KENTUCKY IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR Kentucky was a border state of key importance in the American Civil War .
President Abraham Lincoln recognized the importance of the Commonwealth when , in a September 1861 letter to Orville Browning , he wrote : I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game .
Kentucky gone , we can not hold Missouri , nor Maryland .
These all against us , and the job on our hands is too large for us .
We would as well consent to separation at once , including the surrender of this capitol .
Kentucky , being a border state , was among the chief places where the " Brother against brother " scenario was prevalent .
Kentucky officially declared its neutrality at the beginning of the war , but after a failed attempt by Confederate General Leonidas Polk to take the state of Kentucky for the Confederacy , the legislature petitioned the Union Army for assistance .
After early 1862 Kentucky came largely under Union control .
Kentucky was the site of several fierce battles , including Mill Springs and Perryville .
It was host to such military leaders as Ulysses S. Grant on the Union side , who first encountered serious Confederate gunfire coming from Columbus , Kentucky , and Confederate cavalry leader Nathan Bedford Forrest .
Forrest proved to be a scourge to the Union Army in western Kentucky , even making an attack on Paducah .
Kentuckian John Hunt Morgan further challenged Union control , as he conducted numerous cavalry raids through the state .
Kentucky was the birthplace of Abraham Lincoln , his wife Mary Todd , and his southern counterpart , Confederate President Jefferson Davis .
In the historiography of the Civil War , Kentucky is treated primarily as a border state , with special attention to the social divisions during the secession crisis , invasions and raids , internal violence , sporadic guerrilla warfare , federal - state relations , the ending of slavery , and the return of Confederate veterans .
35,000 Kentuckians served as Confederate soldiers ; an estimated 125,000 Kentuckians served as Union soldiers .
ANTEBELLUM KENTUCKY
Section::::Antebellum Kentucky .
Kentucky 's citizens were split regarding the issues central to the Civil War .
In 1860 , slaves composed 19.5 % of the Commonwealth 's population , and many Unionist Kentuckians saw nothing wrong with the " peculiar institution " .
The Commonwealth was further bound to the South by the Mississippi River and its tributaries , which were the main commercial outlet for her surplus produce , although railroad connections to the North were beginning to diminish the importance of this tie .
The ancestors of many Kentuckians hailed from Southern states like Virginia , North Carolina , and Tennessee , but many Kentucky children were beginning to migrate toward the North .
Kentucky , along with North Carolina , also boasted the best educational systems in the South .
Transylvania University had long been one of the most respected institutions of higher learning in the nation , and while its reputation had begun to fade by 1860 , other Kentucky schools like Centre College and Georgetown College were gaining prominence .
Politically , the Commonwealth had produced some of the country 's best known leaders .
Former Vice - Presidents John C. Breckinridge and Richard M. Johnson both hailed from the state , as did Henry Clay , John J. Crittenden , U.S. President Abraham Lincoln , and Confederate President Jefferson Davis .
However , by the time of the Civil War , Kentucky was in a politically confused state .
The decline of the Whig Party , which Clay had founded , had left many politicians looking for an identity .
Many joined the Democratic Party , a few joined the newly formed Republican Party , while still others associated with one of numerous minor parties such as the Know Nothing Party .
In the 1860 presidential election , the Constitutional Union Party , with Tennessee - native John Bell as its presidential candidate and Massachusetts - native Edward Everett as its vice - presidential candidate , won the state .
The party was composed mainly of former Whigs and Know - Nothings .
Kentucky was strategically important to both the North and South .
The Commonwealth ranked ninth in population by 1860 , and was a major producer of such agricultural commodities as tobacco , corn , wheat , hemp , and flax .
Geographically , Kentucky was important to the South because the Ohio River would provide a defensible boundary along the entire length of the state .
Kentucky governor Beriah Magoffin believed that the rights of the Southern states had been violated and favored the right of secession , but sought all possible avenues to avoid it .
On December 9 , 1860 , he sent a letter to the other slave state governors suggesting that they come to an agreement with the North that would include strict enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act , a division of common territories at the 37th parallel , a guarantee of free use of the Mississippi River , and a Southern veto over slave legislation .
Magoffin proposed a conference of slave states , followed by a conference of all the states to secure these concessions .
Due to the escalating pace of events , neither conference was ever held .
Magoffin called a special session of the Kentucky General Assembly on December 27 , 1860 , and asked legislators for a convention of Kentuckians to decide the Commonwealth 's course regarding secession .
The majority of the General Assembly had Unionist sympathies , however , and declined the governor 's request , fearing that the state 's voters would favor secession .
The Assembly did , however , send six delegates to a February 4 Peace Conference in Washington , D.C. , and asked Congress to call a national convention to consider potential resolutions to the secession crisis , including the Crittenden Compromise , authored by Kentuckian John J. Crittenden .
When the General Assembly convened again on March 20 , it called for a convention of the border states in the Kentucky capital of Frankfort on May 27 , 1861 .
Again , the call went unheeded .
Legislators also passed a proposed Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution that would have guaranteed slavery in states where it was already legal .
WAR BREAKS OUT Section::::War breaks out .
On April 15 , 1861 , President Abraham Lincoln sent a telegram to Kentucky governor Beriah Magoffin requesting that the Commonwealth supply part of the initial 75,000 troops to put down the rebellion .
Magoffin , a Southern sympathizer , replied " President Lincoln , Washington ,
D.C. I will send not a man nor a dollar for the wicked purpose of subduing my sister Southern states .
B. Magoffin " Instead , most Kentuckians favored John J. Crittenden 's position that the Commonwealth should act as a mediator between the two sides .
To that end , both houses of the General Assembly passed declarations of neutrality , a position officially declared by Governor Magoffin on May 20 , 1861 .
Both sides respected the Commonwealth 's neutrality , but positioned themselves strategically to take advantage of any change in the situation .
Union forces established Camp Clay in Ohio just north of the city of Newport , Kentucky and Camp Joe Holt in Indiana opposite Louisville , Kentucky .
Meanwhile , Confederate troops constructed Forts Donelson and Henry just across Kentucky 's southern border in Tennessee , and stationed troops fewer than 50 yards from Cumberland Gap .
Volunteers from the Commonwealth left the state to join up with whichever side they favored .
Some covert recruiting also took place .
Nearly 60 infantry regiments served in the Union armies versus just 9 in the Confederate .
However , a rather large number of cavalry outfits joined the latter .
John Breckenridge originally commanded the " Orphan Brigade " of the Army of Tennessee , consisting of the 2nd , 3rd , 4th , 6th , and 9th Kentucky Infantry .
The brigade 's nickname came about allegedly because the soldiers ' home counties were occupied by Union troops for most of the war and they could n't go home to them .
Realizing that neutrality was becoming less and less feasible , six prominent Kentuckians met to find some solution for a state caught in the middle of a conflict .
Governor Magoffin , John C. Breckinridge , and Richard Hawes represented the secessionists ' position , while Crittenden , Archibald Dixon , and S. S. Nicholas advocated the Northern cause .
The sextet agreed only to continue the doctrine of neutrality , however , and called for the formation of a five - member board to coordinate the Commonwealth 's defense .
The General Assembly created the board on May 24 and vested in it supervision of the state 's military , a power reserved in the Kentucky Constitution for the governor .
The Commonwealth 's military forces , however , proved to be just as divided as the general populace .
The State Guard , under the command of Simon B. Buckner , largely favored the Confederate cause , while the newly formed Home Guard were mostly Unionists .
Several close calls almost started a conflict within the state , but Buckner successfully negotiated with Union general George B. McClellan and Tennessee governor Isham Harris to maintain the Commonwealth 's neutrality through the summer .
ELECTIONS OF 1861 Section::::Elections of 1861 .
The tide of public opinion was beginning to turn in Kentucky , however .
In a special congressional election held June 20 , 1861 , Unionist candidates won nine of Kentucky 's ten congressional seats .
Confederate sympathizers won only the Jackson Purchase region , which was economically linked to Tennessee by the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers .
Seeing imminent defeat at the polls , many Southern Rights Advocates boycotted the election ; the total number of ballots cast was just over half the number that had been cast in the previous year 's election .
Governor Magoffin was dealt a further blow in the August 5 election for state legislators .
This election resulted in veto - proof Unionist majorities of 76–24 in the House and 27–11 in the Senate .
From that point forward , most of Magoffin 's vetoes to protect southern interests were overridden in the General Assembly .
After clashing with the Assembly for over a year on even the most trivial issues , Magoffin decided that resignation was his only option .
Magoffin 's lieutenant governor , Linn Boyd , had died in office , and Senate Speaker John Fisk , next in line for the governorship , was not acceptable to Magoffin as a successor .
In an intricate plan worked out with the General Assembly , Fisk resigned as speaker and the Senate elevated Magoffin 's chosen successor , James F. Robinson , to the post .
Magoffin then resigned , promoting Robinson to governor , and Fisk was re - elected as Senate Speaker .
Almost immediately following the results of the 1861 election , William " Bull " Nelson established Camp Dick Robinson , a Union recruiting camp , in Garrard County .
When Crittenden objected to this violation of Kentucky 's neutrality , Nelson replied , " That a camp of loyal Union men , native Kentuckians , should assemble in camp under the flag of the Union and upon their native soil [ and ] should be a cause of apprehension is something I do not clearly understand . "
Governor Magoffin appealed to President Lincoln to close the camp , but he refused .
Meanwhile , Confederate volunteers covertly crossed the Tennessee border and massed at Camp Boone , just south of Guthrie .
Kentucky 's fragile neutrality was nearing an end .
NEUTRALITY VIOLATED Section::::Neutrality violated .
On September 4 , 1861 , Confederate Major General Leonidas Polk violated the Commonwealth 's neutrality by ordering Brigadier General Gideon Johnson Pillow to occupy Columbus .
Columbus was of strategic importance both because it was the terminus of the Mobile and Ohio Railroad and because of its position along the Mississippi River .
Polk constructed Fort DuRussey in the high bluffs of Columbus , and equipped it with 143 cannons .
Polk called the fort " The Gibraltar of the West . "
To control traffic along the river , Polk stretched an anchor chain across the river from the bank in Columbus to the opposite bank in Belmont , Missouri .
Each link of the chain measured eleven inches long by eight inches wide and weighed twenty pounds .
The chain soon broke under its own weight , but Union forces did not learn of this fact until early 1862 .
In response to the Confederate invasion , Union Brigadier General Ulysses S. Grant left Cairo , Illinois and entered Paducah , Kentucky on September 6 , which gave the Union control of the northern end of the New Orleans and Ohio Railroad and the mouth of the Tennessee River .
Governor Magoffin denounced both sides for violating the Commonwealth 's neutrality , calling for both sides to withdraw .
However , on September 7 , 1861 , the General Assembly passed a resolution ordering the withdrawal of only Confederate forces .
Magoffin vetoed the resolution , but both houses overrode the veto , and Magoffin issued the proclamation .
The General Assembly ordered the flag of the United States to be raised over the state capitol in Frankfort , declaring its allegiance with the Union .
Its neutrality broken , both sides quickly moved to establish advantageous positions in the Commonwealth .
Confederate forces under Albert Sidney Johnston formed a line in the southern regions of Kentucky and the northern regions of Tennessee , stretching from Columbus in the west to Cumberland Gap in the east .
Johnston dispatched Simon B. Buckner to fortify the middle of the line in Bowling Green .
Buckner arrived on September 18 , 1861 and immediately began intensive drill sessions and constructing elaborate defenses in anticipation of a Union strike .
So extensive were the fortifications at Bowling Green that a Union officer who later surveyed them commented , " The labor has been immense – their troops can not be well drilled – their time must have been chiefly spent in hard work , with the axe and spade . "
CONFEDERATE STATE GOVERNMENT Section::::Confederate state government .
The elected government of Kentucky being decidedly Union , a group of Southern sympathizers began formulating a plan to create a Confederate shadow government for the Commonwealth .
Following a preliminary meeting on October 29 , 1861 , delegates from 68 of Kentucky 's 110 counties met at the Clark House in Russellville on November 18 .
The convention passed an ordinance of secession , adopted a new state seal , and elected Scott County native George W. Johnson as governor .
Bowling Green , now occupied by General Johnston himself , was designated as the state capital , though the delegates provided that the government could meet anywhere deemed appropriate by the provisional legislative council and governor .
Being unable to flesh out a complete constitution and system of laws , the delegates voted that " the Constitution and laws of Kentucky , not inconsistent with the acts of this Convention , and the establishment of this Government , and the laws which may be enacted by the Governor and Council , shall be the laws of this state . "
Though President Davis had some reservation about the circumvention of the elected General Assembly in forming the Confederate government , Kentucky was admitted to the Confederacy on December 10 , 1861 .
Kentucky was represented by the central star on the Confederate battle flag .
Though it existed throughout the war , Kentucky 's provisional government had very little effect on the events in the Commonwealth or in the war .
When General Johnston abandoned Bowling Green in early 1862 , the government 's officers traveled with his army , and Governor Johnson was killed in active duty at the Battle of Shiloh .
Continuing to travel with the Army of Tennessee , the government re - entered Kentucky during Braxton Bragg 's campaign in the Commonwealth , but was driven out permanently following the Battle of Perryville .
From that time forward , the government existed primarily on paper , and dissolved following the war .
CONFEDERATE LINE
BROKEN
Section::::Confederate line broken .
Many small skirmishes occurred in Kentucky in 1861 , including " Forrest 's First Fight " at Sacramento , but battles of great military significance did not begin in earnest until 1862 .
BATTLE OF MILL SPRINGS Section::::Battle of Mill Springs .
In January 1862 , Union General George H. Thomas began to advance on George B. Crittenden 's position at Mill Springs .
In rainy conditions , Thomas ' army moved slowly , and Crittenden advanced to meet them before they could be reinforced by forces from nearby Somerset .
The battle commenced on January 19 , 1862 , and favored Crittenden 's forces early on .
However , in the confusion caused by the rain and fog , Felix Zollicoffer , commander of Crittenden 's First Brigade , rode into the midst of the Union forces .
A Confederate officer galloped in , yelling at Zollicoffer to inform him of his mistake .
Upon being identified , Zollicoffer was shot out of the saddle and killed , disheartening the Confederates and turning the tide of the battle .
Thomas ' reinforcements arrived , and Crittenden 's forces were forced to retreat across the flooded Cumberland River .
Many drowned in the process , and Crittenden was given the blame for the debacle .
FORTS HENRY AND DONELSON Section::::Forts Henry and Donelson .
General Johnston learned of Crittenden 's defeat at Mill Springs through an account of the battle printed in a Louisville newspaper .
However , he had larger concerns , as Ulysses S. Grant was advancing down the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers toward Forts Henry and Donelson .
Union ironclads routed the Confederate river gunboats on the Mississippi River during the Battle of Lucas Bend on January 11 , forcing them back to Columbus .
Following Grant 's victory at the Battle of Belmont , General Polk had anticipated that Union forces would target the Mississippi River and attack Columbus , and had withdrawn most of his forces to that location .
Lloyd Tilghman was left to defend Fort Henry with fewer than 3,000 men .
Union troops began their assault on the fort on February 5 , 1862 , and Tilghman surrendered the following day .
General Johnston countered by ordering Pillow , Buckner , and John B. Floyd to the defense of Fort Donelson .
None of the three was specifically given command , a decision that would prove costly .
Grant arrived at Donelson on February 13 , and found himself outnumbered by some 3,000 troops .
Floyd failed to capitalize on his advantage , however , and Grant was reinforced the next day .
On February 15 , the Confederates had nearly cleared an escape route to Nashville , but arguments among the generals delayed the retreat .
Floyd seized a steamboat and used it to evacuate his forces , while Pillow fled in a rowboat .
Buckner , left alone in command , proposed a cease - fire to Grant while terms of surrender were negotiated .
Grant 's reply – that only " an unconditional and immediate surrender " could be accepted – made him a hero in Union eyes , and earned him the nickname " Unconditional Surrender " Grant .
CONFEDERATE WITHDRAWAL Section::::Confederate withdrawal .
The collapse of Forts Henry and Donelson made Polk 's position at Columbus untenable ; the Confederates were forced to abandon " The Gibraltar of the West . "
His line shattered , Johnston abandoned Bowling Green on February 11 , 1862 , retreating first to Nashville , then further south to join P. G. T. Beauregard and Braxton Bragg at Corinth , Mississippi .
Cumberland Gap , the final piece of Johnston 's line , finally fell to Union forces in June 1862 .
MORGAN 'S FIRST RAIDS
Section::::Morgan 's first raids .
Almost immediately following the Confederate withdrawal from Kentucky , Confederate General John Hunt Morgan began the first of his raids into the state .
In May 1862 , Morgan 's riders captured two Union trains at Cave City , but his apparent goal was to agitate Union forces ; he paroled everyone aboard , returned one of the trains , and sent the occupants back to Louisville .
This move accomplished little except to embolden Morgan for a more extensive raid in July .
On July 4 , 1862 , Morgan and his men left Knoxville , Tennessee and captured Tompkinsville five days later .
After a brief stop in Glasgow , where many of Morgan 's troops were from , they continued to Lebanon , capturing it on July 12 .
From there , the cavalry stopped in Harrodsburg and Georgetown , and upon seeing that Lexington was too heavily fortified , turned their attention to the town of Cynthiana .
Morgan was again victorious at Cynthiana , but with Union reinforcements closing in on him , he paroled all the captured soldiers from the battle and rode to Paris .
On their exit from the Commonwealth , the cavalry picked up 50 recruits at Richmond .
They also stopped in Somerset , where Morgan instructed his telegrapher , George " Lightning " Ellsworth to send taunting messages to General Jeremiah Boyle and publisher George Prentice .
At the completion of his escape through the Commonwealth , Morgan claimed to have captured and paroled 1,200 enemy soldiers , recruited 300 men and acquired several hundred horses for his cavalry , used or destroyed supplies in seventeen towns , and incurred fewer than 100 casualties .
SMITH AND BRAGG ADVANCE Section::::Smith and
Bragg advance .
Morgan 's exploits encouraged Confederate General Edmund Kirby Smith to move on Kentucky .
After conferring with General Braxton Bragg at Chattanooga , Smith moved to drive George W. Morgan from Cumberland Gap in August 1862 .
Both generals understood that Smith would capture Cumberland Gap , then join Bragg in Middle Tennessee .
When the two armies met , Bragg would command the combined force against Don Carlos Buell in Nashville .
Once Nashville was captured , Bragg and Smith would commence an invasion of Kentucky .
As the battle at Cumberland Gap wore on , Morgan refused to retreat or surrender his position .
Thinking an invasion of Kentucky was preferable to a long siege on the Gap , Smith left a detachment to handle Morgan and proceeded toward Lexington , abandoning the plan to join Bragg and capture Nashville .
The move forced Bragg 's hand , and he too entered Kentucky on August 28 .
As Smith progressed toward Lexington , Indiana governor Oliver P. Morton decided that Governor Robinson was doing too little to support the Union cause .
He dispatched regiments across the Ohio into Louisville , and considered himself governor of both Indiana and Kentucky .
BATTLE OF RICHMOND Section::::Battle of Richmond .
Upon learning of Smith 's advance into Kentucky , General " Bull " Nelson prepared to engage the invading army at the Kentucky River to take advantage of the better terrain , but delayed the engagement so that more reinforcements could arrive .
He ordered the brigades under Mahlon Manson and Charles Cruft not to attack Smith , but to withdraw to Lexington , but the orders either were not delivered in time , or they were ignored .
After some preliminary skirmishes , Smith 's army met Mahlon 's brigade at Richmond , Kentucky on August 30 .
Smith 's more experienced troops broke the center of the Union line , and Mahlon fell back to Richmond Cemetery .
By the afternoon , General Nelson arrived and tried to rally the troops .
Riding along the front of the Union line , the portly Nelson exclaimed , " Boys , if they ca n't hit me , they ca n't hit a barn door ! "
Unfortunately for Nelson , he was soon hit twice by Confederate gunfire .
Though Nelson was seriously wounded , he escaped the battle as Confederate cavalry moved to cut off the Union retreat .
He left behind 206 killed , 844 wounded , and 4,303 missing .
With only 98 killed , 492 wounded , and 10 missing , Smith had won one of the most complete Confederate victories of the entire war .
BATTLE OF MUNFORDVILLE Section::::Battle of Munfordville .
While Smith was continuing on to Lexington , Bragg was just entering Kentucky , having delayed at Chattanooga until August 28 .
Bragg was told that there were ample supplies in the Glasgow area , but upon learning that Bragg had entered Kentucky , Buell left George Thomas to guard Nashville and moved the rest of his army to heavily fortified Bowling Green .
Meanwhile , Smith had dispatched Colonel John Scott to look for Bragg .
On the night of September 13 , Scott encountered John T. Wilder at Munfordville , and demanded his surrender .
Scott requested the aid of James Chalmers ' Mississippi brigade , which moved to support Scott throughout the night .
The assault commenced the next morning , and though outnumbered , Scott 's forces inflicted more than 200 casualties in the early fighting .
At 9:30 AM , Chalmers tried to intimidate Wilder into surrender , sending a flag of truce with the message , " You have made a gallant defense of your position , and to avoid further bloodshed
I demand an unconditional surrender of your forces .
I have six regiments of infantry , one battalion of infantry sharpshooters , and have just been reinforced by a brigade of cavalry , under Colonel Scott , with two battalions of infantry . "
Upon receiving this message , Wilder replied " Thank you for your compliments .
If you wish to avoid further bloodshed , keep out of the reach of my guns . "
Wilder was soon reinforced by Colonel Cyrus L. Dunham , who brought a force of 4,000 men .
Scott and Chalmers sought assistance from Bragg 's main army .
Bragg was incensed , but arrived the next day to take charge of the battle .
Bragg deployed forces under William J. Hardee and Leonidas Polk to surround the town , delaying his assault until September 17 .
Bragg sent another request for the force 's surrender .
At a council of war , Wilder made an unusual request of Bragg 's subordinate , Simon B. Buckner – that he be allowed to inspect the forces that now surrounded him to determine whether surrender were the correct course of action .
Delighted by this supreme compliment , Buckner obliged , and after surveying the Confederate line , Wilder surrendered .
Wilder 's force of some 4,000 men was paroled and directed to Bowling Green , where Bragg hoped they would be a drain on Buell 's supplies .
The delay caused by the Confederate victory at Munfordville may well have cost them a much more important prize – Louisville .
INAUGURATION OF GOVERNOR HAWES Section::::Inauguration of Governor Hawes .
While Bragg rested his troops and planned his next move , Buell marched north from Bowling Green and arrived in Louisville on September 25 .
Seeing his primary objective fallen into Union hands , Bragg turned to Bardstown , where he had expected to meet Smith .
Smith was actually operating independently near Frankfort , and Bragg , now painfully aware that the lack of cooperation with Smith might prove the Confederates ' undoing in Kentucky , began to disperse his troops into defensive postures at Bardstown , Shelbyville , and Danville .
Both Bragg and Smith had been disappointed with the number of volunteers from Kentucky .
Wagonloads of rifles had been sent to the Commonwealth to equip the anticipated recruits , but although Confederate sympathies were high , willing volunteers were not , and many of the rifles remained on the wagons .
Bragg hoped to rally potential recruits by installing Richard Hawes , governor of Kentucky 's Confederate shadow government , in an inauguration ceremony in Frankfort .
The elected government fled to Louisville just before the Confederates arrived in Frankfort .
The ceremony took place on October 4 , 1862 .
First , Bragg addressed the assembled partisan crowd , promising to defend the Commonwealth .
Then Hawes , who had taken the oath of office months earlier while traveling with Bragg 's Army of Tennessee , delivered a lengthy inaugural address .
He told the crowd that the provisional government would " institute as far as possible such civil institutions , as will protect persons and property , until the people in their sovereign capacity can establish a permanent Government founded on the will of the majority . "
The promises made by Bragg and Hawes were short - lived .
Before the inaugural ball could be held , Buell 's forces had descended on the state capital , firing artillery shells that shattered the jovial atmosphere and put the Confederate forces to flight .
Bragg had sorely underestimated Buell 's ability to make a rapid advance on his position .
While preparations were being made for Hawes ' inauguration , Buell was already forcing the Confederate army from Shelbyville .
Bragg ordered Leonidas Polk from Bardstown to attack Buell 's flank , but Polk was already under attack and retreating to Bryantsville .
Bragg began a retreat from Frankfort to Harrodsburg to regroup with Polk .
Meanwhile , Smith prepared to defend Lexington , where he assumed the bulk of Buell 's force would be directed .
BATTLE OF PERRYVILLE Section::::Battle of Perryville .
By October 7 , Polk 's forces had fallen back to the town of Perryville .
The dry summer of 1862 had left water in short supply , and when the Union troops learned of water in Perryville 's Doctor 's Creek , they began to move on the Confederate position .
Bragg shared Smith 's assumption that the bulk of the Union attack would be directed at Lexington and Frankfort , and ordered Polk 's forces to attack and destroy the approaching Union force before proceeding to Versailles to meet Smith .
The Confederate soldiers in Perryville , however , realized that a much larger force was approaching , and assumed a defensive posture .
In fact , Buell , Charles Champion Gilbert , Alexander McCook , and Thomas Crittenden were all approaching Perryville .
The Confederates were not the only ones to misjudge the situation , however .
When Bragg learned that his men had not attacked as ordered , he came to Perryville himself to lead the attack .
In realigning to an attack posture , the Confederates stirred such a cloud of dust that the approaching Union force believed they were retreating to Harrodsburg .
This gave Bragg 's men the advantage of surprise when they opened fire on McCook 's forces at 2 PM on October 8 .
While McCook was being pushed back on the left flank , the Union center held strong until the right flank began to collapse .
It was not until late afternoon that Buell learned of McCook 's plight , whereupon he sent two brigades from Gilbert 's corps to reinforce him .
This halted the Confederate advance on McCook north of Perryville .
Meanwhile , small Confederate brigades encountered Gilbert 's force of 20,000 men to the west and Crittenden 's force , also 20,000 strong , to the south .
Only then did Bragg realize that he was facing Buell 's main force , and that he was vastly outnumbered .
As night approached and halted the battle , Bragg conferred with his officers and decided to retreat to Harrodsburg to meet Smith .
From Harrodsburg , the Confederates exited Kentucky through Cumberland Gap .
For the remainder of the war , there would be no concerted efforts by the Confederacy to hold Kentucky .
On December 17 , 1862 , under the terms of General Order No . 11 , thirty Jewish families , longtime residents all , were forced from their homes .
Cesar Kaskel , a prominent local Jewish businessman , dispatched a telegram to President Lincoln , and met with him , eventually succeeding in getting the order revoked .
MORGAN STRIKES AGAIN Section::::Morgan strikes again .
His inability to engage Bragg and Smith on their retreat from Kentucky led to Buell being replaced by General William Rosecrans .
Rosecrans encamped at Nashville during the fall and early winter of 1862 .
Believing that Rosecrans would begin a campaign as soon as sufficient supplies were accumluated , Bragg dispatched John Hunt Morgan back into Kentucky in December 1862 to cut the supply line afforded Rosecrans by the Louisville and Nashville Railroad .
Morgan 's raid was part of a plan to disrupt Union supply lines .
While Morgan was moving into Kentucky , Nathan Bedford Forrest was mounting a raid through West Tennessee into the Kentucky Purchase while Earl Van Dorn raided into southern West Tennessee .
THE CHRISTMAS RAID Section::::The Christmas Raid .
Morgan 's men crossed into Kentucky on December 22 and captured a Union supply wagon bound for Glasgow .
On Christmas Day , Morgan 's men rode through Glasgow , bound for Bacon Creek Station and the L&N bridge span .
After quelling the stiff Union resistance , Morgan 's men destroyed the bridge and several miles of railroad track .
Whatever else might happen , they had succeeded in disrupting Rosecrans ' supply line .
From Bacon Creek , Morgan rode to Elizabethtown , arriving on December 27 .
The Union commander , Colonel H. S. Smith , demanded Morgan 's surrender , but Morgan turned the tables , surrounded Smith , and , after a short skirmish , accepted his surrender .
Again , Morgan destroyed the L&N infrastructure in the area , then began planning an escape back to Tennessee .
Colonel John M. Harlan 's artillery shelled Morgan 's force as it crossed the Rolling Fork River on December 29 , seriously wounding First Brigade commander Basil W. Duke .
Duke was taken to Bardstown for medical treatment , however , and recovered in time to rejoin the Confederate retreat the next day .
Freezing rain plagued Morgan 's men as they encamped at Springfield on the night of December 30 .
Worse yet , scouts reported a massive Union force concentrated nine miles away at Lebanon .
With Frank Wolford 's men moving on his position , Morgan made the difficult decision to move out just after midnight in ever - worsening weather .
He ordered a few companies to create a diversion , feigning an attack on Lebanon and burning fence rails to give the appearance of campfires , while the main body of his force continued to Campbellsville .
The plan worked , and following a march that many described as their most miserable night of the war , Morgan 's men arrived safely in Campbellsville on New Year 's Eve and captured some welcome supplies .
The following day , they proceeded through Columbia , and returned to Tennessee on January 3 .
MORGAN CROSSES THE OHIO Section::::Morgan crosses the Ohio .
Following the Christmas Raid , there were only minor incursions into Kentucky by various units under Roy Cluke , John Pegram , Humphrey Marshall , among others .
Frustrated Union commanders could only react to these unpredictable raids .
Morgan would soon do them a favor , however , by raising the visibility of his next raid .
It was widely reported that since his December 1862 marriage , Morgan had lost some of his bravado .
Morgan , eager to dispel such rumors and weary of guarding Bragg 's left flank , proposed a raid through Kentucky and across the Ohio River .
Bragg , fearing an attack from Rosecrans , welcomed the idea of a distraction that would take the pressure off his Army of Tennessee .
Morgan gathered his men to an area between Liberty and Alexandria , Tennessee .
On June 10 , he addressed his unit , telling them that Bragg had sanctioned a raid to Louisville , and if conditions permitted , across the Ohio River into Indiana and possibly Ohio .
He confided Bragg 's true orders – to halt at the Ohio River – only to trusted confidant Basil Duke .
The raid was delayed by orders to intercept a Union raiding party moving on Knoxville , Tennessee , but after three miserable weeks of floundering through muddy conditions , Morgan 's men still had not located the enemy .
They finally began entering Kentucky on July 2 , 1863 .
Two days later , Morgan engaged Colonel Orlando Moore 's forces at Tebbs Bend , where a bridge crossed the Green River near Campbellsville .
As was his custom , Morgan demanded an unconditional surrender , but Moore , noting that this was Independence Day , replied " It is a bad day for surrender , and I would rather not .
"
Moore 's forces won the day , and Morgan , having suffered 71 casualties , decided to bypass the bridge .
Morgan again encountered resistance at Lebanon where , despite the Confederate victory , his nineteen - year - old brother Tom was killed .
From Lebanon , Morgan 's men made haste through Springfield toward Bardstown , where they learned that Union soldiers were less than a day behind , and that Louisville was already bracing for another attack .
Morgan had the advantage of surprise , however , having selected Brandenburg as his target instead .
He sent an advance detachment to make preparations for crossing the Ohio , and on July 7 , they captured two steamboats , the John B. McCombs and the Alice Dean .
By midnight , all of Morgan 's men were on Indiana soil .
Over the next few weeks , Morgan rode along the course of the Ohio River , raiding Indiana and Ohio .
On July 19 , Federal forces captured Duke and 700 of Morgan 's men , but Morgan escaped with 1,100 others .
Union pursuit was heavy , and Morgan lost exhausted men daily , his command dwindling to 363 men by the time he surrendered on July 26 , 1863 .
Morgan was taken to a penitentiary in Columbus , Ohio , but escaped with several of his officers in November 1863 .
Despite the threat of a court martial from Bragg for disobeying orders , the Confederacy so desperately needed leaders that Morgan was restored to his command position .
FORREST RAIDS PADUCAH
Section::::Forrest raids Paducah .
Following Morgan 's capture in the summer of 1863 , there were no major engagements fought in Kentucky until spring of 1864 .
Portions of three infantry regiments from Bragg 's army had requested to reorganize as a mounted infantry under Abraham Buford , but the Confederacy had no horses to supply them .
In response , Nathan Bedford Forrest , who had been operating in Mississippi , began to organize a raid on western Tennessee and Kentucky .
Besides obtaining mounts for the mounted - infantry - to - be , Forrest intended to disrupt Union supply lines , obtain general provisions for Confederate forces , and discourage enlistment of blacks in Kentucky into the Union army .
On March 25 , 1864 , Forrest commenced his attack .
He met Colonel Stephen G. Hicks at Fort Anderson and demanded an unconditional surrender .
Knowing that Forrest 's main objectives were to obtain supplies and horses , Hicks declined .
For the most part , Hicks was right in his assumption that Forrest would not assault the fort , but Confederate colonel Albert P. Thompson , a native of the area , did briefly attempt to capture it before being killed with 24 men from his unit .
Forrest held the city for ten hours , destroying the Union headquarters , as well as the buildings housing the quartermaster and commissary .
Forrest also captured a total of 200 horses and mules before withdrawing to Mayfield .
Following the raid , Forrest granted furlough to the Kentuckians under his command so they could secure better clothing and mounts .
As agreed , every man reported back to Trenton , Tennessee on April 4 .
Unionist newspapers bragged after the raid that Union forces had hidden the best horses in the area and that Forrest had only captured horses stolen from private citizens .
Furious , Forrest ordered Buford back into Kentucky .
Buford 's men arrived on April 14 , forced Hicks back into the fort , and captured an additional 140 horses in the foundry , exactly where the newspaper reports had placed them .
They then rejoined Forrest in Tennessee .
The raid was not only successful in terms of gaining additional mounts , but provided a diversion for Forrest 's attack on Fort Pillow , Tennessee .
1864–1865 :
MILITARY RULE
Section::::1864–1865 :
Military rule .
In response to the growing problem of guerrilla campaigns throughout 1863 and 1864 , in June 1864 , Maj . Gen. Stephen G. Burbridge was given command over the commonwealth of Kentucky .
This began an extended period of military control that would last through early 1865 , beginning with martial law authorized by President Abraham Lincoln .
To pacify Kentucky , Burbridge rigorously suppressed disloyalty and used economic pressure as coercion .
His guerrilla policy , which included public execution of four guerrillas for the death of each unarmed Union citizen , caused the most controversy .
After a falling out with Governor Thomas E. Bramlette , Burbridge was dismissed in February 1865 .
Confederates remembered him as the " Butcher of Kentucky " .
ORDER OF BATTLE FOR UNION FORCES IN KENTUCKY
*
Data is from Tabular Statements Showing the Names of Commanders of Army Corps , Divisions and Brigades , United States Army , During the War of 1861 to 1865 , compiled from the data on record in the office of the Quartermaster General of the Army , Gen. C. McKeever , 1887 .
1862–1863
*
The forces in Kentucky at times also included the Army of the Ohio under Maj .
Gen. Don Carlos Buell , the Army of the Tennessee under Maj .
Gen. Ulysses S. Grant , and the Army of the Cumberland under Maj .
Gen. William Rosecrans .
Part of the Army of Kentucky eventually became the Reserve Corps of the Army of the Cumberland , while the rest was rolled into the XXIII Corps in the Department of Ohio under Maj .
Gen. John G. Foster .
Section::::Order of battle for Union forces in Kentucky .
Section::::1862–1863 .
colspan="3 " align = center Army of KentuckyMaj .
Gen. Gordon Granger 1863–1864
*
The forces in Kentucky at times also included three additional brigades of the 1st division , the brigades 2nd , 3rd , and 4th divisions of the XXIII Corps which were in the field near two divisions of the IX Corps , and a part of the cavalry division of the Department of Ohio under Maj .
Gen. George Stoneman .
*
Curiously , the official records refer to Boyle 's command as the " District of Western Kentucky " , although it included all of Kentucky except Western Kentucky , which was assigned to the District of Columbus S.D. Sturgis , Brigadier General , June 1863S.P.
Carter , Brigadier General , July 10 , 1863J.T. Boyle , Brigadier General , August 6 , 1863 1864–1865
*
The forces in Kentucky at times also included the 1st , 2nd , 3rd and 4th divisions of the XXIII Corps , under the command of Maj .
Gen. John M. Schofield , assigned to Sherman 's forces for the Atlanta Campaign .
Section::::1864–1865 .
colspan="2 " align = center 5th Division , XXIII Corps or District of KentuckyOrganized April 1864.Transferred to Department of the Cumberland , January 1865 .
G.O.
No 5 , A.G. O.Commander , Date AssignedS.G. Burbridge , Brigadier - General , April 1864
SEE ALSO
* Civil War Museum ( Bardstown )
* Confederate States of America – animated map of state secession and confederacy * The Filson Historical Society * History of Kentucky
* List of American Civil War monuments in Kentucky
* List of Kentucky Union Civil War units * List of Kentucky Confederate Civil War units * List of Kentucky 's American Civil War generals * Timeline of Kentucky in the American Civil War Kentucky 's adjacent states in the American Civil War * Illinois in the American Civil War * Indiana in the American Civil War
* Missouri in the American Civil War * Ohio in the American Civil War
* Tennessee in the American Civil War * Virginia in the American Civil War * West Virginia in the American Civil War Western Theater of the American Civil War * Louisville , Kentucky , in the American Civil War
* Lexington , Kentucky , in the American Civil War * Timeline of Kentucky history * Border states ( American Civil War )
* Battle of Belmont * Battle of Perryville * Battle of Cynthiana NOTES
REFERENCES
* Smith , John David . "
Whither Kentucky Civil War and Reconstruction Scholarship ? .
" Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 112.2 ( 2014 ) : 223 - 247 .
online
FURTHER READING
* Astor , Aaron .
Rebels on the Border : Civil War , Emancipation , and the Reconstruction of Kentucky and Missouri ( Louisiana State University Press ; 2012 )
360 pp
* Brown , Kent Masterton .
The Civil War in Kentucky : Battle for the Bluegrass State
( Da Capo Press , 2007 )
* Bush , Bryan S. Louisville and the Civil War : A History and Guide ( 2008 ) excerpt and text search
* Cotterill , R. S.
" The Louisville and Nashville Railroad 1861–1865 , " American Historical Review ( 1924 )
29#4 pp .
700–715 in JSTOR
* Coulter , E. Merton .
The Civil War and Readjustment in Kentucky ( 1926 ) , the standard scholarly study * Dollar , Kent T. , Larry H. Whiteaker , and W. Calvin Dickinson , eds .
Sister States , Enemy States : The Civil War in Kentucky and Tennessee
( University Press of Kentucky , 2009 ) 391pp ; 16 essays by scholars
* Finck , James C. , Divided Loyalties : Kentucky 's Struggle for Armed Neutrality in the Civil War
( Savas Beatie , 2012 )
* Hardin , Elizabeth Pendleton .
The Private War of Lizzie Hardin :
A Kentucky Confederate Girl 's Diary of the Civil War in Kentucky , Virginia , Tennessee , Alabama , and Georgia ( Kentucky Historical Society , 1963 )
* Harrison , Lowell H.
The Civil War in Kentucky ( University Press of Kentucky , 2010 ) , recent overview * Harrison , Lowell H.
" The Civil War in Kentucky : Some Persistent Questions .
"
The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society ( 1978 ) : 1 - 21 .
in JSTOR
* Howard , Victor B.
" The Civil War in Kentucky : The Slave Claims His Freedom .
" Journal of Negro History ( 1982 ) : 245 - 256 .
in JSTOR
* Lewis , Patrick A.
For Slavery and Union : Benjamin Buckner and Kentucky Loyalties in the Civil War ( University Press of Kentucky , 2015 ) 263 pp .
* McDonough , James Lee .
War in Kentucky : From Shiloh to Perryville ( Univ . of Tennessee Press , 1996 )
* McWhiney , Grady .
" Controversy in Kentucky : Braxton Bragg 's Campaign of 1862 . "
Civil War History ( 1960 )
6#1
pp : 5 - 42 .
online
* McNight , Brian D. Contested Borderland : The Civil War in Appalachian Kentucky and Virginia ( University Press of Kentucky , 2006 )
312 pp
* Marshall , Anne Elizabeth .
Creating a confederate Kentucky :
The lost cause and Civil War memory in a border state ( Univ of North Carolina Press , 2010 )
* Penn , William A. , Kentucky Rebel Town : Civil War Battles of Cynthiana and Harrison County , ( Lexington : University Press of Kentucky , 2016 )
* Preston , John David .
The Civil War in the Big Sandy Valley of Kentucky
( Gateway Press , 2008 )
* Peter , Frances Dallam .
A Union Woman in Civil War Kentucky : The Diary of Frances Peter ( University Press of Kentucky , 2015 )
* Reinhart , Joseph R. , ed .
Two Germans in the Civil War : The Diary of John Daeuble and the Letters of Gottfried Rentschler , 6th Kentucky Volunteer Infantry
( University of Tennessee Press , 2004 )
* Rhyne , J. Michael . " '
A Blood Stained Sin ' :
Slavery , Freedom , and Guerrilla Warfare in the Bluegrass Region of Kentucky , 1863–65 .
" Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 112.4 ( 2014 ) : 553 - 587 . * Rockenbach , Stephen . " ' The Weeds and The Flowers Are Closely Mixed ' : Allegiance , Law , And White Supremacy in Kentucky 's Bluegrass Region , 1861–1865 . " Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 111.4 ( 2014 ) : 563 - 589 .
* Townsend , William H. Lincoln and the Bluegrass :
Slavery and Civil War in Kentucky ( 1955 )
online
*
Wooster , Ralph A. " Confederate Success at Perryville , " The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society ( 1961 )
59#4 pp .
318–323 in JSTOR(University Press of Kentucky , 2001 . )
* Yonkers , Charles E. " The Civil War Transformation of George W. Smith : How a Western Kentucky Farmer Evolved from Unionist Whig to Pro - Southern Democrat . "
The Register of the Kentucky Historical Society ( 2005 ) : 661 - 690 .
in JSTOR EXTERNAL LINKS * Digitized images from the Collection on the Civil War in Kentucky photographs , ca 1861–1865 , housed at the University of Kentucky Libraries Special Collections Research Center * " Guerilla Warfare in Kentucky " – Article by Civil War historian
/ author
Bryan S. Bush
* History of the 13th Kentucky Cavalry , CSA , also known as ' Caudill 's Army ' , a Confederate regiment which operated for the course of the war in the Appalachian Mountains of Southeastern Kentucky , Southwestern Virginia , and Northeastern Tennessee .
* Kentucky 's German Americans in the Civil War
* " Major General Stephen Gano Burbridge : ' The Scourge of Kentucky ' " – Article by Civil War historian
/ author Bryan S. Bush .
*
" Morgan 's Christmas Raid " – Article by Civil War historian
/ author Bryan S. Bush * National Park Service map of Civil War sites in Kentucky