MAGNET WIRE Magnet wire or enameled wire is a copper or aluminium wire coated with a very thin layer of insulation .
It is used in the construction of transformers , inductors , motors , speakers , hard disk head actuators , electromagnets , and other applications that require tight coils of insulated wire .
The wire itself is most often fully annealed , electrolytically refined copper .
Aluminium magnet wire is sometimes used for large transformers and motors .
The insulation is typically made of tough polymer film materials rather than enamel , as the name might suggest .
CONSTRUCTION
CONDUCTOR
Section::::Construction .
Section::::Conductor .
The most suitable materials for magnet wire applications are unalloyed pure metals , particularly copper .
When factors such as chemical , physical , and mechanical property requirements are considered , copper is considered the first choice conductor for magnet wire .
Most often , magnet wire is composed of fully annealed , electrolytically refined copper to allow closer winding when making electromagnetic coils .
High - purity oxygen - free copper grades are used for high - temperature applications in reducing atmospheres or in motors or generators cooled by hydrogen gas .
Aluminium magnet wire is sometimes used as an alternative for large transformers and motors .
Because of its lower electrical conductivity , aluminium wire requires a 1.6-times larger cross sectional area than a copper wire to achieve comparable DC resistance .
INSULATION Section::::Insulation .
Although described as " enameled " , enameled wire is not , in fact , coated with either a layer of enamel paint nor with vitreous enamel made of fused glass powder .
Modern magnet wire typically uses one to four layers ( in the case of quad - film type wire ) of polymer film insulation , often of two different compositions , to provide a tough , continuous insulating layer .
Magnet wire insulating films use ( in order of increasing temperature range )
polyvinyl formal ( Formvar ) , polyurethane , polyamide , polyester , polyester - polyimide , polyamide - polyimide ( or amide - imide ) , and polyimide .
Polyimide insulated magnet wire is capable of operation at up to 250 ° C .
The insulation of thicker square or rectangular magnet wire is often augmented by wrapping it with a high - temperature polyimide or fiberglass tape , and completed windings are often vacuum impregnated with an insulating varnish to improve insulation strength and long - term reliability of the winding .
Self - supporting coils are wound with wire coated with at least two layers , the outermost being a thermoplastic that bonds the turns together when heated .
Other types of insulation such as fiberglass yarn with varnish , aramid paper , kraft paper , mica , and polyester film are also widely used across the world for various applications like transformers and reactors .
In the audio sector , a wire of silver construction , and various other insulators , such as cotton ( sometimes permeated with some kind of coagulating agent / thickener , such as beeswax ) and polytetrafluoroethylene ( Teflon ) can be found .
Older insulation materials included cotton , paper , or silk , but these are only useful for low - temperature applications ( up to 105 ° C ) .
For ease of manufacturing , some low - temperature - grade magnet wire has insulation that can be removed by the heat of soldering .
This means that electrical connections at the ends can be made without stripping off the insulation first .
CROSS - SECTION Section::::Cross - section .
Smaller diameter magnet wire usually has a round cross - section .
This kind of wire is used for things such as electric guitar pickups .
Thicker magnet wire is often square , rectangular or hexagonal ( with rounded corners ) in cross section , packing more efficiently and having greater structural stability and thermal conductivity across adjacent turns .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Like other wire , magnet wire is classified by diameter ( AWG number , SWG or millimeters ) or area ( square millimeters ) , temperature class , and insulation class .
Breakdown voltage depends on the thickness of the covering , which can be of 3 types : Grade 1 , Grade 2 and Grade 3 .
Higher grades have thicker insulation and thus higher breakdown voltages .
The temperature class indicates the temperature of the wire at which it has a 20,000 hour service life .
At lower temperatures the service life of the wire is longer ( about a factor of 2 for every 10 ° C lower temperature ) .
Common temperature classes are 105 ° C , 130 ° C , 155 ° C , 180 ° C and 220 ° C .
CURRENT DENSITY Section::::Current density .
In practice maximum current density can vary from 2.5 A / mm for a wire isolated from free air to 6 A / mm for a wire in free air .
If the wire is carrying high frequency currents ( above 10 kHz )
the skin effect may affect the distribution of the current across the section by concentrating the current on the surface of the conductor .
If active cooling is provided by blowing air or circulating water
much higher current densities can be achieved - proportionally to the effectiveness of cooling .
An aluminium wire must have 1.6 times the cross sectional area as a copper wire to achieve comparable DC resistance .
Due to this , copper magnet wires contribute to improving energy efficiency in equipment such as electric motors .
APPLICATIONS
Section::::Applications .
Magnet wire is used in windings of electric motors , transformers , inductors , generators , headphones , loudspeaker coils , hard drive head positioners , electromagnets , and other devices .
IN ELECTRIC MOTORS Section::::In electric motors .
Electric motors convert electrical energy into mechanical motion , usually through the interaction of magnetic fields and current - carrying conductors .
Electric motors are found in numerous diverse applications , such as fans , blowers , pumps , machines , household appliances , power tools , and disk drives .
The very largest electric motors with ratings in the thousands of kilowatts are used in such applications as the propulsion of large ships .
The smallest motors move the dials in electric wristwatches .
Electric motors contain coils to produce the required magnetic fields .
For a given size of motor frame , high conductivity material reduces the energy loss due to coil resistance .
Poorer conductors generate more waste heat when transferring electrical energy into kinetic energy .
Because of its high electrical conductivity , copper is commonly used in coil windings , bearings , collectors , brushes , and connectors of motors , including the highest quality motors .
Copper 's greater conductivity versus other materials enhances the electrical energy efficiency of motors .
For example , to reduce load losses in continuous - use induction - type motors above 1 horsepower , manufacturers invariably use copper as the conducting material in windings .
Aluminium is an alternate material in smaller horsepower motors , especially when motors are not used continuously .
One of the design elements of premium motors is the reduction of heat losses due to the electrical resistance of conductors .
To improve the electrical energy efficiency of induction - type motors , load loss can be reduced by increasing the cross section of copper coils .
A high efficiency motor will usually have 20 % more copper in the stator winding than its standard counterpart .
Early developments in motor efficiency focused on reducing electrical losses by increasing the packing weight of stator windings .
This made sense since electrical losses typically account for more than half of all energy losses , and stator losses account for approximately two‐thirds of electrical losses .
There are , however , disadvantages in increasing the electrical efficiency of motors through larger windings .
This increases motor size and cost , which may not be desirable in applications such as appliances and in automobiles .
IN
TRANSFORMERS Section::::In transformers .
A transformer is a device that transfers electrical energy from one circuit to another through its coils ( windings ) .
The properties needed for motor windings are similar to those needed for transformers , but with the additional requirement to withstand mechanical vibration and centrifugal forces at operating temperatures .
Transformer windings are normally made from copper but aluminium is a suitable competitor where weight and first cost are decisive factors .
In North America , aluminium is the predominant choice of winding material for low - voltage , dry - type transformers larger than 15 kilovolt - amperes ( kVA ) .
In most other areas of the world , copper is the predominant winding material .
Purchasing decisions are generally a function of loss valuations expressed in currency per kilowatt .
Copper used for the manufacture of transformer windings is in the form of wire for small products and strip for larger equipment .
For small products , the wire must be strong enough to be wound without breakage , yet flexible enough to provide close - packed windings .
Strip products must be of good surface quality so that insulating enamels do not break down under voltage .
Good ductility is essential for the strip to be formed and packed while good strength is needed to withstand the high electro - mechanical stresses set up under occasional short - circuit conditions .
Copper winding wires in transformers are compatible with all modern insulation materials , such as lacquer and enamel .
Lacquers permit the close spacing of windings to give best efficiency in the coils .
A major engineering reason to choose copper windings over aluminium is space considerations .
This is because a copper - wound transformer can be made smaller than aluminium transformers .
To obtain equal ratings in aluminium transformers , a 66 % larger cross - sectional area is required than for copper conductors .
However , the use of larger - sized conductors results in aluminium winding strength nearly equivalent to copper windings .
Connectivity is another important benefit of copper - wound transformers .
Cleaning and brushing with a quality joint compound to prevent oxidation is not necessary with copper .
IN GENERATORS Section::::In generators .
The trend in modern generators is to operate at higher temperatures and higher electrical conductivities with oxygen - free copper for field bars and magnetic wire in place of formerly used deoxidized copper .
REFERENCES