CRIME SCENE GETAWAY
A crime scene getaway is the act of fleeing the location where one has broken the law .
It is an act that the offender(s ) may or may not have planned in detail , resulting in a variety of outcomes .
A : crime scene is the " location of a crime ; especially one at which forensic evidence is collected in a controlled manner .
" The " getaway " is any escape by a perpetrator from that scene , which may have been witnessed by eyewitnesses or law enforcement .
The crime scene getaway is the subject of several penal laws , as well as a " notion " in academic studies of criminology .
A perpetrator can escape a crime scene by running , riding a horse , driving a getaway car , or riding with a getaway driver .
If motor vehicles are used for the getaway , then each vehicle is a new crime scene .
AS AN INCHOATE OFFENSE Section::::As
an inchoate offense .
In some jurisdictions , the very act of making a getaway from a crime scene is an inchoate criminal offense in itself , though it is generally viewed as natural behavior for a lawbreaker .
For example , under New York law , " escape " is defined as escaping custody or detention ; " unlawful fleeing a police in a motor vehicle " is a distinct crime .
METHODS OF CRIME SCENE
GETAWAYS RUNNING
Section::::Methods of crime scene getaways .
Section::::Running .
Traditionally , for thousands of years , the standard method of escape from a crime scene was for the perpetrator merely to run away , faster than the constable on patrol , sheriff , or the night watchman .
This was common even into the 20th century .
For example , according to the Warren Commission report , Lee Harvey Oswald infamously walked , then ran away from the Texas Book Depository from where he shot President Kennedy on November 22 , 1963 .
If another means of transportation becomes unavailable , the suspect may have to run .
HORSEBACK Section::::Horseback .
Once humans domesticated horses , that animal became a favorite way to escape a crime scene .
Jesse James and many old " Wild West " bank robbers and train robbers of the 19th century used horses to get way from the scene of their larceny .
The etymology of two common terms for peace officers in premodern times indicates that their major role may have been to prevent horse theft — or escape by horse .
These are constable ( from the Latin comes stabuli -- attendant to the stables ) , and marshall , a loanword from Old Norman French , which in turn is borrowed from Old Frankish * marhskalk " stable boy , keeper , servant " , cognate with Germanic * marha- " horse " ( cf .
Engl .
mare ) and skalk- " servant " ( cf .
Old Engl .
scealc " servant , soldier " ) .
VEHICLE Section::::Vehicle .
A motor vehicle , commonly referred to as a getaway car , is frequently used by the offender to flee the scene of a crime .
Getaway cars are prevalent in major crimes such as bank robberies and homicides .
Very frequently , but not always , a getaway car is stolen and is abandoned soon after the crime , in the hope that the vehicle can not be traced to the offender .
If the vehicle does not belong to the driver and is quickly abandoned , a trace may not be possible without examination of forensic evidence .
In some cases , the offender may go to extreme measures to discard the getaway vehicle in order to hide his ' tracks ' by dumping it in a river or secluded park , and/or setting it on fire ; while this may not make solving the crime impossible , it can make the effort more difficult for law enforcement .
The criminal investigation can be further complicated by the use of multiple getaway vehicles , which can confuse eyewitnesses , as well as creating multiple places to investigate : each vehicle is a new crime scene .
In Forensics for Dummies , the rookie is reminded : " At a minimum , the crime scene includes ...
Areas from which the site can be entered , exited , or even escaped ...
"
Since a getaway vehicle often requires a getaway driver , this additional co - defendant creates problems in itself .
First , having a second perpetrator involved creates yet another inchoate offence that the prosecutor can use in an indictment : conspiracy .
Also , a co - conspirator may cooperate with police , either intentionally by ' turning state 's evidence ' by way of a plea bargain , or inadvertently by giving away information to persons outside the conspiracy .
If the driver , who may have parked some distance away , unknowingly drives past the scene of the crime , the getaway vehicle itself may identify the occupants to the crime victim and police .
This is especially true if the vehicle has unique markings or is an unusual model .
Without a driver , the perpetrator may make errors due to the stress associated with the crime , or lack of ability to multi - task ( such as leaving the car keys at the scene of the crime ) ; a murderer needs to " think strategically " to get away with murder — to " mislead police , stage crime scenes and destroy evidence . "
Taking a public bus or taxicab makes the driver an involuntary co - conspirator , yet also creates an eyewitness whose interest it is to cooperate with police .
Witnesses to the crime will often attempt to take note of the tags ( registration plate ) or other important details of the car and report this information to law enforcement .
It may be possible to identify the offender if an officer spots the offender in possession of the vehicle prior to its abandonment .
In one news story : The earliest robbers known to have made such use of an automobile were the anarchist - inspired Bonnot Gang , active in Paris of the early 1910s .
Later , the method was used by John Dillinger and Bonnie and Clyde , whose exploits got wide media attention and inspired many less - known robbers .
REBUTTAL OF THE INSANITY DEFENSE Section::::Rebuttal of the insanity defense .
Under the M'Naghten rules for the insanity defense , the defendant must be not only mentally ill ( " suffering from a mental disease or defect " is a typical formulation ) but also unable to tell right from wrong .
If the defendant runs away from the crime scene , there must thus be an awareness that the crime is wrong and so a jury would , under such factual circumstances , deny that defense .
Clark v. Arizona ruled that the defense is not a right and that its scope is limited by whether the defendant knew right from wrong .
SEE ALSO
* Crime preparation REFERENCES