CHEERS BEACON HILL
Cheers Beacon Hill is a bar / restaurant located on Beacon Street in the Beacon Hill neighborhood of Boston , Massachusetts , across from the Boston Public Garden .
Founded in 1969 as the Bull & Finch Pub , the bar is best remembered internationally as the exterior of the bar seen in the hit NBC sitcom Cheers , which ran between 1982 and 1993 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The show used the Bull & Finch exterior for the series ' establishing shots of the namesake bar Cheers .
No interior shots were used , and the downstairs pub does not resemble the bar in any way .
A slightly modernized replica of the set bar has been built on the ground floor .
The Official Preppy Handbook published in 1980 described Quaffer 's ( the upstairs at the time ) as " Clubby , library atmosphere , with the requisite backgammon tables .
Private club , but flexible , especially for ladies .
"
The trademark , filed in 1982 has since been canceled .
In 1982 Boston magazine awarded the Bull & Finch the title of Boston 's best bar .
On May 20 , 1993 , the night of Cheers series finale , there was a large party held outside of the bar to commemorate the event .
Many people gathered outside the bar , and watched the finale on two large TV screens specially set up for the event .
The cast of Cheers watched the finale inside the bar .
On the episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno that aired after the finale took place live at the party outside the bar , with many celebrities including sportscaster Bob Costas in the bar , Jay Leno walked into the bar and interviewed them .
Later , Leno played many games with the Cheers cast inside the bar , and at the end of the show , the Cheers theme was played outside the bar .
In 2002 , the Bull & Finch Pub was officially renamed " Cheers Beacon Hill " .
Since August 2001 , there has been a branch location , Cheers Faneuil Hall , in Faneuil Hall .
To capitalize on the popularity of the TV show , this location was built with a replica of the TV bar .
Cheers Beacon Hill is owned by Thomas A. Kershaw , who also owns the Hampshire House restaurant upstairs and the nearby restaurant , 75 Chestnut .
On March 10 , 2009 , the Boston Globe reported that longtime Cheers bartender Eddie Doyle , with a 35-year tenure that predated the sitcom Cheers , had been laid off .
Owner Tom Kershaw cited the recession as the reason for the decision .
The block on which Cheers resides has been renamed Eddie Doyle square in his honor .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS