SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA Small Industries Development Bank of India ( SIDBI ) is a development financial institution in India , headquartered at Lucknow and having its offices all over the country .
Its purpose is to provide refinance facilities and short term lending to industries , and serves as the principal financial institution in the Micro , Small and Medium Enterprises ( MSME ) sector .
SIDBI also coordinates the functions of institutions engaged in similar activities .
SIDBI operates under the Department of Financial Services , Government of India .
SIDBI is one of the four All India Financial Institutions regulated and supervised by the Reserve Bank ; other three are EXIM Bank , NABARD and NHB .
They play a salutary role in the financial markets through credit extension and refinancing operation activities and cater to the long - term financing needs of the industrial sector .
SIDBI is active in the development of Micro Finance Institutions through SIDBI Foundation for Micro Credit , and assists in extending microfinance through the Micro Finance Institution ( MFI ) route .
Its promotion & development program focuses on rural enterprises promotion and entrepreneurship development .
In order to increase and support money supply to the MSE sector , it operates a refinance program known as Institutional Finance program .
Under this program , SIDBI extends Term Loan assistance to Banks , Small Finance Banks and Non - Banking Financial Companies .
Besides the refinance operations , SIDBI also lends directly to MSMEs .
State Bank of India is the largest individual shareholder of SIDBI with holding of 16.73 % shares , followed by Government of India and Life Insurance Corporation of India .
NON - FINANCIAL INTERVENTION Section::::Non - Financial Intervention .
As part of non - financial intervention in the MSME sector , SIDBI had also undertaken various measures in the past .
Recently , in association with credit rating agency CRISIL and Credit Information Company TransUnion CIBIL it has introduced " CriSidEx " and " MSME Pulse " .
CriSidEx , India 's first sentiment index for micro and small enterprises ( MSEs ) has been developed jointly by CRISIL & SIDBI .
It is a composite index based on a diffusion index of 8 parameters and measures MSE business sentiment on a scale of 0 ( extremely negative ) to 200 ( extremely positive ) .
The crucial benefit of CriSidEx is that its readings will flag potential headwinds and changes in production cycles and thus help improve market efficiencies .
And by capturing the sentiment of exporters and importers , it will also offer actionable indicators on foreign trade .
SIDBI in association with TransUnion CIBIL launched " MSME Pulse " , a quarterly report on MSME credit activity , for closely tracking and monitoring the MSME segment in the country .
The report is based on a study done on over five million active MSMEs who have access to formal credit , with live credit facilities in the Indian banking system .
SIDBI has launched the ' Udyami Mitra ' Portal to improve accessibility of credit and handholding services to MSMEs .
They can select and apply for preferred banks through this portal .
Under the portal entrepreneurs can apply for loan without physically visiting any bank branches and can select from over 1 lakh bank branches , track their application status and avail multiple loan benefits .
It also has facility for uploading all necessary documents .
Through the portal the MSMEs can also seek handholding support for getting finance .
SIDBI has also entered into an arrangement with CSC e - governance Services ( CSCeGS ) to take Udyami Mitra portal to the unserved and the underserved MSMEs .
CSCeGS is a special purpose vehicle ( SPV ) set up by ministry of electronics and IT ( MeitY ) which acts as connect point for various digitally aligned services to villages in the country .
OTHER ACTIVITIES
Section::::Other activities .
SIDBI has floated several other entities for related activities , including : * SIDBI Venture Capital Limited ( SVCL ) - for providing Venture Capital ( VC ) assistance to MSMEs ; * Micro Units Development & Refinance Agency ( MUDRA ) - for ' funding the unfunded ' micro enterprises in the country ; * Receivable Exchange of
India Ltd. ( RXIL ) to enable faster realisation of receivables by MSMEs ; * SMERA Ratings Limited ( SMERA ) - for credit rating of MSMEs , renamed as Acuite Ratings & Research Limited . ; * India SME Technology Services Ltd ( ISTSL ) - for technology advisory and consultancy services and
* India SME Asset Reconstruction Company Ltd. ( ISARC ) for speedier resolution of Non - Performing Assets ( NPA ) in the MSME sector .
SIDBI supports the Government of India in its initiatives and work as a nodal agency for some of the schemes related to development of MSMEs , such as Make in India and Startup India .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS