TELEPHONE RECORDING LAWS Telephone recording laws are laws that govern the civilian recording of telephone conversations by the participants .
Recording of private conversations by government or law enforcement ( wiretapping ) are usually covered by distinct laws .
Telephone tapping is strictly regulated in many countries , especially in all developed democracies , to safeguard the privacy of telephone users .
Telephone tapping often must be authorized by a court , and is normally only approved when evidence shows it is not possible to detect criminal or subversive activity in less intrusive ways ; often the law and regulations require that the crime investigated must be at least of a certain severity .
In many jurisdictions , however , permission for telephone tapping is easily obtained on a routine basis without further investigation by the court or other entity granting such permission .
Illegal or unauthorized telephone tapping is often a criminal offense .
However , in certain jurisdictions such as Germany , criminal courts may accept illegally recorded phone calls without the other party 's consent as evidence .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
The federal Telecommunications ( Interception and Access ) Act 1979 and State and Territory listening devices laws may both apply to monitoring or recording of telephone conversations .
The general rule is that the call may not be recorded .
Section 7 of the Telecommunications ( Interception and Access ) Act 1979 prohibits intercepting a telephone call .
" Interception " is defined in section 6 , of which one element is that it is made " without the knowledge of the person making the communication " .
There are exceptions to these rules in very limited circumstances , including where a warrant applies .
If a call is to be recorded or monitored , an organization must tell you at the beginning of the conversation so that you have the chance either to end the call , or to ask to be transferred to another line where monitoring or recording does not take place ( if this is available ) .
Reasons organizations may monitor or record conversations could include : * to protect you in your dealings with the organization * to provide a record in the event of a dispute about the transaction * to improve customer service .
In the state of Queensland
it is not illegal to simply record a telephone conversation if you are a party to the conversation .
CANADA ORGANIZATIONS Section::::Canada .
Section::::Organizations .
In Canada , organizations subject to the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act ( PIPEDA ) must comply with PIPEDA when recording calls .
In order to comply with the PIPEDA , organizations should take the following steps when recording conversations :
* The individual must be informed that the conversation is being recorded at the beginning of the call .
This can be done by an automated recording or by the customer service representative .
*
* The individual must be advised of the purposes .
The organization must be clear about the purposes ; an organization should not state that it is recording the conversation for quality assurance purposes if , in fact , the recording will be used for other purposes .
Informing the individual of the purposes can be done in a variety of ways — verbally , by pressing a number on the keypad ( in the case of automated messages ) or with clear messages on monthly statements .
( For example : If you have any questions about your bill please call 1 - 800-XXX - XXXX .
Please note your call will be recorded for ... )
If the individual proceeds knowing the conversation is being recorded and the purpose of the recording , consent is implied .
*
*
If the caller objects to the recording , the organization should provide the caller with meaningful alternatives .
The alternatives might involve not taping the call ; visiting a retail outlet ; writing a letter ; or , conducting the transaction over the Internet .
* INDIVIDUALS Section::::Individuals .
An individual may record a call as long as he or she is one of the participants of the call .
The recording can be used as evidence in a lawsuit .
However , it is illegal to record communications that the recording party is not participating in .
An illegal recording can lead to a sentence of up to five years in prison .
Section 183 ( Part VI ) of the Criminal Code also outlaws surreptitious recording of communications without consent of one of the intended recipients .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
Calls and conversations may be recorded by any active participant , with no requirement to make other parties aware of the recording .
But forwarding or playing calls considered private is illegal .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
In the case of private persons , calls and conversations may be recorded by any active participant .
There is no requirement to make other parties aware of the recording , but the use of recordings , depending on their content , may be subject to various laws , such as data protection ( privacy ) legislation , libel laws , laws governing trade and national secrets , and any agreements , such as non - disclosure agreements .
Recording of calls by a company or an employer is subject to data protection legislation and , as a general rule , requires informing the participants prior to recording .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
Germany is a two - party consent state — telephone recording without the consent of the two or , when applicable , more , parties is a criminal offence according to Sec .
201 of the German Criminal Code — violation of the confidentiality of the spoken word .
Telephone tapping by authorities has to be approved by a judge .
Telephone recording by a private citizen can be allowed in cases of self - defence , Sec .
32 of the German Criminal Code , or Necessity , Sec .
34 of the German Criminal Code .
For discussion on lawful interception in Germany please see ( German language ) .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India , telephone tapping has to be approved by a designated authority .
It is illegal otherwise .
The Central Government or State Government is empowered to order interception of messages per 12section 5 of Indian Telegraph Act 1885 .
Rule 419 and 419A sets out the procedure of interception and monitoring of telephone messages .
There is a provision for a review committee to supervise the order of interception .
Phone tapping is permitted based on Court order only and such permission is granted only if it is required to prevent a major offence involving national security or to gather intelligence on anti - national / terrorist activities .
Though economic offences / tax evasion were initially covered under the reasons for interception of phones , the same was withdrawn in 1999 by the Government based on a Supreme Court order citing protection to privacy of the individual .
As per Rule 428 of the India telegraphic rules , no person without the sanction of the telegraph authority , use any telephone or cause or suffer it to be used , purposes other than the establishment of local or trunk calls .
The Government of India instructions provide for approved attachments .
There is no provision for attachment for recording conversation .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
According to the Supreme Court of Cassation , recorded conversations are legal and can be used as evidence in court , even if the other party is unaware of being recorded , provided that the recording party takes part of the conversation .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Recorded calls are legal and can be used as evidence in court , providing the person recording is a participant to the conversation , or has consent from at least one participant from the conversation .
LATVIA
Section::::Latvia . Calls and conversations by private persons may be recorded by any active participant .
There is no requirement in laws to make other parties aware of the recording , but the use of recordings , depending on their content , may be subject to various laws .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
Recording of phone calls by private persons falls under interception - related provisions of the Crimes Act 1961 , which has a general prohibition on the use of interception devices .
An exception is made for when the person intercepting the call is a party to the conversation .
There is no requirement that both parties be aware of the interception .
ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
Intercepting communications falls under the provisions of the Penal Code and , in the case of electronic communications , under the Telecommunications Act ( 506/2004 ) .
The recording of a conversation by a private member to that conversation is specifically permitted .
Nevertheless , while such recordings are legal , making use of them may fall subject to further civil or criminal law .
Their admissibility as evidence also depends on the circumstances .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
There are strict conditions for both the act of surveillance as well as the storage of that data , but as long as it is clear enough of what exactly is being used for as well as implementation procedures were legal by authorities , it is deemed as alright .
The subject at hand was suspected for not related criminal investigation therefore the telephone tapping was justified .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
According to the Swedish Penal Code ( Brottsbalken ) ( SFS1962/700 ) Chapter 4 , 8–9 § § , it is illegal to make unauthorized recordings of telephone conversatios .
A court can grant permission for law enforcement agencies to tap telephone lines .
Also , anyone participating in the telephone call may record the conversation — at least one party in the call must be aware of the recording being made .
A recording is always admissible as evidence in a court , even if obtained in illegal matters .
UNITED KINGDOM ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::United Kingdom .
Section::::England and Wales .
The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 in general prohibits interception of communications by a third party , with exceptions related to government agencies .
A recording made by one party to a phone call or e - mail without notifying the other is not prohibited provided that the recording is for their own use ; recording without notification is prohibited where some of the contents of the communication — a phone conversation or an e - mail — are made available to a third party .
Businesses may record with the knowledge of their employees , but without notifying the other party , to
* provide evidence of a business transaction ,
* ensure that a business complies with regulatory procedures , * see that quality standards or targets are being met , * protect national security , * prevent or detect crime , * investigate the unauthorised use of a telecommunications system , or
* secure the effective operation of the telecommunications system .
They may monitor without recording phone calls or e - mails that have been received to see whether they are relevant to the business ( e.g. , to check for business communications addressed to an employee who is away ) ; but such monitoring must be proportional and in accordance with data protection laws and codes of practice .
This summary does not necessarily cover all possible cases .
The main legislation which must be complied with is : * Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 ( " RIPA " )
* Telecommunications ( Lawful Business Practice)(Interception of Communications )
Regulations 2000 ( " LBP Regulations " )
* Data Protection Act 1998
* Telecommunications ( Data Protection and Privacy ) Regulations 1999
* Human Rights Act 1998 Under RIPA unlawful recording or monitoring of communications is a tort , allowing civil action in the courts .
There is a summary of applicable rules on the Oftel website .
Recording is sometimes advised , as in recording business transactions carried out by telephone to provide a record .
It is sometimes mandatory ; from March 2009 Financial Services Authority rules required firms to record all telephone conversations and electronic communications relating to client orders and the conclusion of transactions in the equity , bond , and derivatives markets .
In November 2011 this was extended to cover the recording of mobile phone conversations that related to client orders and transactions by regulated firms .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In Rathbun v United States , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in regard to interstate or foreign communication that " the clear inference is that one entitled to receive the communication may use it for his own benefit or have another use it for him .
The communication itself is not privileged , and one party may not force the other to secrecy merely by using a telephone .
It has been conceded by those who believe the conduct here violates Section 605 [ of the Federal Communication Act ] that either party may record the conversation and publish it . "
See United States v. Polakoff , 113 F. 2d 888 , 889 .
( Therefore , every communications including interstate phone calls , to and from any States in the USA and every foreign phone call to and from the USA , are under the control and the jurisdiction of the Federal government of the USA pursuant to the Federal communication Act of June 19 , 1934 , 48 Stat .
1064 , 1104 ,
47 U.S.C. Section 605 .
That any party to the phone conversation
can
him / herself record the phone conversation or have another person record the phone conversation for him / her and publish it , including posting it on social media . )
Federal law requires that at least one party taking part in the call must be notified of the recording ( 18 U.S.C. § 2511(2)(d ) ) .
For example , it would be illegal to record , without notification , the phone calls of people who come into a place of business and ask to use the telephone .
Telephone recording laws in some U.S. states require only one party to be aware of the recording , while other states require both parties to be aware .
Several states require that all parties consent when one party wants to record a telephone conversation .
Telephone scammers and others intentionally violating the federal Do Not Call list may try to locate in those states , or use their area codes .
Many businesses and other organizations record their telephone calls so that they can prove what was said , train their staff , or monitor performance .
This activity may not be considered telephone tapping in some , but not all , jurisdictions because it is done with the knowledge of at least one of the parties to the telephone conversation .
Telephone recordings are governed by federal law and by mainly two types of state laws : TWO - PARTY CONSENT STATES Section::::Two - party consent states .
States that currently require that all parties consent to the recording include : *
California
* Connecticut ( However this does n't apply if the recording party takes part in the conversation . )
* Florida * Hawaii ( in general a one - party state , but requires two - party consent if the recording device is installed in a private place ) * Illinois ( except for electronic communications , see next section )
* Maryland * Massachusetts ( only " secret " recordings are banned , but is the only state without a " public location " exception )
* Montana ( requires notification only )
* New Hampshire
* Pennsylvania
* Washington ( however , section 3 of the Washington law states that permission is given if any of the parties announces that they will be recording the call in a reasonable manner if the recording contains that announcement ) .
ONE - PARTY CONSENT STATES Section::::One - party consent states .
Other states ( and the District of Columbia ) not listed above require only that one party consent to the recording .
One Party Consent States * Alabama
* Alaska * Arizona
* Colorado * Connecticut ( One Party
Only if the Recording Party is a Participant in the Conversation )
* District Of Columbia *
Georgia * Hawaii
* Idaho * Illinois ( One Party for Private Electronic Communications Only )
* Indiana * Iowa * Kansas * Kentucky * Louisiana * Maine * Michigan ( One Party Only if the Recording Party is a Participant in the Conversation ) * Minnesota * Mississippi * Missouri * Nebraska * Nevada * New Jersey * New Mexico * New York * North Carolina
* North Dakota * Ohio * Oklahoma
* Oregon ( One Party for Electronic Communications , 2 Party for in - person conversations )
* Rhode Island ( Although consent is not required when the recorded party does not have a reason to expect privacy )
* South Carolina * Tennessee * Texas * Utah
* Vermont * Virginia
* West Virginia * Wisconsin ( 2 Consent Required to be Used In Court ) * Wyoming Following the Illinois Supreme Court 's decision in People v. Clark on March 20 , 2014 , which struck down Illinois ' two - party consent law , Illinois was a one - party consent state .
However , the state legislature amended the statute and , as of December 30 , 2014 , Illinois is once again a two - party consent state , although the revised law establishes a one - party consent rule for private electronic communications .
The Michigan Court of Appeals ruled in 1982 that participants in a conversation may record a discussion without getting the permission of other participants .
The ruling stated that eavesdropping only applies to : " a third party not otherwise involved in the conversation being eavesdropped on " .
This is because the law uses the wording , " the private discourse of others " , rather than the wording , " the private discourse of others or with others .
Michigan law is often misinterpreted as requiring the consent of all parties to a conversation .
The California Supreme Court ruled in 2006 that if a caller in a one - party state records a conversation with someone in California , that one - party state caller is subject to the stricter of the laws and must have consent from all callers ( cf .
Kearney v. Salomon Smith Barney Inc. , 39 Cal .
4th 95 ) .
However , non - disclosure recordings by one of the parties can legally be made if the other party is threatening kidnapping , extortion , bribery , human trafficking , or other felony violence .
Also included in the exception is misdemeanor obscenity and threats of injury to persons or property via an electronic communication device ( usually a telephone ) if directed in whole or in part towards a conversation participant or family members .
According to the Digital Media Law Project , ' New York is a one - party consent state . '
Some states distinguish between electronic and in - person communication .
For example , Oregon is a one - party consent state for electronic communication , but requires all - party consent for live in - person communication , with a few exceptions .
ACCEPTED FORMS OF NOTIFICATION RECORDING
BY
A TELEPHONE COMPANY Section::::Accepted forms of notification recording by a telephone company .
The Federal Communications Commission defines accepted forms of notification for telephone recording by telephone companies as : * Prior verbal ( oral ) or written notification of all parties to the telephone conversation .
* Verbal ( oral ) notification before the recording is made .
This is the most commonly used type .
*
An audible beep tone repeated at regular intervals during the call .
SEE ALSO
* Covert listening device *
Eavesdropping
*
Phone hacking *
Privacy *
Secure telephone
*
Telephone tapping
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * FCC Consumer facts on recording calls
* Privacy Rights Clearinghouse / UCAN
* The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press article on telephone recording laws by state * Federal law
18 U.S.C. 119 , Sec .
2511(2)(d )
* Comprehensive Telephone Law Recording Reference
* Guidelines for Recording of Customtomer Telephone Calls