STATUTORY DECLARATION
A statutory declaration is a legal document defined under the law of certain Commonwealth nations .
It is similar to a statement made under oath , however , it is not sworn .
Statutory declarations are commonly used to allow a person to declare something to be true for the purposes of satisfying some legal requirement or regulation when no other evidence is available .
They are thus similar to affidavits ( which are made on oath ) .
Depending on jurisdiction , statutory declarations can be used for : * Declarations of identity , nationality , marital status , etc .
when documentary evidence is unavailable .
* Declaring the intention to change one 's name .
* Affirming the provenance and nature of goods for export or import .
* Statements of originality for patent applications .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Australian law defines a statutory declaration as a written statement declared to be true in the presence of an authorised witness .
The Statutory Declarations Act 1959 governs the use of statutory declarations in matters involving the law of the Australian Commonwealth , Australian Capital Territory , and other territories but not including the Northern Territory .
Any person within the jurisdiction of this law may make a statutory declaration in relation to any matter .
The declaration may be used in connection with matters of law , including judicial proceedings , but what weight is given to the declaration is a matter for the judge to decide .
Statutory declarations must be made in a prescribed form and witnessed by a person as specified in the Statutory Declarations Regulations ( 1993 ) .
Prescribed witnesses include legal and medical practitioners , Justices of the Peace , notaries public , police officers , military officers , registered members of certain professional organisations ( i.e. National Tax Accountant 's Association and Institution of Engineers Australia ) , and certain other Commonwealth employees .
Intentionally making a false statement as a statutory declaration is a crime equivalent to perjury , and punishable by fines and/or a prison sentence of up to four years .
The states of Australia each have their own laws regarding statutory declarations .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canadian jurisdictions , statutory declarations are statements of facts written down and attested to by the declarant before individuals who are authorized to administer oaths , except that they are normally used outside of court settings .
They have the same effect in law as a sworn statement or affidavit .
In federal proceedings , the form is governed by the Canada Evidence Act .
Similar provision is made by the various provinces for use in proceedings within their respective jurisdictions .
A person who makes a false declaration can be charged with perjury under the Criminal Code .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Statutory declarations can be used as a method of legally changing one 's name .
They may be used by UK financial institutions to enable an asset of relatively small value ( usually less than £ 15,000 ) to be transferred to the executors of a will or other persons legally entitled to deal with or benefit from the estate of a person who has died .
ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::England and Wales .
Under the Statutory Declarations Act 1835 , a declaration can be made before anyone who is authorised by law to hear it ( for example , a solicitor or legal executive ) , or before any Justice of the Peace .
In addition , officers of the armed services with the equivalent rank of major and above , and British diplomatic and consular officers in post abroad , may authenticate a statutory declaration .
The person who hears the declaration need not enquire into the truth of it .
That person 's function is limited to hearing the declaration , and certifying that he or she has done so by signing it .
If the declaration turns out to be untrue , the defendant making it may be punished for perjury .
The form of the statutory declaration is prescribed in the schedule to the Act : " I ( full name ) , do solemnly and sincerely declare that the contents of this declaration are true .
And I make this declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true and by virtue of the provisions of the Statutory Declarations Act 1835 . "
A standard form is used for a statutory declaration ; one copy will be given to the applicant and the other is held on file .
SEE ALSO
* Affidavit
* Sworn declaration
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Statutory Declarations - Australian Attorney - General 's Department * Statutory Declarations Act 1959
( Australia ) * Statutory Declarations Regulations 1993
( Australia )
* Statutory Declarations Act , 1938 ( Ireland ) * Oaths and Declarations Act 1957
( New Zealand )