MINOR IN POSSESSION
In the United States , a Minor in Possession , or a MIP , ( also referred to as a PAULA , Possession of Alcohol Under the Legal Age ) is illegal , typically a misdemeanor .
In California , depending on the county in which the person is charged , the crime may also be charged as an infraction .
Anyone who is under the age of 21 and possesses alcohol in the United States , with the exception of special circumstances , is violating the law of the state .
The term " Minor in Possession " is a misnomer , because Americans between 18 and 20 years old are not minors but legal adults , except for residents of Mississippi and 18-year - old residents of Alabama and Nebraska .
PUNISHMENTS Section::::Punishments .
Punishments for minors in possession vary greatly from state - to - state .
Since alcohol enforcement ( and the establishment of drinking ages ) is the responsibility of the individual states , only local and state agencies can legally write a minors in possession citation .
As such , each state levies its own fines and punishments for a minors in possession .
In some states , a simple first - time minors in possession without any other circumstances ( such as driving or public intoxication ) may only involve a fine of $ 100–200 .
Often fines are reduced or eliminated provided the person convicted completes a program such as alcohol education , probation , or community service .
In some states , a fine is eliminated , supplemented or accompanied with a loss of the accused driver license for a period of time ranging from 30 days to 12 months .
For example , violation of California 's Business & Professions Code Section 25662 , regarding persons under 21 in possession of alcohol , carries a punishment of $ 250 and a mandatory revocation of driving privileges for one year in accordance with Vehicle Code Section 13202.5 .
Subsequent offenses or a person with a preexisting criminal record may frequently receive a full fine , or in some extreme cases , several days in jail .
In many cases a third MIP may result in a loss of the accused driver 's license until the age of 21 .
In Washington State , the statutes impose that : providing to and possession of alcohol by minors ( persons under 21 ) is a gross misdemeanor with a potential of $ 5,000 and a year in jail .
Washington State 's law does not apply to liquor given or permitted to be given to a person under the age of twenty - one years by a parent or guardian and consumed in the presence of the parent or guardian .
Additionally , this RCW does not authorize consumption or possession of liquor by a person under the age of twenty - one years on any premises licensed by the state , such as a bar or restaurant .
Also , A person under the age of twenty - one years who experiences alcohol poisoning and is in need of medical assistance shall not be charged or prosecuted under subsection ( 2)(a ) of this section , if the evidence for the charge was obtained as a result of the poisoning and need for medical assistance .
SEE ALSO
* Alcohol consumption by youth in the United States * National Minimum Drinking Age Act * National Youth Rights Association REFERENCES