RENT - A - CENTER Rent - A - Center ( commonly referred to as RAC ) is an American public furniture and electronics rent - to - own company based in Plano , Texas .
The company was incorporated in 1986 and as of 2014 operates approximately 2,972 company - owned stores in the United States , Canada , Puerto Rico and Mexico , accounting for approximately 35 % of the rent - to - own market in the United States based on store count .
Rent - A - Center 's operations include 28 retail installment stores called Get It Now ( based in Wisconsin ) ; 17 Home Choice stores in Minnesota ; 15 rent - to - own stores in Canada that go by Rent - A - Centre and Better Living ; and approximately 1,359 Acceptance Now kiosks housed within retail partner stores throughout the United States .
Its subsidiary , Rent - A - Center Franchising International Inc. ( RACFI ) , formerly known as ColorTyme Inc. , is America 's first franchisor of independently owned - and - operated rent - to - own stores .
Its franchisees operate 162 rent - to - own stores in 31 states under the Rent - A - Center and ColorTyme brand names , and the company 's wheels - and - tires franchise brand , RimTyme , operates 31 stores in 13 states .
In 2014 , Fortune Magazine listed Rent - A - Center at number 711 on the Fortune 1000 list of the largest U.S. corporations , based on revenues alone .
Competitors include Aaron 's , Inc. , easyhome , Best Buy Co. Inc. , and Wal - Mart Stores .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The rent - to - own business was started by Ernie Talley in Wichita , Kansas during the 1960s when he told customers of his store , Mr. T 's Rental , that they had rented a washer and dryer for a long enough duration that they had paid for it in full and now owned it .
Thomas Devlin , a former employee of Mr. T 's rental , recognized the potential of renting name - brand products and partnered with W. Frank Barton and founded the Rent - A - Center brand in Wichita , Kansas in 1973 .
Mark Speese joined Rent - A - Center in 1979 .
In 1986 , Mr. Speese and a colleague left Rent - A - Center and started a competing business known as Vista Rent - To - Own .
Ernest Talley then joined Vista Rent - To - Own as Chairman of the Board of Directors in 1989 and remained Chairman through Vista 's transition to Rent - A - Center .
In 2001 , Talley retired and Speese was appointed as Rent - A - Center 's Chairman and CEO .
Vista Rent - To - Own changed its name to Renters Choice , Inc. in December 1993 , in connection with the acquisition from DEF Investments , Inc. and certain related entities of an 84 store rent - to - own chain operating in 12 states .
Mark Speese retired as Rent - A - Center CEO at the end of January 2014 .
He continues to hold his position as Chairman of the Board , and Rent - A - Center CFO Robert Davis now serves as CEO .
Michael S. Wilding , Rent - A - Center 's current Senior Vice President – Accounting and Global Controller , will serve as Interim Chief Financial Officer , effective February 1 , 2014 .
Renters Choice went public on the NASDAQ stock exchange in 1995 under the symbol " RCII . "
In August 1998 , Renters Choice acquired Thorn Americas , Inc. , which operated 1,474 stores in 49 states and the District of Columbia under the name " Rent - A - Center . "
On 31 December 1998 , Renters Choice changed its name to Rent - A - Center , Inc. and began operating all of its stores under the " Rent - A - Center " brand name .
In February 2003 , Rent - A - Center acquired 295 stores from Rent - Way ,
Inc. In March 2004 , Rent - A - Center commenced operating in Canada with the acquisition of five stores located in Edmonton and Calgary , Alberta .
Later that year in May 2004 , Rent - A - Center completed the acquisitions of Rainbow Rentals , Inc. and Rent Rite ,
Inc. Rent - A - Center completed its acquisition of competitor Rent - Way , Inc. on 15 November 2006 , for a price of approximately $ 600.3 million .
At the time of the acquisition , Rent - Way was ranked number three in the rent - to - own industry with 782 stores in 34 states .
The Rent - Way store acquisition program brought the store total to 3,535 stores .
Given that the acquisition resulted in over - penetration in some markets , Rent - A - Center carried out the closing or merging of 282 stores between 2007 and 2009 .
With 176 Mexico stores as of September 2014 , Rent - A - Center is continuing its expansion in Mexico .
In January 2018 , Mark Speese stepped down as CEO and was succeeded by former president Mitchell Fadel .
On June 18 , 2018 , Rent - A - Center announced it would be acquired by Vintage Capital .
BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Section::::Business operations .
RAC provides new and used brand - named furniture , appliances , computers and electronics from brands , such as Ashley Furniture , Sony , Toshiba , Whirlpool Corporation , Dell and HP .
As part of their rent - to - own business model , Rent - A - Center generally makes its items available with no down payments or long term obligations .
Customers can return an item at any time , for any reason , without penalty and also have the option to re - rent the same item and pick up the payments where they left off .
Delivery , pick - up , service and repair are also included in the stated rental price .
Customers can also upgrade items while they are renting — the payments will change accordingly .
In March 2007 , the corporate office moved to a new location at 5501 Headquarters Drive , Plano , Texas , in the Legacy Business Park .
Construction began on the building in January 2006 .
Employees moved into the building on 16 March 2007 .
The current headquarters measures three stories and includes structured parking for 400 vehicles , a fitness center , and lunchroom .
In July 2015 , Rent A Centre sells several Ontario Locations to easyhome for price for 3.4 Million dollars , with this agreement , Rent A Centre & easyhome signed a 3-year agreement for non - compete contract that each company can not open any stores in each other countries .
PHILANTHROPY Section::::Philanthropy .
Beginning in 2003 , the company has made donations to Big Brothers Big Sisters of America , collected by means of fund raisers held on an annual basis in Rent - A - Center stores .
Between 2005 and 2010 , Rent - A - Center donated and set up 116 " RAC Rooms " at Boys and Girls Clubs of America locations , in which each club selects $ 5,000 worth of new furniture , electronics and computers for their room .
Rent - A - Center also contributed to Boys and Girls Clubs of America with four tech centers in 2014 .
Rent - A - Center has annually allocated $ 60,000 worth of scholarships to customers and the children of customers and coworkers .
Through the Random Acts of Caring initiative , which was launched in 2008 , RAC has donated merchandise and funding to charitable organizations located in communities where Rent - A - Center maintains retail locations .
98 Random Acts of Caring have taken place since 2008 , totaling $ 531,300 in contributions .
Since 2007 , the company has contributed over $ 600,000 in grants to Junior Achievement and , in addition , Rent - A - Center employees volunteer annually to teach financial literacy .
Rent - A - Center has provided monetary and product contributions totaling nearly $ 600,000 to date to the North Texas Food Bank .
Since 2009 , Rent - A - Center has donated more than 1.25 million dollars to 11 food banks across the country .
This is in addition to the grassroots hunger - relief campaign staged across Rent - A - Center 's 3,000-plus U.S. stores throughout the month of September .
Dubbed " Soup to Nuts " and in support of Hunger Action Month , this virtual food drive leverages Rent - A - Center 's stores as collection points for cash donations .
The donated funds are distributed to food banks across the country at the conclusion of the month - long campaign .
An initiative begun in 2010 is Rent - A - Center 's " Operation : Just Like Home , " in which merchandise with a wholesale value of $ 175,000 is delivered to select installations across four military service branches , including the Army , Navy , Air Force , and Marine Corps .
Contributions have been allocated to Family & Morale Welfare and Recreation operations that provide community and family services , such as the Soldier and Family Assistance Centers that in turn serve wounded , ill and injured soldiers and their families .
In 2014 , Rent - A - Center shifted its support of the military through the backing of important military - related nonprofit organizations , including Blue Star Families , Air Force Aid Society , Army Emergency Relief , and the Navy $ Marine Corps Relief Society .
RECEPTION AND LITIGATION Section::::Reception and litigation .
A number of consumer protection concerns have been raised about the rent - to - own industry , including accusations of predatory lending .
Consumer advocates believe that rent - to - own transactions such as those offered by Rent - A - Center should be treated as credit sales , and point out that the price of a product can be two or three times the retail price .
In an April 2000 Federal Trade Commission study on the industry , 75 % of respondents stated that they were satisfied with their rent - to - own experience , whereas 19 % were dissatisfied .
In 2000 , Rent - A - Center was sued for sexual bias in the hiring of women .
The 2002 settlement agreement resulted in a $ 47 million cash payment by Rent - A - Center and mandated that Rent - A - Center offer 10 % of future vacancies over the following 15-month period to women who were found to be past victims of discrimination .
The settlement also led Rent - A - Center to seek qualified women to serve on its Board of Directors , develop equal employment training programs , and hire a new human resources vice president to implement hiring policies that ensured equal employment opportunity for female job applicants and current employees .
In 2006 , Rent - A - Center settled for $ 7 million in restitution and $ 750,000 in civil penalties for deceptive business practices in California .
The State of California claimed RAC , in violation of state law , engaged in unfair competition and illegally misrepresented the price of certain merchandise .
As a result of the settlement , RAC also deposited more than $ 7 million into a special consumer protection fund that is used to enforce consumer protection laws .
In 2010 , seven months after the Washington Attorney General 's Office sued Rent - a - Center and accused the national lease - to - own chain of unfair and deceptive collection practices under Washington 's Consumer Protection Act , Rent - A - Center agreed to settle .
Another prominent case in 2010 included Rent - A - Center vs. Jackson which arose out of an employment discrimination claim brought on by former RAC employee Antonio Jackson .
The case went all the way to the Supreme Court , which sided with RAC in a 5 - 4 decision .
The court held that if a company 's arbitration agreement includes a clause delegating fairness challenges to the arbitrator , a court must enforce that agreement and send the matter to arbitration .
When Jackson first sued , Rent - A - Center cited its arbitration agreement and claimed that any challenges to the agreement had to be decided by the arbitrator .
OTHER NAMES
Section::::Other names .
The Rent - A - Center company converted its Wisconsin stores to Get - It - Now !
credit sale outlets after a judicial decision held that the state 's consumer protection laws defining credit sales included rent - to - own businesses .
Rent - A - Center is also known as Acceptance Now within its partner stores in the US in which it has kiosks .
Rent - A - Center also goes by Home Choice in Minnesota , by Rent - A - Centre in Canada and by Rent - A - Center in Mexico .
SEE ALSO * Closed - end leasing REFERENCES