RESCUE FROM GILLIGAN 'S ISLAND Rescue from Gilligan 's Island is a 1978 made - for - television comedy film that continues the adventures of the shipwrecked castaways from the 1964–67 sitcom Gilligan 's Island , starring Bob Denver and Alan Hale , Jr. , and featuring all the original cast except Tina Louise .
The film first aired on NBC as a two - part special on October 14 and October 21 , 1978 .
The film has the characters finally being rescued after 15 years on the island .
The film was directed by Leslie H. Martinson .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
The story picks up 15 years after the original shipwreck .
Gilligan has a nightmare about the island melting .
The film then notes that far away from Gilligan 's Island in an unidentified country ( one may assume the Soviet Union ) , a military unit is monitoring a satellite that is experiencing technical problems .
The scientists controlling the satellite activate a self - destruct mechanism to prevent the satellite from crashing to Earth , as it contains a disc that holds some very important , top - secret information .
The metal disc from the satellite is not destroyed , instead making it through the Earth 's atmosphere and landing at the lagoon , eventually being found by Gilligan .
The Professor realizes that a unique alloy in the disc can be used to make a barometer .
While using the new barometer , the Professor deduces that they are going to be hit by a tsunami of such magnitude that it will destroy the island ( he ca n't back this up , as even their radio has finally broken down due to age ) .
To survive the killer wave , the Professor has the castaways maneuver three huts together and secure them to one another .
When the castaways awaken the next morning , they realize that the Professor 's prediction has come true ; they have been swept off the island and their huts have become a makeshift raft .
Gilligan makes a fire on the deck to cook a fish , and leaves the fire unattended .
Unfortunately for Gilligan , the fire begins to spread out of control , but the other castaways promptly extinguish it .
After being angry at Gilligan , the castaways are then grateful when the United States Coast Guard spots the smoke and rescues them .
After the raft is towed to Hawaii , the castaways ' names are announced to the anxious crowds .
Most of the cast 's full names are recited , but a bullhorn obscures part of the first mate 's name , and all that is heard is " Gilligan " .
The castaways are at first confused by modern life .
After a ton of hoopla and media hype , the group agrees to meet again at Christmas aboard the S.S. Minnow II .
After viewing an interview of the castaways on TV , spies from the unknown country are made aware that Gilligan is in possession of the recording disc from their satellite and are sent to recover it .
An insurance company informs the Skipper and Gilligan that they will not get a settlement payment for the first Minnow unless their former passengers sign a statement testifying that the Skipper was not responsible for the shipwreck .
First , they visit Ginger .
She is making a movie , and is upset at the changes in Hollywood in the last 15 years .
She is told that sex and swearing are what makes a movie successful , and that nothing else matters .
The producer overhears Gilligan talking about some recent films he had seen which were hits , such as Jaws and Star Wars , neither of which had profanity nor bawdiness , and quickly decides that acting is what really matters .
Ginger signs the insurance statement and the Skipper and Gilligan go off to find the Professor .
The Professor is trying to get back into research and is busying himself in his college lab conducting experiments .
After a series of encounters with college cheerleaders , another faculty member and the college dean , the Professor signs the insurance statement .
Gilligan and the Skipper then go to meet the Howells .
They are having dinner with old friends and are delighted when the Skipper and Gilligan arrive .
The Howells introduce them to their acquaintances before going into the library to discuss matters .
Over the intercom , however , they overhear their rich " friends " making insults toward Gilligan and the Skipper .
The Howells angrily throw their supposed friends out of their house and off their property .
The Howells then sign the insurance statement .
The Skipper and Gilligan go see Mary Ann .
After 15 years , she is set to marry her fianceé , Herbert .
She is sad , however , and her acquaintance Cindy , who is a childhood friend of Mary Ann 's , tries to console her .
Mary Ann explains that she and Herbert have both changed and she no longer loves him .
Cindy says she should call off the wedding , but Mary Ann insists she must do the right thing and marry Herbert .
Again unannounced , the Skipper and Gilligan show up looking for a signature for the insurance statement .
Mary Ann is thrilled to see them but they notice she is unhappy .
She brushes it off and asks them to stay for the wedding .
Cindy confides her true feelings regarding Herbert , and his for her , to Gilligan and the Skipper .
They decide that they must " save " Mary Ann from making a huge mistake .
They grab a tractor pulling an old wagon laden with watermelons and proceed to " scoop " Mary Ann out of the arms of Herbert .
Subsequently , the two spies ( who just happen to be in attendance no matter where Gilligan goes ) and all the male guests begin running after the tractor and almost catch the threesome until Gilligan ingeniously hurls a single watermelon into the group and they tumble over like a " perfect strike " .
Meanwhile , as Mary Ann contemplates how to break the news to Herbert without breaking his heart , in the background , the traditional wedding music starts playing .
This time , Herbert and Cindy are getting married .
Mary Ann is out of her predicament and the Skipper gets his insurance statement signed .
Eventually , the insurance company pays for the first Minnow , and the castaways and crew are ready for a cruise on the Minnow II .
The spies make one last attempt to get the disc , but are thwarted at the last minute by the Federal Bureau of Investigation .
Finally , the cruise gets under way .
Just as 15 years before , however , the Minnow II is caught in a storm , because while cleaning the compass , Gilligan had rendered it useless by removing the magnet that makes the compass work , causing the Skipper to sail for hours in the wrong direction .
When the storm finally subsides , the group is seen pulling themselves from the water onto a beach .
After getting some not - so - happy looks from the rest of the gang , Gilligan runs into the jungle .
Gilligan returns to say he knows where they are by showing the rest of the group a piece of wood from the original Minnow ( the name plate of the original ship , which is incorrectly marked Minnow I ) .
The group react in shock when they realize they landed right back on the same island , and when Gilligan says " we 're home , " the Skipper chases him into the lagoon .
CAST *
Gilligan - Bob Denver
* Jonas " The Skipper " Grumby - Alan Hale , Jr.
* Thurston Howell III - Jim Backus * Mrs. " Lovey " Howell III - Natalie Schafer * Ginger Grant - Judith Baldwin * Professor Roy Hinkley - Russell Johnson *
Mary Ann Summers - Dawn Wells PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Tina Louise declined to appear in the movie , claiming that she was not going to reprise the role that she felt had devastated her career .
Reportedly she asked for a prohibitively large sum of money .
Judith Baldwin , a substantially younger actress who resembled Louise , was cast in her place .
The following year , Baldwin would go on to play Ginger again in The Castaways on Gilligan 's Island .
Cassandra Peterson also auditioned for the part of ' Ginger , ' shortly before KHJ - TV offered her the horror - host position as ' Elvira Mistress of the Dark ' .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Rescue from Gilligan 's Island aired in two parts on NBC on October 14 and 21 , 1978 .
The made - for - TV - movie was released on DVD on January 1 , 2002 , August 1 , 2012 , June 23 , 2015 , and July 9 , 2015 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS