GREASE :
YOU'RE THE ONE
THAT I WANT !
Grease : You 're the One That I Want !
is an NBC reality television series designed to cast the lead roles of Sandy Dumbrowski and Danny Zuko in a $ 10 million Broadway revival of the musical Grease to be directed and choreographed by two - time Tony Award - winner Kathleen Marshall .
The Broadway production began previews at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre on July 24 , 2007 , and officially opened on August 19 .
The TV show , from the producers of Dancing With the Stars , was patterned after an original format created by Andrew Lloyd Webber for the BBC series
How Do You Solve a Problem Like Maria ? , which selected the lead in the successful 2005 West End revival of The Sound of Music .
The show 's title was taken from the song "
You 're the One That I Want " from the 1978 screen adaptation of Grease .
Although the song was not part of the original Broadway production , the revival will add the songs written for the film to those written for the original Broadway production .
The program generated so much interest in the upcoming Broadway revival that , as The New York Post reported on April 4 , 2007 , ticket sales had topped $ 9 million ( 90 % of David Ian 's investment in the production ) , although the TV show was a " ratings loser " .
TRYOUTS , COMPETITION , AND CASTING Section::::Tryouts , competition , and casting .
The show held open auditions in Chicago , New York City and Los Angeles in October and November 2006 .
The show followed the successes and failures of performers of varying quality and experience through the audition process .
The show 's hosts , Access Hollywood anchor Billy Bush and British actress / presenter Denise van Outen , encouraged and interviewed the auditioners .
The applicants were whittled down to 50 , who attended " Grease Academy " for intensive training and testing , particularly in voice and dance .
From these , 12 contestants were selected by the judges .
The panel of three judges consisted of director / choreographer Kathleen Marshall , Grease co - writer Jim Jacobs , and British producer David Ian .
In addition , later episodes of the show featured guest judges
Olivia Newton - John , Andrew Lloyd Webber , Jon Secada , and Rob Marshall , as well as guest performer Frankie Avalon .
The number of contestants rose to 14 in the fourth episode when two previously eliminated contestants , Matt Nolan and Ashley Anderson , were brought back and given a second chance .
The first episode aired in a 90-minute format at 8:00 pm Eastern U.S. time on January 7 , 2007 .
Subsequent episodes of the limited - run series were one hour long .
After the judges had selected the contestants , viewer voting began at the end of the first live show , which aired on January 28 .
Each week , the contestants were coached on a performance skill – singing , dancing or acting .
The contestants ' performances were then critiqued by the judges , after which the viewers voted for their favorite performers .
The two lowest vote recipients in each group from the previous week were required to compete in a " sing - off " , on the next episode , where the judges chose which two should be allowed to remain in the competition , and which two would be eliminated .
At the end of each episode , the eliminated Danny sang " Sandy " as his grand exit , and the eliminated Sandy sang " Goodbye to Sandra Dee " as her grand exit .
In the season finale on March 25 , 2007 , judge Kathleen Marshall stated that if she would have had to choose two performers at the end of the " Grease Academy " section , she would have chosen Julianna and Derek .
However , by the time of the finale she was quite vocal in wanting Max and Laura as her " Danny " and " Sandy " .
Fortunately for her , it was announced that the program 's viewing audience agreed as they had chosen contestants Laura Osnes and Max Crumm to star , respectively , as Sandy and Danny .
The runners up were Ashley Spencer and Austin Miller .
Osnes and Crumm stayed with the Broadway company till July 20 , 2008 .
Two days later Ashley Spencer and Derek Keeling took over the roles of Sandy and Danny .
Allie Schulz recently understudied the roles of Sandy , Cha - Cha , and Patty on Broadway and originated the role Rizzo in the national tour of Grease with Eric Schneider as Danny and Emily Padgett as Sandy .
Season 5 American Idol " winner Taylor Hicks performed as the Teen Angel .
The Broadway production ended on January 4 , 2009 , after 31 previews and 554 performances .
CONTESTANTS
THE SANDYS
Section::::Contestants .
Section::::The Sandys . !
width="200"Name !
width="200"Color ! width="200"Nickname ! width="200"Status THE DANNYS Section::::The Dannys . !
width="200"Name ! width="200"Color !
width="200"Nickname !
width="200"Status GROUP PERFORMANCE
* Week 1 : " You 're The One That I Want!"/"We Go Together " * Week 2 : " Summer Nights " * Week 3 : " Born to Hand Jive "
* Week 4 ( Sandy Night ) : " Look at Me , I 'm Sandra Dee "
* Week 5 ( Danny Night ) : " Greased Lightning " * Week 6 :
" Grease ( is the Word ) "
* Week 7 : " Rock and Roll is Here to Stay " * Week 8 : SING - OFF
PERFORMANCE
* Week 2
: " Tears on My Pillow " * Week 3 : " Those Magic Changes " * Week 4 ( Sandy Night ) : " Blue Moon " * Week 5 ( Danny Night ) : " It 's Raining on Prom Night " * Week 6 : " Rock and Roll Party Queen " UNITED KINGDOM VERSION Section::::United Kingdom version .
A similar show was broadcast in the United Kingdom during the first half of 2007 .
Grease Is the Word was broadcast on ITV , with judges David Ian ( the producer and man behind the revival ) , David Gest , 1980s singer Sinitta , and American dance icon Brian Friedman .
Starting on 7 April 2007
the show followed a similar format to that of the American one .
On 11 June 2007 , Danny Bayne and Susan McFadden were named as the new Danny and Sandy , to act in the West End revival at the London 's Piccadilly Theatre from Wednesday , 8 August 2007 .
ISRAEL VERSION Section::::Israel version .
A similar show was broadcast in Israel in 2008.Grease was broadcast on Channel 2 , with judges Hanny Nahmias and Assaf Amdursky .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official NBC site * Grease
- It 's The Word - Article comparing the Grease TV Show format to American Idol
* NBC Press Release * Reality TV magazine * TV Guide news