REPUBLIC OF MOLOSSIA Molossia , officially the Republic of Molossia , is a claimed micronation bordering the United States , founded by Kevin Baugh ( born July 30 , 1962 ) and headquartered at his home near Dayton , Nevada .
The Republic of Molossia has claimed itself a nation but it is not recognised as a country by the United Nations or any major government .
On April 16 , 2016 , Baugh hosted a tour of Molossia , sponsored by the website Atlas Obscura .
Kevin Baugh continues to pay property taxes on the land to Storey County ( the recognized local government ) , although he calls it " foreign aid .
" The land use of the property identified as being within the county is Manufactured Home Converted to Real Property .
Kevin Baugh has stated , " We all want to think we have our own country , but you know the U.S. is a lot bigger " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origins of Molossia come from a micronation childhood project , called The Grand Republic of Vuldstein , founded by Baugh and James Spielman on May 26 , 1977 .
Vuldstein was run and populated by King James I ( Spielman ) and Prime Minister Baugh , although James soon left Vuldstein .
Baugh used this name for several nomadic kingdoms as he traveled to Europe .
From 1998 to 1999 , Molossia was a member of the United Provinces of Utopia 3 .
On September 3 , 1999 , Baugh created the Republic of Molossia as a successor country to Vuldstein and declared himself president .
On November 13 , 2012 , Kevin Baugh created a petition on the Whitehouse.gov We the People website to obtain official recognition of the micronation ( Petition " We the People " ) .
He declared at the last census ( March 18 , 2012 ) 27 inhabitants ( Newsbites Molossia ) .
TERRITORY Section::::Territory .
Molossia consists of three properties ( previously four ) that are owned by Baugh , in the contiguous United States and comprising a total area of : Harmony Province , located near Dayton , Nevada , is the smallest of Molossia 's territories , at little more than in size .
It is the Baugh family 's primary place of residence , and the site of Molossia 's designated capital , Baughston .
Baughston was renamed from Espera on 30 July 2013 to commemorate President Baugh 's 51st birthday .
The United States of America 's street address for Kevin Baugh 's house is 226 Mary Lane Road , Dayton , Nevada 89403 .
In August 2003 , Baugh purchased a small piece of rural land in Northern California .
This was referred to the Colony of Farfalla .
The property was sold late in 2005 , after Baugh inherited more land which he subsequently named Desert Homestead Province , in Southern California .
Desert Homestead had been owned by Baugh 's grandfather , and the property has been declared a national monument dedicated to him .
In early 2015 a Farfalla Colony became Molossian territory again .
ECONOMY
Section::::Economy .
Molossia 's currency is the valora , which is subdivided into 100 futtrus and pegged to the relative value of Pillsbury cookie dough .
Cookie dough is stored in an outbuilding called the Bank of Molossia , from which valora coins made from gambling chips and printed banknotes are sold .
CNN 's Great Big Story also featured Molossia and Baugh .
CLAIMED WAR WITH
EAST GERMANY
Section::::Claimed war with East Germany .
The Republic of Molossia claims to be at war with East Germany , alleging that they are responsible for military drills performed by Kevin Baugh while stationed with the United States Military in West Germany , and therefore are also responsible for the resulting lack of sleep .
While East Germany formally ceased to exist in 1990 via the Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany , Molossia argues that Ernst Thälmann Island , through dedication by Cuba to Weimar German politician Ernst Thälmann and lack of mention in the Treaty on the Final Settlement or by the nation of Cuba either , is still East German land , allowing the war to continue .
SEE ALSO
* List of micronations REFERENCES FURTHER READING *
" In The Spirit Of Independence Day - One nation , under me " , The Chicago Tribune , Colleen Mastoni , July 3 , 2008 .
* Ryan , John .
Micronations : The Lonely Planet Guide to Self - Proclaimed Nations , .
* iBerkshires Bite - sized sovereignties offer worlds of fun .
February 2 , 2005 .
* Micronations : Republic of Molossia , Unrecognised States Numismatic Society , 2006 .
* Micronations : Little Countries that Could , G4TV , Dave Roos , June 8 , 2001 .
*
" Born to rule " , The Australian , Peter Needham , September 16 , 2006 .
* " State of the nation " , San Francisco Bay Guardian , Lynn Rapoport , February 28 , 2007 .
* Meet the First Family of Molossia , a nation within Nevada : 40-year ' dictator , ' President Kevin Baugh , rules over 33 citizens ( including dogs ) of the micronation he established , complete with its own rules , border control , traditions and currency The Daily Mail , Matthew Wright , July 4 , 2017 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Republic of Molossia official website