TRAVEL DOCUMENT
A travel document is an identity document issued by a government or international treaty organization to facilitate the movement of individuals or small groups of persons across international boundaries , following international agreements .
Travel documents usually assure other governments that the bearer may return to the issuing country , and are often issued in booklet form to allow other governments to place visas as well as entry and exit stamps into them .
The most common travel document is a passport , which usually gives the bearer more privileges like visa - free access to certain countries .
However , the term is sometimes used only for those documents which do not bear proof of nationality , such as a refugee travel document .
PASSPORT Section::::Passport .
In general , a passport is a travel document that also serves as proof of nationality from the issuing country .
Although generally accepted by the majority of countries in the world , some issuing countries expressly exclude the validity of passports from nations that are not recognized by their governments .
NON - CITIZEN PASSPORTS
LATVIA AND ESTONIA Section::::Non - citizen passports .
Section::::Latvia and Estonia .
Non - citizens in the now independent Republics of Latvia and Estonia are individuals , primarily of Russian or Ukrainian ethnicity , who are not citizens of Latvia or Estonia but whose families have resided in the area since the Soviet era of forcible annexation ( 1940 - 1990 ) , and thus have the right to a non - citizen passport issued by the Latvian government as well as other specific rights .
Approximately two thirds of them are ethnic Russians , followed by ethnic Belarussians , ethnic Ukrainians , ethnic Poles and ethnic Lithuanians .
Non - citizens in the two countries are issued special non - citizen passports as opposed to regular passports issued by the Estonian and Latvian authorities to citizens .
This form of legal discrimination is often labelled as xenophobic .
AMERICAN SAMOA Section::::American Samoa .
Although all U.S. citizens are also U.S. nationals , the reverse is not true .
As specified in , a person whose only connection to the U.S. is through birth in an outlying possession ( which is defined in as American Samoa and Swains Island ( which is administered as part of American Samoa ) ) , or through descent from a person so born , acquires U.S. nationality but not U.S. citizenship .
This was formerly the case in only four other current or former U.S. overseas possessions .
The U.S. passport issued to non - citizen nationals contains the endorsement code 9 which states : " THE BEARER IS A UNITED STATES NATIONAL AND NOT A UNITED STATES CITIZEN . "
on the annotations page .
Non - citizen U.S. nationals may reside and work in the United States without restrictions , but must apply for citizenship under the same rules as resident aliens .
Like resident aliens , they are not presently allowed by any U.S. state to vote in federal or state elections , although , as with resident aliens , there is no constitutional prohibition against their doing so .
LAISSEZ - PASSER AND EMERGENCY PASSPORTS
Section::::Laissez - passer and emergency passports .
A laissez - passer ( from the French let pass ) is a travel document issued by a national government or certain international organizations , such as the United Nations , European Union and the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) .
A laissez - passer is often for one - way travel to the issuing country for humanitarian reasons only such as Restoring Family Links .
Some national governments issue laissez - passers to their own nationals as emergency passports .
Others issue them to people who are stateless , or who are unable to obtain a passport from their own government , or whose government is not recognized by the issuing country .
One such example is the People 's Republic of China , which issues the non - passport Chinese Travel Document to its nationals under certain circumstances .
One such circumstance stems from a reported loss of passport while traveling or living abroad .
China issues a temporary two - year validity Travel Document in lieu of a passport to allow said citizen to complete their travels and return to China to apply for a replacement Chinese passport .
Under other circumstances such as a Chinese citizen studying or working abroad , the Chinese embassies or consulates will issue passports if requested .
This Travel Document is a blue - covered passport - sized booklet clearly denoted " TRAVEL DOCUMENT " as opposed to the usual red - covered passport .
Historically , laissez - passers were commonly issued during wartime and at other periods , literally acting as a pass to allow travel to specific areas , or out of war zones or countries for various officials , diplomatic agents , other representatives or citizens of third countries .
In these contexts , a laissez - passer would frequently include quite specific and limited freedom of movement .
The form and issuing authority would be more or less standardized , depending on the circumstances .
An example is when in the early 1950s , the Iraqi government granted permission to its 120,000 Jewish citizens to leave ( Operation Ezra and Nehemiah ) , conditional on their renouncing their citizenship and leaving behind all their properties and assets .
The travel document that was issued was the laissez - passer , since an Iraqi passport was no longer possible .
Laissez - passer documents may also be issued to goods or other non - living objects to facilitate their transport across international borders .
For instance , the Agreement on the Transfer of Corpses sets out rules whereby human corpses may be issued laissez - passer documents in order for a body to be buried or cremated in a country different from the one in which the person died .
In 2008 , the United States Department of Homeland Security denied entry to an Ethiopian asylum seeker carrying a laissez - passer on the basis of a Wikipedia entry describing the document .
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit overturned a ruling by the Board of Immigration Appeals which had upheld the deportation , as there is no guarantee that information in a Wikipedia article is accurate .
ISRAELI TRAVEL DOCUMENTS Section::::Israeli travel documents .
The Israeli authorities maintain a unique system of travel documents issued to non - Israeli permanent residents , such as those living in East - Jerusalem outside Palestinian Authority - administered areas ,
Syrians residing in the Golan Heights , and to certain Israeli citizens .
NATURALISED ISRAELI CITIZENS Section::::Naturalised Israeli citizens .
People who immigrate to Israel are generally not eligible for an Israeli passport until they have resided in Israel for at least 75 % of their first year of citizenship .
Such citizens are issued a " travel document in lieu of national passport " in their first year of citizenship .
UN TRAVEL DOCUMENTS Section::::UN travel documents .
The United Nations and the International Labour Organization issue laissez - passers to officials and members of the UN and other specialized agencies as well as to several international organizations .
The laissez - passer is also issued to their families for official use .
The United Nations Laissez - Passer is similar to a passport , and is generally recognized worldwide , although some countries will not accept the document as sufficient to gain entry .
It does not generally confer diplomatic immunity , but may confer limited immunities and privileges .
Between 2000 and 2010 , the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo ( UNMIK ) issued travel documents to residents of Kosovo as they were often not able to obtain a passport through other channels .
ALIENS AND REFUGEES
* Refugee travel document ( formally : 1951 Convention travel document ) are passport - like booklets issued by national governments to refugees under the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees .
* 1954 Convention travel documents are similar documents issued to stateless persons under the 1954 Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons .
The document is the successor of the ( now defunct )
League of Nations ' Nansen passport .
* Alien 's passports and certificates of identity are passport - like booklets issued by national governments to resident foreigners , other than those issued under the 1951 and 1954 conventions mentioned above .
However , some governments issue certificates of identity to their own nationals as emergency passports .
OTHER DOCUMENTS
AS
TRAVEL DOCUMENTS
Section::::Other documents as travel documents .
Several other groups of documents issued for a different purpose officially serve as travel documents , generally for a limited set of countries .
Such documents ( when allowing full border crossing -exiting one country , and entering another- only ) are discussed below : NATIONAL IDENTITY CARD Section::::National identity card .
Identity cards are generally issued as a means of identification within a country , but in some cases they may also be used as a travel document .
For example , EU , EEA and Swiss citizens can use their national identity cards to exercise their right of free movement in the EU , EEA and Switzerland without a visa .
They can also visit most other countries in Europe as well as a few countries and territories outside Europe .
Similarly , citizens of most South American countries can use their ID cards for travel between the countries .
A U.S. passport card can be regarded an identity card fit for terrestrial international travel , particularly in North America .
DRIVER 'S LICENCE Section::::Driver 's licence .
Driver 's licenses are generally not considered travel documents , since they bear no information on nationality and conditions which would lead to refusal of a travel document have generally not been tested .
However , in several provinces of Canada and U.S. states , nationals / citizens can — upon payment of an extra fee and additional information — receive an Enhanced Driver 's License which enables border crossing between Canada and the U.S. by land and sea .
DE FACTO TRAVEL DOCUMENTS Section::::De facto travel documents .
De facto travel documents are documents which in practice will be sufficient to cross borders legally , but with no legal status as a travel document .
Within the Border Controls in the Common Travel Area , travel between Ireland , the United Kingdom , the British Crown Dependencies , Isle of Man and Channel Islands , no travel documents are required by British or Irish citizens .
As this requirement does not hold for others , these citizens have to establish the presumption of having this nationality , which requires in practice some form of identification .
The documents used for this purpose ( most notably : driving licence ) are thus de facto travel documents .
Some airlines still require passport from CTA citizens .
The Nordic Passport Union means that Nordic citizens ( of Norway , Denmark , Sweden , Finland and Iceland ) can stay in all those countries ( on the paper ) without any I.D. , in the same way as in the home country .
In reality an I.D. card is needed for travel and other situations , and any Nordic I.D. card is valid in the area for travel purposes ( but not for residence , e.g. banking or authority contacts ) .
OTHER MEANS OF IDENTIFICATION
Section::::Other means of identification .
Strictly speaking , it is not necessary for an EU , EEA or Swiss citizen to possess a valid travel document ( such as a national identity card or passport ) to enjoy the right of free movement in the EU , EEA and Switzerland .
In theory , if an EU , EEA or Swiss citizen can prove his / her nationality by ' any other means ' ( e.g. , by presenting an expired national identity card or passport , or a citizenship certificate ) , he / she must be permitted to enter and reside in the EU , EEA and Switzerland without a visa .
An EU citizen who is unable to demonstrate his / her nationality satisfactorily must nonetheless be given ' every reasonable opportunity ' to obtain the necessary documents or to have them delivered within a reasonable period of time .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO
* Chinese Travel Document
* Identity document
* Immigration law
* Interpol Travel Document
* Passport * PRADO – Public Register of Travel and Identity Documents Online – for European travel documents
* Refugee travel document
*
Travel visa REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Information regarding USCIS Form I-131 ( Application for Travel Document ) * PRADO – Public Register of Authentic Identity and Travel Documents
Online , Council of the European Union