HYDRAULIC MOTOR
A hydraulic motor is a mechanical actuator that converts hydraulic pressure and flow into torque and angular displacement ( rotation ) .
The hydraulic motor is the rotary counterpart of the hydraulic cylinder as a linear actuator .
Most broadly , the category of devices called hydraulic motors has sometimes included those that run on hydropower — namely , water engines and water motors — but in today 's terminology the name usually refers more specifically to motors that use hydraulic fluid as part of closed hydraulic circuits in modern hydraulic machinery .
Conceptually , a hydraulic motor should be interchangeable with a hydraulic pump because it performs the opposite function - similar to the way a DC electric motor is theoretically interchangeable with a DC electrical generator .
However , most hydraulic pumps can not be used as hydraulic motors because they can not be backdriven .
Also , a hydraulic motor is usually designed for working pressure at both sides of the motor .
Hydraulic pumps , motors , and cylinders can be combined into hydraulic drive systems .
One or more hydraulic pumps , coupled to one or more hydraulic motors , constitute a hydraulic transmission .
One of the first rotary hydraulic motors to be developed was that constructed by William Armstrong for his Swing Bridge over the River Tyne .
Two motors were provided , for reliability .
Each one was a three - cylinder single - acting oscillating engine .
Armstrong developed a wide range of hydraulic motors , linear and rotary , that were used for a wide range of industrial and civil engineering tasks , particularly for docks and moving bridges .
The first simple fixed - stroke hydraulic motors had the disadvantage that they used the same volume of water whatever the load and so were wasteful at part - power .
Unlike steam engines , as water is incompressible , they could not be throttled or their valve cut - off controlled .
To overcome this , motors with variable stroke were developed .
Adjusting the stroke , rather than controlling admission valves , now controlled the engine power and water consumption .
One of the first of these was Arthur Rigg 's patent engine of 1886 .
This used a double eccentric mechanism , as used on variable stroke power presses , to control the stroke length of a three cylinder radial engine .
Later , the swashplate engine with an adjustable swashplate angle would become a popular way to make variable stroke hydraulic motors .
HYDRAULIC MOTOR TYPES Section::::Hydraulic motor types .
Many designs are possible .
The following types of hydraulic motors are available : GEAR AND VANE MOTORS Section::::Gear and vane motors .
Gear and vane motors are used in simple rotating systems .
Their benefits include low initial cost and high rpm .
A gear motor ( external gear ) consists of two gears , the driven gear ( attached to the output shaft by way of a key , etc . ) and the idler gear .
High pressure oil is ported into one side of the gears , where it flows around the periphery of the gears , between the gear tips and the wall housings in which it resides , to the outlet port .
The gears then mesh , not allowing the oil from the outlet side to flow back to the inlet side .
For lubrication , the gear motor uses a small amount of oil from the pressurized side of the gears , bleeds this through the ( typically ) hydrodynamic bearings , and vents the same oil either to the low pressure side of the gears , or through a dedicated drain port on the motor housing , which is usually connected to a line that vents the motor 's case pressure to the system 's reservoir .
An especially positive attribute of the gear motor is that catastrophic breakdown is less common than in most other types of hydraulic motors .
This is because the gears gradually wear down the housing and/or main bushings , reducing the volumetric efficiency of the motor gradually until it is all but useless .
This often happens long before wear causes the unit to seize or break down .
A vane motor consists of a housing with an eccentric bore , in which runs a rotor with vanes in it that slide in and out .
The force differential created by the unbalanced force of the pressurized fluid on the vanes causes the rotor to spin in one direction .
A critical element in vane motor design is how the vane tips are machined at the contact point between vane tip and motor housing .
Several types of " lip " designs are used , and the main objective is to provide a tight seal between the inside of the motor housing and the vane , and at the same time to minimize wear and metal - to - metal contact .
GEROTOR MOTORS Section::::Gerotor motors .
The gerotor motor is in essence a rotor with N-1 teeth , rotating off center in a rotor / stator with N teeth .
Pressurized fluid is guided into the assembly using a ( usually ) axially placed plate - type distributor valve .
Several different designs exist , such as the Geroller ( internal or external rollers ) and Nichols motors .
Typically , the Gerotor motors are low - to - medium speed and medium - to - high torque .
AXIAL PLUNGER MOTORS Section::::Axial plunger motors .
For high quality rotating drive systems plunger motors are generally used .
Whereas the speed of hydraulic pumps range from 1200 to 1800 rpm , the machinery to be driven by the motor often requires a much lower speed .
This means that when an axial plunger motor ( swept volume maximum 2 litres ) is used , a gearbox is usually needed .
For a continuously adjustable swept volume , axial piston motors are used .
PISTON TYPE .
—
Like piston ( reciprocating ) type pumps , the most common design of the piston type of motor is the axial .
This type of motor is the most commonly used in hydraulic systems .
These motors are , like their pump counterparts , available in both variable and fixed displacement designs .
Typical usable ( within acceptable efficiency ) rotational speeds range from below 50 rpm to above 14000 rpm .
Efficiencies and minimum / maximum rotational speeds are highly dependent on the design of the rotating group , and many different types are in use .
RADIAL PISTON MOTORS Section::::Radial piston motors .
Radial piston motors are available in two basic types , pistons pushing inward , and pistons pushing outward .
The crankshaft type ( e.g. Staffa or SAI hydraulic motors ) with a single cam and the pistons pushing inwards is basically an old design but is one which has extremely high starting torque characteristics .
They are available in displacements from 40 cc / rev up to about 50 litres /
rev but can sometimes be limited in power output .
Crankshaft type radial piston motors are capable of running at " creep " speeds and some can run seamlessly up to 1500 rpm whilst offering virtually constant output torque characteristics .
This makes them still the most versatile design .
The single - cam - type radial piston motor exists in many different designs itself .
Usually the difference lies in the way the fluid is distributed to the different pistons or cylinders , and also the design of the cylinders themselves .
Some motors have pistons attached to the cam using rods ( much like in an internal combustion engine ) , while others employ floating " shoes " , and even spherical contact telescopic cylinders like the Parker Denison Calzoni type .
Each design has its own set of pros and cons , such as freewheeling ability , high volumetric efficiency , high reliability and so on .
Multi - lobe cam ring types ( e.g. Black Bruin , Rexroth , Hägglunds Drives , Poclain , Rotary Power or Eaton Hydre - MAC type ) have a cam ring with multiple lobes and the piston rollers push outward against the cam ring .
This produces a very smooth output with high starting torque but they are often limited in the upper speed range .
This type of motor is available in a very wide range from about 1 litre / rev to 250 litres / rev .
These motors are particularly good on low speed applications and can develop very high power .
BRAKING
Section::::Braking .
Hydraulic motors usually have a drain connection for the internal leakage , which means that when the power unit is turned off the hydraulic motor in the drive system will move slowly if an external load is acting on it .
Thus , for applications such as a crane or winch with suspended load , there is always a need for a brake or a locking device .
USES Section::::Uses .
Hydraulic motors are used for many applications now such as winches and crane drives , wheel motors for military vehicles , self - driven cranes , excavators , conveyor and feeder drives , cooling fan drives for bus and railway locomotive engines , mixer and agitator drives , roll mills , drum drives for digesters , trommels and kilns , shredders for cars , tyres , cable and general garbage , drilling rigs , trench cutters , high - powered lawn trimmers , and plastic injection machines .
Hydraulic motors are used in heat transfer also SEE ALSO
*
Sisu Nemo REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Info on hydraulic motors