30 DAYS OF NIGHT ( FILM ) 30 Days of Night is a 2007 American horror film based on the comic book miniseries of the same name .
The film is directed by David Slade and stars Josh Hartnett and Melissa George .
The story focuses on an Alaskan town beset by vampires as it enters into a thirty - day long polar night .
30 Days of Night was originally pitched as a comic , then as a film , but it was rejected .
Years later , Steve Niles showed IDW Publishing the idea and it took off .
The film was produced on a budget of $ 30 million and grossed over $ 75 million at the box office during its six - week run starting on October 19 , 2007 .
Critical reviews were mixed .
A sequel , , was released on October 5 , 2010 straight to home video .
A prequel mini - series , , was released on FEARnet.com and FEARnet On Demand in 2007 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The town of Barrow , Alaska is preparing for its annual " 30 Days of Night " , a period during the winter when there is a month - long polar night .
As the town gets ready , a stranger rows ashore from a large ship and sabotages the town 's communications and transport to the outside world .
Barrow 's sheriff , Eben Oleson investigates and also learns that his estranged wife , Stella , missed the last plane and must stay the 30 days .
That night , a band of vampires , led by Marlow , attack and slaughter most of the townspeople , forcing Eben , Stella , Eben 's younger brother Jake , and several other survivors to take shelter in a boarded - up house with a hidden attic .
Marlow finds the stranger locked up in the station .
The stranger believed Marlow was going to turn him into a vampire .
Marlow thanks him for doing what he asked , and then snaps his neck .
Marlow ironically comments to his fellow vampires : " The things they believe . "
Eighteen days later , when a blizzard hits , the group uses the whiteout to go to the general store for supplies , but are stranded after it ends .
While the group heads for the station , Eben creates a diversion by having the vampires chase him to his grandmother 's house , where he uses one of her ultraviolet lights to burn the face of Marlow 's lover , Iris , so badly that Marlow is forced to kill her .
As he escapes , the town snow plow operator , Beau , creates another distraction with his tractor , killing many of the vampires , before trying to blow himself up ; when he fails , Marlow crushes his head .
Eben arrives at the station , where he is then forced to kill Carter , who has been bitten and is turning into a vampire .
Two weeks later , Stella and Eben see the deputy , Billy , signaling them with a flashlight and bring him back to the station , after finding out he killed his family to save them from a more painful death .
The trio find the others have made for the utilidor , a power and sewage treatment station that still has power , and head over there but are separated after Stella saves Gail Robbins , a young girl whose family was slaughtered by a vampire named Zurial who was stalking her .
Eben and Billy make it to the utilidor but are attacked by Arvin , who bites Billy ; Billy knocks Arvin into the heavy - duty shredder , and in doing so , painfully grinds his own hand to a stump by accident , before being killed by Eben because he is starting to turn .
As the month comes to an end , with the sun due to rise , the vampires start to burn down the town to destroy evidence of their presence , and prevent any survivors from telling the world what happened .
Realizing Stella is trapped and that he can not beat the vampires in his current state , Eben turns himself into a vampire by injecting himself with Billy 's infected blood .
He confronts Marlow , and they get into a vicious fight , before Marlow is finally killed by having a hole punched through his head , causing the remaining vampires to flee .
Knowing he will die soon , Eben and Stella go off to watch the sunrise together , sharing one last kiss .
As the sun comes up , Eben 's body burns to ash in Stella 's arms , while she stares at the sky , coming to grips with what has happened .
CAST
* Josh Hartnett as Sheriff
Eben Oleson * Melissa George as Stella Oleson * Danny Huston as Marlow * Ben Foster as The Stranger * Mark Boone Junior as Beau Brower * Mark Rendall as Jake Oleson
* Amber Sainsbury as Denise
* Manu Bennett as Deputy Billy Kitka
* Megan Franich as Iris * Joel Tobeck as Doug Hertz
*
Elizabeth Hawthorne as Lucy Ikos * Nathaniel Lees as Carter Davies
* Craig Hall as Wilson Bulosan * Chic Littlewood as Isaac Bulosan * Peter Feeney as John Riis * Andrew Stehlin as Arvin
* John Rawls as Zurial * Jared Turner as Aaron * Kelson Henderson as Gabe * Pua Magasiva as Malekai Hamm
* Grant Tilly as Gus * Rachel Maitland - Smith as Gail
* Kate Elliott as Dawn
* Jacob Tomuri as Seth PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
30 Days of Night author Steve Niles conceived of the story in the form of a comic , but — after meeting a lack of interest in initial pitches — tried to pitch it as a film .
When this did not work out , Niles shelved the idea until he showed it to IDW Publishing .
IDW published the comic and Ben Templesmith provided the artwork .
When Niles and his agent , Jon Levin , shopped the comic around again as a potential film adaptation , Niles found that the idea " went shockingly well , " with Sam Raimi and Senator International picking up the property rights based on the original concept and Templesmith 's unique mood and concepts for the vampires .
According to Raimi , the potential project was " unlike the horror films of recent years " .
Following the publication of the 30 Days of Night comic book miniseries in 2002 , studios , including DreamWorks , MGM and Senator International , bid in the $ 1 million range for rights to a potential vampire film based on the story .
Raimi expressed interest in adapting the miniseries and was negotiating a production deal with his producing partner Robert Tapert to establish a label with Senator Entertainment , of which Senator International is the sales division .
In July 2002 , Senator International acquired the rights for 30 Days of Night in a seven - figure deal with Raimi and Tapert attached as producers .
By October 2002 , Niles was working on adapting 30 Days of Night for the big screen , keeping the film true to the miniseries , though fleshing out the characters more significantly in the adaptation process .
In February 2003 , Columbia Pictures partnered with Senator International to work on 30 Days of Night , which was developing under Senator International 's newly established production company , Ghost House Pictures .
Mike Richardson , the Dark Horse Comics publisher who supported the adaptation project from the beginning , after having turned down an offer to initially publish the project , was attached as executive producer .
The following March , Richardson revealed that Steve Niles had turned in the initial draft for the 30 Days of Night screenplay .
In March 2004 , however , Columbia Pictures requested that Niles 's initial screenplay to be rewritten in preparation for production .
Sue Binder , the business manager of Ghost House Pictures , indicated that filming for 30 Days of Night was still at least a year away , as Ghost House planned to produce three films before the vampire thriller .
The following May , Stuart Beattie , one of the writers for , was rewriting Niles ' 30 Days of Night draft for production .
Niles was pleased with Beattie 's faithfully rewritten script , which was submitted to the studio in October 2004 .
In September 2005 , it was announced that director David Slade had signed on to 30 Days of Night , which would be distributed by Columbia Pictures mainly in North America and Mandate Pictures in international territories .
In March 2006 , Slade revealed that screenwriter Brian Nelson , who wrote the screenplay for Slade 's previous film Hard Candy , was writing a new draft of the 30 Days of Night script , replacing Beattie 's draft .
The director said that filming would begin in summer 2006 in Alaska and New Zealand .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In June 2006 , it was announced that Josh Hartnett was cast as the husband of the married couple that serves as the town 's sheriff team .
Some criticized the choice because the main character ( Eben Olemaun , with the last name changed to Oleson for the motion picture adaption ) was originally Inuit in the comics .
Melissa George joined the 30 Days of Night cast as the wife of Hartnett 's character .
Danny Huston joined the cast as the leader of the vampires .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming did not begin immediately , but in a September 2006 interview , executive producer Mike Richardson said that 30 Days of Night would be shot on 35 mm film , though there had been discussion to shoot the film on Genesis .
In an interview prior to filming , Slade explained that the illustrations of the graphic novel 's illustrator , Ben Templesmith , would be reflected in production design .
Slade also considered Nelson 's draft to be the most faithful to the graphic novel .
He also stated his intention to make a " scary vampire film " , of which he did n't think there were many .
" The rest of them , they fall into all kinds of traps .
We 're going to try to do our best ... and one of the ways we have to do it is be more naturalistic than the graphic novel , because it 's very over - the - top , " said Slade .
There was also concern expressed that while the vampires needed to communicate , talking might lessen the effect .
To counter this , a fictional vampire language , with click consonants , was constructed with the help of a professor of linguistics and the nearby University of Auckland .
Slade explained " we designed this really simple language that did n't sound like any particular accent that you would be aware of , that was based around really simple actions , eating , hunting , yes , no , really basic , because that 's what vampires do . " POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
By February 2007 , the production phase was completed , and a rough cut of the film was prepared .
In April , composer Brian Reitzell was hired to score the film .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Brian Reitzell composed the film 's score .
A soundtrack was released by Invada Records , with an artwork by Marc Bessant in summer 2015 on Vinyl .
NOVELIZATION Section::::Novelization .
To coincide with the film 's release , a novelization by Tim Lebbon was published by Pocket Star on September 25 , 2007 .
It is one of six novels based on the franchise .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
30 Days of Night was released in 2,855 cinemas in the United States and Canada on October 19 , 2007 .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 15,951,902 , placing first in the box office .
The film grossed $ 39,568,996 in the United States and Canada and $ 35,735,361 overseas .
It has grossed $ 75,304,357 worldwide .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
On the review aggregation site Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a 51 % score based on 157 reviews , with an average rating of 5.6/10 .
The site 's consensus states : " While 30 Days of Night offers a few thrills , it ultimately succumbs to erratic execution .
"
Metacritic reports a score of 53 out of 100 from 29 reviews , considered to be mixed or average reviews .
Roger Ebert gave the film 2.5 stars out of a possible 4 .
He criticized several plot holes , such as the vampires moving with supernatural speed in some attacks but ponderous slowness in others , but also singled out Danny Huston for being " quite convincing " as the vampire leader and summed up the film as " well - made , well - photographed and plausibly acted , and is better than it needs to be . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
30 Days of Night was released February 26 , 2008 on DVD , Blu - ray , and UMD for PlayStation Portable in the United States .
DVD sales brought in $ 26,949,780 in revenue , from 1,429,600 sold DVD units .
This does not include Blu - ray sales .
The DVD is a single disc and includes eight featurettes , one of which is a full episode of the anime Blood+ .
The UK Region 2 release is a two disc special edition , released in April 2008 .
Despite being exactly the same as the theatrical release , the BBFC reclassified the film from a 15 to an 18 .
Even though it still only has the eight featurettes on the second disc , it includes a bonus 30 Days of Night graphic novel .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
A straight - to - DVD sequel entitled was released on October 5 , 2010 .
The script for the sequel was written by Steve Niles and Ben Ketai with Ketai also positioned as director .
When filming began on October 20 , 2009 , Rhys Coiro and Mia Kirshner were named as leads , with Kirshner playing the lead vampire villain Lilith .
Other cast named included Harold Perrineau , Kiele Sanchez , Diora Baird , Rhys Coiro , and Monique Ganderton .
Three days after filming began , Niles revealed that Kiele Sanchez replaced Melissa George in the role of Stella Oleson .
The sequel was produced on a lower budget , but being straight - to - video allowed the writers to more closely follow the comic book .
SEE ALSO
* Frostbite , a Swedish 2006 vampire film with similar theme * Vampire film
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* at Ghost House Pictures * Steve Niles Interview for 30 Days of Night at UGO.com * Official multiplayer game for the film * Composer Brian Reitzell discusses his score for 30 Days of Night