SAPHENOUS NERVE
The saphenous nerve ( long or internal saphenous nerve ) is the largest cutaneous branch of the femoral nerve .
It is a strictly sensory nerve , and has no motor function .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
It approaches the femoral artery where this vessel passes beneath the sartorius , and lies in front of the artery , behind the aponeurotic covering of the adductor canal , as far as the opening in the lower part of the Adductor magnus .
Here it diverges from the artery , and emerges from behind the lower edge of the aponeurotic covering of the canal ; it descends vertically along the medial side of the knee behind the sartorius , pierces the fascia lata , between the tendons of the Sartorius and Gracilis , and becomes subcutaneous .
The nerve then passes along the tibial side of the leg , accompanied by the great saphenous vein , descends behind the medial border of the tibia , and , at the lower third of the leg , divides into two branches :
* one continues its course along the margin of the tibia , and ends at the ankle .
* the other passes in front of the ankle , and is distributed to the skin on the medial side of the foot , as far as the ball of the great toe , communicating with the medial branch of the superficial peroneal nerve .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The saphenous nerve , about the middle of the thigh , gives off a branch which joins the subsartorial plexus .
At the medial side of the knee it gives off a large infrapatellar branch , which pierces the sartorius and fascia lata , and is distributed to the skin in front of the patella .
Below the knee , the branches of the saphenous nerve ( medial crural cutaneous branches ) are distributed to the skin of the front and medial side of the leg , communicating with the cutaneous branches of the femoral , or with filaments from the obturator nerve .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Procedures such as saphenous vein cutdown or orthopedic surgery that includes incisions or dissection over the distal tibia or medial malleolus can result in damage to the saphenous nerve , resulting in loss of cutaneous sensation in the medial leg .
This is due to the intimate path that the saphenous nerve and the great saphenous vein travel .
The saphenous nerve is also often damaged during vein harvest for bypass surgery and during trocar placement during knee arthroscopy .
There appears to be occasional meaningful individual variation in the pathway of this nerve , such that the illustration of it done for Gray 's Anatomy , for example , likely represents an unusual rather than usual course .
The saphenous nerve can experience entrapment syndrome from exercises involving the quadriceps or from prolonged walking or standing .
It is characterized by a burning sensation in most patients .
Pain often occurs at night , long after the physical exercise which induced it has stopped , and may be aggravated by climbing stairs .
Usually , in this case , motor function of the lower leg will not be impaired .
This is a key distinction between saphenous nerve neuropathy and lower back radiculopathy .
Saphenous nerve neuropathy only demonstrates sensory alterations , while lumbar radiculopathy will affect the motor , sensory , and deep tendon reflexes of the lower leg .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " Structures of the Adductor Canal "