FOUNDATION STONE
The Foundation Stone ( Even ha - Shtiyya or Selā ' , Sakhrah " Rock " ) is the name of the rock at the centre of the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem .
It is also known as the Pierced Stone because it has a small hole on the southeastern corner that enters a cavern beneath the rock , known as the Well of Souls .
There is a difference of opinion in classical Jewish sources as to whether this was the location of the Holy of Holies or of the Outer Altar .
According to those that hold it was the site of the Holy of Holies , that would make this the holiest site in Judaism ( Tanhuma , chapter 10 ) .
Jewish tradition views the Holy of Holies as the spiritual junction of Heaven and Earth , the axis mundi , and is therefore the direction that Jews face when praying the Amidah .
The other view , that this was the site of the Outer Altar , would explain the holes in the stone which served various sacrificial purposes in the Outer Altar .
From a classical Jewish textual standpoint , there is no conclusive opinion on the matter .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
The rock is located towards the centre of the Temple Mount , an artificial platform built and expanded over many centuries .
The current shape is the result of an expansion by Herod the Great on top of vaults over a summit called Mount Moriah which three millennia ago was the highest elevation in early Jerusalem 's proximity to the City of David .
There is some controversy among secular scholars about equating Mount Moriah , the Temple Mount and the Foundation Stone as the location where events occurred according to the Biblical narrative .
Early Jewish writings assist in confirming that the Dome of the Rock , completed in 691 , is the site of the Holy of Holies and therefore the location of the Foundation Stone .
Pirke De - Rabbi Eliezer , a midrashic narrative of the more important events of the Torah believed to have been compiled in Italy shortly after 833 CE , writes : " Rabbi Ishmael said : In the future , the sons of Ishmael ( the Arabs ) will do fifteen things in the Land of Israel … They will fence in the breaches of the walls of the Temple and construct a building on the site of the sanctuary . "
Rabbis have discussed the precise location of the rock .
David ben Solomon
ibn Abi Zimra was convinced that " under the dome on the Temple Mount , which the Arabs call El - Sakhrah , without a doubt is the location of the Foundation Stone .
"
The Travels of Petachia of Ratisbon , c.1180 , The Travels of Benjamin of Tudela and The Travels of the Student of the Ramban all equally state that " on the Temple Mount stands a beautiful sanctuary which an Arab king built long ago , over the place of the Temple sanctuary and courtyard .
"
Obadiah ben Abraham Bartenura , who wrote a letter from Jerusalem in 1488 , says that " I sought the place of the Foundation Stone where the Ark of the Covenant was placed , and many people told me it is under a tall and beautiful dome which the Arabs built in the Temple precinct . "
Other traditional sources disagreed ; operating under the belief that the Southern Wall of the Temple Mount as it stood in their time was the Southern Wall of the Biblical era , they argued that the measurements given in the Talmud do not reconcile .
The Holy of Holies ends up being too far north
and they therefore locate the Foundation Stone as being directly opposite the current exposed section of the Western Wall , where no building currently stands .
This is the view of Isaac Luria and the Maharsha , who state the prophecy that " Zion will become a ploughed field " indicates that no dwelling will be established there until the time of the Redemption .
It therefore follows that the footprint of the Temple courtyard and Holy of Holies is situated in the unbuilt area between the Dome of the Rock and al - Aqsa Mosque .
Some believe the position is north of the Dome of the Rock , opposite the Gate of Mercy , which Emmanuel Hai Ricci identifies as the Shushan Gate mentioned in the Talmud .
This gate was described as being opposite the opening of the sanctuary .
Modern Jewish academics list four possible locations of the Foundation Stone :
* The stone that was located beneath the Ark of the Covenant is the one under the Dome of the Rock .
*
* The stone that was located beneath the altar is now the one that is under the Dome of the Rock .
*
* The stone that was located beneath the Ark of the Covenant is now near El Kas fountain to the South of the Dome of the Rock .
*
* The stone that was located beneath the Ark of the Covenant is now inside the Spirits Dome situated to the North of the Dome of the Rock .
* DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Although the rock is part of the surrounding 90-million - year - old , Upper Turonian Stage , Late Cretaceous karsted limestone , the southern side forms a ledge , with a gap between it and the surrounding ground ; a set of steps currently uses this gap to provide access from the Dome of the Rock to the Well of Souls beneath it .
The rock has several artificial cuts in its surface generally attributed to the Crusaders whose frequent damage to the rock was so severe that the Christian kings of Jerusalem placed a protective marble slab over the rock .
The marble slab was removed by Saladin .
More recently , there has been speculation that several artificial features of the rock 's surface may substantially predate the Crusades .
Archaeologist Leen Ritmeyer reports that there are sections of the rock cut completely flat , which north - to - south have a width of 6 cubits , precisely the width that the Mishnah credits to the wall of the Holy of Holies , and
hence Ritmeyer proposed that these flat sections constitute foundation trenches on top of which the walls of the original temple were laid .
However , according to Josephus there were 31 steps up to the Holy of Holies from the lower level of the Temple Mount , and the Mishnah identifies 29 steps in total , and each step was half a cubit in height ( according to the Mishnah ) ; this is a height of at least 22 feet — the height of the Sakhra is 21 feet above the lower level of the Temple Mount , and should therefore have been under the floor .
Measuring the flat surface as the position of the southern wall of a square enclosure , the west and north sides of which are formed by the low clean - cut scarp at these edges of the rock , at the position of the hypothetical centre is a rectangular cut in the rock that is about 2.5 cubits ( min .
120.4 cm SI )
long and 1.5 cubits ( min .
72.24 cm SI )
wide , which are the dimensions of the Ark of the Covenant ( according to the Book of Exodus ) .
The Mishnah gives the height of the rock as three thumb - breadths ( min . 6 cm SI ) above the ground .
Radbaz discusses the apparent contradiction of the Mishnah 's measurements and the actual measurement of the rock within the Dome he estimates as a " height of two men " above the ground .
He concluded that many changes in the natural configuration of the Temple Mount have taken place which can be attributed to excavations made by the various occupiers of Jerusalem since the Second Temple construction .
JEWISH SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Jewish significance .
This is the holiest site in Judaism .
Jews all over the world pray towards the Foundation Stone .
The Roman - Era midrash Tanhuma sums up the centrality of and holiness of this site in Judaism :
According to the sages of the Talmud , it was from this rock that the world was created , itself being the first part of the Earth to come into existence .
In the words of the Zohar , " The world was not created until God took a stone called Even haShetiya and threw it into the depths where it was fixed from above till below , and from it the world expanded .
It is the centre point of the world and on this spot stood the Holy of Holies . "
According to the Talmud , it was close to here , on the site of the altar , that God gathered the earth that was formed into Adam .
It was on this rock that Adam — and later Cain and Abel and Noah — offered sacrifices to God .
Jewish sources identify this rock as the place of the Binding of Isaac mentioned in the Bible , where Abraham fulfilled God 's test to see if he would be willing to sacrifice his son .
The mountain is identified as Moriah in Genesis 22 .
It is also identified as the rock upon which Jacob dreamt about angels ascending and descending on a ladder and consequently consecrating and offering a sacrifice upon .. When , according to the Bible , King David purchased a threshing floor owned by Araunah the Jebusite , it is believed that it was upon this rock that he offered the sacrifice mentioned in the verse .
He wanted to construct a permanent temple there , but as his hands were " bloodied " , he was forbidden to do so himself .
The task was left to his son Solomon , who completed the Temple in c. 950 BCE .
The Mishnah in tractate Yoma mentions a stone situated in the Holy of Holies that was called Shetiya and had been revealed by the early prophets ( i.e. David and Samuel . ) .
An early Christian source noting Jewish attachment to the rock may be found in the Itinerarium Burdigalense , written between 333–334 CE when Jerusalem was under Roman rule , which describes a " perforated stone to which the Jews come every year and anoint it , bewail themselves with groans , rend their garments , and so depart . "
ROLE IN THE TEMPLE Section::::Role in the Temple .
Situated inside the Holy of Holies , this was the rock upon which the Ark of the Covenant was placed in Solomon 's Temple .
During the Second Temple period when the Ark of the Covenant was not present , the stone was used by the High Priest who offered up the incense and sprinkled the blood of the sacrifices on it during the Yom Kippur service .
COMMEMORATION IN JEWISH LAW Section::::Commemoration in Jewish law .
The Jerusalem Talmud states :
Citing this , the Mishnah Berurah rules that not only are women not to prepare or attach warp threads to a weaving loom , but it is forbidden for anyone to make , buy or wear new clothes or shoes from the beginning of the week in which Tisha B'Av falls until after the fast , and that people should ideally not do so from the beginning of Av .
In further commemoration of the Foundation Stone , it is also forbidden to eat meat or drink wine from the beginning of the week in which Tisha B'av falls until after the fast .
Some have the custom to refrain from these foodstuffs from Rosh Chodesh Av , while others do so from the Seventeenth of Tammuz .
LITURGICAL REFERENCES Section::::Liturgical references .
In the days when Selichot are recited , in the days leading up to Rosh Hashanah until Yom Kippur , the supplications include the following references : During Sukkot , the following references to the Foundation Stone are mentioned in the Hoshanot recital : הושענא !
– אבן שתיה – הושענא Please save !
–
Foundation Stone – Please save !
הושענא ! –
תאדרנו באבן תלולה – הושענא Please save !
– Adorn us with the elevated Stone – Please save !
ISLAMIC SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Islamic significance .
The Temple Mount , where the Foundation Stone is located , is thought by commentators of the Quran to be the place from which Muhammad began his Night Journey .
Although the Qur'an does not specifically mention Jerusalem in name as the ascension site , labelling the site as the Al - Aqsa Mosque , the Hadith , the recorded sayings of Muhammad , specify that the site is indeed the Foundation Stone in Jerusalem .
According to Islamic belief , angels visited the site 2,000 years before the creation of Adam .
It is also thought to be the place where Israfil , the angel of the trumpet , will sound his horn on Resurrection Day .
Beneath the Foundation Stone is a cavern known as the Well of Souls .
It is sometimes thought of as the traditional hiding place of the Ark of the Covenant .
SEE ALSO
* Black Stone
* Navel of the World
* Jerusalem in Judaism
* Jerusalem in Islam
* Mount Gerizim REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS