FLASH
BLINDNESS Flash blindness is a visual impairment during and following exposure to a light flash of extremely high intensity .
The bright light overwhelms the eye and gradually fades , lasting anywhere from a few seconds to a few minutes .
Flash blindness may also occur in everyday life .
For example , the subject of a flash photograph can be temporarily flash blinded .
This phenomenon is leveraged in non - lethal weapons such as flash grenades and laser dazzlers .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
Flash blindness is caused by bleaching ( oversaturation ) of the retinal pigment .
As the pigment returns to normal , so too does sight .
In daylight the eye 's pupil constricts , thus reducing the amount of light entering after a flash .
At night , the dark - adapted pupil is wide open
so flash blindness has a greater effect and lasts longer .
TEMPORARY VS .
PERMANENT Section::::Temporary vs. permanent .
Is flash blindness temporary or permanent ?
* Some sources such as NATO and the U.S. Department of Defense state that " flash blindness " can be temporary or permanent .
* Other sources restrict the use of the word to temporary , reversible vision loss : " ...
These are , in order of increasing brightness : dazzle , after image formation , flash blindness , and irreversible damage . "
The United States Federal Aviation Administration in Order JO 7400.2 defines flash blindness as " Generally , a temporary visual interference effect that persists after the source of the illumination has ceased . "
Because there appears to be no consensus definition , one should be especially clear about which sense(s ) of the phrase are meant .
For example , using the phrase " temporary flash blindness " when discussing everyday flash photography emphasizes that the condition will disappear without ill effect .
POTENTIAL HAZARDS Section::::Potential hazards .
Because vision loss is sudden and takes time to recover , flash blindness can be hazardous .
At some sporting events such as figure skating , fans are cautioned to not use flash photography so as to avoid distracting or disorienting the athletes .
Also in aviation , there is concern about laser pointers and bright searchlights causing temporary flash blindness and other vision - distracting effects to pilots who are in critical phases of flight such as approach and landing .
The bright initial flash of a nuclear weapon is the first indication of a nuclear explosion , traveling faster than the blast wave or sound wave . "
A 1-megaton explosion can cause flash blindness at distances as great as 13 miles on a clear day , or 53 miles on a clear night .
If the intensity is great enough , a permanent retinal burn will result . "
PAIN Section::::Pain .
It is unclear whether pain is directly associated with flash blindness .
Reaction to flash blindness can be discomforting and disorienting .
The retina has no pain receptors .
Nonetheless , psychological pain may very well be present .
It can cause amplified stress levels but usually fades .
RELATED CONDITIONS Section::::Related conditions .
Welders can get a painful condition called arc eye .
While it is caused by bright light similar to flash blindness , the welder 's arc lasts for much longer than a flash and emits ultraviolet rays that can damage the cornea .
Flash blindness , in contrast , is caused by a single , very brief exposure which oversaturates the retina , and is not usually accompanied by reports of pain .
SEE ALSO
* Smart glass REFERENCES