UTERUS DIDELPHYS Uterus didelphys ( sometimes also uterus didelphis ) represents a uterine malformation where the uterus is present as a paired organ when the embryogenetic fusion of the Müllerian ducts fails to occur .
As a result , there is a double uterus with two separate cervices , and rarely a double vagina as well .
Each uterus has a single horn linked to the ipsilateral fallopian tube that faces its ovary .
In non human species ( e.g. nematodes ) , a didelphic genital tract may be normal rather than a malformation .
Such species are described as didelphic , as opposed to monodelphic , with a single tract .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Persons with the condition may be asymptomatic and unaware of having a double uterus .
However , a study by Heinonen showed that certain conditions are more common .
In his study of 26 women with a double uterus gynecological complaints included dysmenorrhea and dyspareunia .
All patients displayed a double vagina .
The fetal survival rate in 18 patients who delivered was 67.5 % .
Premature delivery occurred in 21 % of the pregnancies .
Breech presentation occurred in 43 % of women and cesarean section was performed in 82 % of the cases .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
The uterus is formed during embryogenesis by the fusion of the two paramesonephric ducts ( also called Müllerian ducts ) .
This process usually fuses the two Müllerian ducts into a single uterine body but fails to take place in these affected women who maintain their double Müllerian systems .
A didelphic uterus will have a double cervix and is usually associated with a double vagina .
The cause of the fusion failure is not known .
Associated defects may affect the vagina , the renal system and , less commonly , the skeleton .
The condition is less common than these other uterine malformations : arcuate uterus , septate uterus , and bicornuate uterus .
It has been estimated to occur in 1/3,000 women .
SYNDROME Section::::Syndrome .
A specific association of uterus didelphys ( double uterus ) , unilateral hematocolpos ( inadequate draining of menstrual blood ) and ipsilateral renal agenesis ( having only one kidney ) has been described .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A pelvic examination will typically reveal a double vagina and a double cervix .
Investigations are usually prompted on the basis of such findings as well as when reproductive problems are encountered .
Not all cases of uterus didelphys involve duplication of the cervix and vagina .
Helpful techniques to investigate the uterine structure are transvaginal ultrasonography and sonohysterography , hysterosalpingography , MRI , and hysteroscopy .
More recently 3-D ultrasonography has been advocated as an excellent non - invasive method to evaluate uterine malformations .
Uterus didelphys is often confused with a complete uterine septum .
Often more than one method of investigation is necessary to accurately diagnose the condition .
Correct diagnosis is crucial as treatment for these two conditions is very different .
Whereas most doctors recommend removal of a uterine septum , they generally concur that it is better not to operate on a uterus didelphys .
In either case , a highly qualified reproductive endocrinologist should be consulted .
MANAGEMENT Section::::Management .
Patients with a double uterus may need special attention during pregnancy as premature birth and malpresentation are common .
Cesarean section was performed in 82 % of patients reported by Heinonen .
Uterus didelphys , in certain studies , has also been found associated with higher rate of infertility , miscarriage , intrauterine growth retardation , and postpartum bleed .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
In the United States , uterus didelphys is reported to occur in 0.1–0.5 % of women .
It is difficult to know the exact occurrence of this anomaly , as it may go undetected in the absence of medical and reproductive complications .
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY Section::::Multiple pregnancy .
A number of twin gestations have occurred where each uterus carried its pregnancy separately .
A recent example occurred on February 26 , 2009 , when Sarah Reinfelder of Sault Ste .
Marie , Michigan delivered two healthy , although seven weeks premature , infants by cesarean section at Marquette General Hospital .
It is possible that the deliveries occur at different times , thus the delivery interval could be days or even weeks .
TRIPLETS Section::::Triplets .
A UK woman with a double uterus gave birth to triplets in 2006 .
Hannah Kersey , of Northam in Devon , gave birth to a pair of identical twins from an egg that implanted into one womb and then divided , and to an infant from a single egg that implanted into the other womb .
This was the first known birth of viable triplets in a woman with a double uterus .
It is estimated that the possibility of such a birth is about 1 in 25 million .
A triplet pregnancy in a woman with uterus didelphys was reported from Israel in 1981 ; one baby died in utero , and of the remaining babies , one was delivered at 27 weeks gestation and the other 72 days later .
SEE ALSO
* Uterine malformation *
Diphallia * Bifid penis
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Images * A social website designed to help those with UD and inform others of this condition