FIVE - STAR RANK
A five - star rank is a very senior military rank , first established in the United States of America in 1944 , with a five - star general insignia , and corresponding ranks in other countries .
The rank is that of the most senior operational military commanders , and within NATO 's " standard rank scale " it is designated by the code OF-10 .
Not all armed forces have such a rank , and in those that do the actual insignia of the " five - star ranks " may not contain five stars .
For example : the insignia for the French OF-10 rank maréchal de France contains 7 stars ; the insignia for the Portuguese marechal contains four gold stars ; and many of the insignia of the ranks in the Commonwealth of Nations contain no stars at all .
Typically , five - star officers hold the rank of general of the army , admiral of the fleet , field marshal , marshal or general of the air force , and several other similarly named ranks .
Five - star ranks are extremely senior — usually the highest ranks .
As an active rank , the position exists only in a minority of countries and is usually held by only a very few officers during wartime .
In times of peace , it is usually held only as an honorary rank .
Traditionally , five - star ranks are granted to distinguished military commanders for notable wartime victories and/or in recognition of a record of achievement during the officer 's career , whether in peace or in war .
Alternatively , a five - star rank ( or even higher ranks ) may be assumed by heads of state in their capacities as commanders - in - chief of their nation 's armed forces .
Despite the rarity and seniority of five - star officers , even more - senior ranks have been adopted in the United States , namely , admiral of the navy and general of the armies .
Other names for highly senior ranks from the twentieth century include généralissime ( France ) , generalisimo ( Spain ) and generalissimus ( USSR ) .
AUSTRALIAN
FIVE - STAR RANKS
* Admiral of the fleet
* Field marshal
* Marshal of the Royal Australian Air Force Only one Australian born officer ( Sir Thomas Blamey ) has held a substantive Australian five - star rank ( field marshal ) .
HM King George VI and HRH Prince Philip ,
Duke of Edinburgh have held all three Australian five - star ranks in an honorary capacity , and have been the only holders of the Australian ranks of admiral of the fleet and marshal of the RAAF .
BRAZILIAN
FIVE - STAR RANKS Section::::Brazilian five - star ranks .
Five - star ranks in Brazil are only used in wartime .
* Marshal ( Brazil ) ( Marechal )
* Grand Admiral ( Almirante ) * Marshal of the Air ( Marechal - do - Ar ) CROATIAN FIVE - STAR RANKS
* Stožerni general ( lit . "
staff general " , usually translated as general of the army ) awarded to six men , none of whom are in active duty .
* Admiral flote ( admiral of the fleet ) .
The rank was called stožerni admiral ( lit . "
staff admiral " ) until 1999 ; only Sveto Letica was awarded this rank – in March 1996 , three months before his retirement .
INDIAN
FIVE - STAR RANKS
* Admiral of the fleet , never been held * Field marshal , held by K. M. Cariappa and Sam Manekshaw
* Marshal of the Air Force , held by Arjan Singh Section::::Indian five - star ranks .
Around 1998 , the Indian Air Force introduced gorget patches ( or collar tabs ) for its air officers .
For marshals of the Indian Air Force , the patches display five stars .
INDONESIAN
FIVE - STAR RANKS Section::::Indonesian five - star ranks .
The Indonesian five star ranks are : * Jenderal besar ( grand general ) - only awarded to three people : * Jenderal besar Soedirman , the rank was granted posthumously .
* Jenderal besar Abdul Haris Nasution , the rank was granted 26-years after his retirement .
* Jenderal besar Soeharto ( 2nd President of Indonesia ) , his rank was granted during his own rule .
*
Laksamana besar ( grand admiral ) - never awarded * Marsekal besar ( grand marshal ) - never awarded ITALIAN FIVE - STAR RANKS
PAKISTANI FIVE - STAR RANKS
* Field marshal ( Pakistan Army five - star rank ) , Ayub Khan
The following ranks have never been awarded : * Admiral of the fleet
* Marshal of the Pakistan Air Force * Field marshal ( Pakistan Army five - star rank ) , Pervaz Musharaf POLISH FIVE - STAR RANKS Section::::Polish five - star ranks .
Marshal of Poland
( Marszałek Polski ) is a Polish Army five - star rank .
There are today no living marshals of Poland , since this rank is bestowed only on military commanders who have achieved victory in war .
SPANISH FIVE - STAR RANKS
* Captain general ( Army )
* Captain general of the Navy * Air captain general ( Air Force ) Section::::Spanish five - star ranks .
These ranks have been reserved for the reigning monarch .
THAI FIVE - STAR RANKS
* Chom Phon ( ) , Royal Thai Army * Chom Phon Ruea ( ) , Royal Thai Navy * Chom Phon Akat ( ) , Royal Thai Air Force Section::::Thai five - star ranks .
The monarch of Thailand is appointed to the three ranks automatically upon accession as he is the constitutional Head of the Royal Thai Armed Forces .
Since 1973 the three ranks have been reserved for members of the royal family .
UK
FIVE - STAR RANKS Section::::UK five - star ranks .
The worn insignia of British five - star commanders do not contain stars ; the vehicle star plate , mounted on the front of a staff car , does display five stars .
* Admiral of the fleet ( awarded to 121 men to date ) * Field Marshal ( awarded to 140 men to date )
* Marshal of the Royal Air Force ( awarded to 27 men to date )
* Captain General of the Royal Marines ( awarded to five members of the British Royal Family , currently held by Prince Harry , Duke of Sussex ) Promotion to the ranks of Admiral of the Fleet and Marshal of the Royal Air Force is now generally held in abeyance in peacetime with exceptions for special circumstances .
Promotion to the rank of Field Marshal was generally stopped in 1995 as a cost - cutting measure but is still made in some cases .
The most recent appointments to five - star ranks are the promotions in 2012 of The Prince of Wales to honourary five - star rank in all three services , and of former Chief of the Defence Staff Lord Guthrie of Craigiebank to the honorary rank of Field Marshal .
In 2014 the former Chief of the Defence Staff Lord Stirrup was promoted to the honourary rank of Marshal of the Royal Air Force .
During World War II and after , serving NATO , a small number of British five - star commanders have held the additional title Supreme Allied Commander , given operational control over all air , land , and sea units led by the four - star commanders of multi - national forces .
U.S. FIVE - STAR
RANKS
* Fleet Admiral ( held by four officers ) * General of the Army ( held by five officers ) * General of the Air Force ( held by one officer ) Section::::U.S. five - star ranks .
Before the five - star ranks were established in 1944 , two officers had previously been promoted from their four - star ranks to the superior and unique ranks of Admiral of the Navy and General of the Armies : Admiral George Dewey ( appointment 1903 retroactive to 1899 , died 1917 ) and General John J. Pershing ( appointed 1919 , died 1948 ) .
In 1944 the Navy and Army specified that these officers were considered senior to any officers promoted to the five - star ranks within their services ( but it was not clear if they were senior by rank or by seniority due to an earlier date of rank ) .
Five - star ranks were created in the US military during World War II because of the awkward situation created when some American senior commanders were placed in positions commanding allied officers of higher rank .
US officers holding five - star rank never retire ; they draw full active duty pay for life .
The five - star ranks were retired in 1981 on the death of General of the Army Omar Bradley .
Nine Americans have been promoted to five - star rank , one of them , Henry H. Arnold , in two services ( US Army then later in the US Air Force ) .
As part of the bicentennial celebration , George Washington was , 177 years after his death , permanently made senior to all other US generals and admirals with the title General of the Armies effective on 4 July 1976 .
The appointment stated he was to have " rank and precedence over all other grades of the Army , past or present " .
During World War II
and ( later ) serving NATO , a small number of American five - star commanders have also held the additional title of Supreme Allied Commander , given operational control over all air , land , and sea units led by the four - star commanders of multi - national forces .
SEE ALSO
* Ranks and insignia of NATO
* List of fleet and grand admirals
* List of field marshals * List of marshals of the Air Force * Design of US army
insignia
* Heraldic origin of the use of five - pointed star * Six - star rank NOTES REFERENCES