LIST OF FEMALE GOVERNORS IN THE UNITED STATES
As of December 2018 , forty - two women have served or are serving as the governor of a U.S. state ( including one from the U.S. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico , two Mayors of the District of Columbia and two acting governors due to vacancies ) .
Currently , six women are serving as governors of U.S. states , along with Mayor of the District of Columbia Muriel Bowser .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first woman to act as governor was Carolyn B. Shelton , who served as acting governor of Oregon for one weekend – 9 a.m. Saturday , February 27 , through 10 a.m. Monday , March 1 , 1909 .
The outgoing governor , George Earle Chamberlain , had been elected to the Senate and had to leave for Washington , D.C. , before his term was over , and the incoming governor , Frank W. Benson , had gotten sick and could n't assume office early .
Chamberlain left Shelton , his secretary , in charge for the weekend .
It was another three and a half years before women were allowed to vote in Oregon .
( As a side note , Chamberlain and Shelton married each other 17 years later . )
The first acting governor to be entrusted with substantial duties while in office was Soledad Chávez de Chacón , who held the powers and duties of Governor of New Mexico for 2 weeks in 1924 while Governor James F. Hinkle attended the Democratic Convention in New York .
Lieutenant Governor Jose A. Baca had died unexpectedly in May , so Chacón , the Secretary of State , filled the position .
Chacón said she believed that her 1924 elevation was the first time in the U.S. that a woman had been called on to assume the responsibilities of governor .
The first woman to assume office as governor pursuant to a special election was Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming ( widow of late Governor William B. Ross , served January 1923 to October 1924 ) , who was elected on November 4 , 1924 , and sworn in on January 5 , 1925 .
Wyoming was the first state to provide women 's suffrage after New Jersey had abolished it in 1807 .
Elected on the November 3 , 1924 general election , and sworn in on January 20 , 1925 , was Miriam A. Ferguson of Texas , whose husband , Governor James Edward Ferguson , had previously held the office but been impeached and removed from office in 1917 .
The first female governor elected without being the wife or widow of a past state governor was Ella T. Grasso of Connecticut , elected in 1974 and sworn in on January 8 , 1975 .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
Connecticut , Arizona , and Alabama are the only three states to have elected female governors from both major parties .
New Hampshire has also had female governors from both parties .
In New Hampshire , Republican Vesta M. Roy only served in the acting capacity for a short time .
Arizona was the first state where a woman followed another woman as governor ( they were from different parties ) .
Arizona also has had the most female governors with a total of four , and is the first state to have three women in a row serve as governor .
On two different occasions , a record nine out of 50 state governorships were held by women : first , between December 4 , 2006 , when Sarah Palin was inaugurated as the first female governor of Alaska , and January 14 , 2008 , when Kathleen Blanco left office as governor of Louisiana , and second , between January 10 , 2009 , when Beverly Perdue was inaugurated as governor of North Carolina , and January 20 , 2009 , when Ruth Ann Minner retired as governor of Delaware .
This record could be matched in January 2019 , when five newly elected female governors are due to take office along with four re - elected female incumbents , following the 2018 elections .
The U.S. Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia , though not states , have also had female chief executives : Governor Sila María Calderón and Mayors Sharon Pratt Kelly and Muriel Bowser , respectively .
Additionally , Lou Leon Guerrero is the governor - elect of Guam and will take office in 2019 .
As of 2018 , a total of 20 states have never had a female governor .
Those states are : Arkansas , California , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Idaho , Illinois , Indiana , Maryland , Minnesota , Mississippi , Missouri , Nevada , New York , North Dakota , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , Virginia , West Virginia and Wisconsin .
Six of these states ( Minnesota , Mississippi , New York , Ohio , Tennessee , and Utah ) have never even seen a major party nominate a female candidate in a gubernatorial election , even though eight consecutive female lieutenant governors have served in Minnesota , from 1983 to the present day .
There have only been two ethnic minority female governors of states : Susana Martinez of New Mexico ( Hispanic ) and Nikki Haley of South Carolina ( Asian American ) .
All three territorial female governors have been ethnic minority : Sharon Pratt and Muriel Bowser of Washington , D.C.
( both African American ) , and Sila María Calderón of Puerto Rico ( Hispanic ) .
However , one additional state and one additional territory are due to be led by an ethnic minority female governor elected in the 2018 elections : Michelle Lujan Grisham of New Mexico ( Hispanic ) and Lou Leon Guerrero of Guam ( Pacific Islander ) .
LIST OF FEMALE STATE GOVERNORS AND ACTING GOVERNORS Section::::List of female state governors and acting governors . !
Picture ! Name(Lifespan ) !
State !
Term start !
Term end !
Party !
Notes !
Departure !
Ref Wyoming Widow of Governor William B. Ross .
First , and to date , only female Governor of Wyoming .
First woman elected in a special election .
Lost
reelection rowspan=2 rowspan=2 rowspan=2 Texas rowspan=2 Democratic rowspan=2 Wife of Governor James E. Ferguson .
First female Governor of Texas .
First woman elected in a general election .
Retired Retired Alabama Wife of Governor George Wallace .
First female Governor of Alabama .
First , and to date , only female governor to die in office .
Died in office Connecticut
First female governor not a wife or widow of a previous governor .
First female Governor of ConnecticutFirst female governor to resign , due to terminal ovarian cancer .
Resigned Washington First female Governor of Washington .
First female Acting Governor of New Hampshire .
Term ended Kentucky First and to date , only female Governor of Kentucky .
Retired Vermont
First , and to date , only female Governor of Vermont .
First foreign - born female governor of any state .
Retired Nebraska
First Republican woman elected governor .
First woman elected governor over another female major party nominee .
First , and to date , only female Governor of Nebraska .
Lost reelection Arizona First female Governor of Arizona .
Elevated from Secretary of State when Evan Mecham was impeached and convicted .
Retired Kansas First female Governor of Kansas .
First woman to defeat an incumbent governor in a general election .
Retired Oregon
First woman elected Governor of Oregon .
Retired Texas
Lost reelection New Jersey First , and to date , only woman elected Governor of New Jersey .
First Republican woman to defeat an incumbent governor in a general election .
Resigned to become Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency .
New Hampshire Democratic
First woman elected Governor of New Hampshire .
Retired Arizona
Elevated from Secretary of State when Fife Symington resigned .
Later elected in her own right .
Term limited Ohio
First , and to date , only female Governor of Ohio .
Elevated from Lieutenant Governor when George Voinovich became U.S. Senator .
Term ended Montana First , and to date , only female Governor of Montana .
Retired Delaware First , and to date , only female Governor of Delaware .
Term limited Massachusetts First female Governor of Massachusetts .
First governor to give birth while in office ( to twins).Youngest female governor to date at age 36 .
Retired Hawaii
First , and to date , only female Governor of Hawaii .
Term limited
Michigan
First female Governor of Michigan Term limited Arizona Resigned to become Secretary of Homeland Security Kansas Resigned to become Secretary of Health and Human Services .
Utah First , and to date , only female Governor of Utah .
Elevated from Lieutenant Governor of Utah when Mike Leavitt became Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency .
Lost nomination for full term
Louisiana
First , and to date , only female Governor of Louisiana Retired Connecticut Elevated from Lieutenant Governor when John G. Rowland resigned .
Later elected in her own right .
Retired Washington
Retired Alaska First , and to date , only female Governor of Alaska ( also its youngest governor).First female governor to appear on a major party presidential ticket , as the 2008 Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States .
Resigned North Carolina First , and to date , only female Governor of North Carolina .
Retired Arizona
Elevated from Secretary of State when Janet Napolitano became Secretary of Homeland Security .
Later elected in her own right .
Term limited New Mexico Incumbent First female Governor of New Mexico .
First Hispanic - American female Governor .
Serving Oklahoma
Incumbent First , and to date , only female Governor of Oklahoma .
Serving First , and to date , only female Governor of South Carolina .
First Asian - American female governor .
Resigned to become United States Ambassador to the United Nations New Hampshire Resigned to become U.S. Senator from New Hampshire .
Rhode Island
Incumbent First , and to date , only female Governor of Rhode Island .
Serving
Oregon Incumbent First , and to date , only bisexual governor and first openly LGBT elected governor .
Elevated from Secretary of State when John Kitzhaber resigned .
Later elected in her own right .
Serving Alabama
Incumbent Elevated from Lieutenant Governor when Robert Bentley resigned .
Later elected in her own right .
Serving
Iowa
Incumbent Elevated from Lieutenant Governor when Terry Branstad became Ambassador to China .
First , and to date , only female Governor of Iowa .
Later elected in her own right .
Serving Michigan January 1 , 2019
Elect Elected New Mexico January 1 , 2019
Elect
Elected Maine January 2 , 2019 Elect First , and to date , only female Governor of Maine .
Elected South Dakota January 5 , 2019 Elect First , and to date , only female Governor of South Dakota .
Elected Kansas January 14 , 2019 Elect Elected TERRITORIES AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Section::::Territories and the District of Columbia . !
Picture ! Name(Lifespan ) !
Jurisdiction !
Term start !
Term end !
Party !
Notes !
Departure First African American female mayor of a major city .
First female Mayor of the District of Columbia .
Puerto Rico First female Governor of Puerto Rico .
Retired Incumbent Serving January 2019 Elect First , and to date , only female Governor of Guam .
Elected TIMELINE OF FEMALE U.S.
GOVERNORS PREGNANCIES Section::::Pregnancies .
There have been two female governors who were pregnant and gave birth during their tenure . !
colspan="5 " Governors who have been pregnant while in office !
Governor !
State !
Date of delivery !
Mother 's age !
Notes Jane Swift Massachusetts May 14 , 2001
align="center"36 Gave birth to twin girls one month into her term of office Sarah Palin Alaska April 18 , 2008 align="center"44
First elected governor to give birth while in office .
SEE ALSO
* List of first gentlemen in the United States * List of female lieutenant governors in the United States NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
" History of Women Governors " Center for American Women and Politics , Eagleton Institute of Politics , Rutgers , The State University of New Jersey