STACHYS BYZANTINA Stachys byzantina
( syn .
S. lanata ; lamb's - ear or woolly hedgenettle ) is a species of Stachys , native to Turkey , Armenia , and Iran .
It is cultivated over much of the temperate world as an ornamental plant , and is naturalised in some locations as an escapee from gardens .
Plants are very often found under the synonym Stachys lanata or Stachys olympica .
Lamb's - ear flowers in late spring and early summer ; plants produce tall spike - like stems with a few reduced leaves .
The flowers are small and light purple .
The plants tend to be evergreen but can " die " back during cold winters and regenerate new growth from the crowns .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Lamb's - ear plants are perennial herbs usually densely covered with gray or silver - white , silky - lanate hairs .
They are named lamb 's ears because of the leaves ' curved shape and white , soft , fur - like hair coating .
Flowering stems are erect , often branched , and tend to be 4-angled , growing 40–80 cm tall .
The leaves are thick and somewhat wrinkled , densely covered on both sides with gray - silver colored , silky - lanate hairs ; the undersides are more silver - white in color than the top surfaces .
The leaves are arranged oppositely on the stems and 5 to 10 cm long .
The leaf petioles are semiamplexicaul ( the bases wrapping half way around the stem ) with the basal leaves having blades oblong - elliptic in shape , measuring 10 cm long and 2.5 cm wide ( though variation exists in cultivated forms ) .
The leaf margins are crenulate but covered with dense hairs , the leaf apexes attenuate , gradually narrowing to a rounded point .
The flowering spikes are 10–22 cm long , producing verticillasters that each have many flowers and are crowded together over most of the length on the spike - like stem .
The leaves produced on the flowering stems are greatly reduced in size and subsessile , the lower ones slightly longer than the interscholastic and the upper ones shorter than the verticillasters .
The leaf bracteoles are linear to linear - lanceolate in shape and 6 mm long .
The flowers have no pedicels ( sessile ) and the calyx is tubular - campanulate in shape , being slightly curved and 1.2 cm long .
The calyx is glabrous except for the inside surface of the teeth , having 10 veins with the accessory veins inconspicuous .
The 2–3 mm long calyx teeth are ovate - triangular in shape and are subequal or the posterior teeth larger , with rigid apices .
The corollas have some darker purple tinted veins inside ; they are 1.2 cm long with silky - lanate hairs but bases that are glabrous .
The corolla tubes are about 6 mm long with the upper lip ovate in shape with entire margins ; the lower lips are subpatent with the middle lobe broadly ovate in shape , lateral lobes oblong .
The stamen filaments are densely villous from the base to the middle .
The styles are exserted much past the corolla .
There are immature nutlets without hairs , brown in color and oblong in shape .
Lamb's - ear is a commonly grown plant for children 's gardens , as it is easy to grow and the thick felt - like leaves are fun to touch .
It is also used as an edging plant .
In Brazil it is used as an edible herb , called lambari .
It has sometimes been used as a medicinal plant .
A number of cultivars exist including white flowering forms , plants with shorter habit and plants that do not bloom as much : * ' Big Ears ' - leaves very large , up to 25 cm long .
* ' Cotton Boll ' - a sterile cultivar that does not produce flowering stems .
Asexually propagated .
* ' Primrose Heron ' - leaves yellow in spring ; flowers pink * ' Sheila Macqueen ' - sterile ; low - growing ; leaves large .
* ' Silky Fleece ' - grows 25 cm tall with lilac - plum flowers , produce smaller white - woolly foliage .
Seed propagated .
* ' Silver Carpet ' - sterile ; leaves grey .
Asexually propagated .
* ' Striped Phantom ' - leaves variegated .
ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIVITY Section::::Antibacterial activity .
Stachys byzantina extract has shown antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus that is resistant to vancomycin .
GALLERY REFERENCES