FRICTION LOSS
In fluid flow , friction loss ( or skin friction ) is the loss of pressure or " head " that occurs in pipe or duct flow due to the effect of the fluid 's viscosity near the surface of the pipe or duct .
In mechanical systems such as internal combustion engines , the term refers to the power lost in overcoming the friction between two moving surfaces , a different phenomenon .
ECONOMICS Section::::Economics .
Friction loss is a significant economic concern wherever fluids are made to flow , whether entirely enclosed in a pipe or duct , or with a surface open to the air .
*
Historically , it is a concern in aqueducts of all kinds , throughout human history .
It is also relevant to sewer lines .
Systematic study traces back to Henry Darcy , an aqueduct engineer .
* Natural flows in river beds are important to human activity ; friction loss in a stream bed has an effect on the height of the flow , particularly significant during flooding .
*
The economies of pipelines for petrochemical delivery are highly affected by friction loss .
The Yamal – Europe pipeline carries methane at a volume flow rate of 32.3 × 10 m of gas per year , at Reynolds numbers greater than 50 × 10 .
*
In hydropower applications , the energy lost to skin friction in flume and penstock is not available for useful work , say generating electricity .
* Irrigation water is pumped at large yearly volumes of flow , entailing significant expense .
* HVAC systems pump conditioning air on a widespread basis .
*
In refrigeration applications , energy is expended pumping the coolant fluid through pipes or through the condenser .
In split systems , the pipes carrying the coolant take the place of the air ducts in HVAC systems .
* Wells and domestic water systems must be engineered for effective and economical operation .
DEFINING FRICTION LOSS
Section::::Defining Friction Loss .
In the following discussion , we define volumetric flow rate V̇ ( i.e. volume of fluid flowing ) V̇ =
πrv
where In long pipes , the loss in pressure ( assuming the pipe is level ) is proportional to the length of pipe involved .
Friction loss is then the change in pressure
Δp per unit length of pipe L When the pressure is expressed in terms of the equivalent height of a column of that fluid , as is common with water , the friction loss is expressed as S , the " head loss " per length of pipe , a dimensionless quantity also known as the hydraulic slope .
where CHARACTERIZING FRICTION LOSS Section::::Characterizing Friction Loss .
Friction loss , which is due to the shear stress between the pipe surface and the fluid flowing within , depends on the conditions of flow and the physical properties of the system .
These conditions can be encapsulated into a dimensionless number Re , known as the Reynolds number where V is the mean fluid velocity and D the diameter of the ( cylindrical ) pipe .
In this expression , the properties of the fluid itself are reduced to the kinematic viscosity
ν where FRICTION LOSS IN STRAIGHT PIPE Section::::Friction loss in straight pipe .
The friction loss In a uniform , straight sections of pipe , known as " major loss " , is caused by the effects of viscosity , the movement of fluid molecules against each other or against the ( possibly rough ) wall of the pipe .
Here , it is greatly affected by whether the flow is laminar ( Re turbulent ( Re > 4000 ) :
*
In laminar flow , losses are proportional to fluid velocity , V ; that velocity varies smoothly between the bulk of the fluid and the pipe surface , where it is zero .
The roughness of the pipe surface influences neither the fluid flow nor the friction loss .
*
In turbulent flow , losses are proportional to the square of the fluid velocity , V ; here , a layer of chaotic eddies and vortices near the pipe surface , called the viscous sub - layer , forms the transition to the bulk flow .
In this domain , the effects of the roughness of the pipe surface must be considered .
It is useful to characterize that roughness as the ratio of the roughness height ε to the pipe diameter D , the " relative roughness " .
Three sub - domains pertain to turbulent flow :
*
In the smooth pipe domain , friction loss is relatively insensitive to roughness .
*
In the rough pipe domain , friction loss is dominated by the relative roughness and is insensitive to Reynolds number .
*
In the transition domain , friction loss is sensitive to both .
*
For Reynolds numbers 2000 FORM FRICTION Section::::Form friction .
Factors other than straight pipe flow induce friction loss ; these are known as " minor loss " :
* Fittings , such as bends , couplings , valves , or transitions in hose or pipe diameter , or * Objects intruded into the fluid flow .
For the purposes of calculating the total friction loss of a system , the sources of form friction are sometimes reduced to an equivalent length of pipe .
MEASUREMENTS
Section::::Measurements .
Because of the importance of friction loss in civil engineering and in industry , it has been studied extensively for over a century .
* Cited by Moody , L. F.
( 1944 ) * Cited by Moody , L. F. ( 1944 ) * Exhibits Nikuradse data .
* Large amounts of field data on commercial pipes .
The Colebrook – White equation was found inadequate over a wide range of flow conditions .
* Shows friction factor in the smooth flow region for 1 SURFACE ROUGHNESS Section::::Surface Roughness .
The roughness of the surface of the pipe or duct affects the fluid flowBrick !
scope="row "
Concrete ! scope="row
" Wood Stave !
scope="row " Galvanized metals ( normal finish),Cast iron ( coated and uncoated ) ! scope="row " Asphalted Cast Iron !
scope="row " Concrete ( new , or fairly new , smooth ) ! scope="row " Steel Pipes , Galvanized metals ( smooth finish),Concrete ( new , unusually smooth , with smooth joints),Asbestos cement , CALCULATING FRICTION LOSS HAGEN – POISEUILLE Section::::Calculating friction loss .
Section::::Hagen
– Poiseuille .
Laminar flow is encountered in practice with very viscous fluids , such as motor oil , flowing through small - diameter tubes , at low velocity .
Friction loss under conditions of laminar flow follow the Hagen – Poiseuille equation , which is an exact solution to the Navier - Stokes equations .
For a circular pipe with a fluid of density ρ and viscosity μ , the hydraulic slope S can be expressed In laminar flow ( that is , with Re Darcy – Weisbach Section::::Darcy – Weisbach .
In many practical engineering applications , the fluid flow is more rapid , therefore turbulent rather than laminar .
Under turbulent flow , the friction loss is found to be roughly proportional to the square of the flow velocity and inversely proportional to the pipe diameter , that is , the friction loss follows the phenomenological Darcy – Weisbach equation in which the hydraulic slope S can be expressed where we have introduced the Darcy friction factor f ( but see Confusion with the Fanning friction factor ) ;
Note that the value of this dimensionless factor depends on the pipe diameter D and the roughness of the pipe surface ε .
Furthermore , it varies as well with the flow velocity V and on the physical properties of the fluid ( usually cast together into the Reynolds number Re ) .
Thus , the friction loss is not precisely proportional to the flow velocity squared , nor to the inverse of the pipe diameter : the friction factor takes account of the remaining dependency on these parameters .
From experimental measurements , the general features of the variation of f are , for fixed relative roughness ε / D and for Reynolds number
Re = V D /
ν
> ~2000 , *
With relative roughness ε / D *
At higher roughness , with increasing Reynolds number Re , f climbs from its smooth pipe value , approaching an asymptote that itself varies logarithmically with the relative roughness ε / D ; this regime is called " rough pipe " flow .
* The point of departure from smooth flow occurs at a Reynolds number roughly inversely proportional to the value of the relative roughness :
the higher the relative roughness , the lower the Re of departure .
The range of Re and ε / D between smooth pipe flow and rough pipe flow is labeled " transitional " .
In this region , the measurements of Nikuradse show a decline in the value of f with Re , before approaching its asymptotic value from below , although Moody chose not to follow those data in his chart , which is based on the Colebrook – White equation .
*
At values of 2000 * The entire dependence of f on the pipe diameter D is subsumed into the Reynolds number Re and the relative roughness
ε / D , likewise the entire dependence on fluid properties density ρ and viscosity μ is subsumed into the Reynolds number Re .
This is called scaling .
The experimentally measured values of f are fit to reasonable accuracy by the ( recursive ) Colebrook – White equation , depicted graphically in the Moody chart which plots friction factor f versus Reynolds number Re for selected values of relative roughness ε / D. CALCULATING FRICTION LOSS FOR WATER IN A PIPE Section::::Calculating Friction Loss for Water in a Pipe .
In a design problem , one may select pipe for a particular hydraulic slope S based on the candidate pipe 's diameter D and its roughness ε .
With these quantities as inputs , the friction factor f can be expressed in closed form in the Colebrook – White equation or other fitting function CALCULATING FRICTION LOSS FOR AIR IN A DUCT Section::::Calculating Friction Loss for Air in a Duct .
Friction loss takes place as a gas , say air , flows through duct work
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pipe pressure drop calculator for single phase flows .
* Pipe pressure drop calculator for two phase flows .
* Open source pipe pressure drop calculator .