HEATER CORE
A heater core is a radiator - like device used in heating the cabin of a vehicle .
Hot coolant from the vehicle 's engine is passed through a winding tube of the core , a heat exchanger between coolant and cabin air .
Fins attached to the core tubes serve to increase surface for heat transfer to air that is forced past them , by a fan , thereby heating the passenger compartment .
HOW IT WORKS Section::::How
it works .
The internal combustion engine in most cars and trucks is cooled by a water and antifreeze mixture that is circulated through the engine and radiator by a water pump to enable the radiator to give off engine heat to the atmosphere .
Some of that water can be diverted through the heater core to give some engine heat to the cabin , or adjust the temperature of the conditioned air .
A heater core is a small radiator located under the dashboard of the vehicle , and it consists of conductive aluminium or brass tubing with cooling fins to increase surface area .
Hot coolant passing through the heater core gives off heat before returning to the engine cooling circuit .
The squirrel cage fan of the vehicle 's ventilation system forces air through the heater core to transfer heat from the coolant to the cabin air , which is directed into the vehicle through vents at various points .
CONTROL Section::::Control .
Once the engine has warmed up , the coolant is kept at a more or less constant temperature by the thermostat .
The temperature of the air entering the vehicle 's interior can be controlled by using a valve limiting the amount of coolant that goes through the heater core .
Another method is blocking off the heater core with a door , directing part ( or all ) of the incoming air around the heater core completely , so it does not get heated ( or re - heated if the air conditioning compressor is active ) .
Some cars use a combination of these systems .
Simpler systems allow the driver to control the valve or door directly ( usually by means of a rotary knob , or a lever ) .
More complicated systems use a combination of electromechanical actuators and thermistors to control the valve or doors to deliver air at a precise temperature value selected by the user .
Cars with dual climate function ( allowing driver and passenger to each set a different temperature ) may use a heater core split in two , where different amounts of coolant flow through the heater core on either side to obtain the desired heating .
AIR CONDITIONING Section::::Air conditioning .
In a car equipped with air conditioning , outside air , or cabin air if the recirculation flap has been set to close the external air passages , is first forced , often after being filtered by a cabin air filter , through the air conditioner 's evaporator coil .
This can be thought of as a heater core filled with very cold liquid that is undergoing a phase change to gas ( the evaporation ) , a process which cools rather than heats the incoming air .
In order to obtain the desired temperature incoming air may first be cooled by the air conditioning and then heated again by the heater core .
In a vehicle fitted with manual controls for the heater and air conditioning compressor , using both systems together will dehumidify the air in the cabin , as the evaporator coil removes moisture from the air due to condensation .
This can result in increased air comfort levels inside the vehicle .
Automatic temperature control systems can take the best course of action in regulating the compressor operation , amount of reheating and blower speed depending upon the external air temperature , the internal one and the cabin air temperature value or a rapid defrost effect requested by the user .
ENGINE COOLING FUNCTION Section::::Engine cooling function .
Because the heater core cools the heated coolant from the engine by transferring its heat to the cabin air , it can also act as an auxiliary radiator for the engine .
If the radiator is working improperly , the operator may turn the heat on ( together with the cabin blower fan placed on full speed , and with the windows opened ) in the passenger cabin , resulting in a certain cooling effect on the overheated engine coolant .
This idea only works to a certain degree , as the heater core is not large enough nor does it have enough cold air going through it to cool large amounts of coolant significantly .
POSSIBLE PROBLEMS Section::::Possible problems .
The heater core is made up of small piping that has numerous bends .
Clogging of the piping may occur if the coolant system is not flushed or if the coolant is not changed regularly .
If clogging occurs the heater core will not work properly .
If coolant flow is restricted , heating capacity will be reduced or even lost altogether if the heater core becomes blocked .
Control valves may also clog or get stuck .
Where a blend door is used instead of a control valve as a method of controlling the air 's heating amount , the door itself or its control mechanism can become stuck due to thermal expansion .
If the climate control unit is automatic , actuators can also fail .
Another possible problem is a leak in one of the connections to the heater core .
This may first be noticeable by smell ( ethylene glycol is widely used as coolant and has a sweet smell ) ; it may also cause ( somewhat greasy ) fogging of the windshield above the windshield heater vent .
Glycol may also leak directly into the car , causing wet upholstery or carpeting .
Electrolysis can cause excessive corrosion leading to the heater core rupturing .
Coolant will spray directly into the passenger compartment followed with white colored smoke , a significant driving hazard .
Because the heater core is usually located under the dashboard inside of the vehicle and is enclosed in the ventilation system 's ducting , servicing it often requires disassembling a large part of the dashboard , which can be labour - intensive and therefore expensive .
Since the heater core relies on the coolant 's heat to warm the cabin air up , it obviously wo n't begin working until the engine 's coolant warms up enough .
This problem can be resolved by equipping the vehicle with an auxiliary heating system , which can either use electricity or burn the vehicle 's fuel in order to rapidly bring the engine 's coolant to operating temperatures .
AIR COOLED ENGINES Section::::Air cooled engines .
Engines that do not have a water cooling system can not heat the cabin via a heater core ; one alternative is to guide air around the ( very hot ) engine exhaust manifold and then into the vehicle 's interior .
Temperature control is achieved by mixing with unheated outside air .
Air - cooled Volkswagen engines use this method .
Depending on the design , this can cause a safety issue where a leak in the exhaust system will begin to fill the passenger cabin with deadly fumes .
REUSE FOR OTHER PURPOSES Section::::Reuse for other purposes .
Car heat cores are also used for D.I.Y. projects , such as for cooling homemade liquid cooling systems for computers .
SEE ALSO * Air cooling
* Internal combustion engine cooling
* Radiator ( engine cooling )
* Radiator ( heating ) *
Water cooling EXTERNAL LINKS * entire cooling system