WATER - FUELLED CAR
A water - fuelled car is an automobile that hypothetically derives its energy directly from water .
Water - fuelled cars have been the subject of numerous international patents , newspaper and popular science magazine articles , local television news coverage , and websites .
The claims for these devices have been found to be pseudoscience and some were found to be tied to investment frauds .
These vehicles may be claimed to produce fuel from water on board with no other energy input , or may be a hybrid claiming to derive some of its energy from water in addition to a conventional source ( such as gasoline ) .
Water is fully oxidized hydrogen .
Hydrogen itself is a high - energy , flammable substance , but its useful energy is released when water is formed .
Water will not burn .
The process of electrolysis can split water into hydrogen and oxygen , but it takes as much energy to take apart a water molecule as was released when the hydrogen was oxidized to form water .
In fact , some energy would be lost in converting water to hydrogen and then burning the hydrogen because some waste heat would always be produced in the conversions .
Releasing chemical energy from water , in excess or in equal proportion to the energy required to facilitate such production , would therefore violate the first or second law of thermodynamics .
WHAT
WATER - FUELLED CARS ARE NOT Section::::What water - fuelled cars are not .
A water - fuelled car is not any of the following :
* Water injection which is a method for cooling the combustion chambers of engines by adding water to the incoming fuel - air mixture , allowing for greater compression ratios and reduced engine knocking ( detonation ) .
*
The hydrogen car , although it often incorporates some of the same elements .
To fuel a hydrogen car from water , electricity is used to generate hydrogen by electrolysis .
The resulting hydrogen is an energy carrier that can power a car by reacting with oxygen from the air to create water , either through burning in a combustion engine or catalyzed to produce electricity in a fuel cell .
* Hydrogen fuel enhancement , where a mixture of hydrogen and conventional hydrocarbon fuel is burned in an internal combustion engine , usually in an attempt to improve fuel economy or reduce emissions .
EXTRACTING ENERGY
FROM WATER
Section::::Extracting energy from water .
According to the currently accepted laws of physics , there is no way to extract chemical energy from water alone .
Water itself is highly stable — it was one of the classical elements and contains very strong chemical bonds .
Its enthalpy of formation is negative ( -68.3 kcal / mol or -285.8 kJ / mol ) , meaning that energy is required to break those stable bonds , to separate water into its elements , and there are no other compounds of hydrogen and oxygen with more negative enthalpies of formation , meaning that no energy can be released in this manner either .
Most proposed water - fuelled cars rely on some form of electrolysis to separate water into hydrogen and oxygen and then recombine them to release energy ; however , because the energy required to separate the elements will always be at least as great as the useful energy released , this can not be used to produce net energy .
CLAIMS OF FUNCTIONING WATER - FUELLED CARS GARRETT ELECTROLYTIC CARBURETOR Section::::Claims of functioning water - fuelled cars .
Section::::Garrett electrolytic carburetor .
Charles H. Garrett allegedly demonstrated a water - fuelled car " for several minutes " , which was reported on September 8 , 1935 , in The Dallas Morning News .
The car generated hydrogen by electrolysis as can be seen by examining Garrett 's patent , issued that same year .
This patent includes drawings which show a carburetor similar to an ordinary float - type carburetor but with electrolysis plates in the lower portion , and where the float is used to maintain the level of the water .
Garrett 's patent fails to identify a new source of energy .
STANLEY MEYER 'S WATER FUEL CELL Section::::Stanley Meyer 's water fuel cell .
At least as far back as 1980 , Stanley Meyer claimed that he had built a dune buggy that ran on water , although he gave inconsistent explanations as to its mode of operation .
In some cases , he claimed that he had replaced the spark plugs with a " water splitter " , while in other cases it was claimed to rely on a " fuel cell " that split the water into hydrogen and oxygen .
The " fuel cell " , which he claimed was subjected to an electrical resonance , would split the water mist into hydrogen and oxygen gas , which would then be combusted back into water vapour in a conventional internal combustion engine to produce net energy .
Meyer 's claims were never independently verified , and in an Ohio court in 1996 he was found guilty of " gross and egregious fraud " .
He died of an aneurysm in 1998 , although conspiracy theories claim that he was poisoned .
DENNIS KLEIN Section::::Dennis Klein .
In 2002 , the firm Hydrogen Technology Applications patented an electrolyser design and trademarked the term " Aquygen " to refer to the hydrogen oxygen gas mixture produced by the device .
Originally developed as an alternative to oxyacetylene welding , the company claimed to be able to run a vehicle exclusively on water , via the production of " Aquygen " , and invoked an unproven state of matter called " magnegases " and a discredited theory about magnecules to explain their results .
Company founder Dennis Klein claimed to be in negotiations with a major US auto manufacturer and that the US government wanted to produce Hummers that used his technology .
At present , the company no longer claims it can run a car exclusively on water , and is instead marketing " Aquygen " production as a technique to increase fuel efficiency , thus making it Hydrogen fuel enhancement rather than a water - fuelled car .
GENESIS WORLD
ENERGY
( GWE )
Section::::Genesis World Energy ( GWE ) .
Also in 2002 , Genesis World Energy announced a market ready device which would extract energy from water by separating the hydrogen and oxygen and then recombining them .
In 2003 , the company announced that this technology had been adapted to power automobiles .
The company collected over $ 2.5 million from investors , but none of their devices were ever brought to market .
In 2006 , Patrick Kelly , the owner of Genesis World Energy was sentenced in New Jersey to five years in prison for theft and ordered to pay $ 400,000 in restitution .
GENEPAX WATER
ENERGY SYSTEM Section::::Genepax Water Energy System .
In June 2008 , Japanese company Genepax unveiled a car which it claims runs on only water and air , and many news outlets dubbed the vehicle a " water - fuel car " .
The company says it " can not [ reveal ] the core part of this invention , " yet , but it has disclosed that the system uses an onboard energy generator ( a " membrane electrode assembly " ) to extract the hydrogen using a " mechanism which is similar to the method in which hydrogen is produced by a reaction of metal hydride and water " .
The hydrogen is then used to generate energy to run the car .
This has led to speculation that the metal hydride is consumed in the process and is the ultimate source of the car 's energy , making the car a hydride - fuelled " hydrogen on demand " vehicle , rather than water - fuelled as claimed .
On the company 's website the energy source is explained only with the words " Chemical reaction " .
The science and technology magazine Popular Mechanics has described Genepax 's claims as " Rubbish .
" The vehicle that Genepax demonstrated to the press in 2008 was a REVAi electric car , manufactured in India and sold in the UK as the G - Wiz .
In early 2009 , Genepax announced they were closing their website , citing large development costs .
THUSHARA PRIYAMAL EDIRISINGHE Section::::Thushara Priyamal Edirisinghe .
Also in 2008 , Sri Lankan news sources reported that Thushara Priyamal Edirisinghe claimed to drive a water - fuelled car about 300 kilometers on three litres of water .
Like other alleged water - fuelled cars described above , energy for the car is supposedly produced by splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen using electrolysis , and then burning the gases in the engine .
Thushara showed the technology to Prime Minister Ratnasiri Wickramanayaka , who " extended the Government 's full support to his efforts to introduce the water - powered car to the Sri Lankan market . "
Thushara was arrested a few months later on suspicion of investment fraud .
DANIEL DINGEL Section::::Daniel Dingel .
Daniel Dingel , a Filipino inventor , has been claiming since 1969 to have developed technology allowing water to be used as fuel .
In 2000 , Dingel entered into a business partnership with Formosa Plastics Group to further develop the technology .
In 2008 , Formosa Plastics successfully sued Dingel for fraud , with the 82-year - old Dingel being sentenced to 20 years imprisonment .
DR GHULAM SARWAR
Section::::Dr
Ghulam Sarwar .
In December 2011 a Pakistani doctor , Ghulam Sarwar claimed that he had invented a car that only runs on water .
At the time the invented car was claimed to use 60 % water and 40 % Diesel or fuel , but that the inventor was working hard to make it run on only water , probably by end of June 2012 .
It was further claimed that the car " emits only oxygen rather than the usual carbon " .
AGHA WAQAR AHMAD Section::::Agha Waqar Ahmad .
Agha Waqar Ahmad , a Pakistani , claimed in July 2012 to have invented water - fuelled car by installing a " water kit " for all kind of automobiles .
The kit consists of a cylindrical jar , which holds the water , a bubbler , and a pipe leading to the engine .
He claims that the kit uses electrolysis to convert water into " HHO " , which is then used as fuel .
The kit requires use of distilled water to work .
Ahmed claims that he has been able to achieve much higher amounts of oxyhydrogen compared to any other inventor because of " undisclosed calculations " .
He has applied for a patent in Pakistan .
Some Pakistani scientists alleged that Agha 's invention is nothing but a fraud as it violates the laws of thermodynamics .
HYDROGEN AS
A SUPPLEMENT Section::::Hydrogen as a supplement .
In addition to claims of cars that run exclusively on water , there have also been claims that burning hydrogen or oxyhydrogen in addition to petrol or diesel fuel increases mileage .
Whether such hydrogen on demand systems actually improve emissions or fuel efficiency is debated .
A number of websites exist promoting the use of oxyhydrogen ( which they often refer to as " HHO " ) , selling plans for do - it - yourself electrolysers or entire kits with the promise of large improvements in fuel efficiency .
According to a spokesman for the American Automobile Association , " All of these devices look like they could probably work for you , but let me tell you they do n't . "
GASOLINE PILL AND RELATED ADDITIVES Section::::Gasoline pill and related additives .
Related to the water - fuelled car hoax are claims that additives , often a pill , convert the water into usable fuel , similar to a carbide lamp , in which a high - energy additive produces the combustible fuel .
This " gasoline pill " has been allegedly demonstrated on a full - sized vehicle , as reported in 1980 in Mother Earth News .
Once again , water itself can not contribute any energy to the process ; the additive or the pill is the fuel .
HYDROGEN ON DEMAND TECHNOLOGIES
Section::::Hydrogen on demand technologies .
A hydrogen on demand vehicle uses a chemical reaction to produce hydrogen from water .
The hydrogen is then burned in an internal combustion engine or used in a fuel cell to generate electricity which powers the vehicle .
While these may seem at first sight to be ' water - fuelled cars ' , they actually take their energy from the chemical that reacts with water , and vehicles of this type are not precluded by the laws of nature .
Aluminium , magnesium , and sodium borohydride are substances that react with water to generate hydrogen , and all have been used in hydrogen on demand prototypes .
Eventually , the chemical runs out and has to be replenished .
In all cases the energy required to produce such compounds exceeds the energy obtained from their reaction with water .
One example of a hydrogen on demand device , created by scientists from the University of Minnesota and the Weizmann Institute of Science , uses boron to generate hydrogen from water .
An article in New Scientist in July 2006 described the power source under the headline " A fuel tank full of water , " and they quote Abu - Hamed as saying :
A vehicle powered by the device would take on water and boron instead of petrol , and generate boron trioxide .
Elemental boron is difficult to prepare and does not occur naturally .
Boron trioxide is an example of a borate , which is the predominant form of boron on earth .
Thus , a boron - powered vehicle would require an economical method of preparing elemental boron .
The chemical reactions describing the oxidation of boron are : The balanced chemical equation representing the overall process ( hydrogen generation and combustion ) is : As shown above , boron trioxide is the only net byproduct , and it could be removed from the car and turned back into boron and reused .
Electricity input is required to complete this process , which Al - Hamed suggests could come from solar panels .
Although it is possible to obtain elemental boron by electrolysis , a substantial expenditure of energy is required .
The process of converting borates to elemental boron and back might be compared with the analogous process involving carbon : carbon dioxide could be converted to charcoal ( elemental carbon ) , then burnt to produce carbon dioxide .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
It is referred to in the pilot episode for the That
' 70s Show sitcom , as well as in the twenty - first episode of the fifth season .
" Gashole " ( 2010 ) , a documentary film about the history of oil prices and the future of alternative mentions
multiple stories regarding engines that use water to increase mileage efficiency .
" Like Water for Octane , " an episode of The Lone Gunmen , is based on a " water - powered " car that character Melvin Frohike saw with his own eyes back in 1962 .
The Water Engine , a David Mamet play made into a television film in 1994 , tells the story of Charles Lang inventing an engine that runs using water for fuel .
The plot centers on the many obstacles the inventor must overcome to patent his device .
The plot of the 1996 action film Chain Reaction revolves around a technology to turn water ( via a type of self - sustaining bubble fusion & electrolysis ) into fuel and official suppression of it .
A water - powered car was depicted in a 1997 episode of Team Knight Rider ( a spinoff of the original Knight Rider TV series ) entitled " Oil and Water " .
In the episode , the vehicle explodes after a character sabotages it by putting seltzer tablets in the fuel tank .
The car shown was actually a Bricklin SV-1 .
The plot of the 2017 novel " Paradox Bound " by Peter Clines revolves around a group of time travelers , the majority of whom drive cars modified in the 2020s to use Garrett carburetors .
SEE ALSO
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
* List of water fuel inventions .
* Perpetual motion REFERENCES