UNITED STATES – COLOMBIA FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
The United States - Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement ( CTPA )
( Spanish : Tratado de Libre Comercio entre Colombia y Estados Unidos or TLC ) is a bilateral free trade agreement between the United States and Colombia .
Sometimes called the Colombia Free Trade Agreement , it was signed on November 22 , 2006 , by Deputy U.S. Trade Representative John Veroneau and Colombian Minister of Trade , Industry , and Tourism Jorge Humberto Botero .
CTPA is a comprehensive agreement that will eliminate tariffs and other barriers to trade in goods and services between the United States and Colombia .
Colombia 's Congress approved the agreement and a protocol of amendment in 2007 .
Colombia 's Constitutional Court completed its review in July 2008 , and concluded that the Agreement conforms to Colombia 's Constitution .
President Obama tasked the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative with seeking a path to address outstanding issues surrounding the Colombia FTA .
The United States Congress then took on the agreement and passed it on October 12 , 2011 .
The agreement went into effect on May 15 , 2012 .
ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP Section::::Economic relationship .
The United States is Colombia 's leading trading partner .
In 2005 , 39 % of Colombia 's exports went to the United States , and 29 % of Colombia 's imports were supplied by the United States .
The second most significant trading partner for Colombia is Venezuela , accounting for 7 % of Colombia 's imports and 10 % of Colombia 's exports .
Other significant trading partners for Colombia are Mexico , Ecuador , Germany , and Brazil .
Colombia is the 28th largest U.S. export market ( $ 5.41 billion in 2005 ) and the 31st largest source of U.S. imports ( $ 8.85 billion in 2005 ) .
The dominant U.S. import item from Colombia is crude oil ( 38 % of U.S. imports from Colombia in 2005 ) , followed by coal , other petroleum oils , precious and semi - precious stones , coffee , tea , and flowers and plants .
Two - thirds of U.S. exports to Colombia are manufactured goods .
The top U.S. exports are chemicals , plastics , electrical equipment , excavating machinery , telecommunications equipment , computers and computer accessories , industrial engines , and drilling and oilfield equipment .
For the last seven years , Colombia has been receiving $ 10 billion to $ 15 billion annually in foreign direct investment , and has been rapidly developing its mining sector .
As a result , Colombia is the sixth - largest market in the world for large earthmoving equipment manufactured by Caterpillar Inc. , a U.S. manufacturer of bulldozers and other earthmoving machinery , despite a Colombian tariff of five to fifteen percent .
U.S. agricultural exports benefiting under the agreement include beef and pork products , wheat , corn , soybeans , and cotton .
The agreement would grant immediate duty - free access to export categories most important to the U.S. beef industry , such as USDA Prime and Choice beef cuts .
All other tariffs on beef would be eliminated , with the final tariffs removed within 15 years .
Colombian tariffs on pork products ranging from 20 to 30 percent , would be phased out to zero within 5 to 15 years .
The U.S. International Trade Commission estimates the fully implemented agreement would boost U.S. beef exports to Colombia by 46 percent and pork exports by 72 percent .
Colombian tariffs of 5 to 20 percent for wheat and soybeans would be immediately eliminated ; with a 25 percent tariff on corn to be phased out over 12 years .
The agreement would immediately eliminate the 10 percent duty on U.S. cotton upon enactment U.S. imports from Colombia have increased notably since 1996 , from $ 4.27 billion in 1996 to $ 8.85 billion in 2005 , a 107 % increase .
The U.S. trade deficit with Colombia was $ 3.43 billion in 2005 .
Since late 2006 , U.S. products have been charged more than $ 3.4 billion in Colombian tariffs and duties that otherwise would have been eliminated by the free trade agreement .
The U.S. International Trade Commission estimates that the agreement would boost U.S. exports to Colombia by an additional $ 1.1 billion per year .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In May 2004 , the United States initiated free trade agreement negotiations with Colombia , Peru , and Ecuador .
The United States concluded negotiations with Colombia in February 2006 and the CTPA was signed on November 22 , 2006 .
After , based on " the New Trade Policy Template " , a bipartisan agreement , both countries negotiated a Protocol of Amendment that was signed on June 28 , 2007 .
PROCESS IN COLOMBIA Section::::Process in Colombia .
The agreement was signed on November 22 , 2006 , was submitted to the Colombian Congress by President Álvaro Uribe on November 30 , 2006 .
The Bill was debated and voted in a joint session on April 25 , 2007 .
The House Floor approved it on June 5 , 2007 ( Yeas 85 Nays 10 ) and the Senate Floor vote on June 14 , 2007 ( Yeas 55 Nays 3 ) .
Finally , the CTPA became public law - Ley 1143 - on July 4 , 2007 .
The Protocol of Amendment , signed on June 28 , 2007 , was submitted to the Colombian Congress by , Uribe on July 20 of 2007 .
The Bill was approved in a joint session on August 29 , 2007 and voted by the House Floor on September 25 , 2007 ( Yeas 84 - Nays 3 ) .
After , the Senate Floor approved the Bill on October 30 , 2007 ( Yeas 54 - Nays 16 ) .
Finally , the Protocol of Amendment became public Law - Ley 1116- on November 21 , 2007 .
The Agreement then underwent a constitutionally mandated court review , according to Colombian regulations .
The agreement was deemed to conform to the Colombian Constitution by Colombia 's Constitutional Court in July 2008 .
Aspects of the agreement relating to copyright are planned to be implemented in Colombia Bill no . 201 of 2012 .
PROCESS IN THE U.S.
Section::::Process in the U.S ..
President Bush sent legislation to implement the U.S.-Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement to Congress for its approval on April 7 , 2007 .
It was not approved before the end of the Congressional session in December , 2008 or the end of President Bush 's term in January , 2009 .
President Obama has asked the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to address outstanding issues in the agreement ; however , during a visit from Colombian President Uribe in June , 2009 , Obama said he did not have a " strict timetable " to the agreement , as controversy over the safety of Colombian labor leaders continue .
U.S. Congress ' failure to secure approval of the Colombia Free Trade Agreement has adversely affected bilateral relations between the two nations .
On October 12 , 2011 after renegotiating parts of the agreement , it was passed by the House 262 - 167 and the Senate 66 - 33 .
An aid program for displaced workers called Trade Adjustment Assistance ( TAA ) was also included in the bill .
KEY PROVISIONS OF THE U.S.-COLOMBIA TRADE PROMOTION AGREEMENT MARKET ACCESS Section::::Key provisions of the U.S.-Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement .
Section::::Market access .
Upon implementation , the agreement would eliminate duties on 80 % of U.S. exports of consumer and industrial products to Colombia .
An additional 7 % of U.S. exports would receive duty - free treatment within five years of implementation .
Remaining tariffs would be eliminated ten years after implementation .
Colombia will join the World Trade Organization 's ( WTO ) Information Technology Agreement ( ITA ) , which would remove Colombia 's trade barriers to information technology products .
In agriculture , the agreement would grant duty - free treatment immediately to certain farm products from both countries , including high quality beef , cotton , wheat , and soybean meal .
Other products that would receive immediate duty - free treatment are key fruits and vegetables , including apples , pears , peaches , and cherries , and many processed food products , including frozen French fries and cookies .
Some other products would receive improved market access ; these include pork , beef , corn , poultry , rice , fruits and vegetables , processed products , and dairy products .
The United States and Colombia worked together to resolve sanitary and phytosanitary barriers to trade in agriculture , including food safety inspection procedures for beef , pork , and poultry .
These commitments are reportedly written in two separate side letters on sanitary and phytosanitary measures that would be attached to the FTA .
ALLEGATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS Section::::Allegations of human rights violations .
In the first 10 months of the Santos administration in Colombia , 104 labor and human rights activists were murdered .
One category of human rights abuses involves the murder of over 50 labor leaders from the Legal Left at the hands of paramilitaries and death squads , and sometimes there have been allegations of involvement on the part of multinational corporations .
In a few cases , this has resulted in damaging public allegations and even court cases for several multinational corporations from the US and Canada ( including Dole , Coca - Cola , Drummond Coal , and Chiquita , formerly known as the United Fruit Company ) .
The Colombian Sintraminercol mining union has alleged that many international mining companies already working in Colombia have a record of paramilitary collaboration , as well as environmental negligence .
The agreement has had much difficulty passing Congress for years due to the persistence of these issues .
The following videos , launched by the US Office on Colombia on June 23 , 2011 , provide testimony from Colombian citizens on the impact of the FTA on : * Afro - Colombian and indigenous communities * Small - scale workers and farmers * Colombian civil society
Political violence had greatly lessened in Colombia over the past decade , however , and objections to the trade agreement have been criticized by Colombians and the Republican party .
Conservative Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper , who signed a Canada - Colombia agreement that took effect in August 2011 , has accused opponents of trade deals with the country as " standing in the way of the development of the prosperity of Colombia , " adding that " we ca n't block the progress of a country like this for protectionist reasons and try to use human rights as a front for doing that . " , but the FTA with Colombia is devastading the economy of the Colombian farmers , indigenous and of the Colombian local industries , because the treatment said that they have to buy genetically modificated seeds from the USA , and that they can not use natural seeds to produce their local food to exported to the USA .
SEE ALSO * Peru - United States Free Trade Agreement *
Área de Libre Comercio de las Américas ( ALCA ) , English name : Free Trade Area of the Americas * Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Embassy of Colombia *
The Colombian Government Trade Bureau * U.S. International Trade Commission Press Release * Congressional Research Service Report on Andean Free Trade Agreement , including Peru TPA
* Colombia - United States Free Trade Agreement at Discourse DB * Brief Summary of the Colombia Free Trade Agreement
* Fact Sheets Detailed Summary of the Colombia Free Trade Agreement * Full Text of the Agreement ( English )
* Video talking about the reasons for a FTA with Colombia - Under Secretary of Commerce , Mr. Chris .
Padilla )
* May 20 , 2008
McCain :
Colombia FTA Benefits U.S. * May 14 , 2008
- Colombian 's leading productive sector trade unions and their members strongly support the U.S. - Colombia TPA .
Here are their testimonies * May 8 , 2008 - Businessweek " Cheap Shots Over Free Trade " * May 7 , 2008 - U.S. Senate " U.S. - Colombia Trade Agreement Good for American Jobs " * May 6 , 2008
- USTR Ambassador Schwab remarks to the Peterson Institute .
" I call on the Congressional leadership to bring the Colombia FTA to a vote .
Let 's move forward with our agenda " * May 6 , 2008 - Bloomberg " Canada Pushes Colombia Trade Agreement , as U.S. Deal Languishes "
* See how international trade impacts your state .