PETROLEUM GEOLOGIST
A petroleum geologist is an earth scientist who works in the field of petroleum geology , which involves all aspects of oil discovery and production .
Petroleum geologists are usually linked to the actual discovery of oil and the identification of possible oil deposits or leads .
It can be a very labor - intensive task involving several different fields of science and elaborate equipment .
Petroleum geologists look at the structural and sedimentary aspects of the stratum / strata to identify possible oil traps .
PROFILE
Section::::Profile .
Petroleum geologists make the decision of where to drill for petroleum .
This is done by locating prospects within a sedimentary basin .
Petroleum geologists determine a prospect 's viability looking at seven main aspects :
* Source-
The presence of an organic - rich source rock capable of generating hydrocarbons during deep burial .
* Reservoir-
The usually porous rock unit that collects the hydrocarbons expelled from the source rock and holds them inside a trap .
* Seal- The rock unit that inhibits the oil or gas from escaping from a hydrocarbon - bearing reservoir rock .
*
Trap- Structural or stratigraphic feature that captures migrating hydrocarbons into an economically producible accumulation .
* Timing- Geologic events must occur in a certain order ,
e.g. that the trap formed before migration rather than after .
* Maturation-
The process of alteration a source rock under heat and pressure , leading to the cracking of its organic matter into oil and gas .
* Migration-
The movement of the ( less dense ) oil or gas from the source rock into a reservoir rock and then into a trap .
These seven key aspects require the petroleum geologist to obtain a 4-dimensional idea of the subsurface ( the three spatial dimensions , plus time ) .
Data may be obtained via Geophysical methods .
Geophysical surveys show the seismology data of elastic waves , mainly seismic reflection .
This provides a 3-dimensional look of the trap , and source rock .
More data may be obtained from the mudlogger , who analyzes the drill cuttings and the rock formation thicknesses .
SEE ALSO
* Geologist * Petroleum industry EXTERNAL LINKS
* Fossiloilandgas.com link * Video interviews with famous geologists