FRIED GREEN TOMATOES
Fried Green Tomatoes is a 1991 comedy - drama film based on the novel Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe by Fannie Flagg .
Directed by Jon Avnet and written by Flagg and Carol Sobieski , it stars Kathy Bates , Jessica Tandy , Mary Stuart Masterson , and Mary - Louise Parker .
It tells the story of a Depression - era friendship between two women , Ruth and Idgie , and a 1980s friendship between Evelyn , a middle - aged housewife , and Ninny , an elderly woman .
The centerpiece and parallel story concerns the murder of Ruth 's abusive husband , Frank , and the accusations that follow .
It received a generally positive reception from film critics and was nominated for two Academy Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Evelyn Couch , a timid , unhappy housewife in her 40s , meets elderly Ninny Threadgoode in an Anderson , Alabama , nursing home where Evelyn 's husband Ed 's Aunt Vesta who has dementia is also staying .
Over several encounters with Evelyn , Ninny tells her the story of the now abandoned town of Whistle Stop , and the people who lived there .
The film 's subplot concerns Evelyn 's dissatisfaction with her marriage , her life , her growing confidence , and her developing friendship with Ninny .
The narrative switches several times between Ninny 's story , which is set between World War I and World War II , and Evelyn 's life in 1980s Birmingham .
Ninny 's story begins with tomboy Idgie Threadgoode , the youngest of the Threadgoode children , whom Ninny describes as her sister - in - law .
Idgie 's close relationship with her charming older brother , Buddy , is cut short when he is hit by a train after his shoe gets stuck in the tracks , leading to his death .
Devastated , she recedes from formal society for much of her childhood and adolescence until Buddy 's former girlfriend , the straitlaced Ruth Jamison , intervenes at the request of the concerned Threadgoode family .
Idgie initially resists Ruth 's attempts at friendship , but gradually a deep attachment develops between them .
Ruth leaves Whistle Stop to marry Frank Bennett and moves to Valdosta , Georgia .
Idgie tries to forget her but later visits her house to find her pregnant and subject to physical abuse from Frank .
Against his wishes and violent attempts to stop her , she returns to Whistle Stop with Idgie , where her baby , a boy whom she names Buddy , Jr. , is born .
Papa Threadgoode gives Idgie money to start a business so she can care for Ruth and Buddy ,
Jr. She and Ruth open the Whistle Stop Cafe , employing the family cook , Sipsey , and her son , Big George , who excels with a barbecue that becomes popular with their patrons .
Frank eventually returns to Whistle Stop to kidnap Buddy , Jr. , but his attempt is thwarted by an unseen assailant , and he is later reported missing .
Once his truck appears at the bottom of a nearby drying lake without its owner , Idgie is immediately a suspect , as she had publicly threatened violence against him for beating Ruth .
She is detained along with Big George for his murder by Grady Kilgore , the local sheriff , who offers to release her and pin the crime solely on Big George ; she refuses to sacrifice him .
During the subsequent trial , the local minister , Reverend Scroggins , has no problem lying , providing Idgie and Big George with sound alibis for the time of Frank 's disappearance .
Taking into account Frank 's reputation for getting drunk , the judge rules his death an accident and dismisses the case .
Idgie and Big George are cleared of all charges .
After the trial , Ruth is diagnosed with cancer , becomes very ill , and eventually dies .
Following her death , the café closes .
Over time , many Whistle Stop residents eventually move away , bringing Ninny to the end of her story , but not before the revelation of what really happened to Frank .
Sipsey murdered him with a blow to the head with a frying pan while trying to prevent him from kidnapping Buddy ,
Jr. Idgie got Big George to barbecue Frank 's body , which was later served to an investigator from Georgia searching for him .
The investigator ate with gusto , proclaiming his meal the best pork barbecue he 'd ever tasted .
Evelyn discovers that during Ninny 's temporary stay at the nursing home , her house was condemned and torn down .
Evelyn , having become friends with her , offers her a room in her house which she accepts .
As they walk away from the empty lot where her house used to be , they pass Ruth 's grave , freshly adorned with a jar of honey , a honeycomb , and a card which reads , " I 'll always love you , the Bee Charmer " .
The Bee Charmer is Ruth 's old nickname for Idgie , and the note reveals that Idgie is still alive .
CAST * Kathy Bates as Evelyn Couch * Mary Stuart Masterson & Nancy Moore Atchison as Imogene
" Idgie " Threadgoode * Mary - Louise Parker as Ruth Jamison
* Jessica Tandy as Ninny Threadgoode
* Cicely Tyson as Sipsey * Chris O'Donnell as Buddy Threadgoode * Stan Shaw as Big George * Gailard Sartain as Ed Couch
* Timothy Scott as Smokey Lonesome * Gary Basaraba as Grady Kilgore * Lois Smith as Mama Threadgoode * Danny Nelson as Papa Threadgoode * Jo Harvey Allen as Women 's Awareness Teacher
* Macon McCalman as Prosecutor * Richard Riehle as Reverend Scroggins * Raynor Scheine as Curtis Smoot * Grace Zabriskie as Eva Bates * Reid Binion as Young Julian * Nick Searcy as Frank Bennett * Constance Shulman as Missy PRODUCTION CONCEPTION AND CASTING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception and casting .
Avnet first read the novel in 1987 .
He was introduced to it by producer Lisa Lindstrom , with whom he worked on television films Heat Wave and Breaking Point .
Although he wanted her to give him a synopsis of the story , she insisted he read the book and like her , he loved it .
He decided to turn the story into a film and pitched the idea to Norman Lear 's company , Act III Communications , who were interested and gave him a small budget for a screenwriter .
He hired Carol Sobieski who had written the screenplay for 1982 's Annie .
She wrote a draft for it as a musical , which he was unhappy with .
Sobieski left the project and he hired Flagg , who had been surprised that anyone would want to turn the novel into a film , to develop the script .
Although she had some screenwriting experience , she found the process of turning her own novel into a script a strange one .
The job was made somewhat easier by the work done by Sobieski and Avnet in choosing which characters from the book were going to be featured , but she found it difficult and also left the project , after writing 70 pages of the screenplay .
With no money left to hire another writer , Avnet took the script over himself and spent the next 2–3 years developing it .
Flagg gave her blessing to the final draft .
Avnet wrote the film with Jessica Tandy in mind ; she expressed excitement about making the film .
He had worked with Kathy Bates and Chris O'Donnell on the 1990 film
Men Do n't Leave before offering them the roles of Evelyn Couch and Buddy Threadgoode respectively .
When Bates read the script she loved the characters and was particularly keen to work with Tandy .
Mary - Louise Parker was casting director David Rubin 's first choice for the role of Ruth Jamison .
She read for the part several times , initially unhappy with her own tests .
When she read along with Mary Stuart Masterson , theyand the producersagreed that they had good chemistry .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
Avnet hired Barbara Ling as production designer .
Scouting for a location , she found Juliette , Georgia , a town that was , according to Avnet , nearly deserted .
The building chosen to be the Whistle Stop Café was formerly an antique and hardware store .
It was redesigned as a cafe , with a horseshoe shaped counter to allow for optimal camera angles .
After the release of the film , Juliette saw an influx of tourists and , with Jon Avnet 's encouragement , locals opened the Whistle Stop Café , recreated to mirror the film set .
Although " Whistle Stop Café " is now a registered trademark , other establishments have appeared using that name .
While writing the novel , Flagg based Whistle Stop on Irondale , Alabama , and the café on a real - life restaurant , the Irondale Café .
She was a frequent visitor there which was formerly owned by her great - aunt .
The scene where Idgie goes to collect honey from a tree stump for Ruth was originally intended to be performed by a stunt double .
However , after the latter backed out at the last minute , Masterson volunteered to do it herself .
The footage of her covered in a swarm of live bees is seen in the final version of the film .
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE FILM AND NOVEL Section::::Differences between the film and novel .
Unlike the novel , the film does not make the lesbian romance between the two central characters explicit , instead leaving the relationship between Idgie and Ruth ambiguous .
The DVD contains an audio commentary in which the director acknowledges the relationship and points out that a scene between Idgie and Ruth engaging in a food fight was intended to be seen as symbolic love - making .
At the time of the film 's debut , it was criticized by reviewers and activists for what was seen as " glossing over " the lesbian relationship .
However , it won an award from the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation for best feature film with lesbian content .
It shows examples of discrimination against African Americans , women , and the disabled , but the novel 's examination of sexuality - based prejudice through a robust lesbian plot , is made more ambiguous .
Though in the book , Idgie and Ninny are two separate characters , at the end of the film it 's largely hinted that they are one and the same , although this runs counter to Ninny 's earlier comment that " I was practically adopted by the Threadgoodes ; I married her brother , Cleo " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was given a limited release in the US on December 27 , 1991 , opening in five theaters .
It got a wide release four weeks later on January 24 , 1992 , in 673 theaters .
It ran for 19 weeks in total , with its widest release having been 1,331 theaters .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film grossed a total of $ 82,418,501 in the United States alone , and took in $ 37,000,000 outside the US , bringing the total to $ 119,418,501 worldwide .
In its opening weekend it earned $ 105,317 , and at its wide release opening weekend it earned $ 5,235,940 , which was 6.4 percent of its total gross .
According to Box Office Mojo , it ranked at no.11 for all films released in the US in 1991 , and no.5 for PG‑13 rated films released that year .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film was generally well received by critics .
Film review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes gave it a " fresh " score of 73 % based on 41 reviews .
Critics enjoyed the narrative , but found it conventional and predictable .
The adaptation of the separate narrative of book to the screen was criticised by Time Out as " clumsy " , Roger Ebert praised the performances , Janet Maslin praised the costume and production design and Emanuel Levy praised the cinematography and score .
The cast drew praise for their performances , particularly Masterson and Tandy .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated at the 64th Academy Awards for Best Actress in a Supporting Role ( Jessica Tandy ) and for Best Writing , Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium ( Fannie Flagg and Carol Sobieski ) .
At the 46th British Academy Film Awards in 1992 , Tandy was nominated for the Best Actress award , and Bates was nominated as Best Actress in a Supporting Role .
Both also received Golden Globe nominations for their work , and the film got a Best Picture ( Comedy or Musical ) nomination .
At the 28th Guldbagge Awards in Sweden , it was nominated for the Best Foreign Film award .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Fried Green Tomatoes :
Original Motion Picture Soundtrack featured a new song by Patti LaBelle .
British singer - songwriter Paul Young also appears on the soundtrack with the song "
What Becomes of the Brokenhearted , " which peaked at # 22 on the Billboard Hot 100 in March 1992 .
For the original score , composed by Thomas Newman , see Fried Green Tomatoes ( score ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS