CURLY WURLY Curly Wurly is a brand of chocolate bar currently manufactured by Cadbury UK and sold in Australia , Austria , Belgium , Canada , Germany , Ireland , Malta , The Netherlands , New Zealand , Portugal , Romania , Malaysia , U.A.E and the United Kingdom .
It was launched in the UK in 1970 .
Its shape resembles two flattened , intertwined serpentine strings .
The bar is made of chocolate - coated caramel .
The source for manufacturing of this product varies .
The Australian product is made in Poland .
HISTORY Section::::History .
This design was created by David John Parfitt , a long - serving research confectioner based at the Bournville factory , while he was experimenting with some surplus toffee from another piece of work .
It was launched in 1970 .
Versions of the chocolate have been released in other countries .
A French version of the Curly Wurly was available in the 1970s and early 1980s under the name " 3 Mousquetaires " .
A Canadian version , and English known as the " Wig Wag " , was available in the 1970s .
In the US , it was marketed as the " Marathon " in the 1970s and 1980s ; see below .
The German versions were called " 3 Musketiere " and " Leckerschmecker " , the Dutch version was called " 3 Musketiers " .
A Swedish version was called " Loop " , released in 2011 under the Swedish brand Marabou ( also owned by Kraft ) .
Cadbury also marketed a U.S. version of the Curly Wurly itself in the 1970s .
US VERSION :
MARATHON Section::::US version : Marathon .
A US version , called " Marathon " , was manufactured by Mars Inc and first sold in August 1973 .
The bright red packaging had printed on it a ruler with inch ( 8) and cm ( 20 ) markings on the reverse demonstrating that it was as long as it claimed .
It was discontinued in October 1981 , though similar products remain on the market .
In Europe , it was introduced in March 1972 as 3 Musketiers , with the packaging having drawings of the titular Three Musketiers on it .
In 1976 this was changed to look more similar to the US version .
In the UK , the Marathon was a chocolate covered peanut bar in a brown packet with blue lettering , also manufactured by Mars Inc.
It was eventually renamed Snickers .
SEE ALSO
* List of chocolate bar brands REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Cadbury UK