GET OUT OF JAIL FREE CARD
A Get Out of Jail Free card is an element of the board game Monopoly which has become a popular metaphor for something that will get one out of an undesired situation .
USE IN THE GAME Section::::Use in the game .
The U.S. version of the board game Monopoly has two Get Out of Jail Free cards , with distinctive artwork .
One , a " Community Chest " card , depicts a winged version of the game 's mascot Mr. Monopoly in his tuxedo as he flies out of an open birdcage .
The other , a " Chance " card , shows him booted out of a prison cell in a striped convict uniform .
Using one of these cards is one of the ways a player can get out of jail ; the card reads :
THIS CARD MAY BE KEPT
UNTIL NEEDED OR SOLD GET OUT OF JAIL FREE Players move around the Monopoly board according to dice throws .
Most of the tiles players land on are properties that can be bought .
There is also a tile , the Jail , that can hold players and cause them to lose their turn until certain conditions are met .
They can end up in this space by landing on the " Go to Jail " tile , throwing three doubles in a row , or drawing a " Go to Jail " card from Community Chest or Chance .
The Get Out of Jail Free card frees the player from jail to continue playing and progress around the board without paying a fee , then must be returned to the respective deck upon playing it .
As the card 's text says , it can also be sold by the possessing player to another player for a price that is " agreeable by both " .
Since players would ordinarily pay $ 50 to leave jail , the card is rarely sold for more than that .
IN LAW
*
In 1567 , the prize in Britain 's first lottery , commissioned by Queen Elizabeth I and Sir Frances Drake to raise funds for England 's navy , included a kind of " get out of jail free card " which the winner could use to excuse any but the most serious crimes .
*
In 1967 , James Robert Ringrose , one of the FBI 's Ten Most Wanted Fugitives , presented a Get Out of Jail Free card to FBI agents after he was arrested .
*
In the U.S. Supreme Court case Hudson v. Michigan ( 2006 ) , the Court ruled that use of evidence against a defendant obtained through search warrants in instances that the police failed to knock - and - announce does not violate the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution .
The majority opinion by Justice Scalia notes that suppressing evidence in such instances would amount " in many cases to a get - out - of - jail - free card . "
* The Patrolmen 's Benevolent Association of the City of New York , a large NYPD union , gives out cards to officers to distribute to friends and family , giving them preferential treatment for minor offenses .
The cards are commonly referred to as " get out of jail free " cards , and are sometimes sold on eBay .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES