JOHN WINCHESTER ( SUPERNATURAL )
John Eric Winchester is a fictional character on The CW 's series Supernatural , and the protagonist of the comic book spin - off series .
Developed by series creator Eric Kripke , the character is mainly portrayed by Jeffrey Dean Morgan .
John is the father of Sam and Dean Winchester , the show 's protagonists .
Seeking revenge after his wife Mary was killed by the demon Azazel , John Winchester became a hunter and raised his two sons to fight the supernatural .
John disappears early in Supernatural , and the first season revolves primarily around Sam and Dean trying to find him .
Morgan was also filming episodes of Grey 's Anatomy while the first season of Supernatural was under production , and future appearances of the character were hindered by his busy schedule .
While Morgan 's portrayal has been praised , fans and critics were generally frustrated at the character for keeping so many secrets .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The father of series protagonists Sam and Dean Winchester , John Winchester first appears in the pilot episode of the series , but plot devices such as flashbacks and time travel detail his background in later seasons .
Apparently abandoned by his father at a young age — his father actually died while serving a secret order known as the Men of Letters — John Winchester grew up hating the man .
John left high school to join the Marine Corps , eventually attaining the rank of corporal and receiving many medals for his service in Vietnam .
After leaving the service , he found a job as a mechanic , and fell in love with Mary Campbell .
In the fourth season episode " In the Beginning , " Dean is sent back through time by the angel Castiel .
Dean meets his parents ' former selves , and ends up convincing John to buy the 67 Chevy Impala that he eventually inherits .
Dean later watches John being killed by Azazel , though the demon then resurrects him in exchange for Mary 's permission to enter her house in ten years .
When the angel Anna Milton travels back in time in the fifth season episode " The Song Remains the Same " to prevent the births of Sam and Dean , John agrees to serve as a temporary vessel for the archangel Michael to stop her .
Michael subsequently kills Anna and erases John and Mary 's memories of the incident .
Azazel later uses his pact with Mary to enter their home in the pilot episode , and ultimately kills her .
The second season episode " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part One " reveals that she had witnessed the demon secretly feeding his blood to Sam .
John investigated the incident and learned of the existence of the supernatural .
His desire to find and kill Azazel led him to become a hunter of supernatural creatures .
He took his sons with him during his travels , but often left them alone in motels for long periods of time during his hunts , leaving Dean with instructions to " shoot first and ask questions later " while watching over Sam .
As revealed in the fourth season episode " Jump the Shark , " John slept with a woman he met while away on a hunt .
Learning over a decade later that he had fathered her son Adam , John made occasional visits over the years to partake in father - son activities with him .
He hid the truth from Adam to protect him , and never revealed to him the existence of Sam and Dean , nor vice versa .
Meanwhile , John trained Sam and Dean to become hunters .
However , Sam later left this life to start anew in college , leading to a fallout between John and his son .
Twenty - two years after Mary 's death , John disappears while on a hunt , forcing Sam and Dean to reunite in an unsuccessful attempt to find him .
Sam returns to the life of a hunter after Azazel kills his girlfriend .
John reluctantly chooses to avoid his sons throughout most of the season while he investigates something , eventually reuniting with them in the episode " Shadow . "
However , the demonic Meg Masters attacks them and reveals that Azazel is after John .
After escaping from Meg , the brothers split up from their father to keep him from the demons .
When vampires murder his old mentor and steal the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything — John teams up with Sam and Dean in " Dead Man 's Blood " to retrieve it .
Because demons can not be killed by conventional means , they hope that the Colt will be effective against Azazel .
In response , Meg begins killing the Winchesters ' friends in " Salvation , " and threatens to kill more unless they deliver the Colt .
John is captured after trying to give her a fake gun , and reveals himself to be possessed by Azazel when the brothers come to his rescue in the first season finale " Devil 's Trap . "
However , he manages to resist the demon 's control .
Despite John 's pleas for Sam to shoot him with the Colt , Sam can not bring himself to do so and allows Azazel to escape .
As the Winchesters flee in Dean 's Impala , a demonically - possessed trucker crashes into them .
In the second season premiere , " In My Time of Dying , " Sam and John awake in the hospital with only minor injuries , but a dying Dean is comatose .
John secretly summons Azazel , and seems to know what the demon 's plans are .
He then makes a deal to save Dean , giving up his life , soul , and the Colt .
Before dying , John instructs Dean to kill Sam
should he become evil .
The fourth season episode " On the Head of a Pin " reveals that the demon Alastair tortured John in Hell for over a century , with John refusing the demon 's offer to stop if he himself would torture someone else .
His soul escapes from Hell in the second season finale "
All Hell Breaks Loose , Part 2 " when a gateway to Hell is opened .
He saves Dean from Azazel , and distracts the demon by temporarily forcing him out of his host , long enough for Dean to kill Azazel with the Colt when he returns to his usual body .
John then gives Sam and Dean a loving smile before becoming engulfed in a white light .
However , the fifth season episode " Dark Side of the Moon " suggests that he might not be in Heaven .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan deemed John a " tormented soul , " motivated by an " equal combination of revenge and protecting his sons . "
Following the death of their mother , Sam and Dean became secondary to John 's quest of killing the demon responsible , although Morgan believed that this aspect changed once John began spending more time with them again .
Though he thought that John was not the world 's best dad and " definitely made a lot of mistakes , " the actor noted that " he did things , even when they were wrong , for the good of his sons . "
John Kubicek of BuddyTV felt that this reasoning extended to John 's decision to hide the truth from Adam to protect him .
Kubicek also suggested that John became involved in Adam 's life to achieve " some level of normalcy " as a father , an opportunity he had previously lost following the death of Sam and Dean 's mother .
Overall , Morgan felt that John " loved those kids more than he loved his own life , " with the character 's demonic pact with Azazel serving as " his way of finding redemption . "
Regarding his portrayal of the character , Morgan commented , " I played him with extra angst .
I think what was on the page , what I foresaw — not knowing where it was going , because no one would ever tell me anything — there was always a lot more going on in his head than he was going to show anybody , including his sons .
Because , indeed , there was a lot more going on . "
Kripke later confirmed this , stating , " It 's our view that John knew everything the producers of the show know .
John knew stuff we 're not even ready to reveal , that wo n't come out for a couple of seasons .
He was an awesome hunter , and by the time he showed up in ' Dead Man 's Blood , ' he knew it all . "
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
In writing the pilot episode , series creator Eric Kripke made several dramatic revisions to John 's storyline .
The first draft of the script had Sam and Dean being raised by their aunt and uncle , though this was changed when Kripke realized that the backstory became much less complicated by having John raise them on the road .
Another revision had John dying at the end of the episode instead of Sam 's girlfriend Jessica .
Though he survives in the final version of the pilot , the writers decided halfway through production of the first season that John did have to die , as they believed his separation from his sons " split the show " by having him away " doing more interesting things than the boys are doing . "
Kripke also felt that John kept Sam and Dean away from the " front lines , " his death being required to allow the brothers to " explore , investigate and confront the yellow - eyed demon directly .
" The writers initially intended for John to die in the car accident in " Devil 's Trap , " but they ultimately postponed his death to prevent the finale from becoming too dark .
Following the character 's eventual escape from Hell , executive producer Ben Edlund stated that even the writers are unsure of where John 's soul ended up .
Evil Dead - actor Bruce Campbell was Kripke 's first choice to portray the character .
However , Campbell was unavailable , and Jeffrey Dean Morgan eventually received the role .
Due to the fact that Morgan 's scene in the pilot episode takes place 22 years before the series , Morgan expected to be replaced by an older actor for subsequent episodes .
Being only 12 years older than Jensen Ackles , who portrays the eldest son Dean , Morgan was surprised when he was asked to reprise the role .
Ackles and Jared Padalecki often teased him about the age difference during filming .
Throughout the season , Morgan became frustrated at times due to his character 's avoidance of his sons , stating , " It pissed off everybody , it pissed off us as actors , it pissed off the audience watching , because none of us really knew where we were gon na go . "
However , he reasoned that John 's motivation for his actions was due to having knowledge that nobody else had .
During production of Supernatural 's first season , Morgan was also working on the shows Weeds and Grey 's Anatomy , so he was often traveling back and forth between Los Angeles and Vancouver , British Columbia .
This interfered at times with Morgan 's acting , as he had trouble getting " Winchester - y enough " after portraying the nice character of Denny Duquette on Grey 's Anatomy .
Morgan commented , " I was stuck in Denny - land , where I was being too nice .
Winchester 's harder to find .
Denny 's more me .
He 's an intense guy , John is .
And Denny , for a guy who 's having trouble living , he 's just a charming dude .
" Morgan was at first reluctant to return for Supernatural 's second season due to his role on Grey 's Anatomy .
Although he lent his voice for the third season episode " Long - Distance Call , " future appearances of Morgan as the character after the second season have been hindered due to the actor 's busy schedule .
Nevertheless , both Kripke and writer Sera Gamble have stated that they " would love to have him back . "
The scheduling conflict has continued into the sixth season of Supernatural , with executive producer Robert Singer revealing that the writers had considered bringing the character back in the alternate reality episode
" My Heart Will Go On " instead of Ellen Harvelle , but due to concerns that they would not be able to secure Morgan 's return , they ultimately chose Ellen for the deceased character they would have ( temporarily ) return in the episode .
During the production of the fifth season , Morgan had an interview with MovieWeb in which he stated that no one from the show had contacted him about making another appearance , and expressed the desire to return for at least one more episode in what was then - believed to be the show 's final season , as he had enjoyed working with on - screen sons Jensen Ackles and Jared Padalecki and he felt that John 's storyline had ended too soon .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
While critics praised Morgan for his performance in the role , their reaction to the character has generally been mixed .
Don Williams of BuddyTV felt that John is a " rather divisive character " , with some fans not understanding John 's motivation for keeping his sons in the dark .
However , Williams himself found the character to be " completely fascinating " .
He chose " In My Time of Dying " as the second best episode of the series , mainly because of John 's contributions , stating , "
Even if you 're not a huge fan of Poppa Winchester , I think it 's impossible not to be moved by the final ten minutes of this episode ...
John 's final speech to Dean , where he finally tells his son that he 's proud of him , is one hell of a tear - jerker , and both Jeffrey Dean Morgan and Jensen Ackles knock that scene out of the park .
" Williams praised Matt Cohen 's performance of a younger version of the character in the time - travel episode " In the Beginning " , believing that he " did an excellent job at portraying a more innocent John Winchester than we 've ever seen before " .
Diana Steenbergen of IGN also criticized John for his lack of explanation , feeling that " it is not exactly easy to watch John treat Dean and Sam so dismissively , especially after they have been nearly killing themselves all season to find him " .
However , Steenbergen praised Morgan for his acting , writing , " Even though he is used sparingly throughout the series , Jeffrey Dean Morgan is always effective as John . "
She also felt that he brought " emotional weight " to the character , allowing the audience to " feel John 's weariness , and his resignation that things will most likely not go well " .
While Brian Tallerico of UGO enjoyed Morgan 's performance , he was happy that the character was killed off because John 's presence made Sam and Dean into " followers " that were " merely existing in the wake of their father " .
With their father gone , the brothers are no longer prevented from " heading up the battle with the other side " .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY FOOTNOTES