MAGNETIC DIP Magnetic dip , dip angle , or magnetic inclination is the angle made with the horizontal by the Earth 's magnetic field lines .
This angle varies at different points on the Earth 's surface .
Positive values of inclination indicate that the magnetic field of the Earth is pointing downward , into the Earth , at the point of measurement , and negative values indicate that it is pointing upward .
The dip angle is in principle the angle made by the needle of a vertically held compass , though in practice ordinary compass needles may be weighted against dip or may be unable to move freely in the correct plane .
The value can be measured more reliably with a special instrument typically known as a dip circle .
Dip angle was discovered by the engineer Georg Hartmann in 1544 .
A method of measuring it with a dip circle was described by Robert Norman in England in 1581 .
EXPLANATION
Section::::Explanation .
Magnetic dip results from the tendency of a magnet to align itself with lines of magnetic field .
As the Earth 's magnetic field lines are not parallel to the surface , the north end of a compass needle will point downward in the northern hemisphere ( positive dip ) or upward in the southern hemisphere ( negative dip ) .
The range of dip is from -90 degrees ( at the South Magnetic Pole ) to +90 degrees ( at the North Magnetic Pole ) .
Contour lines along which the dip measured at the Earth 's surface is equal are referred to as isoclinic lines .
The locus of the points having zero dip is called the magnetic equator or aclinic line .
PRACTICAL IMPORTANCE Section::::Practical importance .
The phenomenon is especially important in aviation , as it causes the airplane 's compass to give erroneous readings during banked turns and airspeed changes .
The latter errors occur because the compass card tilts on its mount when under acceleration .
Compass needles are often weighted during manufacture to compensate for magnetic dip , so that they will balance roughly horizontally .
This balancing is latitude - dependent ; see Compass balancing ( magnetic dip ) .
SEE ALSO
* Aircraft compass turns * South Atlantic Anomaly
* Magnetic declination
REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Compass errors
* Look up magnetic dip values