BENNIE AND THE JETS
" Bennie and the Jets " ( also titled as " Benny & the Jets " ) is a song composed by Elton John and Bernie Taupin .
The song first appeared on the Goodbye Yellow Brick Road album in 1973 .
"
Bennie and the Jets " has been one of John 's most popular songs and was performed during John 's appearance at Live Aid .
The track is spelled Benny on the sleeve of the single and in the track listing of the album , but Bennie on the album vinyl disc label .
SINGLE RELEASE
Section::::Single release .
" Bennie and the Jets " was featured on side one of the Goodbye Yellow Brick Road album , and Elton John was set against releasing it as a single , believing it would fail .
CKLW in Windsor , Ontario , began heavy airplay of the song and it became the # 1 song in the Detroit market .
This attention caused other American and Canadian Top 40 stations to add it to their playlists as well and as a result , the song peaked at # 1 on the US singles chart in 1974 .
In the US , it was certified Gold on 8 April 1974 and Platinum on 13 September 1995 by the RIAA , and had sold 2.8 million copies by August 1976 .
" Bennie and the Jets " was also John 's first Top 40 hit on what at the time was called the Billboard Hot Soul Singles chart , where it peaked at # 15 , the highest position out of the three of his singles which reached that chart .
The acceptance of " Bennie " on R&B radio helped land John , a huge soul music fan , a guest appearance on the edition of 17 May 1975 of Soul Train , where he played " Bennie and the Jets " and " Philadelphia Freedom " .
In Canada , it held the # 1 spot on the RPM national singles chart for two weeks ( 13–20 April ) , becoming his first # 1 single of 1974 and his fourth overall .
SONG COMPOSITION Section::::Song composition .
The song tells of " Bennie and the Jets " , a fictional band of whom the song 's narrator is a fan .
The song is written in the key of G major .
In interviews , Taupin has said that the song 's lyrics are a satire on the music industry of the 1970s .
The greed and glitz of the early 1970s music scene is portrayed by Taupin 's words : Taupin also goes on to describe the flashy wardrobe of " Bennie " , the leader of the band : Produced by Gus Dudgeon , the song was recorded during the " Goodbye Yellow Brick Road " sessions in France at Château d'Hérouville 's Strawberry Studios , where John and Taupin had recorded their previous two albums , Honky Château and Do n't Shoot Me
I 'm Only the Piano Player .
After recording the song in the studio , John and the band worried that it was too plain and unoriginal .
In the Eagle Vision documentary on the making of Goodbye Yellow Brick Road , John recalled , " I fought tooth and nail against ' Bennie ' coming out as a single . "
According to guitarist Davey Johnstone , Bennie and the Jets ' was one of the oddest songs we ever recorded .
We just sat back and said , ' This is really odd .
While mixing the album , Dudgeon came up with the idea of creating a " live from Playhouse Theatre " sound for the track .
He added reverb effects , applause and other audience sounds from John 's previous concerts and a loop from the Jimi Hendrix live album Isle of Wight , plus whistles , giving it the " live concert recording " feel that has since become a sort of trademark .
John rarely plays the song verbatim to the studio version , and often makes subtle or even drastic changes .
Live , the piano solo in the middle of the song has been played in all sorts of variations , from very close to the original to wildly improvised and extended versions , such as the elaborate version during a Central Park concert in 1980 and another memorable take on it during the " Elton and his band " part of the show recorded for what would become Live in Australia in December 1986 .
( It can be seen on various Laserdisc releases of the show . )
He has also been known to end the song in a wide range of styles , including classical , swing , boogie - woogie and even using the signature five - note phrase from John Williams ' score for Close Encounters of the Third Kind .
PERSONNEL * Elton John – piano , Farfisa organ , vocals * Davey Johnstone – acoustic and electric guitars
* Dee Murray – bass * Nigel Olsson – drums MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
In May 2017 , an official music video for " Bennie and the Jets " premiered at the Cannes Film Festival as a winner of Elton John :
The Cut , a competition organized in partnership with AKQA , Pulse Films , and YouTube in honour of the fiftieth anniversary of his songwriting relationship with Bernie Taupin .
The competition called upon independent filmmakers to submit treatments for music videos for one of three Elton John songs from the 1970s , with each song falling within a specific concept category . "
Bennie and the Jets " was designated for the choreography category , and was directed by Jack Whiteley and Laura Brownhill .
The video was influenced by early cinema and the work of Busby Berkeley , portraying characters as participants on a talent show auditioning for Bennie .
CHART PERFORMANCE
WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
align="left"Chart ( 1974 ) !
align="left"Peakposition align="left"Australia align="left"Canada
align="left"New Zealand align="left"US Cash Box Top 100 !
align="left"Chart
( 1976 ) !
align="left"Peakposition
align="left"UK
Singles Chart YEAR - END CHARTS COVERS
* Ray Castoldi , the longtime organist for the NBA 's New York Knicks , is often heard playing this song at Knicks home games .
The song has also been played on the organ at Los Angeles Lakers and Los Angeles Kings home games .
*
The Beastie Boys released a cover of this song on their album in 1999 .
The song , titled " Benny and the Jets " , was sung by frequent Beastie Boys collaborator Biz Markie .
This recording was first released in 1995 as a flexi disc inside of issue two of the Beastie Boys ' Grand Royal magazine .
*
Cher performed the song in a duet on The Cher Show with Elton John on piano in 1975 .
*
In 2006 Christina Aguilera with Elton John performed this song at Fashion Rocks .
*
In 2014 Miguel with Wale performed this song on Goodbye Yellow Brick Road : 40th Anniversary Celebration .
* Indie Pop artist BØRNS performs his own cover of " Bennie and The Jets " during live shows .
At times he adds a verse from Frank Ocean 's " Super Rich Kids " towards the end , as " Super Rich Kids " has samples of " Bennie and The Jets " within it .
*
Pink and Logic covered the song alongside John on the 2018 tribute album .
MONDEGREENS IN THE SONG
Section::::Mondegreens in the song .
The song contains the line
" She 's got electric boots , a mohair suit " , which is often misheard as " She 's got electric boobs , and mohair shoes " .
A scene in the film 27 Dresses shows that this is but one of many mondegreens that listeners have invented for this song .
REFERENCES IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
The original Winnipeg Jets NHL team 's mascot was named Benny , partially in reference to this song , but primarily after the original owner of the ( WHA ) team , Ben Hatskin .
* The band TV Girl released an EP on 25 July 2011 , entitled " Benny and the Jetts " .
It features four songs , the first of which is also titled " Benny and the Jetts " , which describes a girl that the singer once knew who was always listening to the song .
* Axl Rose cited it as a song that meant a lot to him as a teenager .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS