SELF - PORTRAIT
A self - portrait is a representation of an artist that is drawn , painted , photographed , or sculpted by that artist .
Although self - portraits have been made since the earliest times , it is not until the Early Renaissance in the mid-15th century that artists can be frequently identified depicting themselves as either the main subject , or as important characters in their work .
With better and cheaper mirrors , and the advent of the panel portrait , many painters , sculptors and printmakers tried some form of self - portraiture .
Portrait of a Man in a Turban by Jan van Eyck of 1433 may well be the earliest known panel self - portrait .
He painted a separate portrait of his wife , and he belonged to the social group that had begun to commission portraits , already more common among wealthy Netherlanders than south of the Alps .
The genre is venerable , but not until the Renaissance , with increased wealth and interest in the individual as a subject , did it become truly popular .
TYPES Section::::Types .
A self - portrait may be a portrait of the artist , or a portrait included in a larger work , including a group portrait .
Many painters are said to have included depictions of specific individuals , including themselves , in painting figures in religious or other types of composition .
Such paintings were not intended publicly to depict the actual persons as themselves , but the facts would have been known at the time to artist and patron , creating a talking point as well as a public test of the artist 's skill .
In the earliest surviving examples of medieval and Renaissance self - portraiture , historical or mythical scenes ( from the Bible or classical literature ) were depicted using a number of actual persons as models , often including the artist , giving the work a multiple function as portraiture , self - portraiture and history / myth painting .
In these works , the artist usually appears as a face in the crowd or group , often towards the edges or corner of the work and behind the main participants .
Rubens 's The Four Philosophers ( 1611–12 ) is a good example .
This culminated in the 17th century with the work of Jan de Bray .
Many artistic media have been used ; apart from paintings , drawings and prints have been especially important .
In the famous Arnolfini Portrait ( 1434 ) , Jan van Eyck is probably one of two figures glimpsed in a mirror – a surprisingly modern conceit .
The Van Eyck painting may have inspired Diego Velázquez to depict himself in full view as the painter creating Las Meninas ( 1656 ) , as the Van Eyck hung in the palace in Madrid where he worked .
This was another modern flourish , given that he appears as the painter ( previously unseen in official royal portraiture ) and standing close to the King 's family group who were the supposed main subjects of the painting .
In what may be one of the earliest childhood self - portraits now surviving , Albrecht Dürer depicts himself as in naturalistic style as a 13-year - old boy in 1484 .
In later years he appears variously as a merchant in the background of Biblical scenes and as Christ .
Leonardo da Vinci may have drawn a picture of himself at the age of 60 , in around 1512 .
The picture is often straightforwardly reproduced as Da Vinci 's appearance , although this is not certain .
In the 17th century , Rembrandt painted a range of self - portraits .
In The Prodigal Son in the Tavern ( c1637 ) , one of the earliest self - portraits with family , the painting probably includes Saskia , Rembrandt 's wife , one of the earliest depictions of a family member by a famous artist .
Family and professional group paintings , including the artist 's depiction , became increasingly common from the 17th century on .
From the later 20th century on , video plays an increasing part in self - portraiture , and adds the dimension of audio as well , allowing the person to speak to us in their own voice .
GALLERY :
INSERTED SELF - PORTRAITS
WOMEN
PAINTERS Section::::Women painters .
Women artists are notable producers of self - portraits ; almost all significant women painters have left an example , from Caterina van Hemessen to the prolific Elisabeth Vigée - Lebrun , and Frida Kahlo , as well as Alice Neel , Paula Modersohn - Becker and Jenny Saville who painted themselves in the nude .
Vigée - Lebrun painted a total of 37 self - portraits , many of which were copies of earlier ones , painted for sale .
Until the 20th century women were usually unable to train in drawing the nude , which made it difficult for them to paint large figure compositions , leading many artists to specialize in portrait work .
Women artists have historically embodied a number of roles within their self - portraiture .
Most common is the artist at work , showing themselves in the act of painting , or at least holding a brush and palette .
Often , the viewer wonders if the clothes worn were those they normally painted in , as the elaborate nature of many ensembles was an artistic choice to show her skill at fine detail .
ANTIQUITY
Section::::Antiquity .
Images of artists at work are encountered in Ancient Egyptian painting , and sculpture and also on Ancient Greek vases .
One of the first self - portraits was made by the Pharaoh Akhenaten 's chief sculptor Bak in 1365 BC .
Plutarch mentions that the Ancient Greek sculptor Phidias had included a likeness of himself in a number of characters in the " Battle of the Amazons " on the Parthenon , and there are classical references to painted self - portraits , none of which have survived .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
Portraits and self - portraits have a longer continuous history in Asian art than in Europe .
Many in the scholar gentleman tradition are quite small , depicting the artist in a large landscape , illustrating a poem in calligraphy on his experience of the scene .
Another tradition , associated with Zen Buddhism , produced lively semi - caricatured self - portraits , whilst others remain closer to the conventions of the formal portrait .
EUROPEAN ART Section::::European art .
Illuminated manuscripts contain a number of apparent self - portraits , notably those of Saint Dunstan and Matthew Paris .
Most of these either show the artist at work , or presenting the finished book to either a donor or a sacred figure , or venerating such a figure .
Orcagna is believed to have painted himself as a figure in a fresco of 1359 , which became , at least according to art historians — Vasari records a number of such traditions — a common practice of artists .
However , for earlier artists , with no other portrait to compare to , these descriptions are necessarily rather speculative .
Among the earliest self - portraits are also two frescos by , one in Velemér ( 1378 ) , western Hungary , and one in Martjanci ( 1392 ) , northeastern Slovenia .
In Italy Giotto di Bondone ( 1267–1337 ) included himself in the cycle of " eminent men " in the Castle of Naples , Masaccio ( 1401–1428 ) depicted himself as one of the apostles in the painting of the Brancacci Chapel , and Benozzo Gozzoli includes himself , with other portraits , in the Palazzo Medici Procession of the Magi ( 1459 ) , with his name written on his hat .
This is imitated a few years later by Sandro Botticelli , as a spectator of the Adoration of the Magi ( 1475 ) , who turns from the scene to look at us .
Fourteenth - century sculpted portrait busts of and by the Parler family in Prague Cathedral include self - portraits , and are among the earliest such busts of non - royal figures .
Ghiberti included a small head of himself in his most famous work .
Notably , the earliest self - portrait painted in England , other than in a manuscript , is the miniature painted in oils on panel by the German artist Gerlach Flicke , 1554 .
ALBRECHT DÜRER , 1471–1528 , THE FIRST PROLIFIC SELF - PORTRAITIST Section::::Albrecht Dürer , 1471–1528 , the first prolific self - portraitist .
Albrecht Dürer was an artist highly conscious of his public image and reputation , whose main income came from his old master prints , all containing his famous monogram , which were sold throughout Europe .
He probably depicted himself more often than any artist before him , producing at least twelve images , including three oil portraits , and figures in four altarpieces .
The earliest is a silverpoint drawing created when he was thirteen years old .
At twenty - two Dürer painted the Self - portrait with Carnation ( 1493 , Louvre ) , probably to send to his new fiancée .
The Madrid self - portrait ( 1498 , Prado ) depicts Dürer as a dandy in fashionable Italian dress , reflecting the international success he had achieved by then .
In his last self - portrait , sold or given to the city of Nuremberg , and displayed publicly , which very few portraits then were , the artist depicted himself with an unmistakable resemblance to Jesus Christ ( Munich , Alte Pinakothek ) .
He later re - used the face in a religious engraving of , revealingly , the Veil of Veronica , Christ 's own " self - portrait " ( B.25 ) .
A self - portrait in gouache he sent to Raphael has not survived .
A woodcut of a bathhouse and a drawing show virtually nude self - portraits .
RENAISSANCE AND BAROQUE Section::::Renaissance and Baroque .
The great Italian painters of the Renaissance made comparatively few formal painted self - portraits , but often included themselves in larger works .
Most individual self - portraits they have left were straightforward depictions ; Dürer 's showmanship was rarely followed , although a controversially attributed Self - portrait as David by Giorgione would have something of the same spirit , if it is a self - portrait .
There is a portrait by Pietro Perugino of about 1500 ( Collegio del Cambio of Perugia ) , and one by the young Parmigianino showing the view in a convex mirror .
There is also a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci ( 1512 ) , and self - portraits in larger works by Michelangelo , who gave his face to the skin of St. Bartholomew in the Last Judgement of the Sistine Chapel ( 1536–1541 ) , and Raphael who is seen in the characters of School of Athens 1510 , or with a friend who holds his shoulder ( 1518 ) .
Also notable are two portraits of Titian as an old man in the 1560s .
Paolo Veronese appears as a violinist clothed in white in his Marriage at Cana , accompanied by Titian on the bass viol ( 1562 ) .
Northern artists continued to make more individual portraits , often looking very much like their other bourgeois sitters .
Johan Gregor van der Schardt produced a painted terracotta bust of himself ( c. 1573 ) .
Titian 's Allegory of Prudence ( c. 1565–70 ) is thought to depict Titian , his son Orazio , and a young cousin , Marco Vecellio .
Titian also painted a late self - portrait in 1567 ; apparently his first .
Baroque artist Artemisia Gentileschi 's La Pittura ( Self - portrait as the allegory of painting ) presents herself embodying the classical allegorical representation of Painting , seen in the dramatic mask worn around Gentileschi 's neck which Painting often carries .
The artist 's focus on her work , away from the viewer , highlights the drama of the Baroque period , and the changing role of the artist from craftsperson to singular innovator .
Caravaggio painted himself in Bacchus at the beginning of his career , then appears in the staffage of some of his larger paintings .
Finally , the head of Goliath held by David ( 1605–10 , Galleria Borghese ) is Caravaggio 's own .
REMBRANDT AND THE 17TH CENTURY IN NORTHERN EUROPE Section::::Rembrandt and the 17th century in Northern Europe .
In the 17th century , Flemish and Dutch artists painted themselves far more often ; by this date most successful artists had a position in society where a member of any trade would consider having their portrait painted .
Many also include their families , again following the normal practice for the middle - classes .
Mary Beale , Anthony van Dyck and Peter Paul Rubens gave us numerous images of themselves , the latter also often painting his family .
This practice was especially common for women artists , whose inclusion of their families was often a deliberate attempt to mitigate criticism of their profession causing distraction from their " natural role " as mothers .
Rembrandt was the most frequent self - portraitist , at least until the self - obsessed modern period , also often painting his wife , son and mistress .
At one time about ninety paintings were counted as Rembrandt self - portraits , but it is now known that he had his students copy his own self - portraits as part of their training .
Modern scholarship has reduced the autograph count to something over forty paintings , as well as a few drawings and thirty - one etchings , which include many of the most remarkable images of the group .
Many show him posing in quasi - historical fancy dress , or pulling faces at himself .
His oil paintings trace the progress from an uncertain young man to the dapper and very successful portrait - painter of the 1630s to the troubled but massively powerful portraits of his old age .
AFTER REMBRANDT Section::::After Rembrandt .
In Spain , there were self - portraits of Bartolomé Estéban Murillo and Diego Velázquez .
Francisco de Zurbarán represented himself in Luke the Evangelist at the feet of Christ on the cross ( around 1635 ) .
In the 19th century , Goya painted himself numerous times .
French self - portraits , at least after Nicolas Poussin tend to show the social status of the artist , although Jean - Baptiste - Siméon Chardin and some other instead showed their real working costume very realistically .
This was a decision all 18th - century self - portraitists needed to make , although many painted themselves in both formal and informal costume in different paintings .
Thereafter , one can say that most significant painters left us at least one self - portrait , even after the decline of the painted portrait with the arrival of photography .
Gustave Courbet ( see below ) was perhaps the most creative self - portraitist of the 19th century , and The Artist 's studio and Bonjour , Monsieur Courbet are perhaps the largest self - portraits ever painted .
Both contain many figures , but are firmly centred on the heroic figure of the artist .
PROLIFIC MODERN SELF - PORTRAITISTS Section::::Prolific modern self - portraitists .
One of the most famous and most prolific of self - portraitists was Vincent van Gogh , who drew and painted himself more than 43 times between 1886 and 1889 .
In all of these self - portraits one is struck that the gaze of the painter is seldom directed at us ; even when it is a fixed gaze , he seems to look elsewhere .
These paintings vary in intensity and color and some portray the artist with bandages ; representing the episode in which he severed one of his ears .
The many self - portraits of Egon Schiele set new standards of openness , or perhaps exhibitionism , representing him naked in many positions , sometimes masturbating or with an erection , as in Eros ( 1911 ) .
Stanley Spencer was to follow somewhat in this vein .
Max Beckmann was a prolific painter of self - portraits as was Edvard Munch who made great numbers of self - portrait paintings ( 70 ) , prints ( 20 ) and drawings or watercolours ( over 100 ) throughout his life , many showing him being badly treated by life , and especially by women .
Obsessively using the self - portrait as a personal and introspective artistic expression was Horst Janssen , who produced hundreds of self - portraits depicting him a wide range of contexts most notably in relation to sickness , moodyness and death .
The 2004 exhibition " Schiele , Janssen .
Selbstinszenierung , Eros , Tod "
( Schiele , Janssen :
Self - dramatisation , Eros , Death ) at the Leopold Museum in Vienna paralleled the works of Egon Schiele and Horst Janssen , both heavily drawing on sujets of erotica and death in combination with relentless self - portraiture .
Frida Kahlo , who following a terrible accident spent many years bedridden , with only herself for a model , was another painter whose self - portraits depict great pain , in her case physical as well as mental .
Her 55-odd self - portraits include many of herself from the waist up , and also some nightmarish representations which symbolize her physical sufferings .
Throughout his long career , Pablo Picasso often used self - portraits to depict himself in the many different guises , disguises and incarnations of his autobiographical artistic persona .
From the young unknown " Yo Picasso " period to the " Minotaur in the Labyrinth " period , to the " old Cavalier " and the " lecherous old artist and model " periods .
Often Picasso 's self - portraits depicted and revealed complicated psychological insights , both personal and profound about the inner state and well being of the artist .
Another artist who painted personal and revealing self - portraits throughout his career was Pierre Bonnard .
Bonnard also painted dozens of portraits of his wife Marthe throughout her life as well .
Vincent van Gogh , Paul Gauguin , Egon Schiele and Horst Janssen in particular made intense ( at times disturbingly so ) and self - revealing self - portraits throughout their careers .
SELF - PORTRAITS IN GENERAL GALLERY :
PAINTERS AT WORK Section::::Self - portraits in general .
Section::::Gallery : painters at work .
Many of the medieval portraits show the artist at work , and Jan van Eyck ( above ) his chaperon hat has the parts normally hanging loose tied up on his head , giving the misleading impression he is wearing a turban , presumably for convenience whilst he paints .
In the early modern period , increasingly , men as well as women who painted themselves at work had to choose whether to present themselves in their best clothes , and best room , or to depict studio practice realistically .
See also the Gallery of Women painters above .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Art critic Galina Vasilyeva - Shlyapina separates two basic forms of the self - portrait : " professional " portraits , in which the artist is depicted at work , and " personal " portraits , which reveal moral and psychological features .
She also proposes a more detailed taxonomy : ( 1 ) the " insertable " self - portrait , where the artist inserts his or her own portrait into , for example , a group of characters related to some subject ; ( 2 ) the " prestigious , or symbolic " self - portrait , where an artist depicts him- or herself in the guise of a historical person or religious hero ; ( 3 ) the " group portrait " where artist is depicted with members of family or other real persons ; ( 4 ) the " separate or natural " self - portrait , where the artist is depicted alone .
However it might be thought these classes are rather rigid ; many portraits manage to combine several of them .
With new media came a chance to create different kinds of self - portraits besides simply static painting or photographs .
Many people , especially teens , use social networking sites to form their own personal identity on the internet .
Still others use blogs or create personal web pages to create a space for self - expression and self - portraiture .
MIRRORS AND POSES Section::::Mirrors and poses .
The self - portrait supposes in theory
the use of a mirror ; glass mirrors became available in Europe in the 15th century .
The first mirrors used were convex , introducing deformations that the artist sometimes preserved .
A painting by Parmigianino in 1524 Self - portrait in a mirror , demonstrates the phenomenon .
Mirrors permit surprising compositions like the Triple self - portrait by Johannes Gumpp ( 1646 ) , or more recently that of Salvador Dalí shown from the back painting his wife , Gala ( 1972–73 ) .
This use of the mirror often results in right - handed painters representing themselves as left - handed ( and vice versa ) .
Usually the face painted is therefore a mirror image of that the rest of the world saw , unless two mirrors were used .
Most of Rembrandt 's self - portraits before 1660 show only one hand – the painting hand is left unpainted .
He appears to have bought a larger mirror in about 1652 , after which his self - portraits become larger .
In 1658 a large mirror in a wood frame broke whilst being transported to his house ; nonetheless , in this year he completed his Frick self - portrait , his largest .
The size of single - sheet mirrors was restricted until technical advances made in France in 1688 by Bernard Perrot .
They also remained very fragile , and large ones were much more expensive pro - rata than small ones – the breakages were recut into small pieces .
About 80 cm , or two and a half feet , seems to have been the maximum size until then – roughly the size of the palace mirror in Las Meninas ( the convex mirror in the Arnolfini Portrait is considered by historians impractically large , one of Van Eyck 's many cunning distortions of scale ) .
Largely for this reason , most early self - portraits show painters at no more than half - length .
Self - portraits of the artist at work were , as mentioned above , the commonest form of medieval self - portrait , and these have continued to be popular , with a specially large number from the 18th century on .
One particular type in the medieval and Renaissance periods was the artist shown as Saint Luke ( patron saint of artists ) painting the Virgin Mary .
Many of these were presented to the local Guild of Saint Luke , to be placed in their chapel .
A famous large view of the artist in his studio is The Artist 's Studio by Gustave Courbet ( 1855 ) , an immense " Allegory " of objects and characters amid which the painter sits .
GALLERY :
MORTALITY IN THE SELF - PORTRAIT OTHER MEANINGS , STORYTELLING
Section::::Other meanings , storytelling .
The self - portraits of many Contemporary artists and Modernists often are characterized by a strong sense of narrative , often but not strictly limited to vignettes from the artists life - story .
Sometimes the narrative resembles fantasy , roleplaying and fiction .
Besides Diego Velázquez , ( in his painting Las Meninas ) , Rembrandt Van Rijn , Jan de Bray , Gustave Courbet , Vincent van Gogh , and Paul Gauguin other artists whose self - portraits reveal complex narratives include Pierre Bonnard , Marc Chagall , Lucian Freud , Arshile Gorky , Alice Neel , Pablo Picasso , Lucas Samaras , Jenny Saville , Cindy Sherman , Andy Warhol and Gilbert and George .
SELF - PROMOTION Section::::Self - promotion .
The self - portrait can be a very effective form of advertising for an artist , especially of course for a portrait painter .
Dürer was not really interested in portraits commercially , but made good use of his extraordinary self - portraits to advertise himself as an artist , something he was very sophisticated in doing .
Sofonisba Anguissola painted intricate miniatures which served as advertisements for her skill as well as novelty items , considered such because the rarity of successful women painters provided them with an oddity quality .
Rembrandt made his living principally from portrait - painting during his most successful period , and like Van Dyck and Joshua Reynolds , many of his portraits were certainly intended to advertise his skills .
With the advent of regular Academy shows , many artists tried to produce memorable self - portraits to make an impression on the artistic stage .
A recent exhibition at the National Gallery , London , Rebels and Martyrs , did not shrink from the comic bathos that sometimes resulted .
An example from the 21st century is Arnaud Prinstet , an otherwise little - known contemporary artist who has generated good amounts of publicity by undertaking to paint his self - portrait every day .
On the other hand , some artists depicted themselves very much as they did other clients .
DIAGNOSING THE SELF - PORTRAIT
Section::::Diagnosing the self - portrait .
Some artists who suffered neurological or physical diseases have left self - portraits of themselves that have allowed later physicians to attempt to analyze disruptions of mental processes ; and many of these analyses have entered into the textbooks of neurology .
The self - portraits of artists who suffered mental illnesses give a unique possibility to physicians for investigating self - perception in people with psychological , psychiatric or neurologic disturbances .
Russian sexologist Igor Kon in his article about masturbation notes that a habit of masturbating may be depicted in works of art , particularly paintings .
So Austrian artist Egon Schiele depicted himself so occupied in one of his self - portraits .
Kon observes that this painting does not portray pleasure from the masturbation , but a feeling of solitude .
Creations of Schiele are analyzed by other researchers in terms of sexuality , and particularly pedophilia .
COLLECTIONS Section::::Collections .
One of the most distinguished , and oldest , collections of self - portraits is in the Vasari Corridor of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence .
It was originally the collection by the Cardinal Leopoldo de ' Medici in the second part of the 17th century and has been maintained and expanded until the present time .
It is mostly not on view for general visitors , although some paintings are shown in the main galleries .
Many famous artists have not been able to resist an invitation to donate a self - portrait to the collection .
It comprises more than 200 portraits , in particular those of Pietro da Cortona , Charles Le Brun , Jean - Baptiste - Camille Corot , and Marc Chagall .
Other important collections are housed at the National Portrait Gallery ( United Kingdom ) in London ( with various satellite outstations elsewhere ) , and the National Portrait Gallery in Washington , D.C .. GALLERY PHOTO - PORTRAITS Section::::Photo - portraits .
Two methods of obtaining photographic self - portraits are widespread .
One is photographing a reflection in the mirror , and the other photographing one 's self with the camera in an outstretched hand .
Eleazar Langman photographed his reflection on the surface of a nickel - plated teapot .
Another method involves setting the camera or capture device upon a tripod , or surface .
One might then set the camera 's timer , or use a remote controlled shutter release .
Finally , setting up the camera , entering the scene and having an assistant release the shutter ( i.e. , if the presence of a cable release is unwanted in the photo ) can arguably be regarded as a photographic self - portrait , as well .
The speed of creating photographic self - portraits allowed for a range of images with more of a " play " atmosphere than traditional methods .
One such example is Frances Benjamin Johnston 's Self - Portrait , c. 1896 , an image which demonstrates the photo - portrait 's ability to play with gender roles .
DRAWINGS , PRINTS AND ENGRAVINGS SEE
ALSO
* Hockney –
Falco thesis *
Portrait
* Portrait of a Young Man with a Golden Chain
* Portrait painting * Self - portraits by Rembrandt * Self - portraits by Vincent van Gogh
*
The Portrait
Now NOTES AND REFERENCES FURTHER READING *
John J. Ciofalo , Self - Portraits of Francisco Goya .
Cambridge University Press , 2001
* Edward Lucie - Smith with Sean Kelly , The Self Portrait : A Modern View .
( 1987 )
* Ernst van de Wetering and others ; Rembrandt by himself , 1999 , National Gallery , London / Mauritshuis , The Hague , * Joseph Leo Koerner , The Moment of Self - Portraiture in German Renaissance Art , Chicago / London , 1993
* Jonathan Miller , On Reflection , 1998 , National Gallery , .
* Joanna Woodall , Self Portrait .
Renaissance to Contemporary .
National Portrait Gallery , London and Art Gallery of New South Wales , Sydney , 2005 .
*
Belle , Julian ( Ed . ) :
Five Hundred Self - Portraits .
Phaidon Press , London / New York , 2000 ( pb 2004 ) , NOT IN ENGLISH
* Joëlle Moulin , L'autoportrait au XXe siècle , éd .
Adam Biro , Paris , 1999
* Pascal Bonafoux , Les peintres et l'autoportrait , 1984
* Bernard Auriol , L'image préalable , l'expression impressive et l'autoportrait , Psychologie Médicale , 19 , 9 , 1543–1547 , 1987 { available on line : self - portrait }
* Bonafoux , Pascal / Rosenberg , David : Moi !
Autoportraits du XX siècle .
Musée du Luxembourg ( Paris ) /
Skira Editore ( Milano ) , Exhibition catalogue .
2004 , Text French , Paris 2004 , * Borzello , Frances : Wie Frauen sich sehen – Selbstbildnisse aus fünf Jahrhunderten .
Karl Blessing Verlag , München 1998 ,
* Calabrese , Omar : Die Geschichte des Selbstporträts .
Deutscher Kunstverlag , München 2006 ,
* Pfisterer , Ulrich / Rosen , Valeska von ~ ( Hrsg . ) :
Der Künstler als Kunstwerk .
Selbstporträts vom Mittelalter bis zur Gegenwart .
Reclam , Stuttgart 2005 , ( Rezension )
* Jeancolas , Claude .
( 1998 ) .
Passion Rimbaud :
L'Album d'une vie .
Paris : Textuel .
* Kathrin Schmidt :
Annegret Soltau : ich selbst , Mathildenhöhe Darmstadt ( Germany ) , 2006 SELF - PORTRAIT IN NEUROLOGY * Tielsch AH , Allen PJ ( 2005 )
Listen to them draw : screening children in primary care through the use of human figure drawings .
Pediatr Nurs 31(4 )
: 320–327 .
This survey of literature is focused on the method of drawing people as the method of diagnostics .
Children 's figures can recognize mental disorders .
The authors describe the use of self - portraits for diagnostics of emotional disorders in children from 6 to 12 years .
Although this procedure does not make it possible to place final diagnosis , it is useful for the recognition of problems .
* Morin C , Pradat - Diehl P , Robain G , Bensalah Y , Perrigot M ( 2003 )
Stroke hemiplegia and specular image : lessons from self - portraits .
Int J Aging Hum Dev 56(1 ) : 1 - 41 .
Patients with hemiplegia have diverse problems of self - perception , which are caused by neurological defeats of the idea of body , or by psychological problems with the perception their own self .
PSYCHOLOGY OF SELF - PERCEPTION
* Wegner DM ( 2003 )
The mind 's self - portrait .
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1001 : 212–225 .
Psychology and neuroscience approach understanding of reason and consciousness .
Meanwhile , each human reason contains the self - portrait , which contains the self - appraisal of cognitive processes .
This self - portrait assumes that the actions of man are governed by thoughts and , thus , the body is governed by consciousness .
Self - portrait leads to the persuasion , that we consciously desire to make something .
Studies show that self - portraiture is a caricature on the function of the brain , but at the same time it is the basis of the sensation of authorship and responsibility of one 's own actions .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Self Portrait History · History of the Self Portrait and the Selfie * National Portrait Gallery – Official web site *
" The Exploration of Self :
What Artists Find When They Search in the Mirror " by Jeanne Ivy .
* UMBC , research related to The Self Portrait : A Modern View .
( 1987 ) , Edward Lucie - Smith with Sean Kelly and other books One can also use the term " autoportrait " in the search engine of the Joconde database , which describes the works of 84 French museums , including the Louvre : * 52 self - portraits from the National Galleries of Scotland
* Catalogue of self portraits by the Royal Society of Portrait Painters 2007