MANAS NATIONAL PARK
Manas National Park or Manas Wildlife Sanctuary ( Pron:ˈmʌnəs )
( , ) is a national park , UNESCO Natural World Heritage site , a Project Tiger reserve , an elephant reserve and a biosphere reserve in Assam , India .
Located in the Himalayan foothills , it is contiguous with the Royal Manas National Park in Bhutan .
The park is known for its rare and endangered endemic wildlife such as the Assam roofed turtle , hispid hare , golden langur and pygmy hog .
Manas is famous for its population of the wild water buffalo .
ORIGIN OF THE NAME Section::::Origin of the name .
The name of the park is originated from the Manas River , which is named after the serpent goddess Manasa .
The Manas river is a major tributary of Brahmaputra River , which passes through the heart of the national park .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Manas National Park was declared a sanctuary on 1 October 1928 with an area of 360 km .
Manas bioreserve was created in 1973 .
Prior to the declaration of the sanctuary it was a reserved forest called Manas R.F. and North Kamrup R.F.
It was used by the Cooch Behar royal family and Raja of Gauripur as a hunting reserve .
In 1951 and 1955 the area was increased to 391 km .
It was declared a World Heritage site in December 1985 by UNESCO .
Kahitama R.F.
the Kokilabari R.F. and the Panbari R.F. were added in the year 1990 to form the Manas National Park .
In 1992 , UNESCO declared it as a world heritage site in danger due to heavy poaching and terrorist activities .
On 25 February 2008 the area was increased to 950 km .
On 21 June 2011 , it was removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger and was commended for its efforts in preservation .
HUMAN HISTORY Section::::Human history .
There is only one forest village , Agrang , in the core of the national park .
Apart from this village 56 more villages surround the park .
Many more fringe villages are directly or indirectly dependent on the park .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Political Geography : The park area falls in two districts : Chirang and Baksa in the state of Assam in India .
The park is divided into three ranges .
The western range is based at Panbari , the central at Bansbari near Barpeta Road , and the eastern at Bhuiyapara near Pathsala .
The ranges are not well connected ; while two major rivers need to be forded in going from the centre to the Panbari , there is a rough trail ( the daimAri road ) connecting the central to the eastern range .
Most visitors come to Bansbari and then spend some time inside the forest at Mathanguri on the Manas river at the Bhutan border .
Physical Geography : Manas is located in the foothills of the Eastern Himalaya and is densely forested .
The Manas river flows through the west of the park and is the main river within it .
It is a major tributary of Brahmaputra river and splits into two separate rivers , the Bwrsi and Bholkaduba as it reaches the plains .
Five other smaller rivers also flow through the national park which lies on a wide , low - lying alluvial terrace spreading out below the foothills of the outer Himalaya .
The Manas river also serves as an international border dividing India and Bhutan .
The bedrock of the savanna area in the north of the park is made up of limestone and sandstone , whereas the grasslands in the south of the park stand on deep deposits of fine alluvium .
The combination of Sub - Himalayan Bhabar Terai formation along with the riverine succession continuing up to Sub - Himalayan mountain forest make it one of the richest areas of biodiversity in the world .
The park is 950 km .
in area and is situated at a height of 61 m to 110 m above mean sea level .
Climate :
The minimum temperature is around 15 degrees C and maximum temperature is around 37 degrees C. Heavy rainfall occurs between May and September .
The annual average rainfall is around 333 cm .
NATURAL HISTORY BIOMES Section::::Natural history .
Section::::Biomes .
There are two major biomes present in Manas : *
The grassland biomes :
pygmy hog , Indian rhinoceros ( re - introduced in 2007 after extinction due to heavy poaching during the Bodo uprising ) , bengal florican , wild Asian buffalo , etc .
*
The forest biomes : slow loris , capped langur , wild pig , sambar , great hornbill , Malayan giant squirrel or black giant squirrel , Chinese pangolin etc .
FLORA Section::::Flora .
Vegetation :
The monsoon forests of Manas lie in the Brahmaputra Valley semi - evergreen forests ecoregion .
The combination of Sub - Himalayan Bhabar Terai formation with riverine succession leading up to the Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests makes it one of the richest biodiversity areas in the world .
The main vegetation types are : * Sub - Himalayan Light Alluvial Semi - Evergreen forests in the northern parts .
* East Himalayan mixed Moist and Dry Deciduous forests ( the most common type ) .
* Low Alluvial Savanna Woodland , and * Assam Valley Semi - Evergreen Alluvial Grasslands which cover almost 50 % of the park .
Much of the riverine dry deciduous forest is at an early successional stage .
It is replaced by moist deciduous forest away from water courses , which is succeeded by semi - evergreen climax forest in the northern part of the park .
A total of 543 plants species have been recorded from the core zone .
Of these , 374 species are dicotyledons ( including 89 trees ) , 139 species monocotyledons and 30 are Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms .
The park 's common trees include Aphanamixis polystachya , Anthocephalus chinensis , Syzygium cumini , Syzygium formosum , Syzygium oblatum , Bauhinia purpurea , Mallotus philippensis , Cinnamomum tamala , Actinodaphne obvata , Bombax ceiba , Sterculia villosa , Dillenia indica , Dillenia pentagyna , Careya arborea , Lagerstroemia parviflora , Lagerstroemia speciosa , Terminalia bellirica , Terminalia chebula , Trewia polycarpa , Gmelina arborea , Oroxylum indicum and Bridelia spp .
The grasslands are dominated by Imperata cylindrica , Saccharum naranga , Phragmites karka , Arundo donax , Dillenia pentagyna , Phyllanthus emblica , Bombax ceiba , and species of Clerodendrum , Leea , Grewia , Premna and Mussaenda . FAUNA Section::::Fauna .
The sanctuary has recorded 55 species of mammals , 380 species of birds , 50 of reptiles , and 3 species of amphibians .
Out of these wildlife , 21 mammals are India 's Schedule I mammals and 31 of them are threatened .
The fauna of the sanctuary include Indian elephants , Indian rhinoceros , gaurs , Asian water buffaloes , barasingha , Indian tigers , Indian leopards , clouded leopards , Asian golden cats , dholes , capped langurs , golden langurs , Assamese macaques , slow loris , hoolock gibbons , smooth - coated otters , sloth bears , barking deers , hog deers , black panthers , sambar deers and chitals .
The park is well known for species of rare and endangered wildlife that are not found anywhere else in the world like the Assam roofed turtle , hispid hare , golden langur and pygmy hog .
The Manas hosts more than 450 species of birds .
It has the largest population of the endangered Bengal florican to be found anywhere .
Other major bird species include great hornbills , jungle fowls , bulbuls , brahminy ducks , kalij pheasants , egrets , pelicans , fishing eagles , crested serpent - eagles , falcons , scarlet minivets , bee - eaters , magpie robins , pied hornbills , grey hornbills , mergansers , harriers , Indian Peafowl , ospreys and herons .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education *
Bibhuti Lahkar Conservation Biologist
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Wildlife Times : A trip to Kaziranga and Manas National Park * Manas Maozigendri Ecotourism Society - Protectors of Manas * Official Website of Manas National Park
*
Photo essay on the rhino translocations from Pobitora to Manas National Park