DR PEPPER Dr Pepper is a carbonated soft drink marketed as having a unique flavor .
The drink was created in the 1880s by pharmacist Charles Alderton in Waco , Texas and first served around 1885 .
Dr Pepper was first nationally marketed in the United States in 1904 , and is now also sold in Europe , Asia , North and South America , and Australia , as well as New Zealand and South Africa as an imported good .
Variants include a version without high fructose corn syrup , Diet Dr Pepper , as well as a line of additional flavors , first introduced in the 2000s .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The name " Dr. Pepper " was first used commercially in 1885 .
It was introduced nationally in the United States at the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition as a new kind of soda pop , made with 23 flavors .
Its introduction in 1885 preceded the introduction of Coca - Cola by one year .
It was formulated by Brooklyn - born pharmacist Charles Alderton in Morrison 's Old Corner Drug Store in Waco , Texas .
To test his new drink , he first offered it to store owner Wade Morrison , who also found it to his liking .
Patrons at Morrison 's soda fountain soon learned of Alderton 's new drink and began ordering a " Waco " .
Alderton gave the formula to Morrison , who named it Dr. Pepper ( later stylized as " Dr Pepper " ) .
As with Coca - Cola , the formula for Dr Pepper is a trade secret , and allegedly the recipe is kept as two halves in safe deposit boxes in two separate Dallas banks .
A persistent rumor since the 1930s is that the drink contains prune juice , but the official Dr Pepper FAQ refutes this with " Dr Pepper is a unique blend of natural and artificial flavors ; it does not contain prune juice .
" The origin of the rumor is unknown ; some believe it was started by a deliveryman for a competitor trying to cast aspersions based on prune juice 's laxative effects , but it may simply be because many people feel that Dr Pepper tastes similar to prune juice .
In 2009 , an old ledger book filled with formulas and recipes was discovered by Bill Waters while shopping at antiques stores in the Texas Panhandle .
Several sheets and letterheads hinted it had come from the W.B. Morrison &
Co. Old Corner Drug Store ( the same store where Dr Pepper was first served in 1885 ) and faded letters on the book 's cover spelled out " Castles Formulas " .
John Castles was a partner of Morrison 's for a time and worked at that location as early as 1880 .
One recipe in the book titled " D Peppers Pepsin Bitters " was of particular interest , and some speculated it could be an early recipe for Dr Pepper .
However , Keurig Dr Pepper insists it is not the formula for Dr Pepper , but is instead a medicinal recipe for a digestive aid .
The book was put up for auction in May 2009 , but no one purchased it .
NAME Section::::Name .
Theories about the origins of the soft drink 's name abound .
One possible reason why the name was chosen was the practice , common at the time of the drink 's creation , of including Dr. in the names of products to convey the impression that they were healthful .
A theory often cited is that the drink was named after an actual doctor , one Charles T. Pepper of Rural Retreat , Virginia .
Morrison may have named the drink after the doctor in gratitude for Pepper having given Morrison his first job .
However , Milly Walker , Collections Manager / Curator for the Dublin ( Texas )
Dr Pepper Bottling Co. Museum , has stated that U.S. Census records show that a young Morrison lived in Christiansburg , Virginia , 40 miles away from Rural Retreat , and that " there is not one piece of evidence that Morrison ever worked for Charles T. Pepper in Rural Retreat " .
Another story tells of Morrison naming the drink after Charles T. Pepper because the doctor granted Morrison permission to marry Pepper 's daughter , but the girl in question was only eight years old at the time that Morrison moved to Waco .
A Dr. Pepper of Christiansburg is another possible inspiration for the soft drink 's name .
In the census that shows Morrison living in Christiansburg and working as a pharmacy clerk , a Dr. Pepper is recorded on a subsequent page .
Since census takers at this time were walking from door to door , and these census entries are close to each other in the record , it appears that Morrison and this Dr. Pepper lived close to each other .
Furthermore , Pepper is recorded as having a 16-year - old daughter , named Malinda or Malissa .
The period ( full stop ) after Dr was used intermittently in Dr Pepper logos until the 1950s , when , after some debate , it was discarded permanently , for stylistic and legibility reasons .
A logo that debuted at that time had slanted text , in which Dr. resembled Di : .
LEGAL AND TRADE HISTORY Section::::Legal and trade history .
In 1951 , Dr Pepper sued the Coca - Cola company for US$ 750,000 , asserting that nickel Coca - Colas were sold below cost and were a restraint of trade .
In 1972 , Dr Pepper sued the Coca - Cola company for trademark infringement based on a soft drink marketed by Coca - Cola called " Peppo " .
Coca - Cola renamed their beverage Dr. Pibb , which was also determined to violate the trademark .
The soft drink was later renamed Mr Pibb .
Dr Pepper became insolvent in the early 1980s , prompting an investment group to take the company private .
Several years later , Coca - Cola attempted to acquire Dr Pepper , but was blocked from doing so by the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) .
Around the same time , Seven Up was acquired from Phillip Morris by the same investment company that bailed out Dr Pepper .
Upon the failure of the Coca - Cola merger , Dr Pepper and Seven Up merged ( creating Dr Pepper / Seven Up , Inc. , or DPSU ) , giving up international branding rights in the process .
After the DPSU merger , Coca - Cola obtained most non - US rights to the Dr Pepper name ( with PepsiCo taking the Seven Up rights ) .
Dr Pepper was a frequent player in the 1990s antitrust history of the United States .
As part of these activities , economists and the courts have weighed in with the opinion that Dr Pepper is a " pepper " flavored drink and not a " cola " .
In 1995 , the FTC blocked a merger between The Coca - Cola Company and Dr Pepper on grounds that included concerns about a monopoly of the " pepper " flavor category of soft drinks .
In 1996 , Dr Pepper was involved in an antitrust case involving Jerry Jones , the Dallas Cowboys , NFL Properties , Nike , and other commercial interests active at Texas Stadium in Irving , Texas .
Jones had made deals with Dr Pepper and the other companies that , the league said , violated their exclusive marketing contracts with Coca - Cola and other businesses .
The NFL agreed to allow Jones and other teams to pursue their own agreements .
In 1998 , the " pepper " flavor soda category was a major part of the analysis supporting an antitrust case between Coca - Cola and Pepsi .
VARIETIES
DIETARY BRANDS
* Dietetic Dr Pepper was introduced in 1962 ( cans ) and 1963 ( bottles ) .
Sales were slow partly due to the public misconception that the drink was for diabetics , and in 1966 , the company renamed the product Sugar Free Dr Pepper .
The name was changed to Diet Dr Pepper in 1987 .
Diet Dr Pepper , after posting a 6.4 % gain in sales volume , became the 10th best - selling soda in 2006 according to Beverage Digest magazine .
From 1991 to 2006 , the beverage was marketed using the slogan " Diet Dr Pepper tastes more like Regular Dr Pepper .
"
In 2006 , a new marketing campaign was launched comparing the taste of Diet Dr Pepper to desserts instead of regular Dr Pepper with the slogan
" There 's nothing diet about it . "
* Pepper Free ( 1982–1985 ) was first introduced to test markets in 1982 as a caffeine - free version of Diet Dr Pepper , citing company research that indicated a need for a product to fill a niche for the health - conscious consumer .
Originally introduced in only six states , the Pepper Free brand lasted for only three years , and was phased out in 1985 .
While a caffeine - free dietetic product continues to be produced under various name permutations , the reason for pulling the Pepper Free brand are unknown , but could have been due to confusion with the rival " Pepsi Free " brand ( currently " Caffeine - Free Pepsi " ) .
* Caffeine Free Dr Pepper ( not diet ) was first released in 1983 .
* Dr Pepper TEN , a low - calorie version of Dr Pepper , was released in 2011 .
This version retained the taste of regular Dr Pepper , but with 10 calories per serving .
It was marketed toward men , featuring a gunmetal - gray color scheme , industrial rivets , and bold font , and the tagline " It 's Not for Women . "
FLAVOR VARIATIONS
* Dr Pepper Red Fusion ( 2002–2004 ) was available only in the US .
The predominantly cherry - flavored , red - colored Red Fusion was the first new flavor added to the Dr Pepper family of beverages in the company 's 122-year history .
Its production was essentially canceled less than a year later , although in certain areas it was available until late 2004 .
* Dr Pepper Cherry Vanilla ( began 2004 ) was released in some areas on October 15 , 2004 .
The beverage tastes similar to Dr Pepper , but has stronger cherry and vanilla flavors added .
Cherry Vanilla Dr Pepper was the first drink in the planned " Soda Fountain Classics " line of beverages from Dr Pepper , a range of drinks designed to taste similar to popular soda fountain drinks from the 1950s .
It is now only available in select areas of the US .
It was available in Canada for a short time , but it ceased production as of mid-2007 .
It became available again in mid-2008 after Diet Cherry Chocolate Dr Pepper ceased production .
It is also available as a flavor variant in Coca - Cola Freestyle machines that offer Dr Pepper in place of Pibb Xtra .
* Dr Pepper Berries and Cream ( 2006–2007 ) and its diet version were released in most US locations in April 2006 .
It is the second beverage in Dr Pepper 's " Soda Fountain Classics " line of drinks .
In Canada , the diet version of the drink was available approximately from May 2007 to August 2007 and the nondiet version was available from September 2007 to December 2007 .
Berries and Cream and Diet Berries and Cream have also been discontinued .
* Diet Cherry Chocolate Dr Pepper ( 2007–2008 ) was introduced as a limited edition flavor on November 21 , 2007 .
It was discontinued in April 2008 .
It became available in Canada in early January 2008 .
A nondiet version was never created .
The taste is similar to Canfield 's Diet Cherry Chocolate Fudge Soda , but with the distinctive Dr Pepper flavor .
It was featured in the song " Cherry Chocolate Rain " by YouTube celebrity Tay Zonday .
Upon ceasing production , it was replaced by Cherry Vanilla Dr Pepper .
* Dr Pepper Cherry ( began 2009 ) was released in some areas around February 2009 .
The beverage tastes similar to Dr Pepper , but has stronger cherry flavor added .
Variety comes in both regular and diet versions .
Gene Simmons of the band Kiss was chosen to be the variation 's spokesman , with a commercial circulating on television in March – April 2009 featuring Kiss 's song " Calling Dr. Love " ( " Trust me , I 'm a doctor
" claims Simmons in the commercial ) .
It is also available as a flavor variant in Coca - Cola Freestyle machines that offer Dr Pepper in place of Pibb Xtra .
* Heritage Dr Pepper ( or Dr Pepper Heritage ; began 2009 ) became available around November 2009 in various outlets around the United States .
As its name implies , it is a " re - release " of sorts of Dr Pepper 's original formula , which uses sugar instead of high fructose corn syrup , which Dr Pepper and other brands of soft drink started to use around the early 1970s .
The formula of Heritage Dr Pepper and Dublin Dr Pepper are assumed to be one and the same , but Heritage Dr Pepper is a larger - scale , national release aimed at capturing the same marketing essence as the Pepsi and Mountain Dew throwbacks .
* Dr Pepper " Made with Real Sugar " was released to commemorate the drink 's 125th anniversary during summer 2010 .
It featured the use of " real " sugar which was likely a mix of cane and beet sugar as opposed to its usual high fructose corn syrup .
This version of the soda featured six collectible 12 oz cans and a 20 oz plastic bottle decorated with Dr Pepper 's old slogans and images from the 1960s .
* Dr Pepper Vanilla Float ( began 2014 ) is a summertime limited - edition run of Dr Pepper with a vanilla ice cream taste , available in 20-ounce bottles , 2-liter bottles , and 12-ounce 12 packs .
* Dr Pepper Dark Berry ( beginning 2019 ) will be a limited - edition run of Dr Pepper with a dark berry taste , to promote the launch of .
* UK Variation , United Kingdom 's version of Dr Pepper , along with various other countries , is manufactured with sugar instead of high fructose corn syrup ( much like Heritage Dr Pepper in the US , as mentioned above ) .
Since August 2014 , a " New Improved " flavor has been marketed in the UK that reduces the amount of sugar from 10.3 g per 100 ml to 7.2 g while adding artificial sweeteners ( aspartame and acesulfame k ) .
* Dr Pepper Zero ( began 2013 ) –
As Coca Cola distribute Dr Pepper in the United Kingdom , a " Zero " version was introduced , meaning no added sugar and low - calorie , but maintaining a taste more in line with regular Dr Pepper than its diet variant .
* German Variation , Germany 's version of Dr Pepper , similar to its UK version , is also manufactured with a reduced amount of sugar and artificial sweeteners ( also aspartame and acesulfame K ) .
However , the sugar is reduced to 6.8 g per 100 ml , marginally less than in the United Kingdom .
SWEETENERS Section::::Varieties .
Section::::Sweeteners .
Much of the soft drink industry in the United States stopped using sugar in the 1980s , in response to a series of price supports and import quotas introduced beginning in 1982 that increased the price of sugar above the global market price .
As a result , most US soft drinks , including Dr Pepper , now use high fructose corn syrup instead of sugar .
A handful of United States bottling plants still use sugar to sweeten Dr Pepper .
The Dr Pepper bottling plant in Dublin , Texas used to produce such a beverage , known as Dublin Dr Pepper .
In the 1980s , plant owner W.P. " Bill " Kloster ( June 7 , 1918 September 27 , 1999 ) refused to convert the plant to high fructose corn syrup .
Other bottlers still using sugar include Temple Bottling Company , in Temple , Texas , Ab - Tex in Abilene , and West Jefferson Dr Pepper ( WJDP ) of West Jefferson , NC .
On March 25 , 2007 , Coca - Cola bottlers in the Dr Pepper Heartland commenced sales of 16 ounce cans of Dr Pepper made with cane sugar and featuring a logo with ' Old Doc ' on them .
This product was scheduled to be a limited time release .
In January 2009 , " Heritage Dr Pepper " became available in select markets in cans and 16 oz bottles with the distinction " Made with Real Sugar . "
Beginning in July 2010 , Dr Pepper 's 125th Anniversary edition in some markets was made with sugar as opposed to other sweeteners .
Since Dr Pepper Corporate has no control over whether the bottlers will use sugar , there is no guarantee the soda will have sugar .
As of January 2012 , the bottling plant in Dublin , Texas , is no longer bottling Dr Pepper .
The soft drink industry in some other countries never stopped using sugar as a sweetener .
For instance in the European Union , high fructose corn syrup is subject to a production quota .
In 2005 , this quota was set at 303,000 tons ; in comparison , the EU produced an average of 18.6 million tons of sugar annually between 1999 and 2001 .
Therefore , most European soft drink producers , including most Dr Pepper bottling plants , still use sugar to sweeten their products .
However , the bottlers of Dr Pepper in Germany and the United Kingdom use instead a combination of sugar and artificial sweeteners .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
In the United States , Keurig Dr Pepper does not have a complete network of bottlers and distributors , so the drink is sometimes bottled under contract by Coca - Cola or Pepsi bottlers .
Prior to the initial Cadbury Schweppes investment - turned - buyout , 30 % of Dr Pepper / Seven Up products were produced and distributed by Pepsi bottlers , and another 30 % by Coca - Cola bottlers .
The remaining 40 % were produced and distributed by independent bottlers ( mainly consisting of Dr Pepper / Seven Up premerger regional bottlers ) and the Dr Pepper / Seven Up Bottling Group .
Currently , the majority of Pepsi and Coke bottlers bottling Dr Pepper are owned by PepsiCo and The Coca - Cola Company after their buyouts of their major bottlers .
Presently , Dr Pepper Snapple relies on its own bottling group to bottle and distribute its products in more than 30 states .
Coca - Cola and Pepsi have essentially stopped bottling and distributing Cadbury - Schweppes products in favor of in - house alternatives , although regional exceptions can be found .
In Canada and Poland , Cadbury - Schweppes has licensed distribution rights to PepsiCo .
In Mexico , Germany , Sweden , the Netherlands , Slovakia , Finland , Austria , the Czech Republic , Belgium , and Norway , Cadbury - Schweppes owns the trademark and distributes the product .
In Romania , it can be found only in larger cities , imported from Belgium .
In Portugal , Spain , France , Turkey , and Greece , it is almost impossible to find , as it is usually imported from the United Kingdom in particular supermarkets .
In almost all of the other countries of the world , the Coca - Cola Company purchased the trademark from Cadbury - Schweppes and distributes the product .
This mixed worldwide ownership of the trademark is due to antitrust regulations which prevented Coca - Cola from purchasing the rights everywhere .
Dr Pepper is also available in Russia ( though imported , generally from Poland — there 's no local bottling despite numerous talks ) , South Korea and Ukraine .
Although no longer locally bottled in Australia or New Zealand , Dr Pepper is imported and sold by United States Foods , and many other small retailers in Australia , with the UK ( sugar ) version sold in the British sections of Coles and Woolworths supermarkets .
Dr Pepper is not available in Thailand , North Korea and Serbia .
It is rarely sold in the Philippines , Indonesia , Malaysia and Singapore , as it is imported from the United States .
Dr Pepper has been sold in Japan since 1973 and is widely available in greater Tokyo , Okinawa and parts of the Tōkai region , where it is distributed by local Coca - Cola bottlers .
It is not actively marketed in other regions of Japan ; Coca - Cola 's Osaka bottler began selling Dr Pepper in 1983 , but pulled the product two years later due to low sales .
OTHER PRODUCTS
* Dr Pepper has a line of jelly beans made with the Jelly Belly company .
* Hubba Bubba bubblegum produces a Dr Pepper - flavored edition .
The gum is the same color as the soda .
* Dr Pepper collaborated with Vita Food Products to produce Dr Pepper Sweet & Kickin ' BBQ Sauce and Dr Pepper " More than Mesquite " Marinade .
* Cosmetics company Bonne Bell includes Dr Pepper among its licensed soft drink - flavored " Lip Smackers " lip balms .
*
Brach 's has a line of hard candy that features Dr Pepper , Orange Crush , A&W Root Beer , and 7 Up flavored hard candies in Brach 's Soda Poppers .
* Dr Pepper has an ice cream topping syrup also manufactured by Vita Food Products in 2009 called " Dr Pepper cherry dessert topping " .
* Dr Pepper also created an iPod skin cover , but it was discontinued .
* Dr Pepper Slurpee * Dr Pepper Flavored Freezies are currently available with Grape Crush and Hires Root Beer flavors .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
" Dr Pepper Time " , according to one promotion , was at 10 , 2 and 4 o'clock .
During World War II , a syndicated radio program , The 10–2–4 Ranch ( later titled 10–2–4 Time ) , aired in the South and other areas where Dr Pepper was distributed .
The show featured the Sons of the Pioneers and Dick Foran .
In the 1960s , the tune of the chorus of " The Glow - Worm " was used in ads , with lyrics which ended , " It 's Dr Pepper Time ! "
In the 1960s , Dr Pepper released the " Charge " ad : The " Be a Pepper " series referred to fans of Dr Pepper as " Peppers " , and often featured large , sequential , crowd dance scenes , intricately choreographed by Tony Stevens and led onscreen by actor David Naughton .
A recurring jingle was : This became grist for a number of pop culture references and parodies .
One of the first was a July 1981 sketch on the program SCTV , in which an overly - excited injured man ( Eugene Levy ) extols the work of a " Dr Shekter " ( Rick Moranis ) who has been treating him .
Levy and a group of patients wearing casts and crutches engage in their own elaborate dancing and singing ( " Would n't you like to see my doctor , too ? " ) , which Shekter first uses as an opportunity to explain his work , and then grows alarmed ( " These people should not be dancing ! " ) .
In the 1982 sex farce Beach Girls , the slogan became " I 'm a popper , he 's a popper ...
" Wreck - Gar parodied the slogan in The Return of Optimus Prime .
After appearing in a series of commercials , David Naughton had his breakthrough film role as the main character in the John Landis film An American Werewolf in London .
Another famous " I 'm a Pepper " dancer was Ray Bolger , the actor who played the Scarecrow in the film
The Wizard of Oz .
In the early 1960s , Dr Pepper promoted the idea of serving the drink hot with lemon slices in winter .
This idea appeared in the film Blast from the Past initially set in the early 1960s .
In 1978 , Jake Holmes wrote the lyrics to " Be a Pepper " .
Earlier in the 1970s , Randy Newman wrote another jingle entitled " The Most Original Soft Drink Ever " .
Barry Manilow performed Holmes 's jingle in concerts and on albums under the inclusion of " VSM – Very Strange Medley " .
A TV commercial was also created using the jingle and ran from 1977 to 1985 .
The song noted " It 's not a cola , it 's something much much more .
It 's not a root beer , you get root beer by the score . "
( W.W. Clements , former CEO and president of the Dr Pepper/7-Up Company , similarly described the taste of Dr Pepper as one - of - a - kind , saying , " I 've always maintained you can not tell anyone what Dr Pepper tastes like because it 's so different .
It 's not an apple , it 's not an orange , it 's not a strawberry , it 's not a root beer , it 's not even a cola .
It 's a different kind of drink with a unique taste all its own . " )
Dr Pepper has also been featured outside the " I 'm a Pepper " motif .
An example is in the video game Pikmin 2 , where one of the collectible treasures is a Dr Pepper bottle cap ( it is labeled as the " Drought Ender " ) .
Also , an empty Dr Pepper bottle is featured in the book Ragweed by Newbery Medal - winning author Avi ; the book 's illustrator , Brian Floca , is the son of a Dr Pepper bottler .
Several of the classic non-"I'm a Pepper " commercials featured prominent movie stars , one being a television advertisement with Chris Rock as a child enjoying a Dr Pepper .
The 1980s " Out of the Ordinary " advertising campaign involved a series of postapocalyptic commercials featuring a space cowboy and an alien sidekick seeking " something different " from a simple generic cola .
The campaign also produced commercials featuring the movie creature Godzilla , where citizens of a Japanese town offered Dr Pepper as a libation .
The commercials were prominently featured during the 1986 syndication of The Canned Film Festival , which was sponsored by the Dr Pepper Company .
Outside the United States , Squeeze 's Glenn Tilbrook and Chris Difford played for a Dr Pepper advert in the UK with the slogan , " Hold out for the out of the ordinary . "
Dr Pepper 's " Be You " advertising campaign centered on commercials featuring pairs of popular musicians , including LeAnn Rimes with Reba McEntire , Paulina Rubio with Celia Cruz , Thalía with Tito Puente , B2 K with Smokey Robinson , Anastacia with Cyndi Lauper , Patricia Manterola with Ana Gabriel , and LL Cool J with Run - D.M.C.
The campaign also featured individual musicians , notably Garth Brooks .
Dr Pepper made several appearances in the 1994 Robert Zemeckis major motion picture Forrest Gump , as it was the beverage of choice for the movie 's namesake lead character , played by Tom Hanks .
In one of the film 's Dr Pepper scenes , Forrest 's narrative suggests , " The best part about goin' to the White House was , they had all the food and drink that you wanted ...
I must have had me 15 Dr Peppers .
" When subsequently asked by the President how he felt , Forrest gave an honest answer of " I got ta pee . "
Although , arguably the film 's largest product placement installation , the depiction of Dr Pepper was perhaps not always accurate as , in another scene during the 1972 New Year 's Eve celebration which Forrest attends , he drinks a Dr Pepper with a logo that was inconsistent with the timeline of the film .
In Australia , a report on the soft drink industry by IBIS accused Cadbury Schweppes of failing in their marketing of the brand , given its global appeal .
One potential problem with the marketing campaign was in advertising it as " American " .
The use of the Statue of Liberty moving to Australia and passing cans of Dr Pepper on to two Australian males made its imported ( i.e. " non - Australian " ) status clear .
After withdrawing from the Australian market , Dr Pepper arrived without fanfare in New Zealand .
Cans imported from the US are available in some specialty stores in New Zealand and Australia .
On the December 20 , 2000 , episode of the Late Show with David Letterman , Letterman jokingly referred to Dr Pepper as " liquid manure " .
After a representative of Dr Pepper complained , CBS agreed not to rerun that episode .
Letterman repeatedly made assurances on the show that he was joking .
From 2001 to 2003 , Diet Dr Pepper aired ads that promise authentic Dr Pepper taste , using the slogan " Diet Dr Pepper tastes more like regular Dr Pepper " , parodying new ideas inferior to the originals , including XGA ( not PGA )
Extreme Golf , Green Bay Watch ( spoof of Baywatch ) and a TV show
CHimPs ( rather than CHiPs ) .
These ads were produced by
They Might Be Giants .
Several ads for Diet Cherry Vanilla Dr Pepper appeared on television in 2005 .
In one , a young woman on a blind date at a restaurant , who sips into the beverage , suddenly makes her date , restaurant patrons , and even a waitress all part of a musical sequence involving The Muppets version of the song " Mah Nà Mah Nà " .
One campaign features the Queen song "
I Want It All " .
On January 1 , 2008 , the company unveiled a new TV ad campaign featuring the Cheers theme song ( " Where Everybody Knows Your Name " ) performed by Gary Portnoy .
In a 2008 ad , a student in a college lecture takes a sip of Dr Pepper .
When he stops drinking , the Dr Pepper can sings variations of " Flava Licious " ( Flavor Flav ) , and other people in the room start dancing .
In 2008 , Dr Pepper in the UK restarted launching its old adverts and slogan , " What 's the worst that can happen ?
" They also started an on - pack promotion for free ringtones with up to 20 to collect .
A commercial for this included Jesse Eisenberg being forced to be on live TV without his clothes on .
As of 2009 , the slogan of the product was " Drink it slow .
Doctor 's orders " .
Advertising supporting the slogan has celebrities with famous relations to the word " doctor " (
Dr. Dre , Julius " Dr. J " Erving , Gene Simmons ( writer of the Kiss song " Calling Dr. Love " ) , et al . )
or who played fictional doctors ( such as Neil Patrick Harris or Kelsey Grammer ) endorsing the beverage .
The ads culminate with the celebrity stating , " Trust me .
I 'm a doctor " , followed by the new slogan appearing onscreen with a glass of Dr Pepper .
In 2010 , Dr Pepper was part of a marketing and promotional campaign with Marvel Studios to promote the summer blockbuster Iron Man 2 ; characters from the film adorned cans of Dr Pepper , Diet Dr Pepper , and Dr Pepper Cherry .
In 2011 , rapper Pitbull appeared in a commercial with the slogan " Let 's have a real good time . "
Also in 2011 , Dr Pepper was featured in the anime Steins;Gate as Dk Pepper for copyright issues .
SLOGANS
* 1889–1914 : " King of Beverages . "
* 1920s–1940s : " Drink a Bite to Eat at 10 , 2 , and 4 o'clock . "
* 1939 : " When You Drink a Dr. Pepper You Drink a Bite to Eat . "
* 1930s–1940s :
" Good For Life . "
* 1945 : " Dr. Pepper has 23 flavors " * 1950s : " The Friendly Pepper Upper . "
* 1960s : " America 's Most Misunderstood Soft Drink . "
* 1970s-77 : " The Most Original Soft Drink Ever . "
* 1977–1983 : " I 'm a Pepper , He 's a Pepper , We 're a Pepper . "
, " Be a Pepper .
" , " Would n't you like to Be a Pepper too ? "
* 1983 : " Dr Pepper Has Made a Pepper Out of me . "
* 1983 :
" It Tastes and It Looks . "
( Sugar Free Dr Pepper )
* c. 1984
" Out of the Ordinary .
Like You . "
* c. 1984
" The Taste for Out of the Ordinary Bodies . "
( Diet Dr Pepper )
* 1984–1997 : " Hold Out For the Out of the Ordinary . "
* ? 1980s –
Present " Dr Pepper , what 's the worst that could happen ?
" , used in the UK , playing on the fact that many UK consumers do n't know what the drink tastes like and are wary of trying it * 1991 : " Just what the Doctor ordered . "
* c. 1997 :
" It 's Dr Pepper Flavour , Silly ! "
Australia * c. 1997 : " Expect the Unexpected ! "
Australia * 1997 :
" Now 's the Time .
This is the Place .
Dr Pepper Is The Taste . "
* 2000 : " Dr Pepper , It Makes the World Taste Better . "
* 2000–Present : "
Just What The Dr Ordered . "
* c. 2001
" Dr Pepper , so misunderstood " * 2002–2004 : " Be You . "
* 2002–Present : " Solves All Your Problems . "
( used in Europe )
* 2003 " Dr Pepper , to try it is to love it " ( used in the UK )
* 2005–Present : " One Taste & You Get It . "
* 2006 : " Can You Handle The Taste ? "
( seen in Austria , Denmark , Finland , Germany , Netherlands , Sweden , and Poland )
* 2006 : " Authentic blend of 23 flavors . "
United States , Canada * 2006 : " Dr Pepper , makes the world go round . "
* 2006 : " Dr Pepper , nothing better . "
United States * 2006 : " The Dr knows the right touch . "
( used in Europe )
* 2006 : " There 's more to it . "
United States * c. 2006 : " Get Berried in Cream " United States ( used for the new Berries and Cream flavor ) * 2007 : "
I Want It All .
"
United States * 2007 : " El Dr muy bueno " Latin America * 2008 : " Drink It Slow , Dr 's Orders " ( United States ) * 2009 : " Trust me – I 'm a Doctor . "
( ft . Julius Erving , Kelsey Grammer , Gene Simmons , Dr. Dre ) United States * 2009 : " It 's so amazingly smooth , you have try it to believe it ! " and " Amazingly smooth " Dr Pepper Cherry * 2010 : " There 's nothing like a Pepper " United States * 2011 : " Can you handle the taste ? " * 2012 : " Always One of a Kind " ( United States ) DR PEPPER GIRL Section::::Dr Pepper Girl .
In 1963 , singer Donna Loren became a spokesperson for the company when she was selected in a nationwide search to be the " Dr Pepper Girl " .
National exposure followed for Loren as she promoted the drink via radio , print , television , calendars , billboards , and personal appearances .
One of her first appearances for the company was as co - host with Dick Clark ( whom she worked with regularly ) of an ABC television special , Dr Pepper Celebrity Party .
She subsequently made hundreds of singing and personal appearances for Dr Pepper .
In Dr Pepper — King of Beverages , Dr Pepper historian Harry E. Ellis wrote , " Sparkly , vivacious and gifted with a wonderful voice , Donna was an immediate success .
She became widely known in a short period as " The Dr Pepper Girl , " appearing at special events and on programs sponsored by the Company .
Miss Loren would figure prominently in Dr Pepper 's plans for some five years , not only as an entertainer but doing commercials for radio and TV and appearing in many forms of advertising .
She appeared on 24-sheet poster boards , point - of - sale and on Dr Pepper calendars . "
Donna Loren 's role as Dr Pepper spokesperson led to her first appearance in the American International Pictures ' Beach Party film Muscle Beach Party .
Loren later explained : " Dr Pepper was involved in that
[ the Beach Party movies ] and actually placed me as product placement .
And because I could sing , they gave me a duet with Dick Dale , and then it just went on from there .
" From this , she went on to appear in three more Beach Party films .
Away from the company , Loren was a familiar presence in the 1960s due to her many performances on television , films , and her records for Capitol , Reprise and other labels .
She represented Dr Pepper until 1968 .
From 1961 until 1981 , Dr Pepper was also the sponsor of the Miss Teenage America beauty pageant .
FREE DR PEPPER FOR EVERYONE IN AMERICA Section::::Free Dr Pepper for everyone in America .
On March 26 , 2008 , various media outlets reported that Dr Pepper would offer " a free can of Dr Pepper to everyone in America " – excluding former Guns N ' Roses guitarists Buckethead and Slash – if the band released the long - awaited Chinese Democracy in 2008 .
Later in the day , lead vocalist Axl Rose replied to Dr Pepper on Guns N ' Roses ' official website and spoke of his surprise at Dr Pepper 's support .
Rose also said he would share his Dr Pepper with Buckethead as " some of Buckethead 's performances are on Chinese Democracy " .
After it was announced that the album would be released in 2008 , Dr Pepper stated that it would uphold its pledge .
Dr Pepper 's online distribution of free coupons upon the album 's release November 23 , 2008 , proved inadequate .
Lawyers for the band threatened Dr Pepper 's parent company with a lawsuit two days after the album 's release .
In a letter to Dr Pepper , Rose 's lawyer Alan Gutman said , " The redemption scheme your company clumsily implemented for this offer was an unmitigated disaster which defrauded consumers and , in the eyes of vocal fans , ruined Chinese Democracy 's release . "
Rose 's lawyer also demanded that the company make a full - page apology that would appear in The Wall Street Journal , USA Today , The New York Times and The Los Angeles Times .
In a later interview , Rose claimed he told his lawyers it was a non - issue and was surprised by their actions .
MUSEUM
Section::::Museum .
The Dr Pepper Museum , located in the Artesian Manufacturing and Bottling Company building at 300 South Fifth Street in downtown Waco , Texas , opened to the public in 1991 .
The building was the first building to be built specifically to bottle Dr Pepper .
It was completed in 1906 , and Dr Pepper was bottled there until the 1960s .
The museum has three floors of exhibits , a working old - fashioned soda fountain , and a gift store of Dr Pepper memorabilia .
The museum founder , Wilton Lanning , died in January 2018 .
DR PEPPER CAPITAL OF THE WORLD Section::::Dr
Pepper Capital of the World .
The company sells more Dr Pepper in the Roanoke Valley area of Virginia than any other metropolitan area east of the Mississippi River .
Roanoke is approximately 90 miles east of the hometown of Dr. Charles T. Pepper , which is Rural Retreat , Virginia , and 30 miles east of Christiansburg , Virginia , home of Dr. Pepper and Morrison referred to in the census information above .
John William " Bill " Davis opened the first Dr. Pepper plant east of the Mississippi in Roanoke in 1936 ; subsequently the city was named the " Dr Pepper Capital of the World " and broke world records for its mass consumption of Dr Pepper in the late 1950s .
Dr Pepper donated a portion of its sales revenue in the Roanoke area to finance restoration of a circa-1950s neon Dr Pepper sign , which has the company 's " 10–2–4 " logo from the time , in downtown Roanoke .
In October 2015 , the city of Roanoke declared October 24 ( 10 - 2 - 4 ) to be its official Dr. Pepper Day .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* Dr Pepper official website * Dr Pepper on MySpace
* The Dr Pepper Museum * Dr Pepper Company at Handbook of Texas Online * FTC Statement on Coca - Cola Dr Pepper Merger * Temple Bottling Company , in Temple , Texas * Bootlegging Dr Pepper , June 5 , 2008 , by Robb Walsh , Houston Press * Original Formula Found at Drug Store
*
Bill Waters finds Dr Pepper original formula in notebook in antique store in Texas , May 5 , 2009 , Associated Press in the New York Daily News * Caffeine Content for Dr Pepper flavors compared to some other beverages , Good Housekeeping