TEXAS HIGHWAY PATROL
The Texas Highway Patrol is a division of the Texas Department of Public Safety and is the largest state - level law enforcement agency in the U.S. state of Texas .
The patrol 's primary duties are enforcement of state traffic laws and commercial vehicle regulation , but it is a fully empowered police agency with authority to enforce criminal law anywhere in the state .
Highway patrol troopers are also responsible for patrolling the state Capitol Complex in Austin and providing security to the governor .
The current Chief is Lieutenant Colonel Ron Joy .
The highway patrol was founded in 1929 as the Highway Motor Patrol , the first statewide law enforcement agency in Texas since the establishment of the Texas Rangers in 1823 , and the first such force to be uniformed and regularly trained .
Since 1935 , the agency has operated under its current name .
Since its inception with just 60 officers , then known as " inspectors " , the Texas Highway Patrol has grown to meet the increasing volume of vehicular traffic on Texas roads , modern security threats , and the requirements of twenty - first century policing , currently employing over 2,800 sworn troopers .
The Texas Department of Public Safety ( DPS ) , and by extension the Highway Patrol , is Texas ' de facto state police .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Early law enforcement in Texas began with the establishment of the Texas Rangers in 1823 by Stephen F. Austin .
The Rangers were originally formed to protect American settlers from Indian attacks , and over the years transformed into a paramilitary force .
Rangers fought in the Texas Revolution , Mexican – American War , and Civil War .
They quickly developed an international reputation for their exploits and perceived fearlessness ( Mexican soldiers nicknamed them " Texas Devils " for their scouting and fighting abilities ) .
From 1823 to 1845 , they were a territorial force made up of volunteers charged with fighting Native Americans , guarding the Mexican border , and capturing thieves , murderers , and other criminals , occasionally by controversial methods .
Nonetheless , it was not until the latter stages of the 19th century and the Texas cattle boom that the Rangers took on a law enforcement , rather than frontier militia , role .
From 1845 ( when Texas was annexed to the United States ) until the early 20th century , the Rangers were the only form of state law enforcement available .
The force was temporarily disbanded by the federal government after the Civil War , and replaced with the short - lived Texas State Police .
This agency lasted only three years before the Texas Rangers were reorganized .
Until the introduction of the automobile , they remained the only state criminal law enforcement agency in Texas .
The Texas Highway Patrol was established in 1929 as the Texas Highway Motor Patrol , tasked with enforcing traffic laws on Texas roads .
The original force was made up of about 60 officers who patrolled on motorcycles , often in pairs .
Because of this , it was not uncommon for troopers to drive criminals to jail in the offenders ' own cars , then return later for the motorcycle left on the side of the road .
When the Texas Department of Public Safety was formed in 1935 , the Highway Motor Patrol was transferred into that department and was renamed the Texas Highway Patrol .
The use of motorcycles was phased out after World War II , and cars became troopers ' main mode of transportation .
Two - way radio and teletype were also added in the late 1940s , allowing troopers to communicate with regional dispatch centers .
The Aviation Unit was established in 1949 with the purchase of a single - engine aircraft based in Austin .
The 1960s saw some advances in technology , such as radar speed detection .
Nevertheless , troopers ' work was still mostly based on instinct and visual detection , and was often very hazardous .
High - speed pursuits of bootleggers were common , and troopers were required to act as " storm chasers " for the National Weather Service because of the limited weather radar at the time .
Motorcycles were introduced again in the 1970s , but the idea was quickly abandoned when the bikes proved unreliable .
Modern troopers use highly sophisticated technology to conduct their duties .
GPS lets regional dispatch centers identify a patrol unit 's exact location , and in - car computers ( Mobile Data Terminals ) allow troopers to receive knowledge of a person 's background before ever approaching a vehicle .
Troopers are increasingly armed with less - lethal weaponry , such as Tasers .
The highway patrol was also one of the first agencies in Texas to use digital citation printers en masse .
These systems , mounted in the patrol car , allow traffic citations to be largely completed by scanning an offender 's identification card into the Mobile Data Terminal .
This innovation allows for quicker ticket writing and more legible citations .
As of 2016 , the Texas Highway Patrol employs 2,862 sworn troopers ; this is an increase of 32 % from the 2,162 troopers employed in 2014 .
Despite the size of the highway patrol and its unique name and function , however , many Texans refer to troopers simply as " DPS " , referencing the THP 's parent agency .
Some are unaware that an entity by the name of " Texas Highway Patrol " even exists , or is distinct from its parent .
ORGANIZATION Section::::Organization .
In 2013 , the Texas Highway Patrol was divided into seven regions and nineteen districts .
* Region I : Dallas * Region II : Houston
* Region III : McAllen * Region IV :
El Paso
* Region V :
Lubbock
* Region VI :
San Antonio * Region VII :
Austin Note : Region VII is a special region which serves as security for the Capitol Complex , Governor 's Mansion , and Governor of Texas .
Further division is complex .
Districts are divided into two or three sub - districts , each overseen by one or more lieutenants .
These are then divided even further into patrol areas encompassing one or two counties , depending on size and population ; troopers are assigned to specific counties .
Sergeants are responsible for these patrol areas .
Captains oversee districts , and majors oversee regions .
The Texas DPS 's subdivision maps vary between service divisions , making for overlapping jurisdictional maps .
The highway patrol , Texas Rangers , and Criminal Investigations divisions ' jurisdictions , for example , do not coincide with one another .
Further complicating matters , the DPS administrative division has its own subdivisional map .
Even nomenclature used to describe jurisdiction varies — the highway patrol uses " regions " identified by numbers , while the Texas Rangers use " companies " identified by letters .
TRAINING
Section::::Training .
Trainees are housed at DPS headquarters in Austin and receive training both there and at a driving and firing range in Williamson County , north of Austin .
Academies are paramilitary in nature and are physically and mentally demanding .
Academies are styled as Class A / B-(Year ) , and last anywhere from 18 to 28 weeks .
On average , two academies are held per year ; this number can be altered by the Texas DPS director as necessary .
Hands - on material covered includes weapons training , accident investigation , self - defense , pursuit driving , and intense physical readiness .
Classroom study , such as fraudulent document recognition and legal and ethics code study , also plays a large role in cadets ' training .
Due to the difficult nature of the academy , some classes have graduated fewer than 20 % of the starting number .
Class A-2017 graduated 122 troopers out of an original 153 trainees , a success rate of 80 % .
Trainees are allowed to select a duty assignment from a list of available stations throughout the state , although the Texas DPS makes the ultimate decision on troopers ' stations .
Priority in assigning posts is typically given to married cadets , but most trainees nonetheless receive their requested assignments .
Troopers are typically allowed to request a station transfer after one year of satisfactory service .
DUTIES Section::::Duties .
Texas state troopers perform a number of law enforcement duties and tasks :
* Enforce state traffic laws by patrolling the highways and issuing citations to violators .
* Arrest drunk drivers , wanted felons , and other criminals , especially during enforcement blitzes .
*
Respond to , investigate , and report on traffic accidents in rural areas .
* Provide security to the state capitol complex and governor .
* Inspect commercial vehicles for load and driver fatigue violations .
* Assist other DPS divisions with felony investigations , such as narcotics smuggling .
* Educate citizens on traffic safety practices such as child safety seats and proper vehicle maintenance .
* Provide statewide criminal law enforcement , especially in rural areas where local police are limited .
* Participate in selective specialized units , such as regional SWAT teams , marine patrol , and dive recovery .
VARIATION , SPECIALIZATION , AND CHANGES
GENERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT Section::::Variation , Specialization , and Changes .
Section::::General Law Enforcement .
Although the highway patrol 's primary task is enforcement of state traffic laws , many remote areas of the state require troopers to serve general policing duties because of limited local law enforcement .
These duties may include responding to civilian calls for service , serving warrants , patrolling the U.S.-Mexico border , conducting investigations , and other responsibilities .
In other areas , troopers provide assistance to other law enforcement agencies , such as United States Customs and Border Protection , Texas State Game Wardens , and various local and county police entities .
Notwithstanding these duties , the Texas Administrative Code ( which codifies operations of state agencies ) officially considers traffic patrol and accident investigation in rural , unincorporated areas the priority of the highway patrol .
SPECIAL UNITS * Tactical Marine : Consists of six armed patrol vessels used to interdict drug traffickers and human smugglers along the Rio Grande and combat violent Mexican drug cartels
* Bicycle Patrol : Consists of about eight troopers assigned to patrol the state Capitol Complex on bicycles
* Motorcycle Patrol :
Unit was begun as an experiment in 2012 ; now a fully functioning unit including several troopers assigned to the state Capitol Complex * Mounted Horse Patrol :
Including three horses and four troopers , the unit was established in 2014 to patrol the state Capitol Complex * Dive Recovery :
Consists of several SCUBA - certified troopers from throughout the state who specialize in recovering evidence , deceased persons , and other items from waterways and lakes *
Tactical Aviation : Unit consists of numerous rotor and fixed - wing aircraft stationed throughout the state ; highway patrol troopers make up only a small portion of this unit * Special Response Teams : Specially trained tactical teams based in each highway patrol region , troopers and criminal investigators serve high - risk warrants and assist in hostage and barricaded subject scenarios * K-9 : Consists of several troopers throughout the state who handle dogs trained to detect illegal substances and apprehend dangerous fugitives BORDER OPERATIONS Section::::Border Operations .
Since 2014 , the Texas Highway Patrol has participated in Operation Strong Safety , a program intended to increase law enforcement along the Texas - Mexico border .
The patrol 's role in Operation Strong Safety ( OSS ) is to deploy large numbers of troopers to the border in order to add an increased deterrent to drug traffickers and human smugglers .
The plan calls for troopers from across the state to serve approximately one week each patrolling border counties , particularly in South Texas ; deployments rotate constantly to maintain a steady presence along the border .
OSS is the successor to previous similar efforts , such as Operation Border Star , and was approved by the Texas Legislature with an $ 800 million price tag .
These deployments of large numbers of troopers have been criticized by some .
Many troopers complained about participating in the operation , and others were injured during pursuits and struggles with Mexican cartels .
Between January 2005 and June 2009 , Hidalgo County troopers were involved in 656 vehicle pursuits - 30 times the average for troopers in other counties - with only about 40 % of suspects being apprehended .
Some experts also question the patrol 's aggressive pursuit tactics , which often involve shooting out the tires of fleeing vehicles and performing roadblock techniques .
Controversy about the role of firearms in pursuits arose in October 2012 after a THP sharpshooter in a helicopter opened fire on a suspected drug smuggler , accidentally killing two illegal immigrants who were concealed within the vehicle .
In 2015 , the Dallas Morning News reported that the constant rotation of troopers from across the state to the border appeared to be responsible for a significant drop in DPS productivity elsewhere in Texas .
Highway Patrol troopers reportedly wrote 14 % fewer traffic citations in 2014 than in 2013 ; this and other statistics , such as a 25 % decrease in arrests made by Texas Rangers , led the newspaper to conclude that the temporary removal of troopers and other state law enforcement officers from posts around the state was having a detrimental effect on overall DPS service .
The agency has sought to control this issue by increasing the number of troopers and agents permanently assigned to the border .
Despite some criticism , Operation Strong Safety and similar efforts have seen several large seizures of illegal drugs being trafficked from Mexico .
In many cases , seizures of drug profits and weapons being transported south across the border have also been recovered , along with numerous vehicles , many of them stolen .
Law enforcement presence in many border counties has dramatically increased as well .
Hidalgo County , for example , tripled its DPS station from 20 to 60 permanently assigned troopers during Operation Border Star , the predecessor to OSS .
No troopers or other DPS officers have been killed while participating in the operations .
STATISTICS GENERAL
* As of 2016 , the Highway Patrol is made up of 2,863 commissioned troopers , up from 2,162 in 2014 .
*
Among 49 state police agencies nationwide , Texas has one of the lowest proportions of troopers to population of any state .
With approximately 11 troopers per 100,000 residents , the Texas Highway Patrol falls well below the national average of 23 per 100,000 .
* Texas DPS Academy Class A-2017 graduated 122 probationary troopers on June 16 , 2017 .
* Of the 234 troopers commissioned between Classes C-2016 and A-2017 , 95 ( 40 % ) were military veterans and 26 ( 11 % ) were former police officers .
ACTIVITIES
* Between 2001 and 2013 , the Highway Patrol made 35,803,978 traffic stops , resulting in 12,846,418 citations and 20,983,777 warnings issued *
In 2016 , troopers made 42,779 misdemeanor and 11,392 felony arrests statewide
*
In 2014 , troopers investigated 66,088 traffic accidents , accounting for roughly 14 % of all accidents in the state UNIFORMS Section::::Uniforms .
Texas state troopers wear dark tan uniforms , known affectionately by troopers as " Texas Tan " .
Full - length pants with a blue stripe and red piping are worn at all times ; epaulettes on the shirt are similarly patterned .
A black patent leather gun belt is worn with a silver buckle , along with matching leather holsters and pouches .
Badges are reminiscent of the Texas Rangers ' famous " star - in - a - wheel " badge , though featuring a solid blue field behind the star .
The badge number is prominently displayed in black in the center of the star .
Shoulder patches , worn on either sleeve , are predominantly red in color and feature the Texas Highway Patrol crest .
Troopers ' headwear is unique in that instead of the peaked caps or campaign hats popular with other agencies , cowboy hats are worn with the duty uniform .
Felt hats are worn in colder weather and straw hats are worn in warmer weather .
Dress uniforms are similar to the patrol uniform , with the addition of a blue tie , long - sleeved shirt and black cowboy boots .
Dress for various ceremonial units adds white gloves , a white ascot , a black Sam Browne shoulder strap and a red shoulder cord .
SPECIAL UNIFORMS
* Honor Guard : Long - sleeved dress uniform , plus dark blue jacket with tan epaulettes , black Sam Browne shoulder strap , red shoulder cord , and white gloves .
* Pipes and Drums : Long - sleeved shirt with white ascot , black glengarry , red - and - black tartan kilt , horsehair sporran , red - and - black hose , black shoes , and white spats .
* Special Response Team & Tactical Marine Unit :
Drab green military - style blouse , cargo pants , and utility vest , and desert combat boots .
Green helmet worn by SRT , baseball cap or boonie hat by TMU .
* Aircraft :
Drab green flight suit with desert combat boots .
* Aircraft ( Alternate ) : OCP - pattern military blouse and cargo pants , green utility vest ( Tactical Flight Officers only ) , and desert combat boots .
* Bicycle Patrol : Black and royal blue high - performance shirt with " State Trooper " printed on the back in silver lettering .
Worn with black bicycle shorts , athletic shoes , and a blue , white , and black bicycle helmet .
Section::::Special Uniforms .
Troopers working in environments which might dirty the uniform ( such as performing commercial vehicle inspections ) or which require constant movement or exertion may wear an altered version of the patrol uniform .
This variant replaces the slacks with tan cargo pants and features a baseball cap in lieu of the cowboy hat .
PREVIOUS UNIFORMS
Section::::Previous Uniforms .
Early uniforms included a blue - grey blouse and brown pants , typically worn with black motorcycle boots .
These uniforms also featured a bow tie and Sam Browne shoulder straps .
Troopers of this era wore peaked caps and diamond - shaped badges , with a single patch worn on the left shoulder ; until the current uniform was instituted , the patch was circular .
This uniform style was used until early 1959 , when the current uniform was adopted .
Until about 1972 , the uniform continued to feature a shoulder strap , only one shoulder patch , and a black necktie , which was worn at all times ; in addition , the cowboy hat featured a much smaller brim than those currently worn , so that it somewhat resembled a bowler with a creased crown .
It was not until the mid-2000s that a standardized patch design was used for all members of the patrol .
Prior to this change ( which is today being slowly integrated into other Texas DPS divisions ) , differently colored patches identified whether a trooper worked in the highway patrol , driver 's license , or license and weight ( commercial vehicle ) units .
Red patches indicated highway patrol , blue indicated driver 's license , and grey indicated license and weight .
Troopers assigned to the state Capitol had their own unique blue patch depicting the capitol building in yellow .
VEHICLES Section::::Vehicles .
The Texas Highway Patrol uses a variety of vehicles for patrol and specialized services .
Early patrol units were motorcycles , but these were phased out in the 1950s .
Since then , four - wheeled vehicles have been used for all patrol purposes ; one trooper is assigned to each unit .
Current patrol vehicles are painted black with a white hood , roof , and trunk .
Traditionally , the top of the doors were also white , but this practice is being abandoned with newer vehicles . "
Texas Department Public Safety " is printed on the front door over a brown silhouette of the state of Texas .
Underneath , " Texas Highway Patrol " is written in white ; " State Trooper " is written on the front quarter panel and on the trunk .
The Texas Highway Patrol also utilizes helicopters , armored personnel carriers , and marine craft for specialized functions , such as search and rescue , reconnaissance / intelligence , and border patrol .
The Tactical Marine Division is the newest addition to the Highway Patrol , with the acquisition of six patrol vessels intended to police the Rio Grande and international lakes between the U.S. and Mexico .
Several more boats are on order .
In 2012 , the Texas DPS decided to begin replacing its aging fleet of Ford Crown Victorias with Dodge Chargers .
A small number of Ford 's Explorer - based Police Interceptor Utility vehicles were purchased for use mainly in the Texas Panhandle .
Patrol Vehicles
*
Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor
* Dodge Charger * Chevrolet Tahoe * Ford Police Interceptor Utility
Motorcycles *
Harley - Davidson Road King
( Austin only ) Aircraft
* Eurocopter AS350 Helicopter * Eurocopter EC-145 Helicopter * Aero Commander 680V Fixed - Wing Marine Craft
* Yellowfin Shallow Water Interceptor S.R.T.
* LENCO BearCat
* Humvee Recruiting
* Hummer * Dodge Challenger
* Bicycles ( Austin only )
* Horses ( Austin only ) EQUIPMENT Section::::Equipment .
Prior to the SIG Sauer
P226 chambered in .357 sig troopers carried the SIG Sauer P220 chambered in .45 auto or in 9 mm .
In 2013 , Texas DPS officials announced that they would be switching to the Smith & Wesson M&P 9-millimeter handgun as the standard - issue sidearm for troopers , due to higher round capacity over the SIG Sauer .
Troopers already issued .357 sidearms would be allowed to continue using them .
However , the transition was suspended after recruits at the A-2014 class , the first to train with the new weapons , reported functional concerns about the guns after repeated firing .
In early 2015 , the Texas Department of Public Safety completed the process of selecting a replacement for the SIG Sauer P226 , selecting the SIG Sauer P320 , a polymer - framed , striker - fired pistol chambered in 9-millimeter .
The C-2015 recruit class was the first Texas DPS class to be issued and trained on the SIG Sauer P320 and , upon graduation in December 2015 , became the first Troopers to carry this pistol in the field as a duty weapon .
The 9-millimeter ammunition selected for the SIG Sauer P320 was the Hornady 135 grain + P FlexLock Critical Duty .
Other Texas DPS divisions , such as Aircraft and Criminal Investigations , will transition to the P320 over time .
Additional weaponry includes the Bushmaster M4 Type Carbine and the Remington 870 12-gauge shotgun , which is currently being phased out for the Mossberg 590 .
All firearms are state property and may not be modified by the troopers to whom they are issued .
Less - lethal weapons issued to troopers includes expandable straight batons , oleoresin capsicum spray , and Tasers .
Patrol cars are equipped with Panasonic Toughbook computer terminals and digital citation printers .
Mounted lights are either the Whelen Freedom lightbar , in older units , or the Whelen Liberty lightbar , in newer units ; the patrol 's newest Chevrolet Tahoe patrol vehicles are equipped with Whelen Legacy lightbars .
Four of the bar 's eight forward - facing light modules are white " takedown " lights ; these are supplemented by column - mounted LED spotlights in newer vehicles .
Warning lights are also mounted on the rear deck .
Primary light colors for all vehicles are red and blue .
SALARY AND PROMOTIONS Section::::Salary and Promotions .
As of fiscal year 2010 , troopers were being paid almost 20 % less than officers in many municipal police departments , according to a state - conducted audit .
Consequently , increased salaries for troopers were approved for 2014 by the 2013 Texas legislative session .
Troopers are automatically upgraded to different trooper classes in four - year increments .
Salary increases with each class , up to Trooper VI , at which point pay becomes and remains steady ( barring promotion ) .
Troopers are eligible for promotion to sergeant after four years of service .
Promotion is based on availability and completion of a civil service exam , as well as experience and disciplinary history .
After two years as a sergeant , troopers are eligible for promotion to lieutenant .
In September 2015 , troopers received yet another sizable raise - an academy trainee makes more now than a 3-year trooper did a year prior .
RESPONSE TO 2010 AUDIT Section::::Response to 2010 Audit .
Many changes to salaries and promotional requirements were made in response to a 10 % drop in the number of troopers between 2004 and 2010 , when an audit was conducted .
The audit determined that Highway Patrol troopers were being paid far less annually than officers at many metropolitan police departments and sheriff 's offices .
The problem had been present for many years , but had gone unresolved because the Texas State Legislature sets state employee salary , not individual agencies .
Additionally , state agencies had been asked to cut approximately 10 % of their budgets between 2010 and 2012 , making lawmakers hesitant to approve a larger budget for DPS .
However , many legislators also feared that the decrease in size of the DPS , which was predicted to worsen , would result in a gradual lapse in quality of service .
As a result , a 20 % pay increase in the salary of most Texas DPS officials was approved in 2012 .
Additional legislative measures are intended to shield DPS from most future budget cuts .
In previous years , troopers who received promotions were typically required to move to fill available posts throughout the state .
However , concurrent with the legislative decision to increase trooper pay , an internal decision was made by the Texas DPS to relax this method , allowing troopers to have more say in where they are stationed upon being promoted .
The decision was based on a trend of troopers being required to live hours away from their families in order to prevent their spouses from having to leave steady employment .
DPS also made an effort to fill state trooper vacancies .
Recruitment efforts were increased across the country , particularly focusing on military members preparing to leave active duty .
Recruiters traveled as far as California , North Carolina , and Michigan in search of potential applicants .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
Sex Demographics as of 2016 :
*
Male : 95 %
* Female : 5 % FALLEN OFFICERS Section::::Fallen officers .
Since the establishment of the Texas Highway Patrol , 88 troopers have died in the line of duty .
The fallen Troopers are listed below : !
Rank !
Name !
Date of Death !
Cause of Death !
Age !
Location
All fallen Highway Patrol troopers are publicly honored at the Texas Peace Officers ' Memorial in Austin , a memorial at the Texas Department of Public Safety headquarters , and by various memorial markers throughout the state .
GRAPEVINE SLAYINGS Section::::Grapevine Slayings .
The Grapevine Slayings were the murders of two Texas Highway Patrolmen on April 1 , 1934 by members of the Barrow Gang , popularly known as Bonnie and Clyde .
Patrolmen Holloway Daniel " H.D. " Murphy and Edward Bryan Wheeler , both stationed in Fort Worth , were on routine patrol on State Highway 114 in Grapevine when they noticed a car parked on intersecting Dove Road .
Believing the vehicle 's occupants were in need of assistance , the troopers approached the car .
They were unaware that the car 's occupants were Bonnie Parker , Clyde Barrow , and Henry Methvin , outlaws wanted in several states for a string of robberies , kidnappings , and murders - including those of multiple police officers - that began in 1932 and had brought the gang nationwide attention .
As the patrolmen approached the car , they were unexpectedly met with gunfire .
Trooper Wheeler was struck first and was killed instantly , his service weapon still holstered .
Upon witnessing the death of his colleague , Trooper Murphy , a recent academy graduate on one of his first patrols , attempted to retrieve a shotgun from his motorcycle .
However , he was shot before he could load the weapon .
A passing motorist witnessed the shooting and flagged down another trooper , who arrived to find Wheeler dead and Murphy in critical condition .
Trooper Murphy died on his way to a hospital in Grapevine .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Although the Barrow Gang had enjoyed a romantic image among many Americans before the Grapevine shootings , their popularity waned rapidly in the wake of the killings .
Much of the public outcry was fueled by exaggerated media coverage of the incident , featuring erroneous claims by purported witnesses , but the shooting is nonetheless often considered the incident which turned opinions predominantly against the Barrow Gang .
Although Parker was said to have fired several shots at the troopers , including the coup de grâce to Murphy , this report was later discredited .
Henry Methvin , a recent prison escapee , ultimately admitted to firing the first shots , mistakenly believing Barrow wanted the troopers killed ; it is believed Barrow 's actual intention was to kidnap the troopers .
Nevertheless , Parker 's name was later included on an arrest warrant for murder , along with Barrow and Methvin , the latter listed as " John Doe " .
Shortly after the Grapevine Slayings , a posse of Texas Rangers , Dallas County sheriff 's deputies , and Bienville Parish , Louisiana sheriff 's deputies ambushed and killed Parker and Barrow in Bienville Parish , near Shreveport .
The posse 's leader , Frank Hamer , was a retired Texas Ranger who had been hired by the Texas Department of Corrections to track down Bonnie and Clyde .
In a deal with the officers , Henry Methvin and his family had agreed to betray Parker and Barrow and arrange an ambush .
Today , a monument stone marks the location where Troopers Murphy and Wheeler were killed on Dove Road in present - day Southlake .
ATASCOSA COUNTY AMBUSH Section::::Atascosa County Ambush .
The Atascosa County Ambush was a surprise attack outside of Pleasanton , Texas on the evening of October 12 , 1999 which resulted in the deaths of Trooper Terry Wayne Miller and deputies Mark Stephenson and Thomas Monse , Jr. of the Atascosa County Sheriff 's Department .
An additional two officers which subsequently arrived on scene were met with a hail of gunfire and succumbed to non - life threatening gun shot wounds .
The perpetrator , Jeremiah Justin Engleton , placed a phony 9 - 1 - 1 call on the night of October 12 , 1999 to his residence prompting Deputy Stephenson and Deputy Monse to respond .
Upon their arrival , the two deputies were met with gunfire from a high - powered rifle from an Engleton who was hiding in a ditch across the street from his mobile home .
Both deputies died on scene while radioing for assistance as they sat in their police cruiser .
Afterwards Engleton retrieved a Glock .40-caliber semiautomatic service pistol from the one of the bodies of the slain officers before returning to the ditch .
Trooper Terry Wayne Miller arrived on scene , discovered the two bodies of the deputies , radioed in for assistance , and was shot and killed before he was able to remove his seatbelt .
Moments later an additional two deputies arrived on scene and were met with a barrage of gunfire which resulted in both deputies being struck in the arm .
The two injured deputies were saved by an unidentified San Antonio man who dodged bullets to assist them into his pickup truck before speeding off .
As more law enforcement officers converged on the scene of the crime , Jeremiah Engleton turned the handgun he had retrieved earlier from a dead officer on himself and committed suicide .
Several firearms were found on Jeremiah Engleton 's body , of which included a SKS Norenco 7.62 x 39 mm semiautomatic rifle , a Mossberg 12-gauge pump - action shotgun , a Ruger 9 mm semiautomatic handgun , a Glock .40-caliber semiautomatic handgun , and a Lorcin .380-caliber
semiautomatic handgun .
Investigators also discovered a suicide note hidden in Engleton 's right shoe .
In the end over a hundred expensed rifle and shotgun casings littered the ground as well as the bodies of three law enforcement officers and the gunman .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Shortly thereafter it was discovered that Engleton 's then roommate , Kenneth Vodochodsky , was an accomplice in the purchasing of ammunition to carry out the ambush on officers .
Vodochodsky had posted Englton 's bail the previous day for an arrest on an unrelated incident involving arresting officer Thomas Monse , one of the first deputies slain in the ambush .
The pair were seen making purchases at a gun shop just hours after Englton had been released from jail .
Kenneth Vodochodsky was subsequently arrested on October 15 , 1999 and pleaded guilty to two counts of murder and was initially sentenced to death on March 2 , 2001 for his role in the triple murder .
The conviction was later appealed and he was sentenced to 30 years in prison under a plea agreement .
Kenneth Vodochodsky was denied parole in 2015 and will be eligible again in March 2020 .
RANK STRUCTURE Section::::Rank structure . !
Rank !
Insignia DPS Director ( ColonelLt .
ColonelMajorCaptainLieutenantSergeantCorporalTrooper
Probationary Trooper SEE ALSO
* Davis class patrol boat * List of law enforcement agencies in Texas
* State police * State patrol *
Highway patrol
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Texas Highway Patrol ( Official Website )
* Texas Primer : The Resistol Hat - Texas Monthly