NON - FIFA INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL
FIFA is the international governing body of association football , charged with overseeing football globally and with running international representative matches .
However , some international football takes place outside its ratification .
This often consists of matches involving sub - national entities such as islands , colonies or autonomous regions .
Representative matches also occur involving states with limited international recognition who are unable to qualify for FIFA membership .
There are also a limited number of states whose representative teams are not affiliated to FIFA .
Historically , a number of competitions occurred outside FIFA 's auspices .
" NATIONAL " TEAMS Section::::"National " teams .
Broadly - speaking , there are five categories of Non - FIFA national team : STATES Section::::States .
Eight sovereign states ( Federated States of Micronesia , Kiribati , Marshall Islands , Monaco , Nauru , Palau , Tuvalu , and the Vatican City ) are not affiliated to FIFA .
Kiribati and Tuvalu are Associate Members of Oceania Football Confederation .
The following nations have national teams that have played matches outside FIFA : Nauru , Federated States of Micronesia , Palau , Monaco , and the Vatican City .
At present , Marshall Islands does n't have any football team .
The United Kingdom is represented in FIFA through its four constituent countries – England , Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland .
AUTONOMOUS ( OR AUTONOMY - SEEKING ) REGIONS AND UNRECOGNISED
STATES
Section::::Autonomous ( or autonomy - seeking ) regions and unrecognised states .
A second category encompasses regions of larger nations which have a history of autonomy .
They may have already achieved a degree of autonomy ( Catalonia , Galicia or Basque Country , for example ) , or be seeking it .
However , it is necessary to distinguish Basque Country from the others , as it represents all Basque Country , and not only the Autonomous Community of the same name Basque Country .
Alternatively , some unrecognised states may have national teams .
Some established members of UEFA once fell into this category , such as the Faroe Islands .
Current non - FIFA heavyweights Northern Cyprus are the best example of this category of non - FIFA football team .
Also included are the representative sides of the Spanish autonomous regions , which currently play just one game a year , traditionally at Christmas .
REGIONAL ASSOCIATIONS Section::::Regional associations .
The first , and most common , are teams which represent the regional associations of established footballing nations .
These oversee local football in their respective regions and are part of a network of associations that contribute to the national association as a whole .
A good example of this would be Jersey , whose members are also members of the FA .
These regional associations often enter representative teams into international non - FIFA matches .
STATELESS PEOPLE Section::::Stateless people .
The third group of teams features representative sides drawn from ethnic groups that have yet to gain significant control over a home state , or drawn from an ethnic diaspora .
The Sami people of Lapland live in a distinct area of northern Scandinavia , yet fall under the control of four states .
Nevertheless , they have organised a football association and a representative team .
Similarly , the Romani people — having been strewn across Europe for centuries — have a fledgeling footballing organisation to represent them in international competition .
Other stateless nations , such as the Palestinians have been welcomed into FIFA and the AFC despite having no recognised state .
The Esperanto Football Team has been set up to represent the worldwide community of Esperanto speakers .
MINORITIES Section::::Minorities .
Another group of teams consist of ethnic minorities in a state .
ORGANIZATIONS *
N.F.-Board New Federations Board : a now - defunct football association established in 2003 .
It was made up of teams that represent nations that were not recognized as sovereign states and which are therefore not eligible to become members of FIFA , football 's world governing body .
The NF - Board organised the VIVA World Cup and the UNPO Cup .
CSANF was its first continental confederation , for South America .
The N.F. Board has been inactive since 2013 and is considered defunct .
* CONIFA Confederation of Independent Football Associations : from confederations homepage : CONIFA is a global umbrella organization for all the football teams outside FIFA .
There are more than 5,500 ethnicities around the world and hundreds of sportingly isolated regions that do n't have an international arena to play international football .
CONIFA welcome all registered Football Associations and teams to play .
We organize the official World Championship for teams outside FIFA , Continental Championships , International tournament and Cups combined with Cultural Events and Youth Exchanges ..
As of 2018 , ConIFA has more than 40 member associations .
* IIGA International Island Games Association : formed in 1985
, this is an organization with the sole purpose to organise the Island Games , a friendly biennial athletic competition ( including football ) between teams from several islands and other small territories .
NON - FIFA COMPETITIONS Section::::Non - FIFA competitions .
Football tournaments at international multi - sports events , such as the Olympics , Pan - American Games and Francophone games are without FIFA 's jurisdiction , but are , for the most part , operated with the acknowledgement of that body .
These events typically involve age restricted teams , to avoid direct competition with the World Cup and continental championships .
MEN 'S TOURNAMENTS INTERNATIONAL
THE FIFI WILD CUP Section::::Men 's tournaments .
Section::::International . Section::::The FIFI Wild Cup .
The FIFI Wild Cup was organised by the German football club St. Pauli in the summer of 2006 .
It took place while the FIFA World Cup was being played in Germany , and aimed to raise awareness of stateless nations .
Five nations took part , along with a team representing the St Pauli district of Hamburg .
Northern Cyprus beat Zanzibar on penalties to win the trophy . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners THE UNPO CUP Section::::The UNPO Cup .
The UNPO Cup was organised by the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization and NF - Board , and took place in The Hague in June 2005 .
The tournament , which coincided with UNPO 's 7th General Assembly , and featured four teams .
The South Moluccas won the cup , beating Chechnya in the final . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners
THE VIVA WORLD CUP Section::::The VIVA World Cup .
The first VIVA World Cup , organised by the N.F.-Board , took place in Occitania in November 2006 .
Six nations initially accepted invitations , but eventually , only 3 took part , the hosts , Monaco and Saami , the eventual winners .
The second edition took place in Lapland in 2008 and Padania emerged as winners , as the third in 2009 where Padania won the tournament at home . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners CONIFA WORLD FOOTBALL CUP Section::::ConIFA World Football Cup . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners THE ELF CUP Section::::The ELF Cup .
The ELF Cup , organised by the KTFF , took place in November 2006 , in Northern Cyprus .
Eight teams accepted invitations to take part , and the hosts emerged as winners . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners FOOTBALL
AT THE ISLAND GAMES Section::::Football at the Island Games .
The Island Games , which are held every two years , features a competitive football tournament , won on the first two occasions by now - established UEFA and FIFA member , the Faroe Islands , and again in 2007 by now UEFA members , Gibraltar .
Many of the competing nations are affiliated to larger national FAs - the Jersey Football Association , for example , is governed by the FA . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners CONTINENTAL EUROPEAN FOOTBALL CUP
Section::::Continental .
Section::::European Football Cup .
The ConIFA European Football Cup was played in Douglas , the Isle of Man .
The host place of the tournament was moved to London , England , and then to Székely Land , Romania .
The tournament took place from the 13th till the 21st of June , 2015 .
It was the first ever European Championship between representative teams outside FIFA .
The 12 representative teams :
Ellan Vannin , County of Nice , Abkhazia , Nagorno Karabakh , South Ossetia , Occitania , Romani People , Franconia , Sapmi , Northern Cyprus , Szekely Land and Padania .
Subsequently , 3 teams ( Franconia , Monaco , Nagorno - Karabakh ) cancelled their participation for the 2015 ConIFA European Football Cup in Hungary , which forced the originally planned schedule to be revised .
The presence of a total of nine teams led to three groups of three being formed .
In May 2015 , Occitania also announced their withdrawal from the competition , which led to another revision of the match schedule into two groups of four , which ConIFA based upon their ranking points system .
In June 2015 , another three teams , South Ossetia , Abkhazia and Northern Cyprus , were all forced to withdraw , as a result of visa difficulties , while the Felvidek team was added to the line up - leaving two groups of three and six participants in total . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners EUROVIVA CUP Section::::Euroviva Cup .
The official announcement of Euroviva Cup 2017 ™ in Vichy .
Dates :
From Sunday 10th to Sunday 17 December 2017 .
Tournament format : 10 representative teams from Europe .
THE EUROPEADA Section::::The Europeada .
The Europeada is a football tournament for indigenous and national minorities in Europe , and is organized by the Federal Union of European Nationalities .
The first edition was played in 2008 in Surselva , Switzerland . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners
COPA
CSANF Section::::Copa CSANF .
The Copa CSANF is a football tournament for football federations not admitted to FIFA in South America .
Is organized by the Consejo Sudamericano de Nuevas Federaciones .
The first edition was played in 2011 in Chile . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners CSANF 10TH ANNIVERSARY CUP Section::::CSANF 10th Anniversary Cup .
The CSANF 10th Anniversary Cup is a tournament to celebrate the 10 years of the creation of the Consejo Sudamericano de Nuevas Federaciones . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners COPA
ANPO Section::::Copa ANPO .
The Campeonato Nacional de Futbol Pueblos Originarios ( Copa ANPO ) is a football tournament for the indigenous peoples of South America , and is organized by the Asociación Nacional de Pueblos Originarios .
The inaugural tournament was played in 2012 in Chile .
Campeonato de futbol Pueblos Originarios Asociacion Andina de Futbol played among six teams .
Three teams come from the Mapuche people – the largest indigenous population in Chile .
There is a Mapuche team , a Pewenche team ( which is the term used for Mapuche populations living in the mountainous regions of Chile ) , and a Warriache team ( composed of Mapuche individuals from the city ) .
In addition , there is one Aymara team , one Lican Antay ( or Atacameño ) team , and one Rapa Nui team .
The N.F.-Board 's South American governing body CSANF have announced a preliminary date for the second Indigenous Peoples ' Championship .
Set for Santiago in Chile from August 5–10 , 2013 , the sides hoped to compete are Easter Island , Mapuche , Aymara , LikanAntay , Diaguita , Kolla , Quechua and a combined Yaghan - Kawesqar team . !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners OTHER TOURNAMENTS
*
The Coupe de l'Outre - Mer is organised by the FFF , took place in October 2008 , in Paris , France .
Teams representing the eleven French Overseas Territories are allowed to participate .
The first edition was won by Réunion .
After 3 editions the Coupe de l'Outre - Mer , for French overseas territories , has been cancelled by the French Football Federation .
* KTFF 50th Anniversary Cup was held in 2005 under the auspices of the NF - Board , this tournament celebrated 50 years of the football association of Northern Cyprus , the KTFF , and featured representative sides from the host nation , the Sápmi , and Kosovo .
Northern Cyprus triumphed in a round - robin tournament .
* Inter Island Cup played between Cocos Islands and Christmas Island in 1994 , 1997 , 1999 , 2004 and 2005 .
* Micronesia Games played by Northern Mariana Islands , Guam , Palau , Yap and Pohnpei in 1998 .
* Adam Shield played between the Faroe Islands and Shetland , from 1935 to 1967 .
* Micronesian Cup played between Micronesia and Northern Marianas Islands in 1999 .
* Pasefika Cup played by teams composed of ethnic groups in the Pacific Ocean , is played since 2008 .
* Marianas Cup played between Guam and Northern Marianas Islands from 2007 .
* Clericus Cup played between sixteen Roman colleges and seminaries of the Catholic Church since 2007 .
* Virgin Islands Championship played between islands of Virgin archipelago from 1997 to 2003 .
* Inter Islands Competition played between Saba and Sint Eustatius in 2004 and 2006 .
*
Windward Islands Tournament played between St . Lucia , Grenada , Dominica and St . Vincent in 2001 .
* Leeward Islands Tournament played between Caribbean islands from 1949 to 2002 .
* Muratti Vase played between Guernsey , Alderney and Jersey since 1905 .
* GFA Tournament played in Gibraltar , with the host , Isle of Man and Isle of Wight in 2004 .
* Tournoi des Iles played in Brittany , with the host , Guadeloupe , Martinique and French Guiana in 2003 .
* Greenland Cups played between Greenland , Faroe Islands and Iceland from 1980 to 1984 .
* North Atlantic Cup played between Orkney , Faroe Islands and Shetland from 1968 to 1973 .
* Milne Cup annual tournament between Orkney and Shetland , played since 1919 .
* Martinez Shield played between Trinidad Island , Barbados and Demerara ( British Guyana ) , from 1923 to 1933 .
* Tournoi Frantz Fanon between Martinique , Guadeloupe and Haiti , played in 2002 .
* Tournoi du Cinquantenaire played between French Guiana , Martinique and Guadeloupe , in 2003 .
*
The Four Nations played by England , Scotland and Wales with " B " teams and Gibraltar in 2008 .
* Tournoi de Guadeloupe played between Guadeloupe and St .
Lucia in 2006 .
* Jeux Inter - Iles played between Wallis Island and Futuna Island in 2001 .
* Chinese Championship played between Chinese regions , from 1973 to 1989 .
* Chinese National Games played between Chinese regions , from 1959 to 1965 .
* Santosh Trophy played between Indian States , since 1973 .
* DONER Trophy played between the Indian States , in 2003 and 2004 .
*
The Southwest Cup is an open soccer tournament to Native American tribal teams in the Southwest United States .
This tournament is biennial and started in 1957 .
* South - West Counties Championship played between Cornwall , Guernsey and Jersey , and several other English counties from 1998 to 2007 .
*
Alex Oni Cup played between Igbo Nation , Edo Nation and Yoruba Nation , from 1950 to 1957 .
* Brazilian State Championship played by Brazilian states from 1922 to 1987 .
* Brazilian Native Peoples Games are held under the auspices of FUNAI .
* International Small Nations Tournament played by Jersey , Gibraltar and Madeira ( U-20 team ) in Jersey in 2008 .
* 2010 Corsica Football Cup - played 4 teams : 2 non - FIFA and 2 FIFA .
* The Eco - Sys Action Cup ( EAFC ) - playing for the planet .
* The International tournament of peoples and cultures in Marseille ( France ) from 23 to 28 June 2013 .
International Soccer Tournament is part of Marseille European City of Culture 2013 .
6 - 12 Men 's senior teams will vie for honours while sharing a cultural experience with their opponents .
* Tynwald Hill International Football Tournament
The first Tynwald Hill International Football Tournament to be held at Mullen e Cloie , St Johns , Isle of Man from the 4 to 7 July 2013 .
Competing Teams - Sealand , Alderney , Tamil Eelam , Raetia , Occitania and St Johns United .
* 1st Copa America for Pueblos Originarios will be held in Colombia in 2014 .
* Confederation of Independent Football Associations ( ConIFA ) World Championship 2014 in Sweden ( Jämtkraft Arena ) .
ConIFA
World Championship Sweden is set for May 31 to June 8 , 2014 .
*
All Hazara tournament played between Hazara nation in Pakistan .
*
The Cup of the SADR ( Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic ) - a new edition of the Saharawi Soccer Cup with players who live in forced exile in Spain and in France participate .
Section::::Other tournaments .
Some non - FIFA teams play in other tournaments generally played by FIFA members , including the CONCACAF Gold Cup , Indian Ocean Games , CECAFA Cup , South Pacific Games , Coupes des Caraibes , Shell Caribbean Cup , CFU Championship and many more .
Moreover , many teams , before obtaining FIFA membership , played friendlies and international tournaments - for example , the Faroe Islands .
WOMEN TOURNAMENTS Section::::Women Tournaments .
Across a discreet number of minor tournaments , the only three main international football tournaments for women are the Women 's VIVA World Cup , the Europeada and the Island Games .
ISLAND GAMES Section::::Island Games .
A women 's football tournament to the Island Games is played from 2001 edition : !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners VIVA WORLD CUP Section::::VIVA World Cup .
A women 's football tournament to the VIVA World Cup is played from 2008 edition : !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners
The official announcement of the 2nd edition of the Women VIVA World Cup 2018
® in Vichy .
Dates :
From Sunday 3rd to Sunday 10 June 2018 .
Tournament format : 12 teams ( 6 football continents represented ) THE EUROPEADA Section::::The Europeada .
A women 's football tournament to the Europeada is played from the 2016 edition : !
Host Nation !
Year !
Winners YOUTH TOURNAMENTS Section::::Youth Tournaments .
A big number of friendlies are played between youth selections with different restrictions ( U-21 , U-18 , or U-16 for example ) but still does not exists any international or continental tournaments .
Only a little number of minor tournaments are played for youth selections : one of them , and probably one of the most important , is Muratti Vase who is played for U-21 , U-18 , U-15 . CLUB TOURNAMENTS Section::::Club Tournaments .
Despite the fact many non - FIFA associations have their own league , there are no international or continental club tournaments .
SEE ALSO
* List of men 's national association football teams
* UEFA Regions ' Cup
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Non - FIFA Football Updates * Non - FIFA Cups on RSSSF * Island Games on RSSSF * UEFA Regions ' Cup on RSSSF * Outcasts !
The Lands That FIFA Forgot