CHICKEN FOOT ( GAME )
Chicken foot , also known as Chicken dominoes , Chickie dominoes , and Chickie , is a dominoes game of the " Trains " family , similar to Mexican Train .
Chicken Foot is played in rounds , one round for each double domino in the set .
The game is normally played by 2 to 8 players using any of the common sets ( double - six , double - nine , double - twelve , double - fifteen or double - eighteen ) .
If a player does not tap their last domino on the table when they are down to one and the next player plays a domino they must draw from the bone yard .
OBJECTIVE
Section::::Objective .
The goal of the game is to have the lowest score by the end of the last round .
For each round , the goal is for the player to empty their hand of dominoes by playing them on the board .
SETUP Section::::Setup .
The dominoes are first turned face down and shuffled .
Then , each player picks seven dominoes to form their hand .
With more than four players , the game requires an extended set .
The number of dominoes drawn can be increased when fewer players are using a larger set ( for instance , four players using a double - twelve set can draw 15 dominoes ) .
Any remaining dominoes are placed to the side , forming the boneyard .
THE FIRST ROUND Section::::The First Round .
The round begins with the highest double being placed in the center of the layout to start the game ( using a double - twelve set , this would be the double 12 ) .
( In each succeeding round , the next lowest double is found and placed as the starting point : 11 , 10 , 9 , etc .
until the last round using the double blank ) .
In the first round only , everyone draws a single domino from the boneyard .
The player drawing the highest value begins the round and everyone returns their drawn domino to the boneyard .
The starting player must play a matching domino ( one with an end of the same value as the double ) from their hand on one of the four sides of the double , with the matching end against the double .
The next player plays another matching domino on a remaining side , and this continues until all four sides are filled .
If a player can not play because they do not have a matching domino , then the player must draw one domino from the boneyard .
If that domino does not match , their turn passes to the next player .
No other plays can be made until all four sides of the double are filled .
Once all four sides of the double are filled , the player to the left of the last person to fill the double can play any domino in their hand that matches an exposed end of a played domino .
If a player is unable to match any exposed dominoes , they must draw one domino from the bone pile and either play it if possible or pass .
If the boneyard has been emptied , any player who can not play simply passes .
If no player can play or draw , the round ends .
CHICKEN FOOT Section::::Chicken Foot .
Any time a player plays a matching double on an endpoint , the player calls " Chickie ( Number ) " to indicate they have started a new " chicken foot " .
For example , if a player played a double 4 on the end of a 6/4 domino they would lay it long side against the end with the 4 and call " Chickie Fours " .
No other dominoes can be played until three more 4 's are played against the other side of the double 4 .
The three dominoes played against the double 4 are played on the long side opposite the side originally played .
The end result will look like a chicken foot ( hence the name of the game ) with the double having one domino laid perpendicular to one side , and three more dominoes on the opposite side , the middle being perpendicular and the other two at 45 degrees to perpendicular .
Any player who does not have a domino matching the played double must draw a domino from the bone pile and then play it if it matches or pass .
Once three matching dominoes are played to finish the chicken foot , the next player may play a domino on any matching endpoint , including any of the three branches of the new chicken foot .
ENDING
A ROUND Section::::Ending a round .
A round is over when either one player plays the last domino in their hand or no players can make a legal play .
The latter situation can occur if someone plays a double that no longer has three remaining free dominoes to play on it and the boneyard is exhausted .
At the end of each round , each player sums up the spots on the dominoes in their hand , which becomes their score for that hand and is added to their running total .
In each subsequent round , the highest double drawn that has not yet been used to start a round starts the next round .
When a round for each double has been played , the game is over and player with the lowest score wins .
A game can not end in a double .
If it does , the player who plays the double gets 50 points .
A player who holds the double blank in their hand at the end of a round gets 50 points , but a blank half has no value other than the number on the other half .
REFERENCES