THE KNOXVILLE GIRL
" The Knoxville Girl " is an Appalachian murder ballad .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
It is derived from the 19th - century Irish ballad " The Wexford Girl " , itself derived from the earlier English ballad " The Bloody Miller or Hanged I Shall Be " about a murder in 1683 at Hogstow Mill 12 miles south of Shrewsbury .
This ballad was collected by Samuel Pepys who wrote about the murder of Anne Nichols by the Mill 's apprentice Francis Cooper .
Other versions are known as the " Waxweed Girl " , " The Wexford Murder " .
These are in turn derived from Elizabethan era poem or broadside ballad , " The Cruel Miller " .
Possibly modelled on the 17th century broadside William Grismond 's Downfall , or A Lamentable Murther by him Committed at Lainterdine in the county of Hereford on March 12 , 1650 :
Together with his lamentation .
, sometimes known as The Bloody Miller .
LYRICS Section::::Lyrics .
I met a little girl in Knoxville , a town we all know
well
And every Sunday evening , out in her home , I 'd dwell
We went to take an evening walk about a mile from town
I picked a stick up off the ground and knocked that fair girl down
She fell down on her bended knees , for mercy she did cry
" Oh Willy dear , do n't kill me here
, I 'm unprepared to die " She never spoke another word , I only beat her more Until the ground around me within her blood did flow
I took her by her golden curls
and I drug her round and around Throwing her into the river that flows through Knoxville town
Go down , go down , you Knoxville girl with the dark and rolling eyes Go down , go down , you Knoxville girl , you can never be my bride
I started back to Knoxville , got there about midnight
My mother , she was worried and woke up in a fright Saying " dear son , what have you done to bloody your clothes so ? "
I told my anxious mother I was bleeding at my nose
I called for me a candle to light myself to bed
I called for me a handkerchief to bind my aching head Rolled and tumbled the whole night through , as troubles was for me Like flames of hell around my bed and in my eyes could see
They carried me down to Knoxville and put me in a cell
My friends all tried to get me out but none could go my bail
I 'm here to waste my life away down in this dirty old jail Because I murdered that Knoxville girl , the girl
I loved so well RECORDINGS Section::::Recordings . !
Year !
Artist !
Release !
Notes SAMPLES * Plan B in the bootleg mash - up " Paint It Blacker " ( 2007 )
as a reference to violent music existing before modern rap .
PARODIES * Patrick Sky on his album Songs That Made America Famous , as " Yonkers Girl " .
* GG Allin on his album Carnival of Excess , as " Watch Me Kill " .
BIBLIOGRAPHY * Collin Escott .
Roadkill on the Three - chord Highway : Art and Trash in American Popular Music .
New York :
Routledge , 2002 .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS