OFFSIDE ( FIELD HOCKEY )
There is currently no offside rule in field hockey .
There were prior offside rules , rules that restricted the positioning of players from the attacking team in a way similar to the offside rule in association football .
The evolution of the field hockey offside rule culminated with its abolition in the mid-1990s .
HISTORY OF THE OFFSIDE
RULE 1876
RULE Section::::History of the offside rule .
Section::::1876 rule .
A set of rules of field hockey was drawn up by several clubs in London in January 1876 following the establishment of the first , briefly existing , Hockey Association ( of England ) the year before .
( The second , and final , Hockey Association was formed in 1886 . )
An offside rule was included in the 1876 rules .
Under this rule , a player who was nearer to the opponent team 's goal - line than both the ball and the third to last opponent was said to be at an offside position ( simply put : an attacking player was offside if the ball was behind them and there were fewer than three defenders between them and the goal they were attacking ) .
The rule was applied on the whole pitch , except when the ball was hit from the goal - line .
1886 RULE Section::::1886 rule .
In 1886 , the second England Hockey Association drew up a code of Rules based on those used by clubs in the London area .
Offside was then applied to attacking players from the half - way line only .
1972
RULE CHANGE Section::::1972 rule change .
The 1886 offside rule remained unchanged until 1972 , when offside was changed from 3 to 2 defenders .
1987
RULE CHANGE Section::::1987
rule change .
In 1987 , the offside was amended to apply only in the 25 yards area .
OFFSIDE ABOLISHED Section::::Offside abolished .
After various amendments , the offside rule was finally repealed . "
No offside " was introduced as a mandatory experiment in 1990 and it was confirmed as a rule in 1992 by the Hockey Rules Board .
The aims of this change were : * to transfer the balance of power towards the offense , * to create more space around the circle and mid - field , * to help the flow of play , more goals and fewer whistles , and * to make the game more exciting and appealing to spectators .
New tactics were developed by many teams to exploit this new rule .
EVOLUTION OF THE OFFSIDE RULE IN DIAGRAMS Section::::Evolution of the offside rule in diagrams .
SOURCES
* FIH - History of rules * USA Field Hockey Field Hockey Rules History
* New No - offside Rule