SHEET PAN A sheet pan , baking tray or baking sheet is a flat , rectangular metal pan used in an oven .
It is often used for baking bread rolls , pastries and flat products such as cookies , sheet cakes , Swiss rolls and pizzas .
These pans , like all bakeware , can be made of a variety of materials , but are primarily aluminum or stainless steel .
The most basic sheet pan is literally a sheet of metal .
Commercial pans are sometimes made from aluminized steel which combines the conductive , reflective , and food adherence properties of aluminum , with the rigidity , mass , and strength of the inner steel core ( in this process , the aluminum surface is typically 90 % aluminum and 10 % silicon , which is not quite the same as pure aluminum ) .
Common features that may be found in sheet pans include : one or more flat edges to assist food removal , one or more raised edges ( lips ) to retain food , a contiguous rim to retain either food or shallow liquid , handles to assist in moving the pan into and out of the oven , a layer of insulation ( typically air ) designed to protect delicate food from burning ( air bake pan ) , or perforations to aid in speeding cooking ( pizza tray ) .
Rigidity of the pan is especially important if the pan is to be placed directly on a flat heat source ( hearth stone , induction element , etc . )
Rims and ridges contribute to rigidity .
Mass , thermal conductivity , and colour of the pan play key roles in achieving a uniform cooking temperature .
The friction of the pan 's under surface may be a safety consideration in some applications .
Unlike other bakeware , smaller sheet pans function as convenient task trays .
TYPES AND SIZES Section::::Types and sizes .
A sheet pan that has a continuous lip around all four sides may be called a jelly roll pan .
A pan that has at least one side flat , so that it is easy to slide the baked product off the end , may be called a cookie sheet .
Professional sheet pans used in commercial kitchens typically are made of aluminum , with a raised lip around the edge , and in the United States come in standard sizes .
European pan dimensions are governed by GN numbers under European Committee for Standardisation EN 631 .
In American sizing , the full - size sheet pan is , which is too large for most home ovens .
A two thirds sheet pan ( also referred to as a three quarter size sheet pan ) is .
A half sheet pan is ; quarter sheets are .
The half sheet is approximately the same size as mass - market baking sheets found in supermarkets , and the quarter sheet is a common size for rectangular , single - layer cakes .
Within each standard , other commercial kitchen equipment , such as cooling racks , ovens , and shelving , is made to fit these standard pans .
In many cases , American and European are matched closely enough in size to be used interchangeably .
+ Common U.S. Baking Tray Dimensions !
Conventional Size Name ! !
OuterWidth(in ) ! !
OuterDepth(in ) ! !
OuterHeight(in )
Note that values are approximate and vary based on rim size and style .
Typically , for rimmed trays , each rim will sacrifice 0.5–0.75 inches ( 1–2 cm ) of baking surface along that edge .
Pans of a single design from a single vendor will usually share the same rim height and rake across all tray sizes in a series , thus the sacrifice of flat baking surface is proportionally greater ( relative to outer dimension ) for small pans than for large pans .
While nominally half the size — and typically sharing one dimension — quarter sheets will not necessarily nest inside a half sheet side by side ( whether for storage or other purposes ) .
Some vendors supply quarter sheets that are half the size of a half sheet in outer dimension , while other vendors supply quarter sheets that are closer to half the size of a half sheet in flat baking area .
INSTITUTIONAL USE
Section::::Institutional use .
Commercial sheet pans are used for many purposes besides baking .
Kitchen or cooking processes are often designed around kitchen equipment such as sheet pans , presupposing their ubiquity in most commercial food preparation areas .
In bread baking , especially , the bread dough will often go through several long rest intervals on sheet pans stacked in open or enclosed sheet pan racks ( sometimes mounted on wheels ) .
Enclosed racks may also be ventilated or temperature controlled to some degree .
SEE ALSO
* Gastronorm sizes , European standardized cookware dimensions * Parchment paper , sometimes used for lining sheet pans
* Tray REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS