RICHARD WEBBER
Richard Webber , M.D. is a fictional character from the ABC medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy .
The character is portrayed by actor James Pickens , Jr. , and was created by Shonda Rhimes .
He was previously the Chief of Surgery at Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital for 11 years , and was replaced briefly by Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and later permanently by Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Richard married his wife , Adele ( Loretta Devine ) on Valentine 's Day .
During their residency at Seattle Grace , he had an affair with Meredith 's mother , Ellis Grey , although both were married .
Although Ellis left her husband , Richard could not bring himself to leave his wife , Adele ( he would learn decades later that Adele had known about the affair all along and stayed with him anyway ) .
He confessed in a later episode that he ended the affair because he believed that Ellis deserved better and that he had too much baggage .
After completing his residency , Richard left Seattle Grace to complete his fellowship .
There are continuity errors regarding where exactly Richard built his career ; at one point he states that with the exception of his fellowship , he spent his entire career at Seattle Grace .
However , it is also established that he both taught and befriended Addison and Derek , presumably in New York
( the majority of references within the show , as well as additional sources , indicate that a good portion of Richard 's career was spent in Manhattan , rather than Seattle ) .
He graduated from Northwestern University ( as shown in the degree in his office ) STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
The enigmatic Chief of Surgery at Seattle Grace is a leading figure in the show .
Always vigilant , seeking and trying new things , his ambition is to see Seattle Grace as the top surgical program in the country .
This sometimes leads him to take daring decisions , at the beginning of the first season
the Surgical Program is presented as one of the best in the United States .
Later in the series his wife Adele asks him to retire , forcing him to choose between his career or their marriage .
He tries to skirt around it , but Adele , tired of waiting , makes her choice and leaves him .
He moves out and sleeps in his office for a short time .
Since learning of Ellis Grey 's illness , Richard had been visiting her regularly , but upon deciding to attempt a reconciliation with Adele , he realizes that he can no longer continue his emotional affair with Ellis .
He attempts to patch things up with his wife , but is stunned to find out that she has apparently moved on to someone else .
In the meantime , Richard makes plans to retire and must name his successor .
He first thought of recommending Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) as his successor , but after the secret of Burke 's tremor and cover - up came out , that plan is put to a stand - still .
Nevertheless , he tells the hospital board of his retirement but has yet to name his successor ; Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Preston , Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) and Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) are all eagerly clamoring for the post .
Richard eventually chooses Derek , but Derek tells him that Richard should remain chief .
Near the end of the third season , Adele is admitted to the hospital and is discovered to be pregnant ( at 52 years old ) .
Though he believes the father to be the man Adele insinuated to be seeing months earlier , Richard stays by Adele 's side as she is treated .
However , due to complications , she loses the baby .
Adele later admits to Richard that the baby , which was a boy , was actually his .
At the conclusion of the third season , Richard and Adele decide to give their marriage another try .
At the beginning of the fourth season , Richard and Adele declare that his work is the reason that their marriage has failed and separate .
He consequently moves in with his friend Derek Shepherd in his trailer home and tries to repair his life as a divorcé for the remainder of the season until , by the end , he reasserts his good reputation to his wife and wins her back .
At the start of the fifth season , Richard starts to deal with the fact that Seattle Grace 's surgical program ranking has been suffering .
Determined to repair his hospital 's reputation , he has become determined to enforce a new tougher series of hospital rules .
Adding to his new behavior , he seems to becoming more and more agitated by Meredith Grey 's ( Ellen Pompeo ) presence in his life as she is a reminder to him of every mistake he has made over the years .
Over the course of the season , he becomes resentful of his mentee in General Surgery , Dr. Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) 's decision to leave the General Surgery program to embark upon a fellowship in Pediatric Surgery and attempts to prevent it in any way possible ; he gives her an uninspiring letter of recommendation and buys a surgical robot for General Surgery to " lure " Dr. Bailey back to the program .
However , as he finally comes to terms with Dr. Bailey 's choice , she confides to the Chief that her husband has left her with an ultimatum - if she takes the fellowship in Pediatrics , he will divorce her .
Dr. Bailey tells the Chief that she has decided that she will leave her husband herself , but that she still can not take the Pediatrics fellowship , because she will now be a single mother .
In the sixth season he has been under a lot of stress .
In the episode " New History " most of the people believe he is having an affair due to his odd decisions and mistakes lately , but it is revealed at the end of the episode that the chief has gone back to drinking again .
At first , he tells Meredith , who he has taken under his wing to help out learning new skills , that he was n't an alcoholic , but rather in a state of depression , and he promised that his eggnog at Christmas would be his last drink .
However Meredith discovers him at the bar very drunk , showing that he has indeed relapsed .
He was given the choice by Derek and the Board , to retire early or enter a rehab program where he would receive help for his drinking , and possibly gain his job back .
Richard contemplated throwing away his career , which caused him and Derek to get in a shouting match .
He later handed Derek the papers agreeing to enter Rehab .
After rehab , Richard returns as a General Surgery attending and performs awake surgery on Harper Avery .
On the day of shooting , he enters the hospital against police orders and convinces Gary Clarke to shoot himself .
Following the shooting , Derek impulsively quits as Chief and Richard is re - instated .
It appears that his wife Adele is starting to show early symptoms of Alzheimer 's and he starts a diabetes clinical trial based on Ellis ' diaries .
When he asks Meredith to be a part of his trial , she declines and joins Derek 's trial on Alzheimer 's instead .
Adele later receives a spot on Derek 's trial .
During the trial , Meredith tampers with the drugs so that Adele does not receive the placebo .
After the truth is revealed which causes Meredith to lose her job , Richard takes the blame and steps down as chief of surgery to protect her , being replaced by Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) .
As Adele 's condition deteriorates , Richard is forced to have her placed at Rose Ridge .
Catherine Avery ( Debbie Allen ) comes to Seattle and develops an interest in Richard
but he refuses her advances because he is a married man .
However , discovering that Adele , who does not recognize him anymore , has started a relationship with a new man at Rose Ridge , he lets her go .
In season 8 Richard and Catherine run into each other in the hotel where they are staying while in San Francisco to serve as examiners for the boards and have a one - night stand .
However , Catherine 's son Jackson ( Jesse Williams ) , who was also there to take his boards and worked under Richard at Seattle Grace Mercy West , is horrified after finding out about the relationship .
While on the way to Bailey 's wedding , Richard gets a phone call alerting him that Adele has been rushed to the hospital .
Bailey and Meredith perform emergency surgery , which was successful .
However , it is revealed that Adele died of a heart attack while recovering in the ICU .
He later embarks on a relationship with Catherine .
A storm hits the hospital and creates a power outage .
After operating on a former case of Bailey 's , he goes in the electrical room and finds the man who was in charge of the generators lying on the ground .
He sends him to an OR and stays in the room to restore the power but is seemingly electrocuted .
Richard slowly recovers from his electrical injuries after putting Meredith as his POA .
Richard returns to work and is given a retirement package from Hunt on his birthday .
Richard accepts to become the head of the residency program mentoring the residents .
He continues his relationship with Catherine and plans to propose .
Richard chats with Dr. Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) after her first day at Grey Sloan Memorial who says that it was surreal to work at a place where , Ellis Grey , her birth mother , has the same name .
Maggie bears a striking resemblance to Richard , suggesting that he is her father .
As series 11 progresses , it is revealed through moments of flashbacks from Meredith that Maggie is in fact Richard 's daughter , and that Ellis gave her up out of shame and suffering from depression .
Upon finding out the truth Richard does n't tell Maggie the news straight away out of fear Maggie will reject and blame him for giving her up .
This causes Richard to act strangely around her , causing Miranda Bailey to wonder if he is sleeping with her , Richard correcting her on this mistake causes other members of staff to find out the truth before Maggie .
After the truth is revealed Maggie is angry with Richard and ignores and rebuffs him for some time .
Later on in the season the pair are seen to have bonded and are now friends , with Richard and Meredith sharing stories with Maggie about Ellis .
In the season 13 episode " The Room Where It Happens , " when a male patient is wheeled into the OR where Meredith , Hunt , and Edwards are waiting , Webber shows up to help having napped all day .
Webber wants the patient to be given a name , he picks Gail , a cello player and music teacher .
During the episode , each of the doctors has a flashback to a tragic incident from their past .
We learn near the end of the episode , Gail was Webber 's mother , who had advanced pancreatic cancer and died when he was ten .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Grey 's Anatomy at ABC.com