GEORGE O'MALLEY George O'Malley , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States .
The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and was portrayed by actor T. R. Knight from 2005 to 2009 .
Introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , O'Malley worked his way up to resident level , while his relationships with his colleagues Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) formed a focal point of the series .
O'Malley married Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) whom he later separated with to pursue a relationship with Izzie Stevens .
O'Malley also had entertained a romantic interest with Meredith Grey and Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) .
Knight auditioned for the show , expecting a one - season run .
In 2007 , Knight 's co - star Isaiah Washington ( Preston Burke ) insulted him with a homophobic slur , which resulted in the termination of Washington 's Grey 's Anatomy contract .
In 2009 , after the conclusion of the fifth season , it was confirmed that Knight would not be returning for the show 's sixth season .
The actor stated the reason for his departure was due to a " breakdown in communication " with Rhimes , his character 's lack of screen time , as well as his decision to come out as openly gay .
Knight received generally positive reviews for his performance as O'Malley , and garnered a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards .
Despite this , his death received mixed feedback .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
George O'Malley is introduced as a fellow surgical intern to Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) ; the five of them working under Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) .
O'Malley and Stevens move in with Meredith , for whom he has romantic feelings but did not express them due to his fear of rejection and the fact that she and one of the attendings Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) had a mutual interest in one another .
On the first day of internship , O'Malley is selected by chief of cardiothoracic surgery Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) as the first intern to perform surgery .
He freezes in the operating room , and is mocked by his peers , and earns the nickname " 007 " because of almost killing a patient in such a simple operation ( referring to James Bond 's " licence to kill " ) .
O'Malley dates nurse Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) , breaking up with her when he contracts syphilis from her , which she in turn contracted from Karev .
His friendship with Karev is further strained when the two become trapped in an elevator with a patient who begins to bleed out .
Karev freezes , and O'Malley is able to save the patient single - handedly .
He goes on to admit his feelings to Meredith , and the two have a one - night stand .
When Meredith tells him that sleeping together was a mistake , O'Malley begins avoiding her and starts dating orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) .
During a camping trip , O'Malley learns that Torres has slept with chief of plastic surgery Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , and also discovers that Burke is experiencing tremors in his hand .
When O'Malley 's father is diagnosed with esophageal cancer and a leaking aortic valve , he refuses to allow Burke to operate on him , instead contacting Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , Burke 's medical school rival .
His relationship with Torres is strained when he confronts her about sleeping with Sloan , but he allows her to support him through his father 's deteriorating health .
Complications from his father 's surgery leave him in multi - system organ failure , and his life support is turned off .
In an attempt to overcome his grief , O'Malley elopes with Callie to Las Vegas .
He later begins to feel that he was mistaken to marry her , and sleeps with Stevens while intoxicated .
Stevens confesses that she is in love with him , so O'Malley considers transferring to a different hospital so he can be faithful to his wife .
However , he is ineligible to transfer after failing the intern exams .
O'Malley decides to repeat his intern year , and confesses to Torres that he slept with Stevens , leading the two to separate .
O'Malley and Stevens embark on a short - lived relationship , only to discover there is no real chemistry between them .
O'Malley moves in with new intern Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Meredith 's half - sister .
Lexie and O'Malley discover that he only failed his exam by a single point , leading him to confront Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) , the chief of surgery , to ask for a chance to retake the exam .
He passes the second attempt , and begins to distance himself from Lexie , who has fallen in love with him .
O'Malley supports Stevens when she discovers she has melanoma , and walks her down the aisle as she marries Karev .
O'Malley begins to display a talent for trauma surgery , and is told by the chief of trauma surgery Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) that it is definitely his specialty .
He then abruptly and inexplicably decides to join the U.S. Army .
While his friends at the hospital prepare an intervention to convince O'Malley to stay , they all work on a severely disfigured John Doe , brought in after a horrible bus accident , in which he pushed a woman out of the way and saved her life .
O'Malley writes on Meredith 's hand " 007 " and she realizes it is her friend George .
She runs to tell the other surgeons and they rush him to surgery .
However , he flatlines and is ultimately declared braindead .
There is confusion on if John Doe is really George and Callie confirms by a freckle on his hand .
His organs are donated after Stevens confirms that is what O'Malley would have wanted , and he is buried a week later .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
T. R. Knight signed on for the pilot as O'Malley , expecting that the role might be short - lived , because he liked that the character was multi - faceted .
In October 2006 , news reports surfaced that Washington had insulted Knight with a homophobic slur , during an argument with Patrick Dempsey ( Derek Shepherd ) .
Shortly after , the details of the argument became public , and Knight later disclosed that the slur made him come out as gay .
" I was under no delusions , " Knight said at the time .
" My friends on the set knew .
We talked about it .
Publicly it 's not my thing to call up People magazine and be like , '
Hey , you want to know something about me?'
...
I could 've just let it slide and not said anything , but it became important .
It became important to make the statement .
" The situation seemed somewhat resolved when Washington issued a statement , apologizing for his " unfortunate use of words during the recent incident on - set " .
At the 64th Golden Globe Awards , while being interviewed on the red carpet , Washington joked , " I love gay .
I wanted to be gay .
Please let me be gay . "
Later , Washington claimed he never used the slur , labeling it " vile " .
In June 2007 , it was reported that the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) and Shonda Rhimes had chosen not to renew Washington 's contract with the show , not immediately specifying a reason .
In a subsequent interview , Washington claimed that " they fired the wrong guy " ( referring to Knight ) , and said he was considering filing a lawsuit as a result .
He accused Knight of using the controversy to bolster his own career and increase his salary on Grey 's Anatomy .
On July 2 , 2007 , Washington appeared on Larry King Live , to present his side of the controversy .
According to Washington , he never used the " F Word " in reference to Knight , but rather blurted it out in an unrelated context in the course of an argument " provoked " by Dempsey , who he felt was treating him like a " B - word " , a " P - word " , and the " F - word " , which Washington said conveyed " somebody who is being weak and afraid to fight back " .
In 2009 , Rhimes told Entertainment Weekly that she may not have handled the incident correctly , stating : " I was n't interested in what anybody thought publicly .
I was interested in what was going on right here on the ground ... with the people I work with every day .
Did I do it perfectly ?
Of course not .
This is my first television show .
It was a learning experience . "
Knight said that Rhimes was among those for discouraging him to come out , however Rhimes said : " I remember saying [ to fellow executive producer ] , ' This is our proudest day here .
T.R. got to come out
and I got to say to him that it would n't affect his character ' because he was concerned he was going to come out and George would suddenly be gay .
[ ... ] The idea that a gay actor ca n't play a straight man is insulting . "
In December 2008 , reports speculated that Knight requested to be released from his contract and that " they were working out the details " at that time .
In June 2009 , after the conclusion of the fifth season of Grey 's Anatomy , it was confirmed that Knight would not be returning for the show 's sixth season .
The actor stated the reason for his departure was due to a " breakdown in communication " with Rhimes , O'Malley 's lack of screen time , as well as his decision to be openly gay .
Prior to the official announcement of his departure , there was speculation that the role of O'Malley would be recast , but Rhimes labeled it as a " hilarious , ridiculous rumor " .
After the confirmation of his exit , Knight told TV Guide : " Leaving Grey 's Anatomy was not an easy decision for me to make .
I am extremely grateful to have had the opportunity to play this character and will miss my fellow cast and crew very much .
I continue to wish them the very best , and wholeheartedly thank all of the fans who have supported me and the show with such passion and enthusiasm .
" In a statement confirming Knight 's departure , Rhimes said : " I think I speak for the entire Grey 's Anatomy family when I say we wish T.R. Knight the best in his future endeavors .
He is an incredibly talented actor and a person whose strength of character is admired by all of us . "
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Rhimes said she tried to talk him out of quitting , explaining : " I looked in his face and he was really sure .
It felt like the right thing for him . "
However , in another interview , Knight said of his exit : " My five - year experience proved to me that I could not trust any answer that was given [ about O'Malley ] .
" Knight was " at peace " with his departure , saying : " There just comes a time when it 's so clear that moving on is the best decision . "
However , Heigl tried to talk Knight out of leaving , saying : " I did n't think it was the right decision .
I felt like some of the problems could be worked through .
But by the time it came to fruition , I was [ glad ] for him because he was ready to go . "
On the topic of losing a US$ 14 million contract , Knight commented : " From an outsider 's perspective , I get the [ impression that ] '
He 's just a spoiled actor , he does n't know how good he has it . '
There are a lot of people who would like to be in my position .
But in the end , I need to be fulfilled in my work . "
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
O'Malley was characterized a " hapless naif " .
On the topic of O'Malley 's longtime crush on Meredith in the second season , Knight said : " What 's going to be very interesting to see is what he 's going to do with Meredith .
It 's getting close to time .
Whatever he chooses to do will inform who he is the rest of his life . "
After their sexual encounter occurred onscreen , Knight said in an interview with Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune : " George was n't really paying full attention .
He was letting his own feelings override his respect for Meredith .
A person really clued in would get that there was n't anything coming back , but he was so in his head about it and caught up in his own feelings that he was n't listening .
It 's not just that he loves her ...
it 's a kind of selfish love he had for her . "
He also added that , " I think George has a lot of growing up to do .
Part of that is making horrible , stupid mistakes .
He 's been pretty sheltered . "
Series writer Stacy McKee said of the sexual encounter : " There 's no turning back .
There 's nothing George and Meredith can do .
The damage is done – things will never be the same .
They 've just changed something important in their lives forever . "
When asked if O'Malley was becoming more assertive , Knight said : Knight also commented that the character does not appreciate himself and his positive traits .
On the topic of O'Malley performing open heart surgery in an elevator , Knight said : " It 's a slow change
but he 's starting to realize , ' The way I have been doing things is not working . '
The big thing about the open - heart surgery in the elevator was he was forced into it .
He needs to be kind of kicked in the ( butt ) to do these things . "
Knight felt a parallel to George in that his " confidence is n't always at its absolute highest " , but overall he sees more differences than similarities .
However , when the actor starts to think he is so different from O'Malley , an awkward move can suggest otherwise .
" I was walking , doing a scene with Katherine Heigl .
I finished my line with her , and then I walked straight into the light stand .
" Critical of her affair with O'Malley , Knight 's co - star Heigl explained : " They really hurt somebody , and they did n't seem to be taking a lot of responsibility for it .
I have a really hard time with that kind of thing .
I 'm maybe a little too black and white about it . "
Speaking of O'Malley 's relationship with Lexie , Rhimes offered her insight : " I love them as friends .
They make good friends .
We all have that friend we met in school or the gym or somewhere – we just hit it off right away .
And right away there was no pretense or airs .
Just pure honesty .
That 's Lexie and George .
They 're really good friends
and I can see the friendship evolving into something even greater .
"
When asked what his " favorite George moment " was , Knight said his relationships with Stevens and Bailey .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Fans were " widely against " O'Malley 's affair with Meredith in the second season , however certain fans who supported their relationship were critical when Torres was introduced as a love interest for him .
Fans and critics were also against O'Malley 's relationship with Stevens in the fourth season ; Maclean 's said : " George must die .
He 's slept with virtually everyone except the male cast and has been in love with virtually everyone except the male cast .
And he 's not that great of a doctor .
Evolve or die . "
Christopher Monfette of IGN said O'Malley and Stevens were a " mismatch " , adding : " Unfortunately , while it 's refreshing to see a plotline driven by activity versus apathy , the idea of these two ever - affable , best - friend characters suddenly discovering their potential , out - of - nowhere love for each other quickly feels both force - fed and emotionally - incorrect . "
Similarly , DVD Verdict stated that George and Izzie were " one of the strongest ' best friend ' vibes on television " for the first three seasons , explaining " they were perfect as friends [ while ] George and Callie made a good couple . "
UGO.com put the two on their list of " Character Couples Who Should Have Never Happened " .
Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly said that when O'Malley told Torres about his affair with Stevens , the scene was too " melodramatic " .
Laura Burrows , also of IGN , said that the fourth - season premiere " introduced a new side of George " .
Armstrong said of O'Malley and Stevens ' reconciliation : " George and Izzie are finally on the old Grey 's Anatomy road to ruin .
And I admit this is a good lesson in Grey 's viewing as well as life :
Sit tight if you hate something , as nothing is permanent . "
Armstrong also commented that the " sparkling " friendship development between Lexie and O'Malley " won her over " .
The following year , Monfette observed of O'Malley 's lack of screen time : " His growing interest in trauma surgery at the side of Owen leads to an interesting development in the finale , but the character is virtually side - lined this season . "
Carina MacKenzie of the Los Angeles Times said of the character 's death : " The time - lapse episode was an interesting choice , and though we sped through six weeks of mourning in two hours , it did n't feel rushed to me .
I 'm not sure the show could have held my attention for another season of crippling sadness . "
The Huffington Post Michael Pascua commented that O'Malley 's funeral did not live up to his expectations , writing that it " was n't as sad as [ he ] thought it would be " .
In 2006 , Knight and the other cast of Grey 's Anatomy were nominated for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series , at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards .
Also in 2006 , the cast won the award for Best Cast – Television Series at the 11th Satellite Awards .
The cast won the award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series at the 13th Screen Actors Guild Awards , and were nominated again the following year .
Knight 's performance in season three earned him a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General EXTERNAL LINKS