MEXICAN TRAIN
Mexican Train is a game played with number dominoes .
The object of the game is for a player to play all the dominoes from his or her hand onto one or more chains , or " trains " , emanating from a central hub or " station " .
The game 's most popular name comes from a special optional train that belongs to all players .
However , the game can be played without the Mexican Train ; such variants are generally called " Private Trains " or " Domino Trains " .
It is related to the game Chicken Foot .
EQUIPMENT Section::::Equipment .
A double - twelve set of dominoes is marketed as the standard for Mexican Train , and accommodates up to 8 players .
Other sets are commonly used as well .
The following alternate sets are common , depending on the number of people playing : * Double - Six ( 2 players ) * Double - Nine ( 2–4 players )
* Double - Twelve ( 5–8 players )
* Double - Fifteen ( 9–12 players ) * Double - Eighteen ( 13 + players )
In addition to dominoes , the game also requires : * One token or marker for each player
* A special spacer , known as the " station " or " hub " , used to evenly space the trains around the central domino ( optional ) .
* Pencil and paper to keep score
Many sets of dominoes include a station and special train - shaped tokens for markers , and packaged games with a central " station " and custom tokens are available .
However , the station piece is not strictly needed , and anything from coins to poker chips to even pieces of candy or slips of paper can be used as markers .
OBJECTIVE
Section::::Objective .
The object of all Trains games is to be the first player to place all of their dominoes .
Dominoes may be placed onto the player 's train , onto the Mexican train if available , or on the trains of other players under special circumstances .
The middle tile counts as the start of a player 's multiple tile train .
SETUP Section::::Setup .
At the start of each round , the dominoes are placed face side down , shuffled , and drawn by players to form their hands .
Using the double - nine set , players draw dominoes as follows :
* 2–4 players : 10 dominoes each * 5–6 players :
9 dominoes each * 7–8 players
: 7 dominoes each Any remaining dominoes are placed to one side , forming the " boneyard " .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
With a standard double - twelve set the double twelve is placed in the station .
In each successive round the next lower double is used until all doubles are used .
The double - blank is the final round .
Play continues to the left .
Each person lays one legally placed domino per turn , or two if the player 's first domino is a double .
If they are unable to , they must draw a domino from the boneyard .
If they are able to lay that domino , they must do so immediately .
Otherwise , their turn is over and play continues to the left , each player trying to place all their dominoes by playing matching dominoes one at a time , end to end .
A train can be as long as the players can make it ; it only ends when all dominoes that could match its endpoint have already been played .
As a result , trains can become quite long , especially with an extended domino set .
It is acceptable to " bend " the train 90 ° or 180 ° to keep the train on the playing surface , as long as it does not interfere with the endpoints of other trains .
PUBLIC TRAINS Section::::Public Trains .
All trains begin the game as " public , " and all players may play on them .
When a player plays a domino on their train it then becomes " private . "
When a player draws a domino and is unable to play it , they must mark their train as " public " by placing a marker on their train .
If a player is deemed to have made a strategic error the highest score of that round is added to theirs .
Players have the option , whether they can play on their own train or not , of playing a domino on any train currently marked " public . "
When a player with a " public " train adds a domino to it , it becomes " private " again and may not be played on except by the train 's owner .
THE MEXICAN TRAIN Section::::The Mexican Train .
The Mexican Train is an additional train that anyone may play on during their turn .
They can start the train by playing a domino matching the engine ( i.e. the double played at the beginning of the round ) or add to the train .
Mexican trains can be added as long as a space remains .
PLAYING DOUBLES
Section::::Playing doubles .
When a double is played , it is placed perpendicular to the train .
Subsequently , adding a domino to the double is called " finishing " , " satisfying the double " or " covering the double . "
The player who played the double must take another turn .
This additional turn follows exactly the same rules as any normal turn .
They may play anywhere they like , and do not have to " finish the double " on this turn .
They may play elsewhere and , provided they make a legal play , do not have to mark their train for not finishing the double ( unless the double was played on their own train ) .
Blanks are wild .
Like any other turn , if they can not play they must draw a domino and mark their train as " public " .
If a double remains unfinished after it has been played , the train becomes a " public " train .
No other train can be added to by any player until someone " finishes the double " .
Play passes to the next player who can legally play on this train ( if the train is theirs , or if they can legally play on " public " trains ) .
If they can not " finish the double " , they must draw a domino , and if they can not play it on the double , their own train becomes " public " .
Play continues like this until someone " finishes the double " .
Single and double blanks are considered wilds .
Branching on doubles as in Chicken Foot is allowed as an option ( see Variations below ) .
SCORING
Section::::Scoring .
At the end of each round , the player going out receives 0 points , while all other players receive the sum of all pips ( dots ) on their dominoes .
The person with the fewest points after all thirteen rounds have been played is the winner .
In the case of a tie , the person with the most 0-point rounds is the winner .
( If this is still a tie , the person with the lowest round total other than 0 is the winner ) .
PARTNERSHIPS Section::::Partnerships .
With four , six or eight players , the game can be played in teams of two , with partners sitting opposite each other .
Rules are identical except that a player 's train and their partner 's train are considered one and the same ( they will usually extend from opposite sides of the station ) , and thus a player can play on their own end or their partner 's , and neither end becomes public until neither partner can play a tile .
Scoring is also handled in pairs , with the player who went out scoring zero for their team ( even though their partner will have dominoes remaining ) and other teams summing their scores for a team score .
ELEMENTS OF STRATEGY
*
It is generally in a player 's best interest to keep their train private .
By making a train public , the player allows other players to break an impasse in extending the train , but the player loses all other options except to attempt to play on the endpoint of their own train .
*
While public trains offer additional options , the player 's own private train should be considered first .
Trains usually are public because their owners can not play on them ; if that train 's endpoint does not change , its owner has no options until they draw a domino they can play on it .
* A player may choose to dump unmatched tiles on public trains first , before starting their own train , to trick the other players into believing that the player can not start a train .
*
If one or more players played on a public train and the endpoint value has changed , play another tile that will change the endpoint value back to its original value or to a value the player is thought not to have .
*
It is sometimes advantageous to play a double on one 's own train and intentionally leave it unfinished .
If the value of the double has been heavily played elsewhere , other players may be unable to finish it , which will cause many players to have to mark their own trains .
This is a good defensive play when subsequent players are low on dominoes ; they are unlikely to have a matching domino , and must draw and mark their trains until someone can finish the double .
* Because a player playing an unfinished double on someone else 's train does not have to mark their own train as public , it is recommended that players play doubles on public trains whenever possible .
Not only does this remove a major disadvantage to playing an unfinished double , it does not change the endpoint value of the train meaning its owner probably will not be able to play , and other players do have to mark their trains if they can not finish the double .
However double on another player 's train gives that player and everyone else ( if public ) more options .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
There are a number of other versions of the rules for Mexican Train , varying the number of dominoes drawn by each player , the rules for playing doubles , or the number of tiles that can be played during one turn .
For example : Fast Game variation : After the starting double has been placed , turns are ignored , and each player focuses on making their own train as long as possible .
Once everyone has made as long of a train as they can , play reverts to turns , using the rules listed above .
This speeds up the game , but eliminates some of the strategies of playing doubles .
Delayed
First Turn variation :
Similar to the Fast Game variation listed above , instead of simultaneously , each person takes turns playing as many dominoes on their train as possible .
Any player that is unable to play on their first turn draws a domino , and may then begin their first turn or pass .
When a player who has passed finally starts their train , they may play as many dominoes as they can string together .
After starting their train , players are only permitted to play one domino at a time as usual , unless playing a double .
This version allows a player to save their " first turn " string of dominoes for when they have a chance , instead of being stuck with all dominoes from the beginning .
Branching Doubles variation : Once a double has been satisfied , players may continue to branch off of the double in two more directions , meaning the double will have a matching endpoint on all four sides .
Often , players like to angle these branches at a 45-degree angle to accommodate for more room .
This variant gives players more choice and speeds up the game .
Swan Drive variation :
A player who can play on their own train may also play one tile on each subsequent public train in clockwise order .
Each public train must be played on in order to continue in this manner , and only one tile per train may be played ( unless a double must be finished ) .
Once a player can not play on the next public train , or has looped around to their own train , their turn ends .
While playing on each public train , the player may choose to play on the Mexican train or skip it when he comes to it , making the placement of the train somewhat strategical .
This version makes for a much faster game .
REFERENCES
* Mexican Train on BoardGameGeek