CALLIE
TORRES Calliope Iphegenia " Callie " Torres , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the ABC in the United States .
The character was created by series ' producer Shonda Rhimes , and is portrayed by Sara Ramirez .
She was introduced in season two , as a senior orthopedic resident , as a love interest for intern George O'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) .
Eventually becoming an attending orthopedic surgeon , the character was originally contracted to appear on a recurring basis , but received star billing in the third season .
Torres was initially conceived as a love interest , and eventual wife , for O'Malley , and was created to be disliked by her colleagues .
Further storylines include relationships between her and plastic surgeon , Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , cardiothoracic surgeon
Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , as well as a marriage to pediatric surgeon
Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) .
The character 's bisexual storyline with Hahn and Robbins , and her development later in the series has garnered much acclaim .
She is also the longest running LGBT character in television history , appearing in 11 seasons and 239 episodes .
Ramirez 's portrayal of Torres has been widely praised by television critics and the character gained significant popularity as the series progressed .
Ramirez was nominated for several awards for her portrayal of Torres , including the Image Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series , and the ALMA Award for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Television Series .
The character was ranked at no . 7 by AfterEllen.com in the list of " Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters .
" At the end of the show 's twelfth season , Ramirez departed the show after ten years , desiring to take a break .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Callie Torres is introduced as an orthopedic surgery resident with a crush on intern George O'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) .
The two start a relationship and Torres moves into Meredith 's house
( Meredith and Izzie Stevens lived there as well ) .
Uneased at the way their relationship is progressing , O'Malley confronts her , which results in her moving into a hotel .
In the aftermath of the breakup , she meets and has a one - night stand with plastic surgeon Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , who becomes her friend .
Torres and O'Malley subsequently reconcile , and the two marry in Las Vegas on the spur of the moment .
Confused , O'Malley confides to fellow intern Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , about his relationship woes over alcohol , leading to a drunken sexual encounter between the two .
Torres remains unaware of his sexual encounter , but becomes increasingly suspicious , and announces her desire to conceive a child .
Shortly thereafter , however , she discovers that O'Malley has been unfaithful , ending their marriage .
Though her personal life is troubled , Torres thrives professionally when she is appointed as the hospital 's Chief Resident .
However , she soon begins struggling to cope in the role , and is demoted soon thereafter .
Torres forms a friendship with Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , the hospital 's new chief of cardiothoracic surgery .
The two embark on a relationship when Hahn jokingly kisses Torres in an elevator to tease Sloan .
Neither has been with another woman before , and Torres struggles with her bisexuality , and cheats on her with Sloan .
She is initially forgiven , but after an argument about work , Hahn resigns from Seattle Grace , ending their relationship .
New pediatric surgeon
Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) kisses her , and they begin dating .
Their relationship is tested when Torres comes out to her father , Carlos , who disowns her , cutting her off both financially and emotionally .
When she is not granted a position as an attending , she publicly berates the chief , Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) , and resigns from her post .
She begins working at the neighboring Mercy West hospital , and when the two hospitals merge , she is promoted to an attending surgeon .
Torres ' father returns yet again , to condemn her , but ultimately accepts her sexuality .
When Torres explains her desire to bear children , Robbins expresses disappointment , and their differing stances on the matter lead them to break up .
Soon thereafter , a gunman commits mass murder at the hospital , and , relieved to have survived , Torres and Robbins reconcile , with Robbins agreeing that they should have children together .
When Robbins wins a prestigious grant to help treat children in Malawi , a disgruntled Torres agrees to move there with her , as the position will last for three years ; however , her lack of enthusiasm causes Robbins to end their relationship and go without her .
A heartbroken Torres moves in with Sloan , and they have a one - night stand .
Robbins returns for Torres , apologizing and hoping for forgiveness , but Torres initially rebuffs her , and later reveals that she is pregnant with Sloan 's baby .
Robbins agrees to raise the child with her , but dislikes that Sloan will be a permanent part of their lives .
En route a weekend getaway , Robbins proposes to Torres , but before Torres can reply , the two are in a head - on collision with a truck , leaving Torres severely injured .
In an attempt to save her life , obstetrician - gynecologist Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) , delivers Torres 's premature baby .
Torres survives , and agrees to marry Robbins .
After twelve weeks of recovery , both Torres and baby Sofia are discharged and allowed to leave the hospital .
Torres recovers from her surgery , but deals with the backlash from her mother ( Gina Gallego ) 's attitude toward the wedding and her granddaughter .
Torres and Robbins marry in a garden after the minister 's wife falls ill , with general surgeon Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , officiating the ceremony .
In the aftermath of a plane accident that killed Sloan and Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Torres is forced to make the decision to have Alex Karev amputate Robbins 's left leg to keep her alive , which puts strains on their relationship .
The hospital is sued and eventually found guilty of negligence .
Each victim , including Robbins , Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , and Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) must receive $ 15 million of compensation , which leads the hospital to a near bankruptcy as the insurances refuse to pay .
These doctors and Torres buy the hospital with the help of the Harper - Avery Foundation to prevent it from closing , and each become members of the new directing board .
Everything seems to go well for Arizona and Callie , until a big storm hits the hospital now named after Mark Sloan and Lexie Grey .
In the last episode of the ninth season , Arizona cheats on Callie with Dr. Lauren Boswell ( Hilarie Burton ) .
Callie soon discovers Arizona 's infidelity by seeing her wedding ring pinned to Dr. Boswell 's scrub top .
In the aftermath of discovery , both Callie and Arizona share their feelings and it is revealed that Arizona does not forgive Callie for making the call to amputate her leg .
Callie is heartbroken and Arizona states that Callie lost nothing in the crash , to which Callie responds that she , apparently , lost Arizona .
Callie takes Sofia to live with Meredith and Derek , Zola , and Baby Bailey for a while before kicking Arizona out of their apartment and celebrates by dancing in her underwear .
Callie also left Arizona at therapy , telling her that she was the only one that needed to go .
After being hit by a lawsuit , her father , Carlos , visits and tells Callie that he cheated on her mother
but she took him back and Callie would n't be here if her mother did n't give Carlos a second chance .
Callie goes to Arizona 's apartment and invites her to come back home .
Callie finds out during surgery that Arizona was sleeping with Leah , a second year resident , while separated .
Although angry at Arizona , Callie still agrees to work things out .
After April 's failed wedding to Matthew , Callie and Arizona bought a house together , a fresh start , away from the memories of their apartment .
They later decided to try again for a second child .
However , a trip to the OB / GYN led to the discovery that Callie had developed adhesions in her uterus in the years since Sofia 's birth , meaning she could not carry any more babies .
After talking about it , the couple agreed to postpone their dream to have another baby until they 're on more solid footing as a couple .
At the beginning of the eleventh season , Callie and Arizona gave therapy another chance in order to help mend their marriage .
They were made to go 30 days living separate lives in the same house with no sexual activity with others or each other .
They come close to breaking that rule and had to start over and before the 30 days was up
they eventually gave in and connected sexually again .
At the end of the 30 days at the final therapy session Arizona realized she could n't live without Callie ; however Callie did n't feel the same and stated she felt suffocated and eventually walked out of therapy , ending their marriage .
Callie then goes on to date Penny , who was the resident in charge of Derek Shepard 's case .
She comes to a dinner party hosted by Meredith , who recognizes her .
It is then discovered that Penny is going to be working at Grey Sloan Memorial .
When everyone , including Callie , finds out who Penny actually is , they protest and try to get her off of the Grey Sloan Memorial residency line .
She manages to stay on the line despite all the others ' pleads and wishes .
After Callie discloses her desire to move to New York with Penny and take her and Arizona 's daughter , Sofia , with her , Arizona takes Callie to court for sole parental custody .
Callie loses custody of her daughter to Arizona and Penny moves to New York .
After Arizona decides that both Sofia 's moms deserve to be happy , Arizona presents Callie with plane tickets and offers a custody agreement that keeps Sofia in Seattle for the summer and then sharing her every other school year and Christmas .
Callie is referenced occasionally by Arizona and Sofia after her departure from the show .
At the conclusion of season 14 , Arizona departs the show to move to New York and it is implied that the two will ultimately reconcile after Callie and Penny are mentioned to have broken up .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
Ramirez was seen by ABC executives , in her Broadway performance of Spamalot , which garnered their attention .
Due to their admiration , the network offered Ramirez a role on any ABC television series , of her choice , and she chose Grey 's Anatomy .
Ramirez further explained that at her initial audition , the producers liked her , and had intentions to add her to the show , but did not know who to cast her as .
She also said she was in awe of how the executives said , " Pick a show , any show " , explaining that it is rare .
Shonda Rhimes said : " I was looking for a girlfriend for George , but it was in the infancy stages , so I had no idea what I was looking for . "
Rhimes built the character around Ramirez after she met her .
Ramirez 's character was initially given recurring status in the second season and received star billing in the third season , alongside fellow cast member Dane , who portrayed Mark Sloan .
Ramirez discusses maintaining relationships with co - stars :
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) characterized Torres as " driven " , " determined " , and " outgoing " , while also noting her weaknesses : " defensive " and " impulsive " .
Ramirez described her character as someone who " appears to be a certain way , but has some very complex issues going on behind the scenes .
She seems to be a very strong personality , someone who really believes in herself and has worked very hard to get where she is .
She 's very competitive but does have a sense of self , so she does n't need to win all the time . "
At Torres ' initial appearance on the show , she was disliked by fans , due to her getting in the way of O'Malley and Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) 's relationship .
When asked of this , Ramirez said : " You do run across a lot of people who are extremely invested in that story line .
Obviously , I 've heard some negative stuff .
" The end of the show 's fourth season saw Torres grow closer to cardiothoracic surgeon Erica Hahn , in a relationship referred to by the portmanteau " Eri - Cal " and later " Callica " by Michael Ausiello of Entertainment Weekly .
Rhimes stated that : " Callie and Erica have an undeniable chemistry , and watching the story unfold is something the writers are looking forward to .
I wanted to illuminate their relationship in the same way we do all relationships on the show — it will be funny , sweet , honest , and a little bit dirty . "
She explained that in developing the relationship between the two : " we wanted it to be real – not some stunt to get people talking .
We wanted to see what would happen if a woman suddenly had feelings for another woman .
" The two characters shared a kiss at the end of the season four finale , with which D. Williams of After Ellen noted : " Callie and Erica became the only regular lesbian / bisexual female characters currently on network television .
This is also the first time that two regular characters on a network show have begun a lesbian romance , as opposed to one becoming involved with a new lesbian character introduced expressly for that relationship . "
Before continuing with the storyline , the show 's producers consulted with the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation to ensure they maintained realism throughout .
Trish Doolan , star of April 's Shower was invited to consult in the workshop sessions which took place , and surmised that ; " They were really wanting to be truthful to the two characters they 're focusing on in the woman - woman relationship " , with Nikki Weiss , who also consulted , adding : " they did n't want to stereotype anything either , and write from a place where they did n't understand it .
[ ... ] I do n't think they did it as a stunt to get people back to watching after the strike .
I really think that they wanted to develop these two characters , and that you could see a closeness with them way before they ever decided any kind of — I think they just have a chemistry together , as actresses , too .
You could tell that in the room .
They definitely have a chemistry . "
In the show 's fifth season , Torres embarked on a relationship with Arizona Robbins ( Capshaw ) .
Fans refer to the relationship between the two by the portmanteau " Calzona " ( for Callie + Arizona ) .
Rhimes praised the chemistry between Arizona and Callie in contrast , comparing it to that between the show 's primary couple Grey and Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , and stating : " They have that little thing that makes you want to watch them . "
In " An Honest Mistake " , Torres was initially rejected by Robbins , with Robbins citing Torres ' " inexperience " as a factor .
Series writer Peter Nowalk offered the insight :
The couple ultimately decided to begin a relationship , however , the two experience difficulties , but eventually reunite .
Rhimes commented on their reconciliation :
" I love [ Callie ] with Arizona .
[ ... ] I like that they make me feel hopeful about love .
" Rhimes has mentioned of their relationship in the sixth season : " I would like to see Callie happily in a long - term relationship .
We have so much to explore with them , because we barely know anything about [ Arizona ] . "
Callie and Arizona have a five - year relationship , ultimately marrying in the seventh season and divorcing in the eleventh season .
Callie starts a new relationship with Penny Blake and leaves to go to New York with her in the twelfth - season finale .
Shonda Rhimes spoke on Ramirez 's abrupt departure , saying , " This one was different because it was n't a big planned thing .
I had a different plan going and when Sara came in and said , ' I really need to take this break , ' I was lucky that we 'd shot the end of the season with her going to New York . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Maureen Ryan from the Chicago Tribune was critical about the character 's initial development .
Reviewing the third season 's premiere , she wrote the writers should give up on Callie explaining they have made her " far too obviously the " weird girl , " but there 's nothing underneath her brusque persona . "
Her marriage to O'Malley was well received ; Staci Krause of IGN wrote : " Their relationship has been a roller coaster and it was nice to see this turn of events , as she really is a perfect contrast to George . "
Discussing the character in terms of her relationship with Hahn , Williams was largely positive , assessing that : " The story line offered both the drama Grey 's is known for and a truthfulness network television has rarely achieved when it comes to lesbian relationships .
"
Trish Doolan and Nikki Weiss , invited by GLAAD to consult with Grey 's Anatomy producers on the storyline , praised the effort put into researching the issue by the writers and actors involved , though were more negative on the scene which saw Hahn kiss Callie in an elevator in front of Mark Sloan .
Weiss commented : " I just felt like , if they really cared about each other , I do n't think they would do that as a stunt .
That seemed a little , I do n't know , forced .
[ ... ] [ It ] was more like a conquest , like he could have [ Hahn ] too or something . "
LGBT website AfterEllen.com agreed with this view , criticizing the way the scene was edited so as to keep cutting to Sloan 's point of view , as though " privileging the male gaze . "
AfterEllen.com included Torres in their list of the Top 50 Lesbian and Bisexual Characters , ranking her at No . 6 and in their Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters .
The character was also listed in Wetpaint 's " 10 Hottest TV Doctors on TV " .
Commenting on Hahn 's abrupt departure from the show , Dorothy Snarker , writing for AfterEllen.com , observed of Torres and Robbins ' relationship :
" I [ ... ] ca n't help but be wary of how the Grey 's writers will handle this relationship .
Jessica has proven lovely and likable in her brief screen time so far .
But it 's not how the romance starts , but what happens next that really matters .
" Speaking of the musical episode , Nicole Golden of TV Fanatic called Ramirez 's rendition of " Chasing Cars " " amazing " and referred to her performance in Kate Havnevik 's " Grace " as " beautiful " .
Margaret Lyons of New York Magazine was happy with the evolution of Bailey and Torres ' friendship in the first half of the ninth season , calling it " the one bright spot " : "
They joke , they tease each other , they offer sage love advice to one another , now that they 're both on their second marriages .
" Ramirez was nominated for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Television Series at the Alma Awards , in 2007 and 2008 .
Also in 2007 , at the 13th Screen Actors Guild Awards , Ramirez and the cast of Grey 's Anatomy , were the recipients of the Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series .
She and the cast were nominated for the same award , in 2008 .
In 2011 , at the 42nd NAACP Image Awards , Ramirez was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series .
She was ranked at no . 7 in AfterEllen.com 's list of " Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters " REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Callie Torres at ABC.com