GIVE A BOY A GUN Give a Boy
a Gun is an epistolary novel for young adults by Todd Strasser , first published in 2000 .
The novel describes the events and social circumstances that lead up to , and form the aftermath of , a fictional school shooting .
The story is presented in the form of dickents of transcribed post - incident interviews with students , parents , teachers , and community members , compiled by Denise Shipley , a journalism student who is the stepsister of one of the shooters .
The interviews provide a variety of viewpoints on the incident – some sympathetic , others hostile .
Interspersed through the book are footnotes providing statistical information about guns and gun violence .
The plot has some similarities to the real - life Columbine High School massacre of April 20 , 1999 , although Strasser began research on the book before the Columbine shooting .
The book was the first book relating to school shootings published after Columbine .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
Brendan Lawlor and Gary Searle are students at Middletown High School .
Gary has lived in town since second grade , while Brendan is a new arrival .
The two quickly become friends .
They are subjected to verbal and physical bullying by football players at Middletown , which teachers and parents fail to notice , downplay , or outright ignore .
As time passes , both boys become darker and angrier , experimenting with alcohol and drugs , becoming obsessive about violent video games , and withdrawing from most social activities .
Eventually the boys begin to obsess over the possibility of acting on their violent impulses .
Gary experiments with developing a powerful homemade bomb .
Gary and Brendan steal semi - automatic guns from a neighbour .
Meanwhile , students are excited about an upcoming dance to be held in the school 's gym .
On the night of the dance , Brendan leaves a cryptic message for his friend Emily , warning her not to attend because there will be trouble .
Masked , Brendan and Gary enter the gym just after the dance begins .
They shoot out the lights before restraining the attendees with cable ties .
Gary booby - traps the doors with bombs
so they will explode if anyone tries to open them .
The pair approach the football team 's quarterback , Sam , who has been one of their main tormentors .
After some debate , they decide to shoot out his kneecaps so he will be unable to play football ever again .
Gary and Brendan fire their guns randomly around the gym , scaring students and injuring others .
Another football player , Dustin , manages to get free and unties some others .
Gary commits suicide while Brendan is beaten into a coma by the football players .
Brendan suffers irreversible brain damage from the beating and those responsible are arrested and put on trial for attempted murder .
The book ends with Denise Shipley , Gary 's stepsister , wondering if Gary knew if there were other options besides violence .
She swears she will always treat others with respect and teach others to do the same .
She also shares her belief that semi - automatic weapons should be outlawed and handguns should be only in the hands of law enforcement .
CHARACTERS
* Gary Searle – one of the shooters , highly intelligent for his age , screen - name " Dayzd " * Brendan Lawlor – the other shooter , and leader , screen - name " Terminx " * Ryan Clancy – a friend of both Gary 's and Brendan 's , screen - name " Rebooto " * Allison Findley –
Gary 's on - and - off girlfriend and Brendan 's friend , screen - name
" Blkchokr " * Cynthia Searle – Gary 's mother * Emily Kirsch – a former friend of Brendan 's * Brett Betzig – a friend of Brendan 's from Springfield
* Julie Shore – a friend of Brendan 's from Springfield
* Beth Bender
– Middletown High School counselor
* Paul Burns – a football player at Middletown High School
* Sam Flach – a football player at Middletown High School
* Deidre Bunson – a " popular " girl at Middletown High School
*
Ruth Hollington – Gary 's fourth - grade teacher at Middletown Elementary School
* Steve McEvoy – Gary 's sixth - grade teacher at Middletown Middle School
* Katherine Sullivan –
Brendan 's sixth - grade teacher at Springfield Middle School
* Kit Conner – a neighbor of the Lawlors ' in Springfield * Dick Flanagan –
Brendan 's ninth - grade English teacher at Middletown High School
* F. Douglas Ellin – a biology teacher at Middletown High School
* Allen Curry – principal of Middletown High School
* Jack Phillips – a neighbor of Brendan 's * Chelsea Baker – a new girl
* Dustin Williams – a neighbor of Brendan 's and football player REFERENCES