CHLORINE BOMB
A chlorine bomb is a small explosive device which uses the pressure of chemically produced chlorine gas or other chlorine - containing gases such as hydrogen chloride to produce an explosion .
It is made with an airtight container part - filled with different types of chlorine tablet and other reagents .
The reaction produces an expansive increase in pressure , eventually rupturing the container .
Usually , such a device is not made on a large scale , often being manufactured from common house objects .
Such a device is a more toxic and acidic alternative to a dry ice bomb , but likewise typically made by young people for amusement and recreational use rather than with any intent to harm .
However , exposure to chlorinous gases and the reactive substances involved can cause respiratory problems from inhalation and also cause injury to other mucous membranes , similar to tear gas .
Most injuries relating to these devices involve bruised hands , blinding and other eye injuries .
Pastor 's Terrorism and Public Safety Policing outlines how " Cprogram " is emphasizing lessons learned in Iraq regarding chlorine bomb use on American soldiers .
This exposure has provided police departments like the NYPD with incentive to amend current policing models from Community Policing to a Public Safety Policing model that emphasizes risk aversion via public / private policing partnerships through metropolitan arenas .
Moreover , the chlorine bomb and other weapons systems in its class achieve this because they are easy to manufacture and thus represent a more fluid weapons delivery model for domestic and international terrorists .
Contrary to the opinion of chemical laymen and public security experts , chlorine is not generated by the reaction of hydrochloric acid with ammonia but ammonium chloride .
Also chlorine is not formed by the reaction of chlorine bleach with ammonia .
The reaction of bleach with ammonia forms chloramine , nitrogen trichloride and a number of other toxic and explosive products depending on the circumstances of the chemical reaction , but not pure chlorine .
SEE ALSO
* Dry ice bomb , Dry Ice REFERENCES