ELLEN HARVELLE Ellen Harvelle is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's Supernatural portrayed by Samantha Ferris .
Introduced in the second season in order to explore a mother - daughter relationship in the hunting world , the " gun - toting , beer - slinging " Ellen brought a " maternal energy " to the male - dominated series .
The mother of Jo Harvelle and the proprietor of Harvelle 's Roadhouse — a bar frequented by hunters of supernatural creatures — Ellen provides advice and assistance to Sam and Dean Winchester throughout the second season .
Although the character 's appearances in the third season were dropped due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike and failed negotiations , she returns in the fifth and sixth seasons .
Critical reception to the character has been positive , with many critics happy to see her return .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
An old friend of John Winchester , Ellen Harvelle is the wife of hunter William Anthony Harvelle and the mother of Jo Harvelle .
She runs Harvelle 's Roadhouse , a saloon and pub frequented by hunters of supernatural creatures .
When Sam and Dean Winchester arrive there in the second season episode
" Everybody Loves a Clown " , a wary Ellen holds them at gunpoint until she learns that they are John 's sons .
She gives them information regarding a dangerous hunter named Gordon Walker in " Bloodlust " , while Sam and Dean later explain to her in " Simon Said " about the demon Azazel 's planned war against humanity .
Her relationship with the brothers is strained in the episode " No Exit " , where she reveals that she believes her husband 's death was the result of a mistake made by John Winchester while they were working together on a hunt .
However , she admits to Sam in " Hunted " that her husband 's death was not John 's fault and that she had forgiven him a long time ago .
She also does not blame the brothers for Jo 's decision to go off hunting by herself .
The Roadhouse is destroyed by demons in " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part One " , and her whereabouts are unknown throughout the episode .
It is revealed in " Part Two " that she had left the Roadhouse to run a few errands .
She , the Winchesters , and fellow hunter Bobby Singer track Azazel 's activities to a cemetery surrounded by a giant devil 's trap made of railroad tracks .
Unable to step inside the giant symbol without becoming trapped and powerless , Azazel forces the human Jake Talley to do his bidding .
The hunters are unable to stop Jake from opening a gateway to Hell in a mausoleum there , and the devil 's trap is broken as hundreds of demons are released into the world .
As the brothers then kill Azazel , Ellen and Bobby close the gateway .
In the fifth season episode " Good God , Y'all ! " , Ellen reappears with Jo to help fellow hunter Rufus kill demons that have laid siege to a small town .
By the time the Winchesters arrive , it appears that Jo , Rufus , and some other townspeople have become demonically possessed .
However , Ellen and Dean eventually realize that War , one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse , is making the townspeople see each other as demons .
Sam and Dean break War 's spell just as Ellen is about to be killed by one of the town 's residents .
In " Abandon All Hope ... " , Ellen and Jo once again team up with the brothers to find Lucifer and kill him .
Upon their arrival in a seemingly abandoned small town , however , they are attacked by the demon Meg and a pack of hellhounds .
Jo is severely mauled , forcing them to barricade themselves inside a hardware store .
Knowing that her wounds are fatal and that Lucifer must be stopped , Jo convinces them to build a bomb and to use her as bait for a trap .
Ellen stays behind and opens the front doors while the Winchesters escape onto the roof .
After Jo dies in her arms , Ellen blows up the building , killing the hellhounds and herself in the process .
When the angel Balthazar changes history in the sixth season episode " My Heart Will Go On " so that the Titanic never sank , Ellen is restored to life and is married to Bobby .
However , the original timeline is eventually restored .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Series creator Eric Kripke felt that Ellen brought a " maternal energy " to the series , and described the character as " a lioness , which is tough and badass and ' You touch my children , I will kill you . '
"
Likewise , actress Samantha Ferris described her as a " gun - toting , beer - slinging , bar - owning broad " with a " very maternal core " .
Ferris also feels that , despite Ellen having gone through a lot in her life , she is cautious rather than jaded , and is " very protective of the things she has in her life " , especially her daughter Jo and the Winchesters .
Thus , her main concern is Jo 's safety , which prompts her to forbid her daughter from going on hunts .
When she realizes that she can no longer stop Jo from doing what she wants , Ellen becomes her hunting partner , deciding it is the best way to look after her .
By the time of Ellen 's final appearance , actress Alona Tal came to view their characters more as equals rather than mother and daughter .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Due to the father - son dynamics of the hunting world depicted in the series ' first season with the Winchesters , the writers decided to explore a mother - daughter relationship , resulting in the introduction of Ellen and her daughter Jo .
The name originated from the writers ' decision to base her on the " tough yet emotionally - vulnerable " characters portrayed by actress Ellen Barkin .
Ellen was meant to have a " true and honest platonic friendship " with John Winchester , and her backstory of her husband having been killed due to John 's mistake was added to the storyline to explain why John never mentioned the Roadhouse to his sons .
Ferris auditioned for the role , and feels that she was exactly what they had been looking for .
She commented , " I have a certain kind of personality that works specifically with a role , and Ellen is just me on television .
They were looking for a tough , strong , yet a little maternal actor , and I struck a chord .
"
Series creator Eric Kripke agrees , feeling that Ferris " really brought the character to life , " being " nuanced and complex and tough , yet beautiful and feminine . "
The writers intended for the character to make only two guest appearances in the third season , which left Ferris " a bit surprised and [ disappointed ] " at Ellen 's lack of involvement .
However , her initial return was scrapped due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike , and the actress declined a guest appearance in the finale because the lackluster offer " could cost [ her ] money and work .
" The opportunity to return for the fifth season surprised her due to the large time span since her previous appearance .
Though she expected her character to eventually die , a devastated Ferris was surprised at how quickly it occurred .
However , after speaking to director Phil Sgriccia — he told her that Ellen was the " perfect fodder " for the " kick " that the series needed , and would " go out in a blaze of glory"—the actress came to realize that the character 's death made sense .
Ellen 's last words to Dean—"Kick it in the ass . "—was
an improvised homage to the late Supernatural executive producer and director Kim Manners , who had died the year before and would often recite the phrase before filming a scene .
Wanting to " have a surprise in [ the new reality ] " of the sixth season episode
" My Heart Will Go On , " the writers considered bringing back various deceased characters .
Executive Producer Robert Singer explained that they ultimately decided upon Ellen because " she 's a fan favorite " and " in a perfect world , she probably would be a good mate for Bobby . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critical reception to Ellen has been positive .
In their initial appearance , Bryan Enk of UGO felt that the new hunters of the Roadhouse had potential to be the Supernatural equivalent of Buffy the Vampire Slayers 's Scooby Gang , comparing Ellen to Buffy 's Giles , as she is " the elder who can help guide the boys from a home base and serve as an emotional link to their father , a parental figure without all the melodramatic baggage of the actual father from the first season . "
Maureen Ryan of Chicago Tribune was " annoyed " at the destruction of the Roadhouse in the second season finale , as she " really loved Ellen . "
Diana Steenbergen of IGN also favored Ellen from the beginning , believing her to be " a great addition to the show . "
She deemed Ellen " tough and direct , and also female , something the boys do n't have a lot of in their lives right now . "
Steenbergen was happy to see the character return in the fifth season , noting that the show has been missing " smart , tough women who are not evil in general . "
Tina Charles of TV Guide also welcomed the character back , and enjoyed how Ellen 's initial reaction to Dean Winchester in " Good God , Y'all!"—hugging and then slapping him — was " very much in character .
" Regarding the character 's death , Charles noted that " when [ Ellen ] went down in ' Abandon All Hope [ ... ] ' like [ she ] did , I felt it .
[ Her death ] meant something . "
Though also happy to see Ellen reappear in the fifth season , Ryan was disappointed at the lack of screentime the character received in " Good God , Y'All ! "
Commenting on the character 's farewells in the fifth season , Ryan noted that Ferris " brought [ her ] A - game to ' Abandon All Hope … ' "
She added that " [ Ferris fits ] perfectly into the ' Supernatural ' world because [ she understands ] that on this show , restraint is everything .
It 's not necessarily just about what the characters say or do , it 's about what they do n't say — what they ca n't find the words for . "
Having missed Ellen 's " maternal influence , " Charles was happy to see her return in the sixth season episode
" My Heart Will Go On , " while Ryan called Ellen 's scenes with Bobby in the episode " probably the strongest part of the show . "
Ellen 's reappearance gladdened Steenbergen , who called the character a " force to be reckoned with on the show " and added that " she is still missed . "
In a poll conducted by SFX for the Top 200 Sexiest Characters In Sci - Fi , Ellen was voted the 77th sexiest female character in fantasy and science fiction film and television .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY FOOTNOTES