CONTINUOUS POSITIVE AIRWAY PRESSURE
Continuous positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) is a form of positive airway pressure ventilator , which applies mild air pressure on a continuous basis to keep the airways continuously open in people who are not able to breathe spontaneously on their own .
It is an alternative to positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) .
Both modalities stent the lungs ' alveoli open and thus recruit more of the lung 's surface area for ventilation , but , while PEEP refers to devices that impose positive pressure only at the end of the exhalation , CPAP devices apply continuous positive airway pressure throughout the breathing cycle .
Thus , the ventilator itself does not cycle during CPAP , no additional pressure above the level of CPAP is provided , and patients must initiate all of their breaths .
CPAP typically is used for people who have breathing problems , such as sleep apnea .
CPAP also may be used to treat preterm infants whose lungs have not yet fully developed .
For example , physicians may use CPAP in infants with respiratory distress syndrome .
It is associated with a decrease in the incidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia .
In some preterm infants whose lungs have not fully developed , CPAP improves survival and decreases the need for steroid treatment for their lungs .
In resource - limited settings where CPAP improves respiratory rate and survival in children with primary pulmonary disease , researchers have found that nurses can initiate and manage care with once or twice daily physician rounds .
CPAP therapy utilizes machines specifically designed to deliver a constant flow of pressure .
Some CPAP machines have other features as well , such as heated humidifiers .
CPAP is the most effective treatment for obstructive sleep apnea , in which the mild pressure from the CPAP prevents the airway from collapsing or becoming blocked .
Although delivery of CPAP through a nasal mask is the most common modality of treatment , other systems exist for interfacing with adults and children .
Nasal CPAP is frequently used in infants , though its use is controversial .
Studies have shown nasal CPAP reduces ventilator time but an increased occurrence of pneumothorax was also prevalent .
Oral masks and naso - oral masks are often used when nasal congestion or obstruction is an issue .
Devices that combine nasal pressure with maxillary advancement devices ( MAD ) also exist .
COMPLICATIONS
* Swallowing of air into the stomach may occur .
SETTINGS AND MEASUREMENTS
* CPAP * PEEP * Ramp * FIO2 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How to Stop Snoring , By Catherine Winters , December 25 , 2016
* Find the Best CPAP Machine Guide reviews - ConsumerAffairs.com