IZZIE STEVENS Isobel " Izzie " Katherine Stevens , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States .
The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and was portrayed by actress Katherine Heigl from 2005 to 2010 .
Introduced as a surgical intern at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , Izzie worked her way up to resident level , while her relationships with her colleagues Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , George O'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) formed a focal point of the series .
Heigl garnered critical acclaim for her performance as Izzie and received numerous awards and nominations for her role , winning the " Outstanding Supporting Actress In A Drama Series " at the 2007 Emmy Awards .
She was critical of the character 's development during the show 's fourth season , particularly her romance with George .
She declined to put herself forward for the 2008 Emmy Awards , citing insufficient material in the role .
After speculation that Izzie would be killed off in the fifth season , the character was diagnosed with Stage 4 metastatic melanoma .
She married Alex in the series ' one - hundredth episode , and afterwards , her tumor was successfully removed .
Izzie made her final appearance in the sixth season , leaving Seattle after Alex refused to resume their marriage .
Heigl requested to be released from her contract 18 months early , in order to spend more time with her family .
In January 2012 , Heigl reported that she would like to return to Grey 's Anatomy to give closure to her character , however , Rhimes confirmed that there were no plans to have the character return at that time and has since stated that she has no plans to ever re - approach Izzie 's storyline again .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Izzie appears in the first episode of Grey 's Anatomy , meeting fellow interns Meredith Grey , Cristina Yang , Alex Karev , and George O'Malley .
She and George move in with Meredith and become best friends .
Izzie 's boyfriend , hockey player Hank ( Jonathan Scarfe ) , struggles to accept her new role as a surgeon , and the two break up .
Izzie is hurt when Alex exposes her past as a lingerie model .
However , the two later go on to begin a friendship and then a romance .
Alex experiences sexual dysfunction with Izzie and cheats on her with nurse Olivia Harper ( Sarah Utterback ) .
When Izzie finds out , she breaks up with him , though they briefly reunite following a bomb incident at the hospital .
Izzie reveals while treating a pregnant teenager that she had a daughter at the age of 16 and gave her up for adoption .
Izzie falls in love with cardiothoracic patient Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) , and the two become engaged .
When Denny 's condition deteriorates , Izzie deliberately worsens his health further by cutting his LVAD wire to move him up the donor register .
Although Denny receives a new heart , he has a stroke hours later and dies .
Izzie is the sole beneficiary of Denny 's will , inheriting $ 8.7 million .
She uses the money to open a free clinic at the hospital : the Denny Duquette Memorial Clinic .
Izzie disapproves of George 's relationship and marriage to orthopedic resident Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) .
She and George sleep together , and attempt to keep their liaison a secret .
George and resident Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) are the only people aware that Izzie gave birth to a daughter at the age of sixteen ; ultimately the child was given up for adoption .
He supports Izzie when her daughter Hannah ( Liv Hutchings ) , diagnosed with leukemia , arrives at Seattle Grace Hospital in need of a bone marrow transplant from Izzie .
Izzie 's feelings for George grow , and she reveals that she has fallen in love with him .
When Callie discovers George has been unfaithful , the two separate , and George and Izzie embark on a short - lived relationship , only to discover there is no real chemistry between them .
Izzie supports Alex when he discovers his new girlfriend has psychiatric problems , and convinces him to have her committed .
She is also handed primary responsibility for the clinic , as Bailey cuts back on her responsibilities .
Izzie and Alex go on to rekindle their relationship , though Izzie is concerned when she begins hallucinating Denny .
She discovers she has metastatic melanoma ( Stage IV ) which has spread to her liver , skin , and brain , causing the hallucinations .
Her survival chances are estimated at only 5 % .
She is admitted to Seattle Grace as a patient , and Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) successfully removes a tumor from her brain .
Izzie spends her time in the hospital planning Meredith and Derek 's wedding , but when her condition worsens and Derek discovers a second brain tumor , they give the ceremony to Izzie and Alex , who marry in front of all their friends .
The procedure to remove the second tumor from Izzie 's brain causes her to lose her short - term memory , and although she soon regains it , she flatlines moments later .
The fifth season ends with her friends ignoring her DNR order and attempting to resuscitate her , transposed with images of Izzie in an elevator encountering George , who has been in an accident and is also currently flatlining .
Though George dies , Izzie is resuscitated and recovers enough to return to work .
Izzie makes a treatment error that endangers the life of a patient , and is fired from the hospital 's surgical program .
Believing Alex is partially to blame , she writes him a Dear John letter and leaves .
Izzie later learns that Alex was not responsible for her lost job , and returns to make amends with him , but Meredith informs her that Alex is moving on .
Izzie informs Alex that she no longer has cancer .
Although he is pleased , Alex officially breaks up with Izzie , telling her that he loves her but deserves better .
She leaves Seattle to start fresh .
Several episodes later , Alex informs Meredith that Izzie sent divorce papers , which he signs in the episode
" How Insensitive " .
In the sixth - season finale , Alex is shot and asks for Izzie .
Imagining that Meredith 's half - sister Lexie ( Chyler Leigh ) is Izzie , he apologizes and asks her never to leave him again .
In the 300th episode , Alex reveals he never found out what happened to Izzie , but envisions a perfect , happy life for her , always smiling , now that he has moved on .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
Izzie was created by Grey 's Anatomy producer Shonda Rhimes , with actress Katherine Heigl cast in the role .
Heigl originally wanted to play Izzie as a brunette , but was requested to retain her natural blond for the part .
Heigl 's comprehension of medical procedures and terminology is slight ; the actress explained that while she has an admiration for doctors , she is not as fascinated by medicine as other cast members .
When Kate Walsh 's character Addison Montgomery left Grey 's Anatomy to launch the spin - off show Private Practice , Heigl disclosed that she had hoped for a spin - off for Izzie .
Heigl declined to put her name forward for consideration at the 2008 Emmy Awards , claiming that she had been given insufficient material on the series to warrant a nomination .
Following Heigl 's statement , speculation arose that her character would suffer a brain tumor and be killed off Grey 's Anatomy , substantiated by the announcement Jeffrey Dean Morgan would return to the series as Denny , who died at the end of season two .
ABC 's entertainment president Steve McPherson denied the rumor , stating : " There is an unbelievable storyline for her this year , which is really central to everything that 's going to go on this season " .
Speculation resumed , however , when Dean Morgan returned to the show for a second time in its fifth season .
Cast member James Pickens ,
Jr. announced that both Heigl and T.R. Knight were set to depart from the show , but he later retracted his comment .
During the course of the fifth season , Izzie was diagnosed with metastatic melanoma ( Stage IV ) which spread to her liver , skin and brain .
Following the show 's one - hundredth episode wrap party , Heigl revealed she did not know if Izzie would survive , as no one on the production team would disclose her character 's fate to her .
It was confirmed in June 2009 that Heigl would return as Izzie for the show 's sixth season .
Heigl 's appearances in the season were sporadic , seeing Izzie depart and return twice .
Although she was scheduled to appear in the final five episodes of the season , Heigl requested that she be released from her contract 18 months early , and made her final appearance on January 21 , 2010 .
Heigl explained that she wanted to spend more time with her family , and did not think it would be respectful to Grey 's Anatomy viewers to have Izzie return and depart yet again .
Michael Ausiello spoke further on Katherine Heigl 's perspective on Izzie 's departure .
He said , " [ Katherine ] thinks her Jan. 21 farewell - while not originally intended to be her last episode - oddly works as a bookend to Izzie 's story . "
Even though there 's a part of me that would like to go back and do the quick Izzie farewell , " she says , " I also think that my last scene - where Meredith says to Izzie , ' Please do n't go , This is your home , ' and Izzie 's response was , ' No it 's not , not anymore it 's just a place
I Worked
and I can do that
anywhere ' - was kind of tragic and appropriate all at the same time .
When I was playing the scene I was really trying to convey that , for Izzie , that was a lie that she had to tell herself to have the courage to have to move on . "
In August 2010 , Rhimes stated that she did not feel Izzie 's character arc — specifically her relationship with Alex — had fully concluded , and hoped to give proper closure to their relationship in the seventh season .
She later confirmed that she had intended to kill off Izzie off - screen , but opted against this a day later as she felt that it would destroy Alex , rather than give him closure .
Instead , she concluded : " I 'm open to seeing Izzie again .
So if she [ Katherine ] were to come back , we would be thrilled to [ wrap up her story ] .
But if she does n't , we 'll just move on . "
Heigl also went on to say in October 2010 that the character returning to show looks bleak because , " that chapter is closed , and it 's sad .
And it 's hard . "
She also felt that Izzie coming back to the show would , " just feel manipulative . "
However , in January 2012 , Heigl stated in an interview that she has asked the producers if she could return to the show to give closure to Izzie 's storyline : " I 've told them I want to [ return ] , " she said .
" I really , really , really want to see where [ Izzie ] is .
I just want to know what happened to her and where she went and what she 's doing now .
My idea is that she actually like figures it out , and finds some success and does really well in a different hospital .
She was always floundering you know , and so she was always one step behind the eight ball
and I want to see that girl take some power back .
" She later went on to say that she regrets leaving the show , " Oh yeah , sometimes , yeah .
You miss it .
I miss my friends .
It was a great work environment ... and it becomes a family .
I spent six years together with these people every day ...
you grow up together , in a way , " and again commented on Izzie possibly returning to the show , " I always felt that if they wanted me to come back and sort of wrap up that storyline ...
I want them to know that I 'm down with it if they want me to , but I completely understand if it does n't necessarily work ...
They 've got a lot of story lines going on there .
"
But in March 2012 , Shonda Rhimes said that there are no plans at the moment for the character to return , " I think it was really nice to hear her appreciating the show .
At the same time we are on a track we have been planning .
The idea of changing that track is not something we are interested in right now .
" Three years later , Rhimes said she has completely moved on from the idea of Izzie coming back , " I 'm done with that story .
I 've turned that idea over in my mind a thousand times and thought about how it would go .
And I do n't think so . "
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Heigl believes that the Grey 's Anatomy writers incorporate much of the actors ' personalities into their roles , and that Izzie is a " super moral " version of herself .
Episode " Bring the Pain " , which aired as the fifth episode of the second season , was originally intended to be the final episode of the first season .
Rhimes explained that Izzie 's character in this episode came " full circle " from her role in the pilot : " Izzie , so vulnerable and underestimated when we first meet her , is the girl who removes her heart from her sleeve in " Bring the Pain " .
" Discussing Izzie 's personality in a 2006 Cosmopolitan interview , Heigl assessed that she is " immensely kind " and patient .
When Denny died in the season two episode " Losing My Religion " , Rhimes discussed the impact it had on Izzie , noting that Izzie is forced to abandon her idealism , which in turn leads to her letting go of medicine .
In the aftermath of Denny 's death , Heigl came to believe that Izzie was not cut out to be a doctor .
Executive producer Betsy Beers explained , however , that Denny 's death served to make Izzie more mature , and Heigl affirmed that " At the beginning of the [ third ] season they were trying to show how lost Izzie was .
She lost her optimism .
She realizes now that life is difficult , but she still tries very hard to see the best in people . "
In order to demonstrate Izzie 's dislike of George 's love - interest Callie , Rhimes penned a scene which she deemed one of her favorite moments on the show , in which Callie urinates in front of a stunned Izzie and Meredith .
Rhimes assessed that : " I love that Mer and Izzie respond with all the trauma of having viewed a car crash [ ... ]
the point is Callie pees and Izzie tortures her a tiny bit about the hand washing and that made me overjoyed because that 's the kind of thing people do . "
Discussing Izzie 's relationship with Alex in a 2006 Cosmopolitan interview , Heigl assessed that " Even when Alex was a complete dirtbag to her [ Izzie ] , she forgave him and gave him another chance .
And he really screwed her over .
[ ... ] To go for a guy like that is to say I want to be damaged . ' " Writer Stacy McKee deemed Izzie 's moving on from Alex to patient Denny Duquette " karma " , as Alex previously treated Izzie badly , yet as he begins to realize his true feelings , he is forced to watch her embark on a romance with " the undeniably handsome - and totally charming " Denny .
Series writer Blythe Robe commented on Izzie and Denny : " I love the way Izzie lights up when she 's around him .
I love their relationship because it 's so pure and honest and completely game free . "
Writer Elizabeth Klaviter noted at this time the way Izzie " seems to be sacrificing her reputation because of her feelings for Denny . "
When Izzie deliberately worsened Denny 's condition to move him up the transplant list , series writer Mark Wilding questioned the morality of the actions , asking : " is Izzie bad for doing it ?
Is she tremendously irresponsible ?
She cut the LVAD wire for love so does that make her action understandable ? "
Rhimes discussed costuming choices in the scene which saw the interns gather around Denny 's deathbed , explaining : " Meredith and George and Cristina and Callie and Alex are all dressed , not for a prom , but for a funeral .
Everyone in dark colors , everyone dressed somberly .
As if they were in mourning .
Only Izzie is in happy pink .
Only Izzie looks like she did n't know this was coming . "
Following Denny 's death , Heigl approached Rhimes to ask when her character would next have a romantic liaison .
Rhimes explained that " Izzie does n't sleep around " .
Heigl expressed a desire for Izzie to reunite with Alex , explaining : " I believe on some level , there 's a connection between Izzie and Alex .
He can do honorable things even though he 's cutting and sarcastic .
I would like to ultimately see them together , if not this season , then next . "
Yahoo !
Voices wrote that Stevens in the third season " has become more condescending and passive aggressive herself , more than anyone else .
" Heigl was critical of her character 's development in the show 's fourth season , particularly her affair with George , which she deemed " a ratings ploy " .
Heigl explained : " They really hurt somebody , and they did n't seem to be taking a lot of responsibility for it .
I have a really hard time with that kind of thing .
I 'm maybe a little too black and white about it .
I do n't really know Izzie very well right now .
She 's changed a lot . "
Attempting to rationalise Izzie 's actions , Heigl later assessed that : People who are so infallible , perfect and moral tend to be the first to slip and fall .
But I would love to see how she deals with the consequences of what she 's done , because what 's interesting is when people make decisions that shake their world , they suddenly have to go , '
Woo , I did n't know I was capable of this . '
I 'd like to see Izzie take some culpability .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Heigl was nominated for the " Best Supporting Actress in a TV Series " award at the 2007 and 2008 Golden Globe Awards for her role as Izzie .
She was named " Favorite Female TV Star " at the 34th People 's Choice Awards , and awarded " Outstanding Supporting Actress In A Drama Series " at the 2007 Emmy Awards .
Prior to the ceremony , considering Heigl 's chances of winning the Emmy , Variety 's Stuart Levine assessed of her performance : " Heigl has little difficulty reaching Izzie 's highest highs and lowest lows .
Showrunner Shonda Rhimes puts a lot of pressure on Heigl to carry many intense storylines , and she 's up to the challenge . "
Levine also noted , however : " There are times when Izzie becomes completely irrational during crisis situations , which may bother some . "
Fox News included Izzie in its list of " The Best TV Doctors For Surgeon General " .
The character was listed in Wetpaint 's " 10 Hottest Female Doctors on TV " and in BuzzFeed 's " 16 Hottest Doctors On Television " .
During the show 's third season , the New York Post Robert Rorke deemed Izzie to be " the heart and soul " of Grey 's Anatomy .
He deemed her the show 's heroine , and wrote that : " Izzie is a welcome , calming presence , despite the devastation she experienced when she failed to save her patient and fiance Denny Duquette .
[ ... ] Besides the formidable Dr. Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , Izzie seems to be the only adult intern at Seattle Grace ; the character has achieved a depth lacking in her fellow interns . "
Eyder Peralta of The Houston Chronicle was critical of Izzie 's ethics in cutting Denny 's LVAD wire , writing that she " should not be practising medicine " and stating : " That 's the reason I do n't watch Grey 's Anatomy , anymore , because the super hot blond chick can make an earth - shattering , fatal decision and she does n't get canned . "
The season four romance between Izzie and George proved unpopular with viewers , and resulted in a fan backlash among Alex and Izzie fans .
The return of Izzie 's deceased fiancé Denny and the resumption of their romance during the show 's fifth season also proved unpopular with fans , and was deemed " the world 's worst storyline " by Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times .
McNamara was also critical of the episode " Now or Never " , which saw Izzie flatline following neurosurgery , opining that Izzie ought to die .
The episode in which Izzie married
long - term love Alex received 15.3 million viewers , the largest television audience of the night .
Izzie 's cancer storyline received a mixed response from the medical community .
Otis Brawley , chief medical officer at the American Cancer Society , commented that Izzie 's treatment options were unrealistic .
Whereas in the show she was offered the drug interleukin-2 , in reality the drug is never recommended to patients when melanoma has spread to the brain , as it can cause bleeding and strokes .
Brawley explained that such patients would instead be offered radiosurgery .
Conversely however , Tim Turnham , executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation , praised Grey 's Anatomy for bringing about greater public awareness of melanoma , stating : " We welcome the national spotlight Grey 's Anatomy has created for melanoma and its efforts to encourage viewers to learn more about the importance of prevention , early detection and research . "
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General EXTERNAL LINKS