DESTINATION
MATERNITY Destination Maternity Corporation ( ) ( formerly Mothers Work , Inc. ) is the world 's largest designer and retailer of maternity apparel .
It is based in Moorestown , New Jersey .
As of September , 2017 , Destination Maternity operates over 1,000 retail locations in North America , including 512 stores , predominantly under the trade - names Motherhood Maternity ® , A Pea in the Pod ® , and Destination Maternity
® , and sells on the web through DestinationMaternity.com , Motherhood.com and APeainthePod.com
; Destination Maternity brands are offered at retailers such as Macy 's and Boscov 's .
BRANDS Section::::Brands .
Destination Maternity Corporation currently operates the following retail brands : * Motherhood Maternity , * A Pea in the Pod * Destination Maternity COLLECTIONS Section::::Collections .
In 2009 , Destination Maternity partnered with the National Football League to offer NFL football maternity t - shirts , sweatpants , and baby clothes at Motherhood Maternity stores .
In 2010 , a similar partnership was announced to offer MLB baseball maternity t - shirts and baby clothes .
In 2010 , Destination Maternity launched two maternity - wear collections from Heidi Klum .
Lavish by Heidi Klum for A Pea in the Pod features more high - end items , while Loved by Heidi Klum for Motherhood Maternity features affordable options .
In 2012 , the company launched a maternity clothing collection from Jessica Simpson , " available in 700 retail locations , including Motherhood Maternity , Destination Maternity , as well as Destination Maternity shop - in - shops within Macy 's . " .
Other recent collaborations include a collection from Nicole Richie in 2009 , a collection from Disney in 2010 and a collection for Rosie Pope in 2012 .
In 2015 , A Pea in the Pod collaborated with Rachel Zoe and worked with Molly Sims on their exclusive LED ( Luxe Essentials Denim ) Collection .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Motherhood - Affordable Maternity Clothes * a pea in the pod - Stylish & Designer Maternity Clothes * Destination Maternity - Represents both Pea & Motherhood Brands