LORD OF THE FLIES ( 1990 FILM )
Lord of the Flies is a 1990 American survival drama film directed by Harry Hook and starring Balthazar Getty , Chris Furrh , Danuel Pipoly and James Badge Dale .
It was produced by Lewis M. Allen and written by Jay Presson Allen under the pseudonym " Sarah Schiff " , based on the 1954 book Lord of the Flies , by William Golding .
It is the second film adaptation of the book , after Lord of the Flies ( 1963 ) .
The film differs in many ways from both its predecessor film and the novel .
Lord of the Flies centers on Ralph mainly , as the children try to initiate a society after crash - landing on an uncharted island , but things go awry .
The film was released on March 16 , 1990 by Columbia Pictures , with film rights now belonging to Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer .
Upon and since its release , the film has received mixed reviews , generally more negative than its 1963 counterpart .
Most critics praise the film 's scenery but center upon the film 's deviations from the novel as a central flaw .
However , the movie grossed $ 14 million and has acquired a cult following .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
An aircraft carrying 24 young American military school cadets returning home crash lands into the sea near a remote , uninhabited , jungle island in the Pacific Ocean .
The pilot of the plane Captain Benson ( Michael Greene ) , the only adult survivor , is seriously injured and delirious .
All of the survivors arrive on the island .
During the night , Simon , the most independent cadet , finds a river and notifies the other boys , which they all drink from and explore the island afterwards .
Meanwhile , on the beach , an overweight cadet nicknamed " Piggy " ( whose real name is never revealed during the story ) , a boy with glasses , finds a conch seashell and takes it to the grouped cadets , who adopt it to signal the right to speak and be heard by the group .
The senior cadet , and one of the elder boys , Cadet Colonel Ralph , organizes a meeting to discuss surviving their predicament .
Ralph and another of the older boys , Jack , emerge dominant , and an impromptu election is held to determine an official leader for the group .
Ralph is declared the winner .
They start a fire using Piggy 's glasses to try and alert any passing craft .
Things go smoothly for a while , but tensions soon begin to grow between Ralph and Jack .
One night , as they sleep , the delusional Captain Benson wanders away from the boys and into the jungle , eventually making his way to a cave deep inland .
Jack brings all of his hunters to hunt in the jungle , leaving no one watching the fire .
The fire goes out , preventing a passing helicopter from noticing them .
Ralph blames Jack for failing to keep it going .
During the ensuing fight , Jack , tired of listening to Ralph and Piggy , leaves and forms his own camp , taking many of the boys with him .
As more and more boys defect to Jack 's side , one of the younger boys , Larry , finds Captain Benson in the cave , mistakes him for a monster and stabs him , and then tells the other boys .
Jack and his second - in - command Roger ( Gary Rule ) then go to the cave 's entrance and mistake Captain Benson 's dying groans for the sounds of a monster .
One night , Jack and his savages steal a knife from Ralph so they can make more spears , but accidentally trample on Piggy 's glasses in the process , breaking one lens .
Expecting to be rescued , Ralph 's civilized leadership establishes a permanent signal - fire to alert passing ships of their presence on the island .
Not expecting or wanting to be rescued , Jack 's savage leadership adapts to circumstance ; he establishes his camp as spear - bearing hunters who provide meat for both camps .
They kill a wild pig and leave its head as an offering to the " monster " that they believe is in the cave .
Eventually , identical twins Sam and Eric ( Andrew Taft and Edward Taft ) , two of Ralph 's friends , leave him to join Jack 's tribe , leaving Ralph with only Piggy and Simon left .
Meanwhile , Simon finds the pig 's head on the stick .
He then uses a glow stick to explore the cave and discovers the corpse of Capt .
Benson .
Simon realizes Capt .
Benson was what the boys thought was the monster and runs to the beach in an attempt to alert the boys of his discovery , but his waving of the glow stick frightens the other boys , who mistake him for the monster and stab him to death with their spears .
The following morning , Ralph blames himself and Piggy for not stopping the hunters from killing Simon .
Meanwhile , Jack tells his gang that the " monster " can come in any different form .
After Piggy 's glasses are stolen by Jack 's savages that night so they could make fire ,
Piggy and Ralph travel to Jack 's camp at Castle Rock , attempting to call a meeting using the conch .
Piggy insists that everyone be sensible and work together , but Jack 's savages refuse to listen .
As Piggy speaks , Roger pushes a boulder off a cliff and kills Piggy .
Ralph swears revenge on Jack , and Jack takes it as a threat .
With his hunters , Jack drives Ralph away by throwing rocks at him .
Later that night , Ralph secretly returns to Castle Rock to visit Sam and Eric , who warn him that the hunters will chase after Ralph on Jack 's orders .
The following morning , Jack and his hunters begin setting the jungle on fire to force Ralph out of hiding and kill him .
Just barely dodging the spreading fire and Jack 's hunters , Ralph makes a desperate run to the sea .
He falls onto the beach , where he encounters a U.S. Marine Corps officer pilot who has just landed on the island with other Marines after having seen the fire that engulfed much of the island .
As the hunters watch in stunned silence , they reflect upon their savage behavior while Ralph breaks into tears .
CAST
* Balthazar Getty as Ralph : leader of the boys whom work on getting rescued and trying to maintain order * Chris Furrh as Jack : the leader of the hunters
* Danuel Pipoly as Piggy : an intelligent and overweight boy , the object of ridicule , and the most loyal boy to Ralph
* James Badge Dale as Simon : a rather reclusive boy ( credited as Badgett Dale )
* Andrew Taft as Sam :
identical twin
* Edward Taft as Eric :
identical twin * Gary Rule as Roger : the second - in - command to Jack * Michael Greene as Captain Benson * Bob Peck as U.S. Marine Corps Officer * Ethan Warwick as The Beastie PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The filming was done on location at Portland Parish in Jamaica , particularly at Snow Hill and Frenchman 's Cove , in the summer of 1988 .
Additional filming locations included Hamakua Coast ; Kaua'i ; Hana , Maui ( in Hawaii ) and the Los Angeles County Arboretum & Botanic Garden .
The child members cast were relatively inexperienced .
Balthazar Getty ( Ralph ) and James Badgett Dale ( Simon ) were the only child actors who continued with a moderately successful stage career , in parallel to James Aubrey ( the original Ralph ) .
SARA SCHIFF /
JAY PRESSON ALLEN
Section::::Sara Schiff /
Jay Presson Allen .
The screenplay is credited to Sara Schiff .
Schiff is the pseudonym of author Jay Presson Allen .
The screenplay was her last film work before her death in 2006 .
She was reportedly unsatisfied by the final product and had her name removed , hence the attribution to a pseudonym .
Presson - Allen was also producer Lewis M. Allen 's wife .
The trick in adapting , Allen said in a 1972 interview with The New York Times , " is not to throw out the baby with the bath water .
You can change all kinds of things , but do n't muck around with the essence " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released theatrically on March 16 , 1990 in the United States by Columbia Pictures .
It debuted at No.3 CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Lord of the Flies received mixed reviews from critics , providing mixed assessments of the performances of the various actors while praising its scenery .
As of April 2016 , the film has a rating of 63 % " Fresh " on the movie review site Rotten Tomatoes .
Most heavily criticized was the way in which the filmmakers departed from the novel .
Richard Alleva of Crisis Magazine criticized the portrayal of the first assembly on the island , a crucial moment in the book , as " anti - climactic " in the film .
He lamented the fact that the conversation that Simon imagines taking place between himself and the pig , or the " Lord of the Flies " , yet another of the book 's most pivotal moments , was in the movie reduced to only a few moments of Simon staring at the pig .
Alleva also criticized what he saw as misrepresentations of Ralph and Jack , believing that the movie downplayed Ralph 's imperfections as presented in the book and amplified those of Jack .
He said that " In this film , the good boys are too good ; the bad boys too quickly bad , and bad in the wrong way . "
Some have claimed that the novel in general is somewhat dated and unsuitable for a remake .
Roger Ebert remarked in his review that " events take place every day on our mean streets that are more horrifying than anything the little monsters do to one another on Golding 's island . "
PopMatters journalist J.C. Maçek III wrote " The lessons and allusions of the novel and first adaptation feel heavy - handed and far too obvious in this remake .
In short , while the 1963 film , in its black and white darkness , brings the viewer into the film with depth and shock , the 1990 movie is the experience of watching actors reciting lines and making a movie .
Barrie Maxwell of DVD Verdict commented that the color of the island creates a more superficial atmosphere than the stark black and white of the previous version .
Janet Maslin of the New York Times wrote the following in a 1990 review :
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Lord of the Flies at the Movie Review Query Engine