AARON HOTCHNER
Aaron Hotchner is a fictional character from the CBS crime drama Criminal Minds , portrayed by Thomas Gibson .
He is a Supervisory Special Agent and the unit chief of the FBI 's Behavioral Analysis Unit , and has appeared from the series ' pilot episode " Extreme Aggressor " , which was originally broadcast on September 22 , 2005 .
Hotch begins the series married to his high school sweetheart Haley ( Meredith Monroe ) .
They have a son named Jack ( Cade Owens ) , though they later separated over Hotch 's dedication to his job .
Meredith Monroe 's character Haley was later killed in season five by serial killer George Foyet .
On August 12 , 2016 , CBS producers announced that Gibson had been dismissed from Criminal Minds following a physical altercation with one of the show 's writers and that " creative details " regarding the character 's departure would be announced at a later date .
After appearing in the first two episodes of the 2016 - 2017 season , the Hotchner character was removed from the opening credits of subsequent episodes .
At the start of the third episode , one character explained Hotch 's absence by remarking that he was on TDY .
In episode 12.6 titled " Elliott 's Pond " it was revealed that Gibson 's character , Aaron Hotchner , was leaving his post as longtime head of the Behavioral Analysis Unit after Peter Lewis ( aka Mr. Scratch ) began stalking Hotch 's son , Jack .
The two decided to enter the Witness Protection Program .
The move would make it nearly impossible for Hotch to return to his field of work at the BAU , prompting him to resign from the position in effort to protect Jack .
After Peter Lewis 's death , Hotch and Jack left the Witness Protection Program and Hotch chose not return in the BAU to spend time with his child as a full - time dad .
A new BAU chief had to be named and Hotch personally requested Emily Prentiss ( Paget Brewster ) , who did n't really know what to think about the position , but she decided to accept it .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Gibson was cast as Hotchner having previously starred in the comedy series Dharma and Greg .
Of the transition to Criminal Minds , he explained : " It 's very nice to do a little bit of the darkness after a little bit of the lightness .
Variety is the spice of life .
I enjoy both and hopefully I will be able to do as big a variety as I possibly can . "
Gibson 's family lives in San Antonio , Texas , while he commutes to Los Angeles to film Criminal Minds on a weekly basis , something he feels gives him an insight into Hotch 's divided priorities .
Discussing the effect working in the BAU has on the agents ' personal lives , Gibson opined : " I think it ca n't help but take some toll .
And the first casualty may not be the agents themselves , but their families , spouses and children . "
Prior to Hotch and Haley 's separation , in a 2007 interview Gibson stated that he hoped the two would make their relationship last , explaining : " Marriage can certainly survive lots of hardships .
You think about in real life the marriages that survive .
They certainly suffer ...
and I think it 's going to be very interesting to see how they work it out because I know it 's certainly taking its toll .
Haley wanted the marriage to work out . "
Discussing the conflict between Hotch 's career and home life , Gibson detailed : Gibson characterized Hotch as having " moments of levity " , but continued : " Unfortunately , he has a very , very , probably - dusty - it's - so - dry sense of humor .
It 's pretty dark .
It 's pretty bone dry .
We all need a little levity , but I would n't necessarily look for him to break into song and dance .
I think Hotch feels there 's a lot at stake all the time . "
Prior to the departure of Mandy Patinkin 's Jason Gideon from the series , Gibson described Gideon and Hotch as " an old married couple " , deeming them father figures to the rest of the BAU and professional peers to one another .
Of Hotch 's relationship with the rest of the BAU team , Gibson commented : Before Gibson was cast in the role , the character was originally envisioned as a " blonde haired , blue - eyed Mormon " .
STORYLINES BACKSTORY Section::::Storylines .
Section::::Backstory .
Hotch first met his future wife Haley Brooks in high school .
They married soon thereafter , and were initially happy together .
Before joining the FBI , Hotch worked as a prosecutor for the District Attorney 's office .
He has a younger brother named Sean ( Eric Johnson ) , a New York City - based chef .
His mother is an alumna of Mary Baldwin College in Staunton , VA ..
Their father was a workaholic lawyer who survived cancer , and suffered a heart attack at 47 , dying while Sean was still a child .
Upon joining the FBI , Hotch was initially assigned to the Field Office in Seattle , Washington , before transferring to Quantico , Virginia .
In " Natural Born Killer " , Hotchner spoke to a serial killer , Vincent Perotta ( Patrick Kilpatrick ) , and discussed the physical abuse he suffered as a child at the hands of his father .
Perotta claimed that everyone who is abused as a child becomes a serial killer , with Hotchner correcting him by saying that " some people grow up to become serial killers " .
When Perotta caught the correction , he asked what the use of " some " meant .
Hotchner replied by saying " and some people grow up to catch them " .
From his explanation to Perotta earlier , it seems Hotchner and his mother were abused , but she did not do anything with the issue .
CRIMINAL MINDS Section::::Criminal Minds .
In general , Hotchner is depicted as a hard - working ,
( mostly ) humorless , no - nonsense agent who rarely smiles or acts out in anger ; his aloof demeanor and composure tend to be mistaken for a complete lack of emotion .
He takes great care to avoid antagonizing witnesses , local law enforcement and suspects unless he believes provoking them will cause them to reveal information , occasionally chastising his team mates for needlessly flippant or hostile behavior .
With few exceptions , he takes the ethics of his profession very seriously , as evidenced by his angry reaction to Elle Greenaway 's killing of a suspect , which he ( correctly ) believed was cold - blooded murder .
Though lacking evidence , he very clearly stated he would arrest her if he had such .
He occasionally sympathizes with the subjects he pursues , although he universally condemns their behavior and never allows them to justify it .
Following the birth of his son Jack , Hotch 's work with the BAU began disrupting his family life .
Following a two - week suspension in 2007 ( engineered by office rival Section Chief Erin Strauss after a case at a college campus in Flagstaff , Arizona that ended in disaster when both serial killer Nathan Tubbs and copycat killer Anna Begley died ) , he requested a transfer to a different division , which pleased Haley , until Derek Morgan ( Shemar Moore ) convinced him to help the team with a case in Milwaukee .
He changed his mind about leaving the department , and when he returned home , he found that Haley had taken Jack and left him .
He was later served with divorce papers at work .
Hotch attempted to see Jack weekly , but was unable to spend time with him as often as he would like .
At the beginning of the show 's , it was shown that the car exploding at the end of season three was Hotch 's SUV .
Both he and SSA Kate Joyner were caught in the bombing outside the New York City Federal Plaza .
Kate eventually died from her injuries , and Hotch suffered shrapnel wounds and a punctured eardrum which resulted in hyperacusis , causing temporary hearing problems .
Later in the season , the team worked one of Hotch 's old cases : the case of the Boston Reaper .
Hotch revealed to Rossi that he had maintained an interest in the case over the ten years since he had investigated it .
It was also shown that the Reaper , a power - hungry predator , had taken an interest in Hotch himself .
After being misled for a time , Hotch and the team finally identified the Reaper as George Foyet , the only one to have supposedly survived the Reaper by injuring himself .
Hotch and the team arrested Foyet
but he escaped from prison shortly afterward , going on the run .
In the season four finale , " ... And Back " , Hotch was confronted in his apartment by the Reaper ( identified by his trademark mask ) .
Foyet stabbed Hotch nine times and tortured him with a knife before delivering him to the hospital .
Although Hotch survived , Foyet took Haley 's and Jack 's address from Hotch 's apartment , requiring them to be placed in protective custody and unable to contact Hotch while Foyet was at large .
Following the encounter with Foyet and subsequent loss of contact with Hotch 's family , there was concern within the Bureau , and also on the part of Agent Morgan , that Agent Hotchner was suffering the effects of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder , and Hotchner 's actions were analyzed more closely .
In season 9 , Hotch is hospitalized due to complications from the old stab wounds after collapsing in the team 's conference room .
When Chief Strauss began putting pressure on Hotchner to justify all of his tactical decisions , Hotch decided to step down as unit chief to avoid being reassigned to a different unit .
He relinquished his position to Morgan , which he accepted on the condition that he would step down once Foyet had been captured .
Shortly thereafter Foyet reappeared , baiting Hotchner through correspondence with an old unsub ( The Fox ) who had been convicted and imprisoned after being captured in the Season 1 episode , " The Fox " .
With the help of the team , Hotchner proceeded to track Foyet , who posed as a US Marshal in order to locate Haley and Jack .
Having gained access to her Witsec - issued home , Foyet forced Haley to call Hotch on speaker phone .
Hotch managed to issue a code to their son , Jack , which meant for him to go hide in his secret place .
However , Hotch was unable to save Haley , whom Foyet murdered while she was still talking to him on the phone .
Upon arriving at the house , Hotch found Haley 's body in the bedroom and noticed Foyet hiding behind the curtains .
He repeatedly shot at his shadow outlined in the curtains only to discover Foyet was wearing a bullet - proof vest .
A full - out hand - to - hand fight then ensued , with Foyet eventually lying on the floor with Hotch sitting on top of him .
In shock , enraged and afraid for his son 's life , Hotchner continued to pummel Foyet 's head and face , literally beating him to death .
Although dead , he continued pounding on Foyet until the rest of the team arrived ; Morgan had to physically restrain Hotch to get him to stop .
During the post - incident inquiry by Section Chief Strauss , the team demonstrated complete support of Agent Hotchner and his actions , despite Strauss 's persistence in painting them as premeditated .
Her position towards the events eventually changed upon speaking directly with Agent Hotchner who , when asked what he believed would have happened if Foyet had lived , responded : " I do n't have to think ; I know that he would have tried to kill my son , too . "
Chief Strauss concluded that Hotchner 's actions were entirely justifiable .
After his ex - wife 's murder , Hotch took time off to grieve and spend time with his son .
He spoke at Haley 's funeral .
It was clear that Jack was missing his mother , and was comforted by sleeping in his dad 's bed .
Hotch was offered early retirement from the BAU in order to be with his son .
However , after Haley 's sister , Jessica , offered to stay with Jack when Hotch had to go away , Hotch agreed and decided to return to the BAU .
Since then , Hotch has attempted to build a better relationship with his son by being his pillar of support .
Many of Jack 's actions make it clear that he holds his father in high regard .
For example , in one scene , Jack is shown playing with two figures at the dinner table .
He explains to his father that one figure is Hotch , while the other is a " bad guy " .
When Jack 's Aunt Jessica , who is making pancakes for dinner , asks Jack who is going to win , he replies : " Daddy .
No one beats Daddy . "
In another episode , he refuses to dress up as Spider - Man for Halloween because " he 's not a real super hero " .
Instead Jack puts on a suit that is slightly too large for him , and when Hotch asks him what hero he 's supposed to be , he says , " I 'm you , Daddy . "
Later on , Hotch is asked to coach Jack 's soccer team when the team 's performance lacks and he decides to do it with a little help from Rossi , whom he takes on as his assistant .
At the end of the episode , Hotch and Rossi are shown coaching Jack 's team and making them win .
Despite his many responsibilities , after JJ 's departure from the team , Hotch has chosen to take on part of JJ 's role as media liaison , a move that he shares with Penelope Garcia .
Former Media Communications Officer Jennifer " JJ " Jareau has moved on to become an official full - time profiler .
Hotchner requested to run the psych review on his team following Prentiss ' " death " .
This request was granted by Strauss , and saw the different reactions from his team .
Strauss questioned why he had not submitted a psych report for himself , he made an excuse .
Hotch is also very protective of Spencer Reid , which is shown in small ways throughout the episodes .
In the pilot episode " Extreme Aggressor " , Hotch explains that they introduce him as Dr. Spencer Reid instead of Special Agent Spencer Reid so that people will respect him despite his youth .
He has mostly taken over the fatherly role with Spencer after Gideon 's departure .
In the season seven premiere , it was revealed that Hotch was assigned to temporary duty with an investigative task force in Pakistan during the period between seasons .
Once Hotch gets back , he tells JJ it 's time for the team to learn that Prentiss is alive .
Although JJ is n't sure it 's a good idea , Hotch tells her Prentiss is already on her way .
He quickly tells the team what happened with Prentiss on the operating table .
Rossi , Morgan , Reid , and Garcia are all shocked .
Later , in " Proof " , Hotch witnesses Reid 's hostile behavior towards JJ and tells him to take his anger out on him and not JJ .
Reid only replies that it was n't to Hotch whom he spent ten weeks crying over Prentiss , it was JJ , and she never said a word .
In addition to being a BAU Special Agent and also the BAU Unit Chief , Hotch has been promoted to Section Chief because Erin Strauss , the former Section Chief , resigned in the episode " Self - Fulfilling Prophecy " because she had been drinking on the job .
This was despite the fact that his involvement in the above mentioned , bungled Arizona case led to his being told that he was not likely to be considered for a promotion .
Later , Hotch makes a connection with a female runner while training for a triathlon .
Hotch is hesitant and Rossi feels that is because Hotch does n't think enough time has passed since Haley was murdered two years ago .
While on the plane , the group - including Garcia - debate the issue of Hotch 's dating .
After their recent case , Hotch admits to Rossi that he will go on a bike ride with the woman .
At the end of the episode , the woman , Beth , makes it clear that she 's interested in him romantically , which leaves Hotch smiling .
During the beginning of the episode " Closing Time " , it is revealed that Hotch and Beth have continued training as well as having lunches together .
Hotch then asks her out on a date , which she says yes to .
At the end of the episode Hotch shows up a day early with roses , and he and Beth have their first kiss .
Later , after running the triathlon , Hotch finally introduces his son to Beth .
REFERENCES EPISODE SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS