FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE ( SHARE PURCHASE )
Financial assistance in law refers to assistance given by a company for the purchase of its own shares or the shares of its holding companies .
In many jurisdictions such assistance is prohibited or restricted by law .
For example all EU member states are required to restrict financial assistance by public companies up to the limit of the company 's distributable reserves , although some members go further , for example , Belgium , Bulgaria , France , and The Netherlands restrict financial assistance by all companies .
Where such assistance is given in breach of applicable law it will render the relevant transaction void and may constitute a criminal offence .
OUTLINE Section::::Outline .
The assistance can be of a variety of different types .
The most common type of assistance is a financial guarantee for a loan and/or third party security to allow a borrower to borrow money to buy shares which is routinely given ( to the extent legally possible ) after a leveraged buyout in support of the new owner 's acquisition debt .
It would also normally include a gift or loan from the company or any other act which reduces the net assets of the company to a material extent where this is done for the purpose of the acquisition of shares in itself or its parent .
The rationale for such laws is purely economic ; it is based upon the premise that if a company supports the purchase of its own shares , it causes a de facto diminution in the company 's value in the hands of other shareholders ( who are assumed to continue their ownership following the transaction ) .
Conflicting concerns have also been expressed , namely that such financial assistance artificially inflates a share 's price above its market level .
Although the authorities are unclear , it seems that financial assistance may also have been a crime under the English common law prior to its codification by statute .
If that is correct , then laws against financial assistance may be much more prevalent than is normally assumed , and would also apply in many of the English speaking Commonwealth countries .
Laws against financial assistance are sometimes controversial because of the difficulties they can cause in the context of a leveraged buyout , and some jurisdictions which have enacted them have later repealed them .
Some jurisdictions provide for so - called " whitewash " procedures , whereby the shareholders can authorise transactions that would otherwise be void for financial assistance .
Most jurisdictions which prohibit financial assistance permit the company to purchase its own shares and hold them in treasury , and the company can then issue them again on terms that would have been prohibited if they had sought to provide financial assistance in an equivalent manner for a third party purchase .
NOTES