NFL PRESEASON
The National Football League preseason is the period each year during which NFL teams play several not - for - the - record exhibition games before the actual " regular " season starts .
Beginning with the featured Pro Football Hall of Fame game in early August , five weekends of exhibition games are currently played in the NFL .
The start of the preseason is intrinsically tied to the last week of training camp .
EXHIBITION SEASON Section::::Exhibition season .
The games are useful for new players who are not used to playing in front of very large crowds .
Management often uses the games to evaluate newly signed players .
Veteran players will generally play only for about a quarter of each game ( or less ) in order to avoid injury ; the third preseason game ( or fourth for the participants in the Hall of Fame game ) is generally the exception , since starters play well into the third quarter and both teams game plan for the game like the regular season .
Thus , first - stringers ' playing time is kept brief in the exhibition season , and in fact players are not paid their regular salaries for exhibitions , but the same per diem which they receive for training camp .
The exhibition game tickets , however , are usually the same price as regular - season games .
Several lawsuits , by individual fans or by class action , have been brought against specific teams or the entire NFL over the practice of requiring season - ticket holders to purchase exhibition games .
To date , none of these suits has been successful .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Exhibition games have been played in professional football since the beginning of the sport .
In fact , until league play was formalized in 1920 , one could consider virtually all of an independent professional football team 's schedule to be exhibitions ( as in test matches ) .
In the early years of the sport , teams often " barnstormed " , and played squads from leagues outside their own , or against local college teams or other amateur groups , charging fans whatever the traffic would bear .
When the NFL was founded in 1920 , there were no such things as exhibition games , and all games counted in the standings and would be used to determine the league champion .
In 1921 this was revised to only count games involving two league members , thus allowing non - league exhibitions but still effectively disallowing exhibitions between two league teams .
This rule had a direct impact on deciding the 1921 championship , in which the losing team had insisted , both before and after , that the game only be considered an exhibition .
In 1924 , the league again changed the rule to declare games held in December or later to be exhibitions .
By the mid-1930s , teams prepared for a standard 12-game regular season schedule , although even as late as 1939 teams would schedule non - league exhibition games both before and during the season ( during bye weeks ) .
The Pittsburgh Steelers ( then known as the Pirates ) were well known for playing both in the NFL and on a limited schedule in the decades - old Western Pennsylvania circuit in the 1930s .
In the 1960s , teams began playing 14 regular season games , and there was a corresponding decrease in the length of the preseason .
Teams played four or five preseason games each year .
( For example , in 1966 each of the nine American Football League teams each played precisely four preseason games . )
By the end of the decade , however , there would be a rapid increase in the number of preseason games , quickly reaching 1950s levels .
With the AFL – NFL merger of 1970 , the newly merged NFL was granted a Sherman Anti - Trust Act exemption , which emboldened some team owners to expand the exhibition schedule and to require season - ticket holders to pay for one , then two , then three home exhibition games if they wanted to keep their season tickets .
The exhibition season then became , and remains , a large source of owner revenue that is not shared with the players .
From 1970 through 1977 , the NFL season consisted of 14 regular season games and six exhibition games , sometimes but not always three at home and three away ( the 1973 Washington Redskins , for instance , played all but one of six preseason games at home ) , with some played at neutral sites .
Since , the regular season is 16 games , and the exhibition season was cut from six to four games .
Two teams play five exhibition games , however .
From 1999 to 2001 , when the league consisted of an uneven 31 teams , some additional exhibition games ( usually 2 or 3 ) were played over Hall of Fame weekend .
In order to account for the uneven number of teams , each team was required to have a bye week during the exhibition season .
Most teams held their bye week in Hall of Fame weekend , while the others utilized them somewhere else during the exhibition season .
This practice was abandoned after the Houston Texans were added to the league in 2002 , giving it an even 32 teams .
The exhibition games do not count toward any statistics , streaks , season standings or records whatsoever .
For instance , the four wins incurred by the 2008 Detroit Lions & the 2017 Cleveland Browns exhibition seasons did not count " against them " when they went on to become the only teams to go 0–16 ; and the 1972 Dolphins , despite losing three exhibition games , are still considered to have played a perfect season .
Similarly , Ola Kimrin 's 65-yard field goal in an exhibition game is not considered the league record , despite being longer than the 64 yard mark set by Matt Prater in the regular season ( in 2013 ) .
Still , professional football is popular enough that many fans still pay full price for exhibition game tickets , which they must purchase in order to keep their regular - season seats .
Many teams are sold out on a season ticket basis and have large waiting lists , with fans required to pay a one - time or annual fee for the privilege of remaining on the waiting list .
A minority of teams offer promotions and discounts to fill the stands for exhibition games ; an example of this is the Buffalo Bills ' annual " Kids Day " promotion , where tickets , already the lowest priced in the league , are slashed to bargain - basement prices ( around $ 10 ) for children under 12 .
INTERNATIONAL AND NEUTRAL - SITE GAMES
Section::::International and neutral - site games .
Prior to the commencement of the NFL International Series , the NFL had another " featured " exhibition game called the American Bowl .
This matchup was an extra exhibition game for the two teams involved and was often played on the same weekend as the Hall of Fame Game .
It was played outside the United States , usually in Mexico or Japan ; in the latter case , it often involved games that started at 5:00 A.M. U.S.
Eastern time .
The American Bowl was held from 1986 to 2005 ; similar international matches had occurred regularly since 1969 .
In addition , teams previously played home games at stadiums on the fringes of their markets or in markets not currently served by NFL teams .
The Alamodome in San Antonio hosted games in this fashion , as did Rogers Centre ( as part of the Bills Toronto Series ) , with Camp Randall Stadium , the on - campus home of Wisconsin Badgers football in Madison , Wisconsin , hosting one preseason Green Bay Packers game per year until the late 90s .
The Citrus Bowl was previously a common venue for games .
The Carrier Dome in Syracuse , New York has been mentioned as a potential site for such a game , with the host team not yet mentioned .
TELEVISION AND RADIO Section::::Television and radio .
While selected preseason games are televised nationally by the NFL 's main broadcast partners , the majority of them are in - house productions of the individual teams , often in association with a local television broadcaster or regional sports network ( such as Root Sports Northwest for the Seattle Seahawks , NBC Sports Washington for the Washington Redskins , MSG Western New York for the Buffalo Bills and Fox Sports Detroit for the Detroit Lions ) .
Especially if a team 's flagship station is affiliated with or owned by CBS or NBC , rightsholders may also subcontract with their network 's respective sports department , such as CBS Sports ( in the case of the Atlanta Falcons , whose flagship is CBS - owned The CW affiliate WUPA ) or NBC Sports ( in the case of the New York Giants ) to provide resources such as camera crews and graphics , or produce the entire broadcast , giving those networks their own ability to evaluate their production teams and the chemistry of network announcing teams before the season starts .
Preseason broadcasts are typically syndicated to a network of stations within the team 's market region , which also typically includes a package of team - produced programming throughout the season ( such as analysis and coach 's shows ) , local rights to games broadcast on cable , and the right to brand themselves as the " official " station of the team in the market .
Exhibition games are almost exclusively played at night due to hot summer weather , and are frequently scheduled based on local convenience ( e.g. games on the west coast tend to start at 7:00 p.m.
PT/10:00 p.m. ET ) .
When applicable , the NFL 's blackout restrictions apply , although stations are allowed to play the game on a tape delay if the game does not sell out ( unlike the regular season policy , when rights revert to NFL Films ) .
However , the blackout restrictions have never been applied since 2015 as a result of a passed vote during the league 's owners ' meeting in March in which the league , as an experiment because no regular season games in the 2014 season were blacked out and an FCC vote in September 2014 to no longer enforce blackouts , eliminated blackout rules for at least the last two seasons .
Many more exhibition games fail to sell out than do regular - season games .
The Hall of Fame Game is carried by NBC as an edition of Sunday Night Football , and on radio by Westwood One , with alternating carriers such as ESPN and NFL Network in Summer Olympics years , which are not allowed pre - emption of any form by NBC ( locally produced games usually airing on NBC affiliates must also be re - located to other stations due to the same policy ) .
Beginning in 2015 , Compass Media Networks carries select preseason contests involving the Oakland Raiders and Dallas Cowboys nationwide .
The games are also carried by the teams ' local radio networks , but the affiliate count is often reduced due to conflicts with baseball and other local sports .
MATCHUPS Section::::Matchups .
Unlike the regular season , the exhibition matchups are not based on any rotating or set formula .
The NFL schedules the matchups for all of the exhibition games .
Since 2002 , individual teams have been allowed to negotiate their own deals to play each other during the preseason - the league allows individual teams to provide input into desired matchups and determines the matchups for any games that were not individually negotiated , but the league sets all game dates and times .
The exhibition season schedule is released in the spring , shortly before the regular season schedule is announced .
The NFL has set a loose precedent of determining exhibition matchups :
* No two teams have faced each other in the same exhibition season more than once since 1980 .
* NFL teams never play a team outside the league since 1977 .
*
As a general rule , teams in the same division will not play one another during the exhibition season .
The last in - division preseason matchup happened in 2000 .
* Interconference game ( AFC vs. NFC )
matchups are common and encouraged , since regular season matchups between interconference teams are infrequent : teams play other - conference teams only once every four years during the regular season .
These games allow teams to travel to particular markets more frequently than normal , and represent " fresh " matchups .
* Geographically close matchups are preferred , to provide teams with minimal ( if possible ) exhibition season travel .
As such , intrastate rivals are frequent matchups , provided they are not already division foes ; Giants / Jets ( the MetLife Bowl ) , Ravens / Redskins , Eagles / Steelers ( Quaker State Rivalry ) , 49ers / Raiders ( Battle of the Bay ) , Bucs / Dolphins / Jaguars , and Chargers / Rams ( Battle for Los Angeles ) are all frequent exhibition matchups .
The Broncos and Cardinals , the only two teams in the Mountain Time Zone , also play every preseason ( though due to Arizona non observance of daylight saving time , Denver is one hour ahead of Arizona during the NFL preseason , which occurs in August ) .
* Teams with close personal ties often play each other .
*
Since 2005 , the Giants and the Patriots close out their preseason together .
The owners of the two teams are friends .
* The Steelers and the Panthers , since 2003 , close out their preseason together despite a 450-mile distance between Pittsburgh and Charlotte .
There are numerous Pittsburgh - area ties to the Panthers organisation , including former head coach John Fox ( a former assistant at Pitt and the Steelers ) , ex - Steeler linebackers Greg Lloyd and Kevin Greene finishing out their careers at Carolina , and former Steelers safety Donnie Shell having served as the Panthers Director of Player Development since the team 's inception .
On the flip side , former Steelers head coach Bill Cowher attended N.C. State and currently lives in Raleigh .
Former Steelers players Willie Parker and Jeff Reed
both attended UNC .
This also reflects on the increasing number of Western Pennsylvania natives in relocating to the Carolinas .
*
The Buffalo Bills and Detroit Lions often play each other in the preseason , since the late Bills owner Ralph Wilson was a native of Detroit and at one point owned a share of the Lions .
In addition , both Buffalo and Detroit are the only NFL cities
that border Canada , with each city located on opposite sides of Southern Ontario .
*
The Los Angeles Chargers & New Orleans Saints , since 2017 , have played each other because Drew Brees first played for San Diego before being traded to New Orleans in 2006 .
* Along with general in - state rivalries , some long - established " Governor 's Cups " are played annually .
* Texas – Dallas Cowboys vs.
Houston Texans ( since 2002 , Cowboys vs. Houston Oilers from 1967–96 ) * Pennsylvania : Philadelphia Eagles vs. Pittsburgh Steelers
* Missouri – Kansas City vs. St. Louis ( currently suspended due to a lack of a team in St. Louis ; formerly Chiefs vs. Cardinals from 1970–87 and Chiefs vs. Rams from 1995–2015 )
* After the division realignment in 2002 , the NFL factors in former division rivalries which were broken due to teams moving to different divisions if possible .
For a five - year period from 2002–2006 , the league had the authority to schedule former division rivals for exhibition games ( the Cardinals and Seattle Seahawks , who were switched from the NFC East and AFC West , respectively , to the NFC West , are the most notable examples ) .
It was a move intended to recover potentially lost revenue due to the end of a popular annual rivalry game .
In some rare cases , the league has scheduled " hot " regular - season matchups if they did not happen to be scheduled to play that season .
For instance , Tampa Bay and St. Louis had a popular mini - rivalry from 1999 to 2004 .
The teams were not scheduled to play one another in 2003 , so the league reacted by scheduling a Monday night preseason game for them that season .
*
The Tennessee Titans and Pittsburgh Steelers are former division rivals in the old AFC Central .
2018 was the first time the two teams met in the preseason since the Titans became a member of the AFC South and the Steelers became a member of the AFC North .
*
The Detroit Lions and Tampa Bay Buccaneers are former division rivals in the old NFC Central .
2018 was the first time the two teams met in the preseason since the Lions became a member of the NFC North and the Buccaneers became a member of the NFC South .
*
The Seattle Seahawks and Green Bay Packers got scheduled to play each other in the 2013 preseason in a rematch of Fail Mary .
Both teams were not scheduled to play each other in the 2013 regular season .
The teams that play in the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game are determined solely by the league ( and the Hall of Fame committee ) , featuring one AFC team and one NFC team .
Its matchup is announced well in advance , around the time of the Super Bowl , when the Hall of Fame inductees are announced .
Under some circumstances , the matchup is planned well into the future .
For example , the Buccaneers played the Steelers in the 1998 Hall of Fame Game , a matchup that had been announced in 1983 .
In recent times , if there has been an expansion team added to the league , that team will be invited to play in the Hall of Fame game ( Carolina , Jacksonville , the new Cleveland Browns , and Houston all played in their expansion seasons in 1995 , 1999 , and 2002 respectively ) .
The 2009 game , however , was between two original American Football League teams : the Buffalo Bills and the Tennessee Titans ( formerly the Houston Oilers ) .
This matchup was announced after Ralph C. Wilson ,
Jr. an AFL founder and the only owner ever of the Bills , was inducted to the Pro Football Hall of Fame on February 1 , 2009 .
The Titans ' owner , Bud Adams , was also the only owner his team has ever had .
Wilson and Adams were the two last surviving members of the original AFL ownership cabal and are two of the only three men who have majority - owned a Professional Football franchise continuously for fifty years ( the late George Halas , who owned the Chicago Bears from 1920 to 1983 , is the third ) .
The Hall of Fame game served as a kickoff to the 2009 season , which would have been the 50th season of play for the AFL had it survived as an independent entity .
The 2011 ( canceled ) , 2012 , and 2016 games were between two NFC teams .
Normally , the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game has an AFC and NFC matchup , but that is not always the case .
Prior to the 1970 AFL – NFL merger , it was common for teams to play each other twice in the same pre - season .
Among the most recent occurrences were in 1992 when the Dallas Cowboys and Houston Oilers played on August 1 in Tokyo , then again on August 15 , in Dallas , and in a more recent season , the Buccaneers and the Dolphins played each other twice in one preseason .
To this day , although multiple preseason games against the same two teams are no longer common , two teams may hold a joint practice and scrimmage in addition to a preseason contest ( see , for example , the Buffalo Bills and Pittsburgh Steelers in 2014 ) .
It is still somewhat common to see teams that play each other during the regular season once play a preseason game ( either the two teams split in playing at the other 's home stadium , or the two teams play at one of the other 's home both times ) ; the majority of preseason contests each year are between teams that do not play each other in the regular season that year .
It was also commonplace for division opponents to play each other in the preseason , due to the larger size of pre - merger divisions , but this is no longer allowed .
As recent as 1984 , the Cleveland Browns and Pittsburgh Steelers played a preseason game despite the two being bitter rivals .
In 1999 the San Diego Chargers played their division rivals the Denver Broncos and Kansas City Chiefs in the preseason .
The last such occurrence was in the 2000 season when the Seattle Seahawks played the Oakland Raiders .
Another thing that used to be commonplace was for teams from all time zones to play each other .
Teams from the eastern time zone and pacific time zone played each other more often .
Since the league realignment in 2002 , when the NFL began to have 32 teams , teams more than two time zone apart normally do n't play each other .
This saves teams from long travels and going too far geographically .
However , there have been some exceptions .
Not counting the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game and international series , where the site of the locations are neutral , there have been a few matchups that involved teams from the eastern time zone and pacific time zone playing each other .
In 2009 the San Diego Chargers played the Atlanta Falcons in Atlanta .
The San Francisco 49ers played the Baltimore Ravens in 2014 , and the Los Angeles Rams played the Baltimore Ravens in 2018 , both in Baltimore .
The Arizona Cardinals , who are on the pacific time zone during August , have played the New England Patriots in 2006 , the Pittsburgh Steelers in 2006 and 2009 , the Washington Redskins in 2010 , and Atlanta Falcons in 2017 .
NON - LEAGUE OPPONENTS Section::::Non - league opponents .
The College All - Star Game , usually the first game of the preseason , was played annually in Chicago from 1934 to 1976 , and featured the NFL ( from 1966 , World champion ) against an all - rookie team of college all - stars .
During the earlier years of the competition , numerous other regional all - star games of the sort also existe , but after the games became lopsided in favor of the NFL , they were abandoned .
Between 1950 and 1961 , the NFL also attempted exhibition matches against the Canadian Football League ( mixing NFL and CFL rules ) ; these , too , were abandoned after the 1961 preseason , after the NFL won all six matchups ( the CFL finally won a game against American opposition in August 1961 , but this was against an American Football League team ; as a result of the embarrassment , the AFL opted not to play the CFL again beyond that one game ) .
Also , from 1967 to 1969 , during the transition period leading up to the formal AFL – NFL merger , the NFL and American Football League played each other in a series of exhibition matches ; notably , the 1969 match between the Buffalo Bills and Washington Redskins was the only time Vince Lombardi ever lost to an AFL team .
The 1968 games were played under an experimental rule that eliminated extra point kicks and required a play from scrimmage to score one point ( a rule later implemented by the World Football League in 1974 and the XFL in 2001 ) .
Games against non - league opponents were still occasionally played , usually with the NFL teams sending a rookie " split squad " to the game .
The Atlanta Falcons rookies defeated the Alabama Hawks of the Continental Football League 55–0 in a 1969 contest .
In 1972 , the New York Jets rookies defeated the Long Island Chiefs of the then - second - tier Seaboard Football League 29–3 .
The 1976 All - Star Classic is the last game between an NFL team and one outside the league to date .
Since 1977 , no NFL team has played a team outside the league ; this is in contrast to current practice in MLS , NBA , NHL and recent practice in baseball , in which teams can play exhibition games against non - league teams .
Unlike the latter leagues , however , where a near - even parity of talent can exist with foreign or minor league teams , the NFL is stunted by the de facto second tier of American football , college football , being barred by the NCAA from scheduling their teams to play against NFL teams , while the difference in talent between NFL and foreign and/or non - league professional teams is too large to assure a competitive contest .
Likewise , the differing rule sets and venues between the NFL , the CFL and the Arena Football League also complicates any real competitive attempt at an exhibition game between those organizations ( NFL - CFL interleague competitions have been attempted in the past ) .
Even in years when there has been second - tier or competing professional leagues playing by standard 11-man rules , the NFL has opted not to play exhibition games .
The XFL , USFL , UFL and FXFL never played against the NFL in their short lifetimes , lest the league risk injuring its star talent and/or giving potential threats to its monopoly on American professional football any credibility .
SCHEDULE Section::::Schedule .
The exhibition season typically begins the first weekend of August with the Hall of Fame Game ; though in some years it can be on the second weekend .
Previous seasons have seen the American Bowl game held the last weekend of July .
The first full schedule of exhibition games is held the following weekend .
Most games are held on Thursday , Friday , or Saturday nights , with one nationally televised game each night of the week : NFL Network airs a Thursday game , CBS and Fox a Friday and Saturday night game each , NBC with Sunday night games , and ESPN a Monday night game .
Unlike the regular season , CBS 's and Fox 's national exhibition game opponents are selected regardless of conference .
Four full weekends of games are held .
The fourth and final full week of exhibition games ( fifth weekend overall ) usually has teams playing exclusively on Thursday night ( plus Friday , if any ) , with no national games .
This allows teams a few extra days to prepare for the first week of the regular season .
It also prevents conflict with the start of the regular seasons for high school and college football , allowing those venues to expand their first weekends ' games from Thursday through Monday ( Labor Day ) .
There is usually a conflict with the Major League Baseball season , a situation seen in the 2015 preseason when the Pittsburgh Steelers moved a Sunday evening game against the Green Bay Packers at Heinz Field to a traditional 1 p.m. kickoff to avoid parking conflicts with the Pittsburgh Pirates across their shared lot at PNC Park , when the Pirates had a game moved to Sunday evening as part of ESPN 's Sunday Night Baseball .
Nationally televised exhibition games start at 8:00 PM Eastern Time , while regionally televised games usually start at 7:00 PM local time .
Select game nights feature rotating coverage from the NFL RedZone channel .
On various occasions , severe weather or other factors , have postponed or outright canceled some preseason games .
Due to their exhibition nature , suspended or canceled preseason games are normally not made up .
In 2004 , Hurricane Charley postponed a Tampa Bay game against Cincinnati from Saturday until Monday .
In 2001 , a preseason game between Philadelphia and Baltimore was canceled due to turf problems at Veterans Stadium .
Similar turf concerns prompted the league to cancel the 2016 Hall of Fame Game at the last minute .
The 2017 Cowboys - Texans preseason game , originally scheduled for Houston , was at first switched to Arlington due to the flooding spawned by Hurricane Harvey in southeast Texas .
The day prior to the scheduled game , it was cancelled to allow the Texans , who departed Houston the previous Friday to play at New Orleans and then were diverted to Dallas / Fort Worth after the game vs. the Saints , to return to Houston .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Currently , every NFL team requires its season ticket holders to purchase tickets at full price for two exhibition games as a requirement to purchase regular - season tickets .
Complaints regarding this policy have gone all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court , but have failed to change the policy .
A judgment in 1974 stated : " No fewer than five lawsuits have been instituted from Dallas to New England , each claiming that the respective National Football League ( NFL ) team had violated the Sherman Act by requiring an individual who wishes to purchase a season ticket for all regular season games to buy , in addition , tickets for one or more exhibition or preseason games . "
Additionally , some players , coaches , and journalists , and numerous fans , object to the 4-week exhibition schedule .
Players have little monetary incentive to play in exhibitions , since they are paid only a training - camp per diem for these games .
Their salaries do not begin until the regular season , and thus they are essentially playing in exhibitions " for free " .
Regardless of these objections , owners continue to endorse the four - game exhibition season .
The games are an easy source of revenue , and thus are unlikely to be dispensed within the foreseeable future .
PROPOSED REDUCTIONS Section::::Proposed reductions .
In 2008 , NFL commissioner Roger Goodell raised the possibility of shortening the exhibition season , in favor of lengthening the regular season .
There was a possibility that by 2012 , the league would switch to two primary exhibition games ( down from 4 ) and an 18-game regular season ( up from 16 ) .
Reasons cited were solutions to future labor concerns about revenue , and the overall dissatisfaction with the exhibitions among players and fans .
Also , since the NFL is now widely considered a competitive year - round business , veteran players normally train and condition year round , and do not need the extensive exhibition season to get back into playing shape after the previous regular season .
This proposal was eventually rejected in negotiations for the league 's collective bargaining agreement , due to objections and concerns over fatigue and injuries raised by the National Football League Players Association .
Another proposal said to be gaining " growing sentiment among NFL owners " as of 2016 is a proposal to eliminate the last preseason game and give a league - wide bye week leading into the regular season .
REFERENCES