SEMI - PRO Semi - Pro is a 2008 American sports comedy film from New Line Cinema .
The film was directed by Kent Alterman and stars Will Ferrell , Woody Harrelson , André Benjamin and Maura Tierney .
The film was shot in Los Angeles near Dodger Stadium ( in the gym of the Los Angeles City Fire Department Training Center ) , in Detroit , and in Flint , Michigan .
Released in theaters on February 29 , 2008 and released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc on June 3 , 2008 , it was the last film from New Line Cinema before they merged with Warner Bros. PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1976 , Jackie Moon is a singer who used the profits from his one - hit wonder , " Love Me Sexy , " to buy a basketball team in the American Basketball Association ( ABA ) , the Flint Tropics , becoming the owner , head coach , and starting power forward .
The ABA Commissioner announces a plan to merge the league with the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , but only four teams will move to the more established league .
The Tropics , the worst team in the league , are in danger of dissolving .
Jackie argues that the teams with the four best records should be merged and the Commissioner accepts .
Jackie trades the team 's washing machine to the Kentucky Colonels for Ed Monix , a backup point guard who won an NBA Championship with the Boston Celtics , but did not play during the playoffs .
The Commissioner reveals that the Tropics will also need at least 2,000 fans at every remaining home game .
Jackie begins to stage extremely desperate stunts , like wrestling a bear named Dewie .
The Tropics begin playing better with Monix , as well as the increased intensity of Clarence Withers , the Tropics ' best player .
Monix takes over as offensive and defensive coordinator and starting point guard , leaving Jackie as the head coach .
Monix trains the team rigorously with a play he calls the " Puke " as the players are to run it , until they literally throw up .
From Monix 's training , the Tropics go on a winning run , moving from last to fifth .
Jackie gets a visit from the Commissioner .
The NBA does not think that Flint has a large enough media market and will not allow the Tropics into the league even if they beat the first place San Antonio Spurs in the last game of the season .
Jackie admits that he stole " Love Me Sexy " from a napkin his mother wrote on three weeks before she died .
Realizing that all his assets are basically stolen , Jackie trades Withers to the Spurs so that he may realize his dream of playing in the NBA .
Monix inspires the team to leave everything on the court , while they may not be able to continue the franchise after this season
, they have come very far and still have a lot to prove .
Going into the Spurs game , which Moon declares the " MegaBowl " , the Tropics are in fifth place and with a win they would make it into fourth , although they have no chance in making it into the NBA .
The game begins and the Tropics fall behind quickly .
In the closing seconds of the first half , Jackie gets fouled hard by Petrelli while going up for a shot and is injured .
Withers decides he has seen enough and rushes into the Tropics locker rooms with the rest of the team , which angers the Spurs .
During halftime , an unconscious Jackie imagines that he is in heaven with his mother .
He apologizes for stealing her song and she gives him a weapon in order to win .
On the court , the Tropics reveal their new weapon : the alley - oop .
With the return of Withers , the alley - oop is very effective , but the referee calls the play a foul .
After some persuasion by Jackie and Monix , is soon convinced that it is a legitimate score .
The Tropics take advantage of this new strategy and begin coming back .
After the Spurs start defending against the Alley - Oop , Monix calls a time - out and calls for them to run the " Puke " with 12 seconds left and down by two points , 117–115 .
The play gives Jackie the ball , but he gets fouled hard again with two seconds left , giving him 2 free throws .
Shooting granny style , Moon sinks the first basket .
The second bounces off the rim but
Monix tips it in right at the buzzer for two points to win , sparking a wild celebration in the arena and the streets of Flint .
The Spurs ' coach offers Withers his position back .
The now - former ABA Commissioner offers Jackie a position on the staff of the NBA Assistant Commissioner , as a marketing director .
As Jackie is about to accept , the Commissioner is mauled by Dewie the bear and the celebration quickly turns into an arena - wide panic .
Sometime after the Mega Bowl , Dukes receives 2,300 dollars from Jackie via a package as well as a letter promising to pay the rest after the NBA merger , much to Dukes ' surprise and happiness .
CAST * Will Ferrell as Jackie Moon – The owner / player / coach of the failing Flint Tropics , famous for the aging disco hit " Love Me Sexy " .
* André Benjamin as Clarence Withers – dreams to play in the NBA , although all he ever does is gossip about going .
* Woody Harrelson as Ed Monix – The aging point guard , and former NBA Champion , although he sat through every playoff game for the Boston Celtics .
* Andrew Daly as Dick Pepperfield – Play - By - Play Announcer for the Tropics .
* Will Arnett as Lou Redwood – Color Commentator for the Tropics .
While calling the game , smokes cigarettes and drinks Scotch .
* Matt Walsh as Father Pat –
Although a priest , he is the referee for almost all ABA games , not just the Tropics home contests .
* Andy Richter as Bobby Dee – General Manager for the Tropics .
* Jay Phillips as Scootsie Doubleday – Point Guard for the Tropics .
* Josh Braaten as Twiggy Munson – Small Forward for the Tropics .
* Peter Cornell as Vakidis – Center for the Tropics .
Does not understand English .
* DeRay Davis as Bee Bee Ellis – Guard / Forward and also the sixth man for the Tropics .
* David Koechner as Alan Ault – ABA Commissioner who does n't hold Jackie in high - esteem .
* Maura Tierney as Lynn –
Ed Monix 's love interest .
* Rob Corddry as Kyle – Lynn 's new boyfriend .
CAMEOS
* Jackie Earle Haley as Dukes – An unemployed hippie who makes a full - court shot to win $ 10,000 the Tropics do n't have .
* Jason Sudeikis as Danny – One of the few Tropics ' season ticket holders .
* Tim Meadows as Cornelius Banks – A friend of Jackie 's who thinks he plays for the Tropics .
* Pat Kilbane as Petrelli – Ruthless Anaheim Amigos power forward with a heated rivalry with both Jackie Moon and Ed Monix .
* Patti LaBelle as Jackie 's Mom – Appeared in Jackie 's dream to invent the alley - oop .
* Ellia English as Ms. Quincy , Clarence 's mother – Attends every Tropic game to support her son as well as the team .
* Kristen Wiig as Bear Trainer Girl * Ed Helms as Turtleneck reporter
* Brian Huskey as White Pants reporter
* Collette Wolfe as Melinda the Ball Girl * Ian Roberts as Spurs Coach * Phil Hendrie as Nets Coach
* Artis Gilmore as Restaurant customer # 1 * George Gervin as Restaurant customer # 2 * Jerry Minor as Paul the DJ ( uncredited ) DEWIE THE BEAR Section::::Cast .
Section::::Dewie the Bear .
The 5-year - old , , male grizzly bear named Rocky appeared in the film in a scene where Will Ferrell 's character wrestles him to promote his basketball team .
Stuntman and trainer Randy Miller doubled for Ferrell during the wrestling match with the bear .
On April 22 , 2008 , the bear bit 39-year - old Stephan Miller ( Randy Miller 's cousin and fellow trainer ) on the neck , killing him .
MARKETING
* A number shown in the teaser trailer 1 - 800-TROPICS , when called played a recorded message of Jackie Moon talking about season ticket packages for the 1976 season * Several ads for Anheuser - Busch were filmed featuring Will Ferrell in character as Jackie Moon that were aired during Super Bowl XLII .
Some of the ads touted humorous promotional items with offers expiring in November 1977 .
* A music video was released with Jackie Moon singing his ' hit ' "
Love Me Sexy "
* Ferrell appeared in character as Jackie Moon in TV spots for Old Spice deodorant *
A prescreening at the Alamo Drafthouse in Austin , Texas two weeks prior to the box office debut featured an appearance by Will Ferrell and director Kent Alterman .
In order to obtain entrance to the theater , all viewers had to wear a basketball uniform similar to the one worn by Ferrell in the film .
* An official Jackie Moon Semi - Pro costume was released in summer 2008 for Halloween .
* A Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue spread featured Ferrell with Heidi Klum .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Semi - Pro received negative reviews from critics .
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 21 % of critics gave the film positive reviews , based on 157 reviews , although the movie also received a rating of 4.5/10 from the same site .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Semi - Pro is an intermittently funny , half - hearted attempt at sports satire , and one of Will Ferrell 's weaker cinematic efforts .
" Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 47 out of 100 , based on 29 reviews .
Matt Zoeller Seitz of New York Times said , " Semi - Pro finds the sweet spot between sports melodrama and parody , and hammers it for 90 diverting minutes . "
Peter Travers writing for Rolling Stone stated , " when the script , by Scott Armstrong , shoots air balls , Ferrell is a slam - dunk . "
Claudia Puig of USA Today said , " Although not exactly a slam dunk , Semi - Pro is definitely more than semi - funny . "
In his review for The Village Voice , Robert Wilonsky gave the film 2 stars of a possible 4 and wrote that director Kent Alterman , " valiantly tries to tweak the formula by adding a dash more sincerity and humanity to the froth but does n't get too adventurous .
But in the end , it 's comedy comfort food , something powdered poured from a box . "
BOX OFFICE PERFORMANCE Section::::Box office performance .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 15 million in 3,121 theaters in the United States and Canada , holding the number one position at the box office .
Alicia Chang of the Associated Press described the opening as " lackluster " compared to Ferrell 's previous sports spoofs , which opened with $ 47 million , and Blades of Glory , which opened with $ 33 million .
The basketball film went on to gross $ 33,479,698 domestically and $ 10,405,206 internationally , for a total of $ 43,884,904 worldwide .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
2008
ESPY
Awards *
Best Sports Movie ESPY Award * 2008 Teen Choice
Awards
* Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie - Comedy
( Nominated ) *
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc on June 3 , 2008 .
There is a theatrical R - Rated version DVD and a 2-Disc " Let 's Get Sweaty " Unrated Edition DVD and Blu - ray Disc .
Special features include unrated deleted scenes and more .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack for the film was released on February 26 , 2008 and featured songs by LaBelle , WAR , Curtis Mayfield , Will Ferrell , among others .
"
Love Me Sexy " is sung by the fictional Jackie Moon ( played by Will Ferrell ) .
* " Love Me Sexy " – Will Ferrell
*
* " Get Da Funk Out Ma ' Face " –
Brothers Johnson
* * " Lady Marmalade " – LaBelle * *
" The World Is a Ghetto " –
WAR *
* " Tell Me Something Good " – Ronnie Laws
* * " Mr. Big Stuff " – Jean Knight * *
" Give Me Just a Little More Time " – Chairmen of the Board
*
*
" Why Ca n't We Be Friends " – WAR
*
* " Walking in Rhythm " – The Blackbyrds * * " Dance to the Music " –
Sly & The Family Stone
* * " Love Rollercoaster " – Ohio Players
* * " Que Sera , Sera
( Whatever Will Be , Will Be ) " – Sly & The Family Stone
*
* " Move on Up " – Curtis Mayfield * * " Shining Star " –
Elijah Kelley
* SEE ALSO
* The Fish That Saved Pittsburgh
* Slap Shot REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official trailer