CANCER TREATMENT CENTERS OF AMERICA Cancer Treatment Centers of America ( CTCA ) , headquartered in Boca Raton , Florida , is a national , for - profit network of five comprehensive cancer care and research centers and three out patient care centers that serves cancer patients throughout the United States .
CTCA follows an integrative approach to cancer care that uses conventional approaches like surgery , chemotherapy , radiation and immunotherapy to treat the cancer , while also offering integrative therapies to help manage side effects like pain , nausea , fatigue , lymphedema , malnutrition , depression and anxiety .
CTCA was originally headquartered in Schaumburg , Illinois .
In January 2015 , the corporate office was moved to Boca Raton , Florida , and was renamed Cancer Treatment Centers of America Global , Inc. HISTORY Section::::History .
Early Years Cancer Treatment Centers of America
® ( CTCA ) was founded in 1988 by Richard J Stephenson following the death of his mother , Mary Brown Stephenson , who passed away from Lung Cancer .
After his mother 's diagnosis , Richard and his family searched for the most advanced and effective cancer treatments available but were not satisfied with what was available .
Richard , after his mother 's passing , vowed to advance cancer care .
Richard purchased the American International Hospital in Zion , Illinois in 1988 and expanded the hospital to include a radiation center called Mary Brown Stephenson Radiation Oncology Center in honor of his mother .
Cancer Treatment Centers of America in Zion served as the CTCA 's first location .
With Richard as chairman of the board , the cancer program became one of the first in the country to offer a full range of treatment services — surgery , chemotherapy and radiation therapy , as well as immunotherapy , nutrition , mind - body medicine and spiritual support all under one roof .
Expansion CTCA formally opened its second hospital on May 7 , 1990 in Tulsa , Oklahoma .
The hospital was located in the CityPlex Towers , which were constructed by Oral Roberts as part of the City of Faith hospital .
Fifteen years later , on April 29th , 2005 , CTCA Tulsa relocated from CityPlex Towers operations to a newly constructed 195,845-square - foot hospital located in Tulsa to support expanding patient needs .
During its construction , feedback from cancer patients and family members were incorporated into the interior and exterior designs of the facility .
In 2004 , Cancer Treatment Centers of America purchased the former Parkview hospital in Northeast Philadelphia .
After renovating 104,000 square feet and adding an additional 81,000 square feet for future expansion , CTCA opened the Philadelphia location on December 19 , 2005 .
With a total of 200,025 square - foot facility , the Philadelphia location became CTCA 's first hospital on the east coast .
Hospital expansion continued again in October 2007 when CTCA broke ground on a new facility in Goodyear , Arizona .
During its construction , about 300 cancer survivors , signed a commemorative steal beam called the " Beam of Hope " at Hohokam Stadium ( the spring training park for the Chicago Cubs ) .
After signing , the beam was taken back to the hospital and incorporated into facility .
Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Phoenix opened its doors to a 210,000-square - foot hospital on December 29 , 2008 servicing patients primary from the west coast .
To reduce burden from patient travel , CTCA continue to explore opportunities in the southeast portion of the United States .
On August 3 , 2011 , Georgia Lt . Governor Casey Cagle and over 140 cancer patients attended a ground - breaking ceremony in Newnan , Georgia .
During the hospital 's construction , on the 100-day countdown , a collection of patients , caregivers , spiritual representatives and staff participated in a ceremony writing inspirational messages over the floor to signify the beginning .
On September 18 , 2012 , Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Atlanta opened its doors to patients .
Outpatient Expansion
In 2017 , Cancer treatment Centers of America expended it 's network and opened up three " outpatient care centers " near their primary hospital locations .
These are located in Downtown Chicago , North Phoenix and Scottsdale Arizona .
Key Dates !
Year ! !
Event LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
Cancer Treatment Centers of America
® ( CTCA ) serves cancer patients across the United States and abroad through a network of five comprehensive cancer care and research centers ( hospitals ) and three outpatient cancer care centers .
Each cancer hospital has earned accreditations and certifications from the Joint Commissions , American College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer , and National Accreditation Program of Breast Centers and is an active participate in clinical trial and TAPUR research studies .
CTCA COMPREHENSIVE CANCER CARE AND RESEARCH CENTERS
( HOSPITALS )
* Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Atlanta ( formerly Southeastern Regional Medical Center )
* Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Chicago ( formerly Midwestern Regional Medical Center )
* Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Philadelphia ( formerly Eastern Regional Medical Center )
* Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Phoenix ( formerly Western Regional Medical Center )
* Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Tulsa ( formerly Southwestern Regional Medical Center ) CTCA OUTPATIENT CANCER CARE
CENTERS
* Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Downtown Chicago * Cancer Treatment Centers of America , North Phoenix * Cancer Treatment Centers of America , Scottsdale CTCA opened the organization 's first international patient concierge and information office in the Lomas de Chapultepec neighborhood of Mexico City on April 20 , 2015 .
CTCA also maintains an active brand presence in the Middle East , the Caribbean and Latin America , offering patients in these regions the opportunity to pursue treatment at one of the hospital system 's five U.S. comprehensive cancer care and research centers .
ACCREDITATION Section::::Accreditation .
CTCA hospitals have earned Full Standards Compliance from the Joint Commission , as well as the Top Performer on Key Quality Measures and the Magnet Award .
CTCA has also been recognized for strong patient satisfaction scores , with four CTCA hospitals ( Atlanta , Chicago , Philadelphia , Tulsa ) earning Five Star quality ratings by the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) and recognition by various leading health care organizations , including the Association of Community Cancer Centers and the American College of Radiology .
Another accreditation comes from the National Accreditation Program for Breast Centers , which has awarded three - year full accreditations for the breast programs at four CTCA hospitals ( Chicago , Philadelphia , Phoenix , Tulsa ) .
The NABPC has established 27 standards that must be met , including : breast center leadership , research , community outreach , professional education , clinical management and quality improvement .
CLINICAL SERVICES Section::::Clinical Services .
Cancer Treatment Centers of America offers conventional cancer care treatments such as surgical oncology , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , immunotherapy , stem cell transplantation , and targeted therapy in conjunction with supportive therapies such as nutrition , mind - body medicine , and spiritual support to support healing and manage side effects .
When appropriate , CTCA will offer genomic testing to patients to identify tumor markers that may respond to chemotherapies that may have not been typically prescribed .
Cancer Treatment Centers of America also provide cancer specific centers for the following diseases at select locations :
* Breast Cancer * Lung Cancer * Gastrointestinal ( GI ) cancers
In addition , Cancer Treatment Centers of America offers several clinical trials at all five of their hospitals and is an active participate in studies offered through clinicaltrials.gov program .
In 2016 , CTCA offered the TAPUR study also known as the Targeted Agent and Profiling Utilization Registry study .
This was led by the American Society of Clinical Oncology ( ASCO ) .
The study aimed to improve our understanding of how commercially available anti - cancer drugs perform on a broader range of cancers , by matching the drugs to tumors with specific genomic mutations that the drugs are designed to target .
CONTROVERSY * Cancer Treatment Centers of America was the subject of a Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) complaint in 1993 .
The FTC alleged that CTCA made false claims regarding the success rates of certain cancer treatments in CTCA 's marketing and promotional materials .
This claim was settled in March 1996 with an injunction , requiring CTCA to discontinue use of any unsubstantiated claims in its advertising .
CTCA is also required to have proven , scientific evidence for all statements regarding the safety , success rates , endorsements , and benefits of its cancer treatments .
CTCA was also required to follow various steps in order to report compliance to the FTC per the settlement .
The injunction expired in 2016 with no violations over the 20 year period .
*
In 2001 , the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) issued CTCA a Warning Letter concerning three clinical trials that were conducted in violation of FDA requirements .
The FDA currently has no warning letters published on its website for Cancer Treatment Centers of America .
*
In 2013 , oncologist David Gorski , writing for Science Blogs , published an article that criticized CTCA for using pseudoscientific treatments ( e.g. , homeopathy ) in addition to mainstream treatments .
He stated that some " otherwise talented doctors " are now " complicit in the blurring of the line between science and pseudoscience in medicine while believing that they are doing good for the patient by giving them ' holistic care ' .
" The National Cancer Institute ( NCI ) claims that some complementary therapies ( CAM ) have undergone careful evaluation and have been found to be safe and effective .
Patients considering CAM therapies should talk to a licensed clinician to ensure there are no complications and unintended consequences with their treatment .
*
It was reported that CTCA made misleading survival rate claims on its website .
Cancer experts reviewed CTCA 's claims that its survival rates were better than national averages .
CTCA compared its outcomes with the National Cancer Institute 's Surveillance , Epidemiology , and End Results ( SEER ) database .
The experts said that CTCA 's patients and SEER 's patients were not compatible , and that the comparison was biased in favor of CTCA .
For example , CTCA 's patients were younger , and better - insured .
CTCA screened patients for insurance coverage , and limited access to those who are on Medicare , Medicaid , or uninsured .
Additional details on CTCA treatment results on methodology and sources of information can be found on the issued CTCA treatment results publication .
* L. Kirk Hagen , humanities professor at the University of Houston - Downtown , points out that in CTCA 's Web site is a disclaimer that reads "
[ The CTCA ] makes no claims about the efficacy of specific treatments , the delivery of care , nor the meaning of the CTCA and SEER analysis . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Cancer Treatment Centers of America ( CTCA ) on YouTube