CROSS LISTING
Cross listing of shares is when a firm lists its equity shares on one or more foreign stock exchange in addition to its domestic exchange .
This concept is distinctly different than examples such as : American Depositary Receipt ( ADR ) , European Depositary Receipt ( EDR ) , global depository receipt ( GDR ) ( also referred to as international depository receipt ) , and Global Registered Shares ( GRS ) .
ADRs , GDRs and the like are a mechanism to repackage a security primarily listed on an Exchange ( such as Frankfurt ) to enable it to be purchased by an investor outside of that market ( such as within the US on the NYSE ) .
This is a distinct instrument , as not all the rights may come with the ADR ( GDR , EDR , IDR , etc . ) , and the ADR is subject to the fluctuations of the underlying currency .
The original issue ( on Frankfurt ) would be priced in EUR , while the ADR is priced in USD .
In most cases , the ADR is convertible back into the original instrument ( but needs to go through a process of conversion ) .
The ADR ( GDR , IDR , EDR , etc . )
also receives a different ISIN number , recognizing that it is not the same fungible instrument as the underlying stock .
However , many companies cross - list , in which the stock is technically fungible between exchanges .
Royal Dutch Shell , IBM , and Siemens are all examples where the same issue is traded in multiple markets ( " multi - listed " ) .
However , in Frankfurt and Paris , they are traded in EUR , London in GBP , and on NYSE in USD .
Prices are subject to local market conditions , as well as FX fluctuations and are not kept in perfect parity between markets .
They tend to be more liquid than ADRs , GDRs and those types of conventions .
While ' technically ' fungible , these separate primary listings ( they would all be considered ' primary ' listings ) are subject to re - registration which creates significant settlement risk if an investor wants to buy on one exchange and sell in another ( especially where the currencies differ ) .
This primary listing activity is distinctly different than secondary listings , such as listings from the NYSE carried on regional exchanges such as Boston , Philadelphia or others within the same marketplace , or on MTF 's ( Multilateral trading facility ) such as Chi - X or BATS .
Also , this is distinct from being ' admitted for trading ' where a foreign share is accessible in a different market through an exchange convention and not actually registered within that different market .
Generally such a company 's primary listing is on a stock exchange in its country of incorporation , and its secondary listing(s ) is / are on an exchange in another country .
Cross - listing is especially common for companies that started out in a small market but grew into a larger market .
For example , numerous large non - U.S. companies are listed on the New York Stock Exchange or NASDAQ as well as on their respective national exchanges such as Enbridge , BlackBerry Ltd , Statoil , Ericsson , Nokia , Toyota and Sony .
CROSS-/MULTI - LISTING VS .
DEPOSITORY RECEIPTS Section::::Cross-/Multi - listing vs. Depository Receipts .
Depository Receipts are instruments derived from another underlying instrument while Multi - listed instruments represent the actual stock of a company .
Depository Receipts are convertible back to ordinary shares , following a process dependent upon the sponsoring facility that created the instrument .
Ownership of a Depository Receipt does not convey the same rights as a direct holder of equity shares until the Receipt is surrendered and converted into an actual equity share holding .
Multi listed or cross - listed shares , by contrast , are technically the same financial instrument .
Fungibility is a concern across markets .
For example , shares of IBM can not be purchased on NYSE and sold , same - day , on the London Stock Exchange , even though IBM is cross listed in both markets .
There is a re - registration process that must occur to move the number of outstanding shares from one jurisdiction to the other .
This is primarily due to market inefficiencies and structures required to maintain the integrity of registered shares within specific jurisdictions ( typically regulatory driven ) .
CROSS-/MULTI - LISTING VS .
ADMITTED FOR TRADING Section::::Cross-/Multi - listing vs. Admitted for Trading .
Shares traded in a true cross listing / multi listed scenario are processed , matched and settled via the market mechanisms specific to the local exchange .
In this regard , even though shares of IBM bought on NYSE and shares of IBM purchased on LSE are technically the same instrument , those purchased on NYSE will settle via the mechanisms associated with NYSE and the DTCC in the United States .
Those shares purchased on the LSE will settle via the mechanisms of the LSE and CREST in the United Kingdom .
Shares ' admitted for trading ' , such as IBM listed via ARCA in Frankfurt , will settle via DTCC .
It is important to note that IBM is also cross - listed in Frankfurt , in which case , those transactions will settle via the local German market processes .
MOTIVATIONS FOR CROSS - LISTING Section::::Motivations for Cross - Listing .
The academic literature has identified a number of different arguments to cross - list abroad in addition to a listing on the domestic exchange .
Roosenboom and Van Dijk ( 2009 ) distinguish between the following motivations : * Market segmentation : The traditional argument for why firms seek a cross - listing is that they expect to benefit from a lower cost of capital that arises because their shares become more accessible to global investors whose access would otherwise be restricted because of international investment barriers .
* Market liquidity : Cross - listings on deeper and more liquid equity markets could lead to an increase in the liquidity of the stock and a decrease in the cost of capital .
* Information disclosure : Cross - listing on a foreign market can reduce the cost of capital through an improvement of the firm 's information environment .
Firms can use a cross - listing on markets with stringent disclosure requirements to signal their quality to outside investors and to provide improved information to potential customers and suppliers ( for example , by adopting US GAAP ) .
Also , cross - listings tend to be associated with increased media attention , greater analyst coverage , better analysts ' forecast accuracy , and higher quality of accounting information .
* Investor protection ( " bonding " )
: Recently , there is a growing academic literature on the so - called " bonding " argument .
According to this view , cross - listing in the United States acts as a bonding mechanism used by firms that are incorporated in a jurisdiction with poor investor protection and enforcement systems to commit themselves voluntarily to higher standards of corporate governance .
In this way , firms attract investors who would otherwise be reluctant to invest .
* Other motivations :
Cross - listing may also be driven by product and labor market considerations ( for example , to increase visibility with customers by broadening product identification ) , to facilitate foreign acquisitions , and to improve labor relations in foreign countries by introducing share and option plans for foreign employees .
COSTS OF CROSS - LISTING Section::::Costs of cross - listing .
There are , however , also disadvantages in deciding to cross - list : increased pressure on executives due to closer public scrutiny ; increased reporting and disclosure requirements ; additional scrutiny by analysts in advanced market economies , and additional listing fees .
Some financial media have argued that the implementation of the Sarbanes - Oxley act in the United States has made the NYSE less attractive for cross - listings , but recent academic research finds little evidence to support this , see Doidge , Karolyi , and Stulz ( 2007 ) .
WHAT DO MANAGERS SAY ?
Section::::What do managers say ?
A questionnaire asking managers of international companies has shown that firms cross - list in the United States mainly because of specific U.S. business reasons ( for instance U.S. acquisitions , U.S. business expansion and publicity ) , liquidity and status of U.S. capital markets , and industry specific reasons ( listing of competitors , benefits of financial analysts ) .
Meeting SEC disclosure requirements and preparing US - GAAP reconciliations were cited as the most important disadvantages .
Officials of ADR companies without an official listing ( Level I and Rule 144A ADR 's ) perceived the expansion of the U.S. shareholder base as the principal benefit followed by specific U.S. business reasons .
On the question of what deters them from an official US listing , they mentioned the time - consuming and expensive US - GAAP reconciliations as well as listing fees as the hardest impediments .
Additional disclosure requirements were cited as less difficult to overcome .
DO CROSS - LISTINGS CREATE VALUE ?
Section::::Do cross - listings create value ?
There is a vast academic literature on the impact of cross - listings on the value of the cross - listed firms .
Most studies ( for example , Miller , 1999 ) find that a cross - listing on a U.S. stock market by a non - U.S. firm is associated with a significantly positive stock price reaction in the home market .
This finding suggests that the stock market expects the cross - listing to have a positive impact on firm value .
Doidge , Karolyi , and Stulz ( 2004 ) show that companies with a cross - listing in the United States have a higher valuation than non - cross - listed corporations , especially for firms with high growth opportunities domiciled in countries with relatively weak investor protection .
The premium they find is larger for companies listed at official US stock exchanges ( Level II and III ADR programs ) than for over - the - counter listings ( Level I ADR program ) and private placements ( Rule 144A ADR 's ) .
Doidge , Karolyi , and Stulz ( 2004 ) argue that a cross - listing in the United States reduces the extent to which controlling shareholders can engage in expropriation ( through " bonding " to the high corporate governance standards in the United States ) and thereby increases the firm 's ability to take advantage of growth opportunities .
Recent research , shows that the listing premium for crosslisting has evaporated , due to new U.S. regulations and competition from other exchanges .
Some recent academic research finds that smaller foreign firms seeking cross listing venues may be opting for UK exchanges over U.S. exchanges due to the costs imposed by the Sarbanes - Oxley Act .
On the other hand , larger firms seeking " bonding " benefits from a U.S. listing continue to seek a U.S. exchange listing .
There are also studies , however , such as Sarkissian and Schill ( 2009 ) , who argue that cross - listings do not create long - term valuation benefits .
The academic literature largely ignores cross - listings on non - U.S. exchanges .
However , there are many cross - listings on exchanges in Europe and Asia .
Even U.S. firms are cross - listed in other countries .
In the 1950s there was a wave of cross - listings of U.S. firms in Belgium , in the 1960s in France , in the 1970s in the U.K. , and in the 1980s in Japan ( see Sarkissian and Schill , 2014 ) .
Roosenboom and van Dijk ( 2009 ) analyze 526 cross - listings from 44 different countries on 8 major stock exchanges and document significant stock price reactions of 1.3 % on average for cross - listings on US exchanges , 1.1 % on London Stock Exchange , 0.6 % on exchanges in continental Europe , and 0.5 % on Tokyo Stock Exchange .
These findings suggest that cross - listings on Anglo - Saxon exchanges create more value than on other exchanges .
They also highlight the incomplete understanding of why firms cross - list outside the UK and the United States , as many of the arguments discussed above ( enhanced liquidity , improved disclosure , and bonding ) do not apply .
In this respect , Sarkissian and Schill ( 2014 ) show that cross - listing activity in a given host country coincides with the outperformance of host and proximate home country 's economies and financial markets , thus , highlighting the market timing component in cross - listing decisions .
SEE ALSO
* Cross border listings
REFERENCES * Lubberink and Huijgen , " Earnings Conservatism and Equity Raisings of Cross - listed Firms " , unpublished working paper * Piotroski , Joseph D. and Srinivasan , Suraj , " Regulation and Bonding : The Sarbanes - Oxley Act and the Flow of International Listings " , ( January 2008 ) .
Available at SSRN
* Khanna , Tarun , Palepu , Krishna and Srinivasan , Suraj , " Disclosure Practices of Foreign Companies Interacting with U.S. Markets " ( December 2003 ) .
Harvard Business School Strategy Unit Working Paper No . 03 - 081
Available at SSRN or EXTERNAL LINKS
* Research and data on cross - listings on the website of Mathijs A. van Dijk .