ASCENDING LIMB OF LOOP OF HENLE
Within the nephron of the kidney , the ascending limb of the loop of Henle is a segment of the loop of Henle downstream of the descending limb , after the sharp bend of the loop .
This part of the renal tubule is divided into a thin and thick ascending limb ; the thick portion is also known as the distal straight tubule , in contrast with the distal convoluted tubule downstream .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The ascending limb of the loop of Henle is a direct continuation from the descending limb of loop of Henle , and one of the structures in the nephron of the kidney .
The ascending limb has a thin and a thick segment .
The ascending limb drains urine into the distal convoluted tubule .
The thin ascending limb is found in the medulla of the kidney , and the thick ascending limb can be divided into a part that is in the renal medulla and a part that is in the renal cortex .
The ascending limb is much thicker than the descending limb .
HISTOLOGY Section::::Histology .
As in the descending limb , the epithelium is simple squamous epithelium .
FUNCTION THIN ASCENDING
LIMB Section::::Function .
Section::::Thin ascending limb .
The thin ascending limb is impermeable to water ; but is permeable to ions that cross by diffusion .
Water moves out of the tubule and into the interstitium due to osmotic pressure created by the countercurrent system .
THICK ASCENDING
LIMB Section::::Thick ascending limb .
Functionally , the parts of the ascending limb in the medulla and cortex are very similar .
The medullary ascending limb is impermeable to water .
Sodium ( Na ) , potassium ( K ) and chloride
( Cl ) ions are reabsorbed by active transport .
K is passively transported along its concentration gradient through a K leak channel in the apical aspect of the cells , back into the lumen of the ascending limb .
This K " leak " generates a positive electrochemical potential difference in the lumen .
This drives more paracellular reabsorption of Na , as well as other cations such as magnesium ( Mg ) and importantly calcium Ca due to charge repulsion .
This is also the part of the tubule that generates Tamm - Horsfall protein .
The function of this protein is not well understood , but is responsible for creating urinary casts .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
The thick ascending limb symporter :
Na - K - Cl cotransporter .
SEE ALSO
* Descending limb of loop of Henle REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Overview at vet.cornell.edu