COLES GROUP
Coles Group Limited ( formerly Coles Myer Limited ) is an Australian public company operating numerous retail chains .
It was Australia 's second - largest retailer , behind Woolworths Limited , until it was acquired by Western Australian public company Wesfarmers , with transfer of ownership on 23 November 2007 .
The corporate operations ceased at head office in Melbourne from that point , instead based at Wesfarmers head office in Perth .
Coles Group was spun - off from Westfarmers in November 2018 , with the company once again listed as a public company on the Australian Stock Exchange , containing Coles Supermarkets , Coles Express , Coles liquor division and a half - share in FlyBuys , with most of the other entities from the former Coles Group remaining as part of Wesfarmers .
HISTORY COLES Section::::History .
Section::::Coles .
In 1914 , the first Coles " variety store " was opened in Melbourne .
Coles was founded in 1914 by George Coles when he opened what was called the " Coles Variety Store " in Smith Street in the Melbourne suburb of Collingwood .
More stores opened and the chain was regarded as the leaders in providing value to Australian shoppers .
The building formerly occupied by the original Coles Variety Store is now the location of a Woolworths outlet - the major competitor to Coles .
Coles was run in succession by members of the Coles family from 1914 until the mid-1970s by the " famous five knights " , brothers Sir George , Sir Arthur , Sir Edgar , Sir Kenneth and Sir Norman — known by their first initials — GJ , AW , EB , KF , NC .
In 1960 , the first supermarket was opened in the Melbourne suburb of North Balwyn and in 1973 , a Coles store had been established in all capital cities of the country .
Kmart Australia Limited was born out of a joint venture between G.J Coles & Coy ( Coles ) and Kmart Corporation in the US .
The first store opened in the Melbourne suburb of Burwood in 1969 .
In 1978 Coles acquired full ownership of the Australian K - Mart operation and in 1994 bought back all shares Kmart Corporation held in Coles Myer .
A long - term licensing agreement allows Coles Group to use the Kmart name .
Kmart New Zealand shares merchandise and branding with Kmart Australia , and is owned by Coles Group Holdings New Zealand .
In Australia , BI - LO was established by John Weekes in Adelaide during the late 1970s .
It is a major supermarket chain owned and operated by retail giant Coles Group in parallel to Coles Supermarkets .
It has more than 200 stores in Australia .
A new head office opened in 1987 at Hawthorn East , Melbourne .
As of 2008 , it remained the head office for Coles Supermarkets and associated subsidiaries .
In 1996 , BI - LO acquired the six - store Newmart discount supermarket chain in Western Australia which then became the equivalent to BI - LO in Western Australia .
By August 2002 , it grew to 16 stores before being transferred to the management and being re branded as Coles , though some stores were sold off to Foodland Associated Limited and became Action Supermarkets .
Coles Group Limited was listed on the Australian Securities Exchange with the code CGJ , which references back to its first ever registered company name of G.J. Coles & Coy Proprietary Limited .
The company has in the past been listed on the NYSE ( de - listed 6 January 2006 ) , the New Zealand Stock Exchange ( de - listed 1989 ) and the London Stock Exchange .
MYER Section::::Myer .
Sidney Myer arrived in Melbourne in 1899 , working briefly at a drapery store before moving to Bendigo where he and his partner , Jacob Slonim , opened the first store in 1900 .
A second store opened in 1908 .
In 1911 Myer bought a drapery store in Bourke Street , Melbourne , which later became the flagship Myer store , the Myer Emporium .
Myer expanded to Adelaide , acquiring a shareholding in Marshall 's department store in 1925 , later renaming this company as
Myer SA Stores Ltd. Expansion across Australia followed .
( Myer was bought from Coles Myer in 2006 causing the name change to Coles Group . )
MERGER OF GJ COLES AND MYER Section::::Merger of GJ Coles and Myer .
Both chains grew throughout Australia through growth and acquisitions , and both independently listed on the Australian Stock Exchange .
By the 1980s , Coles primarily operated supermarkets , whilst Myer ( Myer Emporium Limited ) operated the department store chains Myer and Grace Bros , as well as the Target discount variety store chain in Australia .
In August 1985 , the Myer Emporium Ltd and GJ Coles & Coy Ltd merged , becoming the largest ever Australian Corporation .
The official name change to " Coles Myer Limited " followed in January 1986 .
AFTER THE MERGER Section::::After the merger .
The office stationery chain Officeworks , based on the US chain Office Depot , was established in 1993 with the first store opening in the Melbourne suburb of Richmond in June 1994 .
This represented a successful introduction of a " category killer " - by comparison , around the same time Coles unsuccessfully attempted to negate the arrival of Toys " R " Us with the short - lived chain World 4 Kids .
In 1996 , the operations of Target and Fosseys ( earlier " Coles Fosseys " ) merged and the first Baby Target speciality store was opened , followed in 1998 by Target Home .
In 1999 , regional Fosseys stores were re - badged as Target Country , with metropolitan stores closed .
Following Target 's operating loss of $ 43 m in 2001 , the chain 's format was repositioned to compete less with Kmart , Woolworths Limited 's Big W , Harris Scarfe and The Warehouse , and more with Myer , with a focus on " middle class " quality products , especially clothing and home wares .
In 1998 , Coles Myer opened the first Megamart store , in Coorparoo , Queensland .
Harris Technology , a computer hardware and software reseller started by Ron Harris in 1986 , was acquired in 1999 .
By 2001 , Coles Myer planned to expand the Megamart chain of furniture and electrical stores , but by 2005 had decided to divest the struggling chain .
Six of the nine stores were sold to competitor Harvey Norman , with the remainder closed .
In 2001 , the Company appointed John Fletcher , formerly of Brambles , as chief executive .
Fletcher engineered a brief turnaround in the company 's fortunes .
Fletcher abolished the shareholder discount card , on the basis that it had eroded margins while providing little benefit , and was unpopular with institutional investors .
Since their introduction in the early 1990s , the card had induced a tenfold increase in the number of Coles Myer 's shareholders , with the overwhelming majority owning only small parcels of shares .
Fletcher also engineered the acquisition of the retail fuel operations of Shell Australia with the fuel outlets rebranded as Coles Express , allowing Coles Group to counter the success of Woolworths ' discount petrol operation .
Woolworths subsequently gained entry to part of Caltex Australia 's network to provide a recognised brand for its fuel offer .
SALE OF MYER Section::::Sale of Myer .
In August 2005 , Coles Myer called for expressions of interest in selling the perennially underperforming Myer department stores .
There was significant interest from both Australian and overseas investors , including the Myer family .
On 13 March 2006 , Coles Myer announced it would sell Myer to a consortium largely controlled by US private equity group Newbridge Capital , part of the Texas Pacific Group .
The Myer family retained a 5 % stake .
Texas Pacific had interests in UK department store Debenhams and high - end US retailer Neiman Marcus .
The sale was completed in June 2006 .
With the sale of Myer , the parent company received shareholder approval to rename as Coles Group Ltd , effective 27 November 2006 .
SALE OF COLES GROUP Section::::Sale of Coles Group .
Coles Group planned to rebrand its assorted holdings under the Coles name , with plans to have all holdings other than Officeworks and Target rebranded by late 2007 .
This plan was not well received by investors , most of whom reportedly believed that such a significant change to the flagship supermarkets business would be too risky and cause an eventual decline in market share .
( The plan was eventually put on hold in March 2007 due to the proposed sale of Coles Group . )
In August 2006 , Coles announced that a group of private equity companies led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &
Co. ( KKR ) was looking to buy the company , with an initial proposal of $ 14.50 per share .
The Coles board rejected the offer stating it significantly undervalued the company , and was conditional on a due diligence process , without a guarantee that the deal would go ahead .
A second proposal of $ 15.25 per share in October 2006 was rejected for largely the same reasons .
In November 2006 , long - term senior supermarkets executive Peter Scott was dismissed for an unspecified breach of the company 's code of conduct .
On 23 February 2007 , the company announced a downgrade of expected earnings and that it was considering ownership options , including the possibility of a full sale of the business or a restructuring such as a demerger .
On 20 March 2007 , it deferred its plans to rebrand Kmart under the Coles banner and create supercentres , and subsequently paused its conversion of BI - LO stores to Coles Supermarkets given the lack of success of this move .
On 23 March , Coles Group stated it planned to sell its businesses as either an entire package , or in three parts ( Officeworks , Target and the remaining businesses Kmart , Coles , Bi - Lo , Liquorland , Vintage Cellars and First Choice Liquor ) .
On 3 April , Solomon Lew , the former chairman and long - time antagonist of the current board and management team , sold his 5.8 % shareholding of the company .
A large portion of these shares were bought by Wesfarmers , which was believed to be part of a consortium of bidders including Macquarie Bank , PEP and Permira .
The share price at which the transaction took place was reportedly $ 16.47 , then 2.2 % above the market price .
A bid for the entire company at this price would have valued Coles Group at A$ 19.7 billion , well above the two KKR proposals announced in 2006 .
In May 2007 , Coles reported its slowest sales growth in at least seven years with continuing poor performance from Coles Supermarkets and Kmart .
On 2 July 2007 , Wesfarmers announced it intended to buy Coles Group for $ 22 billion , the largest take - over bid in Australia .
The sale was expected to be completed in October 2007 .
In August 2007 , Wesfarmers foreshadowed its plans for the restructuring of Coles Group following its anticipated takeover , including investment of A$ 5 billion , establishing three separate divisions ( including a combined Bunnings / Officeworks " big box " retailing division ) , the possible sale of Kmart , and the exit of Coles Group from its head office base at Tooronga .
The independent expert report published in October 2007 , advising shareholders preparatory to the proposed sale was critical of the culture within Coles Group .
At a shareholder meeting in Melbourne on 7 November 2007 , shareholders voted overwhelmingly with 99.25 % approval of the sale of Coles Group to Wesfarmers .
The Scheme of Arrangement between Coles Group and its shareholders was approved by the Supreme Court of Victoria on 9 November 2007 , the last day Coles Group shares traded on the Australian Securities Exchange .
The Scheme was implemented on 23 November 2007 , ending Coles Group as a company with its subsidiaries merged into Wesfarmers ' business structure .
RELISTING
Section::::Relisting .
Coles Group Limited was spun - off from Westfarmers on 21 November 2018 , with the company once again listed as a public company on the Australian Stock Exchange under the trading code , debuting at A$ 12.49 .
At the time of listing , the company includes 806 Coles Supermarkets , 712 Coles Express outlets , 894 liquor stores including Liquorland , Vintage Cellars and First Choice Liquor , Coles - branded financial services and 88 Spirit Hotels , as well as joint - ownership of the FlyBuys loyalty program .
Wesfarmers retained a 15 percent stake in Coles Group as well as full ownership of Kmart , Target and Officeworks , which were previously part of the former Coles Group incarnation .
BUSINESSES
* Coles Supermarkets : the second - largest supermarket chain in Australia .
*
Liquorland :
Liquor chain , with some outlets attached to Coles or Bi - Lo Supermarkets , but run separately .
Also operates some hotels via a subsidiary .
* Vintage Cellars : Liquor chain with an orientation towards fine wines
* 1st Choice Liquor Superstore : Liquor chain comprising larger stores which compete more directly with Woolworths ' Dan Murphy 's * Coles Express : re branded Shell service stations offering convenience stores and fuel products .
Before Coles Myer Ltd took over Shell service stations , Coles Express was the name used for smaller , inner - urban Coles supermarkets which are now known as Coles Central .
* flybuys loyalty program FORMER BRANDS
* BI - LO : a budget supermarket chain .
Until 2001 , Bi - Lo traded as Newmart in Western Australia .
In August 2006 Coles Group began to re - brand BI - LO stores as Coles Supermarket or divested them , but this activity was placed on hold in 2007 pending the sale of Coles Group .
*
Coles SuperCentres were planned to open from September 2007 , with many sourced from either existing Pick
' n Pay Hypermarkets or former ' Super K ' stores , which were divided in the 1990s into separate Coles and Kmart stores .
However these plans were put on hold in March 2007 pending the sale of Coles Group .
Then in August 2007 , Wesfarmers CEO Richard Goyder said super centres would almost certainly not be part of the Wesfarmers approach after taking over Coles Group .
* Harris Technology :
Computer hardware and software reseller with strong online presence , oriented towards corporate customers .
* Kmart : chain of discount department stores , originally 51 % owned by the US S.S. Kresge Company ( later Kmart Corporation ) , but bought out by Coles Myer in 1994 .
Kmart also operates the automotive servicing brand Kmart Tyre & Auto Service .
Until 2006 , Kmart also operated a Garden Super Centre brand .
In August 2006 Coles Group announced that Kmart would be replaced by the Coles brand , but this plan was deferred in March 2007 pending the sale of Coles Group .
* Kmart Tyre & Auto Service : car servicing outlets were attached to All Kmart department stores .
All Shell Autoserv outlets attached to Shell petrol stations were bought by the Kmart Tyre & Auto Service business in early 2006 .
* Officeworks : Large office supplies network , stocking stationery , office and school supplies , computer hardware and software , and office furniture .
* Pick ' n Pay Hypermarket : two " hypermarkets " located in suburbs of Brisbane .
( Rebranded to Coles and Kmart in late 2012 )
* Target : chain of discount department stores whose name and logo was originally purchased from Target Corporation by Myer Emporium Limited in 1968 .
Target Australia is otherwise not related to Target Corporation .
Operates in some regional areas as " Target Country " , smaller stores which were previously branded " Fosseys " .
REFERENCES