NESTOR CARBONELL
Néstor Gastón Carbonell (; born December 1 , 1967 ) is an American actor , director , and screenwriter .
He came to prominence for his role as Luis Rivera in the NBC sitcom Suddenly Susan .
He is known for his roles as Richard Alpert in the ABC drama series Lost and Sheriff Alex Romero in the A&E drama series Bates Motel .
Carbonell also starred as Mayor Anthony Garcia in Christopher Nolan 's superhero films The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) and The Dark Knight Rises ( 2012 ) .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Carbonell was born in New York City to Cuban parents Néstor Tulio Carbonell Cortina and Rosa Ramírez de Arellano Cárdenas .
His parents are of Spanish descent ( his grandparents were of Catalan , Basque , Navarran , and Andalusian origins ) .
Carbonell 's father worked for PepsiCo , which required the family to live for periods of time in London , Mexico City , the Bahamas , and Caracas .
His father is also active in the Cuban community , authoring the book
And The Russians Stayed :
The Sovietization of Cuba .
Carbonell has an older sister , Rosa Maria " Mia " Carbonell , a Senior Vice President of Corporate Communications at Forbes .
Former professional baseball player Rafael Palmeiro is his cousin .
His paternal great - grandfather , José Manuel Cortina , was a noted Cuban orator and diplomat .
Carbonell was educated at The British School while living in Caracas .
His family later moved back to the U.S. , and he attended Deerfield Academy in Massachusetts with future Lost co - star Matthew Fox .
In 1990 , he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in English from Harvard University ( also the alma mater of his father and sister ) .
Carbonell was raised a Roman Catholic .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Carbonell 's first acting role was a guest starring part as Alberto Cordova in an episode of As the World Turns .
He then appeared in episodes of Law & Order , Melrose Place , A Different World , Reasonable Doubts , Good Advice , Brotherly Love , and The John Larroquette Show .
In 1995 , he starred in a dual role , Roberto and one half of the Couple in Bar , in Stephen Sondheim and George Furth 's play Getting Away with Murder .
That same year , he appeared as a main cast member on the short - lived The WB sitcom Muscle .
He subsequently portrayed the regular role of Luis Rivera on the Brooke Shields - led sitcom Suddenly Susan for four seasons ( 19962000 ) .
For much of his early career , he played characters with thick Hispanic accents , and was so convincing that people thought it was how he actually sounded .
One of his first obstacles in Hollywood was convincing them that in reality he did n't have an accent and that he is capable of doing broader roles .
In 2000 , Carbonell made his debut as a screenwriter with the comedy film Attention Shoppers , in which he also starred as Enrique Suarez , the lead role .
He has since had recurring roles on Resurrection Blvd .
, The Tick , Kim Possible ( as the voice of Señor Senior Jr. ) , Century City , Strong Medicine , and Cold Case .
He also guest starred on Scrubs ( in the episode " My Moment of Un - Truth " ) , House ( in the episode " Cursed " ) , Monk ( in the episode " Mr. Monk Gets Married " ) , and Day Break ( in the episode "
What If He Can Change the Day ? " ) .
In 2006 , he appeared alongside his future Lost co - star Matthew Fox , as assassin Pasquale Acosta , in the film Smokin ' Aces .
Carbonell was cast as Richard Alpert on the third season of ABC 's drama series Lost .
The mysteries surrounding his ageless character were heavily discussed among the fan community throughout his arc in the season .
While producing the final episodes of the third season , Carbonell was cast in a starring role as Frank Duque on the CBS series Cane .
The writers of Lost modified their original story plan for the third season in anticipation for Carbonell 's potential unavailability .
Despite Carbonell 's willingness to return to the ABC series , CBS president Nina Tassler ruled out another guest appearance .
Cane was cancelled during the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike , freeing Carbonell from his contract with CBS .
In 2008 , Lost showrunner Carlton Cuse stated that Carbonell would reprise his role as Richard Alpert towards the end of the series ' fourth season , as a result of Cane cancellation .
Carbonell made appearances in the episodes " Cabin Fever " and " There 's No Place Like Home " .
Cuse cited this as an unintended positive consequence of the strike .
Carbonell appeared in nine episodes of the fifth season , and was upgraded to a main cast member of Lost for its sixth and final season .
In 2008 , he landed the role of Mayor Anthony Garcia in Christopher Nolan 's The Dark Knight .
His wife , Shannon Kenny , was previously involved in a Batman project , voicing the character Inque in the Batman Beyond television series .
In 2010 , Carbonell joined the series Psych for two episodes playing Declan Rand , a criminal profiler .
In 2011 , Carbonell starred in the CW series Ringer as FBI agent Victor Machado .
Also in 2011 , he was announced to guest star in FX comedy series Wilfred , a role which later turned into a recurring one .
The following year , Carbonell briefly appeared in The Dark Knight Rises , reprising his role as Mayor Anthony Garcia in the final installment of Christopher Nolan 's Dark Knight trilogy .
From 2013 to the series ' ending in 2017 , he portrayed Sheriff Alex Romero in the A&E Psycho prequel series Bates Motel , opposite Vera Farmiga and Freddie Highmore .
In the first season , he starred in a recurring capacity , but was upgraded to a main cast member starting with the second season .
Carbonell also directed three episodes of the series .
In 2014 , he guest starred on the CBS drama series Person of Interest in the episode " Most Likely to ... " , and on the CBS political drama series The Good Wife in the episode " The Deep Web " .
That same year , he began recurring as Raymond Navaro in NBC 's espionage thriller series State of Affairs .
In 2017 , Carbonell directed the episode " Apple " of the ABC drama series The Good Doctor , starring his Bates Motel co - star Highmore .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Carbonell has been married to Australian actress Shannon Kenny since January 3 , 2001 .
They originally met while working together on the 1995 television series Muscle and went on to co - star in the 2000 film Attention Shoppers , which Carbonell wrote .
The couple have two children , Rafael ( born 2002 ) and Marco ( born 2005 ) .
He is a practicing Roman Catholic .
Carbonell 's dark eyelashes have been a staple topic of discussion in interviews , and both Carbonell and the producers of Lost made it clear they are not enhanced by any form of makeup .
A short skit during the Lost panel at the 2009 San Diego Comic - Con International featured Carbonell allegedly applying eyeliner before throwing a Christian Bale - esque rant upon receiving the wrong color makeup from an assistant .
In a season 5 episode of Lost , James " Sawyer " Ford refers to Carbonell 's character as " your buddy out there with the eyeliner . "
In addition , in the Psych episode " Shawn 2.0 " , Shawn Spencer makes a comment about him having " impossibly dark eyelashes . "
He is fluent in Spanish , a skill he put to use in the sixth - season episode of Lost ,
" Ab Aeterno " , in which numerous scenes contain dialogue mostly or solely in Spanish .
He also starred in a Spanish - language Pepsi commercial alongside Eva Longoria , and in a Spanish - language Heineken commercial .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year ! !
Title ! !
Role ! ! class="unsortable
" Notes STAGE
Section::::Stage . !
Year ! !
Title ! !
Role ! !
Location OTHER CREDITS
Section::::Other credits . !
rowspan="2 "
Year !
rowspan="2 "
Title !
colspan="3
" Functioned as !
rowspan="2 " Notes !
Director !
Writer !
Producer AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominated work !
Result REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Q&A Sessions : The Dark Knight 's Nestor Carbonell [ nocheLatina.com ]