E.T. ADVENTURE E.T. Adventure is a dark ride featured at Universal Studios Florida , and formerly , Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Japan theme parks .
The ride is based on the movie E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial .
E.T. Adventure 's animatronics were manufactured by Sally Corporation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
E.T. Adventure originally opened at Universal Studios Florida in 1990 .
One year later , the attraction opened in Universal Studios Hollywood .
In 2001 , the third installation of this attraction was opened in Universal Studios Japan .
On March 14 , 2003 , the Hollywood version was closed and later replaced by Revenge of the Mummy : The Ride .
More recently , on May 10 , 2009 , the Japanese version was closed and later replaced by .
The Orlando version was also slated to be removed as well , but Steven Spielberg , who directed the E.T. film and already angered by the removal of the Hollywood and Japanese versions , threatened to end cooperation with Universal Studios if it made attempts to do so .
As a result , the Orlando version is still operating as of 2018 , and received a refurbishment in 2017 .
E.T. Adventure was also expected to open at Universal Studios South Korea .
The attraction at Universal Studios Florida originally featured a different pre - show which ran from 1990 - 2002 .
During this pre - show , Steven Spielberg is in a movie theater watching E.T , munching on popcorn and informs the guests that they have volunteered to be actors in a sequel to the film .
The original pre - show was discontinued , because Spielberg wanted to change it for the 20th Anniversary .
During the ride 's early years , guests could either ride on bicycles or on spaceships .
The spaceships were removed in 2004 - 2005 , during a refurbishment .
In 2012 , the ride at Universal Studios Florida received new track switches by Dynamic Structures .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The ride at Universal Studios Florida has guests begin by entering a sound stage .
Some elements of this description may not be accurate for the Hollywood and Japan installations .
EXTERIOR QUEUE Section::::Exterior queue .
The exterior queue is themed to a sound stage where E.T. is being filmed .
TV monitors above guests ' heads display the filmmakers discussing their experiences on creating the film as well as E.T. trivia .
There are also E.T. posters from the film 's 30th Anniversary re - release on display near the end of the queue , in English and various other languages .
Guests are then ushered into the pre - show room .
UPDATE Section::::Update .
Oddly , the poster has been updated with a 30th Anniversary label , but still shows the 2002 re - release date .
PRE - SHOW Section::::Pre - show .
Before going into the interior queue , Steven Spielberg appears on TV screens above the guests and tells them that E.T. 's teacher Botanicus needs E.T. to come back to his home world , " The Green Planet " , because the planet is dying .
Only E.T. 's magical healing touch can save the planet and its inhabitants , so it is up to the guests to bring him home .
He also tells the guests that they 'll make their journey on bikes and that they 'll need an " Interplanetary Passport " to get there .
The guests then enter a second room where they give their name to one of " Spielberg 's assistants " which is programmed into a card that is used later in the ride .
Prior to the 20th anniversary , the pre - show had an additional wraparound , stating that the ride is the set for a sequel , and the guests are the actors playing the parts .
The " Interplanetary Passports " were originally called " Passes " , and the " assistants " were " stagehands " .
INTERIOR QUEUE Section::::Interior queue .
The interior queue is a forest setting where it is established that the police are looking for E.T. and the guests .
In the interior queue , Botanicus is seen beaming down from his ship every few minutes , pleading for E.T. 's return .
On the way , the guests pass by a Speak & Spell seen in the movie , while the letters H - E - L - P E - T come onto the screen of it while its signature loud clacking is heard , then the letters erase and ad lib .
A hare from the film pops up every few seconds .
The guests then board the ride vehicles .
There is also a customized " pine fresh " scent created by scent marketing company , ScentAir .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
Each individual seat is a bicycle , whose handles come down as the lap bars .
The bike in the middle of the front row contains E.T.
However , in the attraction 's early years , guests also had the option of riding in a spaceship modeled after the one that E.T. came to Earth on in the movie .
But these ride vehicles were removed as guests preferred to ride the bikes , given how iconic they were in the famous flying scene in the movie .
The vehicles travel past NASA and police officials who give chase and try to arrest the riders and capture E.T. As they are about to be caught , a police car appears out of nowhere and just as they are about to hit it , the bicycles begin to fly over the city and then into outer space .
From on their bikes , the guests can see a miniature city below , including real moving cars and even a football stadium and two baseball fields .
The bikes are then transported to a kind of portal area with flashing lights which , when finally turned around , arrives at the Green Planet .
The guests then encounter Botanicus , who urges the visitors to save E.T. 's friends .
E.T. 's healing touch travels through the Green Planet , reviving his friends and beginning a celebration with numerous baby E.T.s frolicking and playing .
This lasts for about 3 minutes and is a huge contrast to the beginning ; the beginning is dark and scary while this part of the ride is light and colorful , with spurting water and singing .
At the end , the guests pass an animatronic E.T. who thanks them all by the names that they gave to the travel agents / Spielberg 's Assistants .
Then , in a flash of light , guests are sent back to Earth and into the unload area .
As guests leave the ride , they can sometimes hear E.T. 's voice reminding them , " I 'll be right here . "
SEE ALSO
* Universal Studios Florida
* Incidents at Universal parks ( info on 2004 incident in Japan )
* List of amusement rides based on film franchises REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * E.T. Adventure at Universal Orlando Resort * E.T. Adventure at Universal Studios Japan * E.T. Adventure at Orlando Rocks