VIEW TAX
The view tax is a disparaging term for the fact that the appraisal of a piece of real estate in preparation for assessing property tax includes aspects of a property that are subjective , such as its view .
It was also the informal name for a 2005 bill in the legislature of the U.S. state of New Hampshire ( see below ) .
Some municipalities have used an explicit " view tax " since 2003 , itemizing the view from a property as a separate line item with a dollar amount .
But the New Hampshire Assessing Standards Board has held that the view is merely one factor in determining the fair market value of a property ; as a property with a nicer view will command a higher market price , an assessor should consider the view , like any other desirable amenity .
This implies that a " view tax " would be at least an implicit component of all property taxes in New Hampshire .
The desirability of a view is subjective compared to other aspects of a property 's value .
The remedy for this is to ensure that the value is in line with recent sales of comparable properties .
Scenic views are one factor that attracts home buyers from outside the community .
When they pay large premiums for properties , with or without houses on them , it inevitably inflates the ( potential ) value of adjacent parcels .
Revaluation eventually reflects this fact and subjects abutters to tax increases even in the absence of any change either to their property or to their ability to pay the tax .
The increment may be regarded as a " view tax .
" It would affect not just luxury properties but properties that are small and in poor repair , for which the view might not be a relevant attraction .
Current use is a program in which New Hampshire properties are assessed at their current use ( such as unproductive forest ) rather than its " highest and best use " ( such as a resort development ) .
If a scenic view augments the property 's highest and best use , while being irrelevant to its current use , this increases the value of putting the property in current use .
The designation does not apply to " improved " portions of the land , such as houses and other structures , nor to parcels smaller than , so including the view as a factor in appraisals may affect smaller parcels disproportionately .
A dissatisfied owner of an affected parcel may complain that he was assessed with a " view tax . " 2005
LEGISLATION Section::::2005 legislation .
The " view tax " referred to an impetus in the New Hampshire legislature in 2005 to increase the property tax rate on property with a " pleasing view . "
House Bill 245 would not have imposed a tax , but merely would have set up a committee of six legislators to " study the processes for valuing water frontage and views of scenic areas " .
It was sent to interim study and not passed by either house of the legislature .
In 2012 , a legislative committee rejected House Bill 1393 , which would have mandated that assessors use the sales comparison approach .
The minority proposed an amendment to specify that " In no case shall a separate addition of the value of a view be included in the assessment under the sales comparison approach . "
PORTUGAL
Section::::Portugal .
In 2016 , the Socialist government in Portugal authorized , at the option of the local councils , property tax on certain parcels valued above € 250,000 to increase by up to 20 % or decrease by up to 10 % based on the desirability of the view from the property .
Proponents cited social justice , while opponents called it subjective .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Assessing Standards Board