BEETURIA
Beeturia is the passing of red or pink urine after eating beetroots or foods colored with beetroot extract or beetroot pigments .
The color is caused by the excretion of betalain ( betacyanin ) pigments such as betanin .
The coloring is highly variable between individuals and between different occasions , and can vary in intensity from invisible to strong .
The pigment is sensitive to oxidative degradation under strongly acidic conditions .
Therefore , the urine coloring depends on stomach acidity and dwell time as well as the presence of protecting substances such as oxalic acid .
Beeturia is often associated with red or pink feces .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
The red color seen in beeturia is caused by the presence of unmetabolized betalain pigments such as betanin in beetroot passed through the body .
The pigments are absorbed in the colon .
Betalains are oxidation - sensitive redox indicators that are decolorized by hydrochloric acid , ferric ions , and colonic bacteria preparations .
The gut flora plays a not yet evaluated role in the breakdown of the pigment .
EXPLANATIONS
*
There is some relationship to iron deficiency .
*
There is no known relation to deficiencies in hepatic metabolism or renal excretion .
*
There is no known direct genetic influence , and no single gene variant , that differentiates excreters from non - excreters .
FACTORS AFFECTING BEETURIA Section::::Factors affecting beeturia .
The extent of excreted pigment depends on :
* The pigment content of the meal , including : * The type of beetroot ( for instance , the pigment concentration of the Detroit Rubidus variety is twice that of the Firechief variety )
*
The addition of concentrated beetroot extract as a food additive to certain processed foods
*
The storage conditions of the meal , including light , heat , and oxygen exposure , and repeated freeze - thaw cycles that all could degrade the pigments * Urine volume , affecting the dilution of the dye * The stomach acidity and dwell time
* The presence of protecting substances such as oxalic acid in the meal and during intestinal passage
* Medications that affect stomach acidity such as proton pump inhibitors SEE ALSO * Food color * Porphyria , a group of disorders that may cause reddish urine
* Blue diaper syndrome REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Beeturia - Allergy Advisor