SUSAN BANKS Susan Banks is a fictional character on NBC 's daytime drama Days of Our Lives .
She was played by Eileen Davidson from November 4 , 1996 to April 8 , 1998 , and again in 2014 and 2017 .
Susan is the eccentric mother of Elvis " EJ " DiMera , and once acted as Kristen Blake 's doppelganger .
In November 2011 , it was announced that Brynn Thayer would take over the role of Susan , since Davidson was committed to The Young and the Restless .
Thayer made her brief one - off appearance as Susan on December 7 , 2011 .
In January 2014 , it was announced that Davidson would be returning to Days for a three - month story arc after having departed with the show in November 2013 .
In late September 2014 , it was announced that Davidson would reprise her role as Susan Banks ; her first time portraying the character in 16 years .
Davidson returned to the role once again on November 2 , 2017 .
She reprised the role of Susan 's sister , Sister Mary Moira on November 21 , 2017 .
Stacy Haiduk debuted as Susan on August 21 , 2018 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The decision to create a storyline in which Stefano hires a doppelganger to impersonate Kristen Blake demanded that the Days producers cast an actress who resembled Davidson .
Actress , Brenda Epperson was considered for the role , an actress Davidson suggested to replace her in her role as Ashley Abbott on The Young and the Restless , due to their uncanny resemblance .
Instead of casting Epperson , or any actress for that matter , Davidson suggested that she play both roles : Kristen and her alter .
The show ultimately agreed .
On rehearsing , Davidson related : " I had a tape recorder and I would read the scene and turn it off when the character I was supposed to be talked .
I ran lines that way .
The major way that I knew it was working was because the crew was laughing , and I was laughing , we were cracking up all the time . "
Due to the sixteen - hour work days ( including Saturdays )
Davidson spent on the Days set led to her developing digestive problems and insomnia .
" They worked me to death .
I was at the end of my contract , I was going to leave after the first year I played Susan .
And they asked me to stay an additional year to finish off the storyline , so I did . "
The gruel from playing upwards of five characters led to Davidson 's departure from the show .
Post - Days , head writer James E. Reilly called Davidson personally to apologize for working her ' into the ground . '
He told her that he could n't help it ; he felt inspired by her . "
That 's OK .
You know I volunteered to play both characters ! "
Davidson responded .
In 2011 , Days was unable to obtain Davidson , who was working on The Young and the Restless at the time , to reprise the role of Susan .
A recast was made with actress Brynn Thayer filling in .
Thayer was asked to research the character by watching old clips of Davidson as Susan on YouTube .
The show decided to show only the back of Thayer 's head as Susan , who takes a phone call from Salem .
Per Davidson 's agreement in 2012 to return to the soap , a stipulation was included in her contract
: Lisa Williams , who acted as her double in her mid-90s Days stint , would be re - hired if need be .
Davidson returned to the soap under the assumption that she would be portraying Susan Banks , with just a little bit of Kristen DiMera .
Ultimately , Banks would never reappear .
However , in September 2013 , a tribute of sorts was made to the late James E. Reilly when Kristen , who needs to go undercover , uses Susan 's teeth as a disguise .
Davidson had taken Susan 's teeth with her before leaving the soap in 1998 .
Prior to her 2014 return , Davidson was alerted that her storyline would include Susan Banks .
" They told me , but they also knew that I was up for it . "
Lisa Williams returned as Davidson 's double .
Davidson reprised her role in November 2017 .
In 2017 , head writer Ron Carlivati discussed the decision behind having Susan Banks being responsible for Will Horton 's disappearance and resurrection , stating : " When we went to explore who might have a motivation to initiate Will 's disappearance or Will 's death , Susan came to mind , and we came up with a story that would require [ Eileen Davidson ] involved . "
Carlivati admitted his reluctance to this decision , due to Davidson 's commitment to The Young and the Restless , even considering a recast for the role , however , deemed that " trickier " .
Davidson announced that her scenes became a collaborative effort as Carlivati was unfamiliar with Susan and was relying on others to fill him in – " But who better than , you know , the person that played her ?
[ ... ]
[ Ron ] was very open to hearing my input , and when I thought that it was maybe too broad , he would let me change it or cut it or whatever I needed to do .
It 's easy to write Susan broad , and it 's easy to play her broad .
So it 's always , like , trying to pull it back , but also showing the flavor of her personality . "
On August 17 , 2018 , it was announced that Stacy Haiduk had been cast as Susan ; she made her first appearance as Susan on August 21 , 2018 .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
While James E. Reilly created the character , Davidson was the driving force behind the character 's personality .
" Susan was supposed to be insecure from a small town , not very worldly , basically kind of ignorant .
She had an innocence .
I based a lot of it on innocence , not necessarily ignorance .
But she was very intelligent in a certain way .
She was good at getting what she wanted .
" Davidson would have a lot of input into all of the characters she portrayed , including wardrobe and hairstyles .
Reilly added Susan 's obsession with Elvis Presley .
On Susan 's voice , Davidson states : " For the voice , I just went up a couple of octaves and threw in a Southern accent .
It was easy .
"
Besides the characters Kristen and Susan Banks , Davidson would go on to play an assortment of Susan 's family members :
Sister Mary Moira ( a nun ) , Thomas Banks , and Penelope Kent .
STORYLINES 1996–98 Section::::Storylines .
Section::::1996–98 .
In August 1996 , Kristen is hospitalized after an explosion kills her mother and she miscarries her child .
Stefano soon reappears in Salem and hires Kristen 's lookalike Susan Banks to carry a child that Kristen would raise as her and John 's .
With the help of her father and Peter , Kristen fakes her pregnancy .
When Susan goes into labor , Kristen disguised as a nurse is forced to watch as John marries Susan , believing she is really Kristen .
Kristen gets custody of the child long enough to name him John Black , Jr. and Susan soon returns to claim her child and husband .
Kristen enlists Vivian Alamain ( Louise Sorel ) and Ivan in keeping Susan locked in a secret room but
Marlena puts the pieces together and Kristen is forced to lock her away .
When Susan discovers the truth , sick of Kristen 's manipulations she locks Kristen inside the room and attempts to marry John until Laura Horton ( Jamie Lyn Bauer ) confronts her at the wedding .
After being rejected by John due to her scheming , Kristen 's failed attempt to kill Marlena lands her in jail .
After being released on bail , she attempts suicide after hearing about John and Marlena 's engagement .
She then reveals Marlena 's presumed dead husband , Roman Brady ( now Josh Taylor ) ; John and Kristen then pretend to marry to keep Roman from becoming suspicious .
When John and Stefano ruin her attempt to get back Susan 's son , Elvis
( a.k.a . John , Jr. ) , she reveals that Roman and Marlena have been seeing one another .
Kristen 's attempt to force Susan into giving the child back ends with the death of Susan 's identical sister , Penelope Kent .
Fearing she 'll be charged with murder , Kristen pretends to be Susan and is forced to marry Susan 's boyfriend , Edmund Crumb ( Adam Caine ) .
In the meantime , " Susan " and Edmund go on a honeymoon and Laura is arrested for Kristen 's murder .
Edmund admits to Kristen 's " murder " and they soon run into the real Susan who explains that Kristen sold her into a harem ; it is then revealed that the dead person was Susan 's other sibling , Penelope Kent .
To get revenge against Kristen , Susan exchanges her freedom for Kristen to be sold to the harem .
2011 Section::::2011 .
In December 2011 , Bo ( Peter Reckell ) and Hope ( Kristian Alfonso ) come across an ornament owned by Alice Horton .
Tucked inside it they find a letter written by Susan asking Alice for help with Elvis who was sick and needed a doctor .
The letter is to be extended to Stefano .
Bo finds Susan 's phone number in England and Hope decides to call her .
Hope inquires as to the significance of the letter to Susan ( Brynn Thayer ) who becomes nervous that Elvis is in trouble .
Susan inadvertently reveals that Alice helped Elvis , and Stefano visited her after Elvis was better .
Realizing that she 's said too much , Susan pretends that the phone line has a bad connection and hangs up . 2014 Section::::2014 .
Susan turns up on the DiMera Mansion doorstep .
She 's come to visit EJ .
She 's had a premonition that he 's in grave danger .
She attempts to convince him to return to England with her .
Susan also does n't think that Sami ( Alison Sweeney ) is the right woman for him to be with ; she sees her as nothing but trouble .
She reveals why she allowed Stefano , who she says is evil , to raise him : she and Edmund could n't provide the life that he could .
Susan refers to EJ as her " first born , " suggesting that she 's had more children after him .
Susan is left alone in the mansion and decides to pay John a visit in the hospital .
She goes to open the door to leave and is greeted by Kristen who is standing there .
The two trade barbs ; Susan rushes out after Kristen gets Stefano on the phone .
Susan visits an unconscious John in the hospital .
She talks about their almost wedding and before going , leaves a photo from the nuptials .
2017–18 Section::::2017–18 .
The hunt for Will Horton ( Chandler Massey ) leads Sami , John and Marlena to a house in Memphis occupied by Roger ( John Enos III ) , an Elvis impersonator , and Susan Banks .
While toting a rifle and standing in a bedroom whose walls are adorned with the initials " EJ " , Susan reveals that she paid Dr. Wilhelm Rolf to revive Will as part of a revenge plot against Sami .
Susan holds Sami responsible for EJ 's death ; it 's caused her to spiral out of control as well as ended her marriage to Edmund .
Susan is adamant that Rolf 's revival did n't work .
However , Will , identifying himself as EJ , is found alive and working in a bar in Memphis .
Friends and family try desperately to convince him that he 's been brainwashed by his " mother " Susan and to return to Salem .
When Roger confirms that Susan is n't Will 's biological mother , Susan suffers a mental breakdown and is hospitalized .
Will decides to return to Salem to learn about his former life .
Will keeps tabs on Susan 's progress through Roger , learning that she 's been institutionalized and that on New Year 's Eve she 's suffered a relapse after receiving a visitor in her hospital room .
Months later , a recovered Susan ( Stacy Haiduk ) arrives back in Salem on Will 's doorstep to make amends .
She also turns up at Marlena 's bachelorette party and manages to invite herself to Marlena and John Black 's upcoming wedding .
Susan mentions to Marlena that she was visited by Kristen , who is very much alive , in the hospital .
Marlena convinces Susan that Kristen is dead and that she was probably just hallucinating from the drugs that the hospital had administrated .
Kristen ( Haiduk ) catches Susan alone and forces her at knife - point to switch places with her
so she can attend the wedding undetected .
After the wedding , Susan stays with Victor ( John Aniston ) and Maggie ( Suzanne Rogers ) .
She is determined to give the doll she made ( an exact replica of Marlena ) as a wedding gift to Marlena once she 's recovered in the hospital .
Susan reveals that she used her own hair for the doll .
Susan has a premonition that EJ is still alive .
Sami tracks down a patient in a secret facility Kristen has been running with Dr. Rolf in Nashville and rescues him , but not before he 's severely burned .
Sami uses the hair on Susan 's Marlena doll as a DNA sample to find out if the man she rescued in the facility is really EJ without telling Susan .
In an effort to get her out of his house , Victor tells Susan that Sami has her son .
Susan discovers a bandaged man in the hospital along with the DNA test results confirming that he is indeed her son .
She confronts Sami wielding a scalpel .
Sami convinces Susan to agree to allow her to take EJ to Italy to a renowned clinic for burn victims .
She tells Susan that she can visit .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Davidson 's performance earned her her first Daytime Emmy Award nomination in the category of Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series in 1998 .
REFERENCES
Bibliography
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Susan Banks at soapcentral.com