STOLEN VALOR ACT OF 2005
The Stolen Valor Act of 2005 , signed into law by President George W. Bush on December 20 , 2006 , was a U.S. law that broadened the provisions of previous U.S. law addressing the unauthorized wear , manufacture , or sale of any military decorations and medals .
The law made it a federal misdemeanor to falsely represent oneself as having received any U.S. military decoration or medal .
If convicted , defendants might have been imprisoned for up to six months , unless the decoration lied about is the Medal of Honor , in which case imprisonment could have been up to one year .
In United States v. Alvarez
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled on June 28 , 2012 , that the Stolen Valor Act was an unconstitutional abridgment of the freedom of speech under the First Amendment , striking down the law in a 6 to 3 decision .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Act was first introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives on July 19 , 2005 , by Representative John Salazar , a Democrat from Colorado , as H.R. 3352 .
It was introduced in the Senate by Senator Kent Conrad , a Democrat from North Dakota , on November 10 , 2005 , as S. 1998 .
The Senate version was passed unanimously on September 7 , 2006 .
The House passed the Senate version , S. 1998 , on December 6 , 2006 .
The purpose of the Act was to strengthen the provisions of federal law ( 18 U.S.C. § 704 ) by broadening its scope and strengthening penalties .
Specific new provisions in the Act included : * granting more authority to federal law enforcement officers ;
* broadening the law to cover false claims whereas previously an overt act had to be committed ;
* covering the mailing and shipping of medals ; and * protecting the reputation and meaning of military heroism medals .
The Act made it illegal for unauthorized persons to wear , buy , sell , barter , trade , or manufacture " any decoration or medal authorized by Congress for the armed forces of the United States , or any of the service medals or badges awarded to the members of such forces . "
In the 18 months after the act was enacted , the Chicago Tribune estimated there were twenty prosecutions .
The number increased as awareness of the law spread .
The Act was passed to address the issue of persons claiming to have been awarded military awards to which they were not entitled and exploiting their deception for personal gain .
For example , as of June 2 , 2006 , there were only 120 living Medal of Honor recipients , but there were far more known imposters .
There were also large numbers of people fraudulently claiming to be Navy SEALS and Army Special Forces , among others .
The Orders and Medals Society of America ( OMSA ) , an organization of collectors , opposed the version of the bill that passed .
OMSA was concerned about the changes to 18 USC that in its judgment implied that any movement or exchange of medals was illegal .
LEGAL CHALLENGES
UNITED STATES V. STRANDLOF
Section::::Legal challenges .
Section::::United States v. Strandlof .
Rick Strandlof , founder of Colorado Veterans Alliance , was accused of seeking to raise funds for that organization by posing as Marine Captain " Rick Duncan " and claiming to have received a Silver Star and Purple Heart in the Iraq War .
In January 2010 , he challenged the constitutionality of the Stolen Valor Act in U.S. District Court in Denver , Colorado .
Strandlof 's attorney believed the law was too vague and that " protecting the reputation of military decorations is insufficient to survive [ strict scrutiny ] " , a level of judicial review that requires the government to justify any limitation it places on free speech .
The Rutherford Institute , a Virginia - based civil liberties group , joined in the case on January 20 , 2010 .
" Such expression remains within the presumptive protection afforded pure speech by the First Amendment , " the Institute 's attorney wrote .
" As such , the Stolen Valor Act is an unconstitutional restraint on the freedom of speech . "
On July 16 , 2010 , a federal judge in Denver ruled the Stolen Valor Act is " facially unconstitutional " because it violates free speech and dismissed the criminal case against Strandlof who lied about being an Iraq war veteran .
Strandlof , 32 , was charged with five misdemeanors related to violating the Act – specifically , making false claims about receiving military decorations .
U.S. District Judge Robert E. Blackburn issued his decision rejecting the prosecution 's argument that lying about having military medals dilutes their meaning and significance .
" This wholly unsubstantiated assertion is , frankly , shocking and , indeed , unintentionally insulting to the profound sacrifices of military personnel the Stolen Valor Act purports to honor , " Blackburn wrote .
" To suggest that the battlefield heroism of our servicemen and women is motivated in any way , let alone in a compelling way , by considerations of whether a medal may be awarded simply defies my comprehension . "
Attorney Chris Beall , who filed an amicus curiae brief on behalf of the ACLU of Colorado , said the decision is remarkable .
"
The First Amendment protects speech we do n't like , " he said .
" We do n't need the First Amendment for speech people like .
The government can not criminalize a statement simply because it is false , no matter how important the statement is . "
Beall points out Strandlof was n't charged with stealing money meant for the veterans group , adding that laws are already in place for those crimes .
" That 's plain - old , regular - vanilla everyday fraud , and we do prosecute that every day , " he said .
" Congress does not need a special statute to prevent people from using false claims of valor in order to prevent fraud . "
John Wagner , executive director of the Warrior Legacy Foundation , a veterans group that lobbied for Strandlof 's prosecution , said he will push for an appeal .
A spokesman for the U.S. attorney in Denver said prosecutors are reviewing the decision and have n't decided whether to appeal .
The spokesman said that decision would be made by the U.S. Justice Department in Washington and prosecutors in Denver .
On January 27 , 2012 , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit overruled the district court and reinstated the charges against Strandlof .
Two judges on the three - judge panel held that false statements are not worthy of constitutional protection .
In dissent , Judge Jerome Holmes wrote that the majority was reading language into the act to justify upholding it .
On July 2 , 2012 , the Tenth Circuit vacated its previous opinion , writing , "
In light of United States v. Alvarez , we vacate both the opinion and the judgment issued on January 27 , 2012 . "
UNITED STATES V. ALVAREZ Section::::United States v. Alvarez .
Initially the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit decided Alvarez on August 17 , 2010 , ruling the Stolen Valor Act unconstitutional .
Specifically , in the 2–1 decision , Judge Milan Smith stated for the court that lies not within traditionally unprotected subsets of false facts are subject to First Amendment protection , the Stolen Valor Act is not subject to defamation law precedent , and there 's no compelling reason for government interest in banning such lies .
" The right to speak and write whatever one chooses – including , to some degree , worthless , offensive and demonstrable untruths – without cowering in fear of a powerful government is , in our view , an essential component of the protection afforded by the First Amendment , " Judge Smith wrote .
If lying about a medal can be classified as a crime , Smith said , so many everyday lies could become criminal acts , such as lying about one 's age , misrepresenting one 's financial status on Facebook , or telling one 's mother falsehoods about drinking , smoking or sex .
On March 21 , 2011 , a majority of judges in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit refused to rehear the Alvarez case en banc .
In the order refusing to hear the case en banc , Judge Alex Kozinski issued a lengthy concurrence , responding to critics of the decision and asserting that the First Amendment covers most varieties of lying and misrepresentation , where not otherwise unprotected by the First Amendment under the traditional view .
The traditional view holds that only a certain variety of speech are exempt from standard constitutional scrutiny such as fraud , fighting words , defamation , incitement , and speech attendant to the commission of a crime .
Judge Diarmuid O'Scannlain dissented from the denial of rehearing arguing that false representations are not per se entitled to First Amendment protection .
On October 17 , 2011 , the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to consider the validity of the law .
On June 28 , 2012 , the Supreme Court found the law unconstitutional in a 6 to 3 decision , with Justices Scalia , Thomas and Alito dissenting .
In United States v. Alvarez
the majority held that the Stolen Valor Act was an unconstitutional abridgment of the freedom of speech under the First Amendment .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Following the Supreme Court decision , the U.S. Department of Defense announced they would unveil a new website , valor.defense.gov , which would provide a public record of medal recipients .
That site was unveiled on July 25 , 2012 .
Additionally , in response Representative Joe Heck sponsored the Stolen Valor Act of 2012 to criminalize profiting by falsely claiming to have received a military medal for serving in combat , which passed with a vote of 410 to 3 ; a companion bill was sponsored by Senator Jim Webb , which passed as an amendment of the defense authorization bill .
In the 113th Congress Representative Heck reintroduced the modified act , receiving 65 cosponsors .
The Stolen Valor Act of 2013 was signed by President Barack Obama on June 3 , 2013 .
The Act makes it a federal crime to fraudulently claim to be a recipient of certain military decorations or medals in order to obtain money , property , or other tangible benefit .
SEE ALSO
* List of Acts of the 109th
United States Congress
* Military imposter * Mitchell Paige , Medal of Honor recipient who later tracked imposters
* Stolen Valor , book by B. G. Burkett and Glenna Whitley chronicling phony Vietnam veterans .
* Don Shipley , retired Navy SEAL who exposes fraudulent claims of military service .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Stolen Valor Act of 2005
* Congressional Medal of Honor Society
* Stolen Valor web site , the book the Stolen Valor Act was named after