NOTARY PUBLIC ( NEW YORK ) Notaries public in New York are commissioned by the Secretary of State of New York after passing a short examination in law and procedure .
A notary 's commission is received from and kept on file with the county clerk of the county in which they reside or do business , but notaries are empowered to actually perform their duties anywhere in the state .
REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements .
Notaries must be residents of the state or have a work / business address in the state .
Attorneys at law may automatically be appointed notaries simply by submitting the filing fee .
Someone who is a commissioner or inspector of elections may also be a notary .
One designated employee of the county clerk may be appointed a notary without taking the test .
A state legislator may also be a notary , without any conflict of interest .
Since the passage of the Married women 's property acts in the mid-19th century , a married woman can be a notary .
Certain persons can not be commissioned as a notary public in New York .
These include a non - citizen , someone who has neither a residence nor a business in New York , a person convicted of certain felonies , a person removed from office as notary or commissioner of deeds , and a convicted draft dodger .
By a New York law that bars them from holding any other office , sheriffs may not be appointed notaries .
The above general conditions can however be remedied with a release from the state after a certificate of good conduct is issued or by executive pardon .
POWERS Section::::Powers .
New York notaries are empowered to administer oaths and affirmations ( including oaths of office ) , to take affidavits and depositions , to receive and certify acknowledgments or proof of deeds , mortgages and powers of attorney and other instruments in writing .
Notaries may also demand acceptance or payment of foreign and inland bills of exchange , promissory notes and obligations in writing .
Finally , they can witness the opening of a safe deposit box and provide an inventory of the contents .
New York Notaries may not issue certified copies of official documents ( i.e. birth certificate , marriage certificate , bankruptcy discharge , etc . ) ; notably ( as emphasized by official publications ) they may not certify copies of documents ( for instance , " I hereby certify that this is a true and correct copy ... , " is beyond the authority of a New York State notary ) .
However , a notary may sign a form of affidavit on a copy where the document 's custodian signs and swears to the authenticity of the document ( usually a government issued picture ID ) .
This can suffice as a " notarized copy " in most instances , but is not a certified copy .
A notary can not prepare legal documents , offer any advice , or review documents for legality ( even offering an opinion as to whether a document needs notarization is considered to be " practicing law without a license " in New York ) ; and they may not solemnize marriages .
Further , a notary is not needed to witness a will : in New York , two witnesses , who do not need to be notaries , must attend the will signing ceremony and be able to attest to the mental competence of the testator .
A notary may , however , notarize a self - proving affidavit signed by the maker of the will and the two witnesses , which will facilitate the proof of the will in probate .
SEAL OR STAMP Section::::Seal or stamp .
New York does not require that notaries use an official seal or stamp - the embossed seal is now a decorative addition to a document rather than a requirement of law , and is itself insufficient for a notarization .
New York notaries may write in black ink , or may stamp with a rubber stamp , the required information for notarization : their name ; the words " Notary Public , State of New York " ; the county in which they are qualified ( that is , the county in which the county clerk holds their original certificate and signature card ) ; the county which additional signature certificates are filed ( done for convenience of authenticating their notarizations ) ; the date that the notary 's commission expires ( commissions are renewed every four years ) ; and , only if qualified in New York City ( the counties of The Bronx , Richmond , Kings , Queens and New York )
a registration number .
This information , with the notary 's signature and the date and place of notarization are required for a legal notarization .
RENEWAL OF NOTARY COMMISSION
Section::::Renewal Of Notary Commission .
In New York , a Notary Public commission is granted for a four - year term .
Other than the pre - qualification examination , no continuing education is required .
There is a $ 60.00 re - appointment fee required every 4 years and paid to the County Clerk of the Notary Public .
The renewal application is posted to the Notary approximately 3 months prior to the expiration .
The commission may be renewed up until 6 months after the expiration date without re - qualifying for non - military personnel ; a grace period extends for 12 months after the Honorable Discharge of a member of the United States Military .
A typical layout for a notary 's rubber stamp , for use beneath the notary 's signature .
Notaries may charge fees ( the maximum is $ 2 ) for certain acts , but many choose to either personally waive them , or their employers have a policy of not permitting the notary to charge patrons
( I.e. , clients and customers of their company , agency or firm ; for example , many banks have notaries on duty to serve their depositors for free ) .
Each county clerk also has a notary on duty in the clerk 's office to serve the public at no charge .
As of April , 2017 , New York State had approximately 291,000 commissioned notaries public .
Cities in the State of New York appoint and commission an officer called a Commissioner of Deeds , which can be applied for with the respective City Clerk 's office and is appointed by the City Council .
REFERENCES