TORNADO CLIMATOLOGY Tornadoes have been recorded on all continents except Antarctica and are most common in the middle latitudes where conditions are often favorable for convective storm development .
The United States has the most tornadoes of any country , as well as the strongest and most violent tornadoes .
A large portion of these tornadoes form in an area of the central United States popularly known as Tornado Alley .
Other areas of the world that have frequent tornadoes include significant portions of Europe , South Africa , Philippines , Bangladesh , parts of Argentina , Uruguay , and southern and southeast Brazil , northern Mexico , New Zealand , and far eastern Asia .
The United States averaged 1,274 tornadoes per year in the last decade while Canada reports nearly 100 annually ( largely in the southern regions ) .
However , the UK has most tornadoes per area per year , 0.14 per 1000 km² , although these tornadoes are generally weak , and many other European countries have a similar number of tornadoes per area .
The severity of tornadoes is commonly measured by the Enhanced Fujita Scale , which scales tornado intensity from EF0 to EF5 by wind speed and the amount of damage they do to human environments .
These judgments are made after the tornado has dissipated and the damage trail is carefully studied by weather professionals .
Tornadoes are most common in spring and least common in winter .
The seasonal transition during autumn and spring promotes the development of extratropical cyclones and frontal systems that support strong convective storms .
Tornadoes are also common in landfalling tropical cyclones , where they are focused in the right poleward section of the cyclone .
Tornadoes can also be spawned as a result of eyewall mesovortices , which persist until landfall .
However , favorable conditions for tornado development can occur any time of the year .
Tornado occurrence is highly dependent on the time of day , because of solar heating .
Worldwide , most tornadoes occur in the late afternoon , between 3 pm and 7 pm local time , with a peak near 5 pm .
Destructive tornadoes can occur at any time of day , as evidenced by the Gainesville Tornado of 1936 ( one of the deadliest tornadoes in history ) that occurred at 8:30 am local time .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The United States has the most tornadoes of any country .
Many of these form in an area of the central ( with some definitions including Southern ) United States known as Tornado Alley .
This area extends into Canada , particularly the Prairie Provinces and Ontario ; however , activity in Canada is less frequent and intense than that of the US .
The high frequency of tornadoes in North America is largely due to geography , as moisture from the Gulf of Mexico is easily advected into the midcontinent with few topographic barriers in the way .
The Rocky Mountains block Pacific - sourced moisture and buckle the atmospheric flow , forcing drier air at mid - levels of the troposphere due to downsloping winds and causing cyclogenesis downstream to the east of the mountains .
Downsloping winds off the Rockies force the formation of a dry line when the flow aloft is strong , while the Gulf of Mexico fuels abundant low - level moisture .
This unique topography allows for frequent collisions of warm and cold air , the conditions that breed strong , long - lived storms throughout the year .
This area extends into Canada , particularly Ontario and the Prairie Provinces , and strong tornadoes can also occur in northern Mexico .
A large region of South America is characterized by storms that reach the level of supercells and produce intense hailstorms , floods , and tornadoes during the spring , summer , and early fall .
The region recently appointed as the ( South America ) is considered as the second largest in the world in terms of the formation of extreme weather events .
It covers most of central Argentina , southern Paraguay , southeastern Brazil , and Uruguay .
Bangladesh and surrounding areas of eastern India suffer from a couple tornadoes annually of similar severity to stronger tornadoes in the US .
These occur with a greater recurrence interval ( although over a smaller region ) , and tend to be under - reported due to the scarcity of media coverage of a developing country .
The annual human death toll from tornadoes in Bangladesh is estimated at about 179 deaths per year , which is much greater than in the US .
This is likely due to the density of population , poor quality of construction , lack of tornado safety knowledge and warnings , and other factors .
Other areas of the world that have frequent strong tornadoes include Germany , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Italy , Spain , China , and the Philippines .
Australia , France , Russia , areas of the Middle East , Japan , and parts of Mexico have a history of multiple damaging tornado events .
TORNADOES IN THE UNITED STATES
Section::::Tornadoes in the United States .
The United States averaged 1,274 tornadoes per year in the last decade .
April 2011 saw the most tornadoes ever recorded for any month in the US National Weather Service 's history , 875 ; the previous record was 542 in one month .
It has more tornadoes yearly than any other country and reports more violent ( F4 and F5 )
tornadoes than anywhere else .
Tornadoes are common in many states but are most common to the west of the Appalachian Mountains and to the east of the Rockies .
The Atlantic seaboard states – North Carolina , South Carolina , Georgia and Virginia – are also very vulnerable , as well as Florida .
The areas most vulnerable to tornadoes are the Southern Plains and Florida , though most Florida tornadoes are relatively weak .
The Southern United States is one of the worst - affected regions in terms of casualties .
Tornado reports have been officially collated since 1950 .
These reports have been gathered by the National Climatic Data Center ( NCDC ) , based in Asheville , North Carolina .
A tornado can be reported more than once , such as when a storm crosses a county line and reports are made from two counties .
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
Section::::Common misconceptions .
Some people mistakenly believe that tornadoes only occur in the countryside .
This is hardly the case .
While it is true that the plains states are the most tornado - prone places in the nation , it should be noted that tornadoes have been reported in every U.S state , including Alaska and Hawaii .
One likely reason tornadoes are so common in the central U.S
is because this is where Arctic air , cold fronts that have not been " weakened " yet first collide with warm tropical air from the Gulf of Mexico .
As these fronts head further east , they sometimes lose their strength as they travel over more warm air .
For this reason , tornadoes are not as common on the East Coast as they are in the Midwest .
However , they have happened on rare occasion , such as the F3 twister that struck Limerick Township , Pennsylvania near Philadelphia on 27 July 1994 , the F2 twister that struck the northern suburbs of New York City on 12 July 2006 , the EF2 twister in the borough of Brooklyn on 8 August 2007 , or the F4 twister that struck La Plata , Maryland on 28 April 2002 .
Tornadoes can occur west of the continental divide , but they are infrequent and usually relatively weak and short - lived .
Recently , tornadoes have struck the Pacific coast town of Lincoln City , Oregon ( 1996 ) , Sunnyvale , California ( 1998 ) , and downtown Salt Lake City , Utah ( 1999 - see Salt Lake City Tornado ) .
The California Central Valley is an area of some frequency for tornadoes , albeit of weak intensity .
Though tornadoes that occur on the Western Seaboard are typically weak , more powerful and damaging tornadoes , such as the tornado that occurred on 22 May 2008 in Perris , California , can also occur .
More tornadoes occur in Texas than in any other US state .
The state which has the highest number of tornadoes per unit area is Florida , although most of the tornadoes in Florida are weak tornadoes of EF0 or EF1 intensity .
A number of Florida 's tornadoes occur along the edge of hurricanes that strike the state .
The state with the highest number of strong tornadoes per unit area is Oklahoma .
The neighboring state of Kansas is also a particularly notorious tornado state .
It records the most EF4 and EF5 tornadoes in the country .
TORNADOES IN CANADA Section::::Tornadoes in Canada .
Canada also experiences numerous tornadoes , although fewer than the United States .
On average 62 are reported per year , but this number is expected to be higher due to undetected tornadoes in large expanses of underpopulated areas .
NOAA has a higher average 100 per year in Canada .
This causes tens of millions of dollars in damage .
Most are weak F0 or F1 in intensity , but there are on average a few F2 or stronger that touch down each season .
For example , the tornado frequency of Southwestern Ontario is about half that of the most tornado - prone areas of the central US plains .
The last multiple tornado - related deaths in Canada were caused by a tornado in Ear Falls , Ontario on 9 July 2009 , where 3 died , and the last killer tornado was on 3 August 2018 in Alonsa , Manitoba .
The two deadliest tornadoes on Canadian soil were the Regina Cyclone of 30 June 1912 ( 28 fatalities ) and the Edmonton Tornado of 31 July 1987 ( 27 fatalities ) .
Both of these storms were rated an F4 on the Fujita scale .
The city of Windsor was struck by strong tornadoes four times within a 61-year span ( 1946 , 1953 , 1974 , 1997 ) ranging in strength from an F2 to F4 .
Windsor has been struck by more significant tornadoes than any other city in Canada .
Canada 's first official F5 tornado struck Elie , Manitoba on 22 June 2007 .
Tornadoes are most frequent in the provinces of Alberta , Saskatchewan , Manitoba , and Ontario .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Europe has about 300 tornadoes per year – much more than estimated by Alfred Wegener in his classic book Wind- und Wasserhosen in Europa ( " Tornadoes and Waterspouts in Europe " ) .
They are most common in June – August , especially in the inlands – rarest in January – March .
Strong and violent tornadoes ( F3–F5 ) do occur , especially in some of the interior areas and in the south – but are not as common as in parts of the US .
As in the US , tornadoes are far from evenly distributed .
Europe has some small " tornado alleys " – probably because of frontal collisions as in the south and east of England , but also because Europe is partitioned by mountain ranges like the Alps .
Parts of Styria ( Steiermark ) in Austria may be such a tornado alley , and this county has had at least three F3 tornadoes since 1900 .
F3 and perhaps one F4 tornado have occurred as far north as Finland .
Since 1900 , deadly tornadoes have occurred in Austria , Belgium , Cyprus , Finland , France , Germany , Italy ( such as the F5 / T10 of Udine - Treviso on 24 July 1930 , which killed 23 people , ) , Malta , Poland , Ukraine , Portugal ( such as the F3 / T7 of Castelo Branco on 6 November 1954 , which killed 5 and injured 220 ) , Romania , Russia and the United Kingdom .
The 1984 Ivanovo – Yaroslavl outbreak , with more than 400 fatalities and 213 injured , was the century 's deadliest tornado or outbreak in Europe .
It included at least one F5 and one F4 .
Europe 's perhaps deadliest tornado ever ( and probably one of the World 's deadliest tornadoes ) hit Malta in 1551 ( or 1556 ) and killed about 600 .
One notable tornado of recent years was the Birmingham Tornado ( UK ) which struck Birmingham , United Kingdom , in July 2005 .
A row of houses was destroyed , but no one was killed .
A strong F3 ( T7 )
Tornado hit the small town Micheln in Saxony - Anhalt , Germany on 23 July 2004 leaving 6 people injured and more than 250 buildings massively damaged .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
Bangladesh and the eastern parts of India are very exposed to destructive tornadoes causing higher deaths and injuries .
Bangladesh , Philippines , and Japan have the highest number of reported tornadoes in Asia .
The world 's single deadliest tornado struck the Manikganj District of Bangladesh on April 26 , 1989 , killing an estimated 1,300 people , injuring 12,000 , and leaving approximately 80,000 people homeless .
Five other recorded tornadic events have killed more than 500 people in Bangladesh , the most recent on May 13 , 1996 when multiple tornadoes swept through the Jamalpur and Tangail districts , killing more than 600 .
China occasionally experiences destructive tornadoes .
In June 2016 , a storm producing multiple tornadoes and hail struck a densely populated area of farms and factories near the city of Yancheng in Jiangsu province , about 800 kilometers ( 500 miles )
south of Beijing , China , killing at least 78 people and destroying buildings .
Nearly 500 people were injured , 200 of them critically , the official Xinhua News Agency reported .
Throughout China , an estimate 100 tornadoes may occur per with a few exceeding F4 in intensity , with activity most prevalent in eastern regions .
SOUTH AMERICA Section::::South America .
South America has its own , composed of central and northern Argentina , southern and southeast Brazil , Uruguay , and part of Paraguay , and is considered the second highest frequency tornado region in the world .
Argentina has areas with high tornadic activity , and the strongest tornadoes in the southern hemisphere like the F5 in San Justo , and the in Buenos Aires with more than 300 tornadoes registered in less than 24 hours .
This region is favorable for tornadoes and severe thunderstorms , due to the large size of the Pampas Plain where the cold air from Patagonia and Antarctica collides with warm , moist air from areas of Brazil , northern Argentina and Paraguay , and dry air from the Andes .
SOUTH AMERICAN TORNADOES
Section::::South American Tornadoes .
On 16 September 1816 , one of the first tornadoes recorded in South America destroyed the town of Rojas ( west of Buenos Aires ) An EF4 tornado struck the city of Encarnación , Paraguay , on 20 September 1926 and killed over 300 people , making it the second deadliest tornado in South America .
On 21 April 1970 , an F4 struck Fray Marcos in Uruguay and killed 11 , making it the strongest in Uruguay 's history .
On 10 January 1973 , an F5 struck the city of San Justo , Argentina , north of the city of Santa Fe .
The San Justo tornado is considered the worst tornado ever to occur in the Southern Hemisphere , with winds that exceeded .
On 6 May 1992 , , in Buenos Aires Province , was devastated by an EF4 tornado that caused 4 deaths among the 150 residents .
The province of Buenos Aires ( Argentina ) was impacted by the largest tornado outbreak in South American history on 13 April 1993 .
More than 300 tornadoes were recorded over 24 hours with intensities ranging from F1 to F3 .
On 28 October 1978 , an EF4 tornado with winds of hit the city of Morteros in the province of Córdoba , killing 5 people .
The 26 December struck west of Córdoba 's city center .
It was rated an F3 with winds exceeding , killing 5 and injuring hundreds .
An EF4 tornado destroyed the town of San Pedro , Misiones , on the night of 7 September 2009 , killing 11 people .
The same tornado hit the nearby town of Guaraciaba , Brazil , killing 6 .
The neighboring towns of Veloso Santo and Santa Cecilia were seriously damaged and were declared in a state of emergency .
AFRICA Section::::Africa .
Tornadoes do occur in South Africa .
In October 2011 ( i.e. in the spring ) , two people were killed and nearly 200 were injured after a tornado formed , near Ficksburg in the Free State ; more than 1,000 shacks and houses were flattened .
There is also the seasonal incidence of tornadoes in the coast of western Africa .
These occur during the onset of rainy season when tumultuous winds accompanied by sheets of rain as well as spectacular thunder and lightning batter the coast .
The tornadoes , however , were welcomed by settlers in the region since it dissipates extreme heat and humidity during the last days of the dry season .
These tornadoes are often embedded in the African squall lines and produced by the severe thunderstorms that they bring .
There are experts that attribute the formation of the tornado to the large hail , supported by wind shears in the northern part of the squall lines that veer and increase in height .
These tornadoes damage crops , diminishing the positive impact of its rains .
OCEANIA
Section::::Oceania .
Australia has about 16 tornadoes per year – excluding waterspouts , which are common .
In New Zealand , a tornado hit the northern suburbs of Auckland on 3 May 2011 , killing one and injuring at least 16 people .
FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE Section::::Frequency of occurrence .
Tornadoes can form in any month , providing the conditions are favorable .
For example , a freak tornado hit South St. Louis County Missouri on 31 December 2010 , causing pockets of heavy damage to a modest area before dissipating .
The temperature was unseasonably warm that day .
They are least common during the winter and most common in spring .
Since autumn and spring are transitional periods ( warm to cool and vice versa ) there are more chances of cooler air meeting with warmer air , resulting in thunderstorms .
Tornadoes in the late summer and fall can also be caused by hurricane landfall .
Not every thunderstorm , supercell , squall line , or tropical cyclone will produce a tornado .
Precisely the right atmospheric conditions are required for the formation of even a weak tornado .
On the other hand , 700 or more tornadoes a year are reported in the contiguous United States .
On average , the United States experiences 100,000 thunderstorms each year , resulting in more than 1,200 tornadoes and approximately 50 deaths per year .
The deadliest U.S. tornado recorded is the 18 March 1925 , Tri - State Tornado that swept across southeastern Missouri , southern Illinois and southern Indiana , killing 695 people .
The biggest tornado outbreak on record — with 353 tornadoes over the course of just 3 1/2 days , including four F5 and eleven F4 tornadoes — occurred starting on 25 April 2011 and intensifying on 26 April and especially the record - breaking day of 27 April before ending on 28 April .
It is referred to as the 2011 Super Outbreak .
Previously , the record was 148 tornadoes , dubbed the 1974 Super Outbreak .
Another such significant storm system was the Palm Sunday tornado outbreak of 1965 , which affected the United States Midwest on 11 April 1965 .
A series of continuous tornado outbreaks is known as a tornado outbreak sequence , with significant occurrences in May 1917 , 1930 , 1949 , and 2003 .
TIME OF OCCURRENCE DIURNALITY Section::::Time of occurrence .
Section::::Diurnality .
Tornado occurrence is highly dependent on the time of day .
SEASONALITY Section::::Seasonality .
The time of year is a big factor of the intensity and frequency of tornadoes .
On average , in the United States as a whole , the month with the most tornadoes is May , followed by the months June , April , and July .
There is no " tornado season " though , as tornadoes , including violent tornadoes and major outbreaks , can and do occur anywhere at any time of year if favorable conditions develop .
Major tornado outbreaks have occurred in every month of the year .
July is the peak month in Austria , Finland , and Germany .
On average , there are around 294 tornadoes throughout the United States during the month of May , and as many as 543 tornadoes have been reported in the month of May alone ( in 2003 ) .
The months with the fewest tornadoes are usually December and January , although major tornado outbreaks
can and sometimes do occur even in those months .
In general , in the Midwestern and Plains states , springtime ( especially the month of May ) is the most active season for tornadoes , while in the far northern states ( like Minnesota and Wisconsin ) , the peak tornado season is usually in the summer months ( June and July ) .
In the colder late autumn and winter months ( from early December to late February ) , tornado activity is generally limited to the southern states , where it is possible for warm Gulf of Mexico air to penetrate .
The reason for the peak period for tornado formation being in the spring has much to do with temperature patterns in the U.S. Tornadoes often form when cool , polar air traveling southeastward from the Rockies overrides warm , moist , unstable Gulf of Mexico air in the eastern states .
Tornadoes therefore tend to be commonly found in front of a cold front , along with heavy rains , hail , and damaging winds .
Since both warm and cold weather are common during the springtime , the conflict between these two air masses tends to be most common in the spring .
As the weather warms across the country , the occurrence of tornadoes spreads northward .
Tornadoes are also common in the summer and early fall because they can also be triggered by hurricanes , although the tornadoes caused by hurricanes are often much weaker and harder to spot .
Winter is the least common time for tornadoes to occur , since hurricane activity is virtually non - existent at this time , and it is more difficult for warm , moist maritime tropical air to take over the frigid Arctic air from Canada , occurrences are found mostly in the Gulf states and Florida during winter ( although there have been some notable exceptions ) .
There is a second active tornado season of the year , late October to mid - November .
Autumn , like spring , is a time of the year when warm weather alternates with cold weather frequently , especially in the Midwest , but the season is not as active as it is during the springtime and tornado
frequencies are higher along the Atlantic Coastal plain as opposed to the Midwest .
They usually appear in late summer .
LONG - TERM TRENDS Section::::Long - term trends .
The reliable climatology of tornadoes is limited in geographic and temporal scope ; only since 1976 in the United States and 2000 in Europe have thorough and accurate tornado statistics been logged .
However , some trends can be noted in tornadoes causing significant damage in the United States , as somewhat reliable statistics on damaging tornadoes exist as far back as 1880 .
The highest incidence of violent tornadoes seems to shift from the Southeastern United States to the southern Great Plains every few decades .
Also , the 1980s seemed to be a period of unusually low tornado activity in the United States , and the number of multi - death tornadoes decreased every decade from the 1920s to the 1980s , suggesting a multi - decadal pattern of some sort .
SEE ALSO
* Tornado intensity and damage *
Tornado records
* List of tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
* List of F5 and EF5 tornadoes
* List of tornadoes by calendar day *
Tornadogenesis * Tornado myths
REFERENCES
BOOK REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* U.S. Severe Thunderstorm Climatology ( NSSL )
* U.S. Tornado Climatology ( NCDC )
* U.S. Tornado Climatology ( University of Nebraska – Lincoln ) *
When and Where Do Tornadoes Occur ?
( National Atlas of the United States )