COPENHAGEN AIRPORT , KASTRUP STATION Copenhagen Airport , Kastrup Station ( ) is a railway station in Tårnby , Denmark , served by DSB 's regional trains including the Oresundtrain network .
The nearby Lufthavnen metro station is served by the Copenhagen Metro 's line M2 .
The reconstructed railway station opened on 28 September 2007 , and Metro service began the following month .
The stations take their names from Copenhagen Airport , to which they are connected .
It is linked to Ørestad station on the M1 line by DSB regional trains .
It is located in fare zone 4 .
The airport 's railway station is the closest to the check - in and arrival area in Terminal 3 .
It is located below ground under Terminal 3 .
It is served by the following types of trains :
* Local trains between Copenhagen Central Station and Malmö Central Station .
These trains also stop at Tårnby and Ørestad en route to Copenhagen , and at Hyllie and Triangeln en route to Malmö .
To Copenhagen every 10 minutes , and to Malmö every 20 minutes .
* Regional trains on Sealand and southern Sweden .
Connects to Klampenborg , Helsingør , Lund , Helsingborg , Landskrona and Hässleholm .
* Intercity trains to the rest of Denmark including Odense , Vejle , Århus , Esbjerg and Aalborg .
* Intercity trains in southern Sweden connects to Gothenburg , Kalmar and Karlskrona ( see Oresundtrain ) .
* High - speed
X 2000 trains to Stockholm .
Temporarily from 4 January 2016 to 4 May 2017 , Sweden required train and bus transport companies entering Sweden to perform full identity check of every passenger , because of the European migrant crisis .
For that reason the Southern platform was used only for departures to Sweden , with border checks at openings in fence erected along the platform .
All arrivals and all departures to Denmark used the Northern platform .
Only the regional trains towards Helsingør and Sweden used Copenhagen Airport station , all other trains did not go here during this period .
Lufthavnen ( ' Airport ' ) metro station is located slightly further off than the railway station , at the far end of Terminal 3 on the level 2 .
The metro connects to Nørreport Station and Vanløse station .
SERVICES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Lufthavnen ( Airport ) on www.m.dk * Information about the extension to the airport on www.m.dk