BAMBI ( CHARACTER )
Bambi is the title character in Felix Salten 's 1923 novel Bambi , a Life in the Woods and its sequel Bambi 's Children , as well as the Disney animated films Bambi and Bambi II .
The character of Bambi also appears in Salten 's novels Perri and Fifteen Rabbits .
Early German - language editions of the novels were illustrated by Hans Bertle .
In the films , his species was changed from roe deer to the white - tailed deer , which would be more familiar to American audiences .
His image is a Disney icon , comparable to the recognition of Jiminy Cricket or Tinkerbell , and he is even shown on Disney stock certificates .
He appears as a summon in the video game Kingdom Hearts , and as one of the guests in the animated television series House of Mouse .
He also makes cameos in No Hunting ( 1955 ) , Who Framed Roger Rabbit ( 1988 ) , and The Lion King 1½ ( 2004 ) .
PERSONALITY
BAMBI Section::::Personality .
Section::::Bambi .
In the first film , Bambi is not very strongly personalized to strengthen the environmental perspective of the film .
Bambi , as with most of his friends , could be any deer in any forest .
In his early youth , Bambi has wide eyes , spindly legs , a curious nature and high - pitched voice .
As he grows , he gradually becomes more mature , but even in young adulthood , he seems a very young buck with a delicate build and a fairly naïve nature .
The naturalistic animation in the first film was helped by a pair of four - month - old fawns sent to the studio by Maine game wardens .
However , human models were also used for one scene : actress Jane Randolph and Ice Capades
star Donna Atwood acted as live - action references for the scene where Bambi and Thumper are on ice .
Disney also had Rico LeBrun , a painter of animals , come to the studio to lecture on the structure and movement of animals .
Nature photographer Maurice Day spent months in a forest in Maine , recording animals for the animators , as well .
BAMBI II Section::::Bambi II .
In Bambi II , Bambi is much more distinctly personalized .
In this film which fills in the gap between the death of his mother and when he was next shown as a young adult , Bambi finds himself faced with a number of challenges .
First , there is the death of his mother and his consequential move to live with his father , the Great Prince of the Forest .
His father is reluctant to learn to be a father .
In addition , Bambi begins to fall in love with Faline , and comes into conflict with an older fawn called Ronno ( the same deer he would later fight over Faline with as a young adult ) .
Whereas in the first film he follows life wherever it led him , in this film he is more assertive in order to bond with and impress his father .
In the first film , Bambi 's status as the young prince had little impact on the flow of the story .
In this film , his rank becomes a key part of the storyline as he sets out to prove to himself and others , most of all his father , demonstrating that he deserves to be prince and can live up to his father 's name .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bambi at Disney Archives