UNIVERSITY OF MARY HARDIN –
BAYLOR
The University of Mary Hardin – Baylor ( UMHB ) is a Christian co - educational institution of higher learning located in Belton , Texas , United States .
UMHB was chartered by the Republic of Texas in 1845 as Baylor Female College , the female department of what is now Baylor University .
It has since become its own institution and grown to 3,914 students and awards degrees at the baccalaureate , master 's , and doctoral levels .
It is affiliated with the Baptist General Convention of Texas .
The university is fully accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools .
UMHB 's first doctoral program , leading to the doctor of education ( EdD ) , officially began in June 2007 with 21 students in the inaugural class .
The university 's overall student / faculty ratio is 16:1 .
This university also now awards the doctor of physical therapy and the doctor of nursing practice degrees .
HISTORY Section::::History .
UMHB 's history dates to the time before Texas became a U.S. state .
Its original charter was granted by the Republic of Texas ( prior to statehood ) in 1845 as the female department of Baylor University .
Classes began in May , 1846 , in a small wooden building on a hillside at Independence in Washington County .
The first class consisted of 24 male and female students While it was a coeducational institution , the classes were still separated by gender .
Baylor College 's coeducation lasted only until 1851 , when it was divided into a Female Department and a Male Department .
Each began occupying separate buildings about a mile apart at the Independence campus .
The changing demography of Texas and relocation of the local railroad made it increasingly difficult for college students to get transportation to Independence .
Both colleges were relocated in 1886 to their permanent homes in Central Texas : the women 's division relocated to Belton , where operations continued as Baylor Female College , and the men 's division moved to Waco , merged with coeducational Waco University , and continued as Baylor University .
The Cottage Home System , the first work - study program for women in a college west of the Mississippi , was instituted on the new Belton campus in 1893 by Elli Moore Townsend , wife of the serving president .
Its aim was to provide more affordable housing for women students who could not meet the expense of dormitories .
The women students earned financial assistance by growing vegetables , raising livestock , and hand making crafts and quality clothing items .
Initially the cottages were modest wood frame residences .
In 1905 , a permanent residence hall for the Cottage Home System was built by the residents themselves .
Beginning in 1922 , a few male students , known as " Campus Boys " , were allowed to attend classes and work on campus through their junior year , at which time they transferred to Baylor University or another college for their senior year and graduation .
"
Campus Boys " did work that was deemed unsuitable for the young ladies .
They maintained the grounds , unloaded coal from rail cars , milked cows , fed hogs , served as night watchmen , and unstopped drains .
They lived on the second floor of a carpenter shop in quarters dubbed " The Shack " .
In 1925 , Baylor Female College was renamed Baylor College for Women .
A year later , it was accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Universities , being the first Texas Baptist college to do so .
Then in 1927 , it received accreditation from the American Association of Colleges .
In 1925 , enrollment peaked at 2,372 , which forced the college to start a costly building project .
That , in addition to a devastating campus fire in 1929 , required immediate construction of even more buildings , and with the help of the Great Depression , brought the college to the edge of bankruptcy .
It was saved by a generous gift from Mary and John G. Hardin .
In gratitude , the college changed its name to Mary Hardin – Baylor College in 1934 .
In 1968 , the Scott and White College of Nursing , named for the Scott and White Memorial Hospital located in nearby Temple , became a part of Mary Hardin – Baylor College .
Mary Hardin – Baylor College once again became fully coeducational in 1971 .
August of that year had the first male graduates , including three males receiving bachelor 's degrees .
With the inauguration in 1978 of its first graduate program , a master of education , the college achieved status as a university with five schools : Arts and Sciences , Creative Arts , Business , Education , and Nursing .
It was renamed the University of Mary Hardin – Baylor .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
The school has 119 undergraduate majors and 13 graduate degree programs , including several master 's degrees and two doctoral programs .
Qualified students can participate in engaged learning through internships with businesses and industries .
Study abroad programs are offered on three continents .
UMHB comprises eight colleges : The McLane College of Business , College of Christian Studies , College of Education , College of Humanities and Sciences , Scott and White College of Nursing , College of Visual and Performing Arts , and the Graduate School .
NOTABLE ALUMNI * Sybil Leonard Armes , a Christian author , alternate poet laureate of Texas in 1969 , and former trustee of UMHB * Miriam ' Ma ' Ferguson , Texas ' first female governor and the second woman to be inaugurated governor of any state in the U.S. * Jerrell Freeman , Canadian and American football linebacker
* Buddy Groom , Major League Baseball pitcher , 1992 - 2005
* Oveta Culp Hobby , the first woman appointed as a commanding officer of a military unit , the first director of the Women 's Army Corps , the first Secretary of the United States Department of Health , Education and Welfare , and the second woman to serve in a US cabinet * Margaret " Maggie " Lea Houston , eldest daughter of Republic of Texas President Sam Houston
* Lucy Wilson Rice , Texas painter PRESIDENTIAL CONNECTION Section::::Presidential connection .
Johnson Hall , an all - girls dormitory on the UMHB campus , was named after Rebekah Baines Johnson , mother of President Lyndon B. Johnson and granddaughter of Baptist preacher Reverend George Washington Baines , who served as president of the college from 1861–1864 .
President Johnson , Mrs. Johnson and several other family members were present when the building was dedicated on September 26 , 1968 .
ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
The UMHB Crusaders , or " The Cru " , compete in Division III ( NCAA ) as a member of the American Southwest Conference ( ASC ) .
UMHB was formerly a member of the NAIA before becoming a full member of the NCAA Division III following the 1999–2000 school year .
UMHB held dual membership in the NAIA and NCAA during a provisional period , as UMHB was transitioning to the NCAA .
UMHB sponsors 12 varsity athletic programs , six men 's and six women 's : Men 's sports * Baseball
* Basketball * Football * Golf * Soccer *
Tennis
Women 's sports * Basketball * Golf *
Soccer * Softball *
Tennis * Volleyball ATHLETIC ACHIEVEMENTS Section::::Athletic achievements .
The Crusaders have won four national championships and seven national runner - up finishes :
* The Lady Crusader golf team won the 2000 NAIA Women 's Golf Championship and the 2013 NCAA Division III Women 's Golf Championship .
* The Lady Crusader golf team posted four straight second - place finishes at the NCAA National Tournament from 2002–2005 .
*
The women 's basketball and men 's baseball teams both posted national runner - up finishes in the NAIA .
* The men 's basketball team finished as the NCAA national runner up in 2013 .
*
The football team won the NCAA Division III Championship in 2016 and 2018 and finished as the NCAA national runner - up in 2004 and 2017 .
* UMHB athletic programs have won or shared a combined total of 13 conference championships in the ASC .
* The men 's golf team won the 2008 and 2009 ASC golf championships and have won four conference championships overall .
The team also qualified for the NCAA Division III National Championship in 2008 and 2009
* The first athlete from the UMHB football program to make the jump from college into the NFL was linebacker Jerrell Freeman , who signed a free agent contract with the Tennessee Titans in 2008 , then moved to the Saskatchewan Roughriders of the Canadian Football League for three seasons .
Freeman returned to the National Football League to play four seasons with the Indianapolis Colts .
In the spring of 2016 , he signed as an unrestricted free agent with the Chicago Bears .
STUDENT LIFE
EASTER PAGEANT
Section::::Student life .
Section::::Easter Pageant .
For 75 consecutive years the University of Mary Hardin –
Baylor has produced an outdoor reproduction of the Holy Week .
Each year the pageant takes place on the Wednesday afternoon before Easter and is performed on campus in front of Luther Memorial .
The Easter Pageant is fully produced by the students of UMHB themselves , including directing , costumes , and performances and draws nearly 5,000 viewers each year .
CHARTER DAY Section::::Charter Day .
Charter Day is an annual tradition that celebrates the charter signing on February 1 , 1845 .
The event is held during chapel service on the first Wednesday in February .
During the service , seniors sing the alumni / senior song , " Up with the Purple " .
At the conclusion of the service , seniors traditionally place a wreath of flowers on the grave of Judge R.E.B. Baylor , located in the courtyard .
HOMECOMING
Section::::Homecoming .
Homecoming provides opportunities for graduates and former students to return to campus and connect with former classmates and the university .
The first Homecoming was held in 1909 , and over the years has been held in either the fall or spring .
Students and alumni together celebrate Homecoming in the fall to include football activities .
Selection of the Homecoming Court and the pep rally with fireworks are some of the new events established by students .
ROBING CEREMONY
Section::::Robing ceremony .
Robing symbolizes the passing of the student leadership from the senior class to the junior class .
The specific origin of the robing ceremony is not known , but it may have occurred as early as 1902 .
Seniors place their caps and gowns on the juniors , and this is the first time the juniors are allowed to sing the alumni / senior song , " Up with the Purple " .
Since 2007 , Robing has been held on the Friday of Midnight March with Class Ring Ceremony .
MIDNIGHT MARCH Section::::Midnight March .
At midnight a few weeks before Spring Commencement , seniors in regalia march with lighted candles around Vann Circle Drive .
As they sing the senior / alumni song , they stop to light the candles of special friends and alumni .
In the early stages of the Midnight March , the dormitory residents witness the March inside of their dark rooms .
Later during the ceremony , the residents migrate into the hallway so senior friends can light their candles .
Due to fire codes , however , the March was moved outdoors .
STUNT NIGHT Section::::Stunt Night .
Stunt Night is a competition among the four classes that builds a bond between members and creates class spirit .
It began in 1909 when George Rosborough , the physical education instructor , initiated Stunt Night to give the campus residents , who could not go home , an activity during the Christmas holidays .
The Stunt Night committee selects a theme for the event , allowing the class directors time to prepare a skit and an original song .
The winning class has the honor of decorating the Stunt Night blanket which is then displayed in the Musick Alumni Center and Museum for a year .
DUBBING CEREMONY Section::::Dubbing Ceremony .
In the spring of 1995 , students requested a ceremony to create closer emotional ties to the university .
Subsequently , a " Dubbing Ceremony " became part of Welcome Week .
Each fall new students are " dubbed " with a ceremonial sword by the university administration as " Crusaders Forever " , Prior to the ceremony , students light candles and sing the Alma Mater .
Immediately following the ceremony , the sophomores ring the sophomore bell the number of years the university has been in existence .
MISS MHB PAGEANT Section::::Miss MHB Pageant .
The Pageant provides young women opportunities to gain confidence and poise and to develop friendships through competition .
The pageant has evolved over the years into a two - evening , primarily student - produced event .
Classes and student organizations select representatives and judges interview the contestants , listen to their platforms , and evaluate them on the group dance , individual talent and evening gown stroll .
Miss MHB and three runners - up are named , and each one receives a scholarship for the semester following their selection .
CRUSADER KNIGHTS Section::::Crusader Knights .
The Class of 1994 held the first Crusader Knights in the Fall of 1993 .
It is a two - night , themed event for the men of UMHB .
The competition includes a group opening number , short video - skits created by the participants showing their personality and talent , and the individuals walking in evening attire .
The winner is dubbed Mr. Crusader Knight by the university president .
GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* UMHB Website *
UMHB Athletics Website
* UMHB Alumni Website
* Handbook of Texas Online entry .