LIST OF ASSOCIATION FOOTBALLERS WHO DIED WHILE PLAYING
The following is a list of association footballers who died while playing a game , died directly from injuries sustained while playing , or died after being taken ill on the pitch .
Following an increase in deaths , both during matches and training , the Federation of International Football Associations ( FIFA ) considered mandatory cardiac testing , already in place for years in some countries , such as Italy .
By 2009 , FIFA player Pre - Competition Medical Assessment ( PCMA ) included family history , heart rhythm , sounds , and electrocardiogram ( ECG ) results .
The Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) required extensive medical tests , including ECG and echocardiogram for players in the Europa League 2011–12 .
Constant monitoring has been advised .
Name
Age Team !
Notes
Ruptured bowel in a match against Grimsby Town led to death the next day .
Tetanus from fall on piece of glass in a friendly game against Abercorn led to death ten days later , at the age of 21 .
Rupture of the kidney from a tackle in game against Derby Junction ; he died almost three weeks later .
Pneumonia while playing .
Blood poisoning and tetanus after breaking his arm against Kettering Town in 1896 .
Tetanus caused by on - field injury .
Gashed knee turned septic leading to death .
Heart attack while playing against Burnley , probably from heavy smoking .
He attempted to return to the field of play even when in great pain .
Collapsed after heading a ball in a game against St. Helens and died .
Fatal stomach injuries during a Christmas Day match in 1909 against Partick Thistle at Firhill on a frostbound pitch , after colliding with a Thistle player , led to death four days later .
Burst blood vessel following a wartime game against Reading .
Head injury in a league game at Barnsley in December 1920 ; died as a result of his injury early in the new year .
Late stage tuberculosis after a game against Građanski Zagreb , Hajduk 's greatest rival at the time .
Goalkeeper who died from peritonitis two days after a game against Rangers .
Died from tetanus eight days after fracturing his arm in a match .
During a season - ending match of the , the goalkeeper Georges Le Bidois received a violent kick at his carotid from Swiss Aron Pollitz of US Suisse Paris , which made him succumbed in the locker room .
Upon the announcement of his death , the game was called off .
Perforated bowel after a collision with an opponent .
Died one day later .
Peritonitis after being hit by an opposing player during the match .
Shortly after the incident Arellano was brought to a nearby clinic where he ultimately died .
Collapsed and died on the field of pneumonia during a match against Sheffield United , although Bury claim it was a cerebral hemorrhage .
Injured during an Old Firm match when he dived for the ball and suffered a fractured skull in an accidental collision with Rangers ' Sam English .
He died that same evening .
A goalkeeper who collided with a striker from KR Reykjavik and suffered a head injury in the last game of the Icelandic League on 13 .
June 1933 .
Was taken to hospital , where he died from his injuries on 17 June 1933 .
Died after a clash of heads with Brighton & Hove Albion 's Paul Mooney in a game , who subsequently retired .
When playing as goalkeeper , Thorpe , a diabetic , collapsed into a coma from which he never recovered , attributed to the rough treatment he received on the pitch in a game against Chelsea .
His death lead to the rule that players were no longer able to kick the ball out of the goalkeeper 's arms .
Playing in a friendly match for Atlético Chalaco , Chávez Boza had his femoral artery injured by Víctor Guarderas Lavalle from Alianza Lima .
His limb was amputated which later led to his death since having diabetes .
Collapsed with a heart attack during the away game against Ramnes IL .
He died within minutes after he was carried off the pitch .
Internal bleeding a few days after a collision with an opposing player in a match between his club TSV Braunschweig ( a temporary name for Eintracht Braunschweig ) and SV Werder Bremen on 13 February 1949 .
Collapsed during a match .
Death attributed to stomach congestion .
Collapsed during a match .
Death attributed to a cardiac arrest .
Collapsed during a match .
Death attributed to unusual activity of the thymus gland .
Collapsed during a training session due to a heart ailment and died on the way to the hospital .
Struck by lightning during an FA Amateur Cup quarterfinal against Enfield .
Heart attack during a league game .
Head injuries received during match .
Died as a result of an attack in a Belgian Cup away match against Anderlecht at Parc Astrid .
in Namur was named in his honor .
Heart attack while playing in a Serie A match against Juventus .
Perugia 's ground is named after him .
Died from a heart attack during a club training .
Died during the Ligue 1 match against USM Aïn Beïda in Stade
20 Août 1955 ( Algiers ) , from severe food poisoning .
Died from infarction after fainting in the match against XV de Jaú .
Struck by lightning during an exhibition game .
Son of Jan Jongbloed , goalkeeper of the Dutch national team in both the 1974 and 1978 FIFA World Cup Final .
Collided with an opponent on 21 December away to Celta de Vigo , underwent emergency surgery and returned home .
Relapsed on 7 January with a cerebral haemorrhage and fell into an eight - day coma before dying .
Acute myocardial infarction during a friendly match between Atletico and the UAE 's Al - Jazira Club .
Died from a heart attack in a training match in Florya .
Collapsed at the moment he wanted to take a throw - in while playing against VV Hoogezand .
He died of a heart attack .
Collapsed and died while playing against Angola in a World Cup Qualifier .
An autopsy showed that the 24-year - old had an enlarged heart and high blood pressure .
Heart attack on the pitch while playing against Lincoln City .
He was pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital .
Heart attack during a training session .
The goalkeeper collapsed into a coma in the training session of Hungarian national team .
After a week he died .
Received an elbow hit in the neck by an opponent player , during a match against Panelefsiniakos .
He died before going to hospital .
Died during a game against Dungannon Swifts at Stangmore Park after being struck in the chest by the ball .
Collapsed and died on the pitch of a heart attack .
24 Heart attack in a friendly game against Olympique Lyonnais at Stade Chedli Zouiten 23 Heart attack while playing against Bnei Yehuda .
15 Died after a crossbar fell on his head during a warmup .
23 Undetected heart defect that led to his collapse .
18 Died after an infection from a simple sprain , misdiagnosed by four different hospitals .
Collapsed on the pitch and later died in hospital .
Died in hospital due to heart failure after a game between Persebaya and PSIM Yogyakarta .
Died from a heart attack in his house 's bathroom , at the same night when his team lost 1–3 to Polar Wrocław .
24 Died in a hospital in Paris , France , from a fractured skull after clash of heads two days earlier Struck by lightning during a training session and was killed instantly .
Died while playing for Dinamo ; In the 74th minute of a friendly game against Olteniţa , Hîldan had a heart attack , and fell to the ground .
The North Stand of Dinamo 's stadium is named in his honour .
Injured in a collision with Budun Budunov who also sustained serious head trauma .
He received a brain hemorrhage and died eight days later .
Died during a training session at André - Picquenot Stadium in Tourlaville as a result of a heart attack .
Accidentally struck in the mandible by a teammate charging towards goal .
Internal bleeding was discovered , before he died one week later .
28 Dos Santos suffered a heart attack after a game of his Peruvian club Deportivo Wanka , which scored a goal in the 3–1 win over Alianza Lima .
Struck by lightning during a training session , and was killed instantly .
Struck by the same lightning that killed Hernán Gaviria , and died three days later from the injuries .
Collapsed during a match and later died in a hospital .
Sustained neck and spinal injuries in a collision with Landon Donovan during the 2001 CONCACAF U-20 Tournament on 20 March 2001 .
Paralysed , he died two years later on 9 March 2003 having stopped breathing .
Collapsed while playing in the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup semi - final between his country and Colombia , and died shortly afterward in hospital .
An autopsy later revealed the cause of death was hypertrophic cardiomyopathy .
Cardiac arrest caused by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy while playing against Vitória .
Torn pericardium during a match against CSD Comunicaciones when he collided with Mario Rafael Rodríguez .
He died later in a hospital .
Sudden cardiac death during a Campeonato Brasileiro Série A match against São Paulo .
His death motivated a revamping of practices in medical assistance from clubs and stricter preventative measures in sports grounds in Brazil .
Collided with Mohun Bagan goalkeeper Subrata Paul in the 78th minute of the Federation Cup finals while scoring his second goal .
He staggered away , then collapsed .
Attempts to revive him were unsuccessful and he was pronounced dead upon arrival at Hosmat Hospital .
Collapsed on the pitch 30 minutes into the game against Margate F.C. in the Kent Senior Cup Semi - Final .
An undiagnosed heart defect was identified as the cause of his death .
Collapsed after heading a ball .
Died of a heart attack .
Died suddenly from a cardiac arrest during a football match played with friends in Montemor - o - Novo .
Died suddenly during a training match .
He had lost consciousness on the ground and his body had arrived lifeless to the hospital .
Heart attack during a training session and was , despite revival attempts from teammates and a doctor , declared dead upon arrival at the local hospital .
The number 7 was afterwards retired in his honor .
Suffered a heart attack during training , he died before being taken to the hospital .
Died from undetected heart defect during a training match .
Collapsed on the pitch during a Conference North game against Harrogate Town and died soon afterwards at Harrogate District Hospital .
Medical tests revealed he died from a heart condition known as arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy .
Collapsed on the pitch during a training session with his club and died in the ambulance on the way to the hospital .
The Brazilian was a former top scorer and best player for the Kazakhstan Premier League .
19 Heart attack and died during a training match in Široki Brijeg , Bosnia and Herzegovina .
16 Collapsed and died during youth team pre - season training .
An inquest recorded a verdict of natural causes .
22 Collapsed during a match against Getafe C.F ..
He died later in hospital after several cardiac arrests .
Autopsy revealed arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 28 Sudden heart failure during a training match against Maccabi Beersheba .
Collapsed during his team 's 5–3 win against Dundee United with what was later confirmed as left ventricular failure .
He died on the way to the hospital .
Died shortly after a league game against Union Sportive O'Mbila .
During the match , he collided with an opponent .
He managed to finish the game , but collapsed shortly after and medics were unable to revive him .
Collapsed 17 minutes into a game against Three Bridges of an undetermined cause ( heart attack suspected ) .
Collided with a concrete wall during a game against Cibalia and died in a hospital 5 days later of severe head injuries Felt ill during a game , died later that day in a hospital .
Heart attack during a match against Salesianito .
He died the next day .
Before an away match with Enugu Rangers , goalkeeper Adun of Warri Wolves FC , was assaulted by thugs suspected to be fans of the opposition team .
Adun died 3 days later from internal haemorrhage , during a training session .
Cardiac arrest following a training session .
Ivorian - born Gabonese defender for FC 105 Libreville died after suffering a heart attack during team training .
SEE ALSO
* List of association footballers who died during their careers * Sudden cardiac death of athletes
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Football deaths at Spartacus Educational