THANKSGIVING ( UNITED STATES )
Thanksgiving is a national holiday in the United States , celebrated on the fourth Thursday of November .
It originated as a harvest festival .
Thanksgiving has been celebrated nationally on and off since 1789 , with a proclamation by George Washington after a request by Congress .
Thomas Jefferson chose not to observe the holiday , and its celebration was intermittent until the presidency of Abraham Lincoln , when Thanksgiving became a federal holiday in 1863 , during the American Civil War .
Lincoln proclaimed a national day of " Thanksgiving and Praise to our beneficent Father who dwelleth in the Heavens , " to be celebrated on the last Thursday in November .
Under President Franklin D. Roosevelt , the date was changed to the fourth Thursday in November , an innovation that endures to this day .
Together with Christmas and the New Year , Thanksgiving is a part of the broader fall – winter holiday season in the U.S.
The event that Americans commonly call the " First Thanksgiving " was celebrated by the Pilgrims after their first harvest in the New World in October 1621 .
This feast lasted three days , and — as accounted by attendee Edward Winslow — it was attended by 90 Native Americans and 53 Pilgrims .
The New England colonists were accustomed to regularly celebrating " thanksgivings"—days of prayer thanking God for blessings such as military victory or the end of a drought .
HISTORY
EARLY THANKSGIVING OBSERVANCES Section::::History .
Section::::Early thanksgiving observances .
Setting aside time to give thanks for one 's blessings , along with holding feasts to celebrate a harvest , are both practices that long predate the European settlement of North America .
The first documented thanksgiving services in territory currently belonging to the United States were conducted by Spaniards and the French in the 16th century .
Wisdom practices such as expressing gratitude , sharing , and giving away , are integral to many indigenous cultures and communities .
Thanksgiving services were routine in what became the Commonwealth of Virginia as early as 1607 , with the first permanent settlement of Jamestown , Virginia holding a thanksgiving in 1610 .
In 1619 , 38 English settlers arrived at Berkeley Hundred in Charles City County , Virginia .
The group 's London Company charter specifically required " that the day of our ships arrival at the place assigned ... in the land of Virginia shall be yearly and perpetually kept holy as a day of thanksgiving to Almighty God . "
Three years later , after the Indian massacre of 1622 , the Berkeley Hundred site and other outlying locations were abandoned and colonists moved their celebration to Jamestown and other more secure spots .
HARVEST FESTIVAL OBSERVED BY THE PILGRIMS AT PLYMOUTH Section::::Harvest festival observed by the Pilgrims at Plymouth .
The most prominent historic thanksgiving event in American popular culture is the 1621 celebration at the Plymouth Plantation , where the settlers held a harvest feast after a successful growing season .
Autumn or early winter feasts continued sporadically in later years , first as an impromptu religious observance and later as a civil tradition .
The Plymouth settlers , known as Pilgrims , had settled in land abandoned when all but one of the Patuxet Indians died in a plague .
After a harsh winter killed half of the Plymouth settlers , the last surviving Patuxet , Squanto ( who had learned English and avoided the plague as a slave in Europe ) , came in at the request of Samoset , the first native American to encounter the Pilgrims .
Squanto taught the Pilgrims how to catch eel and grow corn and served as an interpreter for them until he too succumbed to plague a year later .
The Wampanoag leader Massasoit also gave food to the colonists during the first winter when supplies brought from England were insufficient .
The Pilgrims celebrated at Plymouth for three days after their first harvest in 1621 .
The exact time is unknown , but James Baker , the Plimoth Plantation vice president of research , stated in 1996 , " The event occurred between Sept. 21 and Nov. 11 , 1621 , with the most likely time being around Michaelmas ( Sept. 29 ) , the traditional time . "
Seventeenth - century accounts do not identify this as a Thanksgiving observance , rather it followed the harvest .
It included 50 persons who were on the Mayflower ( all who remained of the 100 who had landed ) and 90 Native Americans .
The feast was cooked by the four adult Pilgrim women who survived their first winter in the New World ( Eleanor Billington , Elizabeth Hopkins , Mary Brewster , and Susanna White ) , along with young daughters and male and female servants .
Two colonists gave personal accounts of the 1621 feast in Plymouth .
The Pilgrims , most of whom were Separatists ( English Dissenters ) , are not to be confused with Puritans , who established their own Massachusetts Bay Colony on the Shawmut Peninsula ( current day Boston ) in 1630 .
Both groups were strict Calvinists , but differed in their views regarding the Church of England .
Puritans wished to remain in the Anglican Church and reform it , while the Pilgrims wanted complete separation from the church .
William Bradford , in Of Plymouth Plantation wrote : Edward Winslow , in Mourt 's Relation wrote : The Pilgrims held a true Thanksgiving celebration in 1623 following a fast , and a refreshing 14-day rain which resulted in a larger harvest .
William DeLoss Love calculates that this thanksgiving was made on Wednesday , July 30 , 1623 , a day before the arrival of a supply ship with more colonists , but before the fall harvest .
In Love 's opinion this 1623 thanksgiving was significant because the order to recognize the event was from civil authority ( Governor Bradford ) , and not from the church , making it likely the first civil recognition of Thanksgiving in New England .
Referring to the 1623 harvest after the nearly catastrophic drought , Bradford wrote : These firsthand accounts do not appear to have contributed to the early development of the holiday .
Bradford 's " Of Plymouth Plantation " was not published until the 1850s .
While the booklet " Mourt 's Relation " was summarized by other publications without the now - familiar thanksgiving story .
By the eighteenth century the original booklet appeared to be lost or forgotten .
A copy was rediscovered in Philadelphia in 1820 , with the first full reprinting in 1841 .
In a footnote the editor , Alexander Young , was the first person to identify the 1621 feast as the first Thanksgiving .
According to historian James Baker , debates over where any " first Thanksgiving " took place on modern American territory are a " tempest in a beanpot " .
Jeremy Bang claims , " Local boosters in Virginia , Florida , and Texas promote their own colonists , who ( like many people getting off a boat ) gave thanks for setting foot again on dry land . "
Baker claims , " the American holiday 's true origin was the New England Calvinist Thanksgiving .
Never coupled with a Sabbath meeting , the Puritan observances were special days set aside during the week for thanksgiving and praise in response to God 's providence . "
President John F. Kennedy issued Proclamation 3560 on November 5 , 1963 stating , " Over three centuries ago , our forefathers in Virginia and in Massachusetts , far from home in a lonely wilderness , set aside a time of thanksgiving .
On the appointed day , they gave reverent thanks for their safety , for the health of their children , for the fertility of their fields , for the love which bound them together and for the faith which united them with their God . "
THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR TO NATIONHOOD Section::::The Revolutionary War to nationhood .
During the American Revolutionary War
the Continental Congress appointed one or more thanksgiving days each year , each time recommending to the executives of the various states the observance of these days in their states .
The First National Proclamation of Thanksgiving was given by the Continental Congress in 1777 from its temporary location in York , Pennsylvania , while the British occupied the national capital at Philadelphia .
Delegate Samuel Adams created the first draft .
Congress then adapted the final version : George Washington , leader of the revolutionary forces in the American Revolutionary War , proclaimed a Thanksgiving in December 1777 as a victory celebration honoring the defeat of the British at Saratoga .
THANKSGIVING PROCLAMATIONS IN THE EARLY REPUBLIC
Section::::Thanksgiving proclamations in the early Republic .
The Continental - Confederation Congress , the legislative body that governed the United States from 1774 to 1789 , issued several " national days of prayer , humiliation , and thanksgiving " , a practice that was continued by presidents Washington and Adams under the Constitution , and has manifested itself in the established American observances of Thanksgiving and the National Day of Prayer today .
This proclamation was published in The Independent Gazetteer , or the Chronicle of Freedom , on November 5 , 1782 , the first being observed on November 28 , 1782 :
By the United States in Congress assembled , PROCLAMATION .
It being the indispensable duty of all nations , not only to offer up their supplications to Almighty God , the giver of all good , for His gracious assistance in a time of distress , but also in a solemn and public manner , to give Him praise for His goodness in general , and especially for great and signal interpositions of His Providence in their behalf ; therefore , the United States in Congress assembled , taking into their consideration the many instances of Divine goodness to these States in the course of the important conflict , in which they have been so long engaged , – the present happy and promising state of public affairs , and the events of the war in the course of the year now drawing to a close ; particularly the harmony of the public Councils which is so necessary to the success of the public cause , – the perfect union and good understanding which has hitherto subsisted between them and their allies , notwithstanding the artful and unwearied attempts of the common enemy to divide them , – the success of the arms of the United States and those of their allies , – and the acknowledgment of their Independence by another European power , whose friendship and commerce must be of great and lasting advantage to these States ; Do hereby recommend it to the inhabitants of these States in general , to observe and request the several states to interpose their authority , in appointing and commanding the observation of THURSDAY the TWENTY - EIGHTH DAY OF NOVEMBER next as a day of SOLEMN THANKSGIVING to GOD for all His mercies ; and they do further recommend to all ranks to testify their gratitude to God for His goodness by a cheerful obedience to His laws and by promoting , each in his station , and by his influence , the practice of true and undefiled religion , which is the great foundation of public prosperity and national happiness .
Done in Congress at Philadelphia , the eleventh day of October , in the year of our LORD , one thousand seven hundred and eighty - two , and of our Sovereignty and Independence , the seventh .
JOHN HANSON , President .
CHARLES THOMSON , Secretary .
On Thursday , September 24 , 1789 , the first House of Representatives voted to recommend the First Amendment of the newly drafted Constitution to the states for ratification .
The next day , Congressman Elias Boudinot from New Jersey proposed that the House and Senate jointly request of President Washington to proclaim a day of thanksgiving for " the many signal favors of Almighty God " .
Boudinot said that he " could not think of letting the session pass over without offering an opportunity to all the citizens of the United States of joining , with one voice , in returning to Almighty God their sincere thanks for the many blessings he had poured down upon them . "
As President , on October 3 , 1789 , George Washington made the following proclamation and created the first Thanksgiving Day designated by the national government of the United States of America : On January 1 , 1795 , Washington proclaimed a Thanksgiving Day to be observed on Thursday , February 19 .
President John Adams declared Thanksgivings in 1798 and 1799 .
As Thomas Jefferson was a deist and a skeptic of the idea of divine intervention , he did not declare any thanksgiving days during his presidency .
James Madison renewed the tradition in 1814 , in response to resolutions of Congress , at the close of the War of 1812 .
Caleb Strong , Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , declared the holiday in 1813 , " for a day of public thanksgiving and prayer " for Thursday , November 25 of that year .
Madison also declared the holiday twice in 1815 ; however , neither of these was celebrated in autumn .
In 1816 , Governor Plumer of New Hampshire appointed Thursday , November 14 to be observed as a day of Public Thanksgiving and Governor Brooks of Massachusetts appointed Thursday , November 28 to be " observed throughout that State as a day of Thanksgiving " .
A thanksgiving day was annually appointed by the governor of New York from 1817 .
By 1858 proclamations appointing a day of thanksgiving were issued by the governors of 25 states and two territories .
LINCOLN AND THE CIVIL WAR Section::::Lincoln and the Civil War .
In the middle of the American Civil War , President Abraham Lincoln , prompted by a series of editorials written by Sarah Josepha Hale , proclaimed a national Thanksgiving Day , to be celebrated on the 26th , the final Thursday of November 1863 .
The document , written by Secretary of State William H. Seward , reads as follows : Since 1863 , Thanksgiving has been observed annually in the United States .
The holiday superseded Evacuation Day , a de facto national holiday that had been held on November 25 each year prior to the Civil War and commemorated the British withdrawal from the United States after the American Revolution .
POST - CIVIL WAR ERA Section::::Post - Civil War era .
During the second half of the 19th century , Thanksgiving traditions in America varied from region to region .
A traditional New England Thanksgiving , for example , consisted of a raffle held on Thanksgiving Eve ( in which the prizes were mainly geese or turkeys ) , a shooting match on Thanksgiving morning ( in which turkeys and chickens were used as targets ) , church services — and then the traditional feast , which consisted of some familiar Thanksgiving staples such as turkey and pumpkin pie , and some not - so - familiar dishes such as pigeon pie .
The earliest high school football rivalries took root in the late 19th century in Massachusetts , stemming from games played on Thanksgiving ; professional football took root as a Thanksgiving staple during the sport 's genesis in the 1890s , and the tradition of Thanksgiving football both at the high school and professional level continues to this day .
In New York City , people would dress up in fanciful masks and costumes and roam the streets in merry - making mobs .
By the beginning of the 20th century , these mobs had morphed into Ragamuffin parades consisting mostly of children dressed as " ragamuffins " in costumes of old and mismatched adult clothes and with deliberately smudged faces , but by the late 1950s the tradition had diminished enough to only exist in its original form in a few communities around New York , with many of its traditions subsumed into the Halloween custom of trick - or - treating .
1939 TO 1941
Section::::1939 to 1941 .
Abraham Lincoln 's successors as president followed his example of annually declaring the final Thursday in November to be Thanksgiving .
But in 1939 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt broke with this tradition .
November had five Thursdays that year ( instead of the more - common four ) , Roosevelt declared the fourth Thursday as Thanksgiving rather than the fifth one .
Although many popular histories state otherwise , he made clear that his plan was to establish the holiday on the next - to - last Thursday in the month instead of the last one .
With the country still in the midst of The Great Depression , Roosevelt thought an earlier Thanksgiving would give merchants a longer period to sell goods before Christmas .
Increasing profits and spending during this period , Roosevelt hoped , would help bring the country out of the Depression .
At the time , advertising goods for Christmas before Thanksgiving was considered inappropriate .
Fred Lazarus , Jr. , founder of the Federated Department Stores (
later Macy 's ) , is credited with convincing Roosevelt to push Thanksgiving to a week earlier to expand the shopping season , and within two years the change passed through Congress into law .
Republicans decried the change , calling it an affront to the memory of Lincoln .
People began referring to November 30 as the " Republican Thanksgiving " and November 23 as the " Democratic Thanksgiving " or " Franksgiving " .
Regardless of the politics , many localities had made a tradition of celebrating on the last Thursday , and many football teams had a tradition of playing their final games of the season on Thanksgiving ; with their schedules set well in advance , they could not change .
Since a presidential declaration of Thanksgiving Day was not legally binding , Roosevelt 's change was widely disregarded .
Twenty - three states went along with Roosevelt 's recommendation , 22 did not , and some , like Texas , could not decide and took both days as government holidays .
In 1940 and 1941 , years in which November had four Thursdays , Roosevelt declared the third one as Thanksgiving .
As in 1939 , some states went along with the change while others retained the traditional last - Thursday date .
1942
TO PRESENT Section::::1942 to present .
On October 6 , 1941 , both houses of the U.S.
Congress passed a joint resolution fixing the traditional last - Thursday date for the holiday beginning in 1942 .
However , in December of that year the Senate passed an amendment to the resolution that split the difference by requiring that Thanksgiving be observed annually on the fourth Thursday of November , which was usually the last Thursday and sometimes ( two years out of seven , on average )
the next to last .
The amendment also passed the House , and on December 26 , 1941 , President Roosevelt signed this bill , for the first time making the date of Thanksgiving a matter of federal law and fixing the day as the fourth Thursday of November .
For several years some states continued to observe the last - Thursday date in years with five November Thursdays ( the next such year being 1944 ) , with Texas doing so as late as 1956 .
TRADITIONAL CELEBRATIONS CHARITY Section::::Traditional celebrations .
Section::::Charity .
The poor are often provided with food at Thanksgiving time .
Most communities have annual food drives that collect non - perishable packaged and canned foods , and corporations sponsor charitable distributions of staple foods and Thanksgiving dinners .
The Salvation Army enlists volunteers to serve Thanksgiving dinners to hundreds of people in different locales .
Additionally , pegged to be
five days after Thanksgiving is Giving Tuesday , a celebration of charitable giving .
FOODS OF THE SEASON Section::::Foods of the season .
U.S. tradition compares the holiday with a meal held in 1621 by the Wampanoag and the Pilgrims who settled at Plymouth Plantation .
It is continued in modern times with the Thanksgiving dinner , traditionally featuring turkey , playing a central role in the celebration of Thanksgiving .
In the United States , certain kinds of food are traditionally served at Thanksgiving meals .
Turkey , usually roasted and stuffed ( but sometimes deep - fried instead ) , is typically the featured item on most Thanksgiving feast tables , so much so that Thanksgiving is also colloquially known as " Turkey Day . "
In fact , 45 million turkeys were consumed on Thanksgiving Day alone in 2015 .
With 85 percent of Americans partaking in the meal , that 's an estimated 276 million Americans dining on the festive poultry , spending an expected $ 1.05 billion on turkeys for Thanksgiving in 2016 .
Mashed potatoes with gravy , stuffing , sweet potatoes , cranberry sauce , sweet corn , various fall vegetables , squash , Brussels sprouts and pumpkin pie are commonly associated with Thanksgiving dinner .
Green bean casserole was introduced in 1955 and remains a favorite .
All of these are actually native to the Americas or were introduced as a new food source to the Europeans when they arrived .
Turkey may be an exception .
In his book Mayflower , Nathaniel Philbrick suggests that the Pilgrims might already have been familiar with turkey in England , even though the bird is native to the Americas .
The Spaniards had brought domesticated turkeys back from Central America in the early 17th century , and the birds soon became popular fare all over Europe , including England , where turkey ( as an alternative to the traditional goose ) became a " fixture at English Christmases " .
The Pilgrims did not observe Christmas .
As a result of the size of Thanksgiving dinner , Americans eat more food on Thanksgiving than on any other day of the year .
GIVING THANKS
Section::::Giving thanks .
Thanksgiving was founded as a religious observance for all the members of the community to give thanks to God for a common purpose .
Historic reasons for community thanksgivings are : the 1541 thanksgiving mass after the expedition of Francisco Vásquez de Coronado safely crossing the high plains of Texas and finding game , and the 1777 thanksgiving after the victory in the Revolutionary War Battle of Saratoga .
In his 1789 National Thanksgiving Proclamation , President Washington gave many noble reasons for a national Thanksgiving , including " for the civil and religious liberty " , for " useful knowledge " , and for God 's " kind care " and " His Providence " .
After President Washington delivered this message , the " Episcopal Church , of which President Washington was a member , announced that the first Thursday in November would become its regular day for giving thanks " .
The tradition of giving thanks to God is continued today in many forms , most notably the attendance of religious services , as well as the saying of a mealtime prayer before Thanksgiving dinner .
Many houses of worship offer worship services and events on Thanksgiving themes the weekend before , the day of , or the weekend after Thanksgiving .
At home , it is a holiday tradition in many families to begin the Thanksgiving dinner by saying grace ( a prayer before or after a meal ) .
The custom is portrayed in the photograph " Family Holding Hands and Praying Before a Thanksgiving Meal " .
Before praying , it is a common practice at the dining table for " each person [ to ] tell one specific reason they 're thankful to God that year . "
While grace is said , some families hold hands until the prayer concludes , often indicated with an " Amen " .
Joy Fisher , a Baptist writer , states that " this holiday takes on a spiritual emphasis and includes recognition of the source of the blessings they enjoy year round – a loving God . "
In the same vein , Hesham A. Hassaballa , an American Muslim scholar and physician , has written that Thanksgiving " is wholly consistent with Islamic principles " and that " few things are more Islamic than thanking God for His blessings " .
Similarly many Sikh Americans also celebrate the holiday by " giving thanks to Almighty " .
PARADES Section::::Parades .
Since 1924 , in New York City , the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade is held annually every Thanksgiving Day from the Upper West Side of Manhattan to Macy 's flagship store in Herald Square , and televised nationally by NBC .
The parade features parade floats with specific themes , performances from Broadway musicals , large balloons of cartoon characters , TV personalities , and high school marching bands .
The float that traditionally ends the Macy 's Parade is the Santa Claus float , the arrival of which is an unofficial sign of the beginning of the Christmas season .
It is billed as the world 's largest parade .
The oldest Thanksgiving Day parade is the Philadelphia 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , which launched in 1920 and takes place in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
Philadelphia 's parade was long associated with Gimbels , a prominent Macy 's rival , until that store closed in 1986 .
Its current sponsors are WPVI - TV , the channel 6 ABC affiliate in Philadelphia ; and Dunkin ' Donuts donut chain .
Founded in 1924 , the same year as the Macy 's parade , America 's Thanksgiving Parade in Detroit is one of the largest parades in the country .
The parade runs from Midtown to Downtown Detroit and precedes the annual Detroit Lions Thanksgiving football game .
The parade includes large balloons , marching bands , and various celebrity guests much like the Macy 's parade and is nationally televised on various affiliate stations .
The Mayor of Detroit closes the parade by giving Santa Claus a key to the city .
There are Thanksgiving parades in many other cities , including : * Ameren Missouri Thanksgiving Day Parade ( St. Louis , Missouri )
* America 's Hometown Thanksgiving Parade ( Plymouth , Massachusetts )
* Belk Carolinas ' Carrousel Parade ( Charlotte , North Carolina )
* Celebrate the Season Parade ( Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ) * FirstLight Federal Credit Union Sun Bowl Parade ( El Paso , Texas )
* H - E - B Holiday Parade ( Houston , Texas )
* Uncle Dan 's Thanksgiving Parade ( Chicago , Illinois ) * Santa Claus Parade ( Peoria , Illinois ) , the nation 's oldest , dating to 1887 and held the day after Thanksgiving * Parada de los Cerros Thanksgiving Day Parade ( Fountain Hills , Arizona ) * UBS Parade Spectacular ( Stamford , Connecticut ) – held the Sunday before Thanksgiving so it does n't directly compete with the Macy 's parade away .
Most of these parades are televised on a local station , and some have small , usually regional , syndication networks ; most also carry the parades via Internet television on the TV stations ' websites .
Several other parades have a loose association with Thanksgiving , thanks to CBS 's now - discontinued All - American Thanksgiving Day Parade coverage .
Parades that were covered during this era were the Aloha Floral Parade held in Honolulu , Hawaii every September , the Toronto Santa Claus Parade in Toronto , Ontario , Canada , and the Opryland Aqua Parade ( held from 1996 to 2001 by the Gaylord Opryland Resort & Convention Center in Nashville ) ; the Opryland parade was discontinued and replaced by a taped parade in Miami Beach , Florida in 2002 .
A Disneyland parade was also featured on CBS until Disney purchased rival ABC .
For many years the Santa Claus Lane Parade ( now Hollywood Christmas Parade ) in Los Angeles was held on the Wednesday evening before Thanksgiving .
In 1978 this was switched to the Sunday following the holiday .
SPORTS AMERICAN
FOOTBALL
Section::::Sports .
Section::::American football .
American football is an important part of many Thanksgiving celebrations in the United States , a tradition that dates to the earliest era of the sport in the late 19th century .
Professional football games are often held on Thanksgiving Day ; until recently , these were the only games played during the week apart from Sunday or Monday night .
The National Football League has played games on Thanksgiving every year since its creation .
The Detroit Lions have hosted a game every Thanksgiving Day from 1934 to 1938 and again every year since 1945 .
In 1966 , the Dallas Cowboys , who had been founded six years earlier , adopted the practice of hosting Thanksgiving games .
The league added a third game in prime time in 2006 , which aired on the NFL Network , then moved to NBC in 2012 .
The third game has no set site or team , providing an opportunity for all teams in the league to host a Thanksgiving game in the future .
For college football teams that participate in the highest level ( all teams in the Football Bowl Subdivision , as well as three teams in the historically black Southwestern Athletic Conference of the Championship Subdivision ) , the regular season ends on Thanksgiving weekend , and a team 's final game is often against a regional or historic rival , such as the Iron Bowl between Alabama and Auburn , the Civil War between Oregon and Oregon State , the Apple Cup between Washington and Washington State , and Michigan and Ohio State playing in their rivalry game .
Most of these college games are played on the Friday or Saturday after Thanksgiving , but usually one or two college games are played on Thanksgiving itself .
The lower divisions of the game , including all of Divisions II and III , the NAIA , club football and the rest of the Championship Subdivision ( except the Ivy League , whose season ends before Thanksgiving ) , are in the midst of playoff tournaments over Thanksgiving weekend .
Some high school football games ( which include some state championship games ) , and informal " Turkey Bowl " contests played by amateur groups and organizations , are frequently held on Thanksgiving weekend .
Games of football preceding or following the meal in the backyard or a nearby field are also common during many family gatherings .
Amateur games typically follow less organized backyard - rules , two - hand touch or flag football styles .
OTHER SPORTS
Section::::Other sports .
College basketball holds several elimination tournaments on over Thanksgiving weekend , before the conference season .
These include the Anaheim - based Wooden Legacy , the Orlando - based AdvoCare Invitational , and the Bahamas - based Battle 4 Atlantis , all of which are televised on ESPN2 and ESPNU in marathon format .
The NCAA owned - and - operated NIT Season Tip - Off has also since moved to Thanksgiving week .
This is a relatively new phenomenon , dating only to 2006 .
The National Basketball Association also briefly played on Thanksgiving , albeit in the evening , with a doubleheader airing Thanksgiving night on TNT , a practice that ran from 2009 to 2011 ; the Atlanta Hawks hosted the early game each year , while the Los Angeles Clippers hosted the late game in both 2010 and 2011 ( both of the 2011 NBA Thanksgiving games were canceled due to a labor dispute ) .
The NBA has not scheduled any Thanksgiving games since then , mainly due to the move of the NFL 's primetime Thanksgiving game to NBC .
Though golf and auto racing are in their off - seasons on Thanksgiving , there are events in those sports that take place on Thanksgiving weekend .
The Turkey Night Grand Prix is an annual automobile race that takes place at various venues in southern California on Thanksgiving night ; due in part to the fact that this is after the Monster Energy NASCAR Cup Series and Verizon IndyCar Series have finished their seasons , it allows some of the top racers in the United States to participate .
In golf , Thanksgiving weekend was the traditional time of the Skins Game from 1983 to 2008 ; the event was canceled in 2009 due to a lack of sponsorship and a difficulty in drawing star talent .
In 2018 , golf returned to Thanksgiving weekend with , a one - round match play contest between Tiger Woods and Phil Mickelson played on pay - per - view .
The world championship pumpkin chunking contest was held in early November in Delaware and televised each Thanksgiving on Science Channel , but a lawsuit arising from an injury suffered by one of the producers in the 2016 event caused the cancellation of the 2017 one .
In ice hockey , the National Hockey League announced , as part of its decade - long extension with NBC , that they would begin airing a game on the Friday afternoon following Thanksgiving beginning the 2011–12 NHL season ; the game has since been branded as the " Thanksgiving Showdown " .
( The Boston Bruins have played matinees on Black Friday since at least 1990 , but 2011 was the first time the game was nationally televised . )
The NHL had played games on Thanksgiving itself , usually scheduling games involving Canadian teams ( but not always , as was the case in 2016 , when the league scheduled a nationally televised game
Thanksgiving night between two American teams on the West Coast ) .
In Canada , Thanksgiving is in October , although no games were scheduled in 2011 and only one was scheduled in 2012 ( both the Thanksgiving Showdown and the lone Canadian game on U.S. Thanksgiving were canceled as a result of a labor dispute in 2012 ) ; as a result of the effective day off , almost all of the league 's teams play the day after Thanksgiving .
Professional wrestling promotions have typically held premier pay - per - view events on or around the time of Thanksgiving .
This trend began in 1983 when Jim Crockett Promotions , the largest promoter in the National Wrestling Alliance , introduced Starrcade .
Starrcade , later incorporated into World Championship Wrestling , moved off Thanksgiving in 1988 ; the year prior , the rival World Wrestling Federation had introduced Survivor Series , an event that continues to be hosted in November to the present day .
Many American cities hold road running events , known as " turkey trots " , on Thanksgiving morning , so much so that , Thanksgiving is the most popular race day in the U.S.
Depending on the organizations involved , these can range from one - mile ( 1.6 km ) fun runs to full marathons ( although no races currently use the latter ; the Atlanta Marathon stopped running on Thanksgiving in 2010 ) .
Most turkey trots range from between three and ten miles ( 5–16 km ) .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
While not as prolific as Christmas specials , which usually begin right after Thanksgiving , there are many special television programs transmitted on or around Thanksgiving , such as A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving , in addition to the live parades and football games mentioned above .
In some cases , television broadcasters begin programming Christmas films and specials to run on Thanksgiving Day , taking the day as a signal for the beginning of the Christmas season .
RADIO Section::::Radio .
" Alice 's Restaurant " , an 18-minute monologue by Arlo Guthrie that is partially based on an incident that happened on Thanksgiving in 1965 , was first released in 1967 .
It has since become a tradition on numerous classic rock and classic hits radio stations to play the full , uninterrupted recording to much fanfare each Thanksgiving Day , a tradition that appears to have originated with counterculture radio host Bob Fass , who introduced the song to the public on his radio show .
Another song that traditionally gets played on numerous radio stations ( of many different formats ) is " The Thanksgiving Song " , a 1992 song by Adam Sandler .
Prominent radio host Rush Limbaugh has an annual tradition known as The Real Story of Thanksgiving , in which he gives his interpretation of the Thanksgiving story on his program the day before Thanksgiving .
The public radio series Science Friday broadcasts coverage of the Ig Nobel Prize ceremonies on the day after Thanksgiving .
Football play - by - play and , in at least one case , parade coverage , is also available on the radio .
TURKEY PARDONING
Section::::Turkey pardoning .
Since 1947 , the National Turkey Federation has presented the President of the United States with one live turkey and two dressed turkeys , in a ceremony known as the National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation .
John F. Kennedy was the first president reported to spare the turkey given to him ( he announced he did n't plan to eat the bird ) , and Ronald Reagan was the first to grant the turkey a presidential pardon , which he jokingly presented to his 1987 turkey ( a turkey that would indeed be spared and sent to a petting zoo ) .
There are legends that state that the " pardoning " tradition dates to the Harry Truman administration or even to an anecdote of Abraham Lincoln pardoning his son 's pet turkey ( a Christmas turkey ) ; both stories have been quoted in more recent presidential speeches , but neither has any evidence in the Presidential record .
In more recent years , two turkeys have been pardoned , in case the original turkey becomes unavailable for presidential pardoning .
George H. W. Bush , who served as vice president under Reagan , made the turkey pardon a permanent annual tradition upon assuming the presidency in 1989 , a tradition that has been carried on by every president each year since .
The pardoned turkeys have typically ended up in the Northern Virginia suburbs of Washington ,
D.C. From 1989 to 2004 they were sent to a children 's farm called Frying Pan Farm Park in Herndon , Virginia .
From 2009 to 2013 they were sent to George Washington 's Mount Vernon estate near Alexandria , Virginia , and in 2014 they were sent to an estate in Leesburg , Virginia once owned by former state governor and turkey farmer Westmoreland Davis .
However , from 2005 to 2009 they were sent to either Walt Disney World or Disneyland .
The turkeys rarely live to see the next Thanksgiving due to being bred for large size .
VACATION AND TRAVEL Section::::Vacation and travel .
On Thanksgiving Day , families and friends usually gather for a large meal or dinner .
Consequently , the Thanksgiving holiday weekend is one of the busiest travel periods of the year .
Thanksgiving is a four - day or five - day weekend vacation for schools and colleges .
Most business and government workers ( 78 % in 2007 ) are given Thanksgiving and the day after as paid holidays .
Thanksgiving Eve , the night before Thanksgiving , is one of the busiest nights of the year for bars and clubs ( where it is often identified by the derogatory name Blackout Wednesday ) , as many college students and others return to their hometowns to reunite with friends and family .
CRITICISM AND CONTROVERSY Section::::Criticism and controversy .
Much like Columbus Day , Thanksgiving is considered by some to be a " national day of mourning " , as a celebration of the cultural genocide and conquest of Native Americans by colonists .
Thanksgiving has long carried a distinct resonance for Native Americans , who see the holiday as an embellished story of " Pilgrims and Natives looking past their differences " to break bread .
Professor Dan Brook of the University of California , Berkeley condemns the " cultural and political amnesia " of Americans who celebrate Thanksgiving : " We do not have to feel guilty , but we do need to feel something . "
Professor Robert Jensen of the University of Texas at Austin is somewhat harsher : " One indication of moral progress in the United States would be the replacement of Thanksgiving Day and its self - indulgent family feasting with a National Day of Atonement accompanied by a self - reflective collective fasting . "
Some of the controversy regarding Thanksgiving have been used to justify the Christmas creep ( the act of putting up Christmas decorations before Thanksgiving ) .
Those who sympathize with this view acknowledge it as a small minority view ; author and humanist John G. Rodwan , who does not celebrate Thanksgiving , noted " If you put forth the interpretation ( ... ) that touches on the dishonorable treatment of the native population that lived in what became the United States , then you are likely to be dismissed as some sort of crank ( . )
" Since 1970 , the United American Indians of New England , a protest group led by Frank " Wamsutta " James has accused the United States and European settlers of fabricating the Thanksgiving story and of whitewashing a genocide and injustice against Native Americans , and it has led a National Day of Mourning protest on Thanksgiving at Plymouth Rock in Plymouth , Massachusetts in the name of social equality and in honor of political prisoners .
On November 27 , 1969 , as another notable example of anti - Thanksgiving sentiment , hundreds of supporters traveled to Alcatraz on Thanksgiving Day to celebrate the Occupation of Alcatraz ( which had started a week earlier and lasted until 1971 ) by Native Americans of All Tribes .
The American Indian Movement and the Native American Church ( peyote religion ) both also hold a negative view of Thanksgiving ; the AIM has used it as a platform for protest , most notably when they took over a Mayflower float in a Thanksgiving Day parade .
Some Native Americans hold " Unthanksgiving Day " celebrations in which they mourn the deaths of their ancestors , fast , dance , and pray .
This tradition has been taking place since 1975 .
The perception of Thanksgiving among Native Americans is not , however , universally negative .
Tim Giago , founder of the Native American Journalists Organization , seeks to reconcile Thanksgiving with Native American traditions .
He compares Thanksgiving to " wopila " , a thanks - giving celebration practiced by Native Americans of the Great Plains .
He wrote in The Huffington Post : " The idea of a day of Thanksgiving has been a part of the Native American landscape for centuries .
The fact that it is also a national holiday for all Americans blends in perfectly with Native American traditions . "
He also shares personal anecdotes of Native American families coming together to celebrate Thanksgiving .
Members of the Oneida Indian Nation marched in the 2010 Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade with a float called " The True Spirit of Thanksgiving " and have done so every year since .
In the early part of the twentieth century , the American Association for the Advancement of Atheism ( 4A ) opposed the celebration of Thanksgiving Day , offering an alternative observance called Blamegiving Day , which was in their eyes , " a protest against Divine negligence , to be observed each year on Thanksgiving Day , on the assumption , for the day only , that God exists .
" Citing their view of the separation of church and state , some atheists in recent times have particularly criticized the annual recitation of Thanksgiving proclamations by the President of the United States , because these proclamations often revolve around the theme of giving thanks to God .
The move by retailers to begin holiday sales during Thanksgiving Day ( as opposed to the traditional day after ) has been criticized as forcing ( under threat of being fired ) low - end retail workers , who compose an increasing share of the nation 's workforce , to work odd hours and to handle atypical , unruly crowds on a day reserved for rest .
In response to this controversy , Macy 's and Best Buy ( both of which planned to open on Thanksgiving , even earlier than they had the year before ) stated in 2014 that most of their Thanksgiving Day shifts were filled voluntarily by employees who would rather have the day after Thanksgiving off instead of Thanksgiving itself .
Blue laws in several Northeastern states prevent retailers in those states from opening on Thanksgiving .
Such retailers typically open at midnight on the day after Thanksgiving to circumvent the laws as much as legally possible .
Journalist Edward R. Murrow and producer David Lowe deliberately chose Thanksgiving weekend 1960 to release Murrow 's final story for CBS News .
Entitled Harvest of Shame , the hour - long documentary was designed " to shock Americans into action " in regard to the treatment of impoverished migrant workers in the country , hoping to contrast Thanksgiving dinner and its excesses with the poverty of those who picked the vegetables .
Murrow acknowledged the documentary portrayed the United States from a hostile perspective and , when he left CBS to join the United States Information Agency in 1961 , unsuccessfully tried to stop the special from being aired in the United Kingdom .
DATE Section::::Date .
Since being fixed on the fourth Thursday in November by law in 1941 , the holiday in the United States can occur on any date from November 22 to 28 .
When it falls on November 22 or 23 , it is not the last Thursday , but the penultimate Thursday in November .
Regardless , it is the Thursday preceding the last Saturday of November .
Because Thanksgiving is a federal holiday , all United States government offices are closed and all employees are paid for that day .
It is also a holiday for the New York Stock Exchange and most other financial markets and financial services companies .
TABLE OF DATES ( 1985–2029 ) Section::::Table of dates ( 1985–2029 ) .
The date of Thanksgiving Day follows a 28-year cycle , broken only by century years that are not also a multiple of 400 ( 2100 , 2200 , 2300 , 2500 , … ) .
The cycle break is an effect of the leap year algorithm , which dictates that such years are common years as an adjustment for the calendar - season alignment that leap years provide .
Past and future dates of celebration include : !
November 22 ! !
November 23 ! !
November 24 ! !
November 25 ! !
November 26 ! !
November 27 ! !
November 28 DAYS
AFTER THANKSGIVING Section::::Days after Thanksgiving .
The day after Thanksgiving is a holiday for some companies and most schools .
In the last two decades of the 20th century , it became known as Black Friday , the beginning of the Christmas shopping season and a day for chaotic , early - morning sales at major retailers that were closed on Thanksgiving .
A contrasting movement known as Buy Nothing Day originated in Canada in 1992 .
The day after Thanksgiving is also Native American Heritage Day , a day to pay tribute to Native Americans for their many contributions to the United States .
Small Business
Saturday , a movement promoting shopping at smaller local establishments , takes place on the last Saturday in November , two days after Thanksgiving .
Cyber Monday is a nickname given to the Monday following Thanksgiving ; the day evolved in the early days of the Internet , when consumers returning to work took advantage of their employers ' broadband Internet connections to do online shopping and retailers began offering sales to meet the demand .
Giving Tuesday takes place on the Tuesday after Thanksgiving .
LITERATURE
POETRY * ( 1909 ) , by Florence Earle Coates .
*
" Over the River and Through the Wood " ( 1844 )
, by Lydia Maria Child *
" Thanksgiving Day , November 28 , 1986 " , by William S. Burroughs in Tornado Alley .
MUSIC
* " A Hymn of Thanksgiving " ( 1899 ) , composed and written by Fanny J. Crosby and Ira D. Sankey .
* " Alice 's Restaurant " , a song by Arlo Guthrie on his 1967 album Alice 's Restaurant , based on a true incident in his life that began on Thanksgiving Day , 1965 .
* " Thanksgiving " , a song by George Winston on his 1982 album December .
* " The Thanksgiving Song " , a song by Adam Sandler on his album
They 're All Gon na Laugh at You !
( 1994 )
* " Thanksgiving Day Parade " , a song by Dan Bern on his album New American Language ( 2001 ) .
* " Thanksgiving Day " , a song by Ray Davies on his album Other People 's Lives ( 2006 ) .
*
" We Gather Together " , hymn of Dutch origin now associated with Thanksgiving REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY FURTHER READING
* An hour - long history public radio program examining the roots of America 's Thanksgiving rituals
* Free audio readings of Thanksgiving proclamations by William Bradford , George Washington , and Abraham Lincoln * Historical perspective from the Pokanoket Tribe EXTERNAL LINKS *
' Thanksgiving To Almighty God ' :
Presidential Thanksgiving Proclamations From George Washington To Barack Obama