FENDER HOT ROD DELUXE valign="top "
valign="top " valign="top " valign="top " Celestion A - Type ( Hot Rod Deluxe IV ) The Fender Hot Rod Deluxe is a guitar amplifier manufactured and sold by the Fender Musical Instruments Corporation .
It was introduced in 1996 as part of the " Hot Rod " line of guitar amplifiers and has been in continuous production since .
The Hot Rod Deluxe is a modified version of the Fender Blues Deluxe from the earlier Blues line of amplifiers , and has a higher level of gain in its preamplification signal .
This model , along with the Hot Rod Deville , were originally designated as F.A.T. ( ' Fender American Tube ' ) amplifiers but this moniker was dropped in 2002 when production of this series of amps was moved from Corona , CA to Fender 's Baja - Ensenada , Mexico manufacturing facility .
SPECIFICATIONS Section::::Specifications .
The Hot Rod Deluxe is an all tube combo amp rated at 40 watts .
It utilizes a single 12-inch Celestion A - Type Speaker .
The Hot Rod Deluxe is a mono - channel amplifier featuring 3 switchable gain levels : " Clean " , " Drive " , and " More Drive " selectable on either the control panel or footswitch ( if plugged in ) .
Other features include a Bass , Middle , and Treble EQ , Master Volume , Presence , Normal / Bright , and spring reverb ( solid state for both the driver and the recovery circuits ) .
Footswitch and External Speaker jacks are also built in .
ELECTRONICS AND CONSTRUCTION Section::::Electronics and construction .
As an all - tube ( pre - amp and power sections ) combo guitar amplifier , the Hot Rod Deluxe features a pair of 6L6GC beam tetrodes for the power section and two 12AX7 dual triodes for the preamp section .
One additional 12AX7 tube is utilized for the phase inverter of the power section .
However , the rectifier , reverb driver and recovery , and effects loop circuits are solid state .
The power section uses a " fixed bias " biasing scheme with an adjustable bias potentiometer installed from the factory .
The factory bias is 60 mA total for both 6L6s .
The physical appearance of the Hot Rod series is based on the mid - to - late ' 50 's " narrow panel " tweed amplifiers with accouterments such as a top mounted , chrome plated chassis and black " chicken head " pointer knobs , but with textured black tolex found on Fender amps from the 1960s onward rather than the tweed covering .
Unlike " vintage " Fender tube amplifiers , the Hot Rod Deluxe uses a Printed Circuit Board ( PCB ) construction rather than Point - to - Point ( PTP ) construction .
Internally , there are two sets of circuit boards .
The main circuit board contains the majority of the electronic elements and provides the base onto which the potentiometers for the various controls , and the input and output jacks , are mounted .
A secondary board provides the base onto which the tube sockets are mounted ( although the pair of power tube sockets are mounted directly on the chassis with long leads connecting those to the secondary board ) .
STOCK AND OTHER VERSIONS Section::::Stock and other versions .
At various times , Fender has released special versions or " Limited Editions " of this amplifier .
The stock version of the Hot Rod Deluxe features a 7-Ply 3/4 " Birch / Maple Plywood cabinet upholstered in black tolex with silver " sparkle " speaker grille cloth .
Fender has also updated the Hot Rod Deluxe periodically .
From 1996–2010 , the stock speaker is an Eminence Legend 1258 75
Watt ( special design ) speaker .
In 2010 the updated version , ( dubbed the Hot Rod Deluxe III ) was equipped with a Celestion G12P-80 speaker .
In 2018 it was updated again with a Celestion A - Type speaker , pine cabinet , smoother - sounding spring reverb and modified preamp circuitry .
LIMITED EDITIONS Section::::Limited editions .
From 2003 to 2004 Fender released two limited edition models in polished maple hardwood ( no tolex covering ) .
One of these had a classic three - color sunburst finish ; the other was a stained natural finish ( both with Jensen speakers ) .
From late 2006 to March 2007 , Fender offered the Hot Rod Deluxe " White Lightning " Limited Edition .
Notable features include white tolex with white control knobs , dark black / silver grille cloth , white pilot light ( instead of the stock red ) , and a 12 " Celestion G12 Century Vintage 8-ohm , 60-watt Speaker .
Starting in early 2008 , Fender offered the Hot Rod Deluxe in " Texas Red " Limited Edition , main differences being a 12 " Celestion G12 Century Vintage 8-ohm , 60-watt speaker much like the " White Lightning " version .
It also includes ivory chicken knobs .
Other limited editions have included : * Emerald Green ( V30 , ivory knob , British emerald , grey grill ) * Orange Racing Stripe *
Wine Red * Surf Green * Red Nova *
Western tooled tolex *
Chocolate Brown *
Bluesman blue tolex * Western Noir * Python Snakeskin Fender has also released Hot Rod Deluxes adorned in blonde tolex or tweed cloth ( both with ox - blood grill ) .
Alternate installed speakers have also included the Celestion A - Type , Jensen P12N alnico or Jensen C12N ceramic speaker reissues .
HOT ROD DELUXE
III Section::::Hot Rod Deluxe III .
In 2010 , Fender released an update to the Hot Rod Deluxe with the following changes :
Cosmetic upgrades * Easier - reading black control panel
*
New badge
Electronic upgrades
* Graduated volume and treble pot tapers
*
" Tighter " overdrive Other upgrades
* Celestion G12P-80 speaker
* New low - profile " pedalboard friendly " footswitch SEE ALSO * Fender Hot Rod DeVille
* Peavey Delta Blues 210 REFERENCES
* Fender Official Site