HUMAN BODY
TEMPERATURE Normal human body temperature , also known as normothermia or euthermia , is the typical temperature range found in humans .
The normal human body temperature range is typically stated as .
Individual body temperature depends upon the age , exertion , infection , sex , and reproductive status of the subject , the time of day , the place in the body at which the measurement is made , and the subject 's state of consciousness ( waking , sleeping or sedated ) , activity level , and emotional state .
It is typically maintained within this range by thermoregulation .
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT Section::::Methods of measurement .
Taking a person 's temperature is an initial part of a full clinical examination .
There are various types of medical thermometers , as well as sites used for measurement , including : *
In the rectum ( rectal temperature ) * In the mouth ( oral temperature )
*
Under the arm ( axillary temperature )
*
In the ear ( tympanic temperature ) * in the nose *
In the vagina ( vaginal temperature )
*
In the bladder * On the skin of the forehead over the temporal artery VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
Temperature control ( thermoregulation ) is part of a homeostatic mechanism that keeps the organism at optimum operating temperature , as the temperature affects the rate of chemical reactions .
In humans , the average internal temperature is , though it varies among individuals .
However , no person always has exactly the same temperature at every moment of the day .
Temperatures cycle regularly up and down through the day , as controlled by the person 's circadian rhythm .
The lowest temperature occurs about two hours before the person normally wakes up .
Additionally , temperatures change according to activities and external factors .
In addition to varying throughout the day , normal body temperature may also differ as much as from one day to the next , so that the highest or lowest temperatures on one day will not always exactly match the highest or lowest temperatures on the next day .
Normal human body temperature varies slightly from person to person and by the time of day .
Consequently , each type of measurement has a range of normal temperatures .
The range for normal human body temperatures , taken orally , is ( ) .
This means that any oral temperature between is likely to be normal .
The normal human body temperature is often stated as .
In adults a review of the literature has found a wider range of for normal temperatures , depending on the gender and location measured .
Reported values vary depending on how it is measured : oral ( under the tongue ) : ( ) , internal ( rectal , vaginal ) : .
A rectal or vaginal measurement taken directly inside the body cavity is typically slightly higher than oral measurement , and oral measurement is somewhat higher than skin measurement .
Other places , such as under the arm or in the ear , produce different typical temperatures .
While some people think of these averages as representing normal or ideal measurements , a wide range of temperatures has been found in healthy people .
The body temperature of a healthy person varies during the day by about with lower temperatures in the morning and higher temperatures in the late afternoon and evening , as the body 's needs and activities change .
Other circumstances also affect the body 's temperature .
The core body temperature of an individual tends to have the lowest value in the second half of the sleep cycle ; the lowest point , called the nadir , is one of the primary markers for circadian rhythms .
The body temperature also changes when a person is hungry , sleepy , sick , or cold .
NATURAL RHYTHMS
Section::::Natural rhythms .
Body temperature normally fluctuates over the day following Circadian rhythms , with the lowest levels around 4 a.m. and the highest in the late afternoon , between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m. ( assuming the person sleeps at night and stays awake during the day ) .
Therefore , an oral temperature of would , strictly speaking , be a normal , healthy temperature in the afternoon but not in the early morning .
An individual 's body temperature typically changes by about between its highest and lowest points each day .
Body temperature is sensitive to many hormones , so women have a temperature rhythm that varies with the menstrual cycle , called a circamensal rhythm .
A woman 's basal body temperature rises sharply after ovulation , as estrogen production decreases and progesterone increases .
Fertility awareness programs use this change to identify when a woman has ovulated in order to achieve or avoid pregnancy .
During the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle , both the lowest and the average temperatures are slightly higher than during other parts of the cycle .
However , the amount that the temperature rises during each day is slightly lower than typical , so the highest temperature of the day is not very much higher than usual .
Hormonal contraceptives both suppress the circamensal rhythm and raise the typical body temperature by about .
Temperature also varies with the change of seasons during each year .
This pattern is called a circannual rhythm .
Studies of seasonal variations have produced inconsistent results .
People living in different climates may have different seasonal patterns .
Increased physical fitness increases the amount of daily variation in temperature .
With increased age , both average body temperature and the amount of daily variability in the body temperature tend to decrease .
Elderly patients may have a decreased ability to generate body heat during a fever , so even a somewhat elevated temperature can indicate a serious underlying cause in geriatrics .
MEASUREMENT METHODS Section::::Measurement methods .
+ Temperature by measurement technique !
Method ! !
Women ! !
Men Different methods used for measuring temperature produce different results .
The temperature reading depends on which part of the body is being measured .
The typical daytime temperatures among healthy adults are as follows :
* Temperature in the anus ( rectum / rectal ) , vagina , or in the ear ( otic ) is about
* Temperature in the mouth ( oral ) is about
* Temperature under the arm ( axillary ) is about Generally , oral , rectal , gut , and core body temperatures , although slightly different , are well - correlated , with oral temperature being the lowest of the four .
Oral temperatures are generally about lower than rectal temperatures .
Oral temperatures are influenced by drinking , chewing , smoking , and breathing with the mouth open .
Mouth breathing , cold drinks or food reduce oral temperatures ; hot drinks , hot food , chewing , and smoking raise oral temperatures .
Each measurement method also has different normal ranges depending on sex .
VARIATIONS DUE TO OUTSIDE FACTORS Section::::Variations due to outside factors .
Many outside factors affect the measured temperature as well .
" Normal " values are generally given for an otherwise healthy , non - fasting adult , dressed comfortably , indoors , in a room that is kept at a normal room temperature , , during the morning , but not shortly after arising from sleep .
Furthermore , for oral temperatures , the subject must not have eaten , drunk , or smoked anything in at least the previous fifteen to twenty minutes , as the temperature of the food , drink , or smoke can dramatically affect the reading .
Temperature is increased after eating or drinking anything with calories .
Caloric restriction , as for a weight - loss diet , decreases overall body temperature .
Drinking alcohol decreases the amount of daily change , slightly lowering daytime temperatures and noticeably raising nighttime temperatures .
Exercise raises body temperatures .
In adults , a noticeable increase usually requires strenuous exercise or exercise sustained over a significant time .
Children develop higher temperatures with milder activities , like playing .
Psychological factors also influence body temperature : a very excited person often has an elevated temperature .
Wearing more clothing slows daily temperature change and raises body temperature .
Similarly , sleeping with an electric blanket raises the body temperature at night .
Sleep disturbances also affect temperatures .
Normally , body temperature drops significantly at a person 's normal bedtime and throughout the night .
Short - term sleep deprivation produces a higher temperature at night than normal , but long - term sleep deprivation appears to reduce temperatures .
Insomnia and poor sleep quality are associated with smaller and later drops in body temperature .
Similarly , waking up unusually early , sleeping in , jet lag and changes to shift work schedules may affect body temperature .
CONCEPTS
FEVER Section::::Concepts .
Section::::Fever .
A temperature setpoint is the level at which the body attempts to maintain its temperature .
When the setpoint is raised , the result is a fever .
Most fevers are caused by infectious disease and can be lowered , if desired , with antipyretic medications .
An early morning temperature higher than or a late afternoon temperature higher than is normally considered a fever , assuming that the temperature is elevated due to a change in the hypothalamus 's setpoint .
Lower thresholds are sometimes appropriate for elderly people .
The normal daily temperature variation is typically , but can be greater among people recovering from a fever .
An organism at optimum temperature is considered afebrile or apyrexic , meaning " without fever " .
If temperature is raised , but the setpoint is not raised , then the result is hyperthermia .
HYPERTHERMIA Section::::Hyperthermia .
Hyperthermia occurs when the body produces or absorbs more heat than it can dissipate .
It is usually caused by prolonged exposure to high temperatures .
The heat - regulating mechanisms of the body eventually become overwhelmed and unable to deal effectively with the heat , causing the body temperature to climb uncontrollably .
Hyperthermia at or above about is a life - threatening medical emergency that requires immediate treatment .
Common symptoms include headache , confusion , and fatigue .
If sweating has resulted in dehydration , then the affected person may have dry , red skin .
In a medical setting , mild hyperthermia is commonly called heat exhaustion or heat prostration ; severe hyperthermia is called heat stroke .
Heat stroke may come on suddenly , but it usually follows the untreated milder stages .
Treatment involves cooling and rehydrating the body ; fever - reducing drugs are useless for this condition .
This may be done through moving out of direct sunlight to a cooler and shaded environment , drinking water , removing clothing that might keep heat close to the body , or sitting in front of a fan .
Bathing in tepid or cool water , or even just washing the face and other exposed areas of the skin , can be helpful .
With fever , the body 's core temperature rises to a higher temperature through the action of the part of the brain that controls the body temperature ; with hyperthermia , the body temperature is raised without the influence of the heat control centers .
HYPOTHERMIA Section::::Hypothermia .
In hypothermia , body temperature drops below that required for normal metabolism and bodily functions .
In humans , this is usually due to excessive exposure to cold air or water , but it can be deliberately induced as a medical treatment .
Symptoms usually appear when the body 's core temperature drops by below normal temperature .
BASAL BODY
TEMPERATURE Section::::Basal body temperature .
Basal body temperature is the lowest temperature attained by the body during rest ( usually during sleep ) .
It is generally measured immediately after awakening and before any physical activity has been undertaken , although the temperature measured at that time is somewhat higher than the true basal body temperature .
In women , temperature differs at various points in the menstrual cycle , and this can be used in the long - term to track ovulation both for the purpose of aiding conception or avoiding pregnancy .
This process is called fertility awareness .
CORE TEMPERATURE Section::::Core temperature .
Core temperature , also called core body temperature , is the operating temperature of an organism , specifically in deep structures of the body such as the liver , in comparison to temperatures of peripheral tissues .
Core temperature is normally maintained within a narrow range so that essential enzymatic reactions can occur .
Significant core temperature elevation ( hyperthermia ) or depression ( hypothermia ) that is prolonged for more than a brief period of time is incompatible with human life .
Temperature examination in the rectum is the traditional gold standard measurement used to estimate core temperature ( oral temperature is affected by hot or cold drinks and mouth - breathing ) .
Rectal temperature is expected to be approximately one Fahrenheit degree higher than an oral temperature taken on the same person at the same time .
Ear thermometers measure eardrum temperature using infrared sensors .
The blood supply to the tympanic membrane is shared with the brain .
However , this method of measuring body temperature is not as accurate as rectal measurement and has a low sensitivity for fevers , missing three or four out of every ten fevers in children .
Ear temperature measurement may be acceptable for observing trends in body temperature but is less useful in consistently identifying fevers .
Until recently , direct measurement of core body temperature required surgical insertion of a probe , so a variety of indirect methods have commonly been used .
The rectal or vaginal temperature is generally considered to give the most accurate assessment of core body temperature , particularly in hypothermia .
In the early 2000s , ingestible thermistors in capsule form were produced , allowing the temperature inside the digestive tract to be transmitted to an external receiver ; one study found that these were comparable in accuracy to rectal temperature measurement .
TEMPERATURE VARIATION
HOT * or more – Almost certainly death will occur ; however , people have been known to survive up to .
* – Normally death , or there may be serious brain damage , continuous convulsions and shock .
Cardio - respiratory collapse will likely occur .
* – Subject may turn pale or remain flushed and red .
They may become comatose , be in severe delirium , vomiting , and convulsions can occur .
Blood pressure may be high or low and heart rate will be very fast .
* – ( Medical emergency ) –
Fainting , vomiting , severe headache , dizziness , confusion , hallucinations , delirium and drowsiness can occur .
There may also be palpitations and breathlessness .
* 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) – Fainting , dehydration , weakness , vomiting , headache , breathlessness and dizziness may occur as well as profuse sweating .
Starts to be life - threatening .
* – Severe sweating , flushed and red .
Fast heart rate and breathlessness .
There may be exhaustion accompanying this .
Children and people with epilepsy may be very likely to get convulsions at this point .
* –
( Classed as hyperthermia if not caused by a fever ) –
Feeling hot , sweating , feeling thirsty , feeling very uncomfortable , slightly hungry .
If this is caused by fever , there may also be chills .
NORMAL * is a typically reported range for normal body temperature .
COLD * 36 ° C ( 96.8 ° F ) –
Feeling cold , mild to moderate shivering .
Body temperature may drop this low during sleep .
May be a normal body temperature .
* – ( Hypothermia is less than ) –
Intense shivering , numbness and bluish / grayness of the skin .
There is the possibility of heart irritability .
* 34 ° C ( 93.2 ° F ) –
Severe shivering , loss of movement of fingers , blueness and confusion .
Some behavioural changes may take place .
* 33 ° C ( 91.4 ° F ) –
Moderate to severe confusion , sleepiness , depressed reflexes , progressive loss of shivering , slow heart beat , shallow breathing .
Shivering may stop .
Subject may be unresponsive to certain stimuli .
* 32 ° C ( 89.6 ° F ) – ( Medical emergency ) – Hallucinations , delirium , complete confusion , extreme sleepiness that is progressively becoming comatose .
Shivering is absent ( subject may even think they are hot ) .
Reflex may be absent or very slight .
* 31 ° C ( 87.8 ° F ) – Comatose , very rarely conscious .
No or slight reflexes .
Very shallow breathing and slow heart rate .
Possibility of serious heart rhythm problems .
* 28 ° C ( 82.4 ° F ) –
Severe heart rhythm disturbances are likely and breathing may stop at any time .
Patient may appear to be dead .
* 24 - 26 ° C ( 75.2 - 78.8 ° F ) or less –
Death usually occurs due to irregular heart beat or respiratory arrest ; however , some patients have been known to survive with body temperatures as low as .
HISTORICAL UNDERSTANDING Section::::Historical understanding .
In the 19th century , most books quoted " blood heat " as 98 ° F , until a study published the mean ( but not the variance ) of a large sample as .
Subsequently that mean was widely quoted as " 37 ° C or 98.4 ° F " until editors realised 37 ° C is closer to 98.6 ° F than 98.4 ° F .
Dictionaries and other sources that quoted these averages did add the word " about " to show that there is some variance , but generally did not state how wide the variance is .
REFERENCES