TORNADO
INTENSITY Tornado intensity can be measured by in situ or remote sensing measurements , but since these are impractical for wide scale use , intensity is usually inferred via proxies , such as damage .
The Fujita scale and the Enhanced Fujita scale rate tornadoes by the damage caused .
The Enhanced Fujita Scale was an upgrade to the older Fujita scale , with engineered ( by expert elicitation ) wind estimates and better damage descriptions , but was designed so that a tornado rated on the Fujita scale would receive the same numerical rating .
An EF0 tornado will probably damage trees and peel some shingles off the roof .
an EF5 tornado can rip homes off their foundations and leaving them bare and can even deform large skyscrapers .
The similar TORRO scale ranges from a T0 for extremely weak tornadoes to T11 for the most powerful known tornadoes .
Doppler radar data , photogrammetry , and ground swirl patterns ( cycloidal marks ) may also be analyzed to determine intensity and award a rating .
Tornadoes vary in intensity regardless of shape , size , and location , though strong tornadoes are typically larger than weak tornadoes .
The association with track length and duration also varies , although longer track ( and longer lived ) tornadoes tend to be stronger .
In the case of violent tornadoes , only a small portion of the path area is of violent intensity ; most of the higher intensity is from subvortices .
In the United States , 80 % of tornadoes are EF0 and EF1
( T0 through T3 )
tornadoes .
The rate of occurrence drops off quickly with increasing strength — less than 1 % are violent tornadoes ( EF4 , T8 or stronger ) .
HISTORY OF TORNADO
INTENSITY MEASUREMENTS Section::::History of tornado intensity measurements .
For many years , before the advent of Doppler radar , scientists had nothing more than educated guesses as to the speed of the winds in a tornado .
The only evidence indicating the wind speeds found in the tornado was the damage left behind by tornadoes which struck populated areas .
Some believed they reach ; others thought they might exceed , and perhaps even be supersonic .
One can still find these incorrect guesses in some old ( until the 1960s ) literature , such as the original Fujita Intensity Scale developed by Dr. Tetsuya Theodore Fujita in the early ' 70s .
However , one can find accounts ( e.g. ; be sure to scroll down ) of some remarkable work done in this field by a U.S. Army soldier , Sergeant John Park Finley .
In 1971 , Dr. Tetsuya Theodore Fujita introduced the idea for a scale of tornado winds .
With the help of colleague Allen Pearson , he created and introduced what came to be called the Fujita scale in 1973 .
This is what the F stands for in F1 , F2 , etc .
The scale was based on a relationship between the Beaufort scale and the Mach number scale ; the low end of F1 on his scale corresponds to the low end of B12 on the Beaufort scale , and the low end of F12 corresponds to the speed of sound at sea level , or Mach 1 .
In practice , tornadoes are only assigned categories F0 through F5 .
The TORRO scale , created by the Tornado and Storm Research Organisation ( TORRO ) , was developed in 1974 and published a year later .
The TORRO scale has 12 levels , which cover a broader range with tighter graduations .
It ranges from a T0 for extremely weak tornadoes to T11 for the most powerful known tornadoes .
T0-T1
roughly correspond to F0 , T2-T3 to F1 , and so on .
While T10 + would be approximately an F5 , the highest tornado rated to date on the TORRO scale was a T8 .
There is some debate as to the usefulness of the TORRO scale over the Fujita scale — while it may be helpful for statistical purposes to have more levels of tornado strength , often the damage caused could be created by a large range of winds , rendering it hard to narrow the tornado down to a single TORRO scale category .
Research conducted in the late 1980s and 1990s
suggested that , even with the implication of the Fujita scale , tornado winds were notoriously overestimated , especially in significant and violent tornadoes .
Because of this , in 2006 , the American Meteorological Society introduced the Enhanced Fujita scale , to help assign realistic wind speeds to tornado damage .
The scientists specifically designed the scale so that a tornado assessed on the Fujita scale and the Enhanced Fujita scale would receive the same ranking .
The EF - scale is more specific in detailing the degrees of damage on different types of structures for a given wind speed .
While the F - scale goes from F0 to F12 in theory , the EF - scale is capped at EF5 , which is defined as " winds ≥ " .
In the United States , the Enhanced Fujita scale went into effect on February 2 , 2007 for tornado damage assessments and the Fujita scale is no longer used .
The first observation which confirmed that F5 winds could occur happened on April 26 , 1991 .
A tornado near Red Rock , Oklahoma was monitored by scientists using a portable Doppler radar , an experimental radar device that measures wind speed .
Near the tornado 's peak intensity , they recorded a wind speed of .
Though the portable radar had uncertainty of ± , this reading was probably within the F5 range , confirming that tornadoes were capable of violent winds found nowhere else on earth .
Eight years later , during the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak of May 3 , 1999 , another scientific team was monitoring an exceptionally violent tornado ( one which would eventually kill 36 people in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area ) .
At about 7:00 pm , they recorded one measurement of , faster than the previous record .
Though this reading is just short of the theoretical F6 rating , the measurement was taken more than in the air , where winds are typically stronger than at the surface .
In rating tornadoes , only surface wind speeds , or the wind speeds indicated by the damage resulting from the tornado , are taken into account .
Also , in practice , the F6 rating is not used .
While scientists have long theorized that extremely low pressures might occur in the center of tornadoes , there were no measurements to confirm it .
A few home barometers had survived close passes by tornadoes , recording values as low as , but these measurements were highly uncertain .
However , on June 24 , 2003 , a group of researchers successfully dropped devices called " turtles " into an F4 tornado near Manchester , South Dakota , one of which measured a pressure drop of more than as the tornado passed directly overhead .
Still , tornadoes are widely varied , so meteorologists are still conducting research to determine if these values are typical or not .
TYPICAL INTENSITY Section::::Typical intensity .
In the United States , F0 and F1 ( T0 through T3 )
tornadoes account for 80 % of all tornadoes .
The rate of occurrence drops off quickly with increasing strength — violent tornadoes ( stronger than F4 , T8 ) , account for less than 1 % of all tornado reports .
Worldwide , strong tornadoes account for an even smaller percentage of total tornadoes .
Violent tornadoes are extremely rare outside of the United States , Canada and Bangladesh .
F5 and EF5 tornadoes are rare , occurring on average once every few years .
An F5 tornado was reported in Elie , Manitoba in Canada , on June 22 , 2007 .
Before that , the last confirmed F5 was the 1999 Bridge Creek – Moore tornado , which killed 36 people on May 3 , 1999 .
Nine EF5 tornadoes have occurred in the United States , in Greensburg , Kansas on May 4 , 2007 ; Parkersburg , Iowa on May 25 , 2008 ; Smithville , Mississippi , Philadelphia , Mississippi , Hackleburg , Alabama and Rainsville , Alabama ( four separate tornadoes ) on April 27 , 2011 ; Joplin , Missouri on May 22 , 2011 and El Reno , Oklahoma on May 24 , 2011 .
On May 20 , 2013 a confirmed EF5 tornado again struck Moore , Oklahoma .
TYPICAL DAMAGE EF5
no damage is typical
A typical tornado has winds of or less , is approximately across , and travels a mile ( 1.6 km ) or
so before dissipating .
However , tornadic behavior is extremely variable ; these figures represent only statistical probability .
Two tornadoes that look almost exactly the same can produce drastically different effects .
Also , two tornadoes which look very different can produce similar damage .
This is due to the fact that tornadoes form by several different mechanisms , and also that they follow a life cycle which causes the same tornado to change in appearance over time .
People in the path of a tornado should never attempt to determine its strength as it approaches .
Between 1950 and 2014 in the United States , 222 people have been killed by EF1 tornadoes , and 21 have been killed by EF0 tornadoes .
WEAK TORNADOES Section::::Weak tornadoes .
The vast majority of tornadoes are designated EF1 or EF0 , also known as " weak " tornadoes .
However , weak is a relative term for tornadoes , as even these can cause significant damage .
F0 and F1 tornadoes are typically short - lived — since 1980 almost 75 % of tornadoes rated weak stayed on the ground for or less .
However , in this time , they can cause both damage and fatalities .
EF0
( T0-T1 ) damage is characterized by superficial damage to structures and vegetation .
Well - built structures are typically unscathed , sometimes sustaining broken windows , with minor damage to roofs and chimneys .
Billboards and large signs can be knocked down .
Trees may have large branches broken off , and can be uprooted if they have shallow roots .
Any tornado that is confirmed but causes no damage ( i.e. remains in open fields ) is always rated EF0 as well .
EF1
( T2-T3 )
damage has caused significantly more fatalities than that caused by EF0 tornadoes .
At this level , damage to mobile homes and other temporary structures becomes significant , and cars and other vehicles can be pushed off the road or flipped .
Permanent structures can suffer major damage to their roofs .
SIGNIFICANT TORNADOES Section::::Significant tornadoes .
EF2 ( T4-T5 ) tornadoes are the lower end of " significant " , and yet are stronger than most tropical cyclones ( though tropical cyclones affect a much larger area and their winds take place for a much longer duration ) .
Well - built structures can suffer serious damage , including roof loss , and collapse of some exterior walls may occur at poorly built structures .
Mobile homes , however , are totally destroyed .
Vehicles can be lifted off the ground , and lighter objects can become small missiles , causing damage outside of the tornado 's main path .
Wooded areas will have a large percentage of their trees snapped or uprooted .
EF3 ( T6-T7 ) damage is a serious risk to life and limb and the point at which a tornado statistically becomes significantly more destructive and deadly .
Few parts of affected buildings are left standing ; well - built structures lose all outer and some inner walls .
Unanchored homes are swept away , and homes with poor anchoring may collapse entirely .
Small vehicles and similarly sized objects are lifted off the ground and tossed as projectiles .
Wooded areas will suffer almost total loss of vegetation , and some tree debarking may occur .
Statistically speaking , EF3 is the maximum level that allows for reasonably effective residential sheltering in place in a first floor interior room closest to the center of the house ( the most widespread tornado sheltering procedure in America for those with no basement or underground storm shelter ) .
VIOLENT TORNADOES
Section::::Violent tornadoes .
While isolated examples exist of people surviving E / F5 impacts in their homes — one survivor of the Jarrell F5 sheltered in a bathtub and was miraculously blown to safety as her house disintegrated — surviving an E / F5 impact outside of a robust and properly constructed underground storm shelter is statistically unlikely .
EF4 ( T8-T9 ) damage typically results in a total loss of the affected structure .
Well - built homes are reduced to a short pile of medium - sized debris on the foundation .
Homes with poor or no anchoring will be swept completely away .
Large , heavy vehicles , including airplanes , trains , and large trucks , can be pushed over , flipped repeatedly or picked up and thrown .
Large , healthy trees are entirely debarked and snapped off close to the ground or uprooted altogether and turned into flying projectiles .
Passenger cars and similarly sized objects can be picked up and flung for considerable distances .
EF4 damage can be expected to level even the most robustly built homes , making the common practice of sheltering in an interior room on the ground floor of a residence insufficient to ensure survival .
A storm shelter , reinforced basement or other subterranean shelter is considered necessary to provide any reasonable expectation of safety against EF4 damage .
EF5
( T10-T11 ) damage represents the upper limit of tornado power , and destruction is almost always total .
An EF5 tornado pulls well - built , well - anchored homes off their foundations and into the air before obliterating them , flinging the wreckage for miles and sweeping the foundation clean .
Large , steel reinforced structures such as schools are completely leveled .
Tornadoes of this intensity tend to shred and scour low - lying grass and vegetation from the ground .
Very little recognizable structural debris is generated by EF5 damage , with most materials reduced to a coarse mix of small , granular particles and dispersed evenly across the tornado 's damage path .
Large , multi - ton steel frame vehicles and farm equipment are often mangled beyond recognition and deposited miles away or reduced entirely to unrecognizable component parts .
The official description of this damage highlights the extreme nature of the destruction , noting that " incredible phenomena will occur " ; historically , this has included such awesome displays of power as twisting skyscrapers , leveling entire communities , and stripping asphalt from roadbeds .
Despite their relative rarity , the damage caused by EF5 tornadoes represents a disproportionately extreme hazard to life and limb — since 1950 in the United States , only 58 tornadoes ( 0.1 % of all reports ) have been designated F5 or EF5 , and yet these have been responsible for more than 1300 deaths and 14,000 injuries ( 21.5 % and 13.6 % , respectively ) .
SEE ALSO
*
Tornado * Tornado records *
Wind engineering
REFERENCES FURTHER READING