MAMMA MIA !
( FILM )
Mamma Mia !
( promoted as Mamma Mia !
The Movie ) is a 2008 jukebox musical romantic comedy film directed by Phyllida Lloyd and written by Catherine Johnson based on the 1999 musical of the same name , also written by Johnson , which itself is based on the songs of pop group ABBA , including the title song , with additional music composed by ABBA member Benny Andersson .
The film features an ensemble cast , including Christine Baranski , Pierce Brosnan , Dominic Cooper , Colin Firth , Amanda Seyfried , Stellan Skarsgård , Meryl Streep and Julie Walters .
The plot follows a young bride - to - be who invites three men to her upcoming wedding , each one with the possibility of being her father .
The film was an international co - production between Germany , the United Kingdom , and the United States , and was co - produced by Relativity Media , Playtone and Littlestar Productions .
Principal photography primarily took place on the island of Skopelos , Greece from August to September 2007 .
The film was distributed by Universal Pictures .
Mamma Mia ! held its world premiere on June 30 , 2008 at Leicester Square in London and premiered on July 4 , 2008 in Stockholm , Sweden , with Andersson , Björn Ulvaeus , Anni - Frid Lyngstad and Agnetha Fältskog in attendance .
The film was released theatrically on July 10 in the United Kingdom , on July 17 in Germany and on July 18 in the United States .
It received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the musical numbers and production values , but criticized the plot and casting of inexperienced singers , in particular Brosnan and Skarsgård .
Nonetheless , the film grossed $ 615 million worldwide on a $ 52 million budget , becoming the fifth highest - grossing film of 2008 .
A sequel , titled Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again , was released on July 20 , 2018 with most of the main cast returning .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On the Greek island of Kalokairi , 20-year - old bride - to - be Sophie Sheridan reveals to her bridesmaids , Ali and Lisa , that she has secretly invited three men to her wedding without telling her mother , Donna .
They are the men that her mother 's diary reveals could have been her father : Irish - American architect Sam Carmichael , Swedish adventurer and writer Bill Anderson , and British banker Harry Bright .
She dreams of being given away by her father at her wedding , and believes that after she spends time with them she will know which is her father .
Sophie 's mother Donna , who owns a villa and runs it not very successfully as a hotel , is ecstatic to reunite with her former Dynamos bandmates , wisecracking author Rosie Mulligan and wealthy multiple divorcée Tanya Chesham - Leigh , and reveals her bafflement at her daughter 's desire to get married .
Donna shows off the villa to Rosie and Tanya .
The three men arrive and Sophie smuggles them to their room .
She does n't reveal that she believes one of them is her father , but does explain that she and not her mother sent the invitations .
She begs them to hide so Donna will be surprised by the old friends of whom she " so often " favorably speaks .
They overhear Donna working and swear not to reveal Sophie 's secret .
Donna spies them and is dumbfounded to find herself facing former lovers , demanding they leave .
She confides in Tanya and Rosie that she truly does not know which of the three fathered Sophie .
Tanya and Rosie rally her spirits by getting her to dance with an all female ensemble of staff and islanders .
Sophie finds the men aboard Bill 's yacht , and they sail around Kalokairi , telling stories of Donna 's carefree youth .
Sophie plans to tell her fiancé Sky about her ploy , but loses her nerve .
Sky and Sophie sing to each other , but Sky is abducted for his bachelor party .
At Sophie 's bachelorette party , Donna , Tanya , and Rosie perform .
When Sam , Bill , and Harry arrive , Sophie decides to talk with each of them alone .
While her girlfriends dance with the men , Sophie learns from Bill that Donna received the money for her villa from his great - aunt Sofia .
Sophie guesses she must be Sofia 's namesake .
She asks him to give her away and keep their secret until the wedding .
Sophie 's happiness is short - lived as Sam and Harry each pull her aside to tell her they are her father and will give her away .
Sophie , overwhelmed by the consequences of raising the hopes of all three " fathers " , faints .
In the morning , Rosie and Tanya assure Donna they will take care of the men .
Bill and Harry intend to tell each other what they learned the previous night , but Rosie interrupts them .
Donna confronts Sophie , believing Sophie wants the wedding stopped .
Sophie says that all she wants is to avoid her mother 's mistakes .
Sam accosts Donna , concerned about Sophie getting married so young .
Donna confronts him and they realize they still have feelings for each other .
Tanya and young Pepper continue flirtations from the previous night .
Sophie confesses to Sky and asks for his help .
He reacts angrily to Sophie 's deception and she turns to her mother for support .
As Donna helps her daughter dress for the wedding , their rift is healed and Donna reminisces about Sophie 's childhood .
Donna admits her mother disowned her when she became pregnant .
Sophie asks Donna to give her away .
As the bridal party walks to the chapel , Sam intercepts Donna , who reveals the pain she felt over losing him .
Sophie and Donna walk down the aisle as the band plays .
Donna tells Sophie and all gathered that her father could be any of the three men .
Sam reveals that while he left Donna to get married , he did not go through with it , but returned to find Donna with another man .
The men do not want paternity confirmed , each agreeing to be one - third of a father for Sophie .
She tells Sky they should postpone their wedding and travel the world .
Sam proposes to Donna .
She accepts and they are married .
At the reception , Sam sings to Donna and Rosie makes a play for Bill .
The couples proclaim their love .
Sophie and Sky sail away .
CAST
* Meryl Streep as Donna Sheridan - Carmichael , Sophie 's mother , owner of the hotel Villa Donna .
*
Amanda Seyfried as Sophie Sheridan , Donna 's 20-year - old daughter , Sky 's fiancée .
* Christine Baranski as Tanya Chesham - Leigh , Donna 's other former bandmate ; a rich three - time divorcee .
* Julie Walters as Rosie Mulligan , one of Donna 's former bandmates in Donna and the Dynamos ; an unmarried fun - loving author .
* Pierce Brosnan as Sam Carmichael , Sophie 's possible father and an architect .
* Colin Firth as Harry Bright , Sophie 's possible father and a British banker .
* Stellan Skarsgård as Bill Anderson , Sophie 's possible father , a Swedish sailor and travel writer .
* Dominic Cooper as Sky , Sophie 's fiancé who is designing a website for the hotel .
* Niall Buggy as Father Alex , the wedding priest .
* Chris Jarvis as Eddie , a friend of Sky and Pepper .
* Ashley Lilley as Ali , close friend of Sophie and her bridesmaid .
* Rachel McDowall as Lisa , close friend of Sophie and her bridesmaid .
* Philip Michael as Pepper ,
Sky 's best man who likes Tanya ; a bartender * Juan Pablo Di Pace as Petros
* Enzo Squillino as Gregoris , one of Donna 's employees .
Cameo appearances and uncredited roles
* Benny Andersson as " Dancing Queen " piano player * Björn Ulvaeus as Greek god * Rita Wilson as Greek goddess MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
A soundtrack album was released on July 7 , 2008 by Decca and Polydor in the United States and internationally , respectively .
The recording was produced by Benny Andersson .
The album features sixteen musical numbers within the film , including a hidden track .
The album was nominated at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards for Best Compilation Soundtrack Album for Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media .
The deluxe edition of the soundtrack album was released on November 25 , 2008 .
*
" I Have a Dream " –
Sophie * * " Honey , Honey " – Sophie , Ali and Lisa
* * " Money , Money , Money " – Donna , Tanya and Rosie
* * " Mamma Mia " – Donna * * " Chiquitita " – Rosie , Tanya and Donna
* * " Dancing Queen " – Tanya , Rosie and Donna * * " Our Last Summer " – Harry , Bill , Sam , Sophie and Donna
* * " Lay All Your Love on Me " – Sky and Sophie
* * " Super Trouper " – Donna , Tanya and Rosie
* * " Gimme !
Gimme !
Gimme !
( A Man After Midnight ) " – Sophie , Ali and Lisa
*
* " Voulez - Vous " – Donna , Sam , Tanya , Rosie , Harry , Bill , Sky , Ali , Lisa and Pepper
* * " The Name of the Game " –
Sophie * * " SOS " – Sam and Donna * * " Does Your Mother Know " – Tanya and Pepper *
* " Slipping Through My Fingers " – Donna and Sophie
* * " The Winner Takes It All " – Donna
* * " I Do , I Do , I Do , I Do ,
I Do " – Sam and Donna *
*
" When All Is Said and Done "
– Sam and Donna * * " Take a Chance on Me " – Rosie , Bill , Tanya , Pepper and Harry
* * " Waterloo " – Donna , Rosie , Tanya , Sam , Bill , Harry , Sky and Sophie
*
* " Thank You for the Music " – Sophie * * Featured in the film , but omitted from the soundtrack album .
* Included in the soundtrack album , but omitted from the film .
* Included on the soundtrack album as a hidden track .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Most of the outdoor scenes were filmed on location at the small Greek island of Skopelos ( during August 29-September 2007 ) , and the seaside hamlet of Damouchari in the Pelion area of Greece .
On Skopelos , Kastani beach on the south west coast was the film 's main location site .
The producers built a beach bar and jetty along the beach , but removed both set pieces after production wrapped .
A complete set for Donna 's Greek villa was built at the 007 stage at Pinewood Studios and most of the film was shot there .
Real trees were utilised for the set , watered daily through an automated watering system and given access to daylight in order to keep them growing .
The part of the film where Brosnan 's character , Sam , leaves his New York office to go to the Greek Island was actually filmed at the Lloyd 's building on Lime Street in the City of London .
He dashes down the escalators and through the porte - cochere , where yellow cabs and actors representing New York mounted police were used for authenticity .
The Fernando , Bill Anderson 's yacht ( actually a ketch ) in the film was the Tai - Mo - Shan built in 1934 by H. S. Rouse at the Hong Kong and Whampoa dockyards .
Meryl Streep took opera singing lessons as a child , and as an adult , she previously sang in several films , including Postcards from the Edge , Silkwood , Death Becomes Her , and A Prairie Home Companion .
She was a fan of the stage show Mamma Mia !
after seeing it on Broadway in September 2001 , when she found the show to be an affirmation of life in the midst of the destruction of 9/11 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Though the world premiere of the film occurred elsewhere , most of the media attention was focused on the Swedish premiere , where Anni - Frid Lyngstad and Agnetha Fältskog joined Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson with the cast at the Rival Theatre in Mariatorget , Stockholm , owned by Andersson , on July 4 , 2008 .
It was the first time all four members of ABBA had been photographed together since 1986 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
In November 2008 , Mamma Mia ! became the fastest - selling DVD of all time in the UK , according to Official UK Charts Company figures .
It sold 1,669,084 copies on its first day of release , breaking the previous record ( held by Titanic ) by 560,000 copies .
By the end of 2008 , the Official UK Charts Company declared that it had become the biggest selling DVD ever in the UK , with one in every four households owning a copy ( over 5 million copies sold ) .
The record was previously held by with sales of 4.7 million copies .
In the United States , the DVD made over $ 30 million on its first day of release .
By December 31 , 2008 , Mamma Mia ! became the best - selling DVD of all time in Sweden with 545,000 copies sold .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In the United Kingdom , Mamma Mia ! has grossed £ 69.2 million as of January 23 , 2009 , and is the ninth highest - grossing film of all time at the UK box office .
The film opened at # 1 in the U.K , taking £ 6.6 million on 496 screens .
It managed to hold onto the top spot for 2 weeks , narrowly keeping Pixar 's WALL - E from reaching # 1 in its second week .
When released on July 3 in Greece , the film grossed $ 1.6 million in its opening weekend , ranking # 1 at the Greek box office .
Mamma Mia ! grossed $ 144.1 million in the United States and $ 471.6 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 615.7 million , against a production budget of $ 52 million .
It became the highest grossing live - action musical of all time , until it was surpassed by Bill Condon 's Beauty and the Beast in 2017 .
It was also the highest - grossing movie directed by a woman , until it was surpassed by Patty Jenkins ' Wonder Woman in 2017 .
It is the third highest - grossing film of 2008 internationally ( i.e. , outside North America ) with an international total of $ 458.4 million and the thirteenth highest gross of 2008 in North America ( the US and Canada ) with $ 144.1 million .
The film made $ 9.6 million in its opening day in the United States and Canada , and $ 27.6 million in its opening weekend , ranking # 2 at the box office , behind The Dark Knight .
At the time , it made Mamma Mia !
the record - holder for the highest grossing opening weekend for a movie based on a Broadway musical , surpassing Hairspray 's box office record in 2007 and later surpassed by Into the Woods .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 55 % based on 181 reviews , with an average rating of 5.5/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " This jukebox musical is full of fluffy fun but rough singing voices and a campy tone
might not make you feel like '
You Can Dance ' the whole 90 minutes . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
BBC Radio 5 Live 's film critic Mark Kermode admitted to enjoying the film , despite describing the experience as ' the closest you get to see A - List actors doing drunken karaoke ' .
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian was more negative , giving it one star , and expressed a " need to vomit " .
Bob Chipman of Escape to the Movies said it was " so base , so shallow and so hinged on meaningless spectacle , it 's amazing it was n't made for men " .
The Daily Telegraph stated that it was enjoyable but poorly put together : " Finding the film a total shambles was sort of a shame , but I have a sneaking suspicion I 'll go to see it again anyway .
" Angie Errigo of Empire said it was " cute , clean , camp fun , full of sunshine and toe tappers . "
The casting of actors not known for their singing abilities led to some mixed reviews .
Variety stated that " some stars , especially the bouncy and rejuvenated Streep , seem better suited for musical comedy than others , including Brosnan and Skarsgård .
" Brosnan , especially , was savaged by many critics : his singing was compared to " a water buffalo " ( New York Magazine ) , " a donkey braying " ( The Philadelphia Inquirer ) and " a wounded raccoon " ( The Miami Herald ) , and Matt Brunson of Creative Loafing Charlotte said he " looks physically pained choking out the lyrics , as if he 's being subjected to a prostate exam just outside of the camera 's eye . "
ACCOLADES SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
Because of the film 's financial success , Hollywood studio chief David Linde , the co - chairman of Universal Pictures , said that it would take a while , but there would be a sequel .
He stated that he would be delighted if Judy Craymer , Catherine Johnson , Phyllida Lloyd , Benny Andersson , and Björn Ulvaeus agreed to the project , noting that there were still plenty of ABBA songs to use .
Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again was announced on May 19 , 2017 , with a planned release date of July 20 , 2018 .
It was written and directed by Ol Parker .
It was announced that Seyfried , Cooper , Streep , Firth and Brosnan would be returning .
In July 2017 , Lily James was confirmed to portray young Donna .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Louise FitzGerald , Melanie Williams :
Mamma Mia !
The Movie : Exploring a Cultural Phenomenon .
I.B. Tauris , 2013 , EXTERNAL LINKS