THE GUNS OF NAVARONE ( NOVEL )
The Guns of Navarone is a 1957 novel about the Second World War by Scottish writer Alistair MacLean that was made into the film The Guns of Navarone in 1961 .
The Greek island of Navarone does not exist and the plot is fictitious ; however , the story takes place within the real historical context of the Dodecanese Campaign , the Allies ' campaign to capture the German - held Greek islands in the Aegean Sea in 1943 .
The story is based on the Battle of Leros , and Leros island 's coastal artillery guns – among the largest naval artillery guns used during World War II – that were built and used by the Italians until Italy capitulated in 1943 and subsequently used by the Germans until their defeat .
PLOT INTRODUCTION Section::::Plot introduction .
The story concerns the efforts of an Allied commando team to destroy a seemingly impregnable German fortress that threatens Allied naval ships in the Aegean Sea , and prevents over 1,200 isolated British soldiers from being rescued .
The story is based on the real events surrounding the Battle of Leros in World War II .
The Guns of Navarone brings together elements that would characterise much of MacLean 's subsequent works : tough , competent , worldly men as main characters ; frequent but non - graphic violence ; betrayal of the hero(es ) by a trusted associate ; and extensive use of the sea and other dangerous environments as settings .
Its three principal characters — New Zealand mountaineer - turned - commando Keith Mallory , American demolitions expert " Dusty " Miller , and Greek resistance fighter Andrea – are among the most fully drawn in all of MacLean 's work .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The island of Navarone , off the Turkish coast , has been heavily fortified as the Germans attempt to stifle British naval activity in the Aegean .
A force of twelve hundred British soldiers is now marooned on the nearby island of Kheros ( another variation of the island Keros , which is situated to the west of Amorgos ) and the Royal Navy is planning to send ships to rescue them .
The heavy radar - controlled guns command the only deepwater channel that ships can use and must be silenced at all costs .
Commando attacks have failed and after a bombardment by B-24 Liberator bombers fails to destroy the guns , Captain James Jensen RN , Chief of Operations for SOE in Cairo , decides to launch a desperate last - ditch attempt which he has already planned in case the bombing is unsuccessful .
He has drawn together a team of specialist saboteurs to infiltrate the island via the " unclimbable " south cliff and get into the fortress to destroy the guns .
They have less than one week .
The team meet for the first time in Alexandria .
They comprise : * Captain Keith Mallory – a New Zealand officer with the Long Range Desert Group ( LRDG ) .
Mallory was a pre - war mountain climber , nicknamed " The Human Fly " .
He has been operating in the mountains of German - held Crete .
* Andrea – a former Lt . Colonel in the Greek army , a ruthless fighter and close friend and confidante of Mallory .
* Corporal Dusty Miller – an American explosives expert who transferred from the R.A.F. to the LRDG .
Miller is described as a stringy , cynical man who doubts their chances of success .
* Petty Officer Telegraphist Casey Brown – a Royal Navy engineer and veteran of the Special Boat Service .
He is a native of Clydeside and worked as a testing and installation engineer pre - war .
* Lt Andrew Stevens R.N.V.R. –
Stevens is a young naval officer chosen as navigator .
Like Mallory , he speaks fluent Greek and is an experienced mountaineer but considers himself an abject coward .
The team travel via MTB and plane to Castelrosso , a British - held island .
Here , they discover an eavesdropper , Nikolai the base laundry boy , who allegedly speaks no English but is spying on them anyway .
They demand that he be arrested and held incommunicado , but the story implies that this does not happen .
In an ancient caïque they sail towards Navarone .
They carry papers identifying themselves as collaborators with , and couriers for , the German commandant of the island .
They are intercepted by a German patrol boat , which appears to be expecting them .
They sink it and kill all the crew .
They are wrecked in a storm but manage to land on the island , having lost much of their equipment .
They climb the ' unclimbable ' south cliff , but Stevens slips and is badly injured .
Evading German guards , they travel through heavy snow and rough terrain and are met by Louki , the steward of the exiled owner of the island , and Panayis , his enigmatic friend .
They bring much needed food .
By radio , Jensen tells the team that they have less time than was planned for .
The ships are coming through that very night .
But whilst resting in a cave , they are captured by a troop of German specialist mountain soldiers led by Oberleutnant Turzig , who recognises Mallory as a famous climber .
They are taken to the town of Margaritha where they are ruthlessly interrogated by Hauptmann Skoda .
Thanks to Andrea 's diversionary behaviour , they turn the tables on them and Skoda is shot .
With Turzig and the others securely tied up , they escape and make their way to the town of Navarone .
They are harassed by troops and planes who are also apparently expecting them .
With no medical facilities available , Stevens is clearly dying and beyond help .
He asks to be left behind and feels curiously at peace .
Miller discovers that much of his equipment has been damaged .
Suspicion falls on Panayis , who is also suspected of being a double agent .
He admits nothing , but the evidence is damning .
Miller shoots him .
Mallory and Miller manage to enter the fortress housing the guns , whilst the others create a diversion .
They set the explosives and then get out to meet the others .
They steal a boat and rendezvous with the destroyer HMS Sirdar , which is leading two others through the deepwater channel .
Just in time , the explosives do their work , the guns are destroyed and the ships continue on their way to rescue the soldiers .
LITERARY SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Literary significance .
In 1990 the British Crime Writers ' Association placed The Guns of Navarone 89th on its list
The Top 100 Crime Novels of All Time .
The success of the book 's film adaptation prompted Alistair MacLean to write the only sequel of his writing career , Force 10 from Navarone ( 1968 ) .
However this is a sequel to the film , not the book .
FILM , TV , RADIO OR THEATRICAL ADAPTATIONS Section::::Film , TV , radio or theatrical adaptations .
in 1997 , BBC Radio 2 produced a two - hour adaptation for radio written by Bert Coules and directed by Patrick Rayner .
The cast included :
* Toby Stephens as " Mallory " * David Rintoul as " Andrea " * Michael Williams as " Commodore Jensen " * John Guerrasio as " Miller " * Alex Norton as " Brown " * Peter Kenny as " Stevens " The Guns of Navarone was also produced as an abridged audiobook with Patrick Allen narrating .
SEE ALSO
* The Guns of Navarone ( film ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Book review at AlistairMacLean.com