CHEATING IN VIDEO GAMES
Cheating in video games involves a video game player using non - standard methods to create an advantage or disadvantage beyond normal gameplay , in order to make the game easier or harder .
Cheats may be activated from within the game itself ( a cheat code implemented by the original game developers ) , or created by third - party software ( a game trainer ) or hardware ( a cheat cartridge ) .
They can also be realized by exploiting software bugs ; this may or may not be considered cheating based on whether the bug is considered common knowledge .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Cheating in video games has existed for almost their entire history .
The first cheat codes were put in place for play testing purposes .
Playtesters had to rigorously test the mechanics of a game and introduced cheat codes to make this process easier .
An early cheat code can be found in Manic Miner , where typing " 6031769 " ( based on Matthew Smith 's driving license ) enables the cheat mode .
Within months of s 1981 release , at least two commercial trainers appeared .
1983 advertisements for " The Great Escape Utility " for Castle Wolfenstein ( 1981 ) promised that the $ 15 product " remodels every feature of the game .
Stop startup delays , crashes and chest waiting .
Get any item , in any quantity .
Start in any room , at any rank .
Handicap your aim .
Even add items " .
In a computer game , all numerical values are stored " as is " in memory .
Gamers could reprogram a small part of the game before launching it .
In the context of games for many 8-bit computers , it was a usual practice to load games into memory and , before launching them , modify specific memory addresses in order to cheat , getting an unlimited number of lives , currency , immunity , invisibility , etc .
Such modifications were performed through POKE statements .
The Commodore 64 , Amstrad CPC range and ZX Spectrum also allowed players with the proper cartridges or Multiface add - on to freeze the running program , enter POKEs , and resume .
Some games tried to detect the Multiface and refused to load if it was present .
The earliest models had no ability to " hide " .
Later revisions either included a switch , hid if been opened and closed the menu before loading the game , or automatically hid .
For instance , with codice_1 in Knight Lore for the ZX Spectrum , immunity is achieved .
Magazines such as Crash regularly featured lists of such POKE instructions for games .
In order to find them a hacker had to interpret the machine code and locate the critical point where the number of lives is decreased , impacts detected , etc .
Sometimes the term POKE was used with this specific meaning .
Cheating was exploited by technology - oriented players due to the difficulty of early cheats .
However , a cheat industry emerged as gaming systems evolved , through the packaging and selling of cheating as a product .
Cheat - enablers such as cheat books , game guides , cheat cartridges helped form a cheat industry and cemented cheating as part of gaming culture .
However , cheating was not universally accepted in early gaming ; gaming magazine Amiga Power condemned cheaters , taking the stance that cheating was not part of their philosophy of fairness .
They also applied this in reverse ; games should also not be allowed to cheat the player .
Guides , walkthroughs , and tutorials are sometimes used to complete games but whether this is cheating is debated .
Later , cheating grew more popular with magazines , websites , and even a television show , Cheat ! , dedicated to listing cheats and walkthroughs for consoles and computer systems .
POKE cheats were replaced by trainers and cheat codes .
Generally , the majority of cheat codes on modern day systems are implemented not by gamers , but by game developers .
Some say that as many people do not have the time to complete a video game on their own , cheats are needed to make a game more accessible and appealing to a casual gamer .
In many cases , developers created cheats to facilitate testing , then left them in the game as they expanded the number of ways people could play it .
With the rise in popularity of gaming , cheating using external software and hardware raised a number of copyright legal issues related to modifying game code .
Many modern games have removed cheat codes entirely , except when used to unlock certain secret bonuses .
The usage of real - time achievement tracking made it unfair for any one player to cheat .
In online multiplayer games , cheating is frowned upon and disallowed , often leading to a ban .
However , certain games may unlock single - player cheats if the player fulfills a certain condition .
Yet other games , such as those using the Source engine , allow developer consoles to be used to activate a wide variety of cheats in single - player or by server administrators .
Many games which use in - game purchases consider cheating to be not only wrong but also illegal , seeing as cheats in such games would allow players to access content ( like power - ups and extra coins ) that would otherwise require payment to obtain .
However , cheating in such games is nonetheless a legal grey area because there are no laws against modifying software which is already owned , as detailed in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act .
CHEAT CODES Section::::Cheat codes .
The most basic type of cheat code is one created by the game designers and hidden within the video game itself , that will cause any type of uncommon effect that is not part of the usual game mechanics .
Cheat codes are usually activated by typing secret passwords or pressing controller buttons in a certain sequence .
Less common activation methods include entering certain high score names , holding keys or buttons while dying , picking up items in a particular order and otherwise performing unintuitive actions .
Some games may also offer a debug console that can be used to edit game parameters .
Effects might include unlocking a character or improving a character 's performance : for example providing a car with greater acceleration , entering god mode or noclip mode , unlimited money or ammunition , or just visual gags with no practical purpose , such as " Tutu Qwark " in .
Unlike other cheating methods , cheat codes are implemented by the game developers themselves , often as a tool to playtest certain aspects of the game without difficulty .
One of the earliest known examples of this type of cheat is the Konami Code , created in 1986 by Konami developer Kazuhisa Hashimoto as he worked on porting the 1985 arcade game Gradius for use on the Nintendo Entertainment System .
Hashimoto is quoted as saying " The arcade version of Gradius is really difficult , right ?
I never played it that much , and there was no way I could finish the game , so I inserted the so - called Konami code . "
BOTS Section::::Bots .
In the online game , there are methods called bots ( robots ) , which are programs that emulate human behavior to perform actions ( repetitive or not ) that enable advantages to be achieved .
MODIFICATION OF RUNTIME GAME
DATA
Section::::Modification of runtime game data .
Cheating can easily be achieved by modifying the game 's data while it is running .
These methods of cheating are often less reliable than cheat codes included in a game by its creators .
This is due to the fact that certain programming styles or quirks of internal game logic , different release versions of a game , or even using the same game at different times or on different hardware , may result in different memory usage and hence the trainer program might have no effect , or stop the game from running altogether .
Modifying game data usually constitutes a violation of a software license agreement that prohibits modifying the program at all .
MEMORY EDITING Section::::Memory editing .
Cheating via memory editing involves modifying the memory values where the game keeps its status information .
The way to achieve this will vary depending on the environment in which the game is running .
MEMORY EDITING HARDWARE
Section::::Memory editing hardware .
A cheat cartridge is attached to an interface port on a home computer or console .
It allows a user to modify the game code either before or during its execution .
An early example is the Multiface for the ZX Spectrum , and almost every format since has had a cheat cartridge created for it ; such as Datel 's range of Action Replay devices .
Another popular example of this is Game Genie for Genesis , NES , Super NES , Game Boy , and Game Gear game consoles .
Modern disc - based cheat hardware includes GameShark and Code Breaker which modify the game code from a large database of cheats .
In later generation consoles , cheat cartridges have come to be replaced by cheat discs , containing a simple loader program which loads a game disc and modifies the main executable before starting it .
The legality of this type of devices has been questioned , having raised a particular case named Lewis Galoob Toys , Inc. v. Nintendo of America , Inc. , in which Nintendo unsuccessfully sued Lewis Galoob Toys stating that its cheating device , the Game Genie , created derivative works of games and thus violated copyright law .
MEMORY EDITING SOFTWARE Section::::Memory editing software .
The most basic way of achieving this is by means of memory editor software , which allows the player to directly edit the numeric values in a certain memory address .
This kind of software usually includes a feature that allows the player to perform memory searches to aid the user to locate the memory areas where known values ( such as the number of lives , score or health level ) are located .
Provided a memory address , a memory editor may also be able to " freeze " it , preventing the game from altering the information stored at that memory address .
Game trainers are a special type of memory editor , in which the program comes with predefined functions to modify the run time memory of a specific computer game .
When distributed , trainers often have a single + and a number appended to their title , representing the number of modifications the trainer has available .
In the 1980s and 1990s , trainers were generally integrated straight into the actual game by cracking groups .
When the game was first started , the trainer would typically show a splash screen of its own , sometimes allowing modifications of options related to the trainer , and then proceed to the actual game .
In the cracker group release lists and intros , trained games were marked with one or more plus signs after them , one for each option in the trainer , for example :
" the Mega Krew presents : Ms. Astro Chicken++ " .
Many emulators have built - in functionality that allows players to modify data as the game is running , sometimes even emulating cheating hardware such as Game Genie .
Some emulators take this method a step further and allow the player to export and import data edits .
Edit templates of many games for a console are collected and redistributed as cheat packs .
Emulators also frequently offer the additional advantage of being able to save the state of the entire emulated machine at any point , effectively allowing saving at any point in a game even when save functionality is not provided by the game itself .
Cheating hardware such as " Instant Replay " also allows such behavior for some consoles .
CODE INJECTION Section::::Code injection .
Somewhat more unusual than memory editing , code injection consists of the modification of the game 's executable code while it is running , for example with the use of POKE commands .
In the case of Jet Set Willy on the ZX Spectrum computer , a popular cheat involved replacing a Z80 instruction codice_2 in the program ( which was responsible for decrementing the number of lives by one ) with a codice_3 , effectively granting the player infinite lives .
On Microsoft Windows , a common type of video game hacking is through the use of DLLs , which users must then use a third party program to inject the DLL into their game of choice .
SAVED GAME EDITORS
Section::::Saved game editors .
Editing a saved game offers an indirect way to modify game data .
By modifying a file in persistent storage , it is possible to effectively modify the runtime game data that will be restored when the game attempts to load the save game .
Hex editors were the most basic means of editing saved game files ( e.g. to give the player a large sum of money in strategy games such as Dune II ) .
However , as happened with game editors , dedicated game - editing utilities soon became available , including functions to effortlessly edit saved data for specific games , rendering hex editing largely obsolete for this purpose .
If a saved game is stored in multiple files , it may also be possible to cheat simply by mixing and matching these files .
For example , if one file represents the items in a treasure chest , while another represents the player 's inventory , then the player can save the game before and after picking up an item from the chest , and continue play using the treasure chest file before the item was picked up , and the inventory file from afterward .
NETWORK TRAFFIC FORGERY Section::::Network traffic forgery .
A similar method for cheating in online games involves editing packets to modify outbound network traffic , thus affecting the state of the game .
Although this was more common in the past , modern games are developed with robustness against network and packet modifications , and the terms of service for most games explicitly forbid this form of cheating .
UNUSUAL EFFECTS
Section::::Unusual effects .
Cheat codes may sometimes produce unusual or interesting effects which do n't necessarily make the game easier to play .
For example , one cheat in makes dinosaurs appear " undead " .
Another example occurs in the game Dungeon Siege , where activating the cheat to extend the range of a bow also allows the enemies to fire at the same distance , thereby eliminating the advantage the cheat would have given .
A cheat may even make the game harder to play ; for instance , one could give the enemy special abilities , increase general difficulty , make neutral bystanders attack the player or grant the player a disadvantage such as low health points .
Cheats in Grand Theft Auto games can make NPCs start rioting or wield weapons .
In Grand Theft Auto III , the player can activate a cheat to enable blowing off the limbs of NPCs , a feature originally included in the game .
Recently , however , Rockstar Games has not included such violent or unusual cheat codes in its games , instead choosing to focus on cheats such as vehicle spawns , player effects ( for example , invincibility ) and weapon spawns .
Some games humorously penalize the player for using another game 's cheat codes .
For example , using cheat codes from Doom in Descent only displays sarcastic messages from the programmers on screen ; using codes from Descent in its sequel Descent II lowers the player 's shields and energy to 1 % .
Codes from Doom used in Heretic give the opposite of the desired effect , such as instant death instead of invulnerability or stripping weapons instead of providing them .
The original Dooms " god mode " code " IDDQD " is non - functional in Doom 3 , but produces a console message : " Your memory serves you well . "
Other codes make purely cosmetic changes — for example , to what the player character is wearing — but do not enhance the progress of the game .
Most of the Grand Theft Auto games have a code to change the player character into an NPC .
Other peculiar cheats may invoke " big - head mode " ( GoldenEye 007 ) , replace weapons with other objects , or change the colors of characters .
Easter eggs are a related feature .
Although such hidden content has no impact on gameplay , these ' eggs ' can be found in many games and may hint at future games in a series or give more information on a topic .
Some easter eggs can only be found by cheating commands such as noclip mode .
COUNTER - CHEATING MEASURES Section::::Counter - cheating measures .
In games having attainable achievements or high score records , or both , cheats by nature allow the player to attain achievements too easily or score point totals not attainable or extremely difficult to attain through legitimate means by a non - cheating player .
In some games , developer commentary mode can have the same effect because of these games , in an effort to make all commented - on scenarios accessible to the player , render a player invulnerable to damage while in commentary mode .
BARRIERS TO GAME COMPLETION
* The 32X version of Doom does not allow the player to finish the game if any cheat codes were used ; instead , after a cheating player defeats the game 's penultimate level , the game simulates a program exit to DOS and displays a mock command prompt ( " C:\ > " ) .
* Some PC games and most Xbox games do not record player achievements if they are attained while cheat mode is activated .
For example , turns this barrier into a continuing obstacle if a player saves the game with cheats activated : The game will record that fact in the save file and automatically cause subsequent reloads from the relevant save file to reactivate cheat mode .
*
In Ricochet Infinity , if a player cheats at all , their score will be set to zero , the message " You are Cheating " appears in the message box , and the player 's progress after cheating will not be recorded .
*
In certain games for the Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS such as Pokémon Black and White or Tomodachi Life , countermeasures are employed to stop players taking advantage of changing the system clock , known as ' Time travelling ' .
In Tomodachi Life , for example , the shops will not update or display any seasonal exclusive items until the system clock ticks over to the following day .
*
In Batman : The Movie on the Amiga , if the player has used a cheat , the end sequence appears upside down .
*
In , using cheats ( hidden in some game levels ) disables the save game function and the level progression .
The message " Level completed with cheat codes " will appear instead , and the game will be taken to the main menu .
* The Assassin 's Creed franchise ( in particular , Assassin 's Creed : Revelations ) permits the use of cheats after the game is completed , but disables player progress for any unfinished sub - quests while cheats are active .
*
In Grand Theft Auto , Grand Theft Auto 2 and Grand Theft Auto III , activating " No police " codes will interfere with the game missions requiring interaction with the police .
In GTA , as there is no way of dropping a mission or saving the game , the game will stall when the player is asked to get a police car .
The same is true in GTA 2 ; although the player can save the game , this can be done while not on a mission .
Thus , reverting to an old save is necessary to progress in the game .
GTA requires a level re - entry , losing all progress in that level .
Additionally , using cheats in GTA will prevent the player from achieving 100 % completion and are met with a warning message before attempting to save the game .
PENALTIES TO PLAYER PERFORMANCE
* Entry of Wolfenstein 3-Ds " ILM " code provides a player with the maximum possible lives , weapons , and ammunition but in the process resets a player 's score to zero .
*
If a player in Unreal uses an " Admin Set " command , they will need to restart Unreal to enter any online server .
*
In the Commodore 64 version of SimCity , pressing the F1 key would add $ 10,000 to the player 's available funds .
After the fourth time , an earthquake and fires would occur , and would reoccur every fourth time the cheat was used .
However , if the player activated the cheat before beginning building their city , only forest fires would have to be extinguished , rather than bulldozing and rebuilding damaged areas of the city .
*
In SRB2 , a Sonic the Hedgehog fangame , finishing the game after using cheats causes the game to behave as if the player had lost , and disables the use of unlockable items .
*
In most modern games like Saints Row : The Third , using cheats either disables autosaving or saving in general , or disables Trophies or Achievements .
DISCLAIMERS REGARDING PLAYER ACHIEVEMENT
*
If a player of Portal has any cheats activated when a chamber is completed in Challenge mode , the game will display " CHEATED ! "
above the performance summary screen for that level .
*
Tyrian displays the message
" Cheaters always prosper " on the bottom of the score screen .
*
If a player cheats using a cheating device in the game Persona 3 , the game 's characters condemn the player for cheating .
* MechWarrior 3 makes its cheat modes readily available as standard game options ( as opposed to , e.g. , requiring the entry of a " secret " code ) but labels these game options " dishonorable " , a reference to the code of honor shared by the game 's rival clans .
*
In , entering a cheat code to spawn vehicles will reduce the player 's criminal rating .
If this drops below zero , cheat - related messages are displayed .
Other cheats may render the game extremely difficult .
The game will notify the player if an attempt to save with gameplay - altering cheats enabled , as certain cheats will remain saved with the game if the player does save .
*
In , entering a cheat code while playing a mission will prevent the player from viewing its statistics and uploading them to the Rockstar Games Social Club .
* Sanctum displays a message after each wave if any cheating measure is used , and disables scores and achievement until the game is restarted .
* Metal Fatigue displays the message " ( player name )
is cheating like a slimy rat ! "
when using cheat codes ( in both single player and multiplayer mode ) .
CHEATING IN ONLINE GAMES
Section::::Cheating in online games .
Cheating exists in many multiplayer online computer games .
While there have always been cheat codes and other ways to make single - player games easier , developers often attempt to prevent it in multiplayer games .
With the release of the first popular internet multiplayer games , cheating took on new dimensions .
Previously it was rather easy to see if the other players cheated , as most games were played on local networks or consoles .
The Internet changed that by increasing the popularity of multiplayer games , giving the players relative anonymity , and giving people an avenue to communicate cheats .
Examples of cheats in first - person shooter games include the aimbot , which assists the player in aiming at the target , giving the user an unfair advantage , the wallhack , which allows a player to see through solid or opaque objects or manipulate or remove textures , and ESP , with which the information of other players is displayed .
There are also cheats that increase the size of the enemies ' hitbox which allows you to shoot next to the enemy , which would usually result in a miss , but the game would detect as a hit .
In role - playing games , twinking , the practice of passing on valuable items not normally available at player 's character 's level , may be considered cheating .
In online trading card games , creating multiple accounts by jailbreaking device to get more rewards can be considered as cheating because it is unfair to players who have only one account .
In online multiplayer games , players may use macro scripts , which automate player actions , to automatically find items or defeat enemies for the player 's advantage .
The prevalence of massively multiplayer online games ( MMORPGs ) such as World of Warcraft , Anarchy Online , EverQuest , Guild Wars , and RuneScape has resulted in the trading of in - game currency for real - world currency .
This can lead to virtual economies .
The rise of virtual economies has led to cheating where a gamer uses macros to gain large amounts of in - game money which the player will then trade for real cash .
The Terms of Service of most modern online games now specifically prohibit the transfer of accounts or sale of in - game items for ' real - world ' money .
Depending on the company running the game , this may or may not be taken seriously .
Many online games subtly allow trading of in - game currency for real - life cash due to resources required for the company to find and catch gold buyers , as well as the revenue lost when banning someone buying gold .
Cheating in online games is common on public game servers .
Some online games , such as Battlefield 1942 , include specific features to counter cheating exploits , by incorporating tools such as PunkBuster , nProtect GameGuard , or Valve Anti - Cheat .
However , much like anti - virus companies , some anti - cheat tools are constantly and consistently bypassed until further updates force cheat creators to find new methods to bypass the protection .
In single player games , there are a number of plug - ins available to developers to use to stop cheaters .
An obfuscator will scramble code so it is unreadable by decompilers , rename events / properties / methods and even add fake code .
An obscurer will encrypt variables in memory and mask out strings .
Anti - cheat toolkits have an array of tools such as : detecting speed hacks , encrypting player prefs , detecting time cheats , detecting speed hacks , detecting wall hacks and more .
These can be used in most multi - player games as well .
SEE ALSO
* Billy Mitchell ( video game player )
* Cheating AI *
Xyzzy ( computing ) * Debug menu REFERENCES