THEFT OF THE JULES RIMET
TROPHY
The Jules Rimet Trophy , awarded to the winner of the football World Cup , was stolen in 1966 prior to the 1966 FIFA World Cup in England .
The trophy was later recovered .
One man , Steve Crook of Bristol , was convicted for being involved but other possible culprits are still unknown .
TROPHY PLACED IN AN EXHIBITION
Section::::Trophy placed in an exhibition .
The Football Association had received the silver - gilt trophy in January 1966 before the scheduled World Cup tournament the next July .
It was usually kept in their headquarters at Lancaster Gate apart from for a couple of publicity events .
In February , Stanley Gibbons ' stamp company received permission to place the Trophy in their Stampex exhibition in March on condition that it would be under guard at all times .
The trophy was also insured for £ 30,000 ( despite its official value being only £ 3,000 ) .
The exhibition was held in the Westminster Central Hall and opened on 19 March 1966 , and the World Cup was a major attraction .
Two uniformed officers guarded the trophy around the clock , reinforced by two plainclothes officers during the day .
Additional guards stood beside the display cabinet when the exhibition was open , but nobody was watching the trophy all the time .
On Sundays the Central Hall was used for Methodist services .
THEFT
Section::::Theft .
On Sunday 20 March , when the guards began a noon circuit , around 12:10 they noticed that someone had forced open the display case and the rear doors of the building and stolen the trophy .
The wooden bar that held the door closed was lying on the floor ; thieves had removed the screws and bolts that held it from the other side of the door .
They had removed the padlock from the back of the display case , taken the trophy and left the way they came .
None of the guards had seen or heard anything suspicious , though one of them reported that he had seen a strange man by the public telephone when he had visited the lavatory on the first floor .
Scotland Yard took control of the case and gave it to the Flying Squad .
Officers interviewed the guards and two maintenance workers .
One of the churchgoers had also noticed a man and gave a different description .
The story went public across the world over the next day .
Police had begun to look for two potential suspects but the description the newspapers gave did not correspond to either one of the men the witnesses had seen .
RANSOM DEMAND Section::::Ransom demand .
On Monday 21 March , Joe Mears , the Chairman of the Football Association , received an anonymous phone call .
The unknown man said that Mears would receive a parcel at Chelsea Football Club the next day .
The parcel was delivered to Mears ' home .
It contained the removable lining from the top of the trophy and a ransom note that demanded £ 15,000 in £ 1 and £ 5 notes .
The letter stated that the FA should place a coded ad in the personal Ads column of The Evening News .
If they followed the further instructions , they could get the trophy back by Friday , otherwise , or if the FA informed the police or the press , the thieves would melt the trophy down .
Shortly afterwards Mears received another call – a man who identified himself as " Jackson " changed the instructions to £ 5 and £ 10 notes .
Despite the warnings , Mears contacted the police , met Detective Inspector Charles Buggy of the Flying Squad and gave the trophy lining and the letter to him .
Police told Mears to place the ad on 24 March , and contacted a bank that created a false ransom payment out of bundles of ordinary paper , with real money only at the top and bottom , which were placed in a suitcase .
Two police officers were to act as Mears ' assistants in handing the money over and went to his home to wait for the next call .
FUTILE PURSUIT Section::::Futile pursuit .
Mears was suffering from an asthma attack so his wife answered instead and gave the phone to the " assistant McPhee " ( who was DI Buggy ) .
" Jackson " was nervous but finally agreed to arrange a switch and told " McPhee " to come to Battersea Park to meet him at the gate .
Buggy drove to the park , followed by a number of unmarked Flying Squad vehicles , and met " Jackson " .
Buggy showed him the suitcase and Jackson failed to notice that most of the money was scrap paper .
Buggy insisted on seeing the trophy before handing over the money and said he feared that somebody would try to rob him .
Jackson stepped into Buggy 's car and agreed to lead him to the trophy .
On the way Jackson noticed the Flying Squad van that followed them and got nervous .
At a traffic light in Kennington Park Road , he told Buggy to stop and said he was going to get the trophy .
When he walked away , the van stopped Jackson and he disappeared around the corner .
When Buggy intended to follow him , he reappeared and Buggy told him to get back to the car .
Soon after Jackson jumped off the moving vehicle and ran away .
Buggy pursued him first with a car and then on foot until he captured him in a house garden , revealed that he was a police officer and arrested him .
Other officers came to escort Jackson to Kennington police station .
At the station police recognized that ' Jackson ' was Edward Betchley , a petty thief and used car dealer who had been convicted of theft and receiving stolen goods .
Betchley denied that he had stolen the cup and claimed that he could retrieve it if he was granted bail , which was denied .
He was formally charged with the theft of the trophy and breaking and entering .
Betchley claimed that someone he knew only as " The Pole " had offered him £ 500 to act as a middleman .
Mrs Coombes , who had seen a strange man in the Central Hall , identified him but the security guard did not recognize him .
RECOVERY OF THE TROPHY Section::::Recovery of the trophy .
On 27 March , David Corbett and his dog Pickles were walking in the Beulah Hill district of southeast London , when Pickles begun to sniff at a parcel that was lying under the hedge of Corbett 's house .
It was wrapped in an old newspaper , tied with string .
When he opened the parcel , he recognized the trophy when he noticed the winner 's names on the bottom .
He handed the parcel to the police at Gypsy Hill police station .
Police took Corbett and the trophy to Cannon Row police station where Harold Mayes of the FA identified the trophy .
Police briefly suspected that Corbett was involved with the theft but he had an alibi .
Police announced the recovery of the trophy the next morning but retained the Cup as evidence until 18 April .
They returned it to the FA before the opening of the tournament .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Pickles briefly became a celebrity , and appeared on TV and in some movies .
David Corbett attended the players ' celebration dinner after the World Cup Final , and later received rewards totaling £ 6,000 .
The Football Association made a replica of the trophy for public celebrations .
Edward Betchley was convicted of demanding money with menaces with intent to steal , and received concurrent sentences of two years .
He died of emphysema in 1969 .
THEFT IN BRAZIL
Section::::Theft in Brazil .
In 1970 , Brazil received the Jules Rimet Trophy in perpetuity after winning the World Cup for a third time , but in 1983 the trophy was again stolen .
A banker and football club agent ( although the club , Clube Atlético Mineiro , denies his employment ) called Sérgio Pereira Ayres ( also known as " Sérgio Peralta " ) was the mastermind of the theft .
Peralta engaged two other men , an ex - police officer called Francisco Rivera ( a.k.a .
" Chico Barbudo " ) and a decorator , José Luiz Vieira
( a.k.a .
" Luiz Bigode " ) .
The two men entered the Brazilian Football Confederation ( CBF ) 's building and , after incapacitating the nightwatchman , stole the trophy and two other trophies , " Equitativa " and " Jurrito " .
A safecracker , Antonio Setta ( a.k.a .
" Broa " ) , revealed that Peralta had also approached him for the job , but he refused out of patriotism and because his brother had died of a heart attack when Brazil won the Jules Rimet Trophy .
Peralta and the rest of the suspects were arrested , and it was claimed that the trophy was melted into gold bars by Juan Carlos Hernández , an Argentine gold dealer .
Hernández denied the accusation , and the traces of gold found after an analysis of his foundry did not match the material of the trophy .
In addition , doubts were raised because the trophy was not made of solid gold ; it could not be melted into gold bars , and according to Pedro Berwanger , the Brazilian federal police officer who led the original investigation , it would be worth much more if left intact .
Hernández was arrested , along with the suspects , but when they received their sentences , they all fled .
Chico Barbudo was shot to death in 1989 by five men in a bar .
Luiz Bigode was re - arrested and freed from jail in 1998 .
Antonio Setta died in a car accident in 1985 , as he was going to the police central to testify on the crime .
Juan Carlos Hernández , who had bought a luxurious estate in the upper - class Rio neighborhood of Humaitá shortly after the theft , fled to France and was arrested in 1998 at a bus station in São Paulo for drug trafficking ( coincidentally , he had also served jail time in France for the same offence ) .
He was freed from jail in 2005 , having never served the penalty for receiving stolen goods that he would incur for the trophy .
The mastermind , Sérgio Peralta , was freed from jail in 1998 .
He died of a heart attack in 2003 .
The trophy has never been recovered .
Instead , a replica of the Jules Rimet Trophy was presented to the CBF in 1984 .
REFERENCES
* Martin Atherton –
England loses the World Cup ( History Today June 2006 )
FURTHER READING
*
The Theft of the Jules Rimet Trophy :
The Hidden History of the 1966 World Cup , Martin Atherton , Meyer & Meyer Verlag , 2008 ,