ARE YOU SMARTER THAN A 5TH GRADER ?
( U.S. GAME SHOW )
Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader ?
is an American quiz game show that aired on Fox .
It is produced by Mark Burnett and is hosted by Jeff Foxworthy .
The show premiered as a three - day special which began on February 27 , 2007 with the first two shows each a half - hour in length .
Regular one - hour episodes began airing Thursdays from March 1 through May 10 , and the first season continued with new episodes beginning May 31 .
Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader ? was picked up for the 2007–08 season , which began on September 6 , 2007 , and aired in the same timeslot .
Following the end of the original run of the primetime version on September 18 , 2009 , a first - run syndicated version of the show ran from September 2009 to May 2011 , with Foxworthy returning as host .
On May 26 , 2015 , the program returned to Fox for a new , sixth season , with Foxworthy , again , returning as host .
The show also airs internationally , and the format has been picked up for local versions in a number of other countries .
5th Grader games are played by a single contestant , who attempts to answer ten questions ( plus a final bonus question ) .
Content is taken from elementary school textbooks , two from each grade level from first to fifth .
Each correct answer increases the amount of money the player banks ; a maximum cash prize of $ 1,000,000 can be won .
Along the way , contestants can be assisted by a " classmate " , one of five school - age cast members , in answering the questions .
Notably , upon getting an answer incorrect or deciding to prematurely end the game , contestants must state that they are " not smarter than a 5th grader . "
Two people have won the $ 1,000,000 prize : Kathy Cox , superintendent of public schools for the U.S. state of Georgia ; and George Smoot , winner of the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physics and professor at the University of California , Berkeley .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In November 2006 it was pitched as " Do You Remember Grade School ? " by Burnett and Zoo Productions to network executives in the form of a six - question quiz ; the only network president who was able to win on the quiz was Fox 's Peter Liguori .
On January 31 , 2007 , Fox announced that they had picked up the show for an initial six - episode run , and on February 9 Foxworthy was announced as host .
Less than eight weeks after being pitched , the first episode aired .
On November 6 , 2014 , Fox announced it would revive the series , with a new generation of fifth - graders , to its lineup as part of the summer season of the 2014–15 season .
The new season features several changes , including a new panel of six regular fifth - grade students ( whose usage & seating positions will rotate per episode ) , a new " Grade School Giveaway " feature on the $ 10,000 question , in which a school will win $ 10,000 towards improvements if the contestant answers their $ 10,000 question correctly , and the million dollar question is now from the sixth grade .
Foxworthy explained that the revival was the result of a conversation he had over dinner with Mark Burnett the previous year , in which he considered 5th Grader to be his favorite television role .
When Fox approached him later in 2014 about reviving the series , he accepted the role with little hesitation .
ORIGINAL & REVIVAL VERSIONS ( ON FOX ) GAMEPLAY Section::::Original & revival versions ( on Fox ) .
Section::::Gameplay . !
QuestionNo . !
Correct AnswerValue 1 $ 1,000 2 $ 2,000 3
$ 5,000 4 $ 10,000 5 $ 25,000 6 $ 50,000 7 $ 100,000 8 $ 175,000 9 $ 300,000 10 $ 500,000 bgcolor="lightblue"11 bgcolor="lightblue"$1,000,000 !
1st
Subject !
2nd
Subject colspan=2 bgcolor="lightblue"Million
Dollar Question bgcolor="red"5th Grade bgcolor="red"5th Grade
bgcolor="yellow"4th
Grade
bgcolor="yellow"4th
Grade bgcolor="blue"3rd Grade bgcolor="blue"3rd Grade bgcolor="purple"2nd Grade bgcolor="purple"2nd Grade
bgcolor="green"1st Grade
bgcolor="green"1st Grade
In each game , the contestant ( an adult ) is asked a series of eleven questions , spanning ten subjects ( such as Animal Science , Spelling or Math ) taken from textbooks for first through fifth grade students .
Each question is associated with a grade level ; there are two questions per grade , from first to fifth .
The player can answer the questions in any order , and each correct answer raises their cumulative amount of winnings to the next level ( see table at right ) ; after answering the fifth question correctly , they are guaranteed to leave with at least $ 25,000 .
If the player correctly answers the first ten questions , they are given the opportunity to answer a fifth - grade bonus question ( sixth - grade in the 2015 revival ) worth $ 1,000,000 .
Five fifth graders ( some of whom are also professional child actors ) appear on each show and play along on stage – in general , each episode in a season has the same cast of children .
Prior to the show , the children are provided with workbooks which contain a variety of material , some of which could be used in the questions asked in the game .
The player chooses one to be their " classmate " , who stands at the adjacent podium and is called upon for assistance in choosing a subject ; the other four sit at desks off to the side .
Each child acts as the classmate for two consecutive questions , after which another child is picked from those who have not yet played in that game .
Contestants have three forms of answer - assistance options ( two cheats and a Save ) , each available for use once per game ( up to , but not including , the million dollar subject ) .
The two cheats , Peek and Copy , can be invoked by the contestant to aid in making a decision as follows :
* Peek : The player is shown their classmate 's answer and may choose whether to go along with it or not ; however , they must answer the question upon using this cheat .
* Copy : The player is locked into using their classmate 's answer , without being able to see it first .
If the classmate is correct , the contestant is correct and advances up the money ladder .
If the classmate is incorrect , the contestant loses the game .
When this cheat is used in the 2015 revival , the classmate is allowed to discuss his / her answer with the other fifth graders and change it if desired .
However , the Save is simply a rule of the game :
* Save : If the player answers incorrectly but their classmate is correct , they are credited with a correct answer .
Unlike the Peek or Copy , the contestant can not elect to use the Save , as it is used automatically on their first incorrect response .
However , if the classmate 's answer is also incorrect ( or the classmate 's answer is the same as the contestant 's ) , the contestant loses .
Players could use the Save in tandem with the Peek to have two possible answers , theirs and their classmate 's .
( The Save was removed in season 2 of the syndicated version . )
Once all three forms of assistance are used , the children no longer play an active role in the game .
If the contestant gets an answer wrong ( and is not saved ) , they " flunk out " , and lose everything — or drop to $ 25,000 , if they surpassed the fifth question .
They may choose to " drop out " at any point during the game ( with the exception of the peek cheat noted above ) , which entitles them to leave the game with any winnings they have accrued .
The rules change slightly for the million dollar subject .
The player is only shown the subject of the question before deciding if they will continue or drop out .
However , if they choose to see the question , they are no longer eligible to drop out and must answer the question , with no assistance from the classmates or cheats .
An incorrect answer will cause the contestant to leave with $ 25,000 .
If the contestant wins the million , they will have the opportunity to declare to the camera
" I am smarter than a 5th grader ! "
However , if at any point during the game the player drops out or flunks out , they must face the camera , state their name , and declare " I am not smarter than a 5th grader .
" " Classroom Club " questions were introduced into the game at the beginning of the second season .
These questions are written by elementary school students , who submit them via the show 's Web site .
When one is used , the school of the student who wrote it receives a computer lab , courtesy of the show .
" Field Trip " questions , introduced in the third season , feature a video clip of a National Geographic Channel correspondent asking the question from an appropriate location somewhere in the world .
On the sixth season , the $ 10,000 question will also reward $ 10,000 to a grade school ( connected to the studio via Skype ) towards refurbishments and improvements if the contestant answers correctly .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Each season , a new group of children are cast to appear as the " classmates " on the show .
Any child cast must be " smart , funny , and outgoing " , and must actually be in the 5th grade ( age 9 , 10 or 11 ) during the television season finales .
Contestants who make it through the auditioning process are required to sign a one - year contract stating that they will not tell anybody how much money they make , and that they can not tell or release any information about the actual auditioning process , such as the number of screening processes , the questions asked by the auditioners , and the actual credit for being accepted onto the show .
During every classmate 's final appearance on the show ( " Graduation Night " ) , each classmate receives a $ 25,000 savings bond . !
rowspan=2Season !
colspan="6"Classmates !
Seat 1 !
Seat 2 !
Seat 3 !
Seat 4 !
Seat 5 !
Seat 6 !
1 ( 2007 ) !
2
( 2007–08 ) !
3
( 2008–09 ) !
4 ( 2015 )
CELEBRITY ARE YOU SMARTER THAN A 5TH GRADER ?
Section::::Celebrity Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader ?
Beginning in season 2 , many celebrities played the game and donated their winnings to the charity of their choice .
Of these celebrities , Gene Simmons was the most successful , winning $ 500,000 for Glazer Pediatrics AIDS Foundation .
In addition to these celebrities , former Jeopardy !
champion Ken Jennings and Nobel Prize winner George Smoot , both of whom were playing on their own behalf , won $ 500,000 and $ 1,000,000 respectively .
Jennings 's stint on the show helped propel him back into the lead for the most money won on game shows by one person in the United States .
SYNDICATED VERSION
Section::::Syndicated version .
A half - hour daily syndicated version of the show , also with Foxworthy as host , began airing on September 21 , 2009 .
This version features a top prize of $ 250,000 and a tweaked format between the prime time version and the daytime version .
On March 24 , 2011 , the show was canceled along with Do n't Forget the Lyrics !
due to low ratings .
Reruns continued on several cable outlets for a year afterward ; as of 2018 , the reruns air on Light TV .
On the syndicated version , each class had three kids in each episode , but there were nine kids who traded off with one another throughout both seasons .
The class is as follows : SEASON
1 CLASS *
Annalise Basso
* Pablo * Madison Pettis * Danielle Cohen * Zach Callison * Malachi Smith * Khamani Griffin
* Kevin * Taylar Hender SEASON
2 CLASS
*
Armaan Juneja
* Terrell " TJ " Burnett
* TY Panitz *
Jordan Jones * Lauren Perez * Madison Leisle
* Antonio Gutierrez
* Jenni Marer * Danielle Soibelman GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay . !
Subject !
Question Value bgcolor="gold"Bonus
Question bgcolor="gold"10× Earnings bgcolor="red"5th Grade
bgcolor="red"$5,000
bgcolor="yellow"4th
Grade
bgcolor="yellow"$3,500
bgcolor="blue"3rd Grade
bgcolor="blue"$2,500
bgcolor="purple"2nd Grade
bgcolor="purple"$1,000
bgcolor="green"1st Grade
bgcolor="green"$500
The game play for this version of 5th Grader is similar to the original Fox network version .
Games are played by a single contestant , who attempts to answer eight questions plus one final 5th grade bonus question with the assistance of one of three 5th grade classmates ( instead of five on the network version ) , who vary each week .
In addition , each classmate can be used for up to three questions ( as opposed to two on the network version ) .
Contestants are required to attempt all questions , and do not flunk out simply by answering a question incorrectly , instead losing all money earned to that point .
If a player has any money left after all questions are asked , they are given the choice to either drop out with the money earned , or answer a 5th - grade bonus question worth 10 times their earnings .
The maximum winnings are $ 25,000 without the bonus question , and therefore $ 250,000 if it is answered correctly .
If the contestant answers the bonus question wrong , they lose everything , but if they had earned at least $ 2,500 before the bonus question , then they receive a consolation prize in the form of a $ 2,500 prepaid card .
If they had earned less than $ 2,500 , the value of the card is $ 250 .
On celebrity episodes , the consolation prizes are cash donations to the celebrity 's favorite charity .
In Season 1 , there are 10 regular questions before the bonus question .
The 3rd grade questions are worth $ 2,500 ; 4th grade , $ 3,500 ; and 5th grade , $ 5,000 .
Season 2 premiered on September 20 , 2010 .
The game was shortened , with the fifth grade questions removed from the main game , reducing the number of questions to eight ( plus the 5th - grade bonus question ) .
To compensate , the 3rd and 4th grade questions were increased to $ 3,500 and $ 7,500 respectively .
In addition , the " Save " was removed , and contestants were no longer allowed to skip to a higher - grade question before attempting at least one question from each lower grade .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
David Hinckley of the New York Daily News gave the revival series ' cast a positive review , calling the classmates " terrific ... smart , outgoing and funny , " while arguing that Foxworthy " understands how much to showcase them . "
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The first season of the original series averaged 11.5 million viewers .
The 2015 revival premiered on May 26 , 2015 to 3.31 million viewers , scoring a 0.8/3 rating / share among adults 18–49 .
REFERENCES