MUSIC AND LYRICS Music and Lyrics is a 2007 American romantic comedy film written and directed by Marc Lawrence .
It focuses on the relationship that evolves between a former pop music idol ( of the fictional band PoP ! , which is inspired by Wham !
and Duran Duran ) and an aspiring writer as they struggle to compose a song for a reigning pop diva .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Alex Fletcher ( Hugh Grant ) is a washed - up former pop star who is attempting to revive his dwindling career by hitching his name to the rising star of Cora Corman ( Haley Bennett ) , a young megastar who has asked him to write a song titled " Way Back Into Love .
" Alex is reluctant to compose again after two decades , but his caring but professional manager tells him that his career is doomed if he does n't .
During an unsuccessful attempt to compose the song in collaboration with a " very hip , very edgy " lyricist , Alex discovers that the woman who is temporarily watering his plants , Sophie Fisher ( Drew Barrymore ) , has a gift for writing lyrics .
Sophie , a former creative writing student reeling from a disastrous romance with her former English professor Sloan Cates ( Campbell Scott ) who " forgot " to mention he had a fiancée , initially refuses .
Alex cajoles her into helping him by using a few quickly - chosen phrases she has given him as the basis for a song .
Over the next few days , they grow closer while writing the words and music together , much to the delight of Sophie 's older sister Rhonda ( Kristen Johnston ) , a huge fan of Alex .
Barely meeting the deadline Cora has set for the song 's delivery , Alex and Sophie are thrilled when she accepts it ; however , at a celebratory dinner with Alex 's manager Chris ( Brad Garrett )
Sophie is mortified to encounter Sloan .
She confronts him but finds herself tongue - tied in his presence , and Alex 's own attempts to defend her result in a scuffle .
Nursing their wounds back at Alex 's apartment ,
Alex and Sophie fall into an unplanned romantic encounter .
Sophie is later horrified when she finds Cora plans to record a sexy interpretation of " Way Back into Love , " complete with an Indian vibe which she feels clashes with the romantic spirit of the song .
She is determined to convince Cora to abandon the arrangement , but Alex vetoes her efforts for fear he will lose Cora 's goodwill .
In the ensuing argument , he admits Cora 's version is awful but contends accepting it as the cost of doing business .
Upset by Alex 's willingness to demean his talent and extremely hurt by his argument that Sloan Cates was right about her personality , Sophie leaves him .
Sophie , intending to start a new life in Florida , reluctantly attends the opening of Cora 's new tour at Madison Square Garden , at which Alex and Cora will debut " Way Back Into Love " .
Upon hearing that Alex is singing a new song " written by Alex Fletcher " , Sophie is upset to believe that Alex is stealing credit for her work ; however , the song Alex sings is called " Do n't Write Me Off " , his plea for Sophie to give him another chance .
Touched , Sophie finds Alex backstage , and he confesses he convinced Cora to drop the risqué version of " Way Back into Love " in an attempt to win Sophie back .
He and Cora perform the tune as he and Sophie intended it to be sung , leading to the two of them kissing .
The end of the movie ( an homage to VH1 's Pop - Up Video ) reveals that the song becomes a hit for Cora and Alex , the film version of Sloan 's novel flops with critics and moviegoers ( ruining his career ) , PoP !
reunites for their induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame after which their lead singer Colin Thompson ( who left the band with some of Alex 's songs to start a solo career ) winds up having his hip replaced after years of dancing , and Alex and Sophie go on to become successful partners , both in songwriting and romance .
CAST * Hugh Grant as Alex Fletcher
* Drew Barrymore as Sophie Fisher * Brad Garrett as Chris Riley * Kristen Johnston as Rhonda Fisher
* Haley Bennett as Cora Corman
* Campbell Scott as Sloan Cates
* Scott Porter as Colin Thompson
* Matthew Morrison as Ray , Cora 's Manager RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Music and Lyrics received generally positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a rating of 62 % , based on 172 reviews , with an average rating of 6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Music & Lyrics is a light and pleasant romantic comedy that succeeds because of the considerable charm of its co - stars .
The music segments featuring Hugh Grant are worth the price of admission .
" On Metacritic the film has score of 59 out of 100 , based on 30 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
A.O. Scott of The New York Times called the film " the type of modern Hollywood production that aspires to nothing more than the competent dispensing of mild amusement and easy emotion .
The writer and director , Marc Lawrence ... shows some imagination as he parodies the music - video styles of various eras , and he contrives a bit of novelty in making the movie 's central couple creative partners as well as potential lovers ...
Mr. Grant is at his best when he allows a hard glint of caddish narcissism to peek through his easy flirtatiousness , something he did in About a Boy and American Dreamz .
There is not quite enough of that here , nor enough of the anarchic loopiness that Ms. Barrymore brought to roles opposite Adam Sandler in The Wedding Singer and 50 First Dates . "
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle observed , " Writer - director Marc Lawrence makes a talk - heavy variety of romantic comedy that not everyone likes - Miss Congeniality , Two Weeks Notice , Forces of Nature - but he does it well .
Moreover , Music and Lyrics has virtues its predecessors lack .
Scenes play out longer than in most films , and conversations have a chance to evolve .
Also , because much of the film places the protagonists in rooms together , working for extended periods , there are an unusual number of two - person scenes , giving the actors the chance to show their charm , work off each other and develop the nuances of interaction ...
Lawrence 's take on
pop music success is exactly right , satiric without being absurdist , and therefore a prize worth the effort . "
Todd McCarthy of Variety said " Sitcommy in structure and execution , this very mainstream romance ... offers few surprises .
But its pep , agreeable performances and appealing central conceit will profitably put this Warner Bros. Valentine 's Day romantic comedy over with women and couples seeking a nice diversion ...
Writer - director Marc Lawrence ... makes everything about three times more obvious than it needs to be ; as a director , he needs to edit himself better as a writer ...
But there 's energy here , and the actors feed on it . "
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian rated the film two out of five stars , calling it a " very moderate romcom " and adding , " Grant and Barrymore make a reasonable odd couple , and both have charm , but this never comes to life . "
Philip French of The Observer said , " Grant has the occasional good line ( or at least he makes a few of them seem funny ) , but the film limps along like someone trying to tap dance in flippers . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film opened on February 9 , 2007 in the United Kingdom and Ireland and ranked # 1 at the box office , grossing £ 1.93 million in its first weekend .
It was released on 2,955 screens in the United States and Canada on February 14 and grossed $ 13,623,630 on its opening weekend , ranking # 4 at the box office behind Ghost Rider , Bridge to Terabithia , and Norbit .
It eventually grossed $ 50,572,589 in the US and Canada and $ 95,323,833 in foreign markets for a total worldwide box office of $ 145,896,422 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The with several songs performed by Grant reached # 5 on the Billboard Top Soundtracks Chart and # 63 on the Billboard 200 .
Martin Fry of pop band ABC served as Grant 's vocal coach for the movie .
The album also reached # 93 on the Australian Albums Chart .
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release .
Warner Home Video released the DVD in both anamorphic widescreen ( ) and fullscreen versions in the US , Canada , and US territories on May 8 , 2007 .
Both feature audio tracks and subtitles in English , Spanish , and French .
Bonus features include deleted scenes , a gag reel , Note for Note : The Making of Music and Lyrics , and the music video PoP !
Goes My Heart .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS