SWITCHED AT
BIRTH ( FILM )
Switched at Birth is a 1991 American television film directed by Waris Hussein .
It is based on the true story of Kimberly Mays and Arlena Twigg , babies switched soon after birth in a Florida hospital in 1978 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Within days of Arlena Twigg 's birth in Florida in late 1978 , she is found to have a chronic illness .
Blood tests reveals that she is not the biological daughter of Regina and Ernest Twigg .
Arlena is ill throughout her life and dies at the age of nine .
Subsequently , her parents search for their biological daughter , who they find is being raised as Kimberly Mays by a man who believes that he is her father .
CAST
* Bonnie Bedelia as Regina Twigg
* Brian Kerwin as Robert " Bob " Mays * John M. Jackson as Ernest Twigg
* Eve Gordon as Darlena
* Jacqueline Scott as Ruth Mays
* Judith Hoag as Barbara Mays
* Caroline McWilliams as Lois Morehead * Lois Smith as Margaret Hill
* Kelli Williams as Irisa * Ariana Richards as Kimberly Mays , Age 9 - 11 * Erika Flores as Arlena Twigg , Age 9 * Ed Asner as Ted Marx * Beth Grant as Sophie * Rance Howard as Frank Hill
* Vivian Bonnell as Nurse Ford * Allison Mack as Normia Twigg
FACTUAL
BASIS Section::::Factual basis .
Kimberly Mays and Arlena Twigg were born within a few days of each other in a Wauchula , Florida , hospital in November 1978 .
Kimberly went home with Bob Mays and his wife , Barbara , who died of ovarian cancer when Kimberly was three .
Ernest and Regina Twigg of Sebring , Florida , took home the Mays ' biological daughter , whom they named Arlena .
The Twiggs learned that Arlena had the wrong blood type to be their biological daughter when she was nine years old .
Following Arlena 's death from a heart condition , the Twiggs sought information about their biological daughter and located Kimberly Mays , who was later the subject of a custody battle between her biological parents and Bob Mays , the man who raised her after she was switched at birth .
Bob Mays had agreed in 1989 to grant the Twiggs visitation rights to Kimberly , but he later cut off the visits .
The Twiggs then sued for increased visitation or custody of Kimberly .
A Wauchula circuit court ruled in 1993 that Kimberly would be allowed to cut off all contacts with her biological family and that Bob Mays was her psychological father .
Though Kimberly won the right to stay with Bob Mays , she later ran away and moved in with the Twiggs .
In a 2015 interview with Barbara Walters for the documentary series American Scandals on Investigation Discovery , Kimberly discussed her troubled early adulthood , two divorces , six children , losing custody of her first born to her first husband , living in her car with one child , and working as a stripper to buy food for her children .
The court battle was also the subject of a book entitled The Baby Swap Conspiracy by Loretta Schwarz - Nobel .
SEE ALSO
* Switched at Birth ( 1999 film ) *
Switched at Birth ( TV series )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Switched at birth , movie trailer