TVNZ ONDEMAND
TVNZ OnDemand is a New Zealand online television viewing and downloading service offered by Television New Zealand since 2007 .
It offers a variety of free content , such as news updates and programmes seen on TVNZ channels .
TVNZ OnDemand offers most of the programmes broadcast on air with licensing agreements to be shown for users in New Zealand .
The content is placed within an hour of the shows transmission and is available for 7 to 30 Days on the website .
TVNZ OnDemand was launched March 20 , 2007 , and is available on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 via the TVNZ app on PlayStation Network for New Zealanders .
It is also available on iOS , Android , Xbox One and Windows 10 .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
TVNZ OnDemand was featured in newspapers and radio interviews because a young teenager was able to access the unreleased website and start downloading shows .
PRICING
Section::::Pricing .
Content streamed though TVNZ OnDemand was previously charged for .
All content is now free , ad - supported , with advertisements being shown before , during and after videos .
WATCH
FIRST
Section::::Watch
First .
From 2012 , TVNZ OnDemand began uploading episodes of select shows prior to their airing on TVNZ channels and usually within a day of their original overseas airings ( although sometimes this was weeks or months after their international airing ) .
In September 2014 , it was announced that episodes of seventeen shows would be uploaded within a day of their airings in the US , coinciding with the 2014 - 2015 season .
One of the shows , Manhattan Love Story was cancelled by the US network ABC , but episodes continued to be uploaded to TVNZ OnDemand in line with their intended US airings , making TVNZ the de facto original broadcaster of the series .
TVNZ KIDZONE Section::::TVNZ Kidzone .
On May 1 , 2016 ( 01.06 am ) , when TVNZ Kidzone ( channel version ) closed it is now on TVNZ OnDemand with lot of the shows to watch ( it is still use the former channel programs ) .
On TVNZ Kidzone ( TVNZ OnDemand version ) in 26 June 2016 , the logo changed its definition ( in bold ) to a scribble version .
Formerly known as TVNZ Kidzone24 from May 1 , 2011 to April 25 , 2015 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
TVNZ ondemand
* TVNZ ondemand Announcement tvnz.co.nz , December 18 , 2006 , retrieved December 22 , 2006 .
* TVNZ ondemand Playstation announcement