WHIPCRACKING
Whipcracking is the act of producing a cracking sound through the use of a whip .
Used during livestock driving and horse riding , it has also become an art .
A rhythmic whipcracking belongs to the traditional culture among various Germanic peoples of Bavaria ( Goaßlschnalzen ) , various Alpine areas ( Aperschnalzen ) , Austria , and Hungary ( Ostorozás ) .
Today it is a performing art , a part of rodeo show in United States , a competitive sport in Australia and increasingly popular in the United Kingdom , where it crosses boundaries of sport , hobby and performance .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
The crack a whip makes is produced when a section of the whip moves faster than the speed of sound creating a small sonic boom .
The creation of the sonic boom was confirmed in 1958 by analyzing the high - speed shadow photography taken in 1927 .
Recently , an additional , purely geometrical factor was recognized : the tip of the whip moves twice as fast at the loop of the whip , just like the top of a car 's wheel moves twice as fast as the car itself .
A common explanation is to derive the behavior from the conservation of energy law .
However it was noted that the energy is also conserved when the crack sizzles , therefore derivations from purely conservation laws , including conservation of momentum and some others are insufficient .
Based on simulations , the high speed of the tip of the whip has been proposed to be a result of a " chain reaction of levers and blocks " .
In 1997 , Discover Magazine reported about the possibility of the " whipcracking " effect millions of years ago .
As part of the joint computer scientists ' and paleontologists ' research into the motion of dinosaurs , Nathan Myhrvold , a chief technology officer from Microsoft , carried out a computer simulation of an apatosaurus , which has a very long , tapering tail resembling a whip .
Basing on the reasoning described above , Myhrvold concluded that sauropods were capable of producing a crack comparable to the sound of a cannon .
SHOWS AND COMPETITIONS GOASSLSCHNALZEN Section::::Shows and competitions .
Section::::Goaßlschnalzen .
Goaßlschnalzen , Goaßlschnalzn , Goasslschnoizen is translated as " whip - cracking " , from the Bavarian word Goaßl ( German : Geißel ) for coachwhip .
In earlier centuries , the carriage drivers used elaborate crack sequences to signal their approach and to identify them .
Over time horse - drawn transport dwindled , but the tradition remained , and coaches practiced their skill in their spare time .
Today the Goaßlschnalzer ( " whipsnappers " ) do concert performances , often as bands that include conventional musical instruments .
Whipsnapping is also a traditional sport in Bavaria .
There are many whip - cracking associations in Bavaria .
APERSCHNALZEN Section::::Aperschnalzen .
Aperschnalzen or Apaschnoizn in Bavarian is an old tradition of competitive whipcracking revived in the first half of the 20th century .
The word " aper " means " area free of snow " , and it has been thought that this tradition had a pagan meaning of " driving the winter away " by whipcracking .
BRITISH WHIPCRACKING CONVENTION
Section::::British Whipcracking Convention .
The British Whipcracking Convention is a place for all who are interested in whip cracking .
This ranges from complete novices who have never picked up a whip , through intermediate skills to expert skill sharing .
There are workshops for the differing skill levels as well as competitions and targets .
The third convention was held in Aldersley Leisure Village , Aldersley Road , Wolverhampton on 14 July 2007 .
AUSTRALIAN SPORT Section::::Australian sport .
In the latter half of the 20th century , attempts to preserve traditional crafts , along with a resurgence of interest in Western performance arts and the release of films such as Raiders of the Lost Ark ( in which the hero , Indiana Jones , uses a bullwhip as a tool ) , led to an increased interest in whipcracking as a hobby and performance art , as well as a competitive sport .
Whip cracking competitions have become especially popular in Australia .
They focus on the completion of complex , multiple - cracking routines and precise target work .
Various whips , apart from bullwhips , are used in such competitions .
The most common whip used in Australian competitions is an Australian stockwhip , a whip unique to Australia .
* Target routines
* target cutting
* object wrapping
* object moving / manipulation *
Cracking routines *
Cracking patterns * Cracking with two whips In cracking routines
, the judging criteria are the presentation and making audible cracks in prescribed moments .
In 1986 an Australian whip - cracker Gary Brophy managed to crack a giant whip for the Guinness Book of Records .
the whip measured a staggering 42 m ( 140 ft ) in length .
Gary and his family now tour the world performing their wild west act in circuses and rodeos .
SEE ALSO
* Bullwhip
* Crack the Whip
* John Brady , an expert whipcracker
*
Fiona ( Wilks ) Smith , 12 times Australian ladies champion in whipcracking * Stockwhip
* Whip boxing *
Indiana Jones REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Andrew Conway , The New Bullwhip Book , Loompanics Unlimited , 2005 . .
* Robert Dante , Let 's Get Cracking !
The How - To Book of Bullwhip Skills , CreateSpace , 2008 . .
*
Why Whips Crack
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The art of whipcracking *
The Whip Artistry Studio - Non - combative Whip Arts
* Bullwhip.org * Brophy Family Whips and lasso artists that have been touring the world for over 30 years