RULES OF ENGAGEMENT ( TV SERIES )
Rules of Engagement is an American sitcom that ran on CBS from February 5 , 2007 , to May 20 , 2013 , originally airing as a mid - season replacement .
The series was produced by Adam Sandler 's Happy Madison Productions in association with CBS Television Studios and Sony Pictures Television ( SPT controls the North American rights while CBS controls the international rights ) .
Although the show received negative reviews throughout its run , it always earned reasonably good ratings , helping the show reach 100 episodes ( typically the minimum needed for syndication ) over seven seasons .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Two couples and their single friend deal with the complications of dating , commitment and marriage .
It looks at different relationships in various stages , starring Patrick Warburton and Megyn Price as a long - married couple , Oliver Hudson and Bianca Kajlich as newly engaged sweethearts , and David Spade and Adhir Kalyan
( the latter added in season 3 ) as their still - single friends .
They often gather to enjoy a meal and discuss their issues at " The Island Diner " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The show was heavily promoted by CBS during Super Bowl XLI and launched the following night , the first of seven episodes in its first season .
The pilot episode remains the highest rated episode of the show .
The series was renewed for a second season , which began as a mid - season replacement for The New Adventures of Old Christine on Monday , September 24 , 2007 , with production halted after nine episodes on November 6 , 2007 , in the wake of a writers ' strike .
After the strike ended , CBS announced that the show would return April 14 , 2008 , with a further six episodes .
Seasons three and four were both mid - season entries launched in March 2009 and March 2010 .
On May 18 , 2010 , it was announced that CBS had renewed Rules of Engagement for a 5th season .
It was later announced that this season would start in September , in contrast to its usual midseason start , and received an expanded 24-episode order .
( The fifth season was the first and only season to have a full - season order . )
The first 15 episodes aired on Monday nights , usually in the 8:30 pm Eastern/7:30 pm Central time slot following How I Met Your Mother .
Then on February 24 , 2011 , the series moved to Thursdays at 8:30 pm Eastern/7:30 pm Central , following The Big Bang Theory , after the cancellation of $ h * !
My Dad Says .
On January 31 , 2011 , CBS ordered an additional two episodes of the series to prepare for the possibility of Two and a Half Men going into hiatus following Charlie Sheen 's real - life issues , taking the episode order to 26 .
Two of these episodes were held back and aired as part of the sixth season .
On May 17 , 2011 , the series was renewed for a sixth season to begin airing in fall 2011 .
One day later , CBS announced that Rules of Engagement would move to Saturday nights at 8:00 pm Eastern/7:00 pm Central as part of the network 's new Comedytime Saturday block ; the first time in six years that an original CBS program would air on that night .
It also marked the fourth night on which the series would air , with it previously airing on Mondays , Wednesdays ( two airings ) , and Thursdays .
On October 7 , 2011 , however , it was announced that Rules of Engagement would move back to its 8:30PM EST Thursday timeslot following The Big Bang Theory , replacing new sitcom How to Be a Gentleman which was moved to the new Saturday time slot .
The episode order was cut from the original 18 , down to 13 ( plus two unaired episodes from season five ) on November 14 , 2011 .
Effective January 12 , 2012 , CBS removed Rules of Engagement from its Thursday lineup , replacing it with the new sitcom Rob starring Rob Schneider .
Rules would return to its Thursday 8:30 PM time slot on March 29 , after Rob had finished airing its 8-episode order , resulting in a total of 15 episodes in season 6 .
On May 21 , 2012 , CBS renewed Rules of Engagement for a seventh season of 13 episodes to air mid - season , bringing the total number of produced episodes to 100 .
Season 7 began airing on Mondays at 8:30 , starting February 4 , 2013 .
On May 10 , 2013 , Rules of Engagement was cancelled by CBS after seven seasons and 100 episodes .
The series finale episode aired on May 20 , 2013 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS
* Patrick Warburton as Jeff Bingham , a financial manager and husband of Audrey since August 12 , 1995 .
He has a rather deadpan , cold and sardonic personality and sense of self , particularly when dealing with Russell and Adam , but he is not sadistic or unkind , thereby rendering these traits as merely ironic and biting humor .
He loves sports ( NY Giants , NY Mets , NY Rangers , NY Knicks ) , shuns anything that might resemble sensitivity and often views his marriage as a competition , refusing to let Audrey " win " the upper hand at anything .
He frequently complains about Audrey 's work stories being boring , often forgets plans they have made or tasks she has asked him to complete and , on many occasions , embarrasses her publicly .
He is also very frugal and extremely careful with his money – to the extent where he will buy socks in New Jersey to avoid paying additional tax on them – and tries to discourage Audrey from overspending while planning for their future .
He often reminisces about his college days at Syracuse .
* Megyn Price as Audrey Bingham ( née Curtis ) , formerly from Lincoln , Nebraska , an editor at Indoor Living magazine ( before later resigning ) and the assertive , modern wife of Jeff .
She likes to do things on spur of the moment , such as when she buys furniture on the Internet or makes Jeff 's shirts into a quilt .
She tolerates her husband 's insensitivity because she knows he is not malicious and will do whatever it takes to make the situation right once he realizes his mistake .
As a couple , they both can be very condescending and manipulative towards each other , in order to gain the upper hand , and typically do n't like to concede to the other that they were wrong , for example when they both repeatedly lied about their whereabouts during a weekend when Audrey 's aunt was supposed to visit but fell ill .
They , however , often recognize where both were wrong and apologize .
Audrey does not make fun of her friends as much as her friends make fun of each other , but she will frequently save her most - biting criticisms for Russell .
She often insists that she is a " people person " , but her attempts to prove it usually result in embarrassment , such as having a co - worker lodge a sexual harassment complaint against her .
Audrey likes to think of herself as kind , cultured and smarter than her friends .
She desperately wants to be liked by persons and/or impress them , but her attempts at being charitable and sociable often end in her becoming frustrated , either as a result of her own awkwardness or due to Jeff 's manners .
She and Jeff had a baby , Shea , via a surrogate , Brenda , after Audrey assumed she could never get pregnant , only to discover in the series finale that she is in fact pregnant with Jeff 's child .
* Oliver Hudson as Adam Rhodes , a sensitive and well - meaning – but extremely naive – co - worker of Russell and Timmy , and Jennifer 's fiancé throughout the series until they are married in the series finale .
He is a neighbor of Jeff and Audrey , looks up to Jeff , and often acts on Jeff 's relationship advice ( which is hardened by years of marriage ) to attempt to receive more frequent sexual relations with Jennifer .
This usually results in making the situation worse for himself .
As an example , he once revealed to Jennifer his strategies for avoiding her bad moods , because he was proud that Jeff considered them to be a good idea .
Oftentimes because of his childlike naivete ( almost borderline stupidity ) , people find it hard to explain things to him .
He can not keep secrets and rarely thinks before he speaks .
Adam frequently exhibits feminine or flamboyant behavior and characteristics , which make him the target of many barbs from Jeff and Russell regarding his homosexual tendencies .
It is to be noted that Adam , initially , was simply a smooth , charming guy who was a bit naive but over the course of the series , noticeably after Season 2 , the writers opted to " dumb - down " his character turning him from naive and sweet to borderline moronic and dim - witted .
* Bianca Kajlich as Jennifer Morgan , the charismatic live - in fiancée and eventual wife of Adam , who endures his faults because of his good looks and underlying good nature .
She is very self - conscious of his naivete , and will often try to spare him from embarrassment .
She also has a need for thrills and can easily manipulate Adam into doing whatever she wants , but often feels guilty about it afterward .
She was openly promiscuous in her past and is often referred to by Jeff , Russell and even Adam as being " easy " and always " good to go " .
Her love for sex means Adam rarely has to " work for it " , a fact that Adam enjoys and the guys envy .
Jennifer did , however , attempt to fabricate a clichéd love story of how she and Adam met , due to being slightly embarrassed when Adam continually boasts that they had sex together on their first date .
She and Adam are often naive about their relationship as they typically assume they will not end up bickering and resenting each other like Jeff & Audrey , who often laugh at them for being so clueless and optimistic , and they think will be able to agree on everything .
However , despite their best efforts , this often backfires specifically when they tried working together , cutting back on expenses or when they got into a big fight while trying to plan their entire future during a weekend getaway .
* David Spade as Russell Dunbar , an acerbic , narcissistic , womanizing single friend of the main characters and boss of Adam and Timmy .
Russell is fast - talking , and is an eternal optimist when it comes to women , often ignoring multiple sexual harassment lawsuits leveled against him in the pursuit of sex .
He is also an incompetent manager at his father 's real estate and development business , Dunbar Industries .
If left to his own devices and forced to fend for himself without assistance ( e.g. , from Timmy )
he would completely destroy his office in minutes .
He is often mocked because of his height ( especially by Jeff ) , choice of wardrobe , and his penchant for prostitutes and young women with " daddy " issues .
He also frequently uses his wealth to lure women and do whatever he wants .
In the Season 6 episode " Audrey 's Shower " , Russell takes a break from women and starts to display many creative talents .
It is revealed in a flashback that he was an intelligent child and a musical prodigy , until he saw his piano teacher 's cleavage and wound up taking a different path in life .
His favorite expression , spoken in a high - pitched voice after incredulous questions about his doing something outrageous , is : " I kinda did " .
In the series finale , Russell proposes to Timmy and marries him in order to help Timmy avoid deportation .
* Adhir Kalyan as Timir " Timmy " Patel ( recurring Season 3 ; regular cast from Seasons 4–7 ) , whom Russell hires as his assistant .
He is a mild - mannered man with a quick wit , often matching Russell 's jabs in their verbal sparring .
Although he is fluent in seven languages and holds an MBA from Oxford University , Timmy is often forced to do menial work or to solve Russell 's trivial problems .
While many of Russell 's schemes disgust him , Timmy will often see them through so that he can enjoy Russell 's comeuppance .
He plays cricket and is also an avid fan of the Boston Bruins .
In the series finale , Timmy 's work visa expires and he faces deportation .
Russell sets aside his womanizing ways to marry Timmy so he can stay in the country .
This brought criticism , however , due to the fact that it had already been established in Season 5 that Timmy had been a US citizen for over 10 years which he revealed when Russell wanted to throw him a " Citizenship Party " .
This was not the first time there had been an inconsistent discrepancy with Timmy 's background as he tells his then - girlfriend , Allison , in the episode " Play Ball " , that he was an only child yet in the following season , in the episode " The Set - Up " , it is revealed that he has a sister , Simran , who is currently living in Chicago .
MAJOR RECURRING CHARACTERS * Diane Sellers as Doreen , waitress at The Island Diner .
* Wendi McLendon - Covey as Liz , an unlikeable , annoying , unattractive neighbor and friend of Audrey 's who lives directly upstairs from the Binghams ; for a brief story arc in Season 6
she was married to Russell , but they later separated .
In Season 7 , Episode 7 , she admitted to Russell that she is a sex addict and that she cheated on him multiple times ( with multiple partners ) during their brief marriage .
* Sara Rue as Brenda , Jeff 's lesbian softball teammate who agrees to be a surrogate mother for Audrey and Jeff .
* Nazneen Contractor as Suneetha , Timmy 's fiancée in an arranged marriage , who becomes an object of Russell 's affections .
* Susan Yeagley as Tracy , a man - hungry co - worker of Audrey 's .
* Beth Littleford as Laura , another man - hungry co - worker of Audrey 's .
* Taryn Southern as Allison , the object of Timmy 's affections , which blossoms into an intra - office romance , then ends when she moves away and breaks up with Timmy .
* Geoff Pierson as Franklin Dunbar , Russell 's wealthy , lecherous father .
* Orlando Jones as Brad , Jeff 's gay friend from his gym who eventually makes friends with the rest of the gang .
* Jaime Pressly as Pam , the Bingham 's initial surrogate who they soon soured on due to her sleeping with Russell .
* Heather Locklear as Barbara , Audrey 's sister , on whom Russell has a crush .
* Joan Collins as Bunny Dunbar , Russell 's wealthy , superficial mother .
EPISODES
U.S. RATINGS EST12006–0722007–0832008–0942009–1052010–1162011–1272012–13 SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
In June 2011 , the series was picked up for syndication by local affiliates ,
The CW Plus , and WGN America , making its debut on September 10 , 2012 .
On Wednesday , January 2 , 2013 , the series began airing weekdays on TBS at 2/1c .
Shortly thereafter , it moved to the early morning hour of 6 A.M. throughout the week .
As of May 2016 , the series has left the line - up entirely .
All 7 seasons were available for streaming on Netflix until September of 2018 when they were removed .
In Canada , the series is syndicated on CMT .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result rowspan=22007 Primetime Emmy Award Outstanding Cinematography for a Multi - Camera Series Wayne Kennan Teen Choice Award
Choice TV Actor :
Comedy David Spade rowspan=22008
Art Directors Guild Award Excellence in Production Design Bernard Vyzga and Lynn Griffin rowspan=2BMI Film and TV Award rowspan=2Best
TV Music David Schwartz rowspan=32009 Evan Frankfort , Bert Selen , and George Ritter
Art Directors Guild Award Excellence in Production Design Bernard Vyzga , Joe Pew , and Jerie Kelter ASCAP Film and Television Music Award Top Television Series Steve Mazur , Tom Polce , and Derek Schanche 2010
rowspan=3Primetime Emmy Award
rowspan=2Outstanding Art Direction for a Multi - Camera Series rowspan=2Bernard Vyzga
an Jerie Kelter rowspan=22011 Outstanding Cinematography for a Multi - Camera Series Wayne Kennan rowspan=22012 BMI Film and TV Award
Best TV Music Bert Selen and George Ritter Image Award Outstanding Directing in a Comedy Series Leonard R. Garner ,
Jr. 2013 BMI Film and TV Award Best TV Music Bert Selen and George Ritter DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment owns the rights to release DVDs in Region 1 .
The fifth season of the series was made available beginning February 7 , 2012 , exclusively as a made - on - demand release from Sony Pictures Home Entertainment , in conjunction with amazon.com .
Similarly , the sixth season received a MOD release from online retailers , on October 2 , 2012 .
The seventh and final season has not yet been released on DVD and it is unknown whether the series will see completion on DVD .
However , the entire series is available to purchase and download from amazon.com and the iTunes Store .
Paramount Pictures , in conjunction with CBS Home EntertainmentTwo and a Half Men , CBS ordered an additional two episodes for Rules of Engagement 's fifth season , bringing the total number of episodes to 26 from the initial 24 ordered .
Despite the episodes , " Scavenger Hunt " and " Cheating , " airing during the sixth season , they were originally produced for the fifth season , and are included in the fifth season collection .
Therefore , the sixth season 's DVD release features the 13 episodes produced over that time period , versus the 15 that were broadcast by CBS .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTERS Section::::International broadcasters . !
Country ! !
Network ! !
Series Premiere ! !
Timeslot POLISH VERSION Section::::Polish version .
Polish channel TVN started filming its own version of the show , called Reguły Gry ( literally meaning Rules of the Game in Polish ) .
It premiered on 16 February 2012 on TVN sister channel TVN 7 as its first original production .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rules of Engagement – Official Site * Rules of Engagement – bridestelevision.com
* THRFeed * Rules of Engagement on Comedy Central UK