SELF - FUNDED HEALTH CARE
Self - funded health care , also known as Administrative Services Only ( ASO ) , is a self insurance arrangement whereby an employer provides health or disability benefits to employees using the company 's own funds .
This is different from fully insured plans where the employer contracts an insurance company to cover the employees and dependents .
In self - funded health care , the employer assumes the direct risk for payment of the claims for benefits .
The terms of eligibility and covered benefits are set forth in a plan document which includes provisions similar to those found in a typical group health insurance policy .
Unless exempted , such plans create rights and obligations under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ( " ERISA " ) .
Many employers seek to mitigate the financial risk of self funding claims under the plan by purchasing stop loss insurance from an insurance carrier .
These policies typically provide for risk retention limitations both on a specific claim and aggregate claims basis .
An important aspect of self funded group health plans lies in the requirement that the employer remain liable for funding of plan claims regardless of the purchase of stop loss insurance .
What this means , in turn , is a fund or company 's own bank account creates a pool of their employees and is managed & distributed to claim payouts .
In other words , only the employer has a contractual relationship with plan participants and beneficiaries .
The stop loss policy runs solely between the employer and the stop loss carrier and creates no direct liability to those individuals covered under the plan .
This feature provides the critical distinction between fully insured plans ( subject to State law insurance regulations ) and self funded health plans which , under the provisions of Section 514 of ERISA , are exempt from state insurance regulations .
Stop - loss policies are instrumental in establishing a " worst - case scenario " , or aggregate for any given year .
The aggregate stop - loss helps establish a finite number that can be compared to a plan 's guaranteed fully insured cost .
If the aggregate cost does not exceed the plans ' fully insured guaranteed cost , self - funding may be a viable option .
Another way to look at aggregate insurance is an umbrella policy that caps a company 's liability within a specified time period .
Historically self - funding has been most effective for large corporations and Fortune 500 companies with over 1,000 employees but with the rising cost of healthcare over the past ten years at a rate of close to 10 % , self - funding has become an option for smaller employers .
It is now estimated that the average self - funded plan covers 300 - 400 employees and that , of private sector employees that have a workplace health plan , 59 % were covered by a plan that is at least in part self - insured .
While some large employers self - administer their self funded group health plan , most find it necessary to contract with a third party for assistance in claims adjudication and payment .
Third party administrators ( TPA 's ) provide these and other services , such as access to preferred provider networks , prescription drug card programs , utilization review and the stop loss insurance market .
Insurance companies offer similar services under what is frequently described as " administrative services only " or " ASO " contracts .
In these arrangements the insurance company provides the typical third party administration services but assume no risk for claims payment .
Perhaps the biggest advantage of self - funded plans is transparency of claims data .
Self - funded employers who contract a TPA receive a monthly report detailing medical claims and pharmacy costs .
Knowing this information becomes instrumental in controlling costs by shifting buying patterns .
Other advantages include plan flexibility , access to national PPO networks , and financial savings .
As health care costs continue to rise , more employers will look to alternative ways to finance their healthcare plans .
Consumer driven plans have become popular recently as employers look to shift some of the accountability to employees .
HSAs ( health savings accounts ) and HRA ( health reimbursement accounts ) encourage employees to shop around for the best value when considering elective medical procedures or filling pharmacy prescriptions .
Self - funded plans take one step further in that they provide all claims data to employers allowing them to set up an EPO ( exclusive provider organization ) basically a PPO hand selected by the organization to eliminate high cost providers .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
Captive 101 - Roundstone Management
* Self - Funded Health Care Could Lower Costs - Milwaukee Biz Journal *
Is Self - Funded Health a Path for Small Firms ? - HR Magazine * Self - Funding of Health Care Benefits by Carlton Harker
* ERISA Group Health Plan Administration , Health Plan Law , *
Partially Self Funded Group Health Plans
- High Deductible Health Plans EXTERNAL LINKS
* National Employer Self Funding and Self Insurance Healthcare and Workers Compensation Conference , September 20 - 22 , 2010 in Los Angeles *
Self Funding Magazine * Self Funding Employers Association