CIRCUMZENITHAL ARC
The circumzenithal arc , also called the circumzenith arc ( CZA ) , upside - down rainbow , and the Bravais arc , is an optical phenomenon similar in appearance to a rainbow , but belonging to the family of halos arising from refraction of sunlight through ice crystals , generally in cirrus or cirrostratus clouds , rather than from raindrops .
The arc is located at a considerable distance ( approximately 46 ° ) above the sun and at most forms a quarter of a circle centered on the zenith .
It has been called " a smile in the sky " , its first impression being that of an upside - down rainbow .
The CZA is one of the brightest and most colorful members of the halo family .
Its colors , ranging from violet on top to red at the bottom , are purer than those of a rainbow because there is much less overlap in their formation .
The intensity distribution along the circumzenithal arc requires consideration of several effects :
Fresnel 's reflection and transmission amplitudes , atmospheric attenuation , chromatic dispersion ( i.e. the width of the arc ) , azimuthal angular dispersion ( ray bundling ) , and geometrical constraints .
In effect , the CZA is brightest when the sun is at about 20 ° .
Contrary to public awareness , the CZA is not a rare phenomenon , but it tends to be overlooked since it occurs so far overhead .
It is worthwhile to look out for it when sun dogs are visible , since the same type of ice crystals that cause them ( plate - shaped hexagonal prisms in horizontal orientation ) are responsible for the CZA .
FORMATION Section::::Formation .
The light that forms the CZA enters an ice crystal through its flat top face , and exits through a side prism face .
The refraction of almost parallel sunlight through what is essentially a 90-degree prism accounts for the wide color separation and the purity of color .
The CZA can only form when the sun is at an altitude lower than 32.2 ° .
The CZA is brightest when the sun is at 22 ° above the horizon , which causes sunlight to enter and exit the crystals at the minimum deviation angle ; then it is also about 22 ° in radius , 3 ° in width .
The CZA radius varies between 32.2 ° and 0 ° depending on the solar altitude .
Towards either of the extremes it is vanishingly faint .
When the sun is above 32.2 ° , light exits the crystals through the bottom face instead , to contribute to the almost colorless parhelic circle .
Because the phenomenon also requires that the ice crystals have a common orientation , it occurs only in the absence of turbulence and when there is no significant up- or downdraft .
LUNAR CIRCUMZENITHAL ARC Section::::Lunar circumzenithal arc .
As with all halos , the CZA can be caused by light from the moon as well as from the sun : the former is referred to as a lunar circumzenithal arc .
Its occurrence is rarer than the solar variety , since it requires the moon to be sufficiently bright , which is typically only the case around full moon .
ARTIFICIAL CIRCUMZENITHAL ARC Section::::Artificial circumzenithal arc .
A water glass experiment ( known at least since 1920 , cf .
image on the right , or even longer ) may be used to create an artificial circumzenithal arc .
Illuminating ( under a shallow angle ) the top air - water interface of a nearly completely water - filled cylindrical glass will refract the light into the water .
The glass should be situated at the edge of a table .
The second refraction at the cylinder 's side face is then a skew - ray refraction .
The overall refraction turns out to be equivalent to the refraction through an upright hexagonal plate crystal when the rotational averaging is taken into account .
A colorful artificial circumzenithal arc will then appear projected on the floor .
Other artificial halos can be created by similar means .
SEE ALSO
* Circumhorizontal arc *
Circumscribed
halo * Kern arc *
Sun dog
REFERENCES
* David K. Lynch and William Livingston .
Color and Light in Nature .
2nd ed , 2004 printing .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Atmospheric Optics - About CZAs
* Atmospheric Optics - Circumzenithal Arc Gallery
* Circumzenithal arc over Rome , Italy
* Timelapse video of weak Circumzenithal Arc * Physics of the circumzenithal arc
* Circumzenithal Arc Over Frisco , TX 1 - 23 - 11 Clouds 365 Project - Year 2 * Spaceweather.com Atmospheric optics expert Les Cowley created a diagram labeling the halos * Images of artificial circumzenithal , circumhorizontal and suncave Parry arcs * Italian Aviation Meteo service