RUNNING BOUNCE A running bounce , or simply bounce , is a skill in the sport of Australian rules football ( necessitated by the Laws of the Game )
when a player , while running , bounces the ball on the ground and back in their hands .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Regarded as " the first distinctively Victorian rule " in the code of Victorian rules football ( now Australian rules football ) , the running bounce was first trialed in 1865 and formalised on 8 May 1866 by a committee of Victorian club delegates chaired by H. C. A. Harrison as a way to slow down the player in possession of the ball and to create more opportunities for a turn over , thus helping to increase the number of disposals and encourage more dynamic team play .
Harrison himself was one of the fastest runners in the game , known for his ability to evade opponents while running the length of the field ball - in - hand .
Arthur Conan Doyle considered it " very sporting of [ Harrison ] , ... to introduce the bouncing rule , which robbed him of his advantage .
" The original 1866 rule stipulated that " no player shall run with the ball unless he strikes it against the ground every five of six yards " .
The rule was well - received by players and spectators alike , and considered attractive to watch .
THE SKILL Section::::The skill .
Football is played with an ellipsoidal ( oval - shaped ) ball , rather than a spherical one , so the technique for bouncing one back to oneself while running requires practice .
To execute a running bounce , a player should :
* Hold the ball in his preferred hand ; with that hand on top of the ball towards the end closest to their body , and ; with the ball angled around 30 ° upwards from the horizontal ; * While running , push the ball firmly to the ground around 1.5 - 2 m in front of them , angling the ball slightly with a quick flick of the wrist , so that it strikes the ground towards the end furthest from the player 's body , tilted slightly downward .
Executed properly by a player running at a normal pace , the ball should bounce directly back into their waiting hands .
Players need to readjust the distance of their bounces when running at different paces .
When running faster , the ball must be bounced further in front of the player , and when running slower , the ball must be bounced closer .
At very slow or stationary paces , this correction is more difficult , because it is difficult to correctly angle the ball for the return bounce at such a short distance .
Australian children ( in Australian rules football states ) generally learn how to execute running bounces over a few years while they play at school and in junior levels , so to top - level players , the running bounce is a natural skill .
Nevertheless , bouncing an oval - shaped ball is still a volatile skill .
Even top level players will occasionally lose the ball while bouncing it , by accidentally bouncing the ball on its point , only to see it quickly skid away from him or her .
RULES Section::::Rules .
The rules of football state that a player running on the field with the ball must take a running bounce at least once every fifteen metres .
If they run too far without taking a running bounce , the umpire pays a free kick for running too far to the opposition at the position where the player oversteps his limit .
The umpire signals " running too far " by rolling their clenched fists around each other – similar to false starts in American football or traveling in basketball .
While the distance of 15 m is explicit in the rules , the lack of markings on the ground makes it impossible for umpires to accurately judge these free kicks .
Regular watchers of football generally have a feel for the average time between running bounces which " feels right " , and umpires usually penalise players when they exceed this by more than a few steps .
TOUCHING THE BALL ON THE GROUND
Section::::Touching the ball on the ground .
Instead of executing a running bounce , players may bend over and touch the ball onto the ground .
It must be touched with both hands or a free kick will be rewarded to the opposing team .
This has the disadvantage of taking much longer , increasing the risk of being tackled by an opponent , but it has the advantage of reducing the risk of making a bad bounce and dropping the ball .
This technique is often used on rainy days when the mud or water on the ground makes a regulation bounce much more difficult , but is also used by some players , particularly in lower levels , who have yet to master the running bounce .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
Running bounces are most commonly made by attacking half - back flankers , also known as link - men , or by outside / receiving midfielders .
They generally accept the ball from a rebound , and have wide space in front of them to run into , giving teammates time to create options at half - forward .
Link - men Jason Gram of St Kilda and Kade Simpson of Carlton , and midfielders Nathan Foley and Brett Deledio of Richmond were both in the AFL - wide top 5 for running bounces in 2007 .
RELATED SKILLS Section::::Related skills .
The requirement that a player performs a specialist skill in order to be allowed to run with the ball is common and necessary in many sports .
Introducing these skills prevents players from taking the ball in hand and running the length of the field unchallenged .
In this way , the running bounce is related to :
* dribbling in basketball ;
* the bounce in Gaelic football , essentially the same move , but with a round ball * the solo ( kicking the ball to oneself while on the run ) in Gaelic football .
The running bounce should not be confused with the ball - up , also often referred to as a bounce .
The ball - up is an unrelated umpiring skill used to restart play from a neutral contest .
REFERENCES