SPEED OF ELECTRICITY
The word electricity refers generally to the movement of electrons ( or other charge carriers ) through a conductor in the presence of potential and an electric field .
The speed of this flow has multiple meanings .
In everyday electrical and electronic devices , the signals or energy travel as electromagnetic waves typically on the order of 50%–99 % of the speed of light , while the electrons themselves move ( drift ) much more slowly .
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES Section::::Electromagnetic waves .
The speed at which energy or signals travel down a cable is actually the speed of the electromagnetic wave traveling along ( guided by ) the cable .
i.e. a cable is a form of a waveguide .
The propagation of the wave is affected by the interaction with the material(s ) in and surrounding the cable , caused by the presence of electric charge carriers ( interacting with the electric field component ) and magnetic dipoles ( interacting with the magnetic field component ) .
These interactions are typically described using mean field theory by the permeability and the permittivity of the materials involved .
Due to the skin effect , the energy / signal usually flows overwhelmingly outside the electric conductor of a cable ; the purpose of the conductor is thus not to conduct energy , but to guide the energy - carrying wave .
SPEED OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN GOOD DIELECTRICS Section::::Speed of electromagnetic waves in good dielectrics .
The speed of electromagnetic waves in a low - loss dielectric is given by where SPEED OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN GOOD CONDUCTORS Section::::Speed of electromagnetic waves in good conductors .
The speed of electromagnetic waves in a good conductor is given by
where In copper at 60 Hz , formula_23 3.2 m / s .
Some sprinters can run more than three times as fast .
As a consequence of Snell 's Law and the extremely low speed , electromagnetic waves always enter good conductors in a direction that is normal to the surface , regardless of the angle of incidence .
This velocity is the speed with which electromagnetic waves penetrate into the conductor and is not the drift velocity of the conduction electrons .
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES IN CIRCUITS Section::::Electromagnetic waves in circuits .
In the theoretical investigation of electric circuits , the velocity of propagation of the electromagnetic field through space is usually not considered ; the field is assumed , as a precondition , to be present throughout space .
The magnetic component of the field is considered to be in phase with the current , and the electric component is considered to be in phase with the voltage .
The electric field starts at the conductor , and propagates through space at the velocity of light ( which depends on the material it is traveling through ) .
Note that the electromagnetic fields do not move through space .
It is the electromagnetic energy that moves , the corresponding fields simply grow and decline in a region of space in response to the flow of energy .
At any point in space , the electric field corresponds not to the condition of the electric energy flow at that moment , but to that of the flow at a moment earlier .
The latency is determined by the time required for the field to propagate from the conductor to the point under consideration .
In other words , the greater the distance from the conductor , the more the electric field lags .
Since the velocity of propagation is very high – about 300,000 kilometers per second – the wave of an alternating or oscillating current , even of high frequency , is of considerable length .
At 60 cycles per second , the wavelength is 5,000 kilometers , and even at 100,000 hertz , the wavelength is 3 kilometers .
This is a very large distance compared to those typically used in field measurement and application .
The important part of the electric field of a conductor extends to the return conductor , which usually is only a few feet distant .
At greater distance , the aggregate field can be approximated by the differential field between conductor and return conductor , which tend to cancel .
Hence , the intensity of the electric field is usually inappreciable at a distance which is still small compared to the wavelength .
Within the range in which an appreciable field exists , this field is practically in phase with the flow of energy in the conductor .
That is , the velocity of propagation has no appreciable effect unless the return conductor is very distant , or entirely absent , or the frequency is so high that the distance to the return conductor is an appreciable portion of the wavelength .
ELECTRIC DRIFT
Section::::Electric drift .
The drift velocity deals with the average velocity of a particle , such as an electron , due to an electric field .
In general , an electron will propagate randomly in a conductor at the Fermi velocity .
Free electrons in a conductor follow a random path .
Without the presence of an electric field , the electrons have no net velocity .
When a DC voltage is applied , the electron drift velocity will increase in speed proportionally to the strength of the electric field .
The drift velocity is on the order of millimeters per hour .
AC voltages cause no net movement ; the electrons oscillate back and forth in response to the alternating electric field ( over a distance of a few micrometers – see example calculation ) .
SEE ALSO
* Speed of light * Speed of gravity * Speed of sound
* Telegrapher 's equations * Reflections of signals on conducting lines
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Alfvén , H. ( 1950 ) .
Cosmical electrodynamics .
Oxford :
Clarendon Press
* Alfvén , H. ( 1981 ) .
Cosmic plasma .
Taylor & Francis US .
* " Velocity of Propagation of Electric Field " , Theory and Calculation of Transient Electric Phenomena and Oscillations by Charles Proteus Steinmetz , Chapter VIII , p. 394- , McGraw - Hill , 1920 .
* Fleming , J. A. ( 1911 ) .
Propagation of electric currents in telephone & telegraph conductors .
New York :
Van Nostrand
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Propagation Times * Locomotive engineers journal , Volume 22 , Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers ( U.S. )
Page 692 , which describes an unsuccessful experiment from 1888 .