TIME QUINTET
The Time Quintet is a fantasy / science fiction series of five young adult novels written by Madeleine L'Engle .
PUBLISHING HISTORY
Section::::Publishing history .
The series originated with A Wrinkle in Time , written in 1959 to 1960 and turned down by 26 publishers before Farrar , Straus & Giroux finally published it in 1962 .
A Wrinkle in Time won the Newbery Medal and has sold over 6 million copies .
The sequel , A Wind in the Door , takes place the following year but was published over a decade later , in 1973 .
A Swiftly Tilting Planet , set ten years after A Wrinkle in Time , followed in 1978 .
The fourth title of the quintet , Many Waters , was published in 1986 , but takes place several years before A Swiftly Tilting Planet .
This is readily apparent from the fact that Sandy and Dennys Murry are in high school as of Many Waters , but refer to their college studies at the time of A Swiftly Tilting Planet ; and from Meg 's unmarried status as of Many Waters .
All five titles have been published in numerous editions over the years , with occasional changes in cover art and , in 1997 , a new introduction by L'Engle for the Dell Laurel - Leaf paperbacks .
The books have also been packaged as a boxed set , first ( before the publication of Many Waters ) as the Time Trilogy , next as the Time Quartet , and finally in its entirety as the Time Quintet .
In May , 2007 , the books were reissued under the Square Fish imprint in both mass market and trade paperback form .
Both editions include new cover art , " An Appreciation by Anna Quindlen " , a " Questions for the Author " interview , and the text of Madeleine L'Engle 's Newbery Medal acceptance speech , published under the title " The Expanding Universe " .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
This series follows the lives of Meg Murry , her youngest brother Charles Wallace Murry , and their friend Calvin O'Keefe as they try to save the world from evil forces .
The remaining Murry siblings , twins Sandy and Dennys Murry , take up the struggle in one volume from which the other protagonists are largely absent .
A further book about Polly O'Keefe , the eldest child of Meg and Calvin , features several characters from the other novels and completes the Time Quintet .
A WRINKLE IN TIME
Section::::A Wrinkle in Time .
The mysterious Mrs. Whatsit , Mrs. Who and Mrs. Which are unearthly creatures that act their part as humans and are willing to help the Murrys .
They send Meg and Charles Wallace through time and space to rescue their father on the planet Camazotz , accompanied by their new friend Calvin .
Along the way , the three children learn about the " Dark Thing " , a cloud of evil that shadows many planets , including Earth .
They encounter a brain named IT , which controls the minds of people including Charles Wallace .
A WIND IN THE DOOR
Section::::A Wind in the Door .
Meg , Calvin and the disagreeable school principal Mr. Jenkins have to travel inside one of Charles Wallace 's mitochondria to save him from a deadly disease , part of a cosmic battle against the evil Echthroi and the forces of " Unnaming " .
A SWIFTLY TILTING PLANET
Section::::A Swiftly Tilting Planet .
Charles Wallace must save the world from nuclear war by going back in time and changing might - have - beens , accompanied in spirit ( through kything ) by Meg at home .
MANY WATERS
Section::::Many Waters .
Twins Dennys and Sandy accidentally walk into Mr. Murry 's experiment and are sent back in time to the pre - flood days of Noah .
They befriend his family , a group of seraphim , and some miniature mammoths .
AN ACCEPTABLE TIME Section::::An Acceptable Time .
Meg and Calvin 's eldest daughter , Polly O'Keefe , visits her maternal grandparents only to find herself trapped 3000 years in the past , caught up in a struggle between the People of the Wind and the warlike , drought - stricken People Across the Lake .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
This series takes place in a roughly contemporary setting , usually understood to be in the near future with respect to the publication dates of the first two novels .
Since the series was written over the course of decades , it is not possible to establish an exact year in which each story takes place ; historical events mentioned in the books ( such as the dates of the Apollo space program and the name of the President of the United States ) do not always correspond to the " real world " .
In recognition of this , and of the cosmic nature of the series , the inside front cover of Many Waters states that the series is set in Kairos , a way of looking at time as " real time , pure numbers with no measurement " , reflecting her belief that " God 's time and our time are not the same " .
Each of the books contains one or more instances of tessering , carrying the protagonists to metaphysical battlegrounds in the cosmic struggle between good and evil .
The eponymous " wrinkle in time " is a short hop to the immediate past engineered by the Mrs. W 's to allow Meg , Calvin and Charles Wallace to accomplish their mission and return before they are missed at home .
In A Wind in the Door , Proginoskes takes Meg to " yesterday " to show her the Echthroi destroying a patch of stars .
Charles Wallace spends most of A Swiftly Tilting Planet " Within " the bodies and minds of people from the past , traveling there by unicorn .
Many Waters finds Sandy and Dennys stranded in the time of Noah after using their parents ' computer while an experiment is in progress .
The world of L'Engle 's characters is filled with fictional place names , often taken from mythological figures that relate symbolically to the locale .
For example , the planet Ixchel in A Wrinkle in Time , where Meg is cared for by a motherly sightless creature with tentacles , is named for Ixchel , a Mayan moon goddess .
Other , more mundane locations are often fictionalized versions of places L'Engle has lived or visited in the real world , such as L'Engle 's Connecticut home , which strongly resembles that of the Murry family .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The main characters ( protagonists ) in the Time Quintet are as follows : * Margaret " Meg " Murry is the eldest child of scientists Jack and Kate Murry .
Mathematically brilliant but less than adept at other subjects in school , Meg is awkward , unpopular , and defensive around authority figures as well as her peers , but generally gets on well with her family and Calvin .
Meg is initially unhappy with her physical appearance , particularly her mouse - brown , unruly hair , braces and glasses .
She outgrows most of these limitations in the course of the books , although she never completely overcomes her inferiority complex .
By the time of A Swiftly Tilting Planet she is married to Calvin O'Keefe and imminently expecting her first child .
* Charles Wallace Murry is the youngest Murry child , the most extraordinary and the most vulnerable of the novel 's human characters .
Charles Wallace did not talk at all until he was nearly four years old , at which time he began to speak in complete sentences .
Charles can empathically or telepathically " read " certain people 's thoughts and feelings , and has an extraordinary vocabulary .
As he ages , he faces illness and other difficulties , but survives and adapts .
At age fifteen he remains small for his age , and has a serious , quiet demeanor .
He is entirely absent from the O'Keefe series of books , being " off somewhere on a secret mission . "
* Calvin O'Keefe is the third eldest of Paddy and Branwen O'Keefe 's eleven children , a tall , thin , red - haired 14-year - old high school junior ( as of the first book ) who plays on the school basketball team .
Neglected by his own family , Calvin joyfully enters the lives of the Murrys .
By the time of A Swiftly Tilting Planet he is married to Meg , holds two doctorates , and is presenting an academic paper on chordates .
* Alexander " Sandy " Murry and Dennys Murry — Younger than Meg but older than Charles Wallace , the twin sons of Drs .
Jack and Kate Murry describe themselves as the " squares " of the Murry clan .
This changes somewhat when , as teenagers , they are transported to the time immediately preceding the Deluge in Many Waters .
In the remaining volumes of the Time Quintet , they are the realists of the family , and tend to be skeptical about Meg and Charles Wallace 's accounts and theories about what is happening .
In later life , as seen in the O'Keefe series of books , particularly A House Like a Lotus , Sandy is an " anti - corporate " lawyer , and Dennys is a neurosurgeon .
* Polly O'Keefe is the protagonist of An Acceptable Time , the fifth book in the Time Quintet .
The eldest child of Meg and Calvin , she is born shortly after the events of A Swiftly Tilting Planet .
Intelligent and widely traveled , Polly speaks numerous languages .
In her first three appearances ( The Arm of the Starfish , Dragons in the Waters and A House Like a Lotus ) , she has not yet settled on a specific career path , but may have found her calling as of the end of An Acceptable Time .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
The Time Quintet shows themes of love , loss , friendship , loneliness and the triumph of good over evil .
L'Engle often borrows elements from the Bible in a way similar to C. S. Lewis , one of her favorite authors .
In A Wrinkle in Time , for example , the beautiful creatures of Uriel sing a psalm , and Mrs. Who quotes St. Paul ; and angelic characters — the three " Mrs. Ws " , the " singular cherubim " Proginoskes , and the seraph Aradnaral , among others — aid the Murrys and Calvin , but still leave the humans to make their own difficult choices .
Another theme which echoes Lewis 's work is that phenomena which human perception classifies as " science " , " religion " and " magic " are in actuality part of a single seamless reality .
RELATED SERIES Section::::Related series .
L'Engle has written four books featuring the children of Calvin and Meg O'Keefe , especially their eldest daughter , Polly O'Keefe , and their eldest son , Charles .
These are , in order of both publication and character chronology :
* The Arm of the Starfish ( 1965 ) * Dragons in the Waters ( 1976 )
* A House Like a Lotus ( 1984 ) * An Acceptable Time ( 1989 )
These also take place in a Kairos framework , although only The Arm of the Starfish and An Acceptable Time have the characteristic science fantasy elements to any great extent .
Taken together , the eight books are called the " Murry – O'Keefe " series .
The O'Keefe books further connect , through such characters as Adam Eddington , Canon Tallis and Zachary Gray , to the Austin family series of books , which take place primarily in " chronos " ( or " ordinary , wrist - watch " time ) .
Further overlaps between characters connect virtually every L'Engle novel into one massive series of books .
MOVIE ADAPTATIONS Section::::Movie adaptations .
In 2003 , A Wrinkle in Time was adapted into a television movie by Disney .
A film adaptation of A Wrinkle in Time directed by Ava DuVernay was released in 2018 by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://www.kidsreads.com/reviews/series/the-time-quintet * https://web.archive.org/web/20070128093232/http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/4926262/ *
http://mavarin.com/lengleweb/murry.html
The Time Quintet bibliography page