COGNITIVE THERAPY Cognitive therapy ( CT ) is a type of psychotherapy developed by American psychiatrist Aaron T. Beck .
CT is one of the therapeutic approaches within the larger group of cognitive behavioral therapies ( CBT ) and was first expounded by Beck in the 1960s .
Cognitive therapy is based on the cognitive model , which states that thoughts , feelings and behavior are all connected , and that individuals can move toward overcoming difficulties and meeting their goals by identifying and changing unhelpful or inaccurate thinking , problematic behavior , and distressing emotional responses .
This involves the individual working collaboratively with the therapist to develop skills for testing and modifying beliefs , identifying distorted thinking , relating to others in different ways , and changing behaviors .
A tailored cognitive case conceptualization is developed by the cognitive therapist as a roadmap to understand the individual 's internal reality , select appropriate interventions and identify areas of distress .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Becoming disillusioned with long - term psychodynamic approaches based on gaining insight into unconscious emotions and drives , Beck came to the conclusion that the way in which his patients perceived , interpreted and attributed meaning in their daily lives — a process scientifically known as cognition — was a key to therapy .
Albert Ellis had been working on similar ideas since the 1950s ( Ellis , 1956 ) .
He called his approach Rational Therapy ( RT ) at first , then Rational Emotive Therapy ( RET ) and later Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy ( REBT ) .
Beck outlined his approach in Depression : Causes and Treatment in 1967 .
He later expanded his focus to include anxiety disorders , in Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders in 1976 , and other disorders and problems .
He also introduced a focus on the underlying " schema"—the fundamental underlying ways in which people process information — about the self , the world or the future .
The new cognitive approach came into conflict with the behaviorism ascendant at the time , which denied that talk of mental causes was scientific or meaningful , rather than simply assessing stimuli and behavioral responses .
However , the 1970s saw a general " cognitive revolution " in psychology .
Behavioral modification techniques and cognitive therapy techniques became joined together , giving rise to cognitive behavioral therapy .
Although cognitive therapy has always included some behavioral components , advocates of Beck 's particular approach seek to maintain and establish its integrity as a distinct , clearly standardized form of cognitive behavioral therapy in which the cognitive shift is the key mechanism of change .
Precursors of certain fundamental aspects of cognitive therapy have been identified in various ancient philosophical traditions , particularly Stoicism .
For example , Beck 's original treatment manual for depression states , " The philosophical origins of cognitive therapy can be traced back to the Stoic philosophers " .
As cognitive therapy continued to grow in popularity , the Academy of Cognitive Therapy , a non - profit organization , was created to accredit cognitive therapists , create a forum for members to share emerging research and interventions , and to educate consumer regarding cognitive therapy and related mental health issues .
BASIS
Section::::Basis .
Therapy may consist of testing the assumptions which one makes and looking for new information that could help shift the assumptions in a way that leads to different emotional or behavioral reactions .
Change may begin by targeting thoughts ( to change emotion and behavior ) , behavior ( to change feelings and thoughts ) , or the individual 's goals ( by identifying thoughts , feelings or behavior that conflict with the goals ) .
Beck initially focused on depression and developed a list of " errors " ( cognitive distortion ) in thinking that he proposed could maintain depression , including arbitrary inference , selective abstraction , over - generalization , and magnification ( of negatives ) and minimization ( of positives ) .
As an example of how CT might work : Having made a mistake at work , a man may believe , " I 'm useless and ca n't do anything right at work . "
He may then focus on the mistake ( which he takes as evidence that his belief is true ) , and his thoughts about being " useless " are likely to lead to negative emotion ( frustration , sadness , hopelessness ) .
Given these thoughts and feelings , he may then begin to avoid challenges at work , which is behavior that could provide even more evidence for him that his belief is true .
As a result , any adaptive response and further constructive consequences become unlikely , and he may focus even more on any mistakes he may make , which serve to reinforce the original belief of being " useless . "
In therapy , this example could be identified as a self - fulfilling prophecy or " problem cycle , " and the efforts of the therapist and patient would be directed at working together to explore and shift this cycle .
People who are working with a cognitive therapist often practice the use of more flexible ways to think and respond , learning to ask themselves whether their thoughts are completely true , and whether those thoughts are helping them to meet their goals .
Thoughts that do not meet this description may then be shifted to something more accurate or helpful , leading to more positive emotion , more desirable behavior , and movement toward the person 's goals .
Cognitive therapy takes a skill - building approach , where the therapist helps the person to learn and practice these skills independently , eventually " becoming his or her own therapist . "
COGNITIVE MODEL
Section::::Cognitive model .
The cognitive model was originally constructed following research studies conducted by Aaron Beck to explain the psychological processes in depression .
It divides the mind beliefs in three levels : *
Automatic thought
* Intermediate belief
* Core belief or basic belief
In 2014 , an update of the cognitive model was proposed , called the Generic Cognitive Model ( GCM ) .
The GCM is an update of Beck 's model that proposes that mental disorders can be differentiated by the nature of their dysfunctional beliefs .
The GCM includes a conceptual framework and a clinical approach for understanding common cognitive processes of mental disorders while specifying the unique features of the specific disorders .
Consistent with the cognitive theory of psychopathology , CT is designed to be structured , directive , active , and time - limited , with the express purpose of identifying , reality - testing , and correcting distorted cognition and underlying dysfunctional beliefs .
COGNITIVE RESTRUCTURING ( METHODS )
Section::::Cognitive restructuring ( methods ) .
Cognitive restructuring involves four steps : * Identification of problematic cognitions known as " automatic thoughts " ( ATs ) which are dysfunctional or negative views of the self , world , or future based upon already existing beliefs about oneself , the world , or the future
* * Identification of the cognitive distortions in the ATs
* * Rational disputation of ATs with the Socratic method * * Development of a rational rebuttal to the ATs
*
There are six types of automatic thoughts : * Self - evaluated thoughts *
* Thoughts about the evaluations of others
*
* Evaluative thoughts about the other person with whom they are interacting * * Thoughts about coping strategies and behavioral plans *
* Thoughts of avoidance * * Any other thoughts that were not categorized * Other major techniques include : *
Activity monitoring and activity scheduling * Behavioral experiments
* Catching , checking , and changing thoughts
* Collaborative empiricism : therapist and patient become investigators by examining the evidence to support or reject the patient 's cognitions .
Empirical evidence is used to determine whether particular cognitions serve any useful purpose .
* Downward arrow technique * Exposure and response
prevention
* Cost benefit analysis
* acting ' as if '
* Guided discovery : therapist elucidates behavioral problems and faulty thinking by designing new experiences that lead to acquisition of new skills and perspectives .
Through both cognitive and behavioral methods , the patient discovers more adaptive ways of thinking and coping with environmental stressors by correcting cognitive processing .
* Mastery and pleasure technique
* Problem solving * Socratic questioning :
involves the creation of a series of questions to a ) clarify and define problems , b ) assist in the identification of thoughts , images and assumptions , c ) examine the meanings of events for the patient , and d ) assess the consequences of maintaining maladaptive thoughts and behaviors .
Socratic questions are the archetypal cognitive restructuring techniques .
These kinds of questions are designed to challenge assumptions by :
* Conceiving reasonable alternatives : ' What might be another explanation or viewpoint of the situation ?
Why else did it happen ? '
* Evaluating those consequences : ' What 's the effect of thinking or believing this ?
What could be the effect of thinking differently and
no longer holding onto this belief ? '
* Distancing : ' Imagine a specific friend / family member in the same situation or if they viewed the situation this way , what would I tell them ? '
Examples of socratic questions are : * ' Describe the way you formed your viewpoint originally . '
* ' What initially convinced you that your current view is the best one available ? '
* ' Think of three pieces of evidence that contradict this view , or that support the opposite view .
Think about the opposite of this viewpoint and reflect on it for a moment .
What 's the strongest argument in favor of this opposite view ? '
* ' Write down any specific benefits you get from holding this belief , such as social or psychological benefits .
For example , getting to be part of a community of like - minded people , feeling good about yourself or the world , feeling that your viewpoint is superior to others ' , etc Are there any reasons that you might hold this view other than because it 's true ? '
* ' For instance , does holding this viewpoint provide some peace of mind that holding a different viewpoint would not ? '
* ' In order to refine your viewpoint so that it 's as accurate as possible , it 's important to challenge it directly on occasion and consider whether there are reasons that it might not be true .
What do you think the best or strongest argument against this perspective is ? '
* What would you have to experience or find out in order for you to change your ' mind about this viewpoint ? '
* Given your thoughts so far , do you think that there may be a truer , more accurate , or more nuanced version of your original view that you could state
right ' now ? '
False assumptions are based on ' cognitive distortions ' , such as : * Always Being Right : " We are continually on trial to prove that our opinions and actions are correct .
Being wrong is unthinkable and we will go to any length to demonstrate our rightness .
For example , " I do n't care how badly arguing with me makes you feel , I 'm going to win this argument no matter what because I 'm right .
" Being right often is more important than the feelings of others around a person who engages in this cognitive distortion , even loved ones . "
* Heaven 's Reward Fallacy : " We expect our sacrifice and self - denial to pay off , as if someone is keeping score .
We feel bitter when the reward does n't come . "
TYPES
Cognitive therapy :
based on the cognitive model , stating that thoughts , feelings and behavior are mutually influenced by each other .
Shifting cognition is seen as the main mechanism by which lasting emotional and behavioral changes take place .
Treatment is very collaborative , tailored , skill - focused , and based on a case conceptualization .
Rational emotive behavior therapy ( REBT ) :
based on the belief that most problems originate in irrational thought .
For instance , perfectionists and pessimists usually suffer from issues related to irrational thinking ; for example , if a perfectionist encounters a small failure , he or she might perceive it as a much bigger failure .
It is better to establish a reasonable standard emotionally , so the individual can live a balanced life .
This form of cognitive therapy is an opportunity for the patient to learn of his current distortions and successfully eliminate them .
Cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) : a system of approaches drawing from both the cognitive and behavioral systems of psychotherapy .
Unlike Psychodynamic approaches , CBT is transparent to the individual receiving services .
At the end of the therapy , an individual will often have learned the cognitive therapy skills well enough to " be their own therapist , " decreasing dependence on a therapist to provide the answers .
APPLICATION DEPRESSION Section::::Application .
Section::::Depression .
According to Beck 's theory of the etiology of depression , depressed people acquire a negative schema of the world in childhood and adolescence ; children and adolescents who experience depression acquire this negative schema earlier .
Depressed people acquire such schemas through a loss of a parent , rejection by peers , bullying , criticism from teachers or parents , the depressive attitude of a parent and other negative events .
When the person with such schemas encounters a situation that resembles the original conditions of the learned schema in some way , the negative schemas of the person are activated .
Beck 's negative triad holds that depressed people have negative thoughts about themselves , their experiences in the world , and the future .
For instance , a depressed person might think , " I did n't get the job because I 'm terrible at interviews .
Interviewers never like me , and no one will ever want to hire me .
" In the same situation , a person who is not depressed might think , " The interviewer was n't paying much attention to me .
Maybe she already had someone else in mind for the job .
Next time I 'll have better luck , and I 'll get a job soon . "
Beck also identified a number of other cognitive distortions , which can contribute to depression , including the following : arbitrary inference , selective abstraction , overgeneralization , magnification and minimization .
In 2008 Beck proposed an integrative developmental model of depression that aims to incorporate research in genetics and neuroscience of depression .
This model was updated in 2016 to incorporate multiple levels of analyses , new research , and key concepts ( e.g. , resilience ) within the framework of an evolutionary perspective .
OTHER APPLICATIONS
Section::::Other applications .
Cognitive therapy has been applied to a very wide range of behavioral health issues including : *
Academic achievement
* Addiction * Anxiety disorders
* Bipolar disorder
* Low self - esteem
* Phobia * Schizophrenia * Substance abuse *
Suicidal ideation
* Weight loss CRITICISMS Section::::Criticisms .
A criticism has been that clinical studies of CBT efficacy ( or any psychotherapy ) are not double - blind ( i.e. , neither subjects nor therapists in psychotherapy studies are blind to the type of treatment ) .
They may be single - blinded , the rater may not know the treatment the patient received , but neither the patients nor the therapists are blinded to the type of therapy given ( two out of three of the persons involved in the trial , i.e. , all of the persons involved in the treatment , are unblinded ) .
The patient is an active participant in correcting negative distorted thoughts , thus quite aware of the treatment group they are in .
SEE ALSO
* Beck 's cognitive triad
* Cognitive analytic therapy
* Cognitive bias mitigation
* Cognitive - shifting
* David D. Burns
* Debiasing
* History of psychotherapy * Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy * Recognition primed decision
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* An Introduction to Cognitive Therapy & Cognitive Behavioural Approaches
*
What is Cognitive Therapy
* Academy of Cognitive Therapy
* International Association of Cognitive Psychotherapy