LIST OF VOLCANOES IN AUSTRALIA
This is a list of active , dormant and extinct volcanoes in Australia and its island territories .
Note that the term volcano is used loosely as it can include groups of related volcanoes and vents that erupted at similar times with lava of related origin .
The lists provided below are mainly volcanoes of Cenozoic aged , with some notable older ( Mesozoic and Paleozoic aged ) volcanoes included .
There are no volcanoes on the Australian mainland that have erupted since European settlement , but some volcanoes in Victoria , South Australia , and North Queensland were witnessed by Aboriginal people several thousand years ago .
There are active volcanoes in the Heard and McDonald Islands .
AUSTRALIAN STATES QUEENSLAND Section::::Australian states .
Section::::Queensland . align="centre
"
bgcolor="cccccc " Fraser Volcano 31 million years ago NEW SOUTH WALES Section::::New South Wales . align="centre
"
bgcolor="cccccc " VICTORIA Section::::Victoria . align="center " bgcolor="cccccc " ( There are not many volcanic outcrops in the region , This feature probably should not be in this list ) ( the nearby tertiary basalts are probably not specifically associated with Mount Bonang , this feature probably should not be in this list )
Cosgrove 9 million years ago 300,000 years ago
SOUTH AUSTRALIA Section::::South Australia . align="centre
" bgcolor="cccccc " rowspan="2"Name colspan = " 2 " Elevation rowspan="2 "
Last eruption align="left"Mount
Gambier align="left
" Mount Schank align="left " Newer Volcanics Province align="left " Mount Muirhead align="centre
"
— WESTERN AUSTRALIA Section::::Western Australia .
There are no active or dormant volcanoes in Western Australia , although there are a number of extinct ones , and geological evidence of others .
There are nineteen small extinct volcanoes in the valley of the Fitzroy River in the Kimberley region of Western Australia .
The Kimberley also has a number of groups of hot springs , which may be connected with the volcanic activity that produced the extinct volcanoes ( but since these volcanic formations are Proterozoic in age - i.e. maybe a billion years old , this would be very unlikely ! ) .
There are also deposits of basalt at Bunbury and Cape Gosselin .
TASMANIA
Section::::Tasmania . align="centre
" bgcolor="cccccc " TERRITORIES HEARD AND MCDONALD ISLANDS Section::::Territories .
Section::::Heard and McDonald Islands . align="centre
" bgcolor="cccccc " LORD HOWE ISLAND Section::::Lord Howe Island . align="center "
bgcolor="cccccc " NORFOLK ISLAND Section::::Norfolk Island .
Norfolk Island and neighbouring Nepean Island and Phillip Island are mountain top remnants of an elongated shield volcano .
TASMAN SEA Section::::Tasman Sea . align="center "
bgcolor="cccccc " OTHER Section::::Other . align="center " bgcolor="cccccc " REFERENCES Citations Sources * Volcanoes of Australia , Volcano World EXTERNAL LINKS
* Northern Rivers Geology Blog - Volcanoes and Vulcanology * Volcanoes of Australia
- John Seach