PRESTON BURKE Preston Xavier Burke , M.D. is a fictional character from the medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on ABC in the United States .
The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes , and was portrayed by actor Isaiah Washington from 2005 to 2007 .
Introduced as an attending cardiothoracic surgeon at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , Burke 's romantic relationship with intern Cristina Yang formed one of the main storylines in the shows ' first three seasons .
Burke made his final appearance in the third season , leaving Seattle in the aftermath of his failed wedding .
On June 7 , 2007 , ABC announced it had decided not to renew Washington 's contract , and that he would be dropped from the show after an on - set incident with fellow cast members T.R. Knight and Patrick Dempsey .
While mentioned in passing throughout later seasons , Burke officially returns in the tenth season in order to conclude Cristina Yang 's departure from the series .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Preston Burke is the former chief cardiothoracic surgeon at Seattle Grace Hospital .
He completed his pre - medical studies at Tulane University where he pledged Kappa Alpha Psi , and went on to graduate first in his class from Johns Hopkins School of Medicine .
While in college , he met Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) , who graduated in second place after him , beginning a rivalry between them .
He was once the interim chief of surgery while Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) was healing from his brain surgery .
In season 1 , it is revealed that Richard had promised him the position but instead enticed his former student , renowned neurosurgeon Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , to Seattle as he felt Burke was becoming arrogant and needed competition to keep him on his toes .
He began a relationship with intern Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) but broke it off because he feared it would ruin both of their reputations .
Her miscarriage brought them back together .
He and Cristina lived together in his perfectly kept apartment .
Towards the end of the second season , he was shot , which affected his control of his right - hand .
His temporary fix to this possibly long - term problem was to work together with Cristina during every one of his surgeries so that she could take over in case he might have trouble with his hand .
The arrangement fell apart after Cristina , reacting to growing stress after George O'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) caught onto their secret , went to the Chief and confessed everything .
Initially , he was engaged in a cold war with Cristina , where neither of them spoke .
However , after she broke the silence , he proposed to her and she accepted his proposal .
Before their secret was revealed , Burke was to become the next Chief of Surgery , but he had to compete with his fellow attendings for the position .
He has since recovered from the injury , after Derek operated on him .
For the remainder of the season , Preston and Cristina prepared for the wedding and experienced normal stresses that result from such a process , such as meeting each other 's parents .
However , in the finale of season three , on the day of their wedding , Burke told Cristina that he no longer wished to make her do anything against her will , and realized he was trying to make Cristina the woman he wanted her to be , and not accept her as the woman she is .
Cristina said she " thought this was what she wanted . "
He wanted her to say she knew it was what she wanted , so he left her in the chapel .
Cristina then returned to their apartment and discovered Burke had left , taking with him the things that meant something to only him ( his trumpet , his Eugene Foote collection , his grandmother 's picture , and his lucky scrub cap ) , leaving Cristina devastated .
In the fourth season , Preston 's long - time rival and love - to - hate medic Dr. Erica Hahn replaced him as the head of cardiothoracic surgery .
Before taking over the position she had tremendous respect for Burke although she would have never admitted it to his face .
Hahn disliked Cristina Yang because of her relationships with Dr. Burke and Colin Marlow .
During his employment at a new hospital , he is made the recipient of 2008 's Harper Avery , a highly prestigious medical award .
Cristina is later hurt that he did not mention her in his article , even though Cristina helped Burke with his recovery from an injury .
In season ten , Preston is seen to be living in Zürich , where he runs a privately owned cardiothoracic research hospital .
He invited Cristina to the hospital to give a speech on her research .
Cristina is both shocked and angered by the sight of Preston , and the former couple exchange bitter sentiments .
Cristina claims that the two would never have worked out because she wanted to emulate him , not be by his side .
Preston then reveals his ulterior motive for bringing Cristina to Switzerland : to ask her to take over his hospital , which she accepts .
He is married to an Italian woman , Edra , and has two daughters , Simone and Vivianna .
They are on the verge of moving to Milan .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
The character of Preston Burke was originally envisioned as a caucasian , to be played by Paul Adelstein , who starred in Grey 's Anatomy spin - off Private Practice .
However , due to his commitment to a film whose shooting dates changed , the actor had to drop out at the last moment and his character was rethought .
Isaiah Washington was originally considered for the role of Derek Shepherd , which eventually went to Patrick Dempsey .
Washington later received a callback from Rhimes to play Burke .
He commented : " I knew I could never be wrong in my heart about something so good and so genuine .
Her writing just seemed very complex , very honest . "
" I said that I would only do it if I did n't have to be like that guy on that other medical show who was always struggling with his anger . "
Shonda Rhimes noted Washington 's commitment to his role , revealing that he learns all his surgeries before he performs them on television .
" I think if he stopped at an accident on the street , he 'd know exactly what to do .
He has pulled shifts at hospitals where he follows the surgeons around for 48 hours " .
At the beginning of the series , Burke is one of the three African american characters , along with Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) and Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) .
In the show 's third season , Washington became a central figure in a widely reported backstage controversy .
In October 2006 , news reports surfaced that Washington had insulted co - star T.R. Knight with a homophobic slur .
Shortly after the details of the argument became public , Knight publicly disclosed that he was gay .
The situation seemed somewhat resolved when Washington issued a statement , apologizing for his " unfortunate use of words during the recent incident on - set .
"
The controversy later resurfaced when the cast appeared at the Golden Globes in January 2007 .
While being interviewed on the red carpet prior to the awards , Washington joked , " I love gay .
I wanted to be gay .
Please let me be gay .
" After the show won Best Drama , Washington , in response to press queries as to any conflicts backstage , said , " I never called T.R. a faggot . "
However , in an interview with Ellen DeGeneres on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , Knight said that " everybody heard him . "
After being rebuked by his studio , Touchstone Television ( now ABC Studios ) , Washington issued a statement apologizing at length for using the epithet in an argument with Patrick Dempsey .
On January 30 , 2007 , a source told People magazine that Washington was scheduled to return to the Grey 's Anatomy set as early on that Thursday for the first time since entering " executive counseling " after making the comments at the Golden Globes .
However , on June 7 , 2007 , ABC announced it had decided not to renew Washington 's contract , and that he would be dropped from the show .
" I 'm mad as hell
and I 'm not going to take it anymore
, " Washington said in a statement released by his publicist , borrowing the famous line from Network .
In another report , Washington stated he was planning to " spend the summer pursuing charity work in Sierra Leone , work on an independent film and avoid worrying about the show . "
In a subsequent interview , Washington claimed that " they fired the wrong guy " ( referring to Knight ) and said he was considering filing a lawsuit as a result .
He accused Knight of using the controversy to bolster his own career and increase his salary on Grey 's Anatomy .
Washington , in late June 2007 , began asserting that racism within the media was a factor in his firing from the series .
On July 2 , 2007 , Washington appeared on Larry King Live on CNN , to present his side of the controversy .
According to Washington , he never used the " F Word " in reference to Knight , but rather blurted it out in an unrelated context in the course of an argument " provoked " by Dempsey , who , he felt , was treating him like a " B - word , " a " P - word , " and the " F - word , " which Washington said conveyed " somebody who is being weak and afraid to fight back . "
Washington himself said that his dismissal from Grey 's Anatomy was an unfortunate misunderstanding that he was eager to move past .
On March 6 , 2014 , Shonda Rhimes announced that Washington would return to his role for one episode airing in May to help conclude Sandra Oh 's final storylines as Cristina Yang .
Rhimes said of his return , " It 's important to me that Cristina 's journey unfolds exactly as it should .
Burke is vital to that journey -- he gives her story that full - circle moment we need to properly say goodbye to our beloved Cristina Yang . "
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Washington said of his character : " He did start out sort of stone - faced , but he 's evolved into someone we see as an effective leader and someone who learns how to love and be loved .
"
Thanks to Yang , Washington says Burke " has been able to show levels of vulnerability .
"
In an interview with Oprah Winfrey , Rhimes has described Preston as a " mama 's boy " , and noted the shock the audience felt when discovering that side of his personality after the arrival of his parents .
Isaiah Washington also noted Preston 's " determination " and " commitment " .
Rhimes referred to Burke 's relationship with Yang by the portmanteau " Burktina " , citing " Losing My Religion " as one of her favorite episodes featuring them because it shows their evolution from the beginning of the second season to its end .
Ann Oldenburg of USA Today called it " one of the spiciest relationships on TV right now " .
Drawing a comparison between the two doctors , she said Burke is " tidy " while Yang is " messy " ; he is " spiritual " but she is not .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Isaiah Washington has been nominated for multiple awards for his portrayal of Preston Burke .
He and the Grey 's Anatomy cast won Best Ensemble in a Television Series at the 2006 Satellite Awards .
He was awarded " Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series " twice at the NAACP Image Awards , in 2006 and 2007 .
Washington was recognized along with the rest of the cast at the Screen Actors Guild Awards , receiving three nominations for " Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series " each year from 2006 to 2008 , with the 2007 Awards marking a victory .
TV Guide named Isaiah Washington " TV 's Sexiest Man " in 2006 .
Burke 's relationship with Cristina Yang was considered as " one of the most interesting relationships on the show . "
Similarly , The Orange County Register wrote that their romance became " one of the most touching and funny attractions of Grey 's Anatomy . "
Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV listed Burke as the fifth worthless TV character .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Grey 's Anatomy at ABC.com