BAR COUNCIL OF INDIA
The Bar Council of India is a statutory body established under the section 4 of advocates Act 1961 that regulates the legal practice and legal education in India .
Its members are elected from amongst the lawyers in India and as such represents the Indian bar .
It prescribes standards of professional conduct , etiquettes and exercises disciplinary jurisdiction over the bar .
It also sets standards for legal education and grants recognition to Universities whose degree in law will serve as a qualification for students to enroll themselves as advocates upon graduation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In March 1953 , the ' All India Bar Committee ' , headed by S. R. Das , submitted a report which proposed the creation of a bar council for each state and an all - India bar council as an apex body .
It was suggested that the all India bar council would regulate the legal profession and set the standard of legal education .
The Law Commission of India was assigned the job of assembling a report on judicial administration reforms .
In 1961 , the Advocates Act was introduced to implement the recommendations made by the ' All India Bar Committee ' and ' Law Commission ' .
M. C. Setalvad and C. K. Daphtary were the first chairman and vice chairman respectively .
In 1963 , C. K. Daphtary became the Chairman and S. K. Ghose became the Vice Chairman .
FUNCTIONS Section::::Functions .
Section 7 of the Advocates Act , 1961 lays down the Bar Council 's regulatory and representative mandate .
The functions of the Bar Council are to :
* Lay down standards of professional conduct and etiquette for advocates .
*
* Lay down procedure to be followed by disciplinary committees *
* Safeguard the rights , privileges and interests of advocates * * Promote and support law reform
*
* Deal with and dispose of any matter which may be referred by a State Bar Council
* * Promote legal education and lay down standards of legal education .
*
* Determine universities whose degree in law shall be a qualification for enrollment as an advocate .
*
* Conduct seminars on legal topics by eminent jurists and publish journals and papers of legal interest .
*
* Organise and provide legal aid to the poor .
*
* Recognise foreign qualifications in law obtained outside India for admission as an advocate .
*
* Manage and invest funds of the Bar Council .
*
* Provide for the election of its members who shall run the Bar Councils .
*
* Organise and provide legal aid to the scheduled caste .
* CONSTITUTION Section::::Constitution .
As per the Advocates Act , the Bar Council of India consists of members elected from each state bar council , and the Attorney General of India and the Solicitor General of India who are ex officio members .
The members from the state bar councils are elected for a period of five years .
The council elects its own Chairman and Vice - Chairman for a period of two years from amongst its members .
Assisted by the various committees of the Council , the chairman acts as the chief executive and director of the Council .
PRESENT MEMBERS
Section::::Present members .
+ Bar Council of India !
Name of the Member ! !
Position Manan Kumar Mishra is the present Chairman .
He was preceded by Biri Singh Sinsinewar , who was in turn preceded by the current Chairman , Manan Kumar Mishra .
ENROLLMENT OF ADVOCATES Section::::Enrollment of advocates .
Eligible persons having a recognised law degree are admitted as advocates on the rolls of the state bar Councils .
The Advocates Act , 1961 empowers state bar councils to frame their own rules regarding enrollment of advocates .
The Council 's enrollment committee may scrutinise a candidate 's application .
Those admitted as advocates by any state bar council are eligible to take the All India Bar Examination which is conducted by the Bar Council of India .
Passing the All India Bar Examination awards the state - enrolled advocate with a ' Certificate of Enrolment ' which enables the state - enrolled advocate to practice law as an advocate in any High Court and lower court within the territory of India .
However to practise Law before the Supreme Court of India , Advocates must first appear for and qualify in the Supreme Court Advocate on Record Examination conducted by the Supreme Court .
COMMITTEES Section::::Committees .
The Bar Council of India has various committees which make recommendations to the council .
The members of these committees are elected from amongst the members of the Council .
* Executive Committee : This committee deals with the issues related to management of funds , affairs of the staff , accounts , allotment of work , management of council 's affairs , audit , library and legal publications delegation of work .
* Legal Education Committee : This committee make recommendations to the BCI on matters related to legal education and sets standards of legal education , visits and inspects universities , recommend the pre requisites for foreign advocates practicing law in India , recommend recognition or discontinuance of a law degree from a university etc .
* Disciplinary Committee : This committee reviews applications by persons against summary dismissal of their complaints against advocates for professional misconduct , by the state bar councils and appeals against orders of the disciplinary committees of the state bar councils .
* Advocate Welfare Committee : This committee looks into applications made by advocates for welfare funds .
It verifies the application and provides funds .
The Advocates Welfare committee is certified by the Advocates Welfare Fund Act , 2001 .
* Legal Aid Committee : The Legal Aid Committee provides aids to those requiring legal assistance .
* Building Committee : The Building Committee is responsible for setting up offices for the Council .
* Rules Committee :
The Rules Committee reviews the rules and regulations of the Council .
Other than these , there are Finance Committee , Special or Oversee Committee and All India Bar Examination Committee .
DIRECTORATE OF LEGAL EDUCATION
Section::::Directorate of Legal Education .
The Bar Council of India has established a Directorate of Legal Education for the purpose of organising , running , conducting , holding , and administering the following : *
Continuing Legal Education * * Teachers training
* * Advanced specialised professional courses * * Education program for Indian students seeking registration after obtaining Law Degree from a Foreign University * * Research on professional Legal Education and Standardisation * * Seminar and workshop
* * Legal Research
*
*
Any other assignment that may be assigned to it by the Legal Education committee and the Bar Council of India .
* ALL INDIA BAR EXAMINATION Section::::All India Bar Examination .
On April 10 , 2010 , the Bar Council of India resolved to conduct an All India Bar Examination that tests an advocate 's ability to practice law .
It is required for an advocate to pass this examination to practice law .
This examination is held biannually and tests advocates on substantive and procedural law .
The syllabi for this examination has to be published at least three months before the examination .
An advocate may appear for the examination any number of times .
Once the advocate passes the examination , he / she will be entitled to a Certificate of Practice law throughout India .
The All India Bar Examination ( AIBE ) IX scheduled to be held on 13 December 2015 .
It is clarified that the Bar Examination shall be mandatory for all law students graduating from academic year 2009 - 2010 onwards and enrolled as advocates under Section 24 of the Advocates Act , 1961 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * http://barcouncilofindia.org/ * http://www.allindiabarexamination.com/ * First qualifying exam for law grads today