RICE FLOUR
Rice flour ( also rice powder ) is a form of flour made from finely milled rice .
It is distinct from rice starch , which is usually produced by steeping rice in lye .
Rice flour is a particularly good substitute for wheat flour , which irritates the digestive system of some people .
Rice flour is also used as a thickening agent in recipes that are refrigerated or frozen since it inhibits liquid separation .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Rice flour may be made from either white rice or brown rice .
To make the flour , the husk of rice or paddy is removed and raw rice is obtained , which is then ground to flour .
TYPES EAST ASIA Section::::Types .
Section::::East Asia .
In China , rice flour , called mǐ fěn ( 米粉 ) , is used in a variety of dishes , notably different kinds of rice noodles , like mĭxiàn ( 米线 ) , or fried noodles chǎo mǐ fěn ( 炒米粉 ) .
In Japan , rice flour is called and is available two forms : glutinous and non - glutinous .
The glutinous rice is also called sweet rice , but despite these names it is neither sweet nor does it contain gluten ; the word " glutinous " is used to describe the stickiness of the rice when it is cooked .
The glutinous variety called is produced from ground cooked and is used to create mochi or as a thickener for sauces .
Another variety called is produced from ground uncooked glutinous rice and is often used to produce confectioneries .
The non - glutinous variety called is made from short - grain rice and is primarily used for creating confectioneries .
SOUTHEAST ASIA Section::::Southeast Asia .
In the Philippines , rice flour is n't traditionally prepared dry .
Rather it is made by first soaking uncooked glutinous rice overnight ( usually allowing it to slightly ferment )
then grinding the results ( traditionally with stone mills ) into a rich and smooth viscous rice dough known as galapóng .
It is the basis for numerous types of native rice cakes and desserts ( kakanin ) in native Filipino cuisine .
Depending on the dish , coconut milk ( gata ) , wood ash lye , and various other ingredients may be added to the galapóng .
The galapóng can be prepared by baking , steaming , boiling , or frying , resulting in dishes like puto or bibingka .
SOUTH ASIA Section::::South Asia .
Rice flour has a presence in South Indian cuisine .
Some of the examples include dosa , puttu , golibaje ( mangalore bajji ) and kori rotti .
It is also mixed with wheat , millet , other cereal flours , and sometimes dried fruits or vegetables to make Manni , a kind of baby food ..
It is a regular ingredient in Bangladeshi cuisine , Bengali cuisine and Assamese cuisine .
It is used in making roti and desserts such as sandesh and pitha ( Rice cakes or pancakes which are sometimes steamed , deep fried or pan fried and served along with grated coconut , sesame seeds , jaggery and chashni ) .
It is also used in making Kheer ( a common South Asian dessert ) .
In Sri Lanka , it 's used in making many household food products .
It is used in making food products such as pittu , appa ( hoppers ) , indi appa ( string hoppers ) and sweets such as kewum , kokis , athirasa and many more .
Also it can be used in making bread and other bakery products .
WESTERN ASIA Section::::Western Asia .
Rice flour is known as pirinç unu in Turkish .
LATIN AMERICA Section::::Latin America .
Rice flour is also used in the Central American dish pupusas as a substitute to regular flour .
OTHER USES
COSMETICS
Section::::Other uses .
Section::::Cosmetics .
Rice flour is used in the cosmetics industry .
MUSHROOM CULTIVATION Section::::Mushroom cultivation .
Brown rice flour can be combined with vermiculite for use as a substrate for the cultivation of mushrooms .
Hard cakes of colonised substrate can then be fruited in a humid container .
This method is often ( though not always ) employed by growers of edible mushrooms , as it is a very simple and low - cost method of growing mushrooms .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Japanese rice flours at Wagashi - net.de