ROYAL HOLLOWAY , UNIVERSITY OF LONDON Royal Holloway , University of London ( RHUL ) , formally incorporated as Royal Holloway and Bedford New College , is a public research university and a constituent college of the federal University of London .
It has three faculties , 20 academic departments and c. 9,200 undergraduate and postgraduate students from over 100 countries .
The campus is located west of Egham , Surrey , from central London .
The Egham campus was founded in 1879 by the Victorian entrepreneur and philanthropist Thomas Holloway .
Royal Holloway College was officially opened in 1886 by Queen Victoria as an all - women college .
It became a member of the University of London in 1900 .
In 1945 , the college admitted male postgraduate students , and in 1965 , around 100 of the first male undergraduates .
In 1985 , Royal Holloway merged with Bedford College ( another former all - women 's college in London ) .
The merged college was named Royal Holloway and Bedford New College ( RHBNC ) , this remaining the official registered name of the college by Act of Parliament .
The campus is dominated by the Founder 's Building , a Grade I listed red - brick building modelled on the Château de Chambord in the Loire Valley , France .
The annual income of the institution for 2017–18 was £ 173.6 million of which £ 13.9 million was from research grants and contracts , with an expenditure of £ 169.4 million .
Royal Holloway is ranked joint 34th in the UK and is in the 251st-300th bracket in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings for 2019 .
There are strong links and exchange programmes with institutions in the United States , Canada , and Hong Kong , notably Yale University , the University of Toronto , and the University of Hong Kong .
Royal Holloway was a member of the 1994 Group until 2013 , when the group dissolved .
HISTORY ROYAL HOLLOWAY COLLEGE Section::::History .
Section::::Royal Holloway College .
Royal Holloway College , originally a women - only college , was founded by the Victorian entrepreneur Thomas Holloway in 1879 on the Mount Lee Estate in Egham .
The founding of the college was brought about after Holloway , seeking to fulfil a philanthropic gesture , began a public debate through The Builder regarding ' How best to spend a quarter of a million or more ' , at which point his wife proposed to build a college especially for women .
Holloway later increased his original sum of money to half a million , and today , the campus is still best known for its original 600-bed building , known as the Founder 's Building , designed by William Henry Crossland and inspired by the Château de Chambord in the Loire Valley , France .
Sir Nikolaus Pevsner called the original college building " the most ebullient Victorian building in the Home Counties " , and noted that together with its sister building the Holloway Sanatorium , it represents " the summit of High Victorian design " .
The Founder 's Building , which is now Grade I listed , was officially opened in 1886 by Queen Victoria , who allowed the use of " Royal " in the college 's name .
Founder 's has been described by The Times as " one of Britain 's most remarkable university buildings " , largely for its elaborate architecture , and according to The Sunday Times it " makes the college instantly recognisable " .
The college also has a Chapel , completed in 1886 as one of the last parts of the university to be finished .
October 1887 saw the arrival of the first 28 students at Royal Holloway College .
It later became a constituent of the University of London in 1900 , as did Bedford College , which eventually merged with Royal Holloway College .
MERGER OF ROYAL HOLLOWAY COLLEGE AND
BEDFORD COLLEGE ( 1985 )
Section::::Merger of Royal Holloway College and Bedford College ( 1985 ) .
Bedford College was founded by Elizabeth Jesser Reid in 1849 as a higher education college for the education of women .
Reid leased a house at 47 Bedford Square in the Bloomsbury area of London , and opened the Ladies College in Bedford Square .
The intention was to provide a liberal and non - sectarian education for women , something no other institution in the United Kingdom provided at the time .
The college moved to 8 and 9 York Place ( off Baker Street ) in 1874 , and then to Regent 's Park in 1908 .
In 1900 , the college became a constituent school of the University of London .
Like RHC , following its membership of the University of London , in 1965 , it allowed male undergraduates to study on its premises for the first time .
RHC and Bedford merged in 1985 .
The pressure for the merger was due to a lack of government funding for higher education , and the college was named Royal Holloway and Bedford New College ( RHBNC ) , with an inauguration being held at the College Chapel in 1986 by Elizabeth II .
The newest title remains the official registered name of the college , though this was changed for day - to - day use to " Royal Holloway , University of London " by the College Council in 1992 .
Since the merger with Bedford College , Royal Holloway has entered into collaborative discussions with Brunel University and St George 's , University of London .
The latter project was cancelled in September 2009 .
Royal Holloway , St George 's and Kingston University continue to work together in the field of health and social care teaching and research .
CAMPUS
LOCATION
Section::::Campus . Section::::Location .
Royal Holloway 's campus is set in of woodland , between Windsor and Heathrow .
Around 200 species of shrubs , 150 different types of tree and numerous wild flowering plants can be found in RHC 's parkland .
The nearest station is Egham .
The campus is about 40–50 minutes from Waterloo station in central London about away , and Windsor is .
The campus is from M25 junction 13 and close to the M3 , M4 and M40 and London Heathrow Airport .
RHC 's worst feature is considered to be that " Egham is not known for its social scene " , but it has been noted that the campus 's environment " offers the best of both worlds – friendly and relaxed on the one hand , dynamic and busy on the other . "
FOUNDER 'S BUILDING Section::::Founder 's Building .
The Founder 's Building , which dominates the campus , has striking north and south towers and two large quadrangles and contains a chapel , kitchen and dining hall , lecture theatre and the arts library along with student rooms and offices .
Founder 's has often been the centre of media attention and is a popular filming location for TV and film as a grandiose ' university ' or ' public school ' .
CAMPUS REDEVELOPMENT
Section::::Campus redevelopment .
Between 2002 and 2008 , the college underwent a £ 100 million investment programme and a re - development of its campus , as a result of the merger with Bedford College and the sale of Bedford 's site in Regent 's Park .
A number of recent projects undertaken by Royal Holloway have included an extension to the School of Management ( 2005 and 2011 ) and the library ( which holds half a million books ) .
The biological sciences laboratories have also been renovated and the Windsor Building ( opened in 2007 )
houses seminar rooms and a 400-seat auditorium .
In 2013 , the Student Services Centre , which is a single point of contact for all non - academic enquiries , was opened in the Windsor Building .
The Drama Department expanded its performance space with the opening of the Caryl Churchill Theatre , which seats almost 200 audience members across two levels and has a third floor for technical operation , in 2013 .
The department also uses the onsite 19th - century boilerhouse , which was converted into a performance space with a sprung dance floor in 2014 .
The International Building , opened in 2000 by HRH The Princess Royal , houses the Language Centre along with the English , French , German , Italian and Hispanic Studies Departments .
The new developments have also been followed by the establishment of formal links with New York University , the University of Sydney , and Yale University , and connections with the Royal College of Music means that music students at Royal Holloway have the opportunity to take lessons there .
The size of the campus has allowed the college to develop some of the best sports facilities of any university institution in the London area , and helped build the college 's reputation as a sporting institution of excellence .
An aerobics studio , fitness suite , sports Hall , sports fields and tennis courts account for some of the sporting facilities that Royal Holloway offers .
The Sports Centre was refurbished in 2013 while a bequest by Margaret Young in 2014 enabled the college to further develop its sports facilities .
New for the 2014/15 sporting season were floodlit outdoor pitches and courts , which provide all - weather playing surfaces for a wide range of sports .
Situated on the campus are restaurants and cafès , a college shop , a bank , a health centre , a Chapel , a careers centre , teaching and social spaces and sports facilities .
As a result of an evaluation by People & Planet in 2007 , Royal Holloway was ranked 60th out of 120 universities for environmental performance .
The university has put into place initiatives to enhance environmental performance , such as the improvement of woodland management to develop nature conservation and more recycling banks have been introduced to halls of residence .
Starting in 2015 , work on constructing a new Library and Student Services Centre began .
In January 2017 it was announced that the building would be named after alumna Emily Wilding Davison .
ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION GOVERNANCE Section::::Organisation and administration .
Section::::Governance .
The College Council is the governing body of the college with responsibility for " financial integrity and setting the overall strategic direction of Royal Holloway .
" There are 25 members of the council , many of which are lay members from outside Royal Holloway who are initially appointed for five years .
A total of 16 lay members are appointed ; two from local authorities ; one selected by the Privy Council ; another by the University of London ; two more are appointed as alumni from Royal Holloway , Bedford College or Royal Holloway College ; and the rest are chosen to offer a range of skills and experience .
The Council 's Chairman , who is appointed for five years , is also a lay member .
One of The Chairman 's duties is to chair a number of committees including the Remuneration Committee , which handles the pay and benefits of the senior staff .
The Principal is answerable to the Chairman .
The remaining members of the Council comprise three elected by non - academic members of staff , two elected by academics and one member of academic staff elected by the Academic Board .
There is also one student member elected by the students .
COAT OF ARMS Section::::Coat of arms .
Royal Holloway 's coat of arms consists of the Royal Holloway shield and its surrounding elements .
There are three crescents shown on the coat of arms , which are taken from Thomas Holloway 's own coat of arms .
Taken from the Bedford coat of arms , the field is coloured black and gold in a chequered design , with the addition of ermine spots ( feather - like symbols representing ermine tails ) from the Royal Holloway coat .
Placed between two black lozenges , there is a lamp of learning .
Traditionally , the lozenge is worn on the arm of unmarried women or widows , which places significance on the coat of arms ' lozenges as it acts as a reminder that the colleges were founded for women .
Below , the motto is displayed which is taken from the arms of Bedford College , and reads esse quam videri .
The Royal Holloway shield was created following the merger of Bedford and Royal Holloway Colleges in 1985 .
The shield appears ( in a black and white form ) on legal documents and stationery for legal reasons , along with the following : " Incorporated by Act of Parliament .
Royal Holloway and Bedford New College .
"
The use of the university 's identifying marks is governed by the Communications and External Relations Department .
FACULTIES , SCHOOLS AND DEPARTMENTS Section::::Faculties , schools and departments .
The university is made up of a number of schools and departments organised into three faculties , and 20 academic departments .
One Dean heads each faculty , and is supported by Deputy Deans .
The Principal takes the role of appointing The Heads of Department , who in turn report to their faculty 's Dean .
The faculties are as follows : Faculty of Arts & Social Sciences
* Department of Classics * Department of Drama , Theatre and Dance * Department of English
* Department of History * Department of Media Arts * Department of Modern Languages , Literatures & Cultures ( including Comparative Literature and Culture and Liberal Arts )
* Department of Music * Department of Politics & International Relations ( including Philosophy and European Studies ) * Department of Social Work Faculty of Management , Economics and Law
* Law , Criminology & Sociology * Department of Economics
* School of Management Faculty of Science
* School of Biological Sciences * Department of Computer Science * Department of Earth Sciences * Department of Electronic Engineering * Department of Geography
* Information Security Group
* Department of Mathematics * Department of Physics * Centre of Professional Studies * Department of Psychology FINANCES Section::::Finances .
In the financial year ended 31 July 2013 , Royal Holloway had a total income ( including share of joint ventures ) of £ 142 m ( 2011/12 – £ 137 m ) and total expenditure of £ 136 m ( 2011/12 – £ 129 m ) .
Key sources of income included £ 62 m from tuition fees and education contracts ( 2011/12 – £ 54 m ) , £ 33 m from Funding Council grants ( 2011/12 –
£ 39 m ) , £ 16 m from research grants and contracts ( 2011/12 – £ 14 m ) and £ 1.8 m from endowment and investment income ( 2011/12 – £ 3.1 m ) .
During the 2012/13 financial year Royal Holloway had a capital expenditure of £ 10.9 m ( 2011/12 – £ 6.2 m ) .
At year end Royal Holloway had endowments of £ 74 m ( 31 July 2012 – £ 70 m ) and total net assets of £ 195 m ( 31 July 2012 – £ 187 m ) .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
Royal Holloway employs around 2,300 members of staff , including 534 academic staff and 132 research staff .
The total number of undergraduate and postgraduate students is , from 100 countries .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
In the Research Excellence Framework ( REF ) , published on 18 December 2014 , it was confirmed that Royal Holloway sits within the top 25 per cent of UK universities for ' world - leading ' and ' internationally excellent ' research .
In the REF assessment , 81 per cent of Royal Holloway 's research is rated as world - leading ( 4 * ) and internationally excellent ( 3 * ) , which is an increase of over 20 per cent from RAE 2008 , which is the last time an exercise on this scale was conducted .
In addition , 30 per cent of Royal Holloway 's research is rated as world - leading ( 4 * ) , which is an increase of more than 50 per cent on 2008 when 19 per cent of Royal Holloway 's research was ranked in this category .
Twelve out of 17 departments were ranked in the top quartile for research in the 4 * and 3 * categories , with seven of Royal Holloway 's departments rated in the top 10 .
Royal Holloway 's Geography Department is number one in England for 4 * and 3 * research , while Earth Sciences is second , Psychology fourth , Mathematics fifth and Media Arts ninth in the same categories .
On 14 March 2014 , Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , were welcomed to Royal Holloway when they attended a ceremony to celebrate the Regius Professorship being bestowed on the Department of Music : the first of its kind .
The Music Department was awarded the Regius Professorship by the Queen to mark her Diamond Jubilee .
The prestigious award acknowledges the university 's exceptionally high standards of music teaching and research .
The current research policy chief of the Higher Education Funding Council for England , David Sweeney and his predecessor Rama Thirunamachandran were both sourced directly from Royal Holloway .
COURSES Section::::Courses .
Royal Holloway runs a variety of academic degree programmes , including Single Honours and Joint Honours , with fees of £ 9,000 for full - time undergraduate students ( 2015–2016 entry ) and some financial help schemes The study of an undergraduate programme leads to one of five University of London degrees , which include Bachelor of Arts , Bachelor of Science , Bachelor of Science ( Economics ) , Bachelor of Music and Master in Science .
Discounted fees are offered to students who stay on to complete a postgraduate degree .
The university also runs e - degrees in history and business management .
On a competitive basis , Principal 's Excellence Scholarships worth £ 3,000 a year are given to students who achieve AAA+ and have applied to study Maths , Physics , Modern Languages or European Studies at Royal Holloway from September 2015 .
Other bursaries and scholarships are also offered to students , including bursaries of £ 1,750 per year for undergraduate students with a family income less than £ 25,000 .
In the Research Assessment Exercise ( RAE ) of 2008 , Royal Holloway 's School of Biological Sciences was ranked joint third achieving a proportion of 4 * and 5 * rankings .
The School of Management has all three of its MBA programmes accredited by AMBA , and obtained management school status in 1993 .
Royal Holloway also runs the University of London MBA distance - learning programme .
An Advanced Skills Programme is also run at the university , featuring information technology , communication skills and foreign languages .
STUDY - ABROAD PROGRAMMES Section::::Study - abroad programmes .
Royal Holloway has developed a variety of study - abroad programmes , allowing its students to spend a year in institutions including ; University of Melbourne , University of Sydney University of Toronto , University of Alberta University of Hong Kong International Christian University , Keio University , Ritsumeikan University , Waseda University National University of Singapore Korea University Boston College , Yale University , New York University , Tulane University , Mount Holyoke College , George Washington University Victoria University of Wellington Royal Holloway collaborates with Queen Mary , University of London to help run programmes at the University of London Institute in Paris ( ULIP ) , a central academic body of the University of London in Paris , France .
This offers undergraduate and graduate students the chance to study University of London ratified French Studies degrees in France .
Students who take a degree in French , German , Italian or Hispanic Studies will all take a year abroad as an integral part of the course .
REPUTATION AND RANKINGS Section::::Reputation and rankings .
At one point in time , Royal Holloway was ranked 2nd out of 90 universities in England and Wales for the number of students going into graduate employment .
However , according to Complete University Guide 2016 , the university has seen a drop in graduate employability since 2007/8 with a graduate prospect of only 62.2 % ranking it 77th out of 126 universities in the UK .
Royal Holloway is in the top 25 % of universities in the UK for overall satisfaction ( 89 % ) , according to the National Student Survey 2014 .
The university is popular with both state - educated and privately educated students , with the latter group currently accounting for around 18 % of all students in 2010 .
In 2014–15 , the Times Higher Education World University Rankings ranked the college 47th in Europe and 118th in the world .
Royal Holloway was ranked 29th overall in The Sunday Times 10-year ( 1998–2007 ) average ranking of British universities based on consistent league table performance .
In 2010 , the college benefited from upgraded evaluation methods used by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings .
They ranked the college as 88th in the world , and 22nd in Europe .
COLLABORATIONS Section::::Collaborations .
Royal Holloway has forged successful academic links with other universities in the Greater London area and beyond .
Royal Holloway 's Department of Physics is a founding member of SEPnet , the south - east Physics Network , which supports collaboration between seven universities in south - east England on physics research , outreach and postgraduate teaching .
The John Adams Institute for Accelerator Research ( JAI ) is a major collaboration in the field of particle physics between Royal Holloway and the University of Oxford .
In the field of health and social care research , the SWan ( South West London academic network ) between Royal Holloway , St George 's and Kingston University based at St George 's in Tooting is another of Royal Holloway 's major collaborative projects .
In 2011 , Pearson , the international education company , and RHC set up a partnership .
Royal Holloway is responsible for validating Pearson 's new business degree .
Currently , Royal Holloway awards University of London degrees but has the power to validate its own degrees , which it has not exercised so far .
PICTURE GALLERY AND ART
COLLECTION Section::::Picture gallery and art collection .
Royal Holloway has a collection of important paintings , sculptures , prints , drawings and watercolours from the 17th century and later .
Artists include Sir John Everett Millais , Edward Burne - Jones , Christopher Nevinson , John Nash and Dame Laura Knight .
The gallery is in Founder 's and is open to the public every Wednesday during the autumn and spring terms and some weekends throughout the year .
At the heart of the collections are the legacies of two Victorian collectors : founder Thomas Holloway and artist Christiana Herringham ( 1852–1929 ) .
Their collections have been enhanced with additional acquisitions and commissions .
Following the death of Herringham part of her eclectic art collection , including paintings by her and other women artists as well as Indian miniatures and Japanese woodblock prints , was given to Bedford College by her husband .
Having merged with Royal Holloway , these are now part of Royal Holloway 's art collection .
Several items are on display on the Victorian corridor including a very personal portrait of her children .
Other items can be seen by appointment .
The initial plans for the college did not include a picture gallery but Holloway was inspired to start his own art collection for his students after his brother - in - law visited Vassar College , then the world 's leading college for women , which had a superb collection of art .
In 1881 , at the age of 81 , Holloway started to buy paintings to form his collection .
He amassed paintings at a fast rate and he had completed his art collection by 1883 .
In total he purchased 77 paintings .
In most cases he bought from Christie 's auction house .
In two cases he broke the record for the highest sum ever paid at auction for a contemporary artist in order to buy the pictures he desired .
Highlights of the collection include Sir John Everett Millais ' The Princes in the Tower ( 1878 ) , Sir Edwin Landseer 's Man Proposes , God Disposes ( 1864 ) , Edwin Long 's Babylonian Marriage Market ( 1875 ) and William Powell Frith 's The Railway Station ( 1862 ) .
The pieces in the Herringham collection reflect her interests in the old masters , Indian art and women 's suffrage .
The collections are a teaching resource for the Victorian Studies Centre for teaching and research in Victorian art , architecture and literature , including a taught MA under the Department of English .
It is also used to teach students from departments including history , geography , drama and media arts .
Between 1993 and 1995 , in order to fund the maintenance of Founder 's , three of the most valuable paintings were sold for a total of £ 21 m , a Turner fetching £ 11 m on its own .
The principal at the time , Dorothy Wedderburn , began the sale process which was completed by her successor , Norman Gowar .
The paintings were a Turner ( " Van Tromp going about to please his Masters , Ships at Sea , getting a good wetting " c.1844 ) ; a Constable ( " A Sketch for View on the Stour , nr Dedham " c.1821/2 ) and a Gainsborough ( " Peasants going to Market : Early Morning " c.1770 ) .
The controversial decision was made by principal Dorothy Wedderburn .
The remaining paintings had a current value of £ 16.6 million in 2014 .
The Turner is now in the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles .
There are no figures available for the Herringham collection .
STUDENT
LIFE STUDENTS ' UNION
Section::::Student life .
Section::::Students ' Union .
The Royal Holloway Students ' Union ( SURHUL ) actively represents and provides a service for the needs and interests of all students studying at Royal Holloway .
It is claimed to have " a reputation as one of the best unions in the London area " , in the words of The Independent .
The Students ' Union provides much of the on - campus entertainment , organising and sponsoring the sport clubs and special - interest societies , on top of providing welfare advice to students through the Student Advice Centre .
The Students ' Union runs general meetings , which provide an opportunity to discuss issues , make student announcements and engage in lively debate .
Whilst representatives are elected to sit on and run a General Meeting , any student is eligible to attend , vote and have their say .
The direction and development of the Students ' Union is the responsibility of the Trustee Board , which is made up of two student trustees , one College trustee , three external trustees and five student Sabbatical Officers , consisting of the President , and Vice Presidents Education , Sports , Societies and Media , and Welfare and Diversity .
The Union runs a number of campaigns throughout the year , including various history months , awareness campaigns , and lobbying actions .
The Sabbatical Officers are elected for one year in office and work full - time either during or after completing their degree .
The Union also employs more than 50 permanent members of staff who oversee the administrative , democratic and commercial activities of the organisation .
The main Union building on campus includes a large function hall , two bars , the Tommy 's Kitchen food outlet and its administrative offices .
Elsewhere on campus , the Union operates Medicine – a bar and games venue designed by the creators of the Ministry of Sound – and the campus pub
The Packhorse ( formerly privately owned at The Monkey 's Forehead ) , just across the A30 from the main campus .
STUDENT MEDIA
Section::::Student media .
The Orbital is the Royal Holloway campus magazine and published by the Students ' Union , covering subjects from higher education news , opinion , arts , and reviews .
The original official Royal Holloway student publication was in the format of a newspaper called The Egham Sun , but this was replaced with the magazine edition in the early 1990s .
The magazine is regularly published in print and online .
rhubarbTV is Royal Holloway 's student television station , which relaunched in March 2013 .
In June 2014 , rhubarbTV was named the Royal Holloway Media Outlet of the Year at the first - ever Student Media Awards .
INSANITY RADIO
103.2FM
Section::::Insanity Radio 103.2FM .
The student and community radio station Insanity Radio 103.2FM was established in 1998 .
Available locally on 103.2 FM , Insanity Radio broadcasts 24 hours a day , seven days a week , with live presenters in the studio all day in term time and some holiday periods .
The station is also available worldwide through the internet .
The station takes its name from the Holloway Sanitorium , founded by Thomas Holloway , along with the College that became Royal Holloway .
The station has twice won the Silver Award for Best Student Radio Station at BBC Radio 1 's Student Radio Awards , and is one of few student radio stations to hold a community / FM radio licence .
THE FOUNDER Section::::The Founder .
The Founder is the independent student newspaper .
Founded in 2006 , 4,000 free copies are printed and distributed fortnightly across campus and locally .
It gets no financial support from the college or SURHUL and advertising revenue acquired by the students on the editorial board pays for printing .
At the 2007 Guardian Student Media Awards , Christian Anthony was shortlisted for the Student critic of the year Award .
At the inaugural 2011 London Student Journalism Awards Kate Brook , the newspaper 's Features Editor , was recognised with the Best Feature Writer award .
At the 2016 Student Publication Association Awards , Features Editor Zak Derler received Special Mention in the Best Feature category for his story on the refugee crisis in the Mediterranean .
HALLS OF RESIDENCE Section::::Halls of residence .
Most halls are part of the main campus , and initially allocated to first year students who firmly accept a conditional or unconditional offer .
Accommodation prices at the university can vary , ranging from £ 85-£163 per week .
Halls are either self - catered or catered , with students living in the latter entitled to a 50 per cent discount off the normal price of the majority of food sold in the dining halls .
Around 2,900 students live in halls of residence .
The Founder 's Building houses 493 students in original Victorian rooms and converted space , which underwent refurbishment in 2012 .
Meals for catered students are provided in Founder 's dining hall .
Also on campus , Gowar and Wedderburn , a construction of 570 study bedrooms in two new blocks opened in September 2004 .
These halls were also used as accommodation for rowers at the 2012 Olympic Games .
Similar accommodation blocks , named Butler , Tuke and Williamson , were completed in September 2007 to replace the ageing Athlone , Cameron and Williamson Halls .
Of the waste created by the demolition of Athlone , Cameron and Williamson , 98 per cent was recycled .
All five of these new halls were named after former principals and have been designed to be environmentally friendly , accomplished by sedum - planted roofs that change colour by season , as well as being designed to improve insulation .
In a BREEAM environmental performance assessment , the Butler , Tuke and Williamson halls were rated " Very Good " , as their construction was designed to reduce heat loss .
Kingswood I and II are away .
These halls hold over 400 students , and a free bus service operates to the campus .
Other accommodation includes Highfield Court ( 125 students ) , Penrose Court ( 200 students ) , Reid Hall ( 287 students ) and Runnymede Hall ( 441 students ) , which was opened by HRH The Princess Royal in 1992 .
NOTABLE PEOPLE Section::::Notable people .
The visitor of the college is the Rt Hon Dame Mary Arden , Lady Arden of Heswall DBE QC , Justice of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom .
PRINCIPALS Section::::Principals .
Since 2000 , the college has had three principals : * 2000 to 2002 :
Sir Drummond Bone * 2002 to 2009 : Stephen Hill * 2010 to present : Paul Layzell DL CHAIRS OF COUNCIL Section::::Chairs of council .
Since 2004 , the college has had three chairs of council : * 2004 to 2011 :
Sir Andrew Burns KCMG * 2011 to 2018 : Stephen Cox CVO * 2018 to present :
The Rt Hon Dame Margaret Hodge DBE MP NOTABLE ALUMNI * Sharifa Dina bint Abdul - Hamid ( born 1929 ) , former Queen of Jordan * Dame Kitty Anderson ( 1903–1979 ) , educationist * Dame Catherine Ashton , Baroness Ashton of Upholland GCMG ( born 1956 ) , former High Representative of EU for Foreign Affairs & Security Policy
* Greg Barker , Baron Barker of Battle ( born 1966 ) , politician * Helen Bentwich CBE ( 1892–1972 ) , philanthropist and politician * Daphne Blundell CB ( 1916–2004 ) , former Director of Women 's Royal Naval Service
* Daniel Bradley ( 1928–2010 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society * Emma Bridgewater CBE ( born 1960 ) , entrepreneur * Martin Buck , Fellow of the Royal Society * Susan Bullock CBE ( born 1958 ) , soprano * Helen Cam CBE ( 1885–1968 ) , Zemurray Radcliffe Professor at Harvard * Sophie Christiansen CBE ( born 1987 )
, Gold medalist at Paralympics
*
Dame Ivy Compton - Burnett ( 1884–1969 ) ,
author * Dame Evelyn Denington , Baroness Denington ( 1907–1998 ) ,
politician * Dame Karen Dunnell ( born 1946 ) , medical sociologist and civil servant
*
Dame Ann Ebsworth ( 1937—2002 ) , high court judge
* George Eliot ( 1819–1880 ) , author * Agnes Field CBE ( 1896–1968 ) , film producer *
Dame Janet Finch DL ( born 1946 ) ,
former Vice - Chancellor of Keele University * Dame Janet Fookes , Baroness Fookes DL ( born 1936 ) , politician * Jayne - Anne Gadhia CBE ( born 1961 ) , Chief Executive of Virgin Money
* John Gardiner , Baron Gardiner of Kimble ( born 1956 ) , politician
*
Dame Helen Gwynne - Vaughan GBE ( 1879 - 1967 ) , botanist * Jean Hanson ( 1919–1973 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society *
Dame Caroline Haslett ( 1895–1957 ) , engineer *
Anna Healy , Baroness Healy of Primrose Hill ( born 1955 ) , politician * Ruth Henig , Baroness Henig CBE , DL ( born 1943 ) , politician * Sir Lenny Henry CBE ( born 1958 ) , comedian * Jackie Hunter CBE ( born 1956 ) , pharmaceutical executive * Vice - Admiral Ben Key CBE ( born 1965 ) , Royal Navy officer *
The Right Reverend Declan Lang ( born 1950 ) , Roman Catholic Bishop *
Dame Kathleen Lonsdale ( 1903–1971 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Dame Felicity Lott ( born 1947 ) , soprano
*
Dame Sally Macintyre ( born 1949 ) , medical sociologist * Louisa Martindale CBE ( 1872–1966 ) , surgeon * Lady MacRobert ( 1884–1954 ) , geologist * Angela Mason CBE ( born 1944 ) , civil servant and activist *
Jean McFarlane , Baroness McFarlane of Llandaff ( 1926 - 2012 ) , nurse * Delyth Morgan , Baroness Morgan of Drefelin ( born 1961 ) , politician * Marilynne Morgan CB , barrister and civil servant
* Jennie Page CBE ( born 1944 ) , former Chief Executive of English Heritage
* Sir Andrew Parmley ( born 1956 ) , former Lord Mayor of London * Marie Patterson CBE ( born 1934 ) , trade unionist
* Mary Pickford ( 1902–2002 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society
*
Rosalind Pitt - Rivers ( 1907–1990 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Helen Porter ( 1899–1987 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society * Jenny Randerson , Baroness Randerson ( born 1948 ) , politician * HRH Princess Zeina Rashid of Jordan ( born 1988 )
*
Dame Mildred Riddelsdell DCB , CBE ( 1913–2006 ) , civil servant * Athene Seyler CBE ( 1889–1990 ) , former President of RADA
* Dame Freya Stark ( 1893–1993 ) ,
explorer and travel writer
* Mary Stewart , Baroness Stewart of Alvechurch ( 1903–1984 ) , politician * Jennifer Thomas CBE , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Simon Thurley CBE ( born 1961 ) , former Chief Executive of English Heritage
*
Sarah Tyacke CB ( born 1945 ) , former Keeper of Public Records * Diana Warwick , Baroness Warwick of Undercliffe ( born 1945 ) , former Chief Executive of
Universities UK
* Dame Olive Wheeler ( 1886–1963 ) , educationist and psychologist * Alex Wilkie ( born 1948 ) , Fellow of the Royal Society * Emily Wilding Davison ( 1872–1913 ) , suffragist * Elizabeth Williams CBE ( 1895–1986 ) , mathematician * Roger Wright CBE ( born 1956 ) , former Director of the BBC Proms NOTABLE STAFF * George Barger , Fellow of the Royal Society
*
Dame Gillian Beer , former President of Clare Hall , Cambridge * Sir William Benham , Fellow of the Royal Society * Daniel Joseph Bradley , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Hugh Longbourne Callendar , Fellow of the Royal Society * Lorna Casselton CBE , Fellow of the Royal Society * William Gilbert Chaloner , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Paul Cohn , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Richard Dixon , Fellow of the Royal Society * Lilian Faithfull CBE , university administrator
* Sir Gregory Foster , former Vice - Chancellor of the University of London * Harold Munro Fox , Fellow of the Royal Society *
Dame Jane Francis , Director of the British Antarctic Survey
* Dame Helen Gardner , English literary critic and academic * Nick Hardwick CBE , former HM Chief Inspector of Prisons * Olaus Henrici , Fellow of the Royal Society * Frank Horton , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Dame Olwen Hufton , historian * Julian Johnson , Regius Professor of Music
* Robert Latham CBE , historian
* Sir Oliver Lodge , Fellow of the Royal Society * Oliver McGregor , Baron McGregor of Durris , sociologist * John Duncan Mackie CBE , historian * Louis MacNeice CBE , poet and playwright * Ursula Martin CBE , computer scientist
*
Sir William McCrea , Fellow of the Royal Society * Joseph Mordaunt Crook CBE , historian
* Sir Andrew Motion , former Poet Laureate
*
Sir Roger Penrose OM , Fellow of the Royal Society * Dame Lillian Penson , former Vice - Chancellor of the University of London * Francis Robinson CBE DL , historian * Conrad Russell , Earl Russell , historian
* William James Russell , Fellow of the Royal Society *
Dame Barbara Shenfield , social scientist and politician * Andrew Sentance CBE , economist * Francis Thompson CBE , historian * Samuel Tolansky , Fellow of the Royal Society * Andrew Wathey CBE , Vice - Chancellor of the University of Northumbria
* William Wilson , Fellow of the Royal Society
* Sir Bernard Williams , philosopher * Barbara Wootton , Baroness Wootton of Abinger CH , sociologist SEE ALSO * Holloway Sanatorium – the other of Holloway 's great philanthropic institutions , opened 1885 in nearby Virginia Water * University of London Institute in Paris ( ULIP )
* Institute of Musical Research REFERENCES FURTHER READING * , a contemporary novel set in a semi - fictionalised Royal Holloway .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Students ' Union of Royal Holloway , University of London official website * Royal Holloway , University of London student lists * Pathé video of Queen Mary 's visit to the college in 1937 *
The Founder website