MAXIMUM OVERDRIVE Maximum Overdrive is a 1986 American science fiction horror dark comedy film written and directed by Stephen King .
The film stars Emilio Estevez , Pat Hingle , Laura Harrington , and Yeardley Smith .
The screenplay was inspired by and loosely based on King 's short story " Trucks " , which was included in the author 's first collection of short stories , Night Shift .
Maximum Overdrive is King 's only directorial effort , though dozens of films have been based on his novels or short stories .
The film contained black humor elements and a generally campy tone , which contrasts with King 's sombre subject matter in books .
The film has a mid-1980s hard rock soundtrack composed entirely by the group AC / DC , King 's favorite band .
AC / DC 's album
Who Made Who was released as the Maximum Overdrive soundtrack .
It includes the best - selling singles " Who Made Who " , " You Shook Me All Night Long " , and " Hells Bells " .
The film was nominated for two Golden Raspberry Awards including Worst Director for King and Worst Actor for Estevez in 1987 , but both lost against Prince for Under the Cherry Moon .
In 1988 , Maximum Overdrive was nominated for " Best Film " at the International Fantasy Film Awards .
King himself described the film as a " moron movie " .
He considers the process a learning experience , after which he intended never to direct again .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1987 , as the Earth passes through the tail of a comet , previously inanimate machines suddenly spring to life and turn homicidal .
In a pre - title scene , a man ( King in a cameo ) tries to withdraw money from an ATM , but it instead calls him an " asshole " , and he complains to his wife ( King 's real life wife Tabitha ) .
A bascule bridge inexplicably raises during heavy traffic , resulting in all vehicles upon the bridge at the point of elevation either falling into the river , or gradually colliding together as they rapidly collect towards the bridge base , resulting in multiple injuries and fatalities .
Soon chaos begins as machines of all kinds come to life and begin assaulting humans .
At a roadside truck stop just outside Wilmington , North Carolina , an employee , Duncan Keller , is blinded after a gas dispenser sprays diesel in his eyes .
A waitress is injured by an electric knife , and arcade machines in the back room electrocute another victim .
Employee and ex - convict Bill Robinson begins to suspect something is wrong .
Meanwhile , at a Little League game , a vending machine kills the coach by firing canned soda point - blank into his groin then to his skull .
A driverless steamroller flattens one of the fleeing children , but one named Deke Keller ( Duncan 's son ) manages to escape on his bike .
A newly - wed couple , Connie ( Yeardley Smith ) and Curtis ( John Short ) , stop at a gas station , where a brown tow truck tries to kill Curtis , but he and Connie escape in their car .
Deke rides through his town as humans and even pets are brutally killed by lawnmowers , chainsaws , electric hair dryers , pocket radios , and RC cars .
A driverless ice cream truck begins to stalk Deke , but he hides from the truck in the bushes until a lawn mower is after him as he gets back on his bicycle .
Back at the truck stop , a red trash truck runs over Duncan and hits the car that belongs to the Bible salesman who gets run down by a black Western Star 4800 sporting a giant Green Goblin mask on its grille .
Later , all the big rig trucks roar to life , led by the Happy Toyz ( Green Goblin ) truck , and surround the truck stop , trapping the rest of the humans inside the diner .
Meanwhile on the main highway , Connie and Curtis are chased by a truck , but they make it crash off the side of the road .
Curtis suggests that they should call the police from the truck stop , only to find it surrounded by trucks .
The two try to drive into the parking lot through a gap between the trucks , but the car is hit and flips over .
Bill and Brett , a hitchhiker who came in with the Bible salesman , rush out to help them , but the trucks attempt to attack them .
Bill 's boss Hendershot uses M72 LAW rockets he had stored in a bunker hidden under the diner to destroy many of the trucks .
Deke makes it to the truck stop later that evening and tries to get in via the sewers , but ca n't due to the wire mesh covering the opening .
That night , the survivors hear screaming from the Bible salesman in a ditch , and Bill and Curtis sneak out to help him by climbing through the sewers .
Deke finds the Bible salesman and thinks he 's dead , but he suddenly jumps up and attacks Deke .
Bill and Curtis rescue Deke , and a truck chases them back into the pipe .
The next morning , a Caterpillar D7 G bulldozer and a M274 Mule drive through the diner .
Hendershot uses the rocket launcher to blow the bulldozer away .
The Mule fires its post - mounted M60 machine gun into the building , killing several including Hendershot and the waitress when she drunkenly rants at them .
The Mule then demands , via sending morse code signals through its horn that Deke deciphers , that the humans pump the trucks ' diesel for them in exchange for keeping them alive .
The survivors soon realize they have become enslaved by their own machines .
Robinson suggests they escape to a local island just off the coast , on which no vehicles or machines are permitted .
During a fueling operation , Robinson sneaks a grenade onto the Mule vehicle , destroying it , then leads the party out of the diner via a sewer hatch to the main road just as the trucks demolish the entire truck stop .
The survivors are pursued to the docks by the Green Goblin truck .
The survivors try to hide behind a diner , but an electronic menu blares " Humans Here " until Deke uses a machine gun to destroy the sign .
The same ice cream truck that stalked Deke barrels toward them , but Curtis and Brett destroy it with machine guns .
The team makes it the docks , and the Green Goblin truck follows them , managing to kill Brad the trucker after he steals a large diamond ring from a female corpse in a car .
Robinson destroys the truck once and for all with a direct hit from an M72 LAW rocket shot .
The survivors then sail off to safety .
A title card epilogue explains that two days later , a UFO was destroyed by a Soviet " weather satellite " conveniently equipped with class IV nuclear missiles and a laser cannon .
Six days later , the Earth passes out of the comet 's tail , and the survivors are still survivors .
CAST
* Emilio Estevez as William " Bill " Robinson
* Pat Hingle as Bubba Hendershot
* Laura Harrington as Brett Graham * Yeardley Smith as Connie
* John Short as Curtis * Ellen McElduff as Wanda June * Frankie Faison as Handy
* Leon Rippy as Brad * Christopher Murney as Camp Loman
* J. C. Quinn as Duncan Keller * Holter Graham as Deke Keller * Barry Bell as Steve Gayton
* Patrick Miller as Joey * J. Don Ferguson as Andy * Giancarlo Esposito as Video player * Stephen King ( cameo ) as ATM man PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film was the first to be made by Embassy Pictures after it had been bought by Dino de Laurentiis .
In a 2002 interview with Tony Magistrale for the book Hollywood 's Stephen King , King stated that he was " coked out of [ his ] mind all through its production , and [ he ] really did n't know what [ he ] was doing " .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Maximum Overdrive received overwhelmingly negative reviews , earning a " Rotten " score of 17 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
In Leonard Maltin 's annual publication TV Movie Guide , the film is given a " BOMB " rating .
Two Golden Raspberry Award nominations were given out , to Emilio Estevez for Worst Actor and King for Worst Director .
John Clute and Peter Nichols have offered a modest reappraisal of Maximum Overdrive , admitting the film 's many flaws , but arguing that several scenes display enough visual panache to suggest that King was not entirely without talent as a director .
In an interview discussing the television adaptation of Under the Dome , King admitted that Maximum Overdrive was the worst adaptation of his work .
SEE ALSO
* " Killdozer !
" ( story ) * List of American films of 1986 * Trucks , another adaptation of King 's story
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Entry on Retro Junk