COFFEE - MATE Coffee - Mate is a non - dairy creamer manufactured by Nestlé , available in powdered , liquid and concentrated liquid forms .
It was introduced in 1961 by Carnation .
An unopened bottle of Coffee - Mate can last up to two years with no refrigeration and can stay fresh for two weeks once it is opened .
The product is popular in offices where refrigeration may not be available .
Non - dairy creamer can be used by individuals who are lactose - intolerant .
Once opened , liquid non - dairy creamer should be refrigerated .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
The original product was introduced in February 1961 , followed by Coffee - Mate Lite and Coffee - Mate Liquid in 1989 .
In the US , where the product is manufactured by Nestlé in Glendale , California , the product is available in liquid , liquid concentrate and powdered forms .
American Coffee - Mate comes in over 25 different flavours , including gingerbread , Parisian almond creme , and peppermint mocha .
Discontinued varieties include Coffee - Mate Soy and Coffee - Mate Half & Half .
In Europe , it is only available in powder form as a coffee creamer in one or two varieties depending on the country with no added flavours .
The European version of Coffee - Mate is manufactured without the use of hydrogenated fat , which is linked to heart disease .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Coffee - Mate Original is mostly made up of three ingredients - corn syrup solids , hydrogenated vegetable oil , and sodium caseinate .
Sodium caseinate , a form of casein , is a milk derivative ; however , this is a required ingredient in non - dairy creamers , which are considered non - dairy due to the lack of lactose .
Coffee - Mate Original also contains small amounts of dipotassium phosphate , to prevent coagulation ; mono- and diglycerides , used as an emulsifier ; sodium aluminosilicate , an anticaking agent ; artificial flavor ; and annatto color .
SEE ALSO
* Non - dairy creamer
*
CoffeeRich REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website