FRESHWATER PEARL MUSSEL
The freshwater pearl mussel ( Margaritifera margaritifera ) is an endangered species of freshwater mussel , an aquatic bivalve mollusc in the family Margaritiferidae .
Although the name " freshwater pearl mussel " is often used for this species , other freshwater mussel species can also create pearls and some can also be used as a source of mother of pearl .
In fact , most cultured pearls today come from Hyriopsis species in Asia , or Amblema species in North America , both members of the related family Unionidae ; pearls are also found within species in the genus Unio .
The interior of the shell of Margaritifera margaritifera has thick nacre ( the inner mother of pearl layer of the shell ) .
This species is capable of making fine - quality pearls , and was historically exploited in the search for pearls from wild sources .
In recent times , the Russian malacologist Valeriy Zyuganov received worldwide reputation after he discovered that the pearl mussel exhibited negligible senescence and he determined that it had a maximum lifespan of 210–250 years .
The data of V.V. Zyuganov have been confirmed by Finnish malacologists and gained general acceptance .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
Subspecies within the species Margaritifera magaritifera include : * Margaritifera margaritifera margaritifera ( Linnaeus , 1758 )
* Margaritifera margaritifera parvula ( Haas , 1908 )
* Margaritifera margaritifera durrovensis Phillips , 1928 - critically endangered subspecies in Ireland .
Synonym : Margaritifera durrovensis .
This subspecies is mentioned in annexes II and V of Habitats Directive as Margaritifera durrovensis .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The freshwater pearl mussel is one of the longest - living invertebrates in existence .
The oldest known specimen in Europe was caught in 1993 in Estonia when it was 134 years old .
Like all bivalve molluscs , the freshwater pearl mussel has a shell consisting of two parts that are hinged together , which can be closed to protect the animal 's soft body within .
The shell is large , heavy and elongated , typically yellowish - brown in colour when young and becoming darker with age .
Older parts of the shell often appear corroded , an identifying feature of this mussel species .
The inner surface of the shell is pearl white , sometimes tinged with attractive iridescent colours .
Like all molluscs , the freshwater pearl mussel has a muscular ' foot ' ; this very large , white foot enables the mussel to move slowly and bury itself within the bottom substrate of its freshwater habitat .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
The native distribution of this species is Holarctic .
The freshwater pearl mussel can be found on both sides of the Atlantic , from the Arctic and temperate regions of western Russia , through Europe to northeastern North America .
* North America : eastern Canada and New England in the United States ' Northeast * Europe , including : * Austria - estimated total population of 70 000 individuals in Mühlviertel ( declining ) and in Waldviertel ( some recruitment ) , in the states of Upper and Lower Austria , respectively .
* Belgium * Czech Republic - critically endangered ( CR ) .
In Bohemia , probably locally extinct in Moravia .
Listed in Decree for implementation , No . 395/1992 Sb .
( Czech code )
( in Czech : Vyhláška 395/1992 Sb .
ve znění vyhl .
175/2006
Sb . )
as Critically Threatened species .
Its Conservation status in 2004 - 2006 is bad ( U2 ) in report for European commission in accordance with Habitats Directive .
* Denmark * Estonia * Fennoscandia - vulnerable in Finland and Norway , endangered in Sweden .
Very rare in southern Finland , more common in the north .
Widespread but not common in Norway ; Norway is considered to host a large proportion of the European stock .
Rare in Sweden .
Also in Kola Peninsula and Karelia ( Russia )
( see below ) .
* France * Germany - critically endangered ( vom Aussterben bedroht ) .
Listed as strictly protected species in annex 1 in Bundesartenschutzverordnung .
* Great Britain .
More than half the world 's recruiting population exists in Scotland with populations in more than 50 rivers , mainly in the Highlands , although illegal harvesting has seriously affected their survival .
75 % of sites surveyed in 2010 had suffered " significant and lasting criminal damage " and in response the police and Scottish Natural Heritage have launched a campaign to protect the species .
This species has been fully protected in the United Kingdom under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 since 1998 and partly protected according to section 9(1 ) since 1991 .
* Iberian Peninsula ( Portugal and Spain )
* Ireland .
The Cladagh ( Swanlinbar ) river contains one of the largest populations surviving in northern Ireland , estimated minimum 10,000 , confined to a 6 km stretch of undisturbed river in the middle section .
* Luxembourg * Latvia * Lithuania - extinct * Poland - extinct * Russian Federation - in the rivers of the White Sea basin of the Arkhangelsk and Murmansk Regions .
It is east border of the area of distribution M. margaritifera .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Clean , fast - flowing streams and rivers are required for the freshwater pearl mussel , where it lives buried or partly buried in fine gravel and coarse sand , generally in water at depths between 0.5 and 2 metres , but sometimes at greater depths .
Clean gravel and sand is essential , particularly for juvenile freshwater pearl mussels , for if the stream or river bottom becomes clogged with silt , they can not obtain oxygen and will die .
Also essential is the presence of a healthy population of salmonids , a group of fish including salmon and trout , on which the freshwater pearl mussel relies for part of its life cycle .
LIFECYCLE Section::::Lifecycle .
Capable of living for up to 130 years , the freshwater pearl mussel begins life as a tiny larva , measuring just 0.6 to 0.7 millimetres long , which is ejected into the water from an adult mussel in a mass of one to four million other larvae .
This remarkable event takes place over just one to two days , sometime between July and September .
The larvae , known as glochidia , resemble tiny mussels , but their minute shells are held open until they snap shut on a suitable host .
The host of freshwater pearl mussel larvae are juvenile fish from the salmonid family , which includes the Atlantic salmon and sea trout .
The chances of a larva encountering a suitable fish is very low , and thus nearly all are swept away and die ; only a few are inhaled by an Atlantic salmon or sea trout , where they snap shut onto the fish 's gills .
Attached to the gills of a fish , the glochidia live and grow in this oxygen - rich environment until the following May or June , when they drop off .
The juvenile must land on clean gravely or sandy substrates if it is to successfully grow .
Attached to the substrate , juvenile freshwater pearl mussels typically burrow themselves completely into the sand or gravel , while adults are generally found with a third of their shell exposed .
Should they become dislodged , freshwater pearl mussels can rebury themselves , and are also capable of moving slowly across sandy sediments , using their large , muscular foot .
The freshwater pearl mussel grows extremely slowly , inhaling water through exposed siphons , and filtering out tiny organic particles on which it feeds .
It is thought that in areas where this species was once abundant , this filter feeding acted to clarify the water , benefiting other species which inhabited the rivers and streams .
Maturity is reached at an age of 10 to 15 years , followed by a reproductive period of over 75 years in which about 200 million larvae can be produced .
In early summer each year , around June and July , male freshwater pearl mussels release sperm into the water , where they are inhaled by female mussels .
Inside the female , the fertilized eggs develop in a pouch on the gills for several weeks , until temperature or other environmental cues trigger the female to release the larvae into the surrounding water .
THREATS AND CONSERVATION Section::::Threats and conservation .
Once the most abundant bivalve mollusc in ancient rivers around the world , numbers of the freshwater pearl mussel are now declining in all countries and this species is nearly extinct in many areas .
The causes of this decline are not fully understood , but alteration and degradation of its freshwater habitat undoubtedly plays a central role .
The negative impacts humans have on rivers and streams come from a wide range of activities such as river regulation , drainage , sewage disposal , dredging , and water pollution , including the introduction of excess nutrients .
Anything that affects the abundance of the fish hosts will also affect the freshwater pearl mussel ; for example , the introduction of exotic fish species , such as the rainbow trout , reduce the number of native fish hosts .
Introduced species are also directly affecting the freshwater pearl mussel ; the invasion of the zebra mussel ( Dreissena polymorpha ) , which has been spread to new locations by being transported on the bottom of boats or in ballast waters , has impacted freshwater pearl mussel populations in all countries it has invaded .
The freshwater pearl mussel , which is completely protected in all European countries , has been the focus of a significant amount of conservation efforts .
Measures have included the transfer of adult mussels to areas where it had gone extinct , the culture of juvenile mussels , and the release of juvenile trout , which have been infected with glochidia , into small rivers , but mainly the freshwater pearl mussel has benefited from habitat restoration projects in some areas .
Due to the essential role salmonid fish play in the life of the freshwater pearl mussel , the conservation of salmon and trout is also central in the survival of this endangered freshwater mussel .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Anonymous 2004 .
Margaritifera margaritifera .
Stage 1 and Stage 2 survey guidelines .
Irish Wildlife Manuals , No . 12 .
National Parks and Wildlife Service , Department of Environment , Heritage and Local Government , Dublin , Ireland .
25 pp .
* Moorkens E. A. 2000 .
"
Conservation Management of the Freshwater Pearl Mussel Margaritifera margaritifera .
Part 2 : Water Quality Requirements .
Irish Wildlife Manuals , No . 9 . ,
44 pp .
* Makhrov A. , Bespalaya J. , Bolotov I. , Vikhrev I. , Gofarov M. , Alekseeva Ya . , Zotin A. 2013 .
Historical geography of pearl harvesting and current status of populations of the freshwater pearl mussel Margaritifera margaritifera ( L. ) in west part of Northern European Russia .
– Hydrobiologia .
DOI 10.1007
/ s10750 - 013 - 1546 - 1
* Bolotov , I.N. , Yu .
V. Bespalaya ,
A.A. Makhrov , P.E. Aspholm ,
A.S. Aksenov , M.Yu .
Gofarov , G.A. Dvoryankin ,
O.V. Usacheva , I.V. Vikhrev , S.E. Sokolova , A.A. Pashinin & A.N. Davydov , 2012 .
Influence of Historical Exploitation and Recovery of Biological Resources on Contemporary Status of Margaritifera margaritifera L. and Salmo salar L. Populations in Northwestern Russia . -
Biology Bulletin Reviews 2(6 )
: 460–478 .
DOI 10.1134
/ S2079086412060035
* Bespalaya Yu .
V. , Bolotov I.N. , Makhrov A.A. , Vikhrev I.V. 2012 .
Historical Geography of Pearl Fishing in Rivers of the Southern White Sea Region ( Arkhangelsk Oblast ) .
- Regional Research of Russia 2(2 )
: 172–181 .
DOI 10.1134
/ S2079970512020025 * Bespalaja Yu .
V. , Bolotov I.N. , Makhrov A.A. 2007 .
State of the Population of the European Pearl Mussel Margaritifera margaritifera ( L. )
( Mollusca , Margaritiferidae ) at the Northeastern Boundary of Its Range ( Solza River , White Sea Basin ) .
- Russ .
J. Ecol .
37(3 ) :
222 - 229 .
DOI 10.1134 / S1067413607030095 * Bolotov I. N. , A. A. Makhrov , Yu .
V. Bespalaya , I. V. Vikhrev , O. V. Aksenova , P. E. Aspholm , M. Yu .
Gofarov , A. N. Ostrovskii , I. Yu .
Popov , I. S. Pal'tser , M. Rudzite , M. Rudzitis , I. S. Voroshilova , S. E. Sokolova 2013 .
Results of testing the comparatory method : The curvature of the shell valve frontal section is inappropriate as a systematic character for the freshwater pearl mussel of the genus Margaritifera .
Biology Bulletin 40(2 ) : 221 - 231 .
DOI 10.1134
/ S1062359013020027
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pesticides Database - Chemical Toxicity Studies
* University of Helsinki - Science of River Pearl Mussel
* UK Biodiversity Action Plan * Russian Margaritifera Research Consortium