INDUCTION GENERATOR
An induction generator or asynchronous generator is a type of alternating current ( AC ) electrical generator that uses the principles of induction motors to produce power .
Induction generators operate by mechanically turning their rotors faster than synchronous speed .
A regular AC induction motor usually can be used as a generator , without any internal modifications .
Induction generators are useful in applications such as mini hydro power plants , wind turbines , or in reducing high - pressure gas streams to lower pressure , because they can recover energy with relatively simple controls .
An induction generator usually draws its excitation power from an electrical grid .
Because of this , induction generators can not usually " black start " a de - energized distribution system .
Sometimes , however , they are self - excited by using phase - correcting capacitors .
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION Section::::Principle of operation .
An induction generator produces electrical power when its rotor is turned faster than the synchronous speed .
For a typical four - pole motor ( two pairs of poles on stator ) operating on a 60 Hz electrical grid , the synchronous speed is 1800 rotations per minute ( rpm ) .
The same four - pole motor operating on a 50 Hz grid will have a synchronous speed of 1500 RPM .
The motor normally turns slightly slower than the synchronous speed ; the difference between synchronous and operating speed is called " slip " and is usually expressed as per cent of the synchronous speed .
For example , a motor operating at 1450 RPM that has a synchronous speed of 1500 RPM is running at a slip of +3.3 % .
In normal motor operation , the stator flux rotation is faster than the rotor rotation .
This causes the stator flux to induce rotor currents , which create a rotor flux with magnetic polarity opposite to stator .
In this way , the rotor is dragged along behind stator flux , with the currents in the rotor induced at the slip frequency .
In generator operation , a prime mover ( turbine or engine ) drives the rotor above the synchronous speed ( negative slip ) .
The stator flux still induces currents in the rotor , but since the opposing rotor flux is now cutting the stator coils , an active current is produced in stator coils and the motor now operates as a generator , sending power back to the electrical grid .
EXCITATION Section::::Excitation .
An induction machine requires an externally - supplied armature current .
Because the rotor field always lags behind the stator field , the induction machine always " consumes " reactive power , regardless of whether it is operating as a generator or a motor .
A source of excitation current for magnetizing flux ( reactive power ) for the stator is still required , to induce rotor current .
This can be supplied from the electrical grid or , once it starts producing power , from the generator itself .
An induction machine can be started by charging the capacitors , with a DC source , while the generator is turning typically at or above generating speeds .
Once the DC source is removed the capacitors will provide the magnetization current required to begin producing voltage .
An induction machine that has recently been operating may also spontaneously produce voltage and current due to residual magnetism left in the core .
ACTIVE POWER
Section::::Active power .
Active power delivered to the line is proportional to slip above the synchronous speed .
Full rated power of the generator is reached at very small slip values ( motor dependent , typically 3 % ) .
At synchronous speed of 1800 rpm , generator will produce no power .
When the driving speed is increased to 1860 rpm ( typical example ) , full output power is produced .
If the prime mover is unable to produce enough power to fully drive the generator , speed will remain somewhere between 1800 and 1860 rpm range .
REQUIRED CAPACITANCE Section::::Required capacitance .
A capacitor bank must supply reactive power to the motor when used in stand - alone mode .
The reactive power supplied should be equal or greater than the reactive power that the machine normally draws when operating as a motor .
TORQUE VS .
SLIP Section::::Torque vs. slip .
The basic fundamental of induction generators is the conversion between mechanical energy to electrical energy .
This requires an external torque applied to the rotor to turn it faster than the synchronous speed .
However , indefinitely increasing torque does n't lead to an indefinite increase in power generation .
The rotating magnetic field torque excited from the armature works to counter the motion of the rotor and prevent over speed because of induced motion in the opposite direction .
As the speed of the motor increases the counter torque reaches a max value of torque ( breakdown torque ) that it can operate until before the operating conditions become unstable .
Ideally , induction generators work best in the stable region between the no - load condition and maximum torque region .
MAXIMUM PASS - THROUGH CURRENT
Section::::Maximum pass - through current .
In practice and without taking this notion into account , many users unsuccessfully apply these principles to the actual deployment .
In almost every case , under the same active grid voltage , the power that the generator produces is greater than the power it consumes when it is at the motor , fully loaded state , its rated power .
Sometimes the differences are in multiple folds .
A higher power will lead to a higher amperage .
For prolonged operation , and implied in its guarantee , each motor has a " maximum pass - through current " .
This amperage value , the current density , is derived from the maximum pass - through current property of the internal copper magnet wire and the combined configuration of their connections .
Without opening up the unit to examine the internal setting of the copper wires , a division of the wattage of its rated power by its rated voltage can give users some senses of its value ( W / V = A , where W is its rated power in watts , V is its rated voltage , and A is the amperage value ) .
Therefore , claims of making a unit generate more power than it 's rated should be more closely examined .
GRID AND STAND - ALONE CONNECTIONS Section::::Grid and stand - alone connections .
In induction generators , the reactive power required to establish the air gap magnetic flux is provided by a capacitor bank connected to the machine in case of stand - alone system and in case of grid connection it draws reactive power from the grid to maintain its air gap flux .
For a grid - connected system , frequency and voltage at the machine will be dictated by the electric grid , since it is very small compared to the whole system .
For stand - alone systems , frequency and voltage are complex function of machine parameters , capacitance used for excitation , and load value and type .
USES Section::::Uses .
Induction generators are often used in wind turbines and some micro hydro installations due to their ability to produce useful power at varying rotor speeds .
Induction generators are mechanically and electrically simpler than other generator types .
They are also more rugged , requiring no brushes or commutators .
LIMITATIONS Section::::Limitations .
An induction generator connected to a capacitor system can generate sufficient reactive power to operate on its own .
When the load current exceeds the capability of the generator to supply both magnetization reactive power and load power
the generator will immediately cease to produce power .
The load must be removed and the induction generator restarted with either a DC source , or if present , residual magnetism in the core .
Induction generators are particularly suitable for wind generating stations as in this case speed is always a variable factor .
Unlike synchronous motors , induction generators are load - dependent and can not be used alone for grid frequency control .
EXAMPLE
APPLICATION Section::::Example application .
As an example , consider the use of a 10 hp , 1760 r / min , 440 V , three - phase induction motor as an asynchronous generator .
The full - load current of the motor is 10 A and the full - load power factor is 0.8 .
Required capacitance per phase if capacitors are connected in delta : For a machine to run as an asynchronous generator , capacitor bank must supply minimum 4567 / 3 phases =
1523 VAR per phase .
Voltage per capacitor is 440 V because capacitors are connected in delta .
Minimum capacitance per phase : If the load also absorbs reactive power , capacitor bank must be increased in size to compensate .
Prime mover speed should be used to generate frequency of 60 Hz :
Typically , slip should be similar to full - load value when machine is running as motor , but negative ( generator operation ) : SEE ALSO
* Electrical generator NOTES
REFERENCES
* Electrical Machines , Drives , and Power Systems , 4th edition , Theodore Wildi , Prentice Hall , , pages 311–314 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Testing of stand - alone and grid connected asynchronous generator