DEGRASSI :
THE NEXT GENERATION ( SEASON 4 )
The fourth season of Degrassi :
The Next Generation commenced airing in Canada on 7 September 2004 , concluded on 14 February 2005 and contains twenty - two episodes .
is a Canadian serial teen drama television series .
This season depicts the lives of a group of high school sophomores and juniors as they deal with some of the challenges and issues teenagers face such as bullying , dysfunctional families , school shootings , mental disorders , STDs , disabilities , gambling , homosexuality , and inappropriate student - teacher relationships .
Every episode is titled after a song from the 1980s , except for the two - part season finale " Goin' Down the Road " , which took its name from the 1970 Canadian film Goin' Down the Road .
Filming took place between April and October 2004 .
The first six episodes of season four aired Tuesdays at 8:00 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. on CTV , a Canadian terrestrial television network , before settling into its regular 8:30 p.m. timeslot .
When the season returned to the schedules in January 2005 following a break over the Christmas period , it aired on Mondays at 8:30 p.m.
In the United States , it was broadcast on The N , a digital cable network aimed at teenagers and young adults .
The season was released on DVD as a four disc boxed set on 28 November 2006 by Alliance Atlantis Home Entertainment in Canada , and by FUNimation Entertainment in the US on 24 October 2006 .
The last three episodes were also sold in the US , packaged together in two different releases ; one version was dubbed " unrated , uncensored and uncut " and featured an audio commentary and other bonus material , the other version was dubbed " rated " , and did not feature the audio commentary .
Registered users of the Canadian and US iTunes Stores are also able purchase and download the season for playback on home computers and certain iPods .
This was the first season to release a soundtrack , was available as a digital download on 1 November 2005 .
Season four was one of Degrassi :
The Next Generation 's most successful seasons for viewing figures .
Two episodes were watched by nearly a million Canadian viewers and helped the season garner an average audience of 600,000 , making it the most - viewed domestic drama in Canada .
In the US , one episode from the season was watched by over half - a - million viewers , the highest audience figure
The N had ever had .
Only three awards were won for the season , from a total of nine nominations .
Season four is considered to be the darkest and most controversial season of the show , due to multiple storylines that dealt with harsh and dark issues , especially the two - part episode " " , which involves a school shooting .
This garnered the show more international attention than originally .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The fourth season features nineteen actors who receive star billing with nineteen of them returning from the previous season .
This is the only season of ' '
The Next Generation " that does not add any characters to the main cast ( previously recurring or otherwise ) .
Returning cast members include : * Stacey Farber as Ellie Nash ( 13 episodes ) * Miriam McDonald as Emma Nelson ( 17 episodes ) * Aubrey Graham as Jimmy Brooks ( 16 episodes ) * Shane Kippel as Gavin " Spinner " Mason ( 16 episodes ) * Andrea Lewis as Hazel Aden ( 13 episodes )
* Cassie Steele as ( 18 episodes ) * Lauren Collins as Paige Michalchuk ( 16 episodes ) *
Ryan Cooley as James Tiberius " J.T. " Yorke ( 13 episodes ) * Melissa McIntyre as Ashley Kerwin ( 12 episodes ) * Jake Epstein as Craig Manning ( 21 episodes )
* Jake Goldsbie as Toby Isaacs ( 10 episodes ) *
Sarah Barrable - Tishauer as Liberty Van Zandt ( 12 episodes ) * Amanda Stepto as Spike Nelson ( 8 episodes )
* Stefan Brogren as Archie " Snake " Simpson ( 16 episodes ) *
Pat Mastroianni as Joey Jeremiah ( 8 episodes )
* Stacie Mistysyn as Caitlin Ryan ( 9 episodes ) * Daniel Clark as Sean Cameron ( 9 episodes ) * Dan Woods as Mr. Raditch ( 9 episodes ) * Adamo Ruggiero as Marco Del Rossi ( 17 episodes )
The actor from season three who did not return in any capacity this season was Christina Schmidt as Terri McGreggor .
Shenae Grimes , Dalmar Abuzeid , and Christopher Jacot are introduced in recurring roles as Darcy Edwards , Danny Van Zandt , and Matt Oleander , respectively .
Returning in their recurring roles are Ephraim Ellis as Rick Murray , John Bregar as Dylan Michalchuk , Deanna Casaluce as Alex Nuñez , Mike Lobel as Jay Hogart , Daniel Morrison as Chris Sharpe , Alex Steele as Angela Jeremiah , Melissa DiMarco as Daphne Hatzilakos , Linlyn Lue as Ms. Kwan , and Jennifer Podemski as Ms. Sauve .
Film director Kevin Smith and actor Jason Mewes guest star as exaggerated versions of themselves ( for example Kevin is portrayed as being unmarried and childless ) , who are at Degrassi Community School in the final three episodes of the season to work on Jay and Silent Bob
Go
Canadian , Eh ! , a fictional feature film in the View Askewniverse series that is using Degrassi Community School as a filming location .
Singer Alanis Morissette , who had previously played God in two other Jay and Silent Bob movies , guest star in "
Goin' Down the Road Part One " as herself , playing the school principal in Jay and Silent Bob
Go Canadian , Eh ! CREW Section::::Crew .
The season was produced by Epitome Pictures in association CTV .
Funding was provided by The Canadian Film or Video Production Tax Credit and the Ontario Film and Television Tax Credit , the Canadian Television Fund and BCE - CTV Benefits ,
The Shaw Television Broadcast Fund , the Independent Production Fund , Mountain Cable Program , and RBC Royal Bank .
The season 's executive producers are Epitome Pictures ' president Stephen Stohn , and CEO Linda Schuyler , the co - creator of the Degrassi franchise .
Aaron Martin was promoted from executive story editor during the third season to executive producer .
Degrassi :
The Next Generation co - creator Yan Moore served as the creative consultant and David Lowe was the line producer .
Sean Reycraft and Shelley Scarrow served as co - executive story editors .
Brendon Yorke was the story editor , and Miklos Perlus the junior story editor .
The editor was Stephen Withrow , Stephen Stanley was the production designer , and the cinematographer was Gavin Smith .
The writers for the season are Sean Carley , Richard Clark , R. Scott Cooper , James Hurst , Aaron Martin , Miklos Perlus , Sean Reycraft , Shelley Scarrow , Brandon Yorke .
Kevin Smith was allowed to rewrite his dialogue for the episodes which he appeared in .
Graeme Campbell , Philip Earnshaw , Eleanore Lindo , Ron Murphy , Sudz Sutherland , and Stefan Scaini directed the episodes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
An episode featuring a storyline about a school shooting garnered the series an all - time high audience of 930,000 Canadian viewers .
A second episode with a storyline about oral sex also earned just under 1,000,000 viewers .
Overall , the season averaged an audience of 600,000 and was the top domestic drama for Canadian teenagers aged 12 to 17 , and adults in three age brackets ; ages 18 to 34 , ages 18 to 49 , and ages 25 to 54 .
In the US , the season received an 80 % larger audience compared to season three , and one episode received 540,000 viewers and drew a Nielsen rating of 2.7 for teenagers and 4.7 for female teenagers , meaning that on average 2.7 % of the nation 's teenagers , and 4.7 % of the nation 's female teenagers were tuned in at any given moment .
The season was well received amongst critics , especially in regards to the episodes with Kevin Smith and the storylines on oral sex and the school shooting .
The Palm Beach Post said the series " is told from a teenager 's point of view since the writers have no interest in appealing to a broad - based demographic like the writers on , say , Fox 's The O.C. ...
it connects with teens on their level " , though it was still " surprised Jay used the graphic oral sex term you 'd hear in just about every high school hallway in America " , that word being " blow - job " .
The Boston Herald said " it is important for teens to learn about sexually transmitted diseases and the cost of unprotected sex ... and should help parents begin conversations with their own children " .
PopMatters 's Jodie Janella Horn described Degrassi : The Next Generation as " the most unnervingly accurate series ever of the high school genre " .
Another comparison was made between Degrassi : The Next Generation and The O.C. , saying " The O.C. will never remind me of anything in my life " , while the events in the two - part episode " Voices Carry " with " hotel room trashing , projectile launching , fist fighting at weddings bi - polar loon Craig [ and girlfriend Ashley ] , was like an actual scene from my actual teenage life and just like me , Ashley thinks they 're going to pull through it together " .
AfterElton.com , a website that focuses on the portrayal of gay and bisexual men in the media praised the series for " not only focusing on gay teens , but it showcases gay sex , and relationships .
By not stereotyping [ the gay characters ] they are helping thousands of confused and shameful teenagers feel accepted , in Canada and America alike . "
Ben Neihart called Degrassi :
The Next Generation " tha Best Teen TV N da WRLD ! "
( the best teen TV in the world ) in a six - page article in The New York Times .
Commenting that " the explosive - issue - per - capita ratio is seriously out of whack " , he admitted that " the teen - diary attention to microissues ( zits , periods , parents ' night ) gives the episodes a peculiar authenticity no matter how outrageous their story lines " .
Two episodes were nominated for " Best Youth Script " at the Canadian Screenwriting Awards , which are administered by the Writers Guild of Canada .
Shelley Scarrow 's " Secrets Part One " lost out to " Mercy Street " , written by James Hurst and Miklos Perlus .
At the Directors Guild of Canada Awards , Stefan Sciani won the award for " Outstanding Achievement in a Television Series - Family " for the episode
" Time Stands Still Part Two " , and Stephen Stanley was nominated for the " Outstanding Achievement in Production Design - Television Series " category for the episode " Goin' Down the Road " .
The series won its first Teen Choice Award in the US for " Choice Summer Series " At the Young Artist Awards , Degrassi :
The Next Generation failed to win any of the awards its actors were nominated for .
Adamo Ruggiero was nominated in the " Best Performance in a TV Comedy Series Leading Young Actor " category , Aubrey Graham was nominated in the " Best Performance in a TV Comedy Series Supporting Young Actor " category , and Alex Steele was nominated in the " Best Performance in a TV Comedy Series Recurring Young Actress " category .
The entire cast was nominated in the " Outstanding Young Performers in a TV Series " category " .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The season premiere was an hour - long television special .
CTV broadcast episodes two and three , four and five , and twenty and twenty - one on the same nights , though not as hour - long specials .
In the US , The N aired the season in two blocks , the first block began 1 October 2004 and ran until 11 March 2005 .
The second block , advertised as the " Summer ' 05 " season , was screened between 1 July 2005 and 26 August 2005 .
The season premiere and episodes thirteen and fourteen aired as hour - long specials .
DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases .
The DVD release of season four was released by Alliance Atlantis Home Entertainment in Canada on 28 November 2006 , and by FUNimation Entertainment in the US on 24 October 2006 after it had completed broadcast on television .
It was released in Australia by Shock Records on 13 April 2011 .
As well as every episode from the season , the DVD release features bonus material including deleted scenes , bloopers and behind - the - scenes
featurettes .
The final three episodes of the season were also released separately from the complete season release on 8 November 2005 .
They were packaged together in two different versions ; one was dubbed " unrated , uncensored and uncut " and featured an audio commentary and other bonus material , the other was dubbed " rated " , and did not feature the audio commentary .
valign="top " valign="top " * 22 director 's cut episodes
* 4-disc set
* Languages : * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 ) rowspan="4 " align="left
" width="300 " * Audio commentaries : * " Time Stands Still " * " Secret " * Deleted scenes * Blooper reel * Original cast auditions
* Season 4 interactive quiz
* Character and cast biographies
* Jay and Silent Bob flipbook * Degrassi yearbook * PAX Gun Violence Prevention Public Service Announcements colspan="3 "
align="center " Release dates align="center
" Canada align="center " United States align="center " Region 4 align="center " 28 November 2006 align="center " 24 October 2006 align="center " 13 April 2011 valign="top " valign="top " * 3 director 's cut episodes
* 120 minutes * 1-disc set * Languages : * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 ) rowspan="4 " align="left "
width="300 " * Audio Commentaries : * Five minutes of previously unseen integrated footage
* Reel footage of the Canadian ninja scene * Bloopers
* Deleted scenes *
Jay and Silent Bob photo album
* Degrassi photo
album
* Actor biographies
* Character Profiles colspan="3
"
align="center " Release date align="center " align="center " 8 November 2005 valign="top " valign="top " * 3 director 's cut episodes
* 100 minutes * 1-disc set
* Languages : * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 ) rowspan="4 " align="left
" width="300 " * Five minutes of previously unseen integrated footage
* Reel footage of the Canadian ninja scene * Bloopers
* Deleted scenes *
Jay and Silent Bob photo album
* Degrassi photo
album
* Actor biographies
* Character Profiles colspan="3
"
align="center " Release date align="center " align="center "
8 November 2005 REFERENCES NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Season 4 episode synopses at CTV Television Network
* List of Degrassi :
The Next Generation episodes at IMDB .
* Season 4 at TV.com .