SQUARE ROOT OF 3 Binary
The square root of 3 is the positive real number that , when multiplied by itself , gives the number 3 .
It is more precisely called the principal square root of 3 , to distinguish it from the negative number with the same property .
It is denoted by .
The square root of 3 is an irrational number .
It is also known as Theodorus ' constant , named after Theodorus of Cyrene , who proved its irrationality .
The first sixty digits of its decimal expansion are :
As of December 2013 , its numerical value in decimal has been computed to at least ten billion digits .
The fraction ( … ) for the square root of three can be used as an approximation .
Despite having a denominator of only 56 , it differs from the correct value by less than ( approximately ) .
The rounded value of 1.732 is correct to within 0.01 % of the actual value .
Archimedes reported , accurate to ( six decimal places ) and ( four decimal places ) , respectively .
It can be expressed as the continued fraction , expanded on the right .
It can also be expressed by generalized continued fractions such as which is evaluated at every second term .
The following nested square expressions converge to : PROOF OF IRRATIONALITY Section::::Proof of irrationality .
This irrationality proof for the uses Fermat 's method of infinite descent :
Suppose that is rational , and express it in lowest possible terms ( i.e. , as a fully reduced fraction ) as for natural numbers and .
Therefore , multiplying by 1 will give an equal expression : where is the largest integer smaller than .
Note that both the numerator and the denominator have been multiplied by a number smaller than 1 .
Through this , and by multiplying out both the numerator and the denominator , we get : It follows that can be replaced with : Then , can also be replaced with in the denominator : The square of can be replaced by 3 .
As is multiplied by , their product equals : Then can be expressed in lower terms than ( since the first step reduced the sizes of both the numerator and the denominator , and subsequent steps did not change them ) as , which is a contradiction to the hypothesis that was in lowest terms .
An alternate proof of this is , assuming with being a fully reduced fraction : Multiplying by both terms , and then squaring both gives Since the left side is divisible by 3 , so is the right side , requiring that be divisible by 3 .
Then , can be expressed as : Therefore , dividing both terms by 3 gives : Since the right side is divisible by 3 , so is the left side and hence so is .
Thus , as both and are divisible by 3 , they have a common factor and is not a fully reduced fraction , contradicting the original premise .
GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY Section::::Geometry and trigonometry .
The square root of 3 can be found as the leg length of an equilateral triangle that encompasses a circle with a diameter of 1 .
If an equilateral triangle with sides of length 1 is cut into two equal halves , by bisecting an internal angle across to make a right angle with one side , the right angle triangle 's hypotenuse is length one and the sides are of length and .
From this the trigonometric function tangent of 60 ° equals , and the sine of 60 ° and the cosine of 30 ° both equal .
The square root of 3 also appears in algebraic expressions for various other trigonometric constants , including the sines of 3 ° , 12 ° , 15 ° , 21 ° , 24 ° , 33 ° , 39 ° , 48 ° , 51 ° , 57 ° , 66 ° , 69 ° , 75 ° , 78 ° , 84 ° , and 87 ° .
It is the distance between parallel sides of a regular hexagon with sides of length 1 .
On the complex plane , this distance is expressed as mentioned below .
It is the length of the space diagonal of a unit cube .
The vesica piscis has a major axis to minor axis ratio equal to 1 : , this can be shown by constructing two equilateral triangles within it .
SQUARE ROOT OF −3 Section::::Square root of −3 .
Multiplication of by the imaginary unit gives a square root of -3 , an imaginary number .
More exactly , ( see square root of negative numbers ) .
It is an Eisenstein integer .
Namely , it is expressed as the difference between two non - real cubic roots of 1 ( which are Eisenstein integers ) .
OTHER USES POWER ENGINEERING
Section::::Other uses .
Section::::Power engineering .
In power engineering , the voltage between two phases in a three - phase system equals times the line to neutral voltage .
This is because any two phases are 120 ° apart , and two points on a circle 120 degrees apart are separated by times the radius ( see geometry examples above ) .
SEE ALSO
* Square root of 2
* Square root of 5 NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Theodorus ' Constant at MathWorld * Kevin Brown * E. B. Davis