MALAYSIA DAY
Malaysia Day is held on 16 September every year to commemorate the establishment of the Malaysian federation on the same date in 1963 .
It marked the joining together of Malaya , North Borneo , Sarawak and Singapore to form Malaysia .
But then Singapore was expelled on 9 August 1965 , after two years being a part of Malaysia .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The formation of the new federation was planned to occur on 1 June 1963 , but was later postponed to 31 August 1963 , to coincide with the sixth Hari Merdeka .
Several issues related to objections of neighbouring Indonesia and the Philippines to the formation of Malaysia delayed the declaration to 16 September of the same year .
The postponement was also done to allow the United Nations team time to conduct fact - finding mission in North Borneo ( now Sabah ) and Sarawak regarding the two states participation in a new federation .
Contrary to popular beliefs , no referendum was ever conducted in both North Borneo and Sarawak ; Singapore held a referendum on 1 September 1962 , with all three options endorsing integration into Malaysia .
The formation of Malaysia was made possible with the signing of the international treaty the Malaysia Agreement 1963 between the United Kingdom , the Federation of Malaya ( constituted by 11 states created under the Federation of Malaya Agreement 1957 ; as one component ) ; Sarawak , North Borneo ( renamed Sabah ) and Singapore of the remaining component States .
The Malaysia Agreement 1963 set out the terms and conditions for the component States to be federated under a new constitution into one new nation called Malaysia .
It is under this Agreement that the " Malaysia Bill " , ( Annexture A ) , the constitutions of Sarawak , Sabah and Singapore were created by agreement of all the parties ( Singapore left Malaysia on 9 August 1965 ) .
The Malaysia Bill was introduced in the Malayan Parliament on 9 July 1963 , and received consent from Tuanku Syed Putra , the Yang di - Pertuan Agong , on 29 August 1963 .
Prior to the formation of Malaysia , Sarawak gained its Self - Government Administration on 22 July 1963 , while North Borneo ( which was renamed Sabah ) began Self - Government Administration from the United Kingdom on 31 August 1963 , thus coinciding with the sixth anniversary of the Malayan independence .
Prior to 2010 , Malaysia Day was observed as a state public holiday in Sabah and Sarawak .
Since 2010 , Malaysia Day has been a nationwide public holiday .
Prime Minister Najib Razak made the decision after a question - and - answer session at Parliament on 19 October 2009 , giving Malaysians two celebrations related to the country 's independence .
In conjunction with the day celebration in 2018 under the new Pakatan Harapan ( PH ) government , Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad has promised to restore Sabah and Sarawak status in the Malaysian federation in accordance with the Malaysia Agreement , changing " their status from merely a state to an equal partner of the Malayan states " .
IN POPULAR CULTURES Section::::In popular cultures .
Malaysia Forever was a song composed by Bobby Gimby to celebrate the Formation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963 .
Bobby Gimby received the nickname " The Pied Piper of Canada " after the Prime Minister nicked Gimby as " the Pied Piper from Canada " .
The song was recorded in Kuala Lumpur and Singapore .
It is a folk song with a length of 2 minutes sung by the Choir of the Marymount Vocational School ( Singapore ) .
On the days before the merger , it was taught to school children prior to merger and became an instant hit when it was broadcast over the air - waves of all parts of Malaysia .
SEE ALSO
* Merdeka Day
* Sarawak Day
* North Borneo Self - government Day
* 20-point agreement ( Sabah ) * 18-point agreement ( Sarawak ) * History of Malaysia * Singapore in Malaysia * Malaysia Forever REFERENCES