OVERHEAD PRESS
The press , overhead press or shoulder press is a weight training exercise with many variations , typically performed while standing , in which a weight is pressed straight upwards from racking position until the arms are locked out overhead , while the legs , lower back and abs maintain balance .
The exercise helps build muscular shoulders with bigger arms , and is one of the most difficult compound upper - body exercises .
MOVEMENT Section::::Movement .
The overhead press is set up by taking a barbell or other weight and putting it in racking position .
This can be done by taking the weight from a rack or by cleaning the weight from the floor ( clean and press ) .
The weight is then pressed to overhead until the elbows are fully locked out .
As the weight clears the head , the lifter leans forward slightly , or comes directly under , in order to keep balance .
As the weight is lowered back to racking position and clears the head again , the lifter leans slightly back .
The overhead press is a highly effective compound full - body exercise .
The exercise can be done sitting or standing , with alternating arms or with a hammer grip in which the palms are turned in toward the face .
Performing it standing recruits many more muscle groups in order to maintain balance and support the lift , rather than performing it seated .
Like the squat and deadlift , it can be thought of as a whole - body exercise , to some extent .
EQUIPMENT Section::::Equipment .
The overhead press can be performed with any type of weight / equipment , but is commonly performed with :
* Barbell * Dumbbell * Kettlebell Out of those , the dumbbell and kettlebell provide unilateral qualities , and out of those , the kettlebell provides the most variety due to the grip attributes of the kettlebell .
It provides a different way to get the most benefit out of the exercise .
Over 50 + press variations can be created through changing of : * Grip * Angle
* Stance
*
Etc . VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
Other variations of the overhead press are : * Arnold Press : beginning a dumbbell press with forearms supinated , ending with forearms pronated .
Named after Arnold Schwarzenegger .
The Arnold Press in essence greatly increases the [ Larry ] Scott Press 's range of motion by starting in a position close to the dumbbell curls ' finishing position instead of the Scott Press 's starting position of elbows pulled back and at or above the shoulder .
* Behind - the - neck press : barbell on the trapezius vs. on the anterior deltoids * Bradford Press : as you press , once the bar clears a few inches overhead
it is slowly lowered behind the head
then explosively reversed to the front and slowly lowered to the starting position .
The 2 phases are commonly considered one repetition .
Named after Jim Bradford .
* Dumbbell press : using dumbbells .
* Military press : Heels together with strict form with no pre - movement momentum .
It is called the " Military Press " because this movement used to be the general indicator or test of one 's strength in the military .
The military press targets the deltoid muscles in the shoulders as well as the triceps .
Additionally , it works the core and legs , which the lifter uses to help stabilize the weight .
* Olympic press ( clean and press ) : lift used in Olympic Weightlifting , consists of a clean , then pressing with no lower body movement , such as in the Push press .
Discontinued after 1972 Olympics due to inconsistent judging criteria ( such as should the lifter be allowed to bend backwards slightly when pressing , should a leg drive be allowed ) .
* One - handed press : pressing with one arm at a time .
*
Push press : using leg drive to press the weight up * Seated press : pressing while seated ( commonly on a bench ) .
The seated press can be performed using a Smith machine , but this is often considered inferior to the free - weight variant because of the lack of recruitment of auxiliary muscles and limited range of movement .
pressing to overhead from a deep squat position .
Created by Viktor Sots .
BIOMECHANICS ( MILITARY PRESS )
Section::::Biomechanics ( Military press ) .
The deltoid muscle has a dynamic activation of about 90–120 degrees of abduction .
Afterwards it has an almost static function during the remainder of the lift .
The rest of the movement is mainly due to contraction of trapezius muscle pars acendens , serratus anterior muscle and trapezius pars descendens .
They work together to tilt the scapula to a position that makes the glenoid cavity point superiorly , enabling the last degrees of abduction of the shoulder .
Other contributing muscles include the supraspinatus muscle and biceps brachii muscle caput longum .
The rotator cuff is also active to pull the caput humeri into the glenoid cavity and counteract the superior forces of caput humeri created by the deltoid .
The triceps contribute to the extension of the elbow , and counteract the force from biceps caput longum .
SEE ALSO
* Bench press *
Clean and press *
Dip
*
Handstand pushup
* Press up *
Push press
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Mark Rippetoe with Lon Kilgore , Starting Strength , The Aasgaard Company Publishers , 2005 , FURTHER READING
* A.I. Kampanji , " The physiology of the joints , Volume 1 :
The upper limb