WALK
HARD :
THE DEWEY COX STORY Walk Hard
: The Dewey Cox Story is a 2007 American comedy film directed by Jake Kasdan , and written by Kasdan and co - producer Judd Apatow .
It stars John C. Reilly , Jenna Fischer , Tim Meadows and Kristen Wiig .
The plot echoes the storyline of 2005 's Johnny Cash biopic Walk the Line and 2004 's Ray Charles biopic Ray .
Walk
Hard is a parody of the biopic genre as a whole .
As Walk Hard heavily references the film Walk the Line , the Dewey Cox persona is mostly based on Johnny Cash ; but the character also includes elements of the lives and careers of Roy Orbison , Glen Campbell , Bob Dylan , Ray Charles , Jerry Lee Lewis , Donovan , John Lennon , James Brown , Jim Morrison , Conway Twitty , Neil Diamond , Hank Williams , and Brian Wilson .
The film portrays fictional versions of artists Buddy Holly , The Big Bopper , Elvis Presley , and The Beatles ; also , some artists play themselves , including Eddie Vedder and Ghostface Killah .
In addition , the film parodies or pays tribute to the musical styles of Bob Dylan , David Bowie , Billy Joel , Van Dyke Parks with Brian Wilson , and the seventies punk rock movement .
The film was released in North America on December 21 , 2007 .
It received positive reviews from critics , but was a box office bomb - grossing only $ 20 million against a $ 35 million budget .
The film has since developed a cult following .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dewey Cox begins his quest for stardom in Springberry , Alabama in 1946 .
While playing with his brother Nate , Dewey accidentally cuts his brother in half at the waist with a machete .
The trauma of the incident causes Dewey to lose his sense of smell .
After his brother 's death is announced by a physician making a house call , Dewey 's mother sends him to the local store to buy some butter and a candle .
There , he meets a blues guitarist , who lets Dewey play his guitar .
Dewey is a natural .
In 1953 , after a successful and controversial talent show performance , then 14-year - old Dewey decides to leave Springberry with his 12-year - old girlfriend , Edith .
They soon marry , have sex , and have a baby after 8.7 months .
While working at an all - African American nightclub , Dewey gets a break when he replaces singer Bobby Shad at the last minute and impresses the Hasidic Jewish record executives attending the show that evening .
Dewey then is brought to the studio where he is interrupted while recording a rockabilly rendition of " That 's Amore " .
The recording executive berates Dewey as talentless .
Backed into a corner , Dewey makes the first recording of " Walk Hard " , the song inspired by a speech Dewey gave to Edith .
Within 35 minutes , the song becomes a hit , and Dewey begins to get caught up in the fame of rock and roll .
When Dewey stumbles upon a room of groupies smoking with drummer Sam , Sam introduces Dewey to marijuana .
Sam tells Dewey to leave because he " do n't want no part of this shit " ( a running gag throughout the film ) but Dewey eventually tries it and continues to do so every time he finds Sam with a new drug .
His attitude and drug problems cause him to become unfaithful to Edith .
Dewey 's father then returns to inform Dewey that Dewey 's mother has died while dancing to Dewey 's song on the radio .
Pa manages to make Dewey feel responsible for her death , contributing to an already high level of inner turmoil .
Dewey is then introduced to cocaine , which leads to a change in his music to a louder , " Punk rock " type .
With the addition of backup singer Darlene Madison , Dewey produces several more hit records .
However , they become attracted to each other , and Dewey weds Darlene while still married to Edith , which leads to both women leaving him .
He then snaps at his chimpanzee companion , who is " only concerned with fruit and touching himself " .
Dewey is eventually busted after purchasing drugs from an undercover cop , serves time in jail , and spends time in rehab before Darlene returns .
They move to Berkeley , California in 1966 at the beginning of the ' 60s counterculture movement .
Dewey writes protest songs for midgets .
His singing style is then compared by a reporter to that of Bob Dylan , which Dewey angrily denies .
During a band visit to India , Dewey takes LSD with The Beatles , which causes Dewey to lose touch with reality yet again and have a Yellow Submarine - esque hallucination .
Dewey becomes obsessed with every aspect of the recording process and is consumed with creating his masterpiece entitled Black Sheep ( a homage to Brian Wilson 's Smile ) .
The band does not appreciate his insane style of music and his continuous abuse of the others in the group .
As a result , the band breaks up ; Darlene is also unable to deal with Dewey 's insanity and drug problems and leaves him .
Dewey goes through another stay in rehab , where he is visited by Nate 's ghost .
Nate ridicules Dewey 's self - pity and tells him to start writing songs again .
Dewey is next seen jogging into the 1970s , and hosting a CBS variety television show .
But his song - block prevents him from writing a masterpiece for his brother .
( In the director 's cut , Dewey remarries again , this time to Cheryl Tiegs . )
Nate appears again and tells Dewey that he needs to reconcile with Pa. Dewey soon confronts Pa and gives an emotional ( albeit humorous ) speech .
Although Dewey 's father appreciates his courage , he challenges Dewey to a fight to the death with machetes , having apparently preparing to do so for years .
However , Pa accidentally cuts himself in half .
Just before he dies , the senior Cox forgives Dewey and tells him to be a better father than he was .
His death causes Dewey to have an emotional breakdown and he destroys almost everything in his home .
Dewey is then approached by one of his illegitimate children , and accepts that it is time to focus on spending time with his numerous children .
Darlene returns to him in 1992 , divorced and single .
Dewey talks to Darlene about what he has done since they last met .
After finally understanding what is most important to him , Dewey regains his sense of smell and they get remarried .
In the present day , L'Chaim 's son Dreidel pays a visit to Dewey 's estate .
He informs Dewey that he has become popular with younger listeners through rapper Lil ' Nutzzak 's sampling of " Walk Hard " .
Dewey is upset about this at first , but pays it little mind when he is informed that he is to receive the lifetime achievement award .
Dewey is reluctant to play a song at first , fearing the temptations he once succumbed to , but his wife , children and grandchildren put their full support behind him .
Dewey reunites with his band and he is finally able to fulfill his dream of creating one great masterpiece that sums up his entire life with his final song , " Beautiful Ride " .
The ghost of his family listens to his song .
A title card reveals that Dewey died three minutes after this final performance .
After the credits roll , a short black - and - white clip purporting to be " The actual Dewey Cox , April 16 , 2002 " is played .
( The real Cox is again played by Reilly , but using a more gravelly voice . )
CAST
* John C. Reilly as Dewey Cox , a parody of several 20th century musicians , including Ray Charles , Johnny Cash , Bob Dylan , and Brian Wilson .
* Conner Rayburn as young Dewey Cox
* Kristen Wiig as Edith , a parody of Vivian Liberto
* Raymond J. Barry as Pa Cox is similar to Johnny Cash 's father Ray Cash or Elvis Presley 's father Vernon Presley .
* Margo Martindale as Ma Cox is similar to Johnny Cash 's mother Carrie Cash or Elvis Presley 's mother Gladys Presley .
* Jenna Fischer as Darlene , a parody of June Carter * Angela Correa as Darlene 's singing voice
* Tim Meadows as Sam McPherson * Chris Parnell as Theo
* Matt Besser as Dave * Chip Hormess as Nate Cox
* Jonah Hill as older Nate ( uncredited ) * David " Honeyboy " Edwards as The Old Blues Singer
* Paul Bates as Nightclub manager * David Krumholtz as Schwartzberg * Craig Robinson as Bobby Shad * Harold Ramis as L'Chaim * Simon Helberg as Dreidel L'Chaim
* Philip Rosenthal as Mazeltov
* Martin Starr as Schmendrick
* John Michael Higgins as " Walk Hard " recording engineer * Ed Helms as Stage manager * Jane Lynch as Gail , the news reporter * Angela Little Mackenzie as Beth Anne * Skyler Gisondo as Dewford " Dewdrop / Dewey " Cox , Jr. * Lurie Poston as a Cox kid * Jack McBrayer as DJ * Nat Faxon as Awards show stage manager * Rance Howard as Preacher
* Odette Yustman as Reefer girl
* Frankie Muniz as Buddy Holly
* John Ennis as The Big Bopper
* Jack White as Elvis Presley * Adam Herschman as Jerry Garcia *
The Temptations ( Otis Williams , Ron Tyson , Terry Weeks , Joe Herndon , Bruce Williamson )
as themselves * Eddie Vedder as himself
* Jackson Browne as himself * Jewel as herself * Ghostface Killah as himself
* Lyle Lovett as himself
* Gerry Bednob as Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
* Cheryl Tiegs ( in the director 's cut unrated version ) as herself UNCREDITED * Paul Rudd as John Lennon * Jack Black as Paul McCartney
*
Justin Long as George Harrison * Jason Schwartzman as Ringo Starr * Patrick Duffy ( unrated version ) as himself
* Morgan Fairchild ( unrated version ) as herself * Cheryl Ladd ( unrated version ) as herself PRODUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production and development .
Jake Kasdan brought the idea to his friend and fellow director Judd Apatow .
They then began writing the film together .
The tongue - in - cheek references in this fake biopic were drawn from various sources .
Apatow and Kasdan noted that they watched various types of biopics for inspiration , including those of Jimi Hendrix and Marilyn Monroe .
Despite the humorous approach , the film was crafted in the serious tone of films earmarked for an Oscar , adding to the irony .
John C. Reilly , who actually sings and plays guitar , was chosen to play the title role .
" We took the clichés of movie biopics and just had fun with them , " Reilly said .
The " deliberate miscasting " of celebrity cameos , such as Elvis Presley and The Beatles , was intended to enhance the comedy .
The movie 's poster is a reference to the " young lion " photos of Jim Morrison .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film was praised by notable critics , including Roger Ebert ( who gave the film 3 out of 4 stars ) , receiving 74 % positive reviews at Rotten Tomatoes , classifying it as " certified fresh " .
The movie , however , was not commercially successful , taking $ 18 million at the US box office which was less than the film 's budget .
John C. Reilly received a Golden Globe nomination for his role .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray on April 8 , 2008 .
In the opening weekend , 263,001 DVD units were sold , generating revenue of $ 5,110,109 .
As of May 2010 , DVD sales have gathered revenue of $ 15,664,735 .
PROMOTIONAL APPEARANCES
Section::::Promotional appearances .
Along with a backing band " the hardwalkers " , Reilly made seven musical appearances as Dewey Cox in the weeks prior to the film 's release date .
* December 5 , 2007 - Rock & Roll Hall of Fame
( Cleveland , OH ) * December 6 , 2007 -
The Cubby Bear ( Chicago , IL ) * December 7 , 2007 -
Stubb 's BBQ ( Austin , TX ) * December 8 , 2007 - Mercy Lounge ( Nashville , TN )
* December 10 , 2007 - Great American Music Hall ( San Francisco , CA ) * December 11 , 2007 - The Blacksheep ( Colorado Springs , CO ) * December 13 , 2007 - Guitar Center on Sunset Blvd .
( Los Angeles , CA ) * December 19 , 2007 - Knitting Factory ( New York , NY )
* December 19 , 2007 - Performed in the character of Dewey Cox on Good Morning America .
Several fake commercials were aired including one with John Mayer , hinting Dewey might be his father .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Singer - songwriters Dan Bern and Mike Viola ( of the Candy Butchers ) wrote most of the film 's songs , including " There 's a Change a Happenin ' " , " Mulatto " , " A Life Without You
( Is No Life at All ) " , " Beautiful Ride " and " Hole in My Pants " .
Charlie Wadhams wrote the song " Let 's Duet " .
Marshall Crenshaw wrote the title song , and Van Dyke Parks penned the Brian Wilson - esque 1960s - styled psychedelic jam " Black Sheep "
( the recording session seems to be a specific parody of Wilson 's Smile album sessions , on which Van Dyke Parks worked ) .
Antonio Ortiz wrote " Take My Hand " .
A number of critics noted the unusually high quality of many of the individual songs on the soundtrack , how well they reflected the styles and times they were attempting to parody , and how well they stood on their own as quality compositions .
The soundtrack was nominated for both a Grammy and Golden Globe Award and was nominated and won the Sierra Award for Best Song in a Motion Picture from the Las Vegas Film Critics Society .
John C. Reilly sang on all the tracks and played guitar on most of them .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS