NICOTINE
WITHDRAWAL
Nicotine withdrawal is a group of symptoms that occur in the first few weeks upon the abrupt discontinuation or decrease in intake of nicotine .
Symptoms include intense cravings for nicotine , anger / irritability , anxiety , depression , impatience , trouble sleeping , restlessness , hunger or weight gain , and difficulty concentrating .
A smoking cessation program may improve one 's chance for success in quitting nicotine .
Nicotine withdrawal is recognized in both the American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic and Statistical Manual and the WHO International Classification of Diseases .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
The most documented symptoms are cravings for nicotine , anger / irritability , anxiety , depression , impatience , trouble sleeping , restlessness , hunger or weight gain , and difficulty concentrating .
Symptoms are usually strongest for the first few days and then dissipate over 2 - 4 weeks .
Withdrawal symptoms make it harder to quit nicotine products and most methods for quitting smoking involve reducing nicotine withdrawal .
The most common symptoms are irritability , anxiety and difficulty concentrating .
Depression and insomnia are the least common .
Other withdrawal symptoms may include constipation , cough , dizziness , drowsiness , headache , impulsivity , fatigue , flu symptoms , mood swings , mouth ulcers , and increased dreaming .
Cessation of nicotine usually increases eating and weight , decreases memory , decreases the ability to pay attention and concentrate on tasks , and decreases heart rate .
Cessation of tobacco can also require changes in levels of various medications .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
The effect that nicotine - dependent individuals experience after they discontinue or decrease nicotine use .
Nicotine is an addictive substance found most commonly in tobacco and tobacco products including cigarettes , cigars , chewing tobacco , pipe tobacco , snus , snuff , nicotine gum and e - liquid .
Withdrawal is the body 's reaction to not having the nicotine it had become accustomed to .
Withdrawal is most common and intense in cigarette smokers and intermediate in smokeless users .
The symptoms of nicotine withdrawal usually appear 2 - 3 hours after last intake of nicotine and peak in 2 - 3 days .
In a minority of smokers , cravings may last for years .
Nicotine withdrawal causes few physical signs and is not life - threatening but associated cravings can be as severe as withdrawal from other drugs .
There is some evidence that stopping nicotine may make a prior psychiatric problem worse but this is uncertain .
After the initial withdrawal period , anxiety , depression , and quality of life generally improve such that former smokers are better off than continuing smokers .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Various causes have been proposed to explain the causes of nicotine withdrawal .
Nicotine binds to nicotinic receptors in the brain that , in turn , cause an increase in dopamine .
Dopamine is the major chemical that stimulates reward centers in the brain .
The brain recruits an opposing force to dampen the effects of nicotine and this causes tolerance ( the reduction in the effect of nicotine ) .
The onset of this opposing force and the fact that the brain becomes used to and dependent on nicotine to function normally is known as physical dependence .
When nicotine intake is decreased , the brain 's opposing force is now unopposed and this causes withdrawal symptoms .
It also appears that opiate , serotonergic , glutamic , cannabinoid , and corticotrophin receptors may play a role in nicotine withdrawal .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Gradually reducing nicotine intake causes less withdrawal than abruptly stopping .
Another way to reduce nicotine withdrawal symptoms is to provide the body with an alternative source of nicotine ( nicotine replacement therapy ) for a temporary period and then taper this new nicotine intake .
Other medication used for quitting smoking include bupropion , varenicline , cytisine , nortriptyline , and clonidine .
Treatments other than medication , such as increased exercise , can also reduce nicotine withdrawal .
Many behavior changes such as avoiding situations where one usually smoked , planning ahead to deal with temptations , and seeking the support of friends and family are effective in helping people quit smoking , but whether this is due to reduced withdrawal is unclear .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Most nicotine users have at least one of the above withdrawal symptoms when they try to stop .
These effects are much milder to those who use isolated nicotine over tobacco .
Withdrawal can occur in less frequent users , but heavier users and those with a past or current psychiatric disorder tend to have more severe withdrawal .
Genetics also influence the severity of withdrawal .
SEE ALSO
* Withdrawal * Smoking cessation REFERENCES