ST PETER 'S COLLEGE , JOHANNESBURG St Peter 's College is an independent , co - educational Anglican private secondary school located in Johannesburg , South Africa .
The college aims to create and maintain an environment where : * trust and respect for the individual prevails , * diversity is valued , and * personal responsibility is fostered within the context of teamwork
The campus includes * an indoor aquatic centre , * a music , art , drama and dance ( MADD ) centre and * an astroturf hockey field .
The college hosts two major sporting events each year , namely the Old Petrian 's Open Girls Water Polo Tournament in February where 24 of the top girls ' water polo teams from Southern African schools compete ; and the Annual Sports and Cultural Festival in September which attracts over 3,500 school children to participate in various sporting and cultural codes .
HISTORY Section::::History .
St Peter 's College was founded in 1998 as a response to the shortage of independent high schools in the area .
The college was opened under a former headmaster of St Alban 's College , Ronnie Todd , who was later succeeded by Graham Howarth , who served for 12 years .
Rui Morais , who was appointed headmaster in December 2015 , joined the college in January 2003 .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
St Peter 's has maintained high performance in the IEB matric examinations since its inception ; a significant number of matriculants obtaining ' A ' and ' B ' symbols in their final examinations .
The college offers additional subjects such as Engineering Graphic Design , French , Music , Visual Art and Drama to Matric .
In 2016 the college attained a 100 % matric passrate with 97 % of the students achieving the university entrance standard .
UNIFORM NUMBER 1S Section::::Uniform .
Section::::Number 1s .
The Number 1 uniform consists of the St Peter 's navy blue blazer , the college striped shirt worn with the college blue tie in addition to the number two uniform .
Number 1 's are worn on the first and last day of every term , throughout the winter , as well on special occasions ( i.e. Eucharists , awards ceremonies ) NUMBER 2S Section::::Number 2s .
The Number 2 uniform consists of the St Peter 's College striped shirt , either worn with or without the navy blue sleeveless jersey , and long grey pants for boys or girls , or grey skirt and the choice of blue stockings for girls .
Only black school shoes and grey socks are permitted for boys , and white socks for girls .
The Number 2 is the ' everyday ' uniform and is worn during summer ( terms one and three ) .