DEGRASSI :
THE NEXT GENERATION ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth season of Degrassi :
The Next Generation commenced airing in Canada on 19 September 2005 , concluded on 20 March 2006 and contains nineteen episodes .
is a Canadian serial teen drama television series .
This season depicts the lives of a group of high school sophomores , juniors and seniors as they deal with some of the challenges and issues teenagers face such as body image , teenage pregnancy , drug dealing , coming out , sexual identity , religion , eating disorders and relationships .
Filming took place between May 2005 and November 2005 .
Season five aired Mondays at 8:30 p.m. on CTV , a Canadian terrestrial television network .
In the United States , it was broadcast at 8:00 p.m. on The N , a digital cable network aimed at teenagers and young adults .
The season was released on DVD as a four disc boxed set on 3 July 2007 by Alliance Atlantis Home Entertainment in Canada , and by FUNimation Entertainment in the US .
Registered users of the Canadian and US iTunes Stores are also able purchase and download the season for playback on home computers and certain iPods .
The N Soundtrack was released on 1 August 2006 , following this season .
The fifth season of Degrassi :
The Next Generation was the most successful season to date , averaging 767,000 viewers in Canada , and had one episode watched by a million viewers .
It received praise for its depiction of a relationship between two gay characters , but mixed reviews for highlighting the issue of anorexia and bulimia in teenage girls .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The fifth season features twenty actors who receive star billing with sixteen of them returning from the previous season .
Returning cast members include : *
Sarah Barrable - Tishauer as Liberty Van Zandt ( 13 episodes ) * Stefan Brogren as Archie " Snake " Simpson ( 13 episodes ) * Lauren Collins as Paige Michalchuk ( 15 episodes ) *
Ryan Cooley as James Tiberius " J.T. " Yorke ( 14 episodes ) * Jake Epstein as Craig Manning ( 11 episodes )
* Stacey Farber as Ellie Nash ( 10 episodes )
* Jake Goldsbie as Toby Isaacs ( 14 episodes ) * Aubrey Graham as Jimmy Brooks ( 13 episodes ) * Shane Kippel as Gavin " Spinner " Mason ( 10 episodes ) * Andrea Lewis as Hazel Aden ( 11 episodes )
* Pat Mastroianni as Joey Jeremiah ( 4 episodes ) * Miriam McDonald as Emma Nelson ( 13 episodes )
* Stacie Mistysyn as Caitlin Ryan ( 1 episode ) * Adamo Ruggiero as Marco Del Rossi ( 14 episodes )
* Cassie Steele as ( 14 episodes )
* Amanda Stepto as Spike Nelson ( 6 episodes )
Joining the main cast are Jamie Johnston , who was cast as Peter Stone ( 10 episodes ) .
Mike Lobel , Deanna Casaluce , and Melissa DiMarco as Jay Hogart ( 7 episodes ) ,
Alex Nuñez ( 9 episodes ) , and Daphne Hatzilakos ( 13 episodes ) were promoted after recurring in the previous seasons .
The three actors from season four who did not return this season were Daniel Clark as Sean Cameron , Melissa McIntyre as Ashley Kerwin , and Dan Woods as Mr. Raditch .
All left the series , except for Melissa McIntyre , who made her return in the season finale and Daniel Clark , who made his return in .
Returning in their recurring roles are John Bregar as Dylan Michalchuk , Shenae Grimes as Darcy Edwards , Dalmar Abuzeid as Danny Van Zandt , Alex Steele as Angela Jeremiah , Linlyn Lue as Ms. Kwan , and Jennifer Podemski as Ms. Sauve .
Marc Donato is introduced as Derek Haig .
Caroline Park , who appeared as Kim in seasons 5 through 7 , appeared in five episodes this season .
Film director Kevin Smith and actor Jason Mewes returned to the show for two episodes when they guest starred as exaggerated versions of themselves ( for example Kevin is portrayed as being unmarried and childless ) .
The episodes depict the premiere of Jay and Silent Bob
Go Canadian , Eh ! , a fictional feature film in the View Askewniverse series that used Degrassi Community School as a filming location during season four .
The scenes Alanis Morissette had filmed in season four to play the film 's school principal were replayed as part of the film at the premiere .
CREW Section::::Crew .
The season was produced by Epitome Pictures in association with CTV .
Funding was provided by The Canadian Film or Video Production Tax Credit and the Ontario Film and Television Tax Credit , the Canadian Television Fund and BCE - CTV Benefits ,
The Shaw Television Broadcast Fund , the Independent Production Fund , Mountain Cable Program , and RBC Royal Bank .
The executive producers were Epitome Pictures ' president Stephen Stohn , and CEO Linda Schuyler , the co - creator of the Degrassi franchise .
James Hurst served as the creative producer , David Lowe was the line producer and Sean Reycraft served as the executive story editor .
Brendon Yorke and Alexandra Zarowny served as story editors .
The editor was Stephen Withrow , Stephen Stanley was the production designer , and the cinematographer was Gavin Smith .
The writers for the season are Avra Fein , James Hurst , Aaron Martin , Miklos Perlus , Sean Reycraft , Shelley Scarrow , Brendon Yorke and Alexandra Zarowny .
Phil Earnshaw , Eleanore Lindo , Ron Oliver and Stefan Scaini directed the episodes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The fifth season of Degrassi :
The Next Generation had an audience average of 767,000 viewers , had an increase of twenty - four per cent over the previous season , and was Canada 's most watched Canadian drama series .
The second episode of the season was watched by over one million Canadian viewers ; it was the first time the series had reached that figure .
A two - part episode , aired to coincide with the Canadian National Eating Disorder Awareness Week , earned mixed reviews .
Laura Betker of the Winnipeg Sun said " Thankfully , the show moves far away from the health - class ideal that anorexia and bulimia simply stem from self - conscious teens .
Rather , it displays it as the ugly disease that it truly is ...
All aspects of the story were done well .
The plot was realistic .
The display of the disease was truthful and progressive , while the acting was at an all time high ...
Miriam McDonald 's performance was phenomenal .
[ She ] performs with strength and credibility . "
Bill Harris of the Toronto Sun criticized the episodes ' " ham - fisted handling of anorexia " and wrote : " It 's just that , well , the Degrassi foray , while well - intentioned , leaves you hungry for a fresh insight , some relevant information , a compelling storyline , good writing , believable dialogue , anything . "
Harris even went as far as saying , " That Degrassi episode was so bad it made me want to throw up . "
Other storylines were well received , however .
AfterElton.com , a website which focuses on the portrayal of homosexual and bisexual men in the media , and owned by MTV Networks ' Logo cable television network , reported on the portrayal of two Degrassi : The Next Generation gay characters .
"
Degrassi features ongoing stories of real - life teen dilemmas — including intense gay and lesbian storylines — and does it without the righteous , ' On a Very Special Blossom ' endings that many teen dramas and sitcoms thrive on . " The Gonzaga Bulletin , the student newspaper for Gonzaga University in Spokane , Washington , reported on the show 's popularity amongst its students .
Despite being well received by audiences and the generally good reviews , season five received only two nominations for awards .
At the Gemini Awards , Jim McGrath won the category for " Best Original Music Score for a Dramatic Series " .
The younger members of the cast were nominated for a Young Artist Award in the " Best Young Ensemble Performance in a TV Series ( Comedy or Drama )
" category .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
In a change to previous seasons , CTV broadcast episodes one and two over two weeks , as opposed to an hour - long special .
In the US , The N did broadcast the episodes as an hour - long special , on 7 October 2005 .
The N proceeded to broadcast the next ten episodes , and then put the season on hiatus until 7 April 2006 , when it returned with another hour - long special .
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release .
The DVD release of season five was released by Alliance Atlantis Home Entertainment in Canada , and by FUNimation Entertainment in the US on 3 July 2007 after it had completed broadcast on television .
As well as every episode from the season , the DVD release features bonus material including deleted scenes , bloopers and behind - the - scenes
featurettes .
valign="top " valign="top " * 19 director 's cut episodes
* 4-disc set
* Languages : * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 ) rowspan="4 " align="left
" width="300 " * Deleted scenes *
Blooper reel
* Original cast auditions
* Interview with Cassie Steele * Character and cast biographies
* Degrassi yearbook * Simple Plan music video and interview * Trailers colspan="3 "
align="center " Release dates align="center
"
Region 1 align="center
"
3 July 2007
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Season 5 episode synopses at CTV Television Network
* List of Degrassi :
The Next Generation episodes at IMDB .
* Season 5 at TV.com .