OLD ST PAUL 'S CATHEDRAL
Old St Paul 's Cathedral was the medieval cathedral of the City of London that , until 1666 , stood on the site of the present St Paul 's Cathedral .
Built from 1087 to 1314 and dedicated to Saint Paul , the cathedral was the fourth church on the site at Ludgate Hill .
Work on the cathedral began during the reign of William the Conqueror after a fire in 1087 that destroyed much of the city .
Work took more than 200 years , and construction was delayed by another fire in 1135 .
The church was consecrated in 1240 , enlarged in 1256 and enlarged again in the early 14th century .
At its final state of completion in the middle of the 14th century , the cathedral was one of the longest churches in the world , had one of the tallest spires and some of the finest stained glass .
The presence of the shrine of Saint Erkenwald made the cathedral a site of pilgrimage during the Medieval Period .
In addition to serving as the seat of the Diocese of London , the building developed a reputation as a social hub of the City of London , with the nave aisle , " Paul 's walk " , known as a centre for doing business and a place to hear the latest gossip on the London grapevine .
After the Reformation , the open - air pulpit in the churchyard , St Paul 's Cross , became the stage for radical evangelical preaching and Protestant bookselling .
The cathedral was already in severe structural decline by the beginning of the 17th century .
Restoration work begun by Inigo Jones in the 1620s was halted at the time of the English Civil War ( 1642–1651 ) .
Sir Christopher Wren was attempting another restoration in 1666 when the cathedral was destroyed in the Great Fire of London .
At that point , the old structure was demolished , and the present , domed cathedral was erected on the site , with an English Baroque design by Wren .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
" Old " St Paul 's Cathedral was perhaps the fourth church on the site at Ludgate Hill dedicated to St Paul .
A devastating fire in 1087 , detailed in the Anglo - Saxon Chronicle , destroyed much of the city and the cathedral .
King William
I ( William the Conqueror ) donated the stone from the destroyed Palatine Tower on the River Fleet towards the construction of a new , Romanesque Norman cathedral , an act sometimes said to be his last before death .
Bishop Maurice oversaw early preparations , although it was primarily under his successor , Richard de Beaumis , that construction work fully commenced .
Beaumis was assisted by King Henry I , who gave the bishop stone and commanded that all material brought up the River Fleet for the cathedral should be free from toll .
To fund the cathedral , Henry gave Beaumis rights to all fish caught within the cathedral neighbourhood and tithes on venison taken in the County of Essex .
Beaumis also gave a site for the original foundation of St Paul 's School .
After Henry I 's death , a civil war known as " The Anarchy " broke out .
Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester , was appointed to administer the affairs of St Paul 's .
Almost immediately , he had to deal with the aftermath of a fire at London Bridge in 1135 .
It spread over much of the city , damaging the cathedral and delaying its construction .
During this period , the style of the building was changed from heavy Romanesque into Early English Gothic .
Although the base Norman columns were left alone , lancet pointed arches were placed over them in the triforium and some heavy columns were substituted with clustered pillars .
The steeple was erected in 1221 and the cathedral was rededicated by Bishop Roger Niger in 1240 .
NEW WORK ( 1255–1314 ) Section::::New work ( 1255–1314 ) .
After a succession of storms , in 1255 Bishop Fulk Basset appealed for funds to repair the damaged roof .
The roof was once more rebuilt in wood , which was ultimately to doom the building .
At this time , the east end of the cathedral church was lengthened , enclosing the parish church of St Faith , which was now brought within the cathedral .
The eastward addition was always referred to as " The New Work " .
After complaints from the dispossessed parishioners of St Faith 's , the east end of the west crypt was allotted to them as their parish church .
The congregation were also allowed to keep a detached tower with a peal of bells east of the church which had historically been used to peal the summons to the Cheapside Folkmote .
The parish later moved to the Jesus chapel during the reign of Edward VI and was merged with St Augustine Watling Street after the 1666 fire .
This " New Work " was completed in 1314 , although the additions had been consecrated in 1300 .
Excavations in 1878 by Francis Penrose showed it was long ( excluding the porch later added by Inigo Jones ) and wide ( across the transepts and crossing ) .
By way of comparison , the current cathedral is in length including the portico , and across the transepts , and Winchester Cathedral , the longest remaining medieval church , is long and across the transepts .
The cathedral had one of Europe 's tallest church spires , the height of which is traditionally given as , surpassing all but Lincoln Cathedral .
The King 's Surveyor , Christopher Wren ( 1632–1723 ) , judged that an overestimate and gave .
William Benham noted that the cathedral probably " resembled in general outline that of Salisbury , but it was a hundred feet longer , and the spire was sixty or eighty feet higher .
The tower was open internally as far as the base of the spire , and was probably more beautiful both inside and out than that of any other English cathedral . "
According to the architectural historian John Harvey , the octagonal chapter house , built about 1332 by William Ramsey , was the earliest example of Perpendicular Gothic .
This is confirmed by Alec Clifton - Taylor , who notes that the chapter house and St Stephen 's chapel at Westminster Abbey predate the early Perpendicular work at Gloucester Cathedral by several years .
The foundations of the chapter house were recently made visible in the redeveloped south churchyard of the new cathedral .
INTERIOR Section::::Interior .
The finished cathedral of the Middle Ages was renowned for the beauty of its interior .
Canon William Benham wrote in 1902 : " It had not a rival in England , perhaps one might say in Europe . "
The nave 's immense length was particularly notable , with a Norman triforium and vaulted ceiling .
The length earned it the nickname " Paul 's walk " .
The cathedral 's stained glass was reputed to be the best in the country , and the east - end Rose window was particularly exquisite .
The poet Geoffrey Chaucer uses the windows as a metaphor in " The Miller 's Tale " from The Canterbury Tales , in the knowledge that other Londoners would understand the comparison : From the cathedral 's construction until its destruction at the Reformation , the shrine of Erkenwald was a popular site for pilgrimage .
Under Bishop Maurice , reports of miracles attributed to the shrine increased , with the shrine attracting thousands of pilgrims to the cathedral .
The alliterative Middle English poem St. Erkenwald ( sometimes attributed to the " Pearl Poet " , c.14 ) begins with a description of the construction of the cathedral , referring to the building as the " New Werke " .
The shrine was adorned with gold , silver and precious stones .
In 1339 , three London goldsmiths were employed for a whole year to rebuild the shrine to a higher standard .
William Dugdale records that the shrine was pyramidal in shape with an altar table placed in front for offerings .
Monarchs and other dignitaries were often in attendance at the cathedral , and the court occasionally held session there .
The building was also the scene of several incidents of mediaeval intrigue .
In 1191 , whilst King Richard I was in Palestine , his brother John summoned a council of bishops to St Paul 's to denounce William de Longchamp , Bishop of Ely — to whom Richard had entrusted the affairs of government — for treason .
Later that year , William Fitz Osbern gave a fiery speech against the oppression of the poor at Paul 's Cross and incited a riot which saw the cathedral invaded , halted only by an appeal for calm by Hubert Walter , Archbishop of Canterbury .
Osbern barricaded himself in nearby St Mary - le - Bow and was later executed , after which Paul 's Cross was silent for many years .
Arthur , Prince of Wales , son of Henry VII , married Catharine of Aragon in St Paul 's on 14 November 1501 .
Chroniclers are profuse in their descriptions of the decorations of the cathedral and city on that occasion .
Arthur died five months later , at the age of 15 , and the marriage was later to prove contentious during the subsequent reign of his brother , Henry VIII .
Several kings of the Middle Ages lay in state in St Paul 's before their funerals at Westminster Abbey , including Richard II , Henry VI and Henry VII .
In the case of Richard II , the display of his body in such a public place was to counter rumours that he was not deceased .
The walls were lined with the tombs of mediaeval bishops and nobility .
In addition to the shrine of Erkenwald , two Anglo - Saxon kings were buried inside : Sebbi , King of the East Saxons , and Ethelred the Unready .
A number of figures such as John of Gaunt , 1st Duke of Lancaster and John de Beauchamp , 1st
Baron Beauchamp de Warwick had particularly large monuments constructed within the cathedral , and the building later contained the tombs of the Crown minister Nicholas Bacon , the poet , courtier and soldier Sir Philip Sidney , and of the poet and clergyman John Donne , who was dean of the cathedral between 1621 until his death in 1631 .
Donne 's monument survived the 1666 fire , and is on display in the present building .
PAUL 'S
WALK
Section::::Paul 's Walk .
The first historical reference to the nave , " Paul 's walk " , being used as a marketplace and general meeting area is recorded during the 1381–1404 tenure of Bishop Braybrooke .
The bishop issued an open letter decrying the use of the building for selling " wares , as if it were a public market " and " others ... by the instigation of the Devil [ using ] stones and arrows to bring down the birds , jackdaws and pigeons which nestle in the walls and crevises of the building .
Others play at ball ... breaking the beautiful and costly painted windows to the amazement of spectators .
" His decree goes on to threaten perpetrators with excommunication .
By the 15th century , the cathedral had become the centre of the London grapevine .
" News mongers " , as they were called , gathered there to pass on the latest news and gossip .
Those who visited the cathedral to keep up with the news were known as " Paul 's walkers " .
According to Francis Osborne ( 1593–1659 ) : It was the fashion of those times ... for the principal gentry , lords , courtiers , and men of all professions not merely mechanic , to meet in Paul 's Church by eleven and walk in the middle aisle till twelve , and after dinner from three to six , during which times some discoursed on business , others of news .
Now in regard of the universal there happened little that did not first or last arrive here ...
And those news - mongers , as they called them , did not only take the boldness to weigh the public but most intrinsic actions of the state , which some courtier or other did betray to this society .
St Paul 's became the place to go to hear the latest news of current affairs , war , religion , parliament and the court .
In his play Englishmen for my Money , William Haughton ( d. 1605 ) described Paul 's walk as a kind of " open house " filled with a " great store of company that do nothing but go up and down , and go up and down , and make a grumbling together " .
Infested with beggars and thieves , Paul 's walk was also a place to pick up gossip , topical jokes , and even prostitutes .
In his Microcosmographie ( 1628 ) , a series of satirical portraits of contemporary England , John Earle ( 1601–1665 ) , described it thus :
[ Paul 's walk ] is the land 's epitome , or you may call it the lesser isle of Great Britain .
It is more than this , the whole world 's map , which you may here discern in its perfectest motion , justling and turning .
It is a heap of stones and men , with a vast confusion of languages ; and were the steeple not sanctified , nothing liker Babel .
The noise in it is like that of bees , a strange humming or buzz mixed of walking tongues and feet : it is a kind of still roar or loud whisper ...
It is the great exchange of all discourse , and no business whatsoever but is here stirring and a - foot ...
It is the general mint of all famous lies , which are here like the legends of popery , first coined and stamped in the church .
DECLINE ( 16TH CENTURY )
Section::::Decline ( 16th century ) .
By the 16th century the building was deteriorating .
Under Henry VIII and Edward VI , the Dissolution of the Monasteries and Chantries Acts led to the destruction of interior ornamentation and the cloisters , charnels , crypts , chapels , shrines , chantries and other buildings in the churchyard .
Many of these former religious sites in St Paul 's Churchyard , having been seized by the crown , were sold as shops and rental properties , especially to printers and booksellers , such as Thomas Adams , who were often evangelical Protestants .
Buildings that were razed often supplied ready - dressed building material for construction projects , such as the Lord Protector 's city palace , Somerset House .
Crowds were drawn to the northeast corner of the Churchyard , St Paul 's Cross , where open - air preaching took place .
It was there in the Cross Yard in 1549 that radical Protestant preachers incited a mob to destroy many of the cathedral 's interior decorations .
In 1554 , in an attempt to end inappropriate practices taking place in the nave , the Lord Mayor decreed that the church should return to its original purpose as a religious building , issuing a writ stating that the selling of horses , beer and " other gross wares " was " to the great dishonour and displeasure of Almighty God , and the great grief also and offence of all good and well - disposed persons " .
FIRE ( 1561 ) Section::::Fire ( 1561 ) .
On 4 June 1561 the spire caught fire and crashed through the nave roof .
According to a newsheet published days after the fire , the cause was a lightning strike .
In 1753 , David Henry , a writer for The Gentleman 's Magazine , revived a rumour in his Historical description of St. Paul 's Cathedral , writing that a plumber had " confessed on his death bed " that he had " left a pan of coals and other fuel in the tower when he went to dinner . "
However , the number of contemporary eyewitnesses to the storm and a subsequent investigation appears to contradict this .
Whatever the cause , the subsequent conflagration was hot enough to melt the cathedral 's bells and the lead covering the wooden spire " poured down like lava upon the roof " , destroying it .
This event was taken by both Protestants and Catholics as a sign of God 's displeasure at the other faction 's actions .
Queen Elizabeth contributed towards the cost of repairs and
the Bishop of London Edmund Grindal gave £ 1200 , although the spire was never rebuilt .
The repair work on the nave roof was sub - standard , and only fifty years after the rebuilding was in a dangerous condition .
RESTORATION WORK ( 1621–1666 ) Section::::Restoration work ( 1621–1666 ) .
Concerned at the decaying state of the building , King James I appointed England 's first classical architect , Inigo Jones , to restore the building .
The poet Henry Farley records the king comparing himself to the building at the commencement of the work in 1621 : " I have had more sweeping , brushing and cleaning than in forty years before .
My workmen looke like him
they call Muldsacke after sweeping of a chimney .
"
In addition to cleaning and rebuilding parts of the Gothic structure , Jones added a classical - style portico to the cathedral 's west front in the 1630s , which William Benham notes was " altogether incongruous with the old building ...
It was no doubt fortunate that Inigo Jones confined his work at St Paul 's to some very poor additions to the transepts , and to a portico , very magnificent in its way , at the west end . "
Work stopped during the English Civil War , and there was much defacement and mistreatment of the building by Parliamentarian forces during which old documents and charters were dispersed and destroyed , and the nave used as a stable for cavalry horses .
Much of the detailed information historians have of the cathedral is taken from William Dugdale 's 1658 History of St Pauls Cathedral , written hastily during The Protectorate for fear that " one of the most eminent Structures of that kinde in the Christian World " might be destroyed .
Indeed , a persistent rumour of the time suggested that Cromwell had considered giving the building to London 's returning Jewish community to become a synagogue .
Dugdale embarked on his project due to discovering hampers full of decaying 14th and 15th century documents from the Cathedral 's early archives .
In his book 's dedicatory epistle , he wrote : ...
so great was your foresight of what we have since by wofull experience seen and felt , and specially in the Church , ( through the Presbyterian contagion , which then began violently to breake out ) that you often and earnestly incited me to a speedy view of what Monuments I could , especially in the principall Churches of this Realme ; to the end , that by Inke and paper , the Shadows of them , with their Inscriptions might be preserved for posteritie , forasmuch as the things themselves were so neer unto ruine .
Dugdale 's book is also the source for many of the surviving engravings of the building , created by Bohemian etcher Wenceslaus Hollar .
In July 2010 , an original sketch for Hollar 's engravings was rediscovered when it was submitted to Sotheby 's auction house .
THE GREAT FIRE ( 1666 ) Section::::The Great Fire ( 1666 ) .
After the Restoration of King Charles II , Sir Christopher Wren , the Surveyor to the King 's Works , was appointed to restore the cathedral in a style matching Inigo Jones ' classical additions of 1630 .
Wren instead recommended that the building be completely demolished ; according to his first biographer , James Elmes , Wren " expressed his surprise at the carelessness and want of accuracy in the original builders of the structure " ; Wren 's son described the new design as " The Gothic rectified to a better manner of architecture " .
Both the clergy and citizens of the city opposed such a move .
In response , Wren proposed to restore the body of the gothic building , but replace the existing tower with a dome .
He wrote in his 1666 Of the Surveyor 's Design for repairing the old ruinous structure of St Paul 's : It must be concluded that the Tower from Top to Bottom and the adjacent parts are such a heap of deformaties that no Judicious Architect will think it corrigible by any Expense that can be laid out upon new dressing it .
Wren , whose uncle Matthew Wren was Bishop of Ely , admired the central lantern of Ely Cathedral and proposed that his dome design could be constructed over the top of the existing gothic tower , before the old structure was removed from within .
This , he reasoned , would prevent the need for extensive scaffolding and would not upset Londoners ( " Unbelievers " ) by demolishing a familiar landmark without being able to see its " hopeful Successor rise in its stead . "
The matter was still under discussion when the restoration work on St Paul 's finally began in the 1660s but soon after being sheathed in wooden scaffolding , the building was completely gutted in the Great Fire of London of 1666 .
The fire , aided by the scaffolding , destroyed the roof and much of the stonework along with masses of stocks and personal belongings that had been placed there for safety .
Samuel Pepys recalls the building in flames in his diary : John Evelyn 's account paints a similar picture of destruction : September 3rd
– I went and saw the whole south part of the City burning from Cheapeside to the Thames , and ... was now taking hold of St. Paule 's Church , to which the scaffolds contributed exceedingly .
September 7th – I went this morning on foote from White - hall as far as London Bridge , thro ' the late Fleete - streete , Ludgate Hill , by St. Paules ...
At my returne I was infinitely concern'd to find that goodly Church St. Paules now a sad ruine , and that beautiful portico ... now rent in pieces , flakes of vast stone split asunder , and nothing now remaining intire but the inscription in the architrave , shewing by whom it was built , which had not one letter of it defac'd .
It was astonishing to see what immense stones the heate had in a manner calcin'd , so that all the ornaments , columns , freezes , capitals , and projectures of massie Portland - stone flew off , even to the very roofe , where a sheet of lead covering a great space ( no less than six akers by measure ) was totally mealted ; the ruines of the vaulted roofe falling broke into St. Faith 's , which being fill'd with the magazines of bookes belonging to the Stationers , and carried thither for safety , they were all consum'd , burning for a weeke following .
It is also observable that the lead over the altar at the East end was untouch'd , and among the divers monuments , the body of one Bishop remain'd intire .
Thus lay in ashes that most venerable Church , one of the most antient pieces of early piety in the Christian world .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Temporary repairs were made to the building .
While it might have been salvageable , albeit with almost complete reconstruction , a decision was taken to build a new cathedral in a modern style instead , a step which had been contemplated even before the fire .
Wren declared that it was impossible to restore the old building .
The following April , the Dean William Sancroft wrote to him that he had been right in his judgement : " Our work at the west end , " he wrote , " has fallen about our ears .
" Two pillars had collapsed , and the rest was so unsafe that men were afraid to go near , even to pull it down .
He added , " You are so absolutely necessary to us that we can do nothing , resolve on nothing without you . "
Following this declaration by the Dean , demolition of the remains of the old cathedral began in 1668 .
Demolition of the Old Cathedral proved unexpectedly difficult as the stonework had been bonded together by molten lead .
Wren initially used the then - new technique of using gunpowder to bring down the surviving stone walls .
Like many experimental techniques , the use of gunpowder was not easy to control ; several workers were killed and nearby residents complained about noise and damage .
Eventually , Wren resorted to using a battering ram instead .
Building work on the new cathedral began in June 1675 .
Wren 's first proposal , the " Greek cross " design , was considered too radical by members of a committee commissioned to rebuild the church .
Members of the clergy decried the design as being too dissimilar from churches that already existed in England at the time to suggest any continuity within the Church of England .
Wren 's approved " Warrant design " sought to reconcile the Gothic with his " better manner of architecture " , featuring a portico influenced by Inigo Jones ' addition to the old cathedral .
However , Wren received permission from the king to make " ornamental changes " to the submitted design , and over the course of the construction made significant alterations , including the addition of the famous dome .
The topping out of the new cathedral took place in October 1708 and the cathedral was declared officially complete by Parliament in 1710 .
The consensus on the finished building was mixed ; James Wright ( 1643–1713 ) wrote " Without , within , below , above the eye/ Is filled with unrestrained delight . "
Meanwhile , others were less approving , noting its similarity to St. Peter 's Basilica in Rome : " There was an air of Popery about the gilded capitals , the heavy arches ...
They were unfamiliar , un - English . " NOTABLE BURIALS IN OLD ST PAUL 'S SEE ALSO * List of demolished buildings and structures in London
REFERENCES
Bibliography * OCLC 84564730 .
* OCLC 1562848 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website , with history of Old St. Paul 's