LIST OF HOW I MET YOUR MOTHER CHARACTERS
The American sitcom
How I Met Your Mother premiered on CBS on September 19 , 2005 .
Created by Craig Thomas and Carter Bays , the show is presented from the perspective of Ted Mosby in 2030 ( " Future Ted " ) as he tells his children how he met the titular mother .
The show lasted for nine seasons and 208 episodes ; the finale first aired on March 31 , 2014 .
The main characters are : Ted Mosby , a romantic searching for " The One " ; Barney Stinson , a womanizer ; Robin Scherbatsky , a journalist who moved to New York in 2005 ; and Marshall Eriksen and Lily Aldrin , a long - term couple .
Although the show is based around The Mother , her first appearance is not until the season eight finale .
Many of the main character 's relatives appear throughout the show , such as Lily 's father or Barney 's brother .
They may also be seen in family gatherings , such as Barney and Robin 's wedding or Marshall 's father 's funeral .
Ted 's children and Marvin W. Eriksen ( son of Marshall and Lily ) appear in the background of many episodes without being crucial to many plots .
Ranjit , Carl the Bartender , and several other characters often appear because they work in places the main cast frequent ( such as MacLaren 's Pub ) .
Characters in relationships with Ted , Barney , or Robin often appear in several episodes within a short period of time , such as Victoria , Nora , or Kevin .
Minor characters such as the Slutty Pumpkin or Mary the Paralegal may only appear in one or two episodes , but still play a crucial role in the episodes in which they appear .
CAST S1S2S3S4S5S6S7S8S9Ted Mosby !
Robin Scherbatsky !
Barney Stinson !
Lily Aldrin !
Marshall Eriksen !
Tracy McConnell !
Future TedArthur Hobbs !
Becky !
Bilson !
Brad Morris !
The Captain !
Carl MacLaren !
Claudia Bowers !
Curtis !
Daphne !
Don Frank !
Doug Martin !
Gary Blauman !
James Stinson !
Jeanette Peterson !
Judy Eriksen !
Kevin Venkataraghavan !
Linus !
Loretta Stinson !
Lucy Zinman !
Luke Mosby !
Marcus Eriksen !
Marvin W. Eriksen !
Marvin Eriksen !
Mickey Aldrin !
Nick Podarutti !
Nora !
Patrice !
Penny Mosby !
Quinn Garvey !
Robin Scherbatsky Sr . !
Ranjit Singh !
Sandy Rivers !
Scooter !
Stella Zinman !
Stuart Bowers !
Victoria !
Virginia Mosby !
Wendy the Waitress !
Zoey Pierson Notes : *
" The Mother " was played by various stunt actresses ( including Jennifer Birmingham and the show 's director , Pamela Fryman ) throughout the series until Cristin Milioti assumed the role for the season 8 finale .
* Cristin Milioti was promoted to series regular in season 9 after a brief guest appearance in season 8 .
* Scenes featuring David Henrie and Lyndsy Fonseca were recycled footage beginning with season 3 , although unreleased footage filmed in 2006 was used in season 9 .
* Marvin W. Eriksen has been played by several actors , some uncredited , at different ages varying from babyhood to adulthood .
MAIN CHARACTERS TED MOSBY Section::::Main characters .
Section::::Ted Mosby .
Portrayed by Josh Radnor , Theodore Evelyn " Ted " Mosby ( born on April 25 , 1978 ) is a romantic , originally searching for " The One " and often discussing destiny and " The Universe " controlling things .
Ted grew up in Shaker Heights , Ohio with parents Virginia Mosby , Alfred Mosby , and sister Heather Mosby .
He is an architect who graduated from Wesleyan University , where he met Marshall and Lily .
Ted also serves as the show 's narrator from the future , voiced by Bob Saget , as he tells his children a detailed story , with the premise of explaining how he met their mother .
A brief history of Ted includes being left at the altar , taking a job as an architecture professor and designing the new headquarters for Goliath National Bank .
Ted has dated many people and been in several long - term relationships .
Ted has an on - again , off - again relationship with Robin .
Ted also dated Victoria , Stella , Zoey and Jeanette .
Ted finally gets to meet his wife - to - be , Tracy , on the day of Barney and Robin 's wedding , after accidentally teaching one of her college classes , owning her yellow umbrella for a short time , and dating her roommate .
When he ran into Tracy 's roommate ( Cindy ) , it led to Tracy 's band performing at Barney and Robin 's wedding .
In the finale , it is discovered his wife died six years earlier .
His children claim his story was not about their mother but about Robin ; they urge him to get back together with her
and he does , bringing the iconic blue French horn with him .
ROBIN SCHERBATSKY Section::::Robin Scherbatsky .
Portrayed by Cobie Smulders , Robin Charles Scherbatsky Jr. works as a news reporter for various stations , ending up at World Wide News .
She is originally from Vancouver , British Columbia and is a fan of the Vancouver Canucks .
Robin was named after her father , who she has some issues with as he wanted a male child .
She and Ted have an on - again , off - again relationship there was some sexual tension between them throughout the third season , most obviously when Robin brought home her boyfriend Gael from a trip to Argentina .
The subject of four episodes , Robin was a teen pop singer named Robin Sparkles .
Her first boyfriend was Simon , who starred in her second music video .
In season 4 , Robin moves in with Ted after leaving her short - lived job in Japan .
During " The Leap " , she and Barney pursue a relationship , but it soon ends .
Robin is frequently made fun of for her tendency to laugh while lying , as well as her references to places and history exclusive to Canada , such as Mount Waddington or Danby 's .
Though she has stated explicitly that she does not like children , Future Ted mentioned that she eventually grew to like them and even became close to Ted 's children .
After being unemployed for a while , Robin found out that she would be deported from America if she did not get a job .
Barney helped her land a job for an early morning show in " The Possimpible " .
Soon after she started she got a co - host named Don whom she originally disliked .
However , she grew to like him and they dated for a while .
In " False Positive " , Robin worked as a researcher for World Wide News and eventually moved up to co - anchor after hosting a New Year 's Eve show .
It is revealed in the season 7 finale that Robin married Barney .
They divorce after three years of marriage .
In 2030 , Robin is shown to be living with her dogs in New York when she gets asked out by Ted , a six - year widower by then .
BARNEY STINSON Section::::Barney Stinson .
Portrayed by Neil Patrick Harris
, Barnabus " Barney " Stinson is a former womanizer .
He is known for wearing suits , playing laser tag , performing magic tricks , and overusing catchphrases such as " Suit up ! " , " Legend - wait - for - it - dary " and " Challenge accepted ! " .
Barney is the writer of the Bro Code and the Playbook , documenting rules for best friends ( " bros " ) and his favorite moves to use on women .
Barney was raised by a single mother , Loretta , along with his older brother James .
He spent very little time with his father as a child .
In season 6 , Barney 's father Jerome returns to his life hoping to make amends for abandoning him as a child .
As a young adult , Barney was a long - haired hippie with plans to join the Peace Corps .
Soon after his rejection , he saw a flier for a sale on suits , thus beginning his suit addiction .
Shortly after , he met Ted Mosby at a urinal and announced that he would " teach [ Ted ] how to live " , thus beginning his life with Ted 's group of friends .
In season 4 , Barney falls in love with Robin and spends the next season hiding it from her .
The two get together in season 5 , but the relationship is short - lived .
After their breakup , Barney returns to one - night stands , but sometimes shows regret in ending his relationship with Robin .
In " Desperation Day " , Robin introduces him to her friend Nora .
Barney and Nora have a brief relationship , but it ends because Barney is unwilling to let himself be honest with her about his feelings .
Later , they get back together but Barney cheats on Nora with Robin .
In " Challenge Accepted " , it is revealed that Barney gets married at some point in the future ; in " The Magician 's Code " , the bride is revealed to be Robin .
However , Barney and Robin get divorced in 2016 .
Barney goes back to having one - night stands , and eventually impregnates a woman .
The birth of his daughter , Ellie , effectively causes him to change his ways for good .
LILY ALDRIN Section::::Lily Aldrin .
Portrayed by Alyson Hannigan , Lily Aldrin is a kindergarten teacher .
She is married to Marshall and grew up in Brooklyn , New York .
Like Ted and Marshall , she is a graduate of Wesleyan University and dreams of being an artist ; she has painted naked paintings of Marshall and Barney .
Lily has a huge debt problem because of her impulsive shopping ; she is able to hide this from Marshall until they apply for a mortgage in " Dowisetrepla " .
She is very manipulative , having caused several of Ted 's relationships to end when she disliked his date .
It has been shown many times that she can not keep a secret , with a few exceptions : she hides her second pregnancy and keeps Ted 's move to Chicago a secret from everyone but Marshall .
Another ongoing joke in the show is her implied bisexuality .
Prior to college , Lily dated Scooter .
At college , she met Ted and started dating Marshall .
She and Marshall were together for 9 years and engaged for almost a year before Lily broke up with Marshall to move to San Francisco for a summer to concentrate on her art .
Marshall was so hurt that they stayed separated for a few months after she returned to New York .
They eventually get married at the end of season 2 .
They move into an apartment in " Dowisetrepla " ; previously , they had been living with Ted .
They consider children for years before feeling " ready " .
Lily announces in the season 6 finale that she is pregnant and their first child was revealed to be male in " Mystery vs. History " .
In the episode " Good Crazy " , Lily goes into labor five weeks early and in the episode
" The Magician 's Code – Part 1 " , gives birth to Marvin .
In season eight , Lily accepts a job as The Captain 's art consultant .
The Captain later asks her to move to Italy to search for and purchase artwork for his collection ; she and Marshall agree to move there .
However , this is the cause of disagreement between the couple for most of the season when Marshall accepts an offer to be a judge without consulting Lily .
Lily is revealed to be pregnant with a second child in " Daisy " , followed by third child a few years later in " Last Forever " .
MARSHALL ERIKSEN Section::::Marshall Eriksen .
Portrayed by Jason Segel , Marshall Eriksen met Ted and Lily during their freshman year at Wesleyan University .
He and Lily began dating during college and got married at the end of season 2 .
Marshall is a Columbia Law School graduate originally from Minnesota .
Even though he stands at , he is the shortest male member of his family .
Marshall became a lawyer because he was interested in environmental protection laws .
He accepts a job at a corporate law firm , before joining the legal team at Goliath National Bank , where Barney also works .
Marshall is also very good at various games and believes in the paranormal , specifically Sasquatch and the Loch Ness Monster .
It is revealed in " Last Cigarette Ever " that in the future , he and Lily have a son .
In early 2011 , after being told Marshall and Lily are capable of having a baby , Marshall 's dad has a fatal heart attack and dies .
For several months after this , he is upset and his friends make an effort to be nicer to him .
His first son , born in the episode " The Magician 's Code – Part 1 " is named Marvin , after Marshall 's father .
Marshall was able to arrive just in time to witness the birth .
Marshall eventually is accepted to his dream job , being a judge , after committing to move to Italy with Lily .
This leads to constant strife between the couple through most of the final season .
However , throughout the first half of the last season , Marshall is on a car ride from Minnesota to Long Island after missing his flight to Barney and Robin 's wedding .
In this process , Marshall meets The Mother .
THE MOTHER ( TRACY MCCONNELL )
Section::::The Mother ( Tracy McConnell ) .
Portrayed by Cristin Milioti , the Mother is the title character of the series ; Ted 's narration of the series is based around how he met her .
While several clues about the Mother are revealed throughout the series ( including the story of the yellow umbrella ) , she is not fully seen until the season eight finale , " Something New " .
Season 9 reveals more about the Mother through several flashforwards throughout the season and the 200th episode , " How Your Mother Met Me " , which shows the years 2005 through 2013 from her perspective .
In that episode , it is revealed that her boyfriend Max died on her 21st birthday and that she refrained from dating in the years following ; her first boyfriend after Max , Louis , proposed to her the night before Barney and Robin 's wedding , but she rejected , allowing herself to move on .
It is the highest rated episode of the series on IMDb .
Ted is shown meeting The Mother in the series finale at the Farhampton train station following Barney and Robin 's wedding .
They date , get engaged , and have two children called Luke and Penny .
In the original ending of the show , The Mother is shown to have been deceased in 2024 .
Many fans of the show had become emotionally attached to The Mother .
In many scenes throughout the show , it was shown how incredibly perfect Ted and Tracy were for each other and how nice she was to everyone .
Her death in the series finale was met with considerable dissatisfaction by many viewers .
A petition was started , aiming to rewrite and reshoot the finale .
The petition received over 20,000 signatures and considerable online news coverage .
An alternate ending was released in the ninth season DVD .
In the alternate ending , Tracy Mosby is still living when Ted is telling the story in 2030 .
In the video , future Ted is heard saying , " ...
When I think how lucky I am to wake up next to your mom every morning , I ca n't help but be amazed how easy it all really was ... " , indirectly stating that The Mother is alive .
The video ends right after the train passes at Farhampton station and credits start rolling , implying that Ted never went back to Robin as he lived a successful married life with Tracy Mosby .
SECONDARY CHARACTERS PENNY AND LUKE MOSBY Section::::Secondary characters .
Section::::Penny and Luke Mosby .
Penny and Luke are Ted 's children , teenagers in 2030 as Ted narrates the story of how he met their mother .
Penny is portrayed by Lyndsy Fonseca while Luke is portrayed by David Henrie .
Georgina Bays , the daughter of Carter Bays , has portrayed Ted 's daughter as an infant .
Penny and Luke as young children are portrayed by Katie Silverman and Dexter Cross in " Rally " .
The names of Ted 's children were unknown until " Unpause " .
Before he had met their mother , Ted had repeatedly expressed the desire to name them Luke and Leia .
The children initially appear only in the framing narrative , though Penny appears as an infant in " Trilogy Time " , " Lobster Crawl " and " Unpause " .
Both Penny and Luke appear as young children in " Rally " , when they greet their parents on New Year 's Day in 2022 .
Since the actors playing Ted 's children were going to age quickly , stock footage of them was shot in 2006 , to be used in later episodes .
Additionally , footage for the series finale was shot and the actors were made to sign non - disclosure agreements ; Fonseca said in 2013 that she did not " remember what the secret was " , although Henrie thought he remembered .
A season nine promotional video was filmed with the same actors , now adults , joking that they have been listening to Ted tell the story for eight years , and was first shown at the 2013 San Diego Comic - Con .
MARVIN W. ERIKSEN
Section::::Marvin W. Eriksen .
Marvin Wait - for -
it Eriksen is the son of Lily and Marshall .
In " Challenge Accepted " , Lily discovers she is pregnant after a long - running storyline of Marshall and Lily trying to have kids .
Marvin is born in " The Magician 's Code – Part 1 " ; Marshall arrives just in time for the birth .
Barney helped Marshall arrive in the hospital , in return for choosing the middle name of the baby : " Wait - for - it " .
Marvin appears in many episodes after that , usually causing Marshall and Lily to become stressed and sleep deprived .
In " Who Wants to Be a Godparent ? " , Ted , Barney and Robin all become godparents of Marvin . "
Bedtime Stories " is based around Marvin going to sleep .
Marvin has been played by twins , and several actors have been credited as playing him ; Jake Elliott , August Maturo and Spencer Ralston have played the part of Marvin during various flashforwards .
Craig Thomas said that they were " tending to the fact that [ Marshall and Lily ] have a baby more than other shows have " , although Marvin " does n't take over the show . "
RANJIT SINGH Section::::Ranjit Singh .
Played by Marshall Manesh , Ranjit is a cab driver from Bangladesh .
He drives the main characters around during several significant moments of their lives ; for instance , he drives Marshall and Lily in a limo shortly after they are married and helps Ted with a " two - minute date " in " Ten Sessions " .
In " The Sexless Innkeeper " , he and his wife Falguni go on a double date with Marshall and Lily , although they do not enjoy it .
He also appears in episodes such as " The Limo " , " Rabbit or Duck " , " The Goat " and " Three Days of Snow " .
In " Gary Blauman " , Future Ted reveals that Ranjit became rich through investments and bought a limo service .
Ranjit is the only recurring character to appear in all nine seasons .
CARL
THE BARTENDER Section::::Carl
The Bartender .
Played by Joe Nieves , Carl is the bartender at MacLaren 's , which is frequented by the main characters .
It 's assumed that Carl 's last name is MacLaren and that he owns the bar .
Carl eventually has a son who helps him at MacLaren 's .
Joe Nieves received the part after the scene he was supposed to be in was cut from the pilot but no one had told him , and he turned up on set in a police officer costume .
As no one wanted to tell him that they had cut his scene , they gave him the role of Carl .
Carl is named after one of the assistants to the producers .
WENDY
Section::::Wendy .
Played by Charlene Amoia , Wendy is a waitress from MacLaren 's bar .
Characterized as sweet and somewhat naive , she is well liked by the main characters .
Barney once had a brief relationship with her .
It is also revealed in " Garbage Island " that Wendy the Waitress falls in love and is later married to Marshall 's ex - co worker Meeker ( Daniel G. O'Brien ) who found out at the time they both hate Marshall after his " Go Green " fiasco .
She and Meeker have three kids .
VICTORIA
Section::::Victoria .
Played by Ashley Williams .
A baker at The Buttercup Bakery , Victoria meets Ted in " The Wedding " at the wedding reception of Ted 's friends , for whom Victoria had baked the wedding cake .
They agree to spend the evening together anonymously in order to preserve the memory of the night , despite their attraction to one another .
However , Ted quickly finds her and they begin an intense romantic relationship .
The relationship is complicated when Victoria is offered a cooking fellowship in Germany and they attempt to remain together in a long - distance relationship .
However , Ted kisses Robin and they break up .
Victoria reappears in Ted 's life seven years later , when she is catering the Architect 's Ball that Ted is attending at the end of " The Naked Truth " .
During their reunion , Ted apologizes for cheating on her and she accepts his apology .
However , he becomes upset when he learns that she began dating Klaus , whom she met not long after arriving in Germany , almost immediately after they broke up .
During their ensuing argument , they begin to remember what they loved about their relationship together and end up kissing .
Victoria responds to the kiss with the revelation that Klaus intends to propose to her soon and she and Ted part on amicable terms , though she also warns Ted that his existing relationships with Robin and Barney are stopping him from finding his true love .
In " The Magician 's Code " , Ted , having recently reconciled with Robin , follows her suggestion to contact Victoria in hopes of learning if she ever got married .
When they meet , Ted is stunned to see that Victoria has secretly run away from her wedding to Klaus .
Recalling his own experience at being left at the altar by Stella , Ted attempts to have Victoria return to her wedding to at least inform Klaus that she has run away , but they learn that Klaus has also run away from the wedding , as he has realized that he and Victoria are not meant to be together .
Ted and Victoria 's renewed relationship is short - lived ; when Ted proposes to her , she presents an ultimatum : he must end his friendship with Robin to be with her .
Unwilling to give up his friendship with Robin , Victoria breaks up with him .
She is later revealed to have returned to Germany and sends him Robin 's locket , which she had taken with her .
Bays and Thomas planned to have Victoria as a backup Mother in case CBS decided to cancel the series after season 2 .
Another possible storyline was Williams wearing a fat suit to portray Victoria having become , according to Bays , " enormously fat " because of her baking career .
Victoria was described as Ted 's best girlfriend by People magazine .
JUDY ERIKSEN Section::::Judy Eriksen .
Played by Suzie Plakson , Judy Eriksen is the mother of Marshall .
Married to the late Marvin Eriksen , she has three children : Marvin , Marcus and Marshall .
She lives in St. Cloud , Minnesota and is known to have a tense , sometimes adversarial relationship with Lily , leaving Marshall torn as he loves Lily , but has trouble understanding how she could dislike his mother .
In " The Over - Correction , " she begins a sexual relationship with Lily 's father , Mickey .
JAMES STINSON
Section::::James Stinson .
Played by Wayne Brady , James is Barney 's gay African - American half - brother ; they are very alike and act as each other 's " wingmen " .
This changes when James meets Tom , his future husband .
Barney tries to stop his brother from marrying but changes his mind when he learns that they are adopting a baby .
James marries Tom
and they have a son named Eli .
In the season 6 episode " Cleaning House , " James finds out his father is Sam Gibbs after he and Barney discover an unsent letter that their mother Loretta addressed to him .
At the end of " The Rebound Girl " , it is revealed that James and Tom have adopted an infant daughter named Sadie .
In " Coming Back " , James announces that he is getting a divorce after Tom discovered him cheating .
Robin wins James ' wedding ring in " The Poker Game " and refuses to give it back because James has been saying that she and Barney should not get married .
Barney initially stands by his brother , but then realizes that James ' selfishness is what caused his own marriage to fail .
James reveals that Gary Blauman was one of the guys that he cheated on Tom with in " Gary Blauman " .
Future Ted explains to his children that James and Tom did eventually get back together , and raised Eli and Sadie as a happy family .
ZOEY PIERSON
Section::::Zoey Pierson .
Played by Jennifer Morrison .
One of Ted 's girlfriends .
Ted first meets Zoey when she was an activist protesting the destruction of a historic New York building , in " Architect of Destruction " .
At first Ted is attracted to her , even though he is the architect responsible for the building 's demolition .
However , when she discovers this fact , she turns on him , and the two develop a mutually antagonistic relationship .
In " Natural History " , Ted meets her rich husband , who calls himself The Captain , at a black - tie event at a museum .
Zoey spends Thanksgiving hanging out with the gang in " Blitzgiving " because her husband is spending it with his daughter ; surprisingly , it is Ted who convinces the group to let her do so , after deducing that she is hurting by her stepdaughter 's rejection of her .
Zoey is ( by marriage ) a van Smoot , whose family is shown to have owned the mansion in which Marshall and Lily were married , and an apartment in the Alberta building .
In " Oh Honey " , Zoey divorces the Captain and Zoey gets together with Ted .
However , they break up in " Landmarks " due to tensions caused by the Arcadian .
She appears in " Challenge Accepted " , where she unsuccessfully tries reuniting with Ted .
In " Gary Blauman " , Future Ted reveals that Zoey continued campaigning for various causes .
PATRICE Section::::Patrice .
Played by Ellen D. Williams , Patrice is a World Wide News employee , often shouted down by Robin who is annoyed by her efforts to be best friends .
In season 8 , Patrice joins Barney 's " The Robin " play by pretending to date him .
In " Gary Blauman " , it is shown that Patrice later moves on to becoming a radio talk show host .
MARVIN ERIKSEN Section::::Marvin Eriksen .
Played by Bill Fagerbakke , Marvin Eriksen is : Judy 's husband ; the father of Marvin , Marcus and Marshall ; father - in - law of Lily ; grandfather of Marshall and Lily 's three children and Marcus and Sarah 's children , Marcus Jr. and Martin .
He was very close to Marshall and the rest of his family prior to his passing in early 2011 .
After " Last Words " , set at Marvin 's funeral , Carter Bays stated that they intended to bring back Bill Fagerbakke as Marshall 's father in future episodes during flashbacks .
He later appeared in five episodes as a " ghost " imagined by Marshall .
NORA Section::::Nora .
Played by Nazanin Boniadi , Nora is an English co - worker of Robin 's who meets Barney the day before Valentine 's Day .
Though he is interested in her , Barney is reluctant to admit it , despite Robin 's encouragement .
During his first formal date with Nora , she reveals her wishes to eventually marry and settle down and invites him to meet her parents , both of which Barney accepts as things he wants .
At the end of their date , however , he tells her that his words were a lie and criticizes Nora 's dreams , which seemingly ends the relationship .
Though Barney is convinced that he was lying to her , he later realizes that he does want to marry and settle down .
He gets a second chance with Nora , when he convinces her that he will be honest in their relationship .
They start dating but break up in " Tick Tick Tick " after Barney confesses to cheating on her with Robin .
MICKEY ALDRIN Section::::Mickey Aldrin .
Played by Chris Elliott , Mickey Aldrin is Lily 's father .
Obsessed with attempting to launch Aldrin Games , his unsuccessful board game creator business , he was frequently absent , distant , and unreliable throughout her childhood .
He and Lily did not have a close relationship during the first few seasons .
As the series progressed he gradually redeems himself .
He eventually moves in with Marshall and Lily at Lily 's grandparents ' home in Long Island .
Once there he refuses to leave his childhood home , despite being unwelcome ; he does eventually agree to leave at Lily and Marshall 's insistence , although they let him stay after he makes pancakes for them .
From then on his hobbies make him an occasional nuisance in the household , eventually accidentally burning the house down after Marshall and Lily had returned to the apartment .
This leads to him joining them in Manhattan and despite Lily 's expectations , he proves very helpful in looking after his grandson Marvin W. Eriksen .
He reveals that he had taken much better care of Lily prior to her going to school ; only when she started kindergarten and he found himself at loose ends did he go to the racetrack on a whim , where he developed a gambling addiction .
LINUS Section::::Linus .
Played by Robert Belushi , Linus is a bartender at the Farhampton Inn .
Lily pays him $ 100 to make sure she always has a drink in her hand during the weekend of Barney and Robin 's wedding .
Throughout season 9 , he is constantly seen handing her drinks followed by Lily saying " Thank you , Linus " .
It is revealed in " Daisy " that these drinks are non - alcoholic as Lily is pregnant .
STELLA ZINMAN Section::::Stella Zinman .
Played by Sarah Chalke , Stella is Ted 's dermatologist , who removes his ill - advised butterfly tattoo .
He attempts to convince her to date him over the course of the episode " Ten Sessions " .
Stella initially refuses , wanting to focus on her daughter Lucy , but eventually agrees to go on a two - minute lunch date .
They start dating soon after .
In the last episode of season three , Ted proposes to Stella , and in the season four premiere , she accepts .
In " Shelter Island " , after her sister 's wedding falls apart , Ted
and she agree to take over the wedding .
She ends up leaving Ted at the altar and getting back together with Tony , her ex - boyfriend and father of Lucy .
She later appears in " Right Place Right Time " , where she is still with Tony .
KEVIN VENKATARAGHAVAN Section::::Kevin Venkataraghavan .
Played by Kal Penn , Kevin is originally introduced as Robin 's therapist but later becomes her boyfriend .
She cheats on him with Barney , although he never discovers this .
He proposed to Robin before she told him of her infertility .
He still wanted to marry her , suggesting they could adopt or use a surrogate but when Robin made it clear to him that she did not want to have any children , they broke up .
In " Gary Blauman " , Future Ted says that Kevin ended up with Jeanette .
QUINN GARVEY Section::::Quinn Garvey .
Played by Becki Newton , Quinn is a romantic interest for Barney in season 7 , as she has a scheming personality similar to him .
Barney becomes interested in her without realizing she is a stripper at the Lusty Leopard , despite being a frequent patron .
Quinn initially scams Barney out of a large amount of money , but gives Barney a chance .
Due to Barney 's insecurity , she quits her job as a stripper and accommodates most of his demands regarding his apartment when she moves in with him .
Barney proposes to her in " The Magician 's Code " .
However , due to their inability to trust one another , they break up in " The Pre - Nup " .
Quinn makes a brief return in " The Bro Mitzvah " as a stripper hired for Barney 's bachelor party , much to his chagrin .
SANDY RIVERS Section::::Sandy Rivers .
Played by Alexis Denisof , Alyson Hannigan 's real life husband , Sandy is a narcissistic lecherous anchorman .
He debuts as Robin 's colleague at Metro News One and spares no opportunity to ask her out .
Ted and Marshall make fun of him during his segments .
He resigns from the network to take up a job at CNN but recommends Robin to succeed him as lead anchor .
Sandy and Robin cross paths again in season 6 as colleagues at World Wide News , where he is often seen hitting on young female interns .
Sandy 's inappropriate behavior ruins his career in the US and he does not change his ways even as he anchors a news show in Russia .
MARCUS ERIKSEN Section::::Marcus Eriksen .
Marcus Eriksen is one of Marshall 's brothers , known for pranking Marshall .
He and the rest of his brothers often played roughly with each other .
In " Who Wants to Be a Godparent ?
" , Marcus left his wife and two children for his dream job of being a bartender .
Marcus is often seen at family events such as his father 's funeral .
LORETTA STINSON Section::::Loretta Stinson .
Played by Frances Conroy , Loretta is Barney 's mother .
Prior to her first proper appearance , she appeared from the neck down voiced by Megan Mullally in " Single Stamina " and " Showdown " .
Loretta had a very promiscuous lifestyle and neither Barney nor James
know who their real fathers are until they are adults .
She also tends to tell ridiculous lies to her sons to cover up bad news , such as saying Barney 's father is Bob Barker .
So that his mother would not worry about him , Barney hired actors to pretend to be his family ; when he is forced to reveal the truth in " The Stinsons " , Loretta is not upset .
She returns in " Cleaning House " : the gang go to her home as she is planning to move .
Though she had hidden the identities of James and Barney 's fathers so that she could be both mother and father to them , she eventually discloses who both of their fathers are .
ARTHUR HOBBS Section::::Arthur Hobbs .
Played by Bob Odenkirk , Arthur is a boss at Goliath National Bank and was also Marshall 's boss at Nicholson , Hewitt & West .
Due to his habit of screaming at his employees , he is nicknamed " Artillery Arthur . "
He has a dog named Tugboat .
VIRGINIA MOSBY Section::::Virginia Mosby .
Played by Cristine Rose .
Virginia is Ted 's mother , married to Alfred for 30 years before they get divorced .
She marries Clint in " Home Wreckers " .
Barney jokes on several occasions that he had sex with Virginia , although it is revealed in " Unpause " that they only shared a kiss .
ALFRED MOSBY Section::::Alfred Mosby .
Played by Michael Gross .
Alfred is Ted 's father , married to Virginia for 30 years before they get divorced .
He shares similar views on romance to Ted , being described as a " head - in - the - clouds romantic " by Virginia .
DAPHNE Section::::Daphne .
Played by Sherri Shepherd .
When she , Marshall and Marvin get kicked off a plane , they spend the first half of season 9 travelling together .
Marshall gets to know Daphne through the journey ; she has a daughter and is worried that she is not a good mother .
BRAD MORRIS Section::::Brad Morris .
Played by Joe Manganiello , Brad is a friend of Marshall from law school .
Brad and Marshall begin to hang out after they both discover they are single , following breakups with their respective girlfriends , Kara and Lily .
The bromance between Brad and Marshall becomes increasingly awkward after they go to brunch and a musical together .
Eventually , Brad gets back together with his girlfriend .
He attends Marshall 's bachelor party and wedding and gets punched in the face by Barney when he tries to kiss Robin , although he bears no hard feelings .
He appears in " The Stamp Tramp " , claiming to be in need of help but later revealing that he is the opposition lawyer in a big court case , putting Marshall 's job at risk .
The trial takes place in " Twelve Horny Women " and Gruber Pharmaceuticals are found guilty but only have to pay $ 25,000 , because the judge is biased due to his attraction to Brad ; this leads to Marshall becoming a judge , as he realizes that is the position from which to effect the most change .
His image appears in a flash forward in " Rally " when a news report shows him leading in exit polls over Marshall for New York State Supreme Court Judge in 2020 .
THE CAPTAIN Section::::The Captain .
Played by Kyle MacLachlan , George van Smoot ( known by his nickname " The Captain " ) is introduced as Zoey Pierson 's husband at a gala at the Natural History Museum .
He is obsessed with boats , an interest that Zoey does not share .
Despite the Captain 's frightening demeanor , such as the murderous look he has in his eyes , he proves to be generous , if rather strange ; he is also seen to be somewhat shy because of the apparent age gap between him and most of Zoey 's peers .
While he comes to like Ted , Ted 's fear of the Captain is exacerbated by the fact that Ted and Zoey are attracted to one another .
Zoey eventually divorces the Captain and leaves him for Ted .
A year after Ted breaks up with Zoey , the Captain unexpectedly runs into Ted , Robin and Lily at a gallery show .
He reveals that he holds no hard feelings for Ted regarding his divorce with Zoey .
During the gallery show , Lily 's advice about artwork , while initially dismissed by the Captain , proves to be invaluable and the Captain ends up hiring Lily as his new art consultant in " The Ashtray " .
He announces his intention to move to Rome for a year and asks for Lily and her family to accompany him ; following a fight between Marshall and Lily , they do live in Italy for a year .
The Captain has three Olympic gold medals in fencing and ends up engaged to Becky .
NICK PODARUTTI Section::::Nick Podarutti .
Played by Michael Trucco , Nick is a love interest of Robin .
They originally met in a clothes shop and later came face - to - face in a bar called " Hopeless " .
Each had a crush on the other .
Although Nick was supposed to be a recurring character in season 7 , Michael Trucco could not return as he was playing Justin Patrick in the second season of Fairly Legal .
Instead , he began dating Robin in season 8 .
Nick is characterized as overly emotional and unintelligent , and in " Splitsville " , Robin begins to get annoyed by these traits
( Nick 's groin injury prevents the two from having sex , so she begins to notice his personality more ) .
They break up in the same episode , after Barney makes an impassioned speech about being in love with Robin ; although he tells her that he was lying , it is later revealed he was telling the truth .
ROBIN SR .
Section::::Robin Sr ..
Played by Eric Braeden in " Happily Ever After " and Ray Wise in all other appearances , Robin Charles Scherbatsky Sr . is an overbearing father who wanted a son .
When the baby ( Robin ) turned out to be a girl , he raises her as a son , teaching her stereotypically male activities such as hunting .
Robin Sr expresses his disappointment of his daughter over the years ; he has very little contact with her , becoming married without telling her .
The two eventually reconcile .
BILSON Section::::Bilson .
Played by Bryan Callen .
He works for Goliath National Bank as Barney and Marshall 's co - worker and fires
Ted when he designed an Employee Termination Room that was too " inspired " .
SCOOTER Section::::Scooter .
Played by David Burtka , Neil Patrick Harris ' real life husband , Scooter is Lily 's old high - school boyfriend and is obsessed with her .
They broke up during their high - school prom after being in a relationship for a long time .
Scooter appears over several seasons , during which he fails to win back Lily at her wedding , works as a waiter in a fine - dining restaurant and as a cafeteria server at her school .
A flashback shows that Lily intimidated Scooter into hanging out with her during her days as a bully in 1994 .
Scooter eventually marries Lily 's doppelganger , Jasmine the stripper .
GARY BLAUMAN Section::::Gary Blauman .
Played by Taran Killam , Cobie Smulders ' real life husband , Gary was Barney and Marshall 's coworker until he quit .
In " The Chain of Screaming " , Barney claims his life went downhill after being fired and that he eventually died .
However , Blauman appears in later episodes ; he inexplicably starts hanging out with Bilson when the two of them start working for Goliath National Bank .
In " Gary Blauman " , it is revealed that he slept with Barney 's brother James , in an affair leading to Tom and James nearly getting divorced .
DON FRANK Section::::Don Frank .
Played by Ben Koldyke , Don is Robin 's boyfriend and co - anchor in season 5 , despite Robin originally disliking him .
Robin decides to move into his apartment in " Twin Beds " .
She is offered a job in Chicago but decides to stay for him .
When offered the same job , Don accepts .
In " Unfinished " , a drunken Robin is shown calling him , leaving death threats as she never got over their breakup .
DOUG MARTIN Section::::Doug Martin .
Played by Will Sasso , Doug is an angry , violent bartender who beats up three men for sitting in the gang 's booth .
Although he appears in the background of several significant events , he is only pointed out by Future Ted in " The Fight " .
JEANETTE PETERSON Section::::Jeanette Peterson .
Played by Abby Elliott , Jeanette is the last person Ted dates before The Mother .
A New York Police Department officer who stalks Ted for roughly a year and a half after he was featured in a magazine , Jeanette is described by the gang as " crazy " after she messes up Ted 's apartment , destroys Barney 's Playbook and throws Robin 's locket off a bridge .
It is revealed in " Gary Blauman " that she ended up with Kevin the psychiatrist .
BECKY Section::::Becky .
Played by Laura Bell Bundy , Becky is Robin 's replacement co - anchor for Don Frank at the morning talk show Come On , Get Up New York ! , and starts to eclipse Robin in the show .
Her hyperactivity and cheerfulness wins over the production staff , but Robin dislikes her as she fails to remain professional on camera .
In " Canning Randy " , she does a commercial about boats , giving her the nickname " Boats Boats Boats " .
She marries The Captain .
CURTIS Section::::Curtis .
Played by Roger Bart .
He is the front desk clerk at the Farhampton Inn , who works there until at least 2024 .
He is unintentionally condescending to Ted upon learning he is single .
When The Mother shows up at the inn in the middle of the night , he gives her a key to Robin 's mother 's empty room .
CLAUDIA AND STUART BOWERS Section::::Claudia and Stuart Bowers .
Claudia and Stuart are played by Virginia Williams and Matt Boren .
Claudia and Stuart are about to get married when they make their first appearance .
While Stuart is an easy - going , sensitive , and plain - looking man , Claudia is an attractive , blunt and somewhat high - strung woman ; despite their differences , they have a good relationship .
As their wedding approaches , Claudia becomes increasingly stressed and refuses to allow Ted to bring Robin as a last - minute date to the wedding .
Ted persuades Stuart , behind Claudia 's back , to allow him to bring Robin .
Claudia and Stuart argue over this and break up before the wedding , although Marshall manages to convince them to get back together .
However , as the show progresses , it is shown that Stuart and Claudia have a toxic and unstable relationship .
The couple make minor recurring appearances afterward .
Stuart attends Marshall 's bachelor party in " Bachelor Party " , where it is suggested he regrets marrying Claudia .
He also briefly appears in " Intervention " .
In " Baby Talk " , he and Claudia are seen to have a daughter named Esther .
Stuart makes another appearance in " The Over - Correction " , where Ted blames him for failing to return Ted 's red cowboy boots .
In " The Poker Game " , Stuart claims to have given Marshall and Lily a coffeemaker for their wedding , when it was really Ted 's present .
In that episode it is also revealed that Stuart has been cheating on Claudia .
THE DOPPELGÄNGERS Section::::The Doppelgängers .
In " Double Date " , Ted mentions that the group has seen people who look exactly like them .
This theme of five doppelgängers , one for each of the main characters ( excluding The Mother ) , continues throughout several episodes .
The first three doppelgängers are seen in " Double Date " .
" Moustache Marshall " appears on an advert on the side of a bus , and is spotted by Barney in MacLaren 's . "
Lesbian Robin " is seen in the streets of New York . "
Stripper Lily " ( known by the name " Jasmine " ) works at the Lusty Leopard and also appears in " 46 Minutes " and " Gary Blauman " , eventually marrying Scooter . "
Mexican Wrestler Ted " is discovered in " Robots Versus Wrestlers " .
Barney 's doppelgänger is the most significant ; Lily and Marshall want a sign from " the universe " that they are ready to have children , and agree to start trying once they see Barney 's double .
In " Doppelgangers " , Marshall meets a cab driver who he thinks is Barney 's doppelgänger , but who turns out to be Barney in disguise .
Lily then sees a pretzel vendor and thinks he is the double ; in reality , the vendor looks nothing like Barney but they begin to try to have children as Marshall claims it means that Lily is subconsciously ready to have kids .
Barney 's real doppelgänger , Doctor John Stangel , is revealed in " Bad News " .
He is a fertility doctor , making Lily uncomfortable as she is convinced he is Barney in disguise .
GUEST STARS
As themselves : * Maury Povich in " Subway Wars " : a recurring joke in the episode is that the gang see Maury Povich everywhere and he appears in many scenes that occur simultaneously .
* Regis Philbin , along with Marshall , tries to track down " The Best Burger in New York " .
He also hosts the fictional show Million Dollar Heads or Tails .
* Heidi Klum , Alessandra Ambrosio , Marisa Miller , Miranda Kerr and Adriana Lima of Victoria 's Secret appear in " The Yips " .
*
Marshall imagines a conversation between him and pictures of Kim Kardashian , Spencer Pratt and Heidi Montag on the front page of his magazine in " Benefits " .
Scenes were shot on November 12 , 2008 .
*
Boyz II Men ( Wanya Morris , Nathan Morris and Shawn Stockman ) sing "
You Just Got Slapped " at the end of " " .
Their appearance was described as " a decent surprise " by one critic ; another said their cameo " did n't make sense " ; a third described it as " way random " .
* " Weird Al " Yankovic reads a fan letter from Ted in " Noretta " .
* Ralph Macchio and William Zabka appear in " The Bro Mitzvah " as a surprise at Barney 's bachelor party ; William Zabka also appears in 6 other episodes from " The Broken Code " to " The End of the Aisle " , attending Barney 's wedding .
* Emmitt Smith guest stars in " Monday Night Football " :
Barney meets him when he tries to find out the Super Bowl result .
One critic said his " 60-second bit was not funny " .
*
Jim Nantz appears in " Perfect Week " and " Last Forever – Part 2 " ; in both episodes , Barney imagines being interviewed by him .
In " Perfect Week " , his appearance was complimented by Donna Bowman from The A.V. Club .
* Frank Viola phones Marshall , who is unable to speak to him because of a jinx , in " The Final Page – Part 1 " .
* Nick Swisher , a former New York Yankee , walks into MacLaren 's during " Perfect Week " .
This attracts the attention of the girl Barney was trying to pick up .
His appearance on the show was first announced in December 2009 ; his episode aired in February 2010 .
*
Funk musician George Clinton appears in " Where Were We ? " , in a scene imagined by Marshall .
Robin Pierson said Clinton 's scene was " pure silliness " and Marshall 's imaginings were " just a stupid excuse to give Clinton a part on the show " .
*
Game show host Bob Barker appears in " Showdown " , hosting The Price is Right in which Barney competes .
Barney claims Bob Barker is his father , a lie told by his mother .
Staci Krause said " Barney 's emotional closing words to Bob Barker almost brought tears to [ her ] eyes " .
Pierson said " the writers handled [ Barney 's storyline ] beautifully " .
*
Tim Gunn appears in 5 episodes from " Girls Versus Suits " to " The End of the Aisle " .
First appearing in the 100th episode of the show , he is Barney 's tailor and in season 9 , goes to Farhampton during Barney 's wedding weekend .
Tim Gunn designs Barney 's wedding tux ; they play poker together in " The Poker Game " and in " Sunrise " , a drunk Barney takes Justin and Kyle to Tim Gunn to be fitted for suits .
Brian Zoromski said Gunn " seemed a little bit stilted in his delivery " ; however , Hannigan said he was " more popular than Britney Spears " and that she " [ wanted ] him back in every episode " .
He was third in a list of best guest stars in the show by Bustle .
* Alex Trebek appears in " False Positive " and " P.S. I Love You " .
In the former , a Christmas special , he hosts the fictional game show Million Dollar Heads or Tails ; it was announced Trebek would appear in the show on December 13 by TV Guide on November 17 , 2014 .
Later , Trebek appeared alongside a number of Canadian guest stars in " P.S.
I Love You " in an episode centered around " Robin Sparkles " .
*
Alan Thicke appears in 5 episodes from " Sandcastles in the Sand " to " The Rehearsal Dinner " .
In the Robin Sparkles music video " Sandcastles in the Sand , " he was cast as Sparkles ' dad .
In " The Rough Patch " , he was hired by Lily to help with a plan to break Robin and Barney up ; one critic said about the episode " anything Alan Thicke - related was funny " while another said the highlight of the episode was Thicke telling Barney that he and Robin once worked together on a Canadian variety show .
It was revealed in " Glitter " that Thicke worked with Robin and Jessica Glitter in the variety show " Space Teens " .
Thicke appeared in " P.S.
I Love You " , where he beats Barney easily in a fight , after Barney mistakenly thinks Robin had a crush on Thicke as a teenager .
Thicke 's final appearance on the show was in " The Rehearsal Dinner " , where he sings a Crash Test Dummies song .
However , Thicke also appeared on a website made specifically for the show , CanadianSexActs.org , featured in the episode " Old King Clancy " .
* Jason Priestley , Paul Shaffer , Geddy Lee , Dave Coulier , k.d . lang , Luc Robitaille and Steven Page appear in a fictional documentary during " P.S. I Love You " ; it was announced these Canadian guest stars would appear in a Robin Sparkles - related episode on January 7 , 2013 , roughly a month before the episode aired .
As characters : Abby : Played by Britney Spears ; appears in " Ten Sessions " and " Everything Must Go " .
Abby is Stella 's receptionist .
Very energetic and scatterbrained , she developed an obsessive crush on Ted while he was pursuing Stella .
Barney ended up sleeping with her .
It was announced Spears would appear on the show in March 2008 ; most critics complimented her acting in " Ten Sessions " , with Segel noting that she improvised a few " really good " lines .
However , her scenes in " Everything Must Go " were described as " rushed and awkward " , and her character as " silly " .
An article in Bustle ranked her top in a list of guest stars on How I Met Your Mother .
Amy : Played by Mandy Moore ; appears in " Wait for It " .
A girl who Ted meets at MacLaren 's shortly after breaking up with Robin .
After committing theft and trespassing in someone else 's home , she takes an intoxicated Ted to get a tattoo , a butterfly on his lower back which his friends call a " tramp stamp " .
She was described by IGN as " fantastic in her brief role " ; Joel Keller of TV Squad originally said Moore " does n't pull [ her hard - ass role ] off " , although later said that she was not too bad .
Moore described her kiss with Radnor as " unbelievably awkward " , although Radnor said " she was a really good fake kisser " .
Anita Appleby : Played by Jennifer Lopez ; appears in " Of Course " .
Anita has written a book about dating , encouraging women to " train " men and refrain from sex until they have had seventeen dates with a person ; after being interviewed by Robin on the news , Robin hires her to seduce Barney .
Gael :
Played by : Enrique Iglesias , the guy Robin appears with when returning from Argentina after the breakup with Ted .
He appears in the first two episodes of the third season , " Wait for It " and " We 're Not from Here " .
Genevieve Scherbatsky : Played by Tracey Ullman
, Robin 's mother appears in three episodes of season 9 from " Vesuvius " to " The End of the Aisle " .
Honey :
Played by Katy Perry ; appears in " Oh Honey " .
She is Zoey van Smoot 's cousin , the gullible character who Barney eventually sleeps with .
As Future Ted can not recall her real name , she is referred to as " Honey " .
Perry 's appearance was described as a " gimmick " , but still praised .
Jessica Glitter :
Played by Nicole Scherzinger ; appears in " Glitter " .
She plays an old friend of Robin 's from Canada .
Glitter was her character 's name on a Canadian TV show called " Space Teens " where she and Robin used math to complete missions in space .
Tiffany :
Played by Carrie Underwood ; appears in " Hooked " .
Ted is said to be " on the hook " for this girl : he is infatuated with her while she is just friends with him .
Brian Zoromski of The A.V. Club described her acting as " decent " , especially for a " singer turned actor " .
OTHER CHARACTERS
" Blah Blah " / Carol : Played by Abigail Spencer ; appears in " How I Met Everyone Else " and " Gary Blauman " .
She meets Ted on World of Warcraft and when she is introduced to the gang , they spend the night wondering whether she is crazy .
Ted calls her " blah blah " upon recounting the story to his children in " How I Met Everyone Else " , as he can not remember the girl 's name ; this joke was called " ridiculously funny " by one critic .
She appears again in " Gary Blauman " , where Ted suddenly remembers that her name was Carol .
Mrs. Buckminster : Played by Jane Carr ; appears in " Nannies " .
She is a " delightful " nanny
but Marshall and Lily can not afford her salary .
Barney tries to pay , but Lily realises she feels uncomfortable leaving Marvin with a stranger .
Carly Whittaker :
Played by Ashley Benson ; appears in " Ring Up ! " .
She is Barney 's half - sister , whom Ted briefly dates .
Cathy : Played by Lindsay Price ; appears in " Spoiler Alert " .
Ted is happy dating Cathy until his friends point out that she never stops talking .
Once Ted realises this , it starts to annoy him and they eventually break up .
Cindy :
Played by Rachel Bilson ; appears in 4 episodes from " Girls Versus Suits " to " How Your Mother Met Me " .
She is a PhD candidate who dates Ted .
Her roommate turns out to be The Mother .
Cindy turns out to be a lesbian and marries Casey .
Cindy , who first appears in the show 's 100th episode , " is very important to the ultimate story " according to Bays .
Coat - Check Girl :
Played by Jayma Mays ; appears in " Okay Awesome " and " The Time Travelers " .
Ted meets this girl at a dance club , but never calls her ; several years later , he imagines her dropping by at MacLaren 's .
Darren : Played by Andrew Rannells ; appears in " Bass Player Wanted " and "
How Your Mother Met Me " .
Tracy invited him to join her band , and he quickly began to take over it , culminating in him firing Tracy .
Darren tries to ruin friendships between Ted and Barney , and Lily and Robin ; one critic said " his shit - starting added an edge to everybody 's dynamic . "
Daryl : Played by Seth Green in " The Final Page – Part 1 " .
A friend from their college days , Daryl became obsessed with Lily and Marshall .
He runs a successful business selling Hacky Sacks .
Max Nicholson said " Daryl 's " Hackmigos " bit was a little bizarre , but funny . "
Garrison Cootes : Played by Martin Short ; appears in 3 episodes from " The Naked Truth " to " The Burning Beekeeper " .
He is Marshall 's " workaholic boss " and an " environmental pixie " at the Natural Resources Defense Council .
It was announced that Short would appear on the show playing Marshall 's boss in June 2011 .
Genevieve Scherbatsky : Played by Tracey Ullman ; appears in 3 episodes from " Vesuvius " to " The End of the Aisle " .
She is Robin 's mother , but the gang know very little about her until she is finally seen in season 9 .
Nicholson described her scene in " Vesuvius " as " an appearance that fans have been waiting to see since the season began " .
Hammond Druthers : Played by Bryan Cranston ; appears in 3 episodes from " Aldrin Justice " to " Platonish " .
Druthers is a condescending architect who is Ted 's boss at their architecture firm .
Druthers designs a building in Spokane , Washington that , according to Ted and Lily , looks like an erect penis ; their client accepts Ted 's design instead .
Druthers is then forced to work under Ted .
It was announced in 2013 that Cranston would return to the show .
In the ninth season ( during " Platonish " ) , Druthers offers Ted a new job but Ted declines ; an editor for Vulture criticized Cranston 's appearance in this episode .
Janice Aldrin : Played by Meagen Fay ; appears in 3 episodes from " Bachelor Party " to " The Sexless Innkeeper " .
Janice is Lily 's mother , who divorced Lily 's father ( Mickey ) in 1985 .
She and Lily do not have a good relationship .
Jen :
Played by Lindsay Sloane ; appears in " Double Date " .
Ted and Jen are set up on a blind date in 2002 and again in 2009 .
Jefferson Coatsworth : Played by John Cho ; appears in "
I 'm Not That Guy " .
He interviews Marshall for the Nicholson , Hewitt & West law firm .
Jenkins : Played by Amanda Peet ; appears in " Jenkins " .
Jenkins is a lawyer at Goliath National Bank .
She kisses Marshall when drunk and is attacked by Lily when she finds out .
Jerome Whittaker : Played by John Lithgow ; appears in 4 episodes from " Legendaddy " to " The End of the Aisle " .
Barney begins to wonder who his real father is after James meets his own biological father in " Cleaning House " .
Though Barney refuses Loretta 's initial offer to reveal his father , he discovers in " Natural History " that it is Jerome , although Barney was told as a child that Jerome was his uncle .
Barney is disappointed that Jerome is a " lame suburban dad " .
Jerome has a wife named Cheryl and two children :
J.J. ( Jerome Junior ) and Carly .
Kara :
Played by Aisha Kabia ; appears in " " and " World 's Greatest Couple " .
Marshall 's friend from law school and Brad 's old girlfriend .
Karen :
Played by Laura Prepon ; appears in 3 episodes from " Sorry , Bro " to " Say Cheese " , as well as being mentioned in several others .
Ted 's first real girlfriend , Karen is depicted as highly sarcastic and snooty , which results in Marshall and Lily loathing her .
The feeling is mutual , as Karen also has a low opinion of Ted 's friends .
Karen enjoys berets , Bordeaux wine and Baudelaire 's erotic poetry .
While Ted is deeply in love with her , Karen cheats on him every time she wants to break up .
Karen is often described by critics as " Ted 's worst girlfriend " .
Katie Scherbatsky : Played by Lucy Hale ; appears in 2 episodes from " First Time in New York " to " Vesuvius " .
Katie visits
Robin ( her sister ) in New York and Robin reacts badly when she discovers Katie is planning to lose her virginity to a boy named Kyle .
Bustle ranked her second in a list of best guest stars in the series .
Klaus :
Played by Thomas Lennon ; appears in " Farhampton " and " The Pre - Nup " .
Klaus is Victoria 's fiancé .
They were classmates at Victoria 's culinary fellowship in Germany but enter a relationship roughly a day after Ted and Victoria break up .
He appears on - screen in " Farhampton " as Victoria 's groom , but both of them get cold feet at their wedding .
The failure of the wedding sends Klaus into a spiral and he briefly stays at Ted 's apartment .
Professor Lewis : Played by Jane Seymour ; appears in " Aldrin Justice " .
Professor Lewis is Marshall 's recently divorced law professor who is considered a " cougar " by Barney .
He has sex with her several times .
Liddy Gates :
Played by Mircea Monroe ; appears in " Romeward Bound " .
She is Barney and Robin 's wedding planner , and has a " ridonkulous " body according to Ted and Barney .
Mary : Played by Erinn Bartlett ; appears in " Mary the Paralegal " .
Although she is a paralegal , Barney tells Ted she is a prostitute .
After initially refusing , Ted tries to have sex with Mary but when he calls her a prostitute she slaps him .
Maggie Wilks :
Played by JoAnna Garcia ; appears in " The Window " .
She is described by Ted as so perfect that every person that meets her falls in love with her .
Ted tries three times to start a relationship with her , between her long - term relationships with other men , but fails each time as when he arrives she is already dating another man .
Marissa Heller :
Played by Darby Stanchfield ; appears in " Robots Versus Wrestlers " .
She used to live in Ted and Marshall 's apartment and they occasionally receive mail supposed to go to her .
Mrs. Matsen :
Played by Renée Taylor ; appears in 3 episodes from " As Fast as She Can " to " The Magician 's Code – Part 2 " .
She is Ted 's neighbor and helps Marshall reunite Ted and Zoe in " Oh Honey " .
Max : Played by Geoff Stults ; appears in " Subway Wars " and " Architect of Destruction " .
He dated Robin briefly .
' Crazy ' Meg : Played by April Bowlby ; appears in 4 episodes from " Dowisetrepla " to " " .
A girl who appears obsessed with commitment , Meg initially hooks up with Barney in an apartment that Marshall and Lily later buy , but was arrested for trespassing when Barney leaves her there .
In " The Rough Patch " , she is part of Lily 's plan to break up Robin and Barney , with whom she is still obsessed .
Naomi
the ' Slutty Pumpkin ' : Played by Katie Holmes ; appears in " The Slutty Pumpkin Returns " , after being the subject of " Slutty Pumpkin " .
After meeting her at a Halloween party ten years earlier , Ted believed that they were very compatible but lost the candy bar where she had written her phone number .
For years , Ted wore the same costume and attended the same party in hopes of running into her again .
By chance , he finally finds her costume and tracks her down , but finds that they are not as well - matched as they believed .
They break up .
Nate " Scooby " Scooberman : Played by Robbie Amell ; appears in " A Change of Heart " and " The Exploding Meatball Sub " .
Robin finds this enthusiastic guy in the park and is slow to realize his dog - like qualities .
Nora Zinman : Played by Danneel Ackles ; appears in " Shelter Island " .
Nora is Stella 's sister .
After her fiancé ran off , Stella offered to take over her sister 's wedding with Ted .
Penelope : Played by Amy Acker ; appears in " Come On " .
A girl who hooked up with Barney twice , Penelope tries to teach Ted how to do a rain dance .
PJ : Played by Ryan Sypek ; appears in " Mosbius Designs " .
For a brief time , he is Ted 's office assistant and dates Robin .
Punchy :
Played by Chris Romano ; appears in 4 episodes from " Sandcastles in the Sand " to " The Best Man " .
Adam " Punchy " Punciarello is Ted 's high school buddy .
Ted experiences " revertigo " when he is around Punchy : he acts the way he was in high school .
The gang attends Punchy 's wedding in " The Best Man " .
Randy Wharmpess : Played by Will Forte ; appears in " Rebound Bro " and " Canning Randy " .
An employee of Goliath National Bank 's legal department , Randy worships Barney .
Randy 's ineffectiveness results in his sacking , but is rehired as Marshall feels guilty .
Randy then resorts to destroying Marshall 's office to get fired again , wanting a severance package so he can establish a new microbrewery for his signature beer .
Rhonda French : Played by Stephanie Faracy ; appears in " The Yips " .
A friend of Loretta Stinson , Rhonda is known as the " man - maker " as she has made many men lose their virginity , including Barney .
Sam Gibbs : Played by Ben Vereen ; appears in 4 episodes from " Cleaning House " to " The End of the Aisle " .
He is James Stinson 's father , who was absent from his childhood as Loretta did not want him around .
James meets him at the age of 37 .
Sam officiates at Barney and Robin 's wedding .
Sarah O'Brien :
Played by Beth Lacke ; appears in " Matchmaker " .
She is an engaged dermatologist deemed to be extremely compatible with Ted by Love Solutions , a dating service .
Sascha : Played by Carla Toutz ; appears in " Sweet Taste of Liberty " .
An airport security officer , Sascha invites Barney and Ted back to her house for an incredibly disappointing " party " .
Shelly : Played by Eva Amurri ; appears in " The Playbook " and " " .
Shelly is a teacher who works at Lily 's school .
After she sees Ted stuffing himself with chicken wings , Lily waits three years before trying to fix them up again .
However , Barney sleeps with her before Ted can meet her .
Simon Tremblay : Played by James Van Der Beek ; appears in 3 episodes from " Sandcastles in the Sand " to " Bedtime Stories " .
Robin 's Canadian ex - boyfriend , who broke up with her to date Louise Marsh .
Years later , he visits Robin in New York and they briefly date ; he breaks up with her a second time , again to date Louise Marsh .
He later becomes engaged to Louise and Robin steals and eats his wedding cake .
Dr. Sonya : Played by Vicki Lewis ; appears in three episodes from " The Stinson Missile Crisis " to " The Magician 's Code – Part One " .
She is Lily 's doctor and helps her give birth to Marvin , as well as being the doctor who tells Robin she is infertile .
Stacy Gusar :
Played by Janet Varney ; appears in " Little Boys " .
Barney and Ted try to sleep with her in order to determine who has the most " game " .
Steve Biel :
Played by Kevin Heffernan ; appears in "
I 'm Not That Guy " .
He is a porn star who performs under the name " Ted Mosby " .
Steve
' Blitz ' Henry :
Played by Jorge Garcia ; appears in " Blitzgiving " and " Gary Blauman " .
He is a college friend of Ted and Marshall , who gets his nickname from the curse he has : amazing events occur whenever he leaves .
He passes the curse on to several other characters , including Barney and Ted , before the curse gets passed back to him .
He makes numerous allusions to Jorge Garcia 's Lost character .
Tom : Played by Jai Rodriguez ; appears in " The Rebound Girl " and " Gary Blauman " .
Tom marries James Stinson and they adopt two children , Eli and Sadie .
James cheats on Tom
and they almost get divorced .
Lucy Zinman :
Played by Darcy Rose Byrnes .
Daughter of Stella and Tony , she is often seen happily around Ted and her parents .
"
Appears in 5 episodes from " Rebound Bro " to " Happily Ever After " Tony Grafanello : Played by Jason Jones ; appears in three episodes from " Shelter Island " to " As Fast as She Can " .
He dated Stella and they have a child together .
Stella leaves Ted at the altar and gets back together with Tony .
Feeling guilty for " stealing " Stella , Tony gets Ted a college teaching position .
Subsequently , Tony made a movie about their love triangle called The Wedding Bride , and two sequels were later released .
Ted is infuriated at his portrayal as a stereotypical , over - the top antagonist , although his friends find it hilarious and , at times , quite accurate .
Trudy : Played by Danica McKellar ; appears in " The Pineapple Incident " and " Third Wheel " .
She ends up in Ted 's bed after he gets really drunk .
In a later episode , Ted tries to have a threesome with her and another girl , although it is never said whether he did or not .
Professor Vinick : Played by Peter Gallagher ; appears in " The Final Page – Part 1 " .
He told Ted he 'd never make it as an architect , damaging Ted 's self - esteem and causing him to bear a grudge .
NOTES REFERENCES