TURRITOPSIS DOHRNII
Turritopsis dohrnii , the immortal jellyfish , is a species of small , biologically immortal jellyfish found in the Mediterranean Sea and in the waters of Japan .
It is one of the few known cases of animals capable of reverting completely to a sexually immature , colonial stage after having reached sexual maturity as a solitary individual .
Others include the jellyfish and Aurelia sp.1 .
Like most other hydrozoans , T. dohrnii begin their life as tiny , free - swimming larvae known as planula .
As a planula settles down , it gives rise to a colony of polyps that are attached to the sea - floor .
All the polyps and jellyfish arising from a single planula are genetically identical clones .
The polyps form into an extensively branched form , which is not commonly seen in most jellyfish .
Jellyfish , also known as medusae , then bud off these polyps and continue their life in a free - swimming form , eventually becoming sexually mature .
When sexually mature they have been known to prey on other jellyfish species at a rapid pace .
If a T. dohrnii jellyfish is exposed to environmental stress or physical assault , or is sick or old , it can revert to the polyp stage , forming a new polyp colony .
It does this through the cell development process of transdifferentiation , which alters the differentiated state of the cells and transforms them into new types of cells .
Theoretically , this process can go on indefinitely , effectively rendering the jellyfish biologically immortal , although in practice individuals can still die .
In nature , most Turritopsis are likely to succumb to predation or disease in the medusa stage , without reverting to the polyp form .
The capability of biological immortality with no maximum lifespan makes T. dohrnii an important target of basic biological , aging and pharmaceutical research .
The " immortal jellyfish " was formerly classified as T. nutricula .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The medusa of Turritopsis dohrnii is bell - shaped , with a maximum diameter of about and is about as tall as it is wide .
The jelly in the walls of the bell is uniformly thin , except for some thickening at the apex .
The relatively large stomach is bright red and has a cruciform shape in cross section .
Young specimens 1 mm in diameter have only eight tentacles evenly spaced out along the edge , whereas adult specimens have 80–90 tentacles .
The medusa ( jellyfish ) is free - living in the plankton .
Dense nerve net cells are also present in the epidermis in the cap .
They form a large ring - like structure above the radial cannal which is commonly presented in cnidarians .
Turritopsis dohrnii also has a bottom - living polyp form , or hydroid , which consists of stolons that run along the substrate , and upright branches with feeding polyps that can produce medusa buds .
These polyps develop over a few days into tiny 1 mm medusae , which are liberated and swim free from the parent hydroid colony .
Images of both the medusa and polyp of the closely related species
Turritopsis rubra from New Zealand can be found online .
Until a recent genetic study , it was thought that Turritopsis rubra and Turritopsis nutricula were the same .
It is not known whether or not T. rubra medusae can also transform back into polyps .
DISTRIBUTION AND INVASION Section::::Distribution and invasion .
Turritopsis is believed to have originated in the Pacific but has spread all over the world through trans - Arctic migrations , and has speciated into several populations that are easy to distinguish morphologically , but whose species distinctions have recently been verified by a study and comparison of mitochondrial ribosomal gene sequences .
Turritopsis are found in temperate to tropical regions in all of the world 's oceans .
Turritopsis is believed to be spreading across the world through ballast water discharge .
Unlike other species invasions which caused serious economic and ecological consequences , T. dohrnii 's invasion around the world was unnoticed due to their tiny size and innocuity .
" We are looking at a worldwide silent invasion " , said Smithsonian Tropical Marine Institute scientist Dr. Maria Miglietta .
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
The eggs develop in gonads of female medusae , which are located in the walls of the manubrium ( stomach ) .
Mature eggs are presumably spawned and fertilized in the sea by sperm produced and released by male medusae , as is the case for most hydromedusae , although the related species Turritopsis rubra seems to retain fertilized eggs until the planula stage .
Fertilized eggs develop into planula larvae , which settle onto the sea - floor ( or even the rich marine communities that live on floating docks ) , and develop into polyp colonies ( hydroids ) .
The hydroids bud new jellyfishes , which are released at about one millimetre in size and then grow and feed in the plankton , becoming sexually mature after a few weeks
( the exact duration depends on the ocean temperature ; at it is 25 to 30 days and at it is 18 to 22 days ) .
Medusae of T. dohrnii are able to survive between 14 ° C and 25 ° C .
BIOLOGICAL IMMORTALITY
Section::::Biological immortality .
Most jellyfish species have a relatively fixed life - span , which varies by species from hours to many months ( long - lived mature jellyfish spawn every day or night ; the time is also fairly fixed and species - specific ) .
The medusa of Turritopsis dohrnii is the only form known to have developed the ability to return to a polyp state , by a specific transformation process that requires the presence of certain cell types ( tissue from both the jellyfish bell surface and the circulatory canal system ) .
Careful laboratory experiments have revealed that all stages of the medusae , from newly released to fully mature individuals , can transform back into polyps under the conditions of starvation , sudden temperature change , reduction of salinity and artificial damage of the bell with forceps or scissor .
The transforming medusa is characterized first by deterioration of the bell , mesoglea and tentacles .
All immature medusa ( with 12 tentacles at most ) then turned into a cyst - like stage and then transformed into stolons and polyps .
However , about 20%-40 % of mature medusa went into stolons and polyps stage without passing cyst - like stage .
Polyps were formed after 2 days since stolons had developed and fed on food .
Polyps further multiply by growing additional stolons , branches and then polyps , to form colonial hydroids .
In the experiment , they would eventually transform into stolons and polyps and begin their lives once again even without suffering from environment changes or injury .
Diagram of the transformation procedure can be found at the further reading .
This ability to reverse the biotic cycle ( in response to adverse conditions ) is unique in the animal kingdom , and allows the jellyfish to bypass death , rendering Turritopsis dohrnii potentially biologically immortal .
The process has not been observed in their natural habitat , in part because the process is quite rapid , and because field observations at the right moment are unlikely .
Regardless , most individual medusae are likely to fall victim to the general hazards of life as plankton , including being eaten by predators or succumbing to disease .
The species ' cell development method of transdifferentiation has inspired scientists to find a way to make stem cells using this process for renewing damaged or dead tissue in humans .
GENOMIC ANALYSIS
Section::::Genomic analysis .
Genomic analyses such as sequence analysis on mRNA or mitochondria DNA have been employed to investigate its lifecycle .
mRNA analysis of each life stage showed that a stage - specific gene in the medusae stage is expressed tenfold more than in other stages .
This gene is relative to a Wnt signal that can induce a regeneration process upon injury .
Analysis of nucleotide sequence homologs and protein homologs identified Nemopsis bachei as the species ' closest relative .
None of the closely related species display biological immortality .
CULTURING
Section::::Culturing .
Keeping T. dohrnii in captivity is quite difficult .
Currently only one scientist , Shin Kubota from Kyoto University , has managed to sustain a group of these jellyfish for a prolonged period of time .
The plankton must be inspected daily to ensure that they have properly digested the Artemia cysts they are being fed .
Kubota reported that during a two - year period , his colony rebirthed itself 11 times .
Kubota regularly appears on Japanese television to talk about his immortal jellyfish and has recorded several songs about them .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
* The Blacklist season 2 episode 17
" The Longevity Initiative " – a billionaire tech mogul whose fascination with immortality led him to develop and fund a research team for just that purpose .
Leading the research is a scientist who has been injecting the cells of T. dohrnii into humans in order to hopefully force their cells to regenerate .
* Zoo season 2 episode 6
" Sex , Lies and Jellyfish " – The team searches for immortal jellyfish to find a cure for animal mutations .
* Wild Kratts Videos " Meeting the Immortal Jellyfish " –
During the rescue of the Bowhead whale from Zach , Martin and Chris are thrown from the Tortuga , ending up in the Sea of Japan with a group of jellyfish .
But these jellyfish are different .
They 're called the Immortal jellyfish and can live forever .
With the help of Aviva , Martin and Chris activate with Immortal jellyfish powers and soon discover the highs and lows of living forever .
*
The design and abilities of the Vocaloid LUMi ( ルミ ) draw inspiration from T. dohrnii .
* Progressive post - metal band
The Ocean wrote the song ' Turritopsis Dohrnii , ' inspired by the jellyfish .
SEE ALSO
*
Hydra – another kind of cnidarian that is claimed to be immortal
* List of long - living organisms REFERENCES FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cheating Death :
The Immortal Life Cycle of Turritopsis
*
Telomerase activity is not related to life history stage in the jellyfish Cassiopea sp .
*
Scientists are Close to Finding a Way to be Immortal