BUSINESS SCHOOL ( THE OFFICE )
" Business School " is the seventeenth episode of the third season of the US version of The Office , and the show 's 45th overall .
In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is invited by Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) to speak to his business school class .
When many of the students question the usefulness of paper in a computerized world , Michael attempts to inform the class of how essential paper is .
Meanwhile , a bat becomes trapped in the office , leading Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) on a mission to protect the employees .
The episode was written by Brent Forrester , and directed by Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Firefly creator Joss Whedon .
Whedon became involved with the show due to being a friend of series creator Greg Daniels as well as series co - star Jenna Fischer .
Despite Whedon 's experience with Buffy the Vampire Slayer , the sub - plot about Dwight coming to believe that Jim Halpert is a vampire was entirely coincidental .
The episode aired on NBC on February 15 , 2007 and was seen by an estimated 8.84 million viewers according to Nielsen Media Research .
It was positively received by television critics , with several writing positively of Joss Whedon 's involvement .
Carell 's performance was also positively received , and several critics applauded the scene in which Michael says positive things about Pam 's art .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) invites Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) to speak at his business school class .
Michael is excited , but Ryan admits in a talking head interview that he has only invited Michael because his professor promised to bump up the grade of any student who brings his boss into class .
During his introduction of Michael , Ryan predicts that Dunder Mifflin will become obsolete within five to ten years .
However , Michael could not hear him and proceeds to ruin the event with his antics ( including tearing pages out of a student 's textbook to prove you " ca n't learn from textbooks " ) .
One of Ryan 's classmates asks for Michael 's opinion of Ryan 's prediction .
Infuriated and hurt , Michael punishes Ryan by relocating his desk to the " annex , " where Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) works .
Kelly babbles uncontrollably in excitement at the news .
Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) discovers a bat in the ceiling .
It flies through the office , sending the employees scurrying for cover .
Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) exploit Dwight 's paranoia , and pretend that Jim was bitten by the bat and is turning into a vampire .
Jim calls animal control , but Dwight insists on catching the bat himself even after 5:00 passes and the other employees go home , save Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) who continues to hide in the breakroom for fear of the bat .
Dwight eventually catches the bat with a garbage bag after it lands on Meredith 's head .
Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , in the meantime , invites her co - workers to her art show after work .
At the show , Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) and his partner Gil ( Tom Chick ) critique her art , with Gil dismissing it as " motel art " , not realizing that she is standing right behind them .
None of her other co - workers show , leaving her feeling alienated and sad .
Roy comes by and compliments her work , but obviously does so as a " boyfriend 's gesture " with no sincere appreciation for art .
The general attendees show little interest in her drawings , and she begins to doubt her abilities .
As she begins to take her work down , Michael arrives , having been delayed by the trip back to the office to move Ryan 's things .
He expresses sincere awe for her work and asks to buy her drawing of the office building , saying that he is very proud of her .
Pam embraces him as her eyes tear up .
Michael hangs Pam 's drawing on the wall next to his office .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
" Business School " was the second Office episode written by Brent Forrester .
Forrester had previously written " The Merger " .
The episode was the first to be directed by Joss Whedon .
Whedon , who is a friend of both producer Greg Daniels and Jenna Fischer , and also met most of the production staff prior to the episode , stated that he chose to direct the episode " because I already know the writing staff and a bunch of the cast , and I adore the show . "
When informed that the episode was about a bat entering into the office and one of the characters pretending to be a vampire , Whedon thought that it was a joke ; in reference to Buffy the Vampire Slayer , he quipped to the crew , " Did n't I just leave this party ?
" In an interview featured on the third season DVD , Whedon joked that the " Business School " episode and his former TV show were very similar because " Buffy ... was sad and depressing but ... it was funny .
Especially when people died .
And a lot of people do die in [ ' Business School ' ] .
" But upon completing the episode , Whedon said , " That was just coincidence .
But that 's how that happened .
God , it was fun .
"
Whedon stated that he was surprised with the amount of input he was allowed with the script .
" I would n't say freedom to do things with it ...
But way more input was asked for than I would have ever anticipated .
"
At Pam 's art show , the pieces which she was supposed to have painted did not suit Whedon ; he explained , " I got to the set and saw Pam 's art , and I was like , ' This is not right .
Whedon said that he held up filming for over an hour until the staff was able create new pieces of art .
For the scenes which involved filming with a bat , the production team used an actual bat , an animated bat , and a mechanical bat .
When around the actual bat , Kate Flannery , who portrays Meredith Palmer , stated that " we had to be extremely quiet around [ it ] , basically pretending to scream . "
California State University , Northridge served as the backdrop for Ryan 's business school and the art show ; the scenes at the institution were shot in January 2007 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
" Business School " first aired on February 15 , 2007 in the United States on NBC .
According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by an estimated 8.84 million viewers .
The Office garned a 4.4/11 rating in the 18- to 49-year - old demographic .
This means that it was seen by 4.4 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds watching television at the time of the broadcast .
The episode received generally good reviews from critics .
Brian Zoromski , of IGN , stated that Business School ' was an exercise in what works best in an Office episode . "
Zoromski also praised Joss Whedon 's directorial debut for the show , stating that " Whedon 's direction and sense of humor was both excellently put to use and alluded to in the scenes in which Jim hilariously pretended to become a vampire . "
Zoromski went on to say that the acting of John Krasinski and Rashida Jones , who portrays Karen Filippelli , helped to make the vampire scenes the funniest parts of the episode .
He gave the episode a 9.1 out of 10 .
Abby West , of Entertainment Weekly , stated that " This show has always been able to turn on a dime and take the comedy to a soul - stirring dramatic climax with just the lightest of touches , and last night was no different . "
West went on to praise Michael and Pam 's scene at the art show as one of these moments .
In a retrospective review of the show 's third season , Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " .
Adams highlighted Carell 's acting , writing , " On this rewatch , I found myself slack - jawed at how deep Carell gets into Michael 's ' saying something without saying anything ' style . "
Adams also applauded the way that Carell 's character brings honesty to the final scene in which Michael praises Pam 's art and offers to buy it for the office , writing , " The boss should keep his mouth shut more often , but every once in a while , that constant stream of bad jokes , misattributed information , and banalities produces a warm and uplifting sentiment . "
Finally , Adams compared " Business School " with previous television episodes that Joss Whedon has written , noting that the characters ' " triumphs over naysayers and foreboding villains " ( e.g. Pam receiving harsh criticism about her art only to be vindicated in the end , Michael being humiliated in Ryan 's business class but ultimately affirming his strength as an effective salesman ) was akin to how Whedon often wrote his heroes triumphing over seasonal " Big Bads " .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Business School " at NBC.com