MY LONG GOODBYE
" My Long Goodbye " is the 15th episode of season six of the American comedy - drama Scrubs .
It was written by Dave Tennant and directed by Victor Nelli , Jr ..
It is noteworthy for being the last regular episode featuring Aloma Wright as Laverne Roberts , a regular recurring character since the pilot episode .
A direct sequel to " My No Good Reason " , it depicts each cast member saying their goodbyes to coworker Laverne , who is in a non - responsive coma due to injuries she sustained in a car accident , and whose life support will soon be turned off by her family .
The title of the episode refers to Carla Espinosa 's ( Judy Reyes ) difficulty in saying goodbye to Laverne , ghostly visions of whom appear to Carla to encourage her in this endeavor .
The episode was well - received , with critics praising Reyes 's performance and the emotional drama of the story .
The episode won the Humanitas Prize , for the second time in the series history .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Sacred Heart 's staff starts saying goodbye to Laverne , who suffered terminal injuries after getting into a car accident .
However , Carla Espinosa tells everyone that Laverne could still pull through .
In deep denial , Carla hallucinates that she sees Laverne 's spirit following her around and talking to her .
The whole staff is heart - broken when Laverne 's latest CT scans arrive ; she 's brain dead .
Laverne 's family decides to take her off life support , and one by one the main characters say their own goodbyes to Laverne .
Carla , in the end , learns from Laverne 's spirit that she must say goodbye to the people she cares for before she loses her chance , and says her own tearful goodbye to Laverne .
As Carla walks out of the room and collapses in tears in Turk 's arms , Laverne finally dies and her spirit passes away .
Meanwhile , Dr. Cox confides in J.D. that he does n't want people to know of his daughter 's birth because it will be associated with Laverne 's death , but still tells Jordan that he has told others .
Jordan becomes suspicious because no one has come to congratulate her other than J.D. Even when Laverne passes away , Jordan still does not get admirers , and in desperation she declares an ecstatic J.D. the child 's godfather and agrees to name her baby Jennifer Dylan ( J.D. ) .
Everyone except J.D. , who is with Jordan , goes to the bar to toast Laverne 's memory .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
" My Long Goodbye " received very positive reviews from critics .
IGN gave the episode a score of 8.5 out of 10 , and praising Laverne 's death scene , mainly for Judy Reyes performance and for Carla 's final goodbye , stating that is " a moment both emotional and funny , but always honest " , and that " Reyes hits it out of the park with her performance " .
However , he regretted that Wright " does n't get anything as juicy for herself " , although admitting " this choice does n't lessen the impact any as the show says goodbye to a familiar face " AOL TV 's reviewer gave " My Long Goodbye " a positive review .
He praised the character 's farewells , especially from Elliot , Carla and the Janitor , and also J.D 's inner monologues .
He stated " All and all , a good , solid episode and a nice good - bye to Laverne , one of the unsung players on this program . "
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Although this is Aloma Wright 's last regular appearance as Laverne Roberts , she returned in the Season 7 episode " My Hard Labor " as Nurse Shirley , whose similarities to Laverne go unnoticed by all except J.D. Early reports stated that Aloma Wright would return as Laverne 's alcoholic twin sister .
Wright would reprise her role as Laverne in a flashback in the season 8 episode " My Comedy Show " and in the season eight finale , " My Finale " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS