AUDITORY HALLUCINATION
A paracusia , or auditory hallucination , is a form of hallucination that involves perceiving sounds without auditory stimulus .
A common form of auditory hallucination involves hearing one or more talking voices .
This may be associated with psychotic disorders , and holds special significance in diagnosing these conditions .
However , individuals without any psychiatric disease whatsoever may hear voices .
There are three main categories into which the hearing of talking voices often fall :
a person hearing a voice speak one 's thoughts , a person hearing one or more voices arguing , or a person hearing a voice narrating his / her own actions .
These three categories do not account for all types of auditory hallucinations .
Other types of auditory hallucination include exploding head syndrome and musical ear syndrome .
In the latter , people will hear music playing in their mind , usually songs they are familiar with .
This can be caused by : lesions on the brain stem ( often resulting from a stroke ) ; also , sleep disorders such as narcolepsy , tumors , encephalitis , or abscesses .
This should be distinguished from the commonly experienced phenomenon of getting a song stuck in one 's head .
Reports have also mentioned that it is also possible to get musical hallucinations from listening to music for long periods of time .
Other reasons include hearing loss and epileptic activity .
In the past , the cause of auditory hallucinations was attributed to cognitive suppression by way of executive function failure of the fronto - parietal sulcus .
Newer research has found that they coincide with the left superior temporal gyrus , suggesting that they are better attributed to speech misrepresentations .
It is assumed through research that the neural pathways involved in normal speech perception and production , which are lateralized to the left temporal lobe , also underlie auditory hallucinations .
Auditory hallucinations correspond with spontaneous neural activity of the left temporal lobe , and the subsequent primary auditory cortex .
The perception of auditory hallucinations corresponds to the experience of actual external hearing , despite the absence of physical acoustic output .
FAMOUS EXAMPLES Section::::Famous examples .
Robert Schumann , a famous music composer , spent the end of his life experiencing auditory hallucinations .
Schumann 's diaries state that he suffered perpetually from imagining that he had the note A5 sounding in his ears .
The musical hallucinations became increasingly complex .
One night he claimed to have been visited by the ghost of Schubert and wrote down the music that he was hearing .
Thereafter , he began making claims that he could hear an angelic choir singing to him .
As his condition worsened , the angelic voices developed into demonic ones .
Brian Wilson , songwriter and co - founder of the Beach Boys , has schizoaffective disorder that presents itself in the form of disembodied voices .
They formed a major component of Bill Pohlad 's Love & Mercy ( 2014 ) , a biographical film which depicts Wilson 's hallucinations as a source of musical inspiration , constructing songs that were partly designed to converse with them .
Wilson has said of the voices : " Mostly [ they 're ] derogatory .
Some of it 's cheerful .
Most of it is n't .
" To combat them , his psychiatrist advised that he " talk humorously to them " , which he says has helped " a little bit " .
INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNTS Section::::Individual accounts .
The onset of delusional thinking is most often described as being gradual and insidious .
Patients have described an interest in psychic phenomena progressing to increasingly unusual preoccupations and then to bizarre beliefs " in which I believed wholeheartedly " .
One author wrote of their hallucinations : " they deceive , derange and force me into a world of crippling paranoia " .
In many cases , the delusional beliefs could be seen as fairly rational explanations for abnormal experiences : " I increasingly heard voices ( which I 'd always call ' loud thoughts ' ) ...
I concluded that other people were putting these loud thoughts into my head " .
Some cases have been described as an " auditory ransom note " .
HISTORY ANCIENT HISTORY PRESENTATION
Section::::History .
Section::::Ancient history .
Section::::Presentation .
In the ancient world , auditory hallucinations were often viewed as either a gift or curse by god , or the gods ( depending on the specific culture ) .
According to the Greek historian Plutarch , during the reign of Tiberius ( A.D. 14–37 ) , a sailor named Thamus heard a voice cry out to him from across the water , " Thamus , are you there ?
When you reach Palodes , take care to proclaim that the great god Pan is dead .
" The oracles of ancient Greece were known to experience auditory hallucinations while breathing in certain neurologically active vapors ( such as the smoke from bay leaves ) , while the more pervasive delusions and symptomology were often viewed as possession by demonic forces as punishment for misdeeds .
TREATMENTS Section::::Treatments . Treatment in the ancient world is ill documented , but there are some cases of therapeutics being used to attempt treatment , while the common treatment was sacrifice and prayer in an attempt to placate the gods .
During the Middle Ages , those with auditory hallucinations were sometimes subjected to trepanning or trial as a witch .
In other cases of extreme symptomatology , individuals were seen as being reduced to animals by a curse ; these individuals were either left on the streets or imprisoned in insane asylums .
It was the latter response that eventually led to modern psychiatric hospitals .
PRE - MODERN PRESENTATION Section::::Pre - modern .
Section::::Presentation .
Auditory hallucinations were rethought during the enlightenment .
As a result , the predominant theory in the western world beginning in the late 18th century was that auditory hallucinations were the result of a disease in the brain ( e.g. mania ) , and treated as such .
TREATMENTS
Section::::Treatments .
There were no effective treatments for hallucinations at this time .
Conventional thought was that clean food , water , and air would allow the body to heal itself ( Sanatorium ) .
Beginning in the 16th century Insane Asylums were first introduced in order to remove " the mad dogs " from the streets and left them chained to walls and living in their own filth .
These asylums acted as prisons until the late 18th century .
This is when doctors began the attempt to treat patients .
Often attending doctors would douse patients in cold water , starve them , or spin patients on a wheel .
Soon , this gave way to brain specific treatments with the most famous examples including Lobotomies , shock therapy and branding the skull with hot iron .
CROSS - CULTURAL UNDERSTANDINGS OF AUDITORY HALLUCINATIONS Section::::Cross - Cultural Understandings of Auditory Hallucinations .
According to research on hallucinations , both with participants from the general population and people diagnosed with schizophrenia , psychosis and related mental illnesses , there is a relationship between culture and hallucinations .
In relation to hallucinations , the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM-5 ) states that " transient hallucinatory experiences may occur without a mental disorder " , put differently , short or temporary hallucinations are not exclusive to being diagnosed with a mental disorder .
In a study of 1,080 people with a schizophrenia diagnosis from seven different countries of origin , including Austria , Poland , Lithuania , Georgia , Pakistan , Nigeria and Ghana , researchers found that 74.8 % of the total participants ( n = 1,080 ) disclosed having experienced auditory hallucinations in the last year than any other hallucinations from the date of the interview .
Further , the study found the highest rates of both auditory hallucinations and visual hallucinations in both of the West African countries , Ghana and Nigeria .
In the Ghana sample , n = 76 , auditory hallucinations were reported by 90.8 % and visual hallucinations were reported by 53.9 % of participants .
In the Nigeria sample , n = 324 , auditory hallucinations were reported by 85.4 % and visual hallucinations were reported by 50.8 % of participants .
These findings are in line with other studies that have found that visual hallucinations were reported more in traditional cultures .
A 2015 published study , " Hearing Voices in Different Cultures : A Social Kindling Hypothesis " compared the experiences of three groups of 20 participants who met criteria for schizophrenia ( n = 60 ) from three different places , including San Mateo , CA ( USA ) , Accra , Ghana ( Africa ) , and Chennai , India ( South Asia ) .
In this study , researchers found distinct differences among the participant 's experience with voices .
In the San Mateo , CA sample all but three of the participants referred to their experience of hearing voices with " diagnostic labels , and even [ used ] diagnostic criteria readily " , they also and connected " hearing voices " with being " crazy " .
For the Accra , Ghana sample , almost no participants referenced a diagnosis and instead they spoke about voices as having " a spiritual meaning and as well as a psychiatric one " .
In the Chennai , India sample , similarly to the Ghana interviewees , most of the participants did not reference a diagnosis and for many of these participants , the voices they heard were of people they knew and people they were related to , " voices of kin " .
Another key finding that was identified in this research study is that " voice - hearing experience outside the West may be less harsh " .
Finally , researchers found that " different cultural expectations about the mind , or about the way people expect thoughts and feelings to be private or accessible to spirits or persons " could be attributed to the differences they found across the participants .
In a qualitative study of 57 self - identified Māori participants subcategorized within one or more of the following groups including : " tangata Māori ( people seeking wellness / service users ) , Kaumatua / Kuia ( elders ) , Kai mahi ( cultural support workers ) , Managers of mental health services , clinicians ( psychiatrists , nurses and psychologists ) and students ( undergraduate and postgraduate psychology students ) " , researchers interviewed participants and asked them about " [ 1 ] their understanding of experiences that could be considered to be psychotic or labelled schizophrenic , [ 2 ] what questions they would ask someone who came seeking help and [ 3 ] they we asked about their understanding of the terms schizophrenia and psychosis " .
The participants were also people who either ( 1 ) had worked with psychosis or schizophrenia or ( 2 ) had experienced psychosis or schizophrenia .
In this study , researchers found that the participants understood these experiences labeled " psychotic " or " schizophrenic " through multiple models .
Taken directly from the article , the researchers wrote that there is " no one Māori way of understanding psychotic experiences " .
Instead , as part of understanding these experiences , the participants combined both " biological explanations and Māori spiritual beliefs " , with a preference for cultural and psychosocial explanations .
For example , 19 participants spoke about psychotic experiences as sometimes being a sign of matakite ( giftedness ) .
One of the Kaumatua / Kuia ( elders ) was quoted as saying:"I never wanted to accept it
, I said no it is n't , it is n't [ matakite ] but it would n't stop and
in truth I knew what I had to do , help my people , I did n't want the responsibility
but here I am .
They helped me understand it and told me what to do with it .
"An
important finding highlighted in this study is that studies done by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) have found that " developing countries ( non - Western ) experience far higher rates of recovery from ' schizophrenia ' than Western countries " .
The researchers further articulate that these findings may be due to culturally specific meaning created about the experience of schizophrenia , psychosis and hearing voices as well as " positive expectations around recovery " .
Research has found that auditory hallucinations and hallucinations more broadly are not necessarily a symptom of " severe mental health " and instead might be more common place than assumed and also experienced by people in the general population .
According to a literature review , " The prevalence of voice - hearers in the general population : A literature review " , which compared 17 studies on auditory hallucinations in participants from nine countries , found that " differences in the prevalence of [ voice - hearing in the adult general population ] can be attributed to true variations based on gender , ethnicity and environmental context " .
The studies took place from 1894 to 2007 and the nine countries where the studies took place in are the United Kingdom , Philippines , United States , Sweden , France , Germany , Italy , Netherlands , and New Zealand .
The same literature review highlights that " studies that [ analyzed ] their data by gender report[ed ] a higher frequency of women reporting hallucinatory experiences of some kind " .
Although generally speaking hallucinations ( including auditory ) are strongly related to psychotic diagnoses and schizophrenia , the presence of hallucinations does not exclusively mean that someone is suffering from a psychotic or schizophrenic episode or diagnosis .
POTENTIAL CAUSES Section::::Potential causes .
In 2015 a small survey reported voice hearing in persons with a wide variety of DSM-5 diagnoses , including : * Bipolar disorder * Borderline personality disorder * Depression ( mixed ) *
Dissociative identity disorder
* Generalized anxiety disorder * Major depression
* Obsessive compulsive disorder * Post - traumatic stress disorder
* Psychosis ( NOS ) * Schizoaffective disorder * Schizophrenia
However , numerous persons surveyed reported no diagnosis .
In his popular 2012 book Hallucinations , neurologist Oliver Sacks describes voice hearing in patients with a wide variety of medical conditions , as well as his own personal experience of hearing voices .
SCHIZOPHRENIA Section::::Schizophrenia .
In the case of psychotic patients the premier cause of auditory hallucinations is schizophrenia .
In schizophrenia , patients show a consistent increase in activity of the thalamic and strietal subcortical nuclei , hypothalamus , and paralimbic regions ; confirmed via PET scan and fMRI .
Other research shows an enlargement of temporal white matter , frontal gray matter , and temporal gray matter volumes ( those areas crucial to both inner and outer speech ) when compared to control patients .
This implies both functional and structural abnormalities in the brain , both of which may have a genetic component , can induce auditory hallucinations .
Auditory hallucinations attributed to an external source , rather than internal , are considered the defining factor for the diagnoses of schizophrenia .
The voices heard are generally destructive and emotive , adding to the state of artificial reality and disorientation seen in psychotic patients .
The causal basis of hallucinations has been explored on the cellular receptor level .
The glutamate hypothesis , proposed as possible cause for schizophrenia , may also have implications in auditory hallucinations , which are suspected to be triggered by altered glutamatergic transmission .
Studies using dichotic listening methods suggest that Schizophrenic patients have major deficits in the functioning of the left temporal lobe by showing that patients do not generally exhibit what is a functionally normal right ear advantage .
Inhibitory control of hallucinations in patients have been shown to involve failure of top - down regulation of resting - state networks and up - regulation of effort networks , further impeding normal cognitive functioning .
MOOD DISORDERS AND DEMENTIAS Section::::Mood disorders and dementias .
Mood disorders have also been known to correlate with auditory hallucinations , but tend to be milder than their psychosis induced counterpart .
Auditory hallucinations are a relatively common sequelae of Major Neurocognitive Disorders ( formerly dementia ) such as Alzheimer 's disease .
TRANSIENT CAUSES Section::::Transient causes .
Auditory hallucinations have been known to manifest as a result of intense stress , sleep deprivation , drug use , and errors in development of proper psychological processes .
Genetic correlation has been identified with auditory hallucinations , but most work with non - psychotic causes of auditory hallucinations is still ongoing .
High caffeine consumption has been linked to an increase in the likelihood of experiencing auditory hallucinations .
A study conducted by the La Trobe University School of Psychological Sciences revealed that as few as five cups of coffee a day could trigger the phenomenon .
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENTS PHARMACEUTICALS Section::::Diagnosis and treatments .
Section::::Pharmaceuticals .
The primary means of treating auditory hallucinations is antipsychotic medications which affect dopamine metabolism .
If the primary diagnosis is a mood disorder ( with psychotic features ) , adjunctive medications are often used ( e.g. , antidepressants or mood stabilizers ) .
These medical approaches may allow the person to function normally but are not a cure as they do not eradicate the underlying thought disorder .
PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES Section::::Psychological therapies .
Cognitive behavioral therapy has been shown to help decrease the frequency and distressfulness of auditory hallucinations , particularly when other psychotic symptoms were presenting .
Enhanced Supportive Therapy has been shown to reduce the frequency of auditory hallucinations , the violent resistance the patient displayed towards said hallucinations , and an overall decrease in the perceived malignancy of the hallucinations .
Other cognitive and behavioral therapies have been used with mixed success .
NON - CONVENTIONAL THERAPIES Section::::Non - conventional therapies .
Electroconvulsive therapy or ECT has been shown to reduce psychotic symptoms associated with schizophrenia , mania , and depression , and is often used in psychiatric hospitals .
In recent years , repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation ( rTMS ) has been studied as a biological method of treatment for auditory hallucinations .
rTMS plays a role in altering neural activity over language cortical regions .
Studies have shown that when rTMS is used as an adjunct to antipsychotic medication in treatment - resistant cases , the frequency and severity of auditory hallucinations can be reduced .
ONGOING RESEARCH NON - PSYCHOTIC SYMPTOMOLOGY
Section::::Ongoing research .
Section::::Non - psychotic symptomology .
There is on - going research that supports the prevalence of auditory hallucinations , with a lack of other conventional psychotic symptoms ( such as delusions , or paranoia ) , particularly in pre - pubertal children .
These studies indicate a remarkably high percentage of children ( up to 14 % of the population sampled ) experienced sounds or voices without any external cause , although " sounds " are not considered by psychiatrists to be examples of auditory hallucinations .
Differentiating actual auditory hallucinations from " sounds " or a normal internal dialogue is important since the latter phenomena are not indicative of mental illness .
METHODS Section::::Methods .
To explore the auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia , experimental neurocognitive use approaches such as dichotic listening , structural fMRI , and functional fMRI .
Together , they allow insight into how the brain reacts to auditory stimulus , be it external or internal .
Such methods allowed researchers to find a correlation between decreased gray matter of the left temporal lobe and difficulties in processing external sound stimulus in hallucinating patients .
Functional neuroimaging has shown increased blood and oxygen flow to speech related areas of the left temporal lobe , including Broca 's area and the thalamus .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
The causes of auditory hallucinations are unclear .
It is suspected that deficits in the left temporal lobe attribute that lead to spontaneous neural activity cause speech misrepresentations that account for auditory hallucinations .
Charles Fernyhough , of the University of Durham poses one theory among many but stands as a reasonable example of the literature .
Given standing evidence towards involvement of the inner voice in auditory hallucinations , he proposes two alternative hypotheses on the origins of auditory hallucinations in the non - psychotic .
They both rely on an understanding of the internalization process of the inner voice .
INTERNALIZATION OF THE INNER VOICE Section::::Internalization of the inner voice .
The internalization process of the inner voice is the process of creating an inner voice during early childhood , and can be separated into four distinct levels .
Level one ( external dialogue ) involves the capacity to maintain an external dialogue with another person , i.e. a toddler talking with their parent(s ) .
Level two ( private speech ) involves the capacity to maintain a private external dialogue , as seen in children voicing the actions of play using dolls or other toys , or someone talking to themselves while repeating something they had written down .
Level three ( expanded inner speech ) is the first internal level in speech .
This involves the capacity to carry out internal monologues , as seen in reading to oneself , or going over a list silently .
Level four ( condensed inner speech ) is the final level in the internalization process .
It involves the capacity to think in terms of pure meaning without the need to put thoughts into words in order to grasp the meaning of the thought .
DISRUPTION TO INTERNALIZATION Section::::Disruption to internalization .
A disruption could occur during the normal process of internalizing one 's inner voice , where the individual would not interpret their own voice as belonging to them ; a problem that would be interpreted as level one to level four error .
RE - EXPANSION Section::::Re - expansion .
Alternatively , the disruption could occur during the process of re - externalizing one 's inner voice , resulting in an apparent second voice that seems alien to the individual ; a problem that would be interpreted as a level four to level one error .
TREATMENTS
Section::::Treatments .
Psychopharmacological treatments include anti - psychotic medications .
Psychology research shows that first step in treatment is for the patient to realize that the voices they hear are creation of their own mind .
This realization is argued to allow patients to reclaim a measure of control over their lives .
Some additional psychological interventions might allow for the process of controlling these phenomena of auditory hallucinations but more research is needed .
AFFECTED BRAIN REGIONS
* Left Temporal Lobe : processes semantics in speech and vision , includes primary auditory cortex * Broca 's Area : speech and language comprehension * Superior Temporal Gyrus
: contains primary auditory cortex * Primary Auditory Cortex : processes hearing and speech perception
* Globus Pallidus : Regulation of voluntary movement SEE
ALSO
* Auditory imagery * Earworm * Hypnagogic hallucinations
* Intrusive thought
* Microwave auditory effect
* Speech synthesis
* Tinnitus REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* INTERVOICE Online , website of the international hearing voices movement
* Hearing Voices Network * " Anthropology and Hallucinations " , chapter from The Making of Religion *
" The voice inside : A practical guide to coping with hearing voices "
* Psychology Terms * A salience dysregulation syndrome , from Jim van Os .
The British Journal of Psychiatry , 2009 .