MAGNESIUM CITRATE Magnesium citrate is a magnesium preparation in salt form with citric acid in a 1:1 ratio ( 1 magnesium atom per citrate molecule ) .
The name " magnesium citrate " is ambiguous and sometimes may refer to other salts such as trimagnesium citrate which has a magnesium : citrate ratio of 3:2 .
Magnesium citrate is used medicinally as a saline laxative and to completely empty the bowel prior to a major surgery or colonoscopy .
It is available without a prescription , both as a generic and under various brand names .
It is also used in the pill form as a magnesium dietary supplement .
It contains 11.23 % magnesium by weight .
Compared to trimagnesium citrate , it is much more water - soluble , less alkaline , and contains less magnesium .
As a food additive , magnesium citrate is used to regulate acidity and is known as E number E345 .
MECHANISM OF ACTION Section::::Mechanism of action .
Magnesium citrate works by attracting water through the tissues by a process known as osmosis .
Once in the intestine , it can attract enough water into the intestine to induce defecation .
The additional water stimulates bowel motility .
This means it can also be used to treat rectal and colon problems .
Magnesium citrate functions best on an empty stomach , and should always be followed with a full ( eight ounce or 25 cl ) glass of water or juice to help the magnesium citrate absorb properly and help prevent any complications .
Magnesium citrate solutions generally produce bowel movement in one half to three hours .
USE AND DOSAGE Section::::Use and dosage .
The maximum upper tolerance limit ( UTL ) for magnesium in supplement form for adults is 350 mg of elemental magnesium per day , according to the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) .
In addition , according to the NIH , total dietary requirements for magnesium from all sources ( i.e. , food and supplements ) is 320–420 mg of elemental magnesium per day , though there is no UT for dietary magnesium .
As a laxative syrup with a concentration of 1.745 g of magnesium citrate per fluid ounce , a typical dose for adults and children twelve years or older is between , followed immediately with a full glass of water .
Consuming an adult dose of 10 oz of laxative syrup ( @ 1.745 g / oz ) implies a consumption of 17.45 g of magnesium citrate in a single 10 oz dose resulting in a consumption of approximately 2.0 g of elemental magnesium per single dose .
Given that this laxative dose contains five times the recommended nutritional dose for magnesium , caution should be taken to avoid prolonged usage ( i.e. , over five days ) and to follow the manufacturer 's instructions strictly .
For children between three and twelve years of age , the typical dose is roughly half that , based on physician recommendation .
Magnesium citrate is not recommended for use in children and infants two years of age or less .
Although less common , as a magnesium supplement the citrate form is sometimes used because it is believed to be more bioavailable than other common pill forms , such as magnesium oxide .
However , according to one study , magnesium gluconate is marginally more bioavailable than magnesium citrate .
Magnesium citrate , as a supplement in pill form , is useful for the prevention of kidney stones .
SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Side effects .
Magnesium citrate is generally not a harmful substance , but care should be taken by consulting a healthcare professional if any adverse health problems are suspected or experienced .
It is always important to correctly follow the prescribed doses ; extreme magnesium overdose can result in serious complication such as slow heart beat , low blood pressure , nausea , drowsiness , etc .
If severe enough , an overdose can even result in coma or death .
However , a moderate overdose will be excreted through the kidneys , unless one has serious kidney problems .
Rectal bleeding or failure to have a bowel movement after use could be signs of a serious condition .
SEE ALSO * ATC code
A12
*
Magnesium aspartate
* Magnesium oxide
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Saline laxatives .
MedicineNet .
* Magnesium citrate Patient Advice .
Drugs.com .