HELLYEAH
Hellyeah , stylized as HELLYEAH , is an American metal supergroup with elements from nu metal , groove metal , and heavy metal , formed in Dallas , Texas in 2006 .
The band 's current lineup consists of lead vocalist Chad Gray , guitarists Christian Brady and Tom Maxwell , and bassist Kyle Sanders .
The idea to form a supergroup originated in 2000 on the Tattoo the Earth tour , although plans were constantly put on hold due to scheduling conflicts .
The summer of 2006 allowed the band to take the project seriously and record its first album .
Recorded at Chasin ' Jason studio in Dimebag Darrell 's backyard , a self - titled album was completed in roughly one month .
Released on April 10 , 2007 , the album entered the Billboard 200 at number 9 , selling 45,000 copies .
AllMusic reviewer William Ruhlmann stated the album is " a competent example of its genre " awarding the album three - and - a - half stars .
HISTORY FORMATION AND EARLY DAYS Section::::History .
Section::::Formation and early days .
Hellyeah 's beginnings can be traced back to 2000 on the Tattoo the Earth tour featuring Mudvayne , Nothingface , Slayer , Slipknot and Sevendust .
Nothingface guitarist Tom Maxwell became friends with Mudvayne vocalist Chad Gray , and they talked about the possibility of forming a supergroup .
The following year , Nothingface toured with Mudvayne and talks to form the supergroup continued , although were constantly put on hold due to scheduling conflicts .
At this time , Gray and Maxwell had brainstormed five band names .
Mudvayne guitarist Greg Tribbett approached Maxwell " out of the blue " and wanted to join the band .
Nothingface drummer Tommy Sickles originally helmed the drum kit for the band 's demo , however , things did not work out and the search for a new drummer began .
The band knew former Pantera and Damageplan drummer Vinnie Paul , and tried to persuade him to join the band as their drummer .
Originally , Paul was not sure if he would return to music after the death of his brother , Dimebag Darrell and an 18-month hiatus : "
It was one of those things that I did n't think I 'd be a part of this ever again without him , and after about a year and a half had gone by , these guys called me up , Chad [ Gray ] and Tom [ Maxwell ]
, they were like , ' We 're thinking about putting this band together , would you be into it ? '
First couple of times , I told them , ' No , I do n't think I 'm ready to do this yet . '
And they just were real persistent , they kept calling me .
And one night , I had been drinking some red wine and listening to some Kiss on 12 " vinyl record and I said , ' You know what , lets take a shot at this , lets see what happens . ' "
The band 's persistence paid off and Paul joined the project .
Paul commented about joining the project : " Everybody had their head in the right place and that let's - tear - the - world - a - new - ass attitude " .
In their previous bands , there had only been one guitarist , so having two was a new experience for all members .
Paul felt two guitarists brought back the " old school Iron Maiden thing where they play two parts and give you a grinding rhythm part with a badass melody on top " .
In 2006 , Mudvayne did not have any plans to tour and were taking most of the summer and fall off , while Nothingface was preparing to record their next album .
The time over the summer allowed the band to pursue the project which had been talked about for years .
Gray flew into Baltimore to Nothingface 's home studio to discuss the project further .
The song " Waging War " was written in two days , followed by Maxwell tracking it the next day , and Gray completing vocals .
During the summer of 2006 , schedules were clear , which allowed members to take the time to record a studio album .
The album was recorded at Paul 's backyard studio , Chasin ' Jason in Arlington , Texas .
Filled with photos of his late brother Dimebag , Paul found it tough entering the studio where the last albums by Damageplan and Pantera , and the collaboration Rebel Meets Rebel were recorded , but felt " the dark cloud that was there went away " , due to everyone 's positive energy .
Maxwell and Tribbett were the primary writers of the album , and Paul was there to " steer them in the right direction " , with Gray adding his opinion on musical arrangements .
Paul built the members a cabana style house on his pool deck with air conditioning , a TV , and beds
so the members felt comfortable while recording .
Paul produced the record and Gray felt Paul " facilitated the whole thing " .
The album was completed in roughly a month , with three recording sessions .
The band worked on the record for eight days and returned home for a break .
A 14-day session , followed the break and then another 10 days in the studio .
Gray asserts the breaks in between recording sessions were to " re charge the batteries " , and " get a fresh head " .
As the line - up was complete , the band started to brainstorm names .
When a member thought of a name they would write it on a piece of paper and put it in an amp box outside the studio .
Someone wrote " Hellyeah " , and the band thought it was a perfect choice .
Paul says it 's " very affirmative and full of attitude .
When your buddy asks if you want to get a beer tonight , you do n't just say ' yes , ' you say , "
Hell yeah ! " .
Gray attributes the name to " late teens , keggers and chicks and AC / DC and Metallica " .
HELLYEAH ( 2007–2008 )
Section::::Hellyeah ( 2007–2008 ) .
Revolver was one of the first print publications to feature the band in March 2007 .
The self - titled track , " Hellyeah " , started gaining satellite radio airplay in February 2007 , and the first single " You Would n't Know " hit American radio airwaves the same month .
" You Would n't Know " peaked at number 5 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks , and 35 on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks .
The album 's second single , " Alcohaulin ' Ass " peaked at number 7 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks .
The band 's self - titled album , Hellyeah was released on April 10 , 2007 via Epic Records .
The album debuted at No .
9 on the Billboard 200 album charts , with sales of just under 45,000 .
The album peaked on the Top Hard Rock albums at number 15 , and number 3 on the Top Rock Albums .
As of October 18 , 2007 , the album has sold 204,000 copies .
Hellyeah received generally positive reviews .
William Ruhlmann of Allmusic awarded the album three and a half stars out of five , commenting ; " Their album is a competent example of its genre , in which Tribbett and Maxwell combine to create crushing riffs over the pummeling rhythm section of Paul , while Gray howls typically enraged , expletive - littered lyrics to songs " .
However , Ruhlmann believes Hellyeah is not a notable variation from members ' previous bands .
Blabbermouth.net reviewer Don Kaye awarded the album 7 out of 10 , praising the track " Matter of Time " for its slashing main riff , and " One Thing " as it " marches to the finish line with a rumbling , crunching wall of guitars worthy of Dimebag himself " .
Kaye thought that Hellyeah 's first studio effort was not equal to any of its members ' main output .
KNAC contributor Andrew Depedro stated " it 's a set of good songs recorded by 5 accomplished musicians from diverse backgrounds not letting their pasts define them and those songs in one form or another speak to you in different ways " .
Bassist Montano was asked to leave Hellyeah after the album 's release party , where he assaulted guitarist Tom Maxwell and made numerous gun threats while heavily intoxicated .
The band 's publicist stated his departure was due to " personal reasons on both sides " The band considered Damageplan bassist Bob Zilla as Paul thought ; " It was kind hard to go ahead and commit to this band without Bob being part of it " .
Zilla was invited to audition and got the gig immediately .
Hellyeah embarked on their first tour on May 2007 titled Fire
it Up , made an appearance at the Download Festival , and underwent Australian tour in July 2007 .
The Family Values Tour with Korn and Evanescence , saw the band start touring in late July , which also consisted playing with Alter Bridge in San Antonio before passing through thirty cities before ending in Washington ,
D.C. A DVD titled Below the Belt was released on November 13 , 2007 , and featured a documentary , music videos , performance footage from the making of the album , first studio sessions , coverage of the band 's world tour , and personal interviews .
It was produced by members of the band and Ryan Ziemba .
STAMPEDE ( 2009–2010 ) Section::::Stampede ( 2009–2010 ) .
Hellyeah headlined a tour in the spring of 2010 with : Seether , Five Finger Death Punch , Drowning Pool , and Lacuna Coil .
The first date was May 11 , 2010 in Madison , WI .
They were also confirmed to play the main stage at Download Festival 2010 .
In 2009 , the band revealed that they were in the studio recording a new album , later revealed to be titled Stampede .
For Stampede , the members went to drummer Vinnie Paul 's Texas home studio , for a recording process draped in a relaxed , pressure - free atmosphere , surrounded by the obligatory cocktails , good eats and familial brotherhood .
" We were doing it at my house solely .
We ate , drank and BBQed together , which made the brotherhood that happened , come through in the music , " Paul said .
The band members lived in bungalows on the grounds and turned Paul 's house into a studio .
Drums were recorded downstairs and guitars were recorded upstairs , with video screens in each room so the members could see one another while tracking .
" It 's a broad , diverse album that covers rock , heavy metal and Southern rock ground .
That is the main thing that I like about it : it 's not so focused on one thing , " Paul said .
The high ceilings at the Paul home allowed for the creation of a big , booming sound .
They also were able to work at their own natural pace .
" We slept there , so if one of us just came up with an idea , we could jump on it , " guitarist Tom Maxwell said .
" Cowboy Way " , a song from the new album , was released for a free download via the band 's website on April 21 , 2010 .
The music video for " Cowboy Way " premiered on May 20 , 2010 .
The first single , " Hell of a Time " , was released on June 1 , 2010 .
The music video for " Hell of a Time " premiered on June 16 , 2010 .
The song " The Debt That All Men Pay " premiered on the Ultimate Guitar Archive on June 22 , 2010 .
Stampede was released on July 13 , 2010 via Epic Records and sold 28,000 copies in its first week of release , debuting at No .
8 on the Billboard 200 , making it the band 's highest charting album to date .
The group was confirmed to be playing the Rockstar Energy Drink Uproar Festival along with other headliners Disturbed , Avenged Sevenfold , Stone Sour and Halestorm .
BAND OF
BROTHERS ( 2011–2012 ) Section::::Band of Brothers ( 2011–2012 ) .
Hellyeah finished recording a new album , titled Band of Brothers , and were extremely satisfied with the production of the record ; which was produced by Jeremy Parker , who has produced albums for Godsmack and Evanescence , and was recorded in the home of drummer Vinnie Paul 's studio in Arlington , Texas ; VP 's Upstairs Studio .
Band of Brothers was released on July 17 , 2012 , via Eleven Seven Music , the band 's new record label home after leaving Epic Records .
The digital single " War In Me " was released on iTunes on April 3 , 2012 .
They played the Download Festival on Sunday 16 June 2013 and played at Graspop Metal Meeting on Sunday 30 June 2013 .
In July 2013 , they were part of the Gigantour 2013 .
LINEUP CHANGES AND BLOOD FOR BLOOD
( 2013–2015 ) Section::::Lineup changes and Blood for Blood ( 2013–2015 ) .
In late 2013 , the band posted updates to their Facebook page , detailing that they were in the process of writing and recording their next album .
A few short clips were posted by the band showing some of the guitar work underway .
In 2014 , the band announced the track list and title of their album to be Blood for Blood , released on June 10 .
It was also announced that guitarist Greg Tribbett and bassist Bob Kakaha have departed the band , and were shortly replaced by Christian Brady ( Magna - Fi / Überschall ) on guitar and ( Skrew / Bloodsimple / MonstrO ) bassist Kyle Sanders ( brother of Troy Sanders of Mastodon ) .
Hellyeah and Adrenaline Mob have announced a few tour dates together .
On June 3 , the full album was available for streaming via YouTube .
In 2015 , Hellyeah released the official video for the album 's third single , " Hush " .
The song was also used to promote the " No More " campaign against domestic violence .
Slayer was chosen to headline the 2015 Rockstar Energy Mayhem Festival .
The bands Hellyeah , King Diamond , The Devil Wears Prada , Thy Art Is Murder , Whitechapel , Jungle Rot , Sister Sin , Sworn In , Shattered Sun , Feed Her To The Sharks , Code Orange & Kissing Candice also participated in the Rockstar Tour .
The festival covers 26 stops from June 26 through August 2 .
UNDEN!ABLE ( 2016–2017 )
Section::::Unden!able ( 2016–2017 ) .
In 2016 , the band released a new song called " Human " from their fifth studio album .
The album was titled Unden!able and released June 3 , 2016 .
Tom Maxwell has stated that included on the album will be " a lot of stuff they never tried before " , calling it " moody , dark and crushing " .
Included on the album is a cover of " I Do n't Care Anymore " by Phil Collins which features archived guitar work from Dimebag Darrell recorded before his death .
UPCOMING SIXTH STUDIO ALBUM AND THE DEATH OF
VINNIE PAUL ( 2018–PRESENT )
Section::::Upcoming sixth studio album and the death of Vinnie Paul ( 2018–present ) .
On October 26 , 2017 , Blabbermouth.net reported that the band will start recording for their sixth studio album in early November .
Vinnie Paul died on June 22 , 2018 ; his cause of death was later announced as dilated cardiomyopathy and coronary artery disease .
Shortly before his death , Vinnie laid down the drum tracks for Hellyeah 's sixth album at The Hideout recording studio in Las Vegas .
MUSICAL STYLE
Section::::Musical style .
Hellyeah 's late drummer , Vinnie Paul , described the band 's sound as " a familiar groove , with a new sound " .
Blabbermouth.net reviewer Don Kaye commented " with little of the complexity of Mudvayne or angularity of Nothingface and much more of the full - on , pedal - to - the - metal style of Vinnie Paul 's previous work " .
However , Kaye said the songs " Star " and " Thank You " border on musical cliché .
Andrew Depedro of KNAC.com stated " ' Alcohaulin ' Ass ' showcases Gray 's hidden talent as an outlaw country and western - type crooner in the intro " , although he thought the band 's lyrics were repetitive .
Hellyeah has been categorized as heavy metal and groove metal .
BAND MEMBERS Section::::Band members .
Current * Chad Gray –
lead vocals
* Tom Maxwell – rhythm and lead guitars , backing vocals
* Christian Brady – lead and rhythm guitars , backing vocals
* Kyle Sanders – bass , backing vocals Former * Vinnie Paul – drums * Greg Tribbett – lead guitar * Jerry Montano – bass * Bob Zilla – bass , backing vocals Session musicians
* Kevin Churko – bass
Timeline
DISCOGRAPHY
* Hellyeah ( 2007 )
* Stampede ( 2010 )
* Band of Brothers ( 2012 )
* Blood for Blood ( 2014 )
* Unden!able ( 2016 ) ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Loudwire Music Awards 2017 Vinnie Paul Best Drummer
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site