COMANCHE MOON ( MINISERIES )
Comanche Moon is a television miniseries that is an adaptation of the novel of the same name where Woodrow Call and Gus McCrae are in their middle years , still serving as respected Texas Rangers .
In terms of the Lonesome Dove series ' storyline , it serves as a prequel to the original Lonesome Dove miniseries , and a sequel to Dead Man 's Walk .
It first aired on CBS beginning Sunday , January 13 , and continuing Tuesday , January 15 , and Wednesday , January 16 , 2008 .
PLOT
PART 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Part 1 .
The series starts in The Republic of Texas in the early 1800s with a massacre of Comanche chieftains , observed by a young Buffalo Hump .
The opening coda then explains that The Texas Rangers " were formed as a volunteer troop to contain the Comanche " before indicating the locale as north - west Texas in 1858 .
Woodrow Call and Augustus McCrae join a party of eight others , led by Captain Scull and supported by a Kickapoo scout ( Famous Shoes ) , who are hoping to capture Kicking Wolf , who is hiding in the camp of Buffalo Hump .
Meanwhile , in Austin Clara Forsythe runs her shop and is visited by Maggie Tilton - the two become closer while both waiting for the party to return .
In the nearby mansion , Inez Scull briefly seduces a young ranger , Jake Spoon .
The tables turn on the Rangers as the Captain 's horse is stolen by Kicking Wolf .
Scull departs with Famous Shoes to retrieve it , deputizing Call and McCrae to take the party back to Austin .
The party comes across a burnt out wagon and are able to rescue a traumatized mother and her young daughters from some Comanche before returning to Austin .
Separating at a river crossing to the Sierra , Scull then tracks his horse alone towards Yellow Cliffs in northern Mexico , a known slavers den , and finds an injured Kicking Wolf but no horse .
Buffalo Hump then plans a combined and perhaps final raid to the ocean for all Comanche .
In Austin , having met the governor , McCrae and Forsythe reunite , as do Call and Tilton ( who announces that she is carrying Call 's child ) .
Meanwhile , Scull is captured by Ahumado 's men and put into a wooden cage .
Call and McRae , now confirmed as Captains , are then tasked with retrieving Scull just as the Comanche army departs .
PART 2 Section::::Part 2 .
The show begins with a Comanche attack on Austin during which the town is ravaged .
With the exception of a last stand at the Scull mansion , property losses are extensive , alongside most of the men being killed and the surviving women raped or kidnapped .
News of the attacks filter back to the Rangers , who decide to return immediately , and learn of the extent of the devastation .
Meanwhile , Scull , having survived the cage is moved to Ahumado 's snake - pit while awaiting ransom .
Blue Duck falls out with his father , Buffalo Hump , and is exiled , and the camp is devastated by cholera .
Also , in Galveston , Forsythe is brought news of her parents ' death in the raid and the loss of the store , and is proposed to by her other romantic interest , Bob Allen , a horse - trader from Nebraska .
In Austin , the governor re - issues the order to Call and McCrae to rescue Scull , on the proviso that they can convince cattle ranchers to provide them the 1000-head ransom on credit .
After burying Bill Coleman , Call tries to come to terms with becoming a husband , while McCrae ponders why Forsythe chose Allen over him .
En route to the ranchers , they have a run - in with some wild cattle before being directed to rancher Dick King and the " town " of Lonesome Dove .
Unable to secure the ransom , Call and McCrae set off alone to rescue Scull .
Meanwhile , in the snake - pit , Scull is still alive , although his sanity is weakening .
Outside the pit , Ahumado is bitten by a spider and dies en route to the medicine tree , and the rest of the camp is abandoned .
Scull is rescued and returned to Austin .
McCrae loses the love of Forsythe when she learns of his affair , and Call remains restless since Tilton has had a son , named Newton .
PART 3 Section::::Part 3 .
Seven years later , in 1865 , the American Civil War ends , Call is still single and McCrae is mourning the death of Nellie , his wife .
Call remains listless , and is blind to Spoon moving in with Maggie ( who now is a clerk at the store ) , and is equally unable to admit feelings for her or accept his son , even though he regularly has dinner with both of them .
In Austin , Governor Pease is again in charge , but the pending arrival of Union cavalry represent a new phase in the struggle with the Comanche , with Rangers to be used as scouts .
In Nebraska , Clara Allen , now a mother of two , hears of Nellie 's death and mourns the loss of her own child too .
In Boston , the Sculls are still married , although infidelity is still an ongoing source of tension .
On the plains , Blue Duck continues to attack and kill settlers , increasing the chances of " Blue coats " arriving in force to suppress the Comanche .
Led by Charles Goodnight , the Rangers and cavalry locate a Comanche camp , and recapture " the Parker girl " .
Heading back to Austin , they meet Clara Allen who is visiting again in order to sell her family 's property .
Allen and McCrae rekindle their friendship , and she returns to her family in Nebraska , just as Maggie begins showing symptoms of TB .
At the Comanche camp .
Buffalo Hump realizes his time has come and leaves for good .
His brother - in - law then relays the news to his nephew , Blue Duck at his hideaway in the forest .
The Rangers and sheriffs soon raid the camp and hang most of the outlaws , but Blue Duck has already left seeking to kill his father , whose death represents the end of an era for the region .
CAST
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
As with others in the Lonesome Dove series , the teleplay was co - written by author Larry McMurtry and Diana Ossana .
It was directed by Simon Wincer , with the music directed by Lennie Niehaus .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
Events such as the shooting of the chieftains ( ahistorical , but based on the Council House Fight ) , the attack on Austin ( ahistorical , but based on the Great Raid of 1840 ) , and the rescue of the white woman ( historical , based on Cynthia Ann Parker ) were all included in the series , although actual timelines or events were altered .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The series received generally negative reviews from critics .
Common complaints were the clownish portrayal of the Texas Rangers , who were continually drunk on duty and tumbling into bed with beautiful women under the slightest pretext , the negative stereotyping of the Mexican characters , who were largely portrayed as unwashed wild - eyed drooling killers superstitiously worshiping long - vanished Aztec gods , and the simplistic portrayal of frontier women , who were either weak - willed , simpering victims or cruel and manipulative Gorgons .
Brian Lowry from Variety called it " tedious , at times cartoonishly bad " .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
It was released in Region 1 on DVD on February 26 , 2008 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS