TIME IN SASKATCHEWAN
The Canadian province of Saskatchewan is geographically located in the Mountain Time Zone .
However , most of the province observes Central Standard Time year - round .
As a result , it is effectively on daylight saving time ( DST ) year round , as clocks are not turned back an hour in autumn when most jurisdictions return to standard time .
The city of Lloydminster is the only exception to this arrangement .
Located partly in Saskatchewan and partly in Alberta , it observes Mountain Time year - round , and changes its clocks for DST .
Since Lloydminster does change its clocks , the time in Saskatchewan is the same in all parts of the province during the summer months .
During the summer , clocks in the entire province match those of Calgary and Edmonton .
During the winter , clocks in most of the province outside Lloydminster match those of Winnipeg .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1912 , the first law was passed that called for the use of standard time .
This law left the choice of time zone up to the municipal government .
The result was a patchwork of towns following either of the two neighbouring time zones ( Mountain Standard Time or Central Standard Time ) with or without daylight saving time .
During World War I and World War II , all municipalities were forced to adopt daylight saving time to save on fuel , but were not forced to adopt the same time zone .
In 1966 , the Saskatchewan Provincial Government sought the help of a professional astronomer living in the province .
The Milton Study ( Earl R.V. Milton - A submission to the Government of Saskatchewan regarding Time Zones in Saskatchewan , 1966 ) a ) concluded that Saskatchewan is in the Mountain Standard Time Zone , and b ) suggested that the three prairie provinces ( Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba ) covered too much area to share a single time zone .
In 1966 , based on the Milton Study , the Saskatchewan Government passed Chapter 85 , to be known as the Time Act , 1966 ( Statutes of Saskatchewan , 1966 ) .
The key points of this act were : *
The eastern part of Saskatchewan will permanently be one hour ahead of Mountain Standard Time ( the equivalent of Central Standard Time ) .
*
In the western part of Saskatchewan ( e. g. , all points west of Saskatoon ) , municipal governments will still be able to choose what time zone to follow .
In the early part of this century , discussion was renewed over whether Saskatchewan should change its clocks to be in synch with other provinces .
And if so , whether to stay on Mountain Time , or move to a kind of double DST by going yet another hour ahead in the summer .
Premier Brad Wall had pledged to hold a referendum in the 2011 provincial election , but later decided against it , saying it would be a waste of money since polls consistently showed a strong majority favoured the status quo .
The only cities that chose not to match the rest of Saskatchewan 's time zone were in the southwest , in the areas around Lloydminster and Swift Current .
Part of Lloydminster spills into Alberta , which mandates the use of daylight saving time .
In order to keep clocks in sync throughout the city , Lloydminster chose to follow Alberta 's practice of observing daylight saving time — effectively placing Lloydminster and the surrounding area on Mountain Time year - round .
Swift Current and surrounding communities also observed Mountain Time until April 30 , 1972 when they changed to match the rest of the province .
With respect to some province - wide matters , such as provincial elections , CST is effectively used province - wide .
This means that during any provincial general election held when DST is not in effect in Lloydminster , polls in that city will open and close an hour earlier local time compared to the rest of the province .
For other matters ( for example , liquor laws ) , the local time is always the effective time in Lloydminster .
The town of Creighton which is across the border from the larger community of Flin Flon , Manitoba unofficially observes Central Daylight Time with the rest of Manitoba .
Unlike Lloydminster , Creighton 's use of CDT has no legal sanction at the provincial level .
This has some interesting side effects - for example , liquor establishments in Creighton are able to stay open one hour later than establishments in Flin Flon whilst CDT is in effect since a liquor establishment in Creighton can only be bound to observe CST by provincial law .
SASKATCHEWAN TIME ZONE Section::::Saskatchewan Time Zone .
Due to these discrepancies , many computer programs and major operating systems offer a distinct " Saskatchewan " option when listing time zone options that automatically disables DST .
In the tz database , both the America / Regina and America
/ Swift_Current entries result in Saskatchewan time .
The current wording of the Time Act says that during the entire year Saskatchewan observes " central standard time " , which is defined to be " the time that is six hours behind Greenwich time " .
With respect to mean solar time however , this translates into Saskatchewan effectively being on DST year round .
In the map above , Saskatchewan is the rectangle of Central Standard Time protruding into Mountain Standard Time in Canada , visually displaying that geographically , Saskatchewan is in the Mountain Time Zone .
SEE ALSO
* Time in Canada
* Time in Arizona REFERENCES
* Earl R.V. Milton : A submission to the Government of Saskatchewan regarding Time Zones in Saskatchewan , 1966
* The Saskatchewan Time System Saskatchewan Ministry of Municipal Affairs