THE STRANGERS ( 2008 FILM )
The Strangers is a 2008 American horror film written and directed by Bryan Bertino .
Kristen ( Liv Tyler ) and James ( Scott Speedman ) are expecting a relaxing weekend at a family vacation home , but their stay turns out to be anything but peaceful as three masked intruders leave Kristen and James struggling for survival .
Writer - director Bertino was inspired by real - life events : the Manson family Tate murders , a multiple homicide ; the Keddie Cabin Murders , that occurred in California in 1981 ; and a series of break - ins that occurred in his own neighborhood as a child .
Made on a budget of $ 9 million , the film was shot on location in rural South Carolina in the fall of 2006 .
Originally slated for a theatrical release in November 2007 , it was postponed before a theatrical release on May 30 , 2008 .
It grossed $ 82 million at the box office worldwide and received mixed reviews from critics , with some praising its atmosphere and tension , and others criticizing its script and characters .
Contemporary film scholars have interpreted it as a criticism of the perceived safety of pastoral life , as well as an exploration of stranger - on - stranger violence .
A sequel , titled , was released on March 9 , 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In a secluded area , away from civilization , James Hoyt and Kristen McKay arrive at night to James ' childhood remote summer home .
After being tired and irritable after a long evening at a friend 's wedding reception , James calls his friend Mike and asks him to pick him up in the morning .
Shortly after 4:00 AM , there is a loud knock at the door .
A young blonde woman , whose face is hidden under the shadows , asks " Is Tamara home ? "
but is turned away by James .
He goes for a drive to purchase a pack of cigarettes ; before he departs , he starts a fire in the hearth .
Kristen realizes the chimney flue is closed , and attempts to open it ; smoke emanating from the fire triggers a smoke alarm .
Kristen attempts to disarm the smoke alarm when she is startled by another knock at the door ; she drops the alarm on the floor , unnerved .
She calls James ' cellphone from the landline , but their call is cut short .
She returns to the kitchen , where , unbeknownst to her , a man — Man in Mask — watches her from an adjacent hallway .
Kristen notices the smoke alarm she left on the floor is now sitting on a chair , and realizes someone else has been in the house .
Upon going to retrieve her cell phone from the charger , she finds it is missing , and begins to panic .
When she hears a noise from the backyard , she arms herself with a knife , and opens the curtains to find the Man in Mask , staring at her .
Screaming , she stumbles into the hallway , and watches as the front door unlatches with a crack .
When she goes to push the door closed , the blonde woman , now in a doll mask — Dollface — peeks in a creepy manner .
After locking the door , Kristen hides in the bedroom and hears the strangers outside banging violently against the walls of the house .
The noise eventually stops and James returns to the home .
After she explains what has happened , he goes outside to the car to get his phone , whereupon he finds the car ransacked and sees Dollface watching him from afar .
The couple attempt to leave in James ' car but another woman in a pin - up girl mask — Pin - Up Girl — rear - ends them with a truck , forcing them to flee .
Back inside the house , Kristen and James find a shotgun and wait for the intruders in a bedroom .
Mike arrives and realizes something is wrong after seeing the smashed car in the driveway .
He enters the house , and James , mistaking him for one of the strangers , shoots him dead .
Devastated , James remembers an old radio transmitter in the backyard shed .
He leaves and encounters Pin - Up Girl , searching the backyard with a flashlight .
When James tries to shoot her , the Man in Mask knocks him unconscious , discharging the gun in the process .
Kristen hears the shot and runs to the shed .
She finds the radio , but Pin - Up Girl smashes it with an ax .
Kristen rushes back to the house where she encounters Dollface , who taunts her with a knife , saying , " You 're gon na die .
" She tries to leave but is incapacitated by the Man in Mask .
Finding themselves tied to chairs in the living room with the strangers standing before them , Kristen demands , " Why are you doing this ? "
Dollface replies , " Because you were home . "
The strangers then unmask themselves to the couple offscreen and take turns stabbing the couple before leaving the home .
As they drive away in the truck , they come across two young boys on bicycles distributing religious tracts door - to - door .
Dollface comes out of the truck and asks if she can have one of their tract cards .
One of the boys asks her , " Are you a sinner ? " , to which Dollface responds saying , " Sometimes . "
The boy gives her one , and the strangers drive away as Pin - Up Girl states , " It 'll be easier next time .
" The two boys come upon the house and discover the chaotic scene with a messy house , including blood on the walls , a gun sitting on the kitchen counter , an empty wedding ring box , a bloody knife , red rose petals on the floor , chairs and tables tipped over , the record player still playing but no songs or music , and the bloodied bodies of Kristen , James , and Mike inside .
One of the boys approaches Kristen 's body and attempts to touch it .
As he reaches out to her , Kristen wakes , startles him by grabbing his hand and screams .
CAST
* Liv Tyler as Kristen McKay * Scott Speedman as James Hoyt * Gemma Ward as Dollface * Kip Weeks as Man in Mask * Laura Margolis as Pin - Up Girl * Glenn Howerton as Mike * Alex Fisher and Peter Clayton - Luce as Mormon boys THEMES Section::::Themes .
Film scholar Kevin
Wetmore noted the film 's portrayal of violence as a reflection of its contemporary culture , writing : " Death is a random act in post-9/11 horror — the result of being in the wrong place at the wrong time , as the cliché goes .
Unlike in eighties slasher horror , for example , where engaging in negative behavior such as drinking , doing drugs , having premarital sex are often forerunners to being killed by the killer(s ) ; [ here ] , death is random and unrelated to one 's behavior . "
In The Horror Show Guide : The Ultimate Frightfest of Movies , Mike Mayo noted the film 's " grim realism , " writing that the main characters " could have wandered out of a gloomy Ingmar Bergman film , " ultimately branding the film as an example of " naturalistic domestic horror " akin to Michael Haneke 's Funny Games .
The film has also been noted by scholar Philip Simpson as highlighting " the divide between the underprivileged and privileged classes , " as well as for its inversion of commonly - held beliefs about violence in urban areas and pastoral ethics : "
The Strangers , as many horror films do ... undermines the conventional notion of rural society as a simpler , crime - free place .
One might call the narrative sensibility informing The Strangers ' pastoral paranoia ' , in that danger lurks among the rough folk of the country rather than the suburbs and cities .
Of course , it may be that provincial violence is a result of contamination , or in other words that the kind of stranger - upon - stranger violence typically associated with urban life metastasizes to the rural , a phenomenon noted by Louis Wirth . "
In his book Hearths of Darkness : The Family in the American Horror Film ( 2014 ) , scholar Tony Williams notes the film 's setting within a 1970s - era home as representative of an " American tradition of violence that is random and without any coherent explanation . "
Additionally , Williams reads the three masked assailants as metaphors for the " repressed and unresolved tensions affecting the couple inside the house . "
PRODUCTION SCREENPLAY AND INSPIRATION Section::::Production . Section::::Screenplay and inspiration .
Writer - director Bryan Bertino wrote the screenplay which was originally titled The Faces ; it was the third screenplay he had ever written .
Bertino had a particular interest in the horror genre , noting how one can connect to an audience by scaring them , and would state in subsequent interviews that he grew up watching horror films .
In particular , he stated he was significantly inspired by thriller films of the 1970s while writing the screenplay , and envisioned a film that " put the audience in the world of the victims . "
According to production notes and subsequent interviews , the film was inspired by true events from Bertino 's childhood : Bertino explains : In interviews , Bertino stated he was " very impressed " with some of the theories circulating on the Internet about the " true events " the movie is allegedly based on , but said that his main inspiration was the true crime book Helter Skelter about the Manson Family murders ; some journalists speculated that the film was also inspired by the unsolved Keddie Cabin Murders of 1981 that occurred in a small vacation community in California 's Sierra Nevada .
The film 's premise has been compared by some film critics to the French horror film Them , released two years earlier , which also features a couple terrorized by strangers in their remote home .
Bertino entered the screenplay for The Strangers into a screenwriting contest , after which he sold its directorial rights to Universal Pictures .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
When casting the two leading actors in the film , Bertino sought Liv Tyler for the role of Kristen .
Tyler , who had not worked for several years after the birth of her son , accepted the part after being impressed by the script , which she read while on a flight from Japan to Los Angeles : " I especially liked Bryan 's way of saying a lot , but not saying everything .
Often in movies , it 's all spelled out for you , and the dialogue is very explanatory .
But Bryan does n't write like that ; he writes how normal people communicate — with questions lingering .
I knew it would be interesting to act that . "
Canadian actor Scott Speedman was cast as James .
Speedman was also impressed by the script , stating that " the audience actually gets time to breathe with the characters before things get scary as hell .
That got me interested from the first pages " .
In casting the three masked intruders , Bertino chose Australian fashion model Gemma Ward for the part of Dollface , feeling she had the exact " look " he had imagined ; Ward was officially cast in the film in September 2006 .
In preparing for the role , Ward read Vincent Bugioisi 's Helter Skelter for inspiration .
Kip Weeks was then chosen as the Man in the Mask , and television actress Laura Margolis , who found the script to be a real " page turner " , was cast in the part of Pin - Up Girl .
In retrospect , Bertino said he chose the three actors based on their abilities to convey their characters in spite of the fact that their faces remain unseen onscreen .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Bertino had not initially planned on directing The Strangers , and had been disconnected from the project after selling directorial rights to Universal Pictures .
Both Justin Lin and Mark Romanek were attached to direct , but eventually backed out .
Approximately two years after Bertino had sold the screenplay , Universal passed the project onto its subsidiary , Rogue Pictures , who approached Bertino to direct the project , despite his lack of experience .
On a $ 9 million budget , filming for The Strangers began on October 10 , 2006 , and finished in early 2007 .
It was shot on location roughly 10 miles outside of Florence , South Carolina , and the house interior was constructed by a set crew .
Though the film takes place in 2005 , the house itself was deliberately constructed with an architecture reminiscent of 1970s ranch houses and dressed in furnishings applicable to the era .
Bertino based the house on the types of homes common where he had grown up in rural Texas .
The property was located on the outskirts of Timmonsville , South Carolina .
Despite weather complications , the film was largely shot in chronological order .
During production , it was reported that Liv Tyler came down with tonsillitis due to the extensive screaming the role required her to do .
Tyler would later recall it being the most difficult film she had ever worked on , " both physically and emotionally . "
According to Laura Margolis , who played the Pin - Up Girl , Tyler also specifically requested that she not see her mask prior to filming : " I got strict instructions not to let Liv see me in my mask before we shot , " Margolis recalled .
" The first scene that I shot was stalking [ her ] outside of the barn .
I had been told that she really wanted to be scared .
She did n't want to have to fake it , and so it was my responsibility to really scare her .
So we shot that scene , I ran at her , she started actually screaming , and then she kicked me away . "
The masks featured in the film were chosen by Bertino , who wanted them to appear as though the killers " could have picked them up at any store . "
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Film editor Kevin Greutert was hired to edit the film ; at the time , he recently finished editing Saw III .
Several changes were made to the film during post - production , primarily regarding the conclusion : In the screenplay and the original footage shot , the three masked strangers reveal their faces on camera .
After the sequence in which Kristen and James are stabbed , the strangers wander around the house , cleaning up parts of the crime scene before dressing into Kristen and James 's clothes .
Following test screenings , it was decided by the producers that the strangers ' faces should remain unseen to the audience , which required the sequences following the stabbing to be excised .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
A musical score , consisting of 19 pieces composed by score producer tomandandy , was released on May 27 , 2008 , and was distributed by Lakeshore Records .
The album was received with generally positive reviews by critics .
" It 's a creepy score for what appears to be a movie that will make you jump as well as make sure that the doors are locked at night , " writes reviewer Jeff Swindoll .
" This is an impressive score and adds a tremendous chill - factor to the film , " says Zach Freeman of Blogger News , grading it with an A. TRACK LISTING RELEASE Section::::Release .
The producers originally planned for a summer release in July 2007 , which was eventually postponed to November 2007 ; however , this date was postponed as well .
The producers instead opted for a summer release , and The Strangers had its theatrical debut in United States and Canada on May 30 , 2008 .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 21 million in 2,467 theaters , ranking # 3 at the box office and averaging $ 8,514 per theater .
The overall box office return was successful , earning $ 82.4 million worldwide .
MARKETING AND PROMOTION Section::::Marketing and promotion .
In late July 2007 , Bertino , Tyler and Speedman attended San Diego 's annual Comic - Con event to promote the film ; all three were present for a questions - and - answers panel session , as well as a screening of the film 's official teaser trailer ; this trailer was released on the internet several weeks later .
It was not until March 2008 that a full - length trailer for the film was released , which can be found on Apple 's QuickTime trailer gallery .
The trailer originally began running in theaters attached to Rogue Pictures ' sci - fi film Doomsday in March 2008 , and television advertisements began airing on networks in early - mid April 2008 to promote the film 's May release .
Two one - sheet posters for the film were released in August 2007 , one showing the three masked Strangers , and the other displaying a wounded Liv Tyler .
In April 2008 , roughly two months before the film 's official theatrical debut , the final , official one - sheet for the film was released , featuring Liv Tyler standing in a darkened kitchen with a masked man looming behind her in the shadows .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Strangers was released on DVD and Blu - ray in the United States on October 21 , 2008 .
Both the Blu - ray and DVD feature rated and unrated versions of the film , with the unrated edition running approximately two minutes longer .
Bonus materials include two deleted scenes and a making - of featurette .
The DVD was released in the UK on December 26 , 2008 .
The film was available on Universal VOD ( Video on Demand ) from November 19 , 2008 , through March 31 , 2009 .
In commemoration of the film 's 10th anniversary , a two - disc collector 's edition Blu - ray by Scream Factory was released on March 6 , 2018 , featuring a 2 K video transfer , as well as a combination of new and archival cast and crew interviews .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 45 % , based on 153 reviews , and an average rating of 4.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " The Strangers provides a few scares , but offers little else to distinguish itself from other slasher films .
" Metacritic reported an average score of 47 out of 100 , based on 27 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B – " on an A+ to F scale .
Unfavorable reviews included Roger Ebert 's of the Chicago Sun - Times , who gave the film one - and - a - half stars out of four , saying : " The movie deserves more stars for its bottom - line craft , but all the craft in the world ca n't redeem its story . "
Bob Mondello of NPR said the film was " A sadistic , unmotivated home - invasion flick .
"
Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer noted that " No one is getting at anything in The Strangers , except the cheapest , ugliest kind of sadistic titillation .
"
Elizabeth Weitzman of the New York Daily News compared the film to 2007 's Vacancy - a comparison which does " Strangers " no favors .
Vacancy director Nimród Antal gave us a pair of heroes who fought like hell to survive , becoming closer and stronger in the effort .
Bertino 's undeveloped protagonists are colossally stupid and frustratingly passive . "
Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post panned the film , calling it " a fraud from start to finish . "
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle , said the film " uses cinema to ends that are objectionable and vile , " but admitted that " it does it well , with more than usual skill . "
Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe said of the director , " Bertino has the pretensions of an artist and the indelicacy of a hack .
He tries to get under our skin with a pile driver . "
Stephen Whitty of The Star - Ledger opined of the film , " Unfolding with an almost startling lack of self - awareness , young filmmaker Bryan Bertino 's debut is such a careful , straight - faced knockoff of ' 70s exploitation films that it plays like a parody . "
Among the positive reviews , Jeannette Catsoulis of The New York Times said The Strangers is " suspenseful , " " highly effective , " and " smartly maintain[s ] its commitment to tingling creepiness over bludgeoning horror . "
Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter called the film a " creepily atmospheric psychological thriller with a death grip on the psychological aspect .
"
James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , saying that , " This is one of those rare horror movies that concentrates on suspense and terror rather than on gore and a high body count . "
Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club said that " as an exercise in controlled mayhem , horror movies do n't get much scarier . "
Additional positive feedback for the film came from Joblo.com reviewer Berge Garabedian , who praised director Bertino for " building the tension nicely , with lots of silences , creepy voices , jump scares , use of songs and a sharp eye behind the camera , as well as plenty of Steadicam
give it all more of a voyeuristic feel .
" Empire Magazine remarked on the film 's retro - style , saying , " Like much recent horror , from the homages of the Grindhouse gang through flat multiplex remakes of drive - in classics , The Strangers looks to the ' 70s . " , and ultimately branded the film as " an effective , scary emotional work - out . "
Slant Magazines Nick Schager listed The Strangers as the 9th best film of 2008 .
In 2009 , the film was ranked # 13 on " Bravo 's 13 Scarier Movie Moments " television piece , and in a 2018 retrospective , Clark Collis of Entertainment Weekly deemed the film a " modern - day slasher classic . "
SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
In August 2008 , Rogue Pictures confirmed that a sequel was in the works , with Brian Bertino co - writing the screenplay with Ben Ketai .
The project was originally slated to enter principal photography in 2009 , during which time it was tentatively titled The Strangers : Part II .
Directors Laurent Briet and Marcel Langenegger were considered to direct , but landed eventually to Johannes Roberts .
After a troubled development period , filming on the sequel began May 30 , 2017 .
Later titled The Strangers : Prey at Night , the film was released on March 9 , 2018 .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring home invasions REFERENCES WORKS CITED EXTERNAL LINKS