LORD OF ALL HOPEFULNESS
" Lord of all Hopefulness " is a Christian hymn written by Jan Struther , which was published in the enlarged edition of Songs of Praise ( Oxford University Press ) in 1931 .
The hymn is used in liturgy , at weddings and at the beginning of funeral services .
" Lord of all Hopefulness " is commonly set to the melody of an Irish folksong named Slane .
In English hymn books , where traditional folk tunes are used , the place of collection is sometimes attributed as the tune name , and this melody is named after the Hill of Slane , the site St. Patrick lit an Easter fire in defiance of the pagan king , Lóegaire , near the village of the same name ( ) in County Meath , Ireland .
Slane is also the melody of another well - known hymn , "
Be Thou My Vision " .
There are two variants of this tune ; the text of " Lord Of All Hopefulness " fits a metre of 10.11.11.11 , and an anacrucial version of Slane must be used ( with an upbeat on the 2nd , 3rd and 4th lines of each verse ) . , commonly used in Irish and Scottish hymnals ( including the Hymnbooks of the Church of Scotland ) , fits the 10.10.10.10 metre and is not suitable for " Lord of all Hopefulness " .
The tune has its origin as a traditional Irish tune , principally ' With my Love on the Road , ' also known as ' The Banks of the Bann , ' and still a commonly - performed trad tune .
" Lord of all Hopefulness " has also been given its own tune , Miniver ( originally in The BBC Hymn Book 1951 ) , written by Cyril Vincent Taylor which acknowledges Jan Struther by reference to her famous text character " Mrs Miniver " .
" Lord of all Hopefulness " was the opening hymn at the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle on 19 May 2018 .
PUBLICATION Section::::Publication .
The hymn is included in a number of popular Christian hymn books , including the New English Hymnal , Hymns and Psalms
This hymn can also be found in the 1971 combined red Hymn Book of the Anglican Church of Canada and the United Church of Canada , set to the tune Avonlea by Stanley Osborne , with a note saying that it could also be sung to the tune " Slane " with a few modifications to the melody .
It is also sung by Catholic congregations in the U.S. REFERENCES