WASHING OUT MOUTH WITH SOAP Washing out mouth with soap is a traditional form of physical punishment that consists in placing soap , or a similar cleansing agent , inside a person 's mouth so that the person will taste it , inducing what most people consider an unpleasant experience .
This form of punishment was especially common in the United States and United Kingdom from the late 19th century through the 1960s .
Washing out mouth with soap is most often used as a response to profanity , lying , biting , tobacco use , or verbal disrespect .
It functions both as a symbolic " cleansing " following the infraction , as well as acting as a deterrent due to the foul aftertaste .
It is commonly used as child discipline or school discipline , and is more frequently employed by mothers than fathers .
This punishment still has advocates today , even though its use has diminished considerably in recent years in favour of discipline methods that are not considered violent or humiliating .
Additionally , ingestion of soaps and detergents can have potentially serious health consequences , and persons utilizing this form of punishment may face legal sanctions .
TECHNIQUE Section::::Technique .
Washing out mouth with soap is essentially defined by the introduction of soap , or a soap - like cleansing agent , into the oral cavity .
Methods commonly used for this purpose include placing a bar of soap in a person 's mouth and forcing them to hold it there , chew it , and/or swallow it ; forcing a person to drink liquid soap or another liquid cleanser or to swish such liquids in their mouth ; and using a toothbrush to brush the used cleaning product onto a person 's teeth and oral tissues .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Washing out mouth with soap is meant to be unpleasant , but is usually not intended to cause death or serious harm .
Nonetheless , many people employ the aforementioned techniques with extremely limited knowledge regarding the safety of ingesting their chosen cleansing agents .
Agents likely to cause serious harm if swallowed include many automatic dishwasher detergents and laundry detergents .
Even ordinary bar soaps and liquid hand soaps may cause harmful effects including vomiting , diarrhea , irritation of the lining of the mouth and digestive tract , and in rare instances , pulmonary aspiration .
This is especially true if these products are ingested in large quantities .
HISTORY Section::::History .
One of the earliest recorded uses of forcing another to ingest soap as punishment appeared in the 1832 Legal Examiner , in which it was noted that a married couple " were constantly quarrelling ; and that one evening , on the man 's return home , he found his wife intoxicated , [ ... ]
perceiving a piece of kitchen soap lying on the ground near the spot , he crammed it into his wife 's mouth , saying , " She has had plenty of water to wash with , she ought now to have a little soap " .
In the 1860s , the periodical Aunt Judy 's Annual Volume featured the main characters forced to eat a bar of soap as punishment for constantly failing to wash up , as the climax to a story entitled " Scaramouches at School " .
In 1872 , The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal stated that the practice of washing out the mouth of a child heard to swear was noted by an American colleague , and should be recommended to colleagues in the Orient as well .
In 1873 , a schoolmistress in Mahaska , Iowa was noted to have punished a boy in her class for indulging in chewing tobacco by washing his mouth out with soap .
Much later examples tell how Filipino or Lakota aboriginals were punished for speaking their native language with a similar punishment .
An 1898 " study in moral education " , published by the Journal of Genetic Psychology , noted that whipping , withdrawal of privileges , lectures , being sent alone to a room and washing out a subject 's mouth with either soap , salt or pepper , were the most likely punishments to deter future abuses .
Two years later , a New York State Department of Social Welfare officer submitted a complaint against the Rochester Orphan Asylum noting that " I find , as charged , that children 's mouths have been washed with soap - suds , but not , as also charged , with ashes and water ; that such punishments were ordered for obscene or profane language " .
By the start of the 20th century , the practice was also noted at the Maryland State Reformatory for Women as punishment for any infraction of the rules .
In the 1940s , washing out mouth with soap was a hazing ritual in the British Royal Navy .
In the 1950s , several American schoolboards ruled in favour of washing out a pupil 's mouth with soap as a legitimate punishment .
In 1953 , Wisconsin judge Harvey L. Neelan fined a Miss Mertz $ 25 for her drunken obscenities and noted that she should be required to wash her mouth with soap .
In 1963 , Michigan judge Francis Castellucci ordered Louis Winiarski , who had been found using obscene language around women and children , to wash his mouth with soap before leaving the courtroom .
A similar case in October 1979 saw a New York resident choose to wash his mouth out with soap , rather than serve ten days in prison for his disorderly conduct and obscenities .
In 1977 , the National Criminal Justice Reference System published a report defending the use of corporal punishment in schools , in which a school administrator noted that he documented 200 cases , over his 13-year career , of using corporal punishmenting , noting " That 's not just using paddles in every instance , but if you shake a student , if you grab a student , if you wash a student 's mouth out with soap , that 's corporal punishment under the definition of the law " .
In 1982 , the Journal of Youth and Adolescence listed the practise , alongside paddling and hairpulling as a " moderate " punishment for children , beneath the realm of " severe " punishment such as whipping .
Similarly in 1996 , the American Academy of Pediatrics classified it as an alternative to spanking .
In 2006 , students at the Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts carried out a peer - reviewed study on the ability of punishment to curb the use of profanity by interviewing colleagues on their remembered upbringings , and noted that the most commonly reported parental reaction was a verbal reprimand ( 41 % ) .
Soap in the mouth was mentioned in 20 % of the episodes , and physical punishments were described in 14 % .
LEGAL RAMIFICATIONS
Section::::Legal ramifications .
There have been a number of cases of arrests , charges and civil lawsuits arising from the domestic discipline of washing another 's mouth out with soap ; often arising from the perception of abuse of parental authority by an outside figure .
In the United States , there is often variance between individual states as well ; for example North Carolina specifically instructs its social workers that " washing a child 's mouth out with soap is not considered an extreme measure " , but the Florida Department of Children and Families took away a mother 's two children permanently after she forced her 8-year - old daughter to chew soap after saying " fuck " , leading to an allergic reaction .
NOTABLE CASES
*
In 1890 , a Mormon father submitted a complaint to the Brooklyn
, Nevada school board noting that a teacher had washed his daughter 's mouth out with soap , after she lied to the teacher .
*
In March 1949 , twenty years before the advent of no fault divorce , Mary L. Muick was granted a divorce against her husband Joseph Muick in San Jose , California after he retaliated against her own threats to soap his son 's mouth for foul language at a family gathering by forcibly washing her mouth with soap .
*
Through the 1960s and 1970s , Sister Marie Docherty was accused of mistreating girls in her care at Nazareth House in Aberdeen , Scotland ; including washing their mouths out with soap if they swore .
*
In November 1980 , an African American mother in Albany , Georgia appealed to the school board to fire the Caucasian teacher who had washed her daughter 's mouth out with soap .
When the schoolboard refused , 500 black families picketed the school board .
* Convicted murderer Steven W. Bowman was alleged to have washed out his girlfriend 's mouth with soap in July 2000 , when she mentioned her other romantic partner 's name ; before murdering him .
* A teacher in Rochester , New York was suspended in 2004 for washing out the mouth of a student for using vulgar language .
Following her suspension , parents and family members of her students signed a petition supporting her actions and requesting her reinstatement .
OTHER NOTABLE INSTANCES
* Washington Senator R. Lorraine Wojahn noted that her mother washed out her mouth with soap when she was five years old , for trying some of her father 's chewing tobacco .
* American inventor , activist , and transgender woman Lynn Conway 's parents washed her mouth out with soap for asserting that she was a girl .
*
Former president George W. Bush recalled that his mother had washed his mouth out with soap for " getting fresh " with her .
*
Following Toledo , Ohio mayor Carty Finkbeiner 's use of profanity in a news conference in 1998 , presidential candidate Ralph Nader sent him a bar of soap with which to wash out his mouth .
* After Jane Fonda said " cunt " on NBC 's " Today " in 2008 , Concerned Women for America sent her a 1.5 gallon bottle of soap with instructions to " drink the whole bottle . "
*
In 2009 , Dr. Phil suggested to Sarah Jessica Parker that she wash her mouth out with soap whenever she experienced a tobacco craving .
SEE ALSO
* Hotsaucing * Castor oil
* Grounding ( discipline technique )
* Spoiled child
* Tantrum * Teenage rebellion
* Time - out ( parenting ) REFERENCES