RULES OF SNOOKER Snooker is a cue sport that is played on a baize - covered table with pockets in each of the four corners and in the middle of each of the long side cushions .
It is played using a cue and snooker balls : one white , 15 worth one point
each ( sometimes played with fewer red balls , commonly 6 or 10 ) , and six balls of different : yellow ( 2 points ) ,
green ( 3 ) , brown ( 4 ) , blue ( 5 ) , pink ( 6 ) , black ( 7 ) .
A player ( or team ) wins a ( individual game ) of snooker by scoring more points than the opponent(s ) , using the cue ball to the red and coloured balls .
A player ( or team ) wins a match when they have achieved the best - of score from a pre - determined number of frames .
The number of frames is always odd so as to prevent a tie or a draw .
THE TABLE Section::::The table .
Snooker is played on a rectangular snooker table with six pockets , one at each corner and one in the middle of each long side .
The table usually has a slate base , covered in green baize .
At one end of the table ( the baulk end ) is the baulk line , which is from the baulk cushion ( the short cushion at the baulk end ) .
A semicircle of radius , called the D , is drawn behind this line , centred on the middle of the line .
The cushion at the other end of the table is known as the top cushion .
A regulation ( full - size ) table is ; because of the large size of these tables , smaller tables are common in homes , pubs and other places where space is limited .
These are often around in length , with all the dimensions and markings scaled down accordingly .
The balls used are sometimes also scaled down , and/or reduced in number ( in the case of the reds ) by omitting the longest row of balls in the rack .
THE BALLS Section::::The balls .
Snooker balls , like the balls for all cue sports , are typically made of phenolic resin , and are smaller than American pool balls .
Regulation snooker balls ( which are specified in metric units ) are nominally 52.5 mm ( approximately inches ) in diameter , though many sets are actually manufactured at 52.4 mm ( about in . )
No weight for the balls is specified in the rules , only that the weight of any two balls should not differ by more than 0.5 g .
Some recreational sets ( which are usually not measured metrically ) are in .
( about 54 mm ) up to as large as pool balls , at in .
( about 57.2 mm ) ; larger ball size requires wider pocket openings .
Miniature sets also exist , for half - size home tables .
There are fifteen , six ( yellow , green , brown , blue , pink , and black ) , and one white .
Usually none of the balls are numbered , though the six colour balls often are in the US , where they are easily mistaken at first glance for pool balls ( the design is similar , but the numbering does not match pool 's scheme ) .
At the beginning of a frame , the balls are set up in the arrangement shown in the illustration .
The six colours ( a term referring to all balls except the white and the reds ) are placed on their own spots .
On the baulk line , looking up the table from the baulk end , the green ball is located where the " D " meets the line on the left , the brown ball in the middle of the line , and the yellow ball where the " D " meets the line on the right .
This order is often remembered using the mnemonic God Bless You , the first letter of each word being the first letter of the three colours ( Green , Brown , Yellow ) .
At the exact centre of the table sits the blue ball .
Further up the table is the pink ball , which sits midway between the blue spot and the top cushion , followed by the red balls , arranged in a tightly - packed triangle behind the pink ( the apex must be as close as possible to the pink ball without touching it ) .
Finally , the black ball is placed on a spot from the top cushion , centred from left to right so that the brown , blue , pink , and black balls all sit on an imaginary line that bisects the table along its length .
OBJECTIVE
Section::::Objective .
The objective of the game of snooker is to strike the white cue ball with a cue so that it strikes the object balls in turn and causes them to fall into one of the six pockets .
Points are scored for potting balls legally , in accordance with the rules described below , or in the event of a foul committed by the opponent .
The player who scores more points wins the frame , and the first player to win a set number of frames wins the match .
MATCH Section::::Match .
A match usually consists of a fixed , odd number of frames .
A frame begins with setting up the balls as described above .
A frame ends when all balls are potted , or when one of the players concedes defeat because he is too far behind in score to equal or beat the score of the other player .
A match ends when one player has won enough frames to make it impossible for the other player to catch up .
For example , in a match of 19 frames , the first player to win 10 of them is the victor .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
At the beginning of each frame , the balls are set up by the referee as explained .
One player then takes a break - off shot , placing the cue ball anywhere inside the D and attempting to hit and/or pot one or more of the red balls .
It is common for players to start by placing the ball on the line , between the brown ball and either the green or yellow ball .
The break - off alternates between players on successive frames .
Only one player may visit the table at a time .
A break is the number of points scored by a player in one single visit to the table .
A player 's turn and break end when he fails to pot a ball , when he does something against the rules of the game , which is called a foul , or when a frame has ended .
The ball or balls that can be hit first by the white are called the ball(s ) " on " for that particular stroke .
The ball(s ) " on " differ from shot to shot : a red ball , if potted , must be followed by a colour , a potted colour must be followed by a red , and so on until a break ends .
If a red is not potted , any red ball remains the ball " on " for the opponent 's first shot .
Only a ball or balls " on " may be potted legally by a player ; potting a ball not " on " constitutes a foul .
If the cue ball comes to rest in direct contact with a ball that is on or could be on , the referee shall declare a " touching ball .
" The striker must " play away " from that ball without moving it , but is not required to hit any other ball because the touching ball is on .
If the object ball moves , it is considered a " push shot " and a foul shall be called .
No penalty is incurred for playing away if ( 1 ) the ball is on ; ( 2 ) the ball could be on and the striker nominates such ball ; or ( 3 )
the ball could be on and the striker nominates , and first hits , another ball that could be on .
If the cue ball is touching another ball which could not be on ( e.g. touching a colour when the striker must pot a red , or vice versa ) , a touching ball is not called , and the striker must play away from it and hit a legally nominated object ball .
Where the cue ball is simultaneously touching several balls that are on or could be on , the referee shall indicate that each and every one of them is a touching ball ; the striker must therefore play away from all of them .
The striker scores no points for balls potted as the result of a foul .
Depending on the situation , these balls will either remain off the table ; be returned to their original spots ; or be replaced in the positions they occupied before the foul shot , along with any other balls that were moved during the shot .
For details on such situations , see Foulsbelow ) .
If a player fails to pot a ball " on " , whether a red or a nominated colour , the other player will come into play and the balls " on " are always the reds , as long as there are still reds on the table .
The alternation between red balls and colours ends when all reds have been potted and a colour is potted after the last red , or a failed attempt to do so is made .
All six colours have then to be potted in ascending order of their value ( yellow , green , brown , blue , pink , black ) .
Each becomes the ball " on " in that order .
During this phase , the colours are not replaced on the table after being legally potted , however , any colour potted as the result of a foul is re - spotted .
After all six colours have been potted , the player with the higher score wins the frame ( but see below for end - of - frame scenarios ) .
FOULS Section::::Fouls .
A foul is a shot or action by the striker which is against the rules of the game .
When a foul is made during a shot , the player 's turn ends and they receive no points for any balls potted on that shot .
Common fouls are : * Failing to hit any other ball with the cue ball .
*
First hitting a ball " not - on " with the cue ball .
* Potting a ball " not - on " .
* Potting the cue ball ( in - off ) .
* Touching any object ball with anything but the cue ball .
* Touching any ball before all balls have come to a complete stop .
* Hitting the cue ball more than once on the same shot .
* Making a ball land off the table .
* Touching the cue ball with anything other than the tip of the cue .
The exception is that while positioning the cue ball " in - hand " ; it may be touched by anything except the tip of the cue .
* Playing a " push shot " - a shot in which an object ball ( whether " on " or not ) in direct contact with the cue ball moves when the cue ball is hit .
* Playing a " jump shot " - a shot where the cue ball leaves the bed of the table and jumps over a ball before first hitting another ball .
* Playing a shot with both feet off the ground .
The player may lean over the table , support a portion of his weight on it , and/or use a mechanical bridge as desired , but at least one foot must remain in contact with the ground .
When a player commits a foul and the cue ball remains on the table , the opponent may either play from the resulting position or , if he considers it to be disadvantageous , request that the offender play again .
If the cue ball is potted or leaves the table , the opponent receives it " in - hand , " allowing him to place it anywhere within the " D " for his next shot .
It is sometimes erroneously believed that potting two or more balls in one shot is an automatic foul .
This is only true if one of the potted balls is not " on " ( e.g. a red and a colour , or two different colours ) .
When the reds are " on " , two or more of them may be legally potted in the same shot and are worth one point each ; however , the player may only nominate and attempt to pot one colour on his next shot .
If a free ball has been granted ( see below ) , multiple balls may be legally potted in one shot .
Should a cue ball be touched with the tip while " in - hand " , i.e. when breaking - off or playing from the " D " after being potted or knocked off the table , a foul is not committed as long as the referee is satisfied that the player was only positioning the ball , and not playing a shot or preparing to play one .
When a player commits a foul , the opponent receives penalty points equal to the value of the ball " on " , the value of the highest valued ball involved in the foul , or 4 points , whichever is greatest .
When multiple fouls are made in one shot , only the most highly valued foul is counted .
Penalty points are therefore at least 4 points and at most 7 .
Not hitting the ball " on " first is the most common foul .
A common defensive tactic is to play a shot that leaves the opponent unable to hit a ball " on " directly .
This is most commonly called " snookering " one 's opponent , or alternatively " laying a snooker " or putting the other player " in a snooker " .
Because players receive points for fouls by their opponents , repeatedly snookering one 's opponent is a possible way of winning a frame when potting all the balls on the table would be insufficient to ensure a win or tie .
This portion of the frame is known as the " snookers - required " stage .
FREE BALL Section::::Free ball .
A free ball is a player - nominated substitute for the ball " on " when a player becomes snookered as the result of a foul committed by the opponent .
The snooker is considered illegitimate in this case , and the affected player is allowed to nullify it by nominating any object ball as being " on " for the first shot of his turn .
Once the free ball shot is taken legally , the game continues normally ; however , if the player who committed the foul is asked to play again , a free ball is not granted .
For example , as illustrated in the provided picture , if the ball on is the final red , but is snookered by the black due to a foul , the player will be able to name the blue as the free ball .
He could then pot the blue as if it were a red for one point .
The blue will then be respotted , a nominated colour ball will be on , and normal play will resume .
Note that , as a natural corollary of the rules , the free ball is always a colour ball .
If the ball on is a red , then by definition it can not be snookered via another red , as it merely provides an alternative clean shot with another ball on .
If the ball on is a red , and is snookered by a colour after a foul , then logically the red is either the final one or all reds are snookered by a colour ball , meaning the free ball has to be a colour .
If the ball on is a colour ball that is snookered by a red , a previous red must have been successfully potted ; the snooker therefore must be self - inflicted and can not have occurred as the result of a foul .
If the ball on is a colour that is snookered by another colour after a foul , all reds must have been already potted ; thus the free ball still has to be a colour ball .
Interesting situations could occur if somehow both the free ball and the real ball on are potted .
If a colour was the ball on ( all reds were potted ) , and both the free ball and the actual ball on are potted , only the ball on is scored .
The free ball is respotted while the actual ball on will stay off the table .
This is the only time when attempting to pot a colour that two balls can be potted without a foul occurring , because technically speaking both of the potted balls are on .
If the ball on is red and both the free ball and a real red are potted , then each ball potted is scored as a red for a total of two points .
The colour free ball is then re - spotted and the red remains off the table .
By the same logic , a player may hit the free ball into a real red in order to pot the latter ( a plant ) .
Going back to the picture above , the player could nominate the black as the free ball and use it to plant the real red .
If the player potted both balls in one shot , two points would be awarded and the black would be re - spotted .
Not potting the free ball incurs no penalty , so the striker may play a snooker using the free ball , gratis .
However , if said snooker is achieved by having the free ball obstructing the ball on , then the strike is a foul and a penalty of the value of the ball on is awarded to the opponent .
The reason is that the free ball was to be treated as the ball on , and one can not snooker a ball on by another ball on ( following the same logic that a red can not snooker another red when red is on ) .
The only exception to this is when there are only two balls remaining on the table , namely pink and black .
If the opposition somehow fouled trying to pot pink , and illegitimately snookered the striker with the black , then it is fair for the striker to snooker the opposition " back " with the free black ball .
A free ball scenario does not occur when the ball gets stuck at the edge of a pocket jaw ( commonly referred to as " angled ' ) in such a manner that the player is unable to hit any ball on .
This is because according to the official snooker rules a ball is snookered only if its way is obstructed by balls not on .
In this scenario , after a foul , the player may choose to either take the shot from the current position or ask the offender to play again , as per the usual rules on fouls .
FOUL AND A MISS Section::::Foul and a Miss. A foul and a miss will be called if a player does not hit the ball " on " first ( foul ) and is deemed by the to have not made the best possible attempt ( miss ) .
In this case , the opponent has the option to request that all balls on the table to be returned to their position before the foul , and require the fouling player to take the shot again .
The rule was introduced to prevent players from playing ( i.e. , deliberately fouling so as to leave the balls in a safe position , reducing the risk of giving a frame - winning chance to the opponent ) .
Multiple misses often occur because players attempt to hit a shot very softly or thinly in situations where a fuller contact might leave their opponent an easy potting chance .
This can lead to an apparently easy being attempted several times , as players feel that it is better to concede many points but leave a safe position , than concede none and leave a frame - winning chance .
The " best attempt " determination consists of three key elements : *
Whether the player 's choice of shot is the easiest to be achieved .
If a player deliberately attempts a difficult shot with the intent of fouling , it can be ruled a miss .
*
Whether the cue ball has been hit with sufficient strength to reach the ball " on " .
Undershooting almost always results in a miss , while overshooting may or may not .
* Whether the player has tried to get the cue ball as close to the ball " on " as possible .
All three of these elements must be present in order for the referee to decide that a player has made his best attempt .
There are three situations in which a miss will not be called , even if the referee decides that a best attempt has not been made : *
If either player needs penalty points to win a frame , or if either player would need them after the current penalty is applied .
This is to prevent the players from running up the score due to repeated misses in worst - case scenarios .
*
If the score difference is equal to the number of points still on the table , either before or after the penalty is applied , and the referee believes that the foul was not intentional .
This is to prevent the score difference from decreasing too much , at the referee 's discretion .
*
If it is physically impossible to play a legal shot .
The player must still put sufficient strength into the shot so that the cue ball would be able to reach its target if it were not obstructed .
If a player fouls and misses in a non - snookered scenario , and if the opponent requests that he play the shot again from the original position , a second failure to make a best attempt is ruled a foul and a miss regardless of the score difference .
The fouling player is issued a warning by the referee , and a third such failure forfeits the frame to the opponent .
THE END OF A FRAME Section::::The end of a frame .
A frame normally ends in one of three ways :
* A concession , in which one player gives up due to being too far behind to have a realistic chance of winning the frame .
Concession before the stage may be interpreted as ungentlemanly conduct and result in a penalty of a second frame being applied .
*
The final black is potted legally ( including after a re - spot ) , and this does not leave the score tied .
*
The striker leads by more than seven points with only the black remaining .
He may claim the win at this point , but may also elect to pot the black in order to complete a high - scoring break .
There are three less common ways to end a frame :
* A foul on the black , when the black is the only ball left .
It is sometimes wrongly assumed that play continues after a foul on the black if there are fewer than seven points between the scores .
This is not the case : the player who is in the lead following the assessment of a penalty after a foul , when only the black remains , becomes the winner .
* Failure to hit a ball " on " three times in a row , if the player has a clear sight of the ball .
The referee will warn a player after a second such miss that a third miss will mean that the opponent will be awarded the frame .
This rule does not apply if the player is snookered .
As missing due to avoiding a direct shot on a ball is usually a tactical , rather than skill - related , outcome , this rule is rarely invoked , as a player will simply hit the ball directly on the third shot .
* A player may incur a verbal warning if the referee deems that he is taking too long to shoot .
Additional hesitation may forfeit the frame to the opponent at the referee 's discretion .
If the score is tied after the final black is potted , the black is re - spotted .
The winner of a coin toss by the referee decides which player will take first strike at the black ; that player receives the cue ball " in - hand " for his first shot .
Play then continues normally until the black is potted or another frame - ending situation occurs .
MAXIMUM BREAK Section::::Maximum break .
The highest break that can be made under normal circumstances is 147 .
To achieve that , the player must pot all 15 reds , with the black after every red , followed by potting the six remaining colours .
This " maximum break " of 147 rarely occurs in match play .
The fastest maximum break in a tournament was achieved during the World Championships on April 21 , 1997 , by Ronnie O'Sullivan against Mick Price in 5 minutes and 20 seconds .
If an opponent fouls before any balls are potted , and leaves the player a free ball , the player can then nominate a colour and play it as a red for one point , then nominate a colour and pot it for its normal value .
It is thus possible to score for 16 reds and blacks ( 16 * 8) , plus the values of all the colours ( 27 ) , resulting in a break of 155 .
Under tournament conditions , Jamie Burnett achieved 148 points .
The highest possible score , as distinct from the highest possible break , is unlimited and depends on the value of points scored from the opponent 's foul shots when added to the player 's own scored points ( which may not require the highest break ) .
However , the highest possible score from a single visit clearance is 162 ( foul on the black , followed by a free ball treated as a red , as above ) .
REFERENCES