SWITCH PITCHER
In baseball , a switch - pitcher is an ambidextrous pitcher who is able to pitch with both the right and left hand from the pitcher 's mound .
Four 19th - century pitchers are known to have thrown with both hands :
Tony Mullane in 1882 and in 1893 , Elton Chamberlain in 1888 , Larry Corcoran in 1884 , and George Wheeler .
Greg A. Harris was one of few major league pitchers in the modern era to pitch with both his left and his right arm , though he only did so in a single Major League game .
A natural right - hander , by 1986 he could throw well enough left - handed that he felt capable of pitching with either arm in a game .
Harris did not throw left - handed in a regular - season game until September 28 , 1995 , the penultimate game of his career .
Pitching for the Montreal Expos against the Cincinnati Reds in the ninth inning , Harris retired Reggie Sanders pitching right - handed , then switched to his left hand for the next two hitters , Hal Morris and Eddie Taubensee , who were both left - handed batters .
Harris walked Morris but got Taubensee to ground out .
He then went back to his right hand to retire Bret Boone to end the inning .
Pat Venditte regularly pitches with both arms .
Venditte was drafted by the New York Yankees , played for the Seattle Mariners , Toronto Blue Jays , Philadelphia Phillies , Oakland Athletics and now plays for the Los Angeles Dodgers .
While with the Staten Island Yankees , the Yankees ' Single - A affiliate , when he opposed switch hitter Ralph Henriquez , Venditte switched his modified glove to his left arm .
( Hitters traditionally derive advantages from batting from the opposite side of the plate to the pitcher 's throwing arm . )
Henriquez then switched to batting left - handed , and a series of changes continued for several minutes .
This prompted the PBUC ( Professional Baseball Umpires Corporation ) to issue a new rule about switch - pitching .
In short , switch - pitchers must indicate to the umpire , batter , and any runners the hand with which they will use to pitch .
The pitcher must continue using this hand for the duration of the at bat , with some exceptions for injury and the use of pinch hitters .
Following this choice , batters can then select with which hand they will bat .
Right - handed pitcher Yu Darvish throws with his left hand when training .
He does this to keep both arms strong and balanced .
He does not pitch left - handed during a game , however .
In 2003 , the Atlanta Braves drafted switch pitcher Brandon Berdoll of Temple ( Texas ) Junior College in the 27th round .
He never made it to the major leagues .
In the collegiate ranks , Matt Brunnig ( Harvard class of 2006–07 ) was able to pitch over 85 mph left - handed and over 90 mph right - handed , but only pitched with both arms in the same game a few times .
In college , he pitched more from the right side as a starter and pitched some relief as a lefty although he did start one game left - handed .
When playing the outfield after a start he would typically play the position with the other arm to rest the arm he just pitched with .
Switch - throwers are commonly taught to switch - throw at a young age .
For instance , Venditte 's father trained him in ambidextrous throwing from the age of three and Brunnig 's father taught him from age five .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING * The Associated Press . "
Ambidextrous pitcher stars at Creighton " .
MSNBC , May 3 , 2006 .
Accessed 12 June 2007 .
* German , Norman .
Switch - Pitchers .
St. Augustine , Florida : BluewaterPress LLC , 2010 .
In this novel Ernest Hemingway smuggles twin Cuban pitchers to the U.S. for a shot at major league fame .
A dugout full of rats reveals one to be a switch - pitcher when he throws at the rats equally well either right- or left - handed .
* Holtzman , Jerome . "
A lesson in switch - pitching " .
MajorLeagueBaseball.com via the Internet Archive , March 3 , 2000 .
Accessed 12 June 2007 .