CAPE VERDE –
EUROPEAN UNION RELATIONS
Cape Verde is an island nation , part of the Macaronesian group of islands of the Atlantic Ocean and was a former Portuguese colony during the colonial era between 1460 and 1975 .
EU - Cape Verde relations are founded on the EU / Cape Verde Special Partnership , agreed in 2007 , building on six pillars ;
* Good governance * Security / stability
* Regional integration * Technical and Regulatory Convergence
* Knowledge - based Society
*
The fight against poverty , and development .
Following that , an Action Plan for Security and Stability was launched in 2014 and a Mobility Partnership .
Cape Verde is 97 % Christian and its background is a fusion of African , Asian , European and South American backgrounds , where about 70 % is African and mixed .
Less than 30 % is African , whereas about 1 % is of unmixed European descent .
Because of this , Cape Verdeans find it hard to define themselves as either mixed or Africans .
They regard themselves as either both or as unique Cape Verdeans .
Politically , Cape Verdeans also worked as part of the Portuguese administration , with independence leader Amílcar Cabral being part of the colonial administration in Guinea - Bissau and Angola .
Cape Verde is a member of the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) , an African regional bloc with aims for internal integration similar to those of the EU , and even though it has not yet participated in all of its activities , it can not have membership in both organizations at the same time .
It is also a member of the African Union , an organization aiming for a common currency in Africa , a single defense force for the African continent and an African Union head of state .
Recently , Cape Verde has been distancing itself from its regional African partners and forging closer ties with the EU .
In a move signaling its preparation to loosen ties with the West African regional bloc , the government of Cape Verde in September 2006 declared its intentions on suspending the ECOWAS free movement of goods and trade .
Prime Minister José Maria Neves announced that his country will start imposing restrictions on the entrance of citizens from all ECOWAS member states .
The Cape Verde government soon will present ECOWAS with proposals for " special status " instead of full membership .
This is also an effort to limit the recent rise of illegal immigration of other West African nationals using Cape Verde and its proximity to the Canary Islands as a springboard towards Europe .
Cape Verde is also a member of the Generalised System of Preferences with further incentives for good governance ( GSP+ ) .
Cape Verde is also one of the beneficiaries of the EU 's regional cooperation programme with Portuguese - speaking African countries
( PALOP ) countries :
Angola , Guinea Bissau , Cape Verde and São Tomé and Príncipe .
MEMBERSHIP Section::::Membership .
In March 2005 former Portuguese president Mário Soares launched a petition urging the European Union to start membership talks with Cape Verde , saying the country could act as a bridge between Africa , Latin America and the EU .
Cape Verde 's per capita GDP is lower than any of the current member states , accession countries , or candidate countries .
However , it is higher than that of some of the EU - designated " potential candidate countries " of the Western Balkans like Bosnia and Herzegovina .
In terms of respect of democracy the Freedom house report ranks Cape Verde top in Africa and again Cape Verde has a better ranking than that of some designated " potential candidate or member countries " of the EU : Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , and Albania .
Most of the imports and exports of Cape Verde are for and from the European Union , and it has a service - based economy .
Its currency , the escudo , is pegged to the euro .
Although the Cape Verde archipelago is geographically in Africa , there have been similar situations before .
Cyprus is an island nation that , despite being geographically in Asia , has already joined both the Council of Europe and the EU .
Furthermore , the Cape Verde islands are part of the same island group as the Canary Islands ( part of Spain ) , Madeira Islands ( part of Portugal ) and Azores Islands ( part of Portugal ) , known as Macaronesia .
There is currently no political recognition by the EU of Cape Verde as a European state , but unlike in the case of Morocco , there is no formal rejection either .
Complementing Cape Verde 's efforts to join the EU , the Macaronesian group of islands ( the Azores , Madeira , and the Canary Islands ) are throwing their support for their regional brethren .
The Atlantic group of islands are pushing for an entrance of Cape Verde into the EU under a special status .
SEE ALSO * Macaronesia * Special member state territories and the European Union
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * EU Relations with Cape Verde
* EU strategy for Cape Verde