HANDGUN
A handgun is a short - barreled firearm designed to be fired with only one hand .
The two most common handgun sub - types in use today are revolvers and semi - automatic pistols .
In the days before mass production , handguns were often considered a badge of office , much the same as a sword .
As they had limited utility and were more expensive than the long - guns of the era , handguns were carried only by the very few who could afford to purchase them .
However , in 1836 , Samuel Colt patented the Colt Paterson , the first practical mass - produced revolver .
It was capable of firing 5 shots in rapid succession and very quickly became a popular defensive weapon , giving rise to the saying " God created men , but Colt made them equal . "
Today , in most of the world , handguns are generally considered self - defense weapons used primarily by police and military officers .
However , in the United States , handguns are also widely available to civilians and commonly carried for self - defense .
HISTORY HAND CANNONS Section::::History .
Section::::Hand cannons .
Firearms first appeared in China where gunpowder was first developed .
The oldest known bronze barrel handgun is the Heilongjiang hand cannon , dated to 1288 .
It is 34 centimeters ( 13.4 inches )
long without a handle and weighs 3.55 kg ( 7.83 pounds ) .
The diameter of the interior at the end of the barrel is 2.6 cm ( 1.0 inches ) .
The barrel is the lengthiest part of the hand cannon and is 6.9 inches long .
The hand cannon has a bulbous base at the breech called the yaoshi ( ) or gunpowder chamber , where the explosion that propels the projectile occurs .
The diameter of the Heilongjiang hand - gun 's powder chamber is 6.6 cm ( 2.6 inches ) .
The walls of the powder chamber are noticeably thicker to better withstand the explosive pressure of the gunpowder .
The powder chamber also has a touch hole , a small hole for the fuse that ignites the gunpowder .
Behind the gunpowder chamber is a socket shaped like a trumpet where the handle of the hand cannon is inserted .
The bulbous shape of the base gave the earliest Chinese and Western cannons a vase - like or pear - like appearance , which gradually disappeared when advancements in metallurgical technology made the bulbous base obsolete .
MATCHLOCKS Section::::Matchlocks .
The matchlock appeared in Europe in the mid-15th century .
The matchlock was the first mechanism invented to facilitate the firing of a hand - held firearm .
The classic European matchlock gun held a burning slow match in a clamp at the end of a small curved lever known as the serpentine .
Upon the pulling of a lever ( or in later models a trigger ) protruding from the bottom of the gun and connected to the serpentine , the clamp dropped down , lowering the smoldering match into the flash pan and igniting the priming powder .
The flash from the primer traveled through the touch hole igniting the main charge of propellant in the gun barrel .
On release of the lever or trigger , the spring - loaded serpentine would move in reverse to clear the pan .
For obvious safety reasons the match would be removed before reloading of the gun .
Both ends of the match were usually kept alight in case one end should be accidentally extinguished .
WHEELLOCKS
Section::::Wheellocks .
The wheellock was the next major development in firearms technology after the matchlock and the first self - igniting firearm .
Its name is from its rotating steel wheel to provide ignition .
Developed in Europe around 1500 , it was used alongside the matchlock .
The wheellock works by spinning a spring - loaded steel wheel against a piece of pyrite to generate intense sparks , which ignite gunpowder in a pan , which flashes through a small touchhole to ignite the main charge in the firearm 's barrel .
The pyrite is clamped in vise jaws on a spring - loaded arm ( or ' dog ' ) , which rests on the pan cover .
When the trigger is pulled , the pan cover is opened , and the wheel is rotated , with the pyrite pressed into contact .
A close modern analogy of the wheellock mechanism is the operation of a cigarette lighter , where a toothed steel wheel is spun in contact with a piece of sparking material to ignite the liquid or gaseous fuel .
A wheellock firearm had the advantage that it can be instantly readied and fired even with one hand , in contrast to the then - common matchlock firearms , which must have a burning cord of slow match ready if the gun might be needed and demanded the operator 's full attention and two hands to operate .
On the other hand , wheellock mechanisms were complex to make , making them relatively costly .
FLINTLOCKS Section::::Flintlocks .
A flintlock is a general term for any firearm that uses a flint striking ignition mechanism .
The term may also apply to a particular form of the mechanism itself , that was introduced in the early 17th century , and rapidly replaced earlier firearm - ignition technologies , such as the matchlock and the wheellock .
Flintlock pistols were used as self - defense weapons and as a military arm .
Their effective range was short , and they were frequently used as an adjunct to a sword or cutlass .
Pistols were usually smoothbore although some rifled pistols were produced .
Flintlock pistols came in a variety of sizes and styles which often overlap and are not well defined , many of the names we use having been applied by collectors and dealers long after the pistols were obsolete .
The smallest were less than long and the largest were over .
From around the beginning of the 1700s the larger pistols got shorter , so that by the late 1700s the largest would be more like long .
The smallest would fit into a typical pocket or a hand warming muff and could easily be carried by women .
The largest sizes would be carried in holsters across a horse 's back just ahead of the saddle .
In - between sizes included the coat pocket pistol , or coat pistol , which would fit into a large pocket , the coach pistol , meant to be carried on or under the seat of a coach in a bag or box , and belt pistols , sometimes equipped with a hook designed to slip over a belt or waistband .
Larger pistols were called horse pistols .
Arguably the most elegant of the pistol designs was the Queen Anne pistol , which was made in all sizes .
Probably the high point of the mechanical development of the flintlock pistol was the British duelling pistol ; it was highly reliable , water resistant and accurate .
External decoration was minimal but craftsmanship was evident , and the internal works were often finished to a higher degree of craftsmanship than the exterior .
Dueling pistols were the size of the horse pistols of the late 1700s , around long and were usually sold in pairs along with accessories in a wooden case with compartments for each piece .
CAPLOCKS Section::::Caplocks .
The caplock mechanism or percussion lock was developed in the early 19th century and used a percussion cap struck by the hammer to set off the main charge , rather than using a piece of flint to strike a steel frizzen .
They succeed the flintlock mechanism in firearm technology .
The rudimentary percussion system was developed by Rev. Alexander John Forsyth as a solution to the problem that birds would startle when smoke puffed from the powder pan of his flintlock shotgun , giving them sufficient warning to escape the shot .
His invention of a fulminate - primed firing mechanism deprived the birds of their early warning system , both by avoiding the initial puff of smoke from the flintlock powder pan , as well as shortening the interval between the trigger pull and the shot leaving the muzzle .
Forsyth patented his ignition system in 1807 .
However , it was not until after Forsyth 's patents expired that the conventional percussion cap system was developed .
The caplock offered many improvements over the flintlock .
The caplock was easier to load , more resistant to weather , and was much more reliable than the flintlock .
Many older flintlock weapons were later converted into caplocks so that they could take advantage of this increased reliability .
The caplock mechanism consists of a hammer , similar to the hammer used in a flintlock , and a nipple ( sometimes referred to as a " cone " ) , which holds a small percussion cap .
The nipple contains a tube which goes into the barrel .
The percussion cap contains a chemical compound called mercuric fulminate or fulminate of mercury , whose chemical formula is Hg(ONC ) .
It is made from mercury , nitric acid and alcohol .
When the trigger releases the hammer , it strikes the cap , causing the mercuric fulminate to explode .
The flames from this explosion travel down the tube in the nipple and enter the barrel , where they ignite the main powder charge .
REVOLVERS PERCUSSION ERA Section::::Revolvers .
Section::::Percussion era .
In 1836 , Samuel Colt patented the Colt Paterson , the first practical mass - produced revolver .
It uses a revolving cylinder with multiple chambers aligned with a single , stationary barrel .
Initially , this 5-shot revolver was produced in .28 caliber , with a .36 caliber model following a year later .
As originally designed and produced , no loading lever was included with the revolver ; a user had to disassemble the revolver partially to re - load it .
Starting in 1839 , however , a reloading lever and a capping window were incorporated into the design , allowing reloading without requiring partial disassembly of the revolver .
This loading lever and capping window design change was also incorporated after the fact into most Colt Paterson revolvers that had been produced from 1836 until 1839 .
Unlike later revolvers , a folding trigger was incorporated into the Colt Paterson .
The trigger only became visible upon cocking the hammer .
Colt would go on to make a series of improved revolvers .
The Colt Walker , was a single - action revolver with a revolving cylinder holding six charges of black powder behind six bullets ( typically .44 caliber lead balls ) .
It was designed in 1846 as a collaboration between Captain Samuel Hamilton Walker and American firearms inventor Samuel Colt .
The 1847 Colt Walker was the largest and most powerful black powder repeating handgun ever made .
The Colt 1851 Navy Revolver is a cap and ball revolver that was designed by Samuel Colt between 1847 and 1850 .
The six - round .36 caliber Navy revolver was much lighter than the contemporary Colt Dragoon Revolvers developed from the .44 Walker Colt revolvers of 1847 , which , given their size and weight , were generally carried in saddle holsters .
It is an enlarged version of the .31 caliber Colt Pocket Percussion Revolvers , that evolved from the earlier Baby Dragoon , and , like them , is a mechanically improved and simplified descendant of the 1836 Paterson revolver .
As the factory designation implied , the Navy revolver was suitably sized for carrying in a belt holster .
It became very popular in North America at the time of Western expansion .
Colt 's aggressive promotions distributed the Navy and his other revolvers across Europe , Asia , and Africa .
The .36 caliber ( .375–.380 inch ) round lead ball weighs 80 grains and , at a velocity of 1,000 feet per second , is comparable to the modern .380 pistol cartridge in power .
Loads consist of loose powder and ball or bullet , metallic foil cartridges ( early ) , and combustible paper cartridges ( Civil War era ) , all combinations being ignited by a fulminate percussion cap applied to the nipples at the rear of the chamber .
The Colt Army Model 1860 is a 6-shot muzzle - loaded cap & ball .44-caliber
single - action revolver used during the American Civil War made by Colt 's Manufacturing Company .
It was used as a side arm by cavalry , infantry , artillery troops , and naval forces .
More than 200,000 were manufactured from 1860 through 1873 .
Colt 's biggest customer was the US Government with no less than 129,730 units being purchased and issued to the troops .
The weapon was a single - action , six - shot weapon accurate up to 75 to 100 yards , where the fixed sights were typically set when manufactured .
The rear sight was a notch in the hammer , only usable when the revolver was fully cocked .
The Colt .44-caliber
" Army " Model was the most widely used revolver of the Civil War .
It had a six - shot , rotating cylinder , and fired a round spherical lead ball , or a conical - tipped bullet , typically propelled by a 30-grain charge of black powder , which was ignited by a small copper percussion cap that contained a volatile charge of fulminate of mercury ( a substance that explodes upon being subjected to a sharp impact ) .
The percussion cap , when struck by the hammer , ignited the powder charge .
When fired , balls had a muzzle velocity of about 900 feet per second ( 274 meters / second ) , although this depended on how much powder it was loaded with .
METALLIC CARTRIDGE ERA Section::::Metallic cartridge era .
The Smith & Wesson Model 1 was the first firearm manufactured by Smith & Wesson , with production spanning the years 1857 through 1882 .
It was the first commercially successful revolver to use metallic rimfire cartridges instead of loose powder , musket ball , and percussion caps .
It is a single - action , tip - up revolver holding seven .22
Short black powder cartridges .
The Smith & Wesson Model No . 2 Army is a 6-shot ,
.32
caliber revolver , intended to combine the small size and convenience of the Smith & Wesson Model 1 .22 rimfire with a larger more effective cartridge .
It was manufactured 1861 – 1874 , with a total production of 77,020 .
The Smith & Wesson Model 3 was a 6-shot , single - action , cartridge - firing , top - break revolver produced by Smith & Wesson from circa 1870 to 1915 , and was recently again offered as a reproduction by Smith & Wesson and Uberti .
The S&W Model 3 was originally chambered for the .44 S&W American and .44 Russian cartridges , and typically did not have the cartridge information stamped on the gun ( as is standard practice for most commercial firearms ) .
Model 3 revolvers were later produced in an assortment of calibers , including .44 Henry Rimfire , .44 - 40 , .32–44 , .38–44 , and .45 Schofield .
The design would influence the smaller S&W .38
Single Action that is retroactively referred to as the Model 2 .
All of these revolvers would automatically eject the spent shell cases when opened .
The Colt Single Action Army , also known as the Single Action Army , SAA , Model P , Peacemaker , M1873 , and Colt .45 is a single - action revolver with a revolving cylinder holding six metallic cartridges .
It was designed for the U.S. government service revolver trials of 1872 by Colt 's Patent Firearms Manufacturing Company — today 's Colt 's Manufacturing Company — and was adopted as the standard military service revolver until 1892 .
The Colt SAA has been offered in over 30 different calibers and various barrel lengths .
Its overall appearance has remained consistent since 1873 .
Colt has discontinued its production twice , but brought it back due to popular demand .
The revolver was popular with ranchers , lawmen , and outlaws alike , but as of the early 21st century , models are mostly bought by collectors and Cowboy Action Shooters .
Its design has influenced the production of numerous other models from other companies .
The Colt SAA " Peacemaker " revolver is a famous piece of Americana known as " The Gun That Won the West " .
In 1889 , Colt introduced the Model 1889 , the first truly modern double action revolver , which differed from earlier double action revolvers by having a " swing - out " cylinder , as opposed to a " top - break " or " side - loading " cylinder .
Swing out cylinders quickly caught on , because they combined the best features of earlier designs .
Top - break actions gave the ability to eject all empty shells simultaneously and exposed all chambers for easy reloading , but having the frame hinged into two halves weakened the gun and negatively affected accuracy , due to lack of rigidity .
" Side - loaders " , like the earlier Colt Model 1871 and 1873 , gave a rigid frame , but required the user to eject and load one cylinder at a time , as they rotated the cylinder to line each chamber up with the side - mounted loading gate .
Smith & Wesson followed 7 years later with the Hand Ejector , Model 1896 in .32
S&W Long caliber , followed by the very similar , yet improved , Model 1899 ( later known as the Model 10 ) , which introduced the new .38 Special cartridge .
The Model 10 went on to become the best selling handgun of the 20th century , at 6,000,000 units , and the .38 Special is still the most popular chambering for revolvers in the world .
These new guns were an improvement over the Colt 1889 design since they incorporated a combined center - pin and ejector rod to lock the cylinder in position .
The 1889 did not use a center pin and the cylinder was prone to move out of alignment .
The Smith & Wesson Model 36 is a 5 shot , revolver chambered for .38 Special .
It is one of several models of " J - frame " Smith & Wesson revolvers .
It was introduced in 1950 , and is still in production .
The Model 36 was designed in the era just after World War II , when Smith & Wesson stopped producing war materials and resumed normal production .
For the Model 36 , they sought to design a revolver that could fire the more powerful .38
Special round in a small , concealable package .
Since the older I - frame was not able to handle this load , a new frame was designed , which became the Smith & Wesson J - frame .
MAGNUM ERA Section::::Magnum era .
The post - war periods in the 20th century were times of great innovation .
In 1935 Smith and Wesson released the Smith & Wesson Model 27 which was the first revolver chambered for .357 Magnum .
It was designed as a more powerful handgun for law enforcement officers .
The Model 27 started the " Magnum Era " of handguns .
The high point was in 1955 when the company created the Smith & Wesson Model 29 in .44 Magnum .
Two decades later the Dirty Harry movies made this gun a cultural icon .
The S&W Model 19 was also introduced in 1955 , it is a .357 Magnum revolver produced by Smith & Wesson on its K - frame design .
The Model 19 is smaller and lighter than the original the S&W Model 27 .357 Magnums .
It was made at the behest of retired Assistant Chief Patrol Inspector of the U.S. Border Patrol , famous gunfighter , and noted firearms and shooting skills writer Bill Jordan .
DERRINGERS Section::::Derringers .
The original Philadelphia Deringer was a single - shot muzzleloading percussion cap pistol introduced in 1852 , by Henry Deringer .
In total , approximately 15,000 Deringer pistols were manufactured .
All were single barrel pistols with back action percussion locks , typically .41 caliber with rifled bores , and walnut stocks .
Barrel length varied from 1.5 " to 6 " , and the hardware was commonly a copper - nickel alloy known as " German silver " .
The term derringer ( ) has become a genericized misspelling of the last name of Henry Deringer .
Many copies of the original Philadelphia Deringer pistol were made by other gun makers worldwide , and the name was often misspelled ; this misspelling soon became an alternative generic term for any pocket pistol , along with the generic phrase palm pistol , which Deringer 's competitors invented and used in their advertising .
With the advent of metallic cartridges , pistols produced in the modern form still commonly called " derringers " .
Daniel Moore patented a single shot metallic cartridge .38
Rimfire derringer in 1861 .
These pistols have barrels that pivoted sideways on the frame to allow access to the breech for reloading .
Moore would manufacture them until 1865 , when he sold out to National Arms Company which produced single shot .41
Rimfire derringers until 1870 , when it was acquired by Colt 's Patent Firearms Manufacturing Company .
Colt continued to produce the .41 Rimfire derringer after the acquisition , as an effort to help break into the metallic - cartridge gun market , but also introduced its own three single shot Colt Derringer Models , all of them also chambered in the .41 Rimfire cartridge .
The last model to be in production , the third Colt Derringer , was not dropped until 1912 .
The third Colt Derringer Model was re - released in the 1950s for western movies , under the name of Fourth Model Colt Deringer .
The Remington Model 95 derringer was one of the first metallic cartridge handguns .
Small and easy to use , Remington manufactured more than 150,000 of these over - under double - barreled derringers from 1866 until the end of their production in 1935 .
The Remington derringer doubled the capacity of the derringers designed by Daniel Moore , while maintaining a compact size .
The Remington Model 95 has achieved such widespread popularity , that it has completely overshadowed its predecessors , becoming synonymous with the word " derringer " .
The Model 95 was made only in .41 Rimfire .
Its barrels pivoted upwards to reload and a cam on the hammer alternated between top and bottom barrels .
The .41 Rimfire bullet moved very slowly , at about , around half the speed of a modern .45 ACP .
It could be seen in flight , but at very close range , such as at a casino or saloon card table , it could easily kill .
There were four models with several variations .
The Remington derringer design is still being made ; in a variety of calibers from .22 long rifle to .45 Long Colt and .410 gauge , by several manufacturers .
The current production of derringers are used by Cowboy Action Shooters as well as a concealed - carry weapon .
While the classic Remington design is a single - action derringer with a hammer and tip - up action , the High Standard D-100 introduced in 1962 , is a hammer - less , double - action derringer with a half - trigger - guard and a standard break action design .
These double - barrel derringers were chambered for .22 Long Rifle and .22 Magnum and were available in blued , nickel , silver , and gold plated finishes .
Although , they were discontinued in 1984 , American Derringer would obtain the High Standard design in 1990 and produce a larger .38 Special version .
These derringers called the DS22 and DA38 are still made and are popular concealed carry handguns .
The COP .357 is a modern 4-shot Derringer - type pistol chambered for .357 Magnum .
Introduced in 1983 , it is a double - action weapon about twice as wide , and substantially heavier than the typical .25 automatic pistol .
Still , it is relatively compact size and a powerful cartridge makes it an effective defensive weapon or a police backup gun .
The COP .357 is quite robust in design and construction .
It is made of solid stainless steel components .
Cartridges are loaded into the four separate chambers by sliding a latch that " pops - up " the barrel for loading purposes , similar to top - break shotguns .
Each of the four chambers has its own dedicated firing pin .
It uses an internal hammer , which is activated by depressing the trigger to hit a ratcheting / rotating striker that in turn strikes one firing pin at a time .
Older " pepperboxes " also used multiple barrels , but the barrels were the part that rotated .
The COP .357 operates similarly to the Sharps derringer of the 1850s , in that it uses the ratcheting / rotating striker , which is completely internal , to fire each chamber in sequence .
SEMI - AUTOMATIC PISTOLS Section::::Semi - automatic pistols .
In 1896 , Paul Mauser introduced the Mauser C96 " Broomhandle " , the first mass - produced and commercially successful semi - automatic pistol , which uses the recoil energy of one shot to reload the next .
The distinctive characteristics of the C96 are the integral 10-round , box magazine in front of the trigger , the long barrel , the wooden shoulder stock which gives it the stability of a short - barreled rifle and doubles as a holster or carrying case , and a unique grip shaped like the handle of a broom .
The grip earned the gun the nickname " broomhandle " in the English - speaking world , because of its round wooden handle .
The Pistole Parabellum , commonly known in the United States as just the Luger .
It is a toggle - locked recoil - operated semi - automatic pistol produced in several models and by several nations from 1898 to 1948 .
It was one of the first semi - auto pistols to use an 8-round detachable magazine housed in the pistol - grip .
The design was first patented by Georg Luger as an improvement upon the Borchardt Automatic Pistol , and was produced as the Parabellum Automatic Pistol , Borchardt - Luger System by the German arms manufacturer Deutsche Waffen-
und Munitionsfabriken ( DWM ) .
The first production model was known as the Modell 1900 Parabellum .
Later versions included the Pistol Parabellum Model 1908 or P08 which was produced by DWM and other manufacturers .
The first Parabellum pistol was adopted by the Swiss army in May 1900 .
In German Army service , the Parabellum was later adopted in modified form as the Pistol Model 1908 ( P08 ) in caliber 9×19
mm Parabellum .
The Colt Model 1911 is an 8-round , single - action , semi - automatic , magazine - fed , recoil - operated pistol chambered for the .45 ACP cartridge .
It served as the standard - issue sidearm for the United States Armed Forces from 1911 to 1986.Designed by John Browning , the M1911 is the best - known of his designs to use the short recoil principle in its basic design .
The pistol was widely copied , and this operating system rose to become the preeminent type of the 20th century and of nearly all modern centerfire pistols .
It is popular with civilian shooters in competitive events such as USPSA , IDPA , International Practical Shooting Confederation , and Bullseye shooting .
Compact variants are popular civilian concealed carry weapons in the U.S. because of the design 's relatively slim width and stopping power of the .45 ACP cartridge .
The Walther PP ( Polizeipistole , or police pistol ) series pistols were introduced in 1929 and are among the world 's first successful double action , blowback - operated semi - automatic pistols , developed by the German arms manufacturer Carl Walther GmbH Sportwaffen .
They feature exposed hammers , a traditional double - action trigger mechanism , a single - column 8-round magazine ( for .32 ACP version ) , and a fixed barrel that also acts as the guide rod for the recoil spring .
The Walther PP and smaller PPK models were both popular with European police and civilians for being reliable and concealable .
They would remain the standard issue police pistol for much of Europe well into the 1970s and 80s .
During World War II , they were issued to the German military , including the Luftwaffe .
The Browning Hi Power is a 14-round , single - action , semi - automatic handgun available in 9 mm .
Introduced in 1935 , it is based on a design by American firearms inventor John Browning , and completed by Dieudonné Saive at Fabrique Nationale ( FN ) of Herstal , Belgium .
Browning died in 1926 , several years before the design was finalized .
The Hi - Power is one of the most widely used military pistols in history , having been used by the armed forces of over 50 countries .
The Hi Power name alludes to the 13-round magazine capacity , almost twice that of contemporary designs such as the Luger or Colt M1911 .
The Browning was one of the first pistols to use high capacity , detachable magazines .
The Heckler & Koch VP70 was introduced in 1970 , it is a 19-round , 9×19 mm , blowback - operated , double - action - only , select - fire , polymer frame pistol manufactured by German arms firm Heckler & Koch GmbH.
The VP70 was a revolutionary pistol , introducing the polymer frame , predating the Glock by 12 years .
It also uses a spring - loaded striker , instead of a conventional firing pin and has a relatively heavy double - action - only the trigger pull .
It also uses a high - capacity 18-round magazine , twice as many rounds as the single - column magazine designs of the era , and 5 more rounds than the Browning Hi - Power .
In lieu of a blade front sight , the VP70 uses a polished ramp with a central notch in the middle to provide the illusion of a dark front post .
Contrary to a common misconception , the VP70 does indeed have a manual safety .
It is the circular button located immediately behind the trigger and it 's a common crossblock safety .
One unique feature of this weapon involved the combination stock / holster for the military version of the VP70 .
The stock incorporates a selector switch that , when mounted , allows for a three - round - burst mode of fire .
Cyclic rate of fire for the burst is 2200 rounds per minute .
When not mounted , the stock acts as a holster .
VP stands for Volkspistole ( literally " People 's Pistol " ) , and the designation 70 was for the first year of production : 1970 .
The Smith & Wesson Model 59 was a 15-round , semi - automatic pistol introduced in 1971 .
It was the first standard double - action pistol to use a high - capacity 14-round capacity staggered - magazine .
It went out of production a decade later in 1980 when the improved second generation series was introduced ( the Model 459 ) .
The Model 59 was manufactured in 9×19 mm Parabellum caliber with a wider anodized aluminum frame ( to accommodate a double - stack magazine ) , a straight backstrap , a magazine disconnect ( the pistol will not fire unless a magazine is in place ) , and a blued carbon steel slide that carries the manual safety .
The grip is of three pieces made of two nylon plastic panels joined by a metal backstrap .
It uses a magazine release located to the rear of the trigger guard , similar to the Colt M1911 .
The Beretta 92 is a 16-round , 9 mm Parabellum , double - action , semi - automatic pistol introduced in 1975 .
It has an open slide design , an alloy frame and locking block barrel , originally used on Walther P38 , and previously used on the M1951 .
The grip angle and the front sight integrated with the slide were also common to earlier Beretta pistols .
What were perhaps the Model 92 's two most important advanced design features had first appeared on its immediate predecessor , the 1974 .380 caliber Model 84 .
These improvements both involved the magazine , which featured direct feed ; that is , there was no feed ramp between the magazine and the chamber ( a Beretta innovation in pistols ) .
In addition , to a 15-round " double - stacked " magazine design , it was the first Beretta design to use a magazine release located to the rear of the trigger guard , similar to the Colt M1911 .
The United States ' military replaced the M1911A1 .45 ACP pistol in 1985 with the Beretta 92FS , designated as the M9 .
The Glock 17 , is an 18-round , 9 mm Parabellum , polymer - framed , safe - action , short recoil - operated , locked - breech semi - automatic pistols designed and produced by Glock Ges.m.b .
H. , located in Deutsch - Wagram , Austria .
It entered Austrian military and police service by 1982 after it was the top performer on an exhaustive series of reliability and safety tests .
Despite initial resistance from the market to accept a perceived " plastic gun " due to unfounded durability and reliability concerns and fears that its use of a polymer frame might circumvent metal detectors in airports , Glock pistols have become the company 's most profitable line of products , commanding 65 % of the market share of handguns for United States law enforcement agencies , as well as supplying numerous national armed forces , security agencies , and police forces in at least 48 countries .
Glocks are also popular firearms among civilians for recreational and competition shooting , home and self - defense , and concealed carry or open carry .
The FN Five - seveN , is a 21-round , semi - automatic pistol designed and manufactured by Fabrique Nationale d'Armes de Guerre - Herstal ( FN Herstal ) in Belgium .
The Five - seveN pistol was introduced in 1998 .
It was developed in conjunction with the FN P90 personal defense weapon and the FN 5.7×28 mm cartridge .
Developed as a companion pistol to the P90 , the Five - seveN shares many of its design features
: it is a lightweight polymer - based weapon with a large magazine capacity , ambidextrous controls , low recoil , and the ability to penetrate body armor when using certain types of ammunition .
The Five - seveN is currently in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations .
In the United States , the Five - seveN is in use with numerous law enforcement agencies , including the U.S. Secret Service .
In the years since the pistol 's introduction to the civilian market in the United States , it has also become increasingly popular with civilian shooters .
MACHINE PISTOLS Section::::Machine pistols .
A machine pistol is generally defined as a handgun capable of fully automatic or selective fire .
During World War I , the Austrians introduced the world 's first machine pistol the Steyr Repetierpistole M1912 / P16 .
The Germans would quickly follow suit with machine pistols versions of the Luger P08 " Artillery Pistol " and later models of the Mauser C96 .
Their light weight , small size , and extremely high rates of fire , make machine pistol difficult to control in full - auto .
Most machine pistols can attach a shoulder stock to improve control , like the Heckler & Koch VP70 .
Others , such as the Beretta 93R also have a forward hand - grip .
3D PRINTED
HANDGUNS Section::::3D printed handguns .
The Solid Concepts 1911DMLS is a 3D printed version of the M1911 pistol .
It was made public around November 2013 and was printed via the direct metal laser sintering method .
It was created by Solid Concepts .
The Solid concepts browning M1911 replica fired more than 600 bullets without any damage to the gun .
The metal printer used to create the weapon cost between $ 500,000 to $ 1,000,000 at the time the gun was created as of November 2013 .
The gun is made up of 34 3D - printed components .
OVERVIEW OF GUN LAWS BY NATION
Section::::Overview of gun laws by nation .
Many handguns are easily concealed — a trait that is useful both to civilians wishing to bear arms for self - defense and to criminals wishing to carry a handgun for illegal purposes .
For these reasons , handguns are a particular focus of debates on gun politics , and in most jurisdictions both keeping and bearing arms are heavily regulated .
SEE ALSO
* Action ( firearms )
* Antique firearms
*
Gunspinning
* Gun ownership
* Handgun effectiveness
* Handgun hunting
* List of Bianchi Cup champions * List of pistols
* Machine pistol
* Pistol * Pistol - whipping * Pocket pistol * Small arms
* Target shooting REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Interactive Illustrated Pistol
* Handgun Database
* Ballistics By The Inch – Relationship between barrel length and bullet velocity .