ROCKY ( FILM SERIES )
Rocky is a series of American boxing sports - drama films .
The first film , Rocky ( 1976 ) , and its five sequels centered on the boxing career of the eponymous fictional character , Rocky Balboa ( Sylvester Stallone ) .
For the seventh , a spin - off Creed ( 2015 ) , and eighth , Creed II , the series shifted its focus towards Adonis Creed ( Michael B. Jordan ) , the son of Rocky 's deceased rival and friend Apollo Creed ( Carl Weathers ) , trained by a now retired Rocky .
All films in the series were written or co - written by Stallone except for Creed , which was written by Ryan Coogler and Aaron Covington .
The original film and the fifth installment were directed by John G. Avildsen , Creed was directed by Coogler , Creed II was directed by Steven Caple Jr. , and the rest were directed by Stallone .
The film series has grossed more than $ 1.4 billion at the worldwide box office .
The original film , the third and the seventh have received Academy Award nominations .
The first film won Best Picture , Best Director , and Best Film Editing .
Stallone has received Academy Award nominations for his portrayal of Rocky , in the first and seventh film .
The soundtrack of the series has also received nominations for the first and third films .
FILMS ROCKY ( 1976 )
Section::::Films .
Section::::Rocky ( 1976 ) .
Rocky Balboa
( Sylvester Stallone ) is a small - time boxer who seems to be going nowhere in life , as he works day - in and day - out as a collector for a loan shark and fights in sleazy clubs for low pay rewards , for which Rocky is mocked and told that he 's nothing but a ' bum , ' especially by gym trainer Mickey Goldmill ( Burgess Meredith ) .
At the same time , Rocky successfully courts Adrian Pennino ( Talia Shire ) , a painfully shy woman with an alcoholic brother , Paulie ( Burt Young ) .
But when the world heavyweight champion boxer Apollo Creed ( Carl Weathers ) chooses Rocky at random as his opponent in a title fight , Rocky realizes he now has the chance to prove that he 's not worthless .
With Adrian 's support and Mickey becoming his trainer and manager , Rocky fights for his self - respect .
ROCKY II ( 1979 )
Section::::Rocky II ( 1979 ) .
Soon after proving himself , even with a split decision loss to Apollo Creed , Rocky expects the good life to follow .
He marries Adrian and begins spending the money he earned from the match .
But after he fails at both endorsements and a series of low wage jobs , Rocky realizes the only way he can survive is to begin boxing again .
Creed on the other hand , faces criticism from fans to overcome the fight .
As a result , he publicly taunts Rocky into a rematch , for which Rocky trains once again with Mickey .
In the fifteenth round , Rocky knocks Creed to the ground , falling to the canvas himself in the process .
Both fighters struggle to get to their feet , but only Rocky is successful .
For the first time , Rocky is declared the World Heavyweight Champion ; even Apollo shows respect for him as he regains his support from fans for doing a fair fight .
ROCKY III ( 1982 )
Section::::Rocky III ( 1982 ) .
After winning the heavyweight title , Rocky takes advantage of his newfound wealth and fame , appearing in multiple advertisements and television programs , and relishing his new celebrity status .
After defending the title multiple times , he is prepared to retire , but the number one contender , James " Clubber " Lang ( played by Mr. T ) , challenges Rocky publicly .
Rocky , after dealing with Mickey 's heart attack before the fight , is overpowered by the stronger , hungrier Lang and is knocked out in the second round .
Mickey passes away after the fight , and former rival Apollo Creed steps in , training Rocky to fight in Creed 's old style ( in his old Los Angeles gym ) and to use more guile and skill .
In the rematch , Rocky outboxes Lang , tiring the stronger fighter out and eventually knocking him out in the third round .
After the fight , Apollo calls in his " favor " for training Rocky , which is a one - on - one match between the two of them with no cameras , no media , just man vs. man in the gym .
The film ends as they each throw their first punch .
ROCKY IV ( 1985 )
Section::::Rocky IV ( 1985 ) .
After winning back his title from Clubber Lang , Rocky continues to live the good life , now that he and Apollo are good friends .
However , a new fighter from the USSR , Ivan Drago ( played by Dolph Lundgren ) , has emerged and challenges Rocky to an exhibition match .
Apollo fights instead , and the beating he takes from Drago ends with Apollo dying in Rocky 's arms in the ring as Drago coldly watches .
To avenge Apollo , Rocky challenges Drago to a match , which is to be held on Christmas Day in Moscow .
In a montage replete with symbolism , Rocky is shown training in a remote cabin in Siberia with the help of Creed 's old trainer Duke , his brother - in - law Paulie , and eventually Adrian , doing exercises such as chopping wood , lifting rocks , running in the snow and climbing a mountain , while Drago is seen in an advanced training facility running on treadmills , utilizing weightlifting machines and injecting steroids to boost his strength .
During the fight , Rocky takes the worst beating of his life but refuses to fall .
He eventually wins over the foreign crowd with his display of courage and determination , and he knocks Drago out with seconds left in the final round .
ROCKY V ( 1990 )
Section::::Rocky V ( 1990 ) .
In the aftermath of his fight with Ivan Drago , Rocky Balboa is diagnosed with brain damage and is forced to retire from the ring .
Additionally , the Balboa fortune is all gone due to an unscrupulous accountant .
Rocky 's family returns to their old neighborhood and Adrian returns to the pet store she used to work at , while ( in a subplot )
Rocky ( Robert ) Jr. ( played by Sylvester Stallone 's real son Sage ) deals with bullying at his school and Rocky re - opens Mickey 's old gym .
While training other boxers , Rocky meets a young , hungry boxer named Tommy Gunn ( played by real - life fighter Tommy Morrison ) and begins training him which results in a strained relationship with Robert .
Unfortunately , as Tommy begins his rise to fame under Rocky 's wing , a sleazy fight promoter named George Washington Duke convinces Tommy that Rocky is holding him back and Tommy leaves Rocky for Duke .
After Tommy wins the heavyweight title , he makes a short speech thanking Duke , and is met with jeers and the familiar chant of " Rocky " from the crowd .
Seething from this insult , as well as being called by publicists as " Rocky 's robot " and being told that he 's " no Rocky Balboa , " Tommy decides to seek out his former mentor for a final showdown .
Rocky starts to walk away from the public challenge , but Paulie decides to let Tommy have a piece of his mind about how Tommy has treated Rocky and proceeds to punch Paulie .
Rocky then challenges Tommy outside and the two proceed in a violent bare - knuckle street brawl , which Rocky wins .
Rocky then proceeds to punch Duke for harassing him .
In the end , Rocky and Robert reconcile as they run up the steps as father and son .
ROCKY BALBOA ( 2006 )
Section::::Rocky Balboa ( 2006 ) .
In Rocky Balboa , sixteen years have passed since his final fight with his former protégé , Tommy " The Machine " Gunn .
Long retired , Rocky Balboa still staggers around an ever - changing world ; his son is grown and distant , Paulie is working back at the meat plant , and Rocky 's wife Adrian has died .
Rocky has opened a restaurant named after his wife , which he stocks with mementos of his prime as he tells his old fight stories to customers .
But when a computer simulated fight on ESPN depicting a bout between a young Rocky Balboa and the current champion , Mason Dixon ( Antonio Tarver ) reignites interest in the faded boxer , Rocky discovers he has not lost his fighting spirit and considers an opportunity to prove himself in the ring again .
Rocky almost wins the fight but loses in a split decision just like the first film ( in an alternate ending Rocky won ) .
Rocky is last seen visiting his wife 's grave saying , " Yo Adrian , we did it . "
CREED ( 2015 )
Section::::Creed ( 2015 ) .
Adonis " Donnie " Johnson ( Michael B. Jordan ) , the illegitimate son of the late former heavyweight champion Apollo Creed , tracks down Rocky Balboa at Adrian 's and asks Rocky to become his trainer .
Rocky is reluctant , but eventually agrees .
When word gets out that Donnie is Creed 's illegitimate son , the handlers of world light heavyweight champion " Pretty " Ricky Conlan , who is forced into retirement by an impending prison term , offer to make Donnie the latter 's final challenger — provided that he change his name to Adonis Creed .
Donnie balks at first , wanting to forge his own legacy .
However , he eventually agrees .
While helping Donnie train , Rocky learns he has non - Hodgkin 's lymphoma .
He is initially unwilling to undergo chemotherapy because it was n't enough to save Adrian from ovarian cancer .
Donnie persuades Rocky to seek treatment and continues training while Rocky recovers .
In a battle reminiscent of Apollo and Rocky 's first fight , Donnie fights Conlan in Conlan 's hometown of Liverpool and surprises almost everyone by going the distance and pushing Conlan to his limit .
Conlan wins by split decision , but Donnie wins the respect of Conlan and the crowd , with Conlan calling Donnie the future of the light heavyweight division .
Returning to Philadelphia , Donnie and a recovering Rocky both make their way up the Philadelphia Museum steps and look at the skyline .
CREED II ( 2018 )
Section::::Creed II ( 2018 ) .
Three years after losing the fight to " Pretty " Ricky Conlan , Adonis Johnson Creed wins the World Heavyweight Championship and proposes to his girlfriend , Bianca Taylor ( Tessa Thompson ) .
Meanwhile , three decades since the death of Apollo Creed and his loss to Rocky Balboa , Ivan Drago is training his son , Viktor Drago ( Florian Munteanu ) , to reclaim their honor by having Viktor publicly challenge Adonis for the World Heavyweight Title .
Rocky is reluctant to train Adonis , fearing Adonis will meet the same fate as his father , but Adonis accepts the challenge without him and is badly injured during the fight .
Because of Viktor 's disqualification , Adonis retains the title .
Viktor demands a rematch , while he is being promoted by his father 's supporters who originally abandoned Drago , including Drago 's ex - wife , Ludmilla ( Brigette Nielsen ) .
Viktor is subjected to vicious training sessions in preparation for the rematch .
Rocky comes to Adonis ' aid and decides to train him in the Southern California desert , with a different tactic for Adonis to take in Viktor 's powerful punches .
The rematch is set in Moscow , and Adonis is able to take Viktor 's powerful punches , while leaving Viktor exhausted .
Viktor 's supporters and his mother leave during the fight with doubt that Viktor will win .
Drago seeing his son taking Adonis ' punches without fighting back , throws in the towel and assures his son that he is more important to him and that he will not abandon him like he was .
While Rocky later reunites with his son , Robert ( Milo Ventimiglia ) and meets his grandson , Adonis brings Bianca and their newborn baby girl to his late father 's grave , making peace with his late father and honoring his legacy .
CREW AND PRODUCTION
DETAILS studios CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters .
This table breaks down the main characters , and the actors who have portrayed them .
* An empty , dark - grey cell indicates the character was not in the film .
*
An indicates an appearance through archival footage and/or photographs *
A indicates that the character appears only through the use of still - photograph .
*
A indicates a role as a younger version of the character .
RockyRocky IIRocky IIIRocky IVRocky VRocky BalboaCreedCreed II !
1976 !
1979 ! 1982 !
1985 !
1990 ! 2006 !
2015 !
2018 !
Robert " Rocky " Balboa !
Adrianna " Adrian " Balboa !
Paul " Paulie " Pennino !
Apollo Creed !
Michael " Mickey " Goldmill !
Tony " Duke " Evers !
Mary Anne Creed !
Marie !
Tony Gazzo !
Spider Rico !
Robert Balboa Jr. !
James " Clubber " Lang !
Ivan Drago !
Ludmila Drago !
Tommy " The Machine " Gunn !
George Washington Duke !
Mason
" The Line " Dixon !
rowspan="2 "
Adonis " Donnie " Creed !
Bianca Taylor !
" Pretty " Ricky Conlan !
Danny " Stuntman " Wheeler !
Tony
" Little Duke " Evers !
Viktor Drago RECEPTION BOX OFFICE PERFORMANCE Section::::Reception . Section::::Box office performance . ! rowspan="2 "
Film !
rowspan="2 " Release date !
colspan="3
" Box office
gross !
colspan="2 " text="wrap " Box office ranking !
rowspan="2 "
Budget !
rowspan="2 " !
North America !
Otherterritories !
Worldwide !
All timeNorth America !
All timeworldwide !
colspan="2
" Total !
$ !
# 26 } CRITICAL AND PUBLIC RESPONSE Section::::Critical and public response . !
Film !
Rotten Tomatoes !
Metacritic !
CinemaScore ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades .
At the 49th Academy Awards , Rocky was nominated for ten Academy Awards .
Sylvester Stallone was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor , and Best Original Screenplay , with Talia Shire being nominated for Best Actress , and both Burgess Meredith and Burt Young being nominated for Best Supporting Actor .
" Gon na Fly Now " was nominated for Best Original Song , and Rocky itself was nominated for Best Sound Editing , and won Best Picture , Best Director for John G. Alvidson , and Best Film Editing .
At the 55th Academy Awards , the song " Eye of the Tiger " from Rocky III was nominated for Best Original Song .
On December 7 , 2010 , Stallone was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame and Museum , for paying tribute to boxers in writing and creating the underdog character of Rocky .
On January 10 , 2016 , Stallone won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in Creed .
At the 88th Academy Awards REFERENCES