POST - VACATION BLUES Post - vacation blues ( Canada and US ) , post - holiday blues ( UK , Ireland and some Commonwealth countries ) , vacation / holiday blues or post - travel depression ( PTD ) is a type of mood that persons returning home from a long trip ( usually a vacation ) may experience .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
A person may suffer from post vacation blues after returning home or to a normal routine from a long vacation , especially if it was a pleasurable one .
The longer a trip lasts , the more intense the post vacation blues may be .
This is because after the person returns home , they realize how boring and unsatisfactory their normal lifestyle routine is when compared to the activities they did while on their holiday / vacation .
It is easier to overcome / adjust to a normal routine the shorter the trip was .
Post vacation blues may result in tiredness , loss of appetite , strong feelings of nostalgia , and in some cases , depression .
Jet lag may intensify the post vacation blues .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
In general , post vacation blues will wear off over time .
It usually takes a few days , but in extreme cases it can last for several weeks for the mood to fully wear off .
Faster ways of treating post vacation blues is for the person to share their experiences with family and friends , or to look at photos and souvenirs .
Some may find comfort in re - living their holiday / vacation experiences , for example , if one really enjoyed jet - skiing during their holiday , they may purchase their very own jet - ski for personal use .
Another well known method of curing post vacation blues is to plan or book the next vacation , this offers a distraction and also provides the person something to look forward to .
SIMILAR MOODS
* Monday blues – may be experienced by persons after weekends .
* Post - party blues – may be experienced by persons after an enjoyable party or nightlife experience , not to be confused with a hangover , which can have similar psychological effects due to high alcohol intake .
* New employee apathy / Freshman apathy * Spring fever *
In Japan , a phenomenon known as gogatsu - byou ( 五月病 , literally " May sickness " ) leaves some people feeling depressed a month after they started a new school year or new job , as their expectations were not met .
SEE ALSO
* Human factors * Human reliability
* Seasonal affective disorder
* Homesickness
* Nostalgia REFERENCES