CALICO CAT Calico cats are domestic cats with a spotted or particolored coat that is predominantly white , with patches of two other colors ( often orange and black , sometimes gray ) .
Outside North America , the pattern is more usually called tortoiseshell and white .
In the province of Quebec , Canada , they are sometimes called chatte d'Espagne ( French for ' ( female ) cat of Spain ' ) .
Other names include brindle , tricolor cat , tobi mi - ke ( Japanese for ' triple fur ' ) , and lapjeskat ( Dutch for ' patches cat ' ) ; calicoes with diluted coloration have been called calimanco or clouded tiger .
Occasionally , the tri - color calico coloration is combined with a tabby patterning ; this calico - patched tabby is called a caliby .
" Calico " refers only to a color pattern on the fur , not to a breed or two - colored eyes on a cat .
Among the breeds whose standards allow calico coloration are the Manx , American Shorthair , British Shorthair , Persian , Arabian Mau , Japanese Bobtail , Exotic Shorthair , Siberian , Turkish Van , Turkish Angora and Norwegian Forest Cat .
Because genetic determination of coat colors in calico cats is linked to the X chromosome , calicos are nearly always female , with one color linked to the maternal X chromosome and a second color linked to the paternal X chromosome .
Because males only have one X chromosome , they can be orange or black , but a male calico would have to have a rare condition where they have three sex chromosomes ( two X chromosomes and one Y chromosome ) in order to be calico .
In addition to other symptoms caused by the condition , these male calicos are often sterile .
There is also a type of calico cat referred to as a dilute calico .
Dilute calicos are not necessarily rare .
They are recognized by their grey , silver , and gold colors instead of the traditional white , black , brown or red patched coat of a calico .
Dilute calicos are also called light calicos , because they usually have no dark - colored fur .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The coat pattern of calico cats does not define any breed , but occurs incidentally in cats that express a range of color patterns ; accordingly the effect has no definitive historical background .
However , the existence of patches in calico cats was traced to a certain degree by Neil Todd in a study determining the migration of domesticated cats along trade routes in Europe and Northern Africa .
The proportion of cats having the orange mutant gene found in calicoes was traced to the port cities along the Mediterranean in Greece , France , Spain and Italy , originating from Egypt .
GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
In genetic terms , calico cats are tortoiseshells in every way , except that in addition they express a white spotting gene .
There is however one anomaly : as a rule of thumb the larger the areas of white , the fewer and larger the patches of ginger and dark or tabby coat .
In contrast a non - white - spotted tortoiseshell usually has small patches of color or even something like a salt - and - pepper sprinkling .
This reflects the genetic effects on relative speeds of migration of melanocytes and X - inactivation in the embryo .
Serious study of calico cats seems to have begun about 1948 when Murray Barr and his graduate student E.G. Bertram noticed dark , drumstick - shaped masses inside the nuclei of nerve cells of female cats , but not in male cats .
These dark masses became known as Barr bodies .
In 1959 , Japanese cell biologist Susumu Ohno determined the Barr bodies were X chromosomes .
In 1961 , Mary Lyon proposed the concept of X - inactivation : one of the two X chromosomes inside a female mammal shuts off .
She observed this in the coat color patterns in mice .
Calico cats are almost always female because the locus of the gene for the orange / non - orange coloring is on the X chromosome .
In the absence of other influences , such as color inhibition that causes white fur , the alleles present in those orange loci determine whether the fur is orange or not .
Female cats , like all female placental mammals , normally have two X chromosomes .
In contrast , male placental mammals , including chromosomally stable male cats , have one X and one Y chromosome .
Since the Y chromosome does not have any locus for the orange gene , there is no chance that an XY male could have both orange and non - orange genes together , which is what it takes to create tortoiseshell or calico coloring .
One exception is that in rare cases faulty cell division may leave an extra X chromosome in one of the gametes that produced the male cat .
That extra X then is reproduced in each of his cells , a condition referred to as XXY , or Klinefelter syndrome .
Such a combination of chromosomes could produce tortoiseshell or calico markings in the male , in the same way as XX chromosomes produce them in the female .
All but about one in three thousand of the rare calico or tortoiseshell
male cats are sterile because of the chromosome abnormality , and breeders reject any exceptions for stud purposes because they generally are of poor physical quality and fertility .
In any event , because the genetic conditions for calico coloring are X linked , a fertile male calico 's coloring would not have any determination in the coloring of any male offspring ( who would receive the Y , not the X chromosome from their father ) .
As Sue Hubble stated in her book Shrinking the Cat : Genetic Engineering before We Knew about Genes , The mutation that gives male cats a ginger - colored coat and females ginger , tortoiseshell , or calico coats produced a particularly telling map .
The orange mutant gene is found only on the X , or female , chromosome .
As with humans , female cats have paired sex chromosomes , XX , and male cats have XY sex chromosomes .
The female cat , therefore , can have the orange mutant gene on one X chromosome and the gene for a black coat on the other .
The piebald gene is on a different chromosome .
If expressed , this gene codes for white , or no color , and is dominant over the alleles that code for a certain color ( i.e. orange or black ) , making the white spots on calico cats .
If that is the case , those several genes will be expressed in a blotchy coat of the tortoiseshell or calico kind .
But the male , with his single X chromosome , has only one of that particular coat - color gene : he can be not - ginger or he can be ginger ( although some modifier genes can add a bit of white here and there ) , but unless he has a chromosomal abnormality he can not be a calico cat .
It is currently impossible to reproduce the fur patterns of calico cats by cloning .
Penelope Tsernoglou wrote " This is due to an effect called x - linked inactivation which involves the random inactivation of one of the X chromosomes .
Since all female mammals have two X chromosomes , one might wonder if this phenomenon could have a more widespread impact on cloning in the future . "
Calico cats may have already provided findings relating to physiological differences between male and female mammals .
FOLKLORE Section::::Folklore .
Cats of this coloration are believed to bring good luck in the folklore of many cultures .
In the United States , these are sometimes referred to as money cats .
A cat of the calico coloration is also the state cat of Maryland in the United States .
In the late nineteenth century , Eugene Field published " The Duel " , a beloved poem for children also known as " The Gingham Dog and the Calico Cat " .
In Japan , the Maneki - neko figures depict calico cats , bringing good luck ; and Japanese sailors often had a calico ship 's cat to protect against misfortune at sea .
SEE ALSO
* Bicolor cat * Point coloration *
Tabby cat *
Maltese cat
* Deaf white cat
* Cat coat genetics *
Tortoiseshell cat * Brindle REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS