RELATIVE CHANGE AND DIFFERENCE
In any quantitative science , the terms relative change and relative difference are used to compare two quantities while taking into account the " sizes " of the things being compared .
The comparison is expressed as a ratio and is a unitless number .
By multiplying these ratios by 100 they can be expressed as percentages so the terms percentage change , percent(age ) difference , or relative percentage difference are also commonly used .
The distinction between " change " and " difference " depends on whether or not one of the quantities being compared is considered a standard or reference or starting value .
When this occurs , the term relative change ( with respect to the reference value ) is used and otherwise the term relative difference is preferred .
Relative difference is often used as a quantitative indicator of quality assurance and quality control for repeated measurements where the outcomes are expected to be the same .
A special case of percent change ( relative change expressed as a percentage ) called percent error occurs in measuring situations where the reference value is the accepted or actual value ( perhaps theoretically determined ) and the value being compared to it is experimentally determined ( by measurement ) .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
Given two numerical quantities , x and y , their difference , , can be called their actual difference .
When y is a reference value ( a theoretical / actual / correct / accepted / optimal / starting , etc .
value ; the value that x is being compared to ) then Δ is called their actual change .
When there is no reference value , the sign of Δ has little meaning in the comparison of the two values since it does n't matter which of the two values is written first , so one often works with , the absolute difference instead of Δ , in these situations .
Even when there is a reference value , if it does n't matter whether the compared value is larger or smaller than the reference value , the absolute difference can be considered in place of the actual change .
The absolute difference between two values is not always a good way to compare the numbers .
For instance , the absolute difference of 1 between 6 and 5 is more significant than the same absolute difference between 100,000,001 and 100,000,000 .
We can adjust the comparison to take into account the " size " of the quantities involved , by defining , for positive values of x :
The relative change is not defined if the reference value ( x ) is zero .
For values greater than the reference value , the relative change should be a positive number and for values that are smaller , the relative change should be negative .
The formula given above behaves in this way only if x is positive , and reverses this behavior if x is negative .
For example , if we are calibrating a thermometer which reads −6 ° C when it should read −10 ° C , this formula for relative change ( which would be called relative error in this application ) gives , yet the reading is too high .
To fix this problem we alter the definition of relative change so that it works correctly for all nonzero values of x : If the relationship of the value with respect to the reference value ( that is , larger or smaller ) does not matter in a particular application , the absolute difference may be used in place of the actual change in the above formula to produce a value for the relative change which is always non - negative .
Defining relative difference is not as easy as defining relative change since there is no " correct " value to scale the absolute difference with .
As a result , there are many options for how to define relative difference and which one is used depends on what the comparison is being used for .
In general we can say that the absolute difference is being scaled by some function of the values x and y , say .
As with relative change , the relative difference is undefined if is zero .
Several common choices for the function would be : * max ( , ) , * max(x , y ) , * min ( , ) , * min ( x , y ) , * ( x + y)/2 , and * ( + )
/2 .
FORMULAE
Section::::Formulae .
Measures of relative difference are unitless numbers expressed as a fraction .
Corresponding values of percent difference would be obtained by multiplying these values by 100 ( and appending the % sign to indicate that the value is a percentage ) .
One way to define the relative difference of two numbers is to take their absolute difference divided by the maximum absolute value of the two numbers .
if at least one of the values does not equal zero .
This approach is especially useful when comparing floating point values in programming languages for equality with a certain tolerance .
Another application is in the computation of approximation errors when the relative error of a measurement is required .
Another way to define the relative difference of two numbers is to take their absolute difference divided by some functional value of the two numbers , for example , the absolute value of their arithmetic mean : This approach is often used when the two numbers reflect a change in some single underlying entity .
A problem with the above approach arises when the functional value is zero .
In this example , if x and y have the same magnitude but opposite sign , then which causes division by 0 .
So it may be better to replace the denominator with the average of the absolute values of x and y : PERCENT ERROR
Section::::Percent error .
Percent Error is a special case of the percentage form of relative change calculated from the absolute change between the experimental ( measured ) and theoretical ( accepted ) values , and dividing by the theoretical ( accepted ) value .
The terms " Experimental " and " Theoretical " used in the equation above are commonly replaced with similar terms .
Other terms used for experimental could be " measured , " " calculated , " or " actual " and another term used for theoretical could be " accepted .
"
Experimental value is what has been derived by use of calculation and/or measurement and is having its accuracy tested against the theoretical value , a value that is accepted by the scientific community or a value that could be seen as a goal for a successful result .
Although it is common practice to use the absolute value version of relative change when discussing percent error , in some situations , it can be beneficial to remove the absolute values to provide more information about the result .
Thus , if an experimental value is less than the theoretical value , the percent error will be negative .
This negative result provides additional information about the experimental result .
For example , experimentally calculating the speed of light and coming up with a negative percent error says that the experimental value is a velocity that is less than the speed of light .
This is a big difference from getting a positive percent error , which means the experimental value is a velocity that is greater than the speed of light ( violating the theory of relativity ) and is a newsworthy result .
The percent error equation , when rewritten by removing the absolute values , becomes : It is important to note that the two values in the numerator do not commute .
Therefore , it is vital to preserve the order as above : subtract the theoretical value from the experimental value and not vice versa .
PERCENTAGE CHANGE Section::::Percentage change .
A percentage change is a way to express a change in a variable .
It represents the relative change between the old value and the new one .
For example , if a house is worth $ 100,000 today and the year after its value goes up to $ 110,000 , the percentage change of its value can be expressed as
It can then be said that the worth of the house went up by 10 % .
More generally , if V represents the old value and V the new one , Some calculators directly support this via a or function .
When the variable in question is a percentage itself , it is better to talk about its change by using percentage points , to avoid confusion between relative difference and absolute difference .
EXAMPLE OF PERCENTAGES OF PERCENTAGES
Section::::Example of percentages of percentages .
If a bank were to raise the interest rate on a savings account from 3 % to 4 % , the statement that " the interest rate was increased by 1 % " is ambiguous and should be avoided .
The absolute change in this situation is 1 percentage point ( 4 % − 3 % ) , but the relative change in the interest rate is : So , one should say either that the interest rate was increased by 1 percentage point , or that the interest rate was increased by formula_13
In general , the term " percentage point(s ) " indicates an absolute change or difference of percentages , while the percent sign or the word " percentage " refers to the relative change or difference .
EXAMPLES COMPARISONS Section::::Examples .
Section::::Comparisons .
Car M costs $ 50,000 and car L costs $ 40,000 .
We wish to compare these costs .
With respect to car L , the absolute difference is .
That is , car M costs $ 10,000 more than car L.
The relative difference is , and we say that car M costs 25 % more than car L.
It is also common to express the comparison as a ratio , which in this example is , and
we say that car M costs 125 % of the cost of car L.
In this example the cost of car L was considered the reference value , but we could have made the choice the other way and considered the cost of car M as the reference value .
The absolute difference is now since car L costs $ 10,000 less than car M.
The relative difference , is also negative since car L costs 20 % less than car M.
The ratio form of the comparison , says that car L costs 80 % of what car M costs .
It is the use of the words " of " and " less / more than " that distinguish between ratios and relative differences .
OTHER CHANGE UNITS
Section::::Other change units .
Change in a quantity can also be expressed logarithmically using the unit of logarithmic change : the neper ( Np ) .
Normalization with a factor of 100 , as done for percent , yields the derived unit ( cNp ) , which aligns with the definition for percentage change for very small changes : Using cNp has two advantages .
First , the magnitude of the change expressed in cNp is the same whether V or V is chosen as the reference , since formula_19 .
In contrast , formula_20 , with the approximation error becoming more significant as V and V diverge .
For example : !
V ! !
V ! !
Change ( cNp ) ! !
Change ( % )
The second advantage is that the total change after a series of cNp changes equals the sum of the changes .
With percent , summing the changes is only an approximation , with larger error for larger changes .
For example : !
Change 1 ( cNp ) ! !
Change 2 ( cNp ) ! !
Total Change ( cNp ) ! !
Change 1 ( % ) ! !
Change 2 ( % ) ! !
Total Change ( % )
SEE ALSO
* Approximation error
* Errors and residuals in statistics *
Relative standard deviation
* Decibel
* Neper NOTES REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://www.acponline.org/clinical_information/journals_publications/ecp/janfeb00/primer.htm