OSLO AIRPORT STATION Oslo Airport Station
( ) , also known as Gardermoen Station , is a railway station located in the airport terminal building of Oslo Airport , Gardermoen in Norway .
Located on the Gardermoen Line , it is served by the Airport Express Trains , express trains to Trondheim and Oslo , regional trains to Lillehammer and Skien ( via Oslo ) and commuter trains to Eidsvoll and Kongsberg ( via Oslo ) .
The station is located from Oslo Central Station .
The station is manned , and there is a single bus route , and several coach services , to and from the airport .
It opened in 1998 , along with the new airport .
During 2000–2001 , there were several derailments at the station .
South of the station is a terminal for unloading freight trains carrying aviation fuel .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
Gardermoen is at kilometer marker 51.85 ( 32.22 mi ) from Oslo S , but the actual distance is only .
This is because the distance markers follow the slightly longer Hoved Line between Oslo and Lillestrøm .
The station is built directly below the airport terminal , and access is obtained via escalators or elevators located in the airport 's arrival hall .
North of the station , the tracks run in a tunnel below the terminal and runway area .
The tracks on platform 2 and 3 only have connection southwards ; north of the station they are only connected to a short turning track .
Aviation fuel is transported to the airport by train .
CargoNet hauls a daily train load of fuel from Sjursøya , with an unloading terminal just south of the passenger station .
They are the only freight trains to use the Gardermoen Line .
SERVICES Section::::Services .
Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) and the Airport Express Train are the only companies that operate to the station .
The outer side platforms ( 1 and 4 ) serve NSB trains , while the two inner island platforms ( 2 and 3 ) serve the Airport Express Trains .
The station is manned , from 07:00 to 22:00 on weekdays , with reduced opening hours on weekends .
The platform ( but not necessarily the trains ) are wheelchair accessible , and an escort service for disabled persons can be prebooked .
Baggage trolleys are available , and a wide selection of services , including cafes , kiosks , banks and police , are available at the airport terminal , as are taxis .
A single local bus route , Ruter no . 855 , also serves the airport from Kløfta , Jessheim and Maura .
There are many coaches from all parts of the country that also serve the airport , as well as coach services to Oslo operated by Flybussekspressen and SAS Ground Services .
AIRPORT EXPRESS TRAIN Section::::Airport Express Train .
The Flytoget airport express train services operate six times per hour .
Three run directly to Oslo Central Station ( ) in nineteen minutes and terminate there ; the other three services make an additional stop at Lillestrøm Station , then continue beyond Oslo Central towards Drammen Station , a total of eight stops .
Total travel time to Drammen is 60 minutes .
In 2007 , the Airport Express Train had 5.35 million passengers . !
Station !
Distance !
Time
Lillestrøm
align="right"30.90
km align="right"12 min Oslo Central Station align="right"48.07 km align="right"19 /
22 min
Nationaltheatret
align="right"49.50
km
align="right"27 min Skøyen align="right"52.43
km align="right"32 min Lysaker align="right"55.07 km
align="right"34 min Sandvika align="right"62.24
km
align="right"42 min Asker
align="right"71.93 km align="right"48
min
Drammen
align="right"100.96
km
align="right"60 min
NORWEGIAN STATE
RAILWAYS
Section::::Norwegian State Railways .
The Oslo Commuter Rail operated by NSB , provides one service in each direction each hour — line 450 from Kongsberg Station via Oslo Central to Eidsvoll Station .
NSB also provides one regional service in each direction per hour towards Skien Station ( via Oslo Central ) and Lillehammer Station .
On the Dovre Line to Trondheim Central Station , five daily express trains are also offered , including one NSB Night Train .
Northbound trains use track 1 , while southbound trains use track 4 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The decision to build the station , railway and airport was taken by the Parliament on 8 October 1992 .
NSB Gardermobanen , a subsidiary of the Norwegian State Railways , was created to build the line and station , as well as operate the Flytoget airport express train services .
Construction of the station was performed in parallel with the construction of the airport , and the station is built in the same style as the rest of the airport , in postmodernist concrete and wood .
The station was taken into use on 27 September 1998 , and public services commenced along with the opening of the airport on 8 October 1998 .
In 2001 , as part of a reorganization of NSB Gardermobanen , the ownership of the station was transferred to the Norwegian National Rail Administration .
INCIDENTS Section::::Incidents .
In 2000–01 , the Airport Express Train experienced three derailments with empty trains at Gardermoen ; one caused by the engineer falling asleep and two by the train passing a red light .
No more such accidents occurred after automatic train control was installed in 2001 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* , Norwegian National Rail Administration * , Flytoget * , Norwegian State Railways * Norwegian Railway Club
entry
* Interchange information , from Avinor