GOVERNOR ( UNITED STATES )
In the United States , a governor serves as the chief executive officer and commander - in - chief in each of the fifty states and in the five permanently inhabited territories , functioning as both head of state and head of government therein .
As such , governors are responsible for implementing state laws and overseeing the operation of the state executive branch .
As state leaders , governors advance and pursue new and revised policies and programs using a variety of tools , among them executive orders , executive budgets , and legislative proposals and vetoes .
Governors carry out their management and leadership responsibilities and objectives with the support and assistance of department and agency heads , many of whom they are empowered to appoint .
A majority of governors have the authority to appoint state court judges as well , in most cases from a list of names submitted by a nominations committee .
All but five states ( Arizona , Maine , New Hampshire , Oregon , and Wyoming ) have a lieutenant governor .
The lieutenant governor succeeds to the gubernatorial office ( the powers and duties but not the office , in Massachusetts and West Virginia ) , if vacated by the removal from office , death , or resignation of the previous governor .
Lieutenant governors also serve as unofficial acting state governors in case the incumbent governors are unable to fulfill their duties , and they often serve as presiding officers of the upper houses of state legislatures .
But in such cases , they can not participate in political debates , and they have no vote whenever these houses are not equally divided .
ROLE AND POWERS Section::::Role and powers .
States are the primary subdivisions of the United States , and possess a number of powers and rights under the United States Constitution , such as regulating intrastate commerce , running elections , creating local governments , and ratifying constitutional amendments .
Each state has its own constitution , grounded in republican principles , and government , consisting of three branches : executive , legislative , and judicial .
Also , due to the shared sovereignty between each state and the federal government , Americans are citizens of both the federal republic and of the state in which they reside .
The governor heads the government 's executive branch in each state or territory and , depending on the individual jurisdiction , may have considerable control over government budgeting , the power of appointment of many officials ( including many judges ) , and a considerable role in legislation .
The governor may also have additional roles , such as that of commander - in - chief of the state 's National Guard ( when not federalized ) and of that state 's respective defense force ( which is not subject to federalization ) .
In many states and territories the governor also has partial or absolute power to commute or pardon a criminal sentence .
All U.S. governors serve four - year terms except those in New Hampshire and Vermont , who serve two - year terms .
In all states , the governor is directly elected , and in most cases has considerable practical powers , though this may be moderated by the state legislature and in some cases by other elected executive officials .
In the five extant U.S. territories , all governors are now directly elected as well , though in the past many territorial governors were historically appointed by the President of the United States .
Governors can veto state bills , and in all but seven states they have the power of the line - item veto on appropriations bills ( a power the President does not have ) .
In some cases legislatures can override a gubernatorial veto by a two - thirds vote , in others by three - fifths .
In Alabama , Indiana , Kentucky , and Tennessee , the governor 's veto can be overridden by a simple majority vote , making it virtually useless .
In Arkansas , a gubernatorial veto may be overridden by an absolute majority .
The Governor of North Carolina had no veto power until a 1996 referendum .
In 47 of the 50 states , whenever there is a vacancy of one of the state 's U.S. Senate seats , that state 's governor has the power to appoint someone to fill the vacancy until a special election is held ; the governors of Oregon , Alaska , and Wisconsin do not have this power .
A state governor may give an annual State of the State address in order to satisfy a constitutional stipulation that a governor must report annually ( or in older constitutions described as being " from time to time " ) on the state or condition of the state .
Governors of states may also perform ceremonial roles , such as greeting dignitaries , conferring state decorations , issuing symbolic proclamations or attending the state fair .
The governor may also have an official residence ( see Governor 's Mansion ) .
In a ranking of the power of the governorship in all 50 states , University of North Carolina political scientist Thad Beyle makes the distinction between " personal powers " of governors , which are factors that vary from person to person , season to season - and the " institutional powers " that are set in place by law .
Examples of measurable personal factors are how large a governor 's margin of victory was on election day , and where he or she stands in public opinion polls .
Whether a governor has strong budget controls , appointment authority , and veto powers are examples of institutional powers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In colonial North America , governors were chosen in a variety of ways , depending on how the colony was organized .
In the crown colonies of Great Britain , France , and Spain , the governor was chosen by the ruling monarch of the colonizing power , or his designees ; in British colonies , the Board of Trade was often the primary decision maker .
Colonies based on a corporate charter , such as the Connecticut Colony and the Massachusetts Bay Colony , elected their own governors based on rules spelled out in the charter or other colonial legislation .
In proprietary colonies , such as the Province of Carolina before it became a crown colony ( and was divided into North and South ) , governors were chosen by the Lords Proprietor who controlled the colony .
In the early years of the American Revolutionary War , eleven of the Thirteen Colonies evicted ( with varying levels of violence ) royal and proprietary governors .
The other two colonies ( Connecticut and Rhode Island ) had corporate charters ; Connecticut Governor Jonathan Trumbull was governor before and during the war period , while in Rhode Island , Governor Joseph Wanton was removed from office in 1775 for failing to support the rebel war effort .
Before achieving statehood , many of the 50 states were territories or parts of territories .
Administered by the federal government , they had governors who were appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate rather than elected by the resident population .
Election of territorial governors began in Puerto Rico in 1948 .
The last appointed territorial governor , Hyrum Rex Lee in American Samoa , left office in 1978 .
DEMOGRAPHICS PARTY Section::::Demographics .
Section::::Party .
There are currently 34 Republicans and 16 Democrats .
The 116th Congress , meeting January 3rd , will have 27 Republicans and 23 Democrats .
Two Democrats ( including the mayor of DC ) , two Republicans , one New Progressive and one independent also occupy territorial governorships .
No other third parties hold a Governorship .
TENURE Section::::Tenure .
For each term , governors serve four years in office .
The exceptions are Vermont and New Hampshire where tenures are two years long .
The longest - serving governor is Terry Branstad of Iowa , who was elected to his sixth non - consecutive term in 2014 .
He previously served for two consecutive terms from 1975 to 1983 .
On December 14 , 2015 , he became the longest serving governor in US history , breaking the record held by George Clinton of New York , who served 21 years from 1777 to 1795 , and from 1801 to 1804 .
Governor Branstad resigned on May 24 , 2017 , to become the United States Ambassador to China .
In the majority of states , term limits cap a governor 's tenure .
AGE Section::::Age .
The oldest current governor is Jerry Brown of California , born on .
The youngest current governor is Ricardo Rosselló of Puerto Rico , born on .
The youngest person to ever serve as a governor in the United States was Stevens T. Mason of the Michigan Territory , elected in 1835 having just turned 24 .
Mason would later become the first governor of the state of Michigan when it was admitted to the Union in January 1837 , when he was 25 .
Mason was re - elected in November 1837 , then age 26 .
The second youngest governor ever elected was J. Neely Johnson of California , when he was elected in 1855 at the age of 30 , and the third youngest governor was Harold Stassen of Minnesota , when he was elected in 1938 at age 31 .
When future President Bill Clinton was elected Governor of Arkansas in 1978 at age 32 , he became the youngest governor since Stassen .
In 35 states , the minimum age requirement of the governor is 30 , though in some it is 25 ( 7 ) , 21 ( 1 ) , or 18 ( 5 ) .
Oklahoma is the only state with an older age , 31 .
Some states require the governor to be a qualified elector / voter , implying a minimum age of 18 .
Kansas and Vermont do not have an explicit or implicit age requirement .
GENDER Section::::Gender .
There are currently 44 male state governors .
There are 6 female governors : Kate Brown of Oregon , Mary Fallin of Oklahoma , Kay Ivey of Alabama , Kim Reynolds of Iowa , Susana Martinez of New Mexico , and Gina Raimondo of Rhode Island .
Of those , Fallin , Ivey , Martinez , and Reynolds are Republicans , while Brown and Raimondo are Democrats .
All five territorial governors are male ; the mayor of Washington , D.C. is female .
Thirty - eight women have been or are currently serving as the governor , including two in an acting capacity .
The first female governor was Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming ( widow of the late Wyoming Governor William B. Ross ) who was elected on November 4 , 1924 and sworn in on January 5 , 1925 succeeding Frank Lucas .
Also elected on November 4 , 1924 was Miriam A. Ferguson of Texas ( wife of former Texas Governor James E. Ferguson ) , succeeding Pat Morris Neff on January 21 , 1925 .
The first female governor elected without being the wife or widow of a past state governor was Ella T. Grasso of Connecticut , elected in 1974 and sworn in on January 8 , 1975 .
Connecticut and Arizona are the only two states to have elected female governors from both major parties .
New Hampshire has also had female governors from two parties , but Republican Vesta M. Roy served only in the acting capacity for a short time .
Arizona was the first state where a woman followed another woman as governor ( they were from different parties ) .
Arizona also has had the most female governors with a total of four , and is the first state to have three women in a row serve as governor .
Washington was the first state to have both a female governor and female U.S. Senators serving at the same time ( Christine Gregoire ; Patty Murray ; Maria Cantwell , respectively ) .
New Hampshire was the first and currently only state to have a female governor and entirely female Congressional delegation serving at the same time .
Previously , there were a record nine women serving as chief executive of their states on two different occasions : first , between December 4 , 2006 , when Sarah Palin was inaugurated as the first female governor of Alaska , and January 14 , 2008 , when Kathleen Blanco left office as governor of Louisiana ; and second , between January 10 , 2009 , when Beverly Perdue was inaugurated as governor of North Carolina , and January 20 , 2009 , when Ruth Ann Minner retired as governor of Delaware .
RACE AND ETHNICITY Section::::Race and ethnicity .
There are currently 46 state governors who are non - Hispanic whites of European American background .
There are 4 minority governors : Susana Martinez of New Mexico and Brian Sandoval of Nevada , who are Hispanic Americans ; Chris Sununu of New Hampshire , who is of Palestinian descent ; and David Ige of Hawaii , who is of Japanese descent .
Martinez , Sandovel , and Sununu are Republicans while Ige is a Democrat .
Among the five U.S. territories , one Hispanic ( Ricardo Rosselló of Puerto Rico ) , one Black ( Kenneth Mapp of the U.S. Virgin Islands ) , and two Pacific Islander Americans ( Eddie Calvo of Guam and Lolo Letalu Matalasi Moliga of American Samoa ) currently serve as governor .
African - American Muriel Bowser is the current Mayor of the District of Columbia , an office equivalent to a governor .
In 1990 , Douglas Wilder of Virginia became the first African - American governor of any state since Reconstruction .
BIRTHPLACE
Section::::Birthplace .
13 of the current state governors were born outside the state they are serving : Mike Dunleavy of Alaska ( born in Pennsylvania ) , Doug Ducey of Arizona ( born in Ohio ) , John Hickenlooper of Colorado ( born in Pennsylvania ) , Rick Scott of Florida ( born in Illinois ) , Matt Bevin of Kentucky ( born in Colorado ) , Larry Hogan of Maryland ( born in Washington , D.C. ) , Charlie Baker of Massachusetts ( born in New York ) , Brian Sandoval of Nevada ( born in California ) , Phil Murphy of New Jersey ( born in Massachusetts ) , Susana Martinez of New Mexico ( born in Texas ) , John Kasich of Ohio ( born in Pennsylvania ) , Mary Fallin of Oklahoma ( born in Missouri ) , Kate Brown of Oregon ( born in Spain ) , and Scott Walker of Wisconsin ( born in Colorado ) .
State constitutions have varying requirements for the length of citizenship and residency of the governor but unlike the President , state governors do not need to be natural - born citizens .
There is some ambiguity in some state constitutions if a governor must be a citizen or just a resident .
PHYSICAL DISABILITY Section::::Physical disability .
Two legally blind governors have served :
Bob C. Riley , who was acting governor of Arkansas for eleven days in January 1975 , and David Paterson , who was governor of New York from 2008 until 2010 .
The current governor of Texas , Greg Abbott , has been paraplegic since an accident in 1984 ; he has used a wheelchair ever since .
Governor of New York Franklin D. Roosevelt was paraplegic ; he later became the first wheelchair - using president .
SALARY Section::::Salary .
The average salary of a state governor in 2009 was $ 124,398 .
The highest salary currently being accepted is that of California Governor Jerry Brown at $ 196,000 , which will increase to $ 202,000 beginning in December of 2018 .
The lowest salaries are those of Maine Governor Paul LePage and of Puerto Rico Ricardo Rosselló at $ 70,000 .
There have been several instances where the governor of a state has either refused their salary in its entirety or instead only taken $ 1.00 per year .
Alabama Governor Robert J. Bentley refused his yearly salary of $ 119,950.00 until the state reached full employment .
Michigan Governor Rick Snyder takes a $ 1.00 yearly salary , while Texas Governor Greg Abbott has returned his salary to the state during each year he has held office .
During his tenure as Governor of California , Arnold Schwarzenegger also did not accept his salary of $ 170,000.00 per year .
However , several governors instead have decided to take a reduction in their salary instead of refusing it entirely .
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo took a 5 percent reduction in his salary in 2015 , and Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear reduced his salary by 10 percent during the same year .
Only six states ( California , New York , New Jersey , Michigan , Pennsylvania and Virginia ) currently offer their governors a higher salary than the $ 174,000 paid to members of Congress .
In many states , the governor is not the highest - paid state employee ; most often , that distinction is held by the head football or men 's basketball coach at a major state university .
GUBERNATORIAL ELECTION TIMELINE SCHEDULE Section::::Gubernatorial election timeline schedule .
All states except Louisiana hold gubernatorial elections on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November .
The earliest possible date for the election is therefore November 2 ( if that date falls on a Tuesday ) , and the latest possible date is November 8 ( if November 1 falls on a Tuesday ) .
Louisiana holds its gubernatorial primary on the third or fourth Saturday of October and the general election ( commonly referred to as the runoff within the state ) on the third Saturday of November , but the general election is cancelled if one candidate wins the primary outright ( see primary section below ) .
* Two states hold their gubernatorial elections every even numbered year .
Recent years are 2010 , 2012 , 2014 and 2016 .
The other 48 states hold gubernatorial elections every four years .
* Thirty - four states and three territories hold their gubernatorial elections during a midterm election year .
Recent years are 2002 , 2006 , 2010 , 2014 , and 2018 .
* Nine states and two territories hold their gubernatorial elections during a presidential election year .
( although Puerto Rico and American Samoa do not hold an election for President ) .
Recent years are 2004 , 2008 , 2012 , and 2016 .
* Three states hold their gubernatorial elections the year before a presidential election year .
Recent years are 2003 , 2007 , 2011 , and 2015 .
* Two states hold their gubernatorial elections the year after a presidential election year .
Recent years are 2001 , 2005 , 2009 , 2013 , and 2017 .
GUBERNATORIAL PRIMARIES Section::::Gubernatorial primaries .
All states , except for California , Louisiana , and Washington , hold primaries in which each political party holds a primary election , and the winner of the primary election moves on to compete in a general election .
In California , Louisiana , and Washington , all the candidates run in a blanket primary against each other .
Regardless of political party , the top two candidates move on to the general election .
In Louisiana , the general election is cancelled if one of the candidates receives more than 50 % of the votes cast .
In California and Washington , the top two vote getters proceed to the general election regardless of how many votes the top vote getter received in the primary , and California prohibits write - in candidates from competing in the general election .
TERM LIMITS RELATIONSHIP WITH LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR
Section::::Relationship with lieutenant governor .
The type of relationship between the governor and the lieutenant governor greatly varies by state .
In some states the governor and lieutenant governor are completely independent of each other , while in others the governor gets to choose ( prior to the election ) who would be his or her lieutenant governor .
* Five states do not have a lieutenant governor .
In those states , a different constitutional officer assumes the office of the governor should there be a vacancy in the office .
Those states are Arizona ( Sec . of State ) , Maine ( Pres . of Senate ) , New Hampshire ( Pres . of Senate ) , Oregon ( Sec . of State ) , and Wyoming ( Sec . of State ) .
* Seventeen states have separate elections for the governor and the lieutenant governor , which may lead to the governor and the lieutenant governor being from different parties .
Those states are Alabama , Arkansas , California , Delaware , Georgia , Idaho , Louisiana , Mississippi , Missouri , Nevada , North Carolina , Oklahoma , Rhode Island , Texas , Vermont , Virginia , and Washington .
* Two states have the State Senate appoint the lieutenant governor , which may mean that the governor and the lieutenant governor are from different parties .
Those states are Tennessee and West Virginia .
* Eight states have the governor and lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket , but the governor does not get to choose his / her running mate .
In those states , the winners of the governor primaries and the winners of the lieutenant governor primaries run together as joint tickets in the general election .
The governor and lieutenant governor would therefore be from the same party , but may not necessarily be political allies .
Those states are Alaska , Hawaii , Massachusetts , Michigan , New York , Pennsylvania , New Mexico , Connecticut , and Wisconsin .
* Eighteen states have the governor and lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket similar to the President and Vice President of the United States .
In those states , the governor gets to pick ( prior to the elections ) who would be the lieutenant governor .
Those states are Colorado , Florida , Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Kansas , Kentucky , Maryland , Minnesota , Montana , Nebraska , New Jersey , North Dakota , Ohio , South Carolina , South Dakota , and Utah .
SEE ALSO
* Seals of governors of the U.S. states
* Flags of governors of the U.S. states
* Governors of Puerto Rico * List of Governors of Guam
* List of Governors of American Samoa * List of Governors of the United States Virgin Islands
* List of Governors of the Northern Mariana Islands
* Governor * Lieutenant governor * State constitutional officer ( United States )
* State legislature ( United States )
* List of current United States governors * List of female governors in the United States * List of minority governors and lieutenant governors in the United States
*
Oldest living United States governors
* List of U.S. state governors born outside the United States
* Premier ( Canada ) similar position of provincial / territorial government in Canada
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Rutgers Program on the Governor