WWE SMACKDOWN VS .
RAW 2008 WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 is a professional wrestling video game developed by Yuke 's and released on the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , Wii , PlayStation Portable and Nintendo DS video game consoles by THQ in November 2007 .
Amaze Entertainment oversaw development for the Nintendo DS version .
The game is the ninth edition of the long - running WWE SmackDown vs. Raw ( later renamed to simply WWE )
video game series based on the professional wrestling promotion World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) .
It is the sequel to 2006 's WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2007 , succeeded by WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 in 2008 .
It is the first WWE game to include the promotion 's ECW brand .
It is also the first WWE game to be available for all seventh generation video game consoles .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Each wrestler now has two fighting style categories , one primary and one secondary .
Each fighting style has its advantages and disadvantages in each particular match type .
There are eight styles altogether : high - flyer , hardcore , submission artist , powerhouse , showman , brawler , dirty and technical .
In addition , creative manager of THQ Cory Ledesma stated early in production that he planned on having numerous wrestler animations redone .
A new " struggle submission system " has been introduced , incorporating more analog control into the game .
The player executing the submission can now decide how much pressure is applied by moving the analog stick in a particular direction .
Similarly , the player locked in a submission hold will have to power out also by using the analog stick .
The game features the revived ECW brand , and it takes its place alongside the established Raw and SmackDown !
brands .
The official box art features the ECW logo prominently .
The game 's ECW branding has expanded the number of weapons available under the ring during gameplay .
New weapons such as guitars are available and tables and barbed wire bats can be set on fire .
Despite the inclusion of the brand , the video game franchise will keep its SmackDown !
vs. Raw name , although an early logo included " ECW Invasion " in the title .
It has been changed , however , to " Featuring ECW " .
The game features several arenas that WWE held events at in 2006 and 2007 .
There are also arenas based on each WWE television show .
MODES
Section::::Modes .
The game allows several different game modes to be played , each with different goals and options .
The Season and General Manager Modes of previous games have been merged into the new " WWE 24/7 " mode , which takes its name from WWE 's video on demand service .
Players can choose to play one of the game 's included superstars or create a superstar , or as a general manager of one of the brand .
Playing as a wrestler , the goal is to take that wrestler and achieve " legend " status .
In order to do so , the player has to win matches , team with and feud with other wrestlers , and gain popularity .
At the same time , they must choose whether to train , exercise , relax , or take part in other activities when not wrestling , all with their own positive and negative effects .
( The player could only choose to be either on the Smackdown brand or the Raw brand , as the ECW brand was excluded ) .
Playing as a general manager is similar to the previous General Manager modes in the series , in which one has to choose a brand and act as its General Manager ( Jonathan Coachman for Raw , Theodore Long for SmackDown !
, Tommy Dreamer for ECW ) , draft a roster and make decisions to make it the most popular brand of the three .
The General Manager is allowed to make staffing decisions , schedule workouts and events .
This was also the last game in the Smackdown vs Raw series to have a General Manager mode .
There is also an all - new Tournament Mode , which allows the player to control a superstar through the various stages of the WWE tournament , such as Beat The Clock Sprint and King of the Ring , as well as Money in the Bank tournament .
The game also allows you to create your own tournament .
( This feature is excluded from the Nintendo DS and mobile versions . )
Like previous games in the series , the game also allows players to challenge for and defend championships .
The game includes championships used by the WWE in 2007 , bringing back the branded championships from the previous game and for the first time , the ECW Championship .
FIGHTING STYLE
SYSTEM Section::::Fighting Style System .
The game featured the Fighting Style System which would not appear in later games until the release of WWE 2K18 , where the system has returned .
With each style , the character would adopt a series of preset abilities .
And , depending on primary ability , they would also be able to perform a unique move that can only be activated if the player has a stored finisher icon .
The fighting styles were Powerhouse , Showman , Hardcore , Dirty , Brawler , High - Flyer , Submission and Technical .
This system was highly criticized as these pre - setting gave some wrestlers abilities which they can not actually use , or stopped them from using common moves .
For example , Carlito and Chavo Guerrero did not have the ability to perform any of their springboard attacks , and Mr. McMahon was as strong as some of the larger characters in the game .
Also , the choice of fighting styles limited the variety of moves available in create - a - moveset .
Wrestlers with the powerhouse fighting style can break out of a pin attempt with just one button press , unless they had sustained a large amount of arm damage .
They could also do a powerful Irish Whip ( later named a ' Hammer Throw ' ) , which could cause damage if the opponent hit the corner turnbuckles .
A player ( regardless of weight ) could be sent reeling over the top rope with the force of this move .
Their special ability was called ' Rampage ' , a temporary adrenaline rush in which their grapple moves could not be reversed or blocked .
Technical wrestlers automatically reversed all quick grapple moves until they had taken a good deal of arm damage .
They also had the ability to perform diving attacks onto opponents outside of the ring .
Their special ability was an adrenaline rush that allowed them to counter every attack for a limited time .
Showman is one of the more common kinds .
Performing taunts or dives from higher positions cause a faster rise in momentum .
They also have 2 special abilities .
One allows them to perform one of their opponent 's taunts , and if uninterrupted , the opponent is be unable to gain any momentum for a limited time .
They can alternatively copy their opponent 's finishing move if in the correct position to do so .
However , the copied move is weaker than the original .
The most common kind is the Brawler .
Brawlers can sit on a downed opponent and punch their opponent 's head repeatedly .
They also have a special combination of 3 to 5 strikes .
If the first strike connects , the defending wrestler is not able to block , avoid or counter the remainder of the strikes in the combination .
Their special ability is called ' Wreck Shop ' , a limited adrenaline rush in which all opponent strikes are countered and all strikes become unblockable .
High - flyers can perform springboard diving attacks to opponents inside or outside of the ring .
Instead of countering or side - stepping attacks , they perform an evasive roll .
Their special ability is a possum pin .
After recovering from being knocked down , a high - flyer can remain on the ground .
If the attacker attempts a grapple move , the defending wrestler will go for a pin attempt which is difficult to break out of .
However , if the opponent attempts a strike , then the pin attempt is lost .
Submission wrestlers can break out of Struggle Submissions with ease .
They can also force an opponent to submit to any Struggle Submission , even if it is not a finisher or signature move .
Dirty wrestlers , like Chavo Guerrero , can perform dirty moves , which boost their momentum faster .
They can also remove turnbuckle covers and use weapons to build momentum .
They can also use the referee as a human shield , making themselves immune to all attacks .
When they release the referee , they shove him into the opponent .
This is difficult to avoid and momentarily stuns the opponent and the referee .
Their special move involves an eye - poke and a low blow which causes a lot of damage to the head and torso .
Hardcore wrestlers get momentum bonuses for using weapons .
They can also perform grapple moves while holding a weapon .
If they try to use a steel chair with full momentum , they automatically perform the Steel Chair DDT .
If they are caused to bleed , they instantly get full momentum .
Their special move can only be performed with a steel chair in hand .
They strike themselves in the face repeated until they bleed .
While this causes full momentum , it also causes critical head damage .
ROSTER
Section::::Roster .
ECW made its first appearance in the series , and overall 12 superstars made their WWE video game debuts .
This is the first game in the series not to feature Chris Benoit after his double murder and suicide in June 2007 .
All material related to Benoit were removed or made unavailable through normal means , including all versions of the crossface and diving headbutt .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack featured 11 songs of hard rock , nu - metal , and alternative rock genres .
DEVELOPMENT PLAYSTATION 2 Section::::Development .
Section::::PlayStation 2 .
Graphics and gameplay are similar to the previous years in the SvR series .
It also includes the new 24/7 mode which includes Become a Legend or GM Mode where you can also train superstars and gain them popularity .
XBOX 360 AND PLAYSTATION 3 Section::::Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 .
The Xbox 360 has the custom soundtrack feature which people can import their own music in superstars entrances .
However , the PS3 has a first person view in entrances where people can control where the superstar looks with the sixaxis controller .
The PS3 version also had a special " Collector 's Edition " which came with a DVD detailing the game , a Kelly Kelly trading card , and a booklet featuring various superstars signature moves .
The Xbox 360 version also had special " High Flyer " and " Dirty " Editions which came with Special Edition Slipcase , " I 'm a High Flyer " or " I Fight Dirty " T - shirts , 1 page
Kelly Kelly calendar , 8 Numbered Limited Edition " Fighting Styles " Postcards , and a " Create a Superstar " Mini Guide .
WII Section::::Wii .
Instead of featuring 24/7 mode , it features Main Event Mode , where you can play as a created superstar and rise to the top .
The Wii version of the game features only chairs as the exclusive weapons .
Also the Wii version only has 5 match types such as Singles Match , Hardcore Match , Tag Team Match , Triple Threat Match and Knockout Match .
PSP
Section::::PSP .
The game has the same graphics as the previous games in the SvR PSP ports , however , Slaughter , Eddie Guerrero and Jim Neidhart are PSP exclusive unlockable Legends .
MATCHES Section::::Matches .
This would be the last game to feature the Buried Alive Match , as it would not appear in its sequel SmackDown vs. Raw 2009 , or any other games to follow until WWE 2K16 ( however only in the 2 K Showcase ) RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The game was met with average to mixed reception upon release .
GameRankings and Metacritic gave it a score of 73.60 % and 71 out of 100 for the PlayStation 2 version ; 71.72 % and 74 out of 100 for the PlayStation 3 version ; 70.47 % and 71 out of 100 for the Xbox 360 version ; 66.20 % and 68 out of 100 for the PSP version ; 61.64 % and 61 out of 100 for the DS version ; 59.14 % and 59 out of 100 for the Wii version ; and 55 % for the Mobile version .
GameZone gave the Mobile version 5.5 out of 10 and said , " Overall it does more than most , has decent visuals , and runs pretty smoothly .
But it does n't have the proper mechanics to make it feel like a wrestling game – consequently , it comes off as an arcade button - masher . "
However , IGN gave the same version four out of ten and said , " Smackdown vs. Raw 2008 can only be recommended for the hardcore wrestling fan .
For anyone else looking to spice up their action gaming category I recommend Chess .
At least every match will be different . "
The PlayStation 2 version of WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 received a " Platinum " sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association ( ELSPA ) , indicating sales of at least 300,000 copies in the United Kingdom .
SEE ALSO
* List of licensed wrestling video games
* List of fighting games
* List of video games in the WWE 2 K Games series
* WWE 2 K REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS