SPONTANEOUS GLASS
BREAKAGE Spontaneous glass breakage is a phenomenon by which toughened glass ( or tempered ) may spontaneously break without any apparent reason .
The most common causes are : INSTALLATION DAMAGE Section::::Installation damage .
While glass is being moved and installed , it is easy for the glaziers to nick or chip the edges of the glass with various tools .
It is also possible for fasteners such as nails or screws used to attach glass stops to nick the glass edges if these fasteners are installed at an improper angle .
These small nicks or chips may not result in immediate breakage .
However , over time , as the glass expands and contracts , stress concentrations can develop around the nick , leading to breakage .
In the case of tempered glass the entire unit usually breaks .
BINDING IN THE FRAME
Section::::Binding in the frame .
Glass expands and contracts with changes in temperature and deflects due to wind , so almost all modern glass is set on resilient blocks at the bottom and with space for expansion at the sides and top .
The gaskets holding the glass in the frame are also usually resilient to cushion the glass against wind buffeting .
If no space is provided at the perimeter of the unit , the glass will bind against the frame , causing internal stresses to develop in the glass which can exceed the strength of glass , resulting in breakage .
INTERNAL DEFECTS AND INCLUSIONS IN THE GLASS Section::::Internal defects and inclusions in the glass .
Nickel sulfide inclusions ( " stones " ) can be present in the glass .
The most common cause of these inclusions is the use of stainless - steel machinery in the glassmaking and handling process .
Small shavings of stainless steel containing nickel change structure over time and grow , creating internal stresses in the glass .
When these stresses exceed the strength of the glass , breakage results .
This type of breakage is almost always found in tempered glass and is indicated by a distinctive " figure eight " pattern , with each " loop " of the figure eight approx .
30 mm in diameter .
Alternatively , small pieces of refractory brick can be eroded by the molten glass from the internal walls of the furnace during processing and become embedded in the finished glass .
These are also known as " stones " , and can also break the glass when the glass is heated , as they create thermal anomalies .
THERMAL STRESSES Section::::Thermal stresses .
Breakage due to thermal stress is most common in large pieces of sealed insulating glass with heavy heat - absorbing ( reflective ) coatings .
The coating is usually applied to the " number two " surface ( the inside face of the outside lite ) .
This causes the outside lite of glass to heat up more than the inside lite as the coating converts radiant heat from the Sun into sensible heat .
As the outer lite expands due to heating , the entire unit bends outward .
If the spacer bar or other edge condition connects the two lites of glass in a very rigid manner , bending stresses can develop which exceed the strength of the glass , causing breakage .
This was the cause of extensive glass breakage at the John Hancock Tower in Boston .
INADEQUATE GLASS
THICKNESS Section::::Inadequate glass thickness .
A pane that is too large or thin , having not been properly engineered for wind loads on the site , can be broken by the wind .
See Bernoulli 's Principle on wind .
REMEDIES Section::::Remedies .
Any breakage problem has more severe consequences where the glass is installed overhead or in public areas ( such as in high - rise buildings ) .
A safety window film can be applied to the tempered panes of glass to protect from its falling .
An old - fashioned precaution was to install metal screens below skylights .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
American Society for Testing and Materials ( ASTM )