AUSTRALIA – UNITED KINGDOM
RELATIONS Australia – United Kingdom relations , also referred to as Anglo – Australian relations , are the relations between the commonwealth realms of Australia and the United Kingdom , marked by cultural , institutional and language ties , extensive people - to - people links , aligned security interests , sporting tournaments ( notably The Ashes ) , and significant trade and investment co - operation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1766 during his first voyage to the Pacific , Royal Navy captain James Cook sailed along and mapped the east coast , which he named New South Wales and claimed for Great Britain .
Seventeen years later , following the loss of its American colonies in 1783 , the British Government sent a fleet of ships , the " First Fleet " , under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip , to establish a new penal colony in New South Wales .
A camp was set up and the flag raised at Sydney Cove on 26 January 1788 , and the British Crown Colony of New South Wales was formally promulgated on 7 February 1788 .
Further Crown Colonies were established in Van Diemen 's Land ( now known as Tasmania ) in 1803 ; Swan River Colony ( now known as Western Australia ) in 1828 ; South Australia in 1836 ; Victoria in 1851 ; and Queensland in 1859 .
The six colonies federated in 1901 and the Commonwealth of Australia was formed as a Dominion of the British Empire .
Australia fought alongside Britain and its Allies in World War I , notably at Gallipoli ( against the Ottoman Empire ) and the Western Front .
It fought with Britain and its allies again in World War II , protecting Britain 's Pacific colonies from Imperial Japan .
Until 1949 , Britain and Australia shared a common nationality code .
The final constitutional ties between the United Kingdom and Australia ended in 1986 with the passing of the Australia Act 1986 .
Formal economic relations between the two countries declined following Britain 's accession to the European Economic Community in 1973 .
Nevertheless , the United Kingdom remains the second largest overall foreign investor in Australia .
In turn , Australia is the seventh largest foreign direct investor in Britain .
Due to Australia 's history as a colony of Britain , the two nations retain significant shared threads of cultural heritage , many of which are common to all English - speaking countries .
English is the de facto language of both nations .
Both legal systems are based on the common law .
Pom is a common nickname given by Australians to British people , said in jest without malice or prejudice , in a similar way to how British ( and other ) people call Australians Aussies , and refer to Australia as " Oz " or " down under " ( a reference to the fact that Australia is notable for being entirely in the southern hemisphere ) .
MIGRATION Section::::Migration .
Streams of migration from the British Isles to Australia played a key role in Australia 's development , and the people of Australia are still predominantly of British or Irish origin .
According to the 2011 Australian Census , around 1.1 million Australians were born in Britain , despite the last substantial scheme for preferential migration from Britain to Australia ending in 1972 .
Former Australian prime minister Julia Gillard was born in Barry , Vale of Glamorgan in Wales .
The former leader of the Liberal Party of Australia and former prime minister Tony Abbott was also born in Britain , although to Australian parents .
There is a population of around 100,000 Australians in Britain , especially in Greater London .
In recent years there has been growing support for the idea of freedom of movement between the UK , Canada , Australia and New Zealand with citizens able to live and work in any of the four countries - similar to the Trans - Tasman Travel Arrangement between Australia and New Zealand .
MILITARY Section::::Military .
The two countries have a long history of close collaboration in military affairs .
In modern times they are members of the AUSCANNZUKUS military alliance including the Five Eyes intelligence - sharing alliance with the US , Canada and New Zealand , and the Five Power Defence Arrangements with Malaysia , Singapore and New Zealand .
They also collaborate in ad - hoc groupings like Combined Task Force 151 to counter piracy off Somalia , and the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 in 2014 .
Australia shared the British honours system until 1975 , and so four Australians were awarded the Victoria Cross in the Vietnam War despite Britain not participating .
Australia created its own VC in 1991 , made from the same block of metal as the British ones .
DIPLOMACY Section::::Diplomacy .
The contemporary political relationship between London and Canberra is underpinned by a robust bilateral dialogue at head - of - government , ministerial and senior officials level .
As Commonwealth realms , the two countries share a monarch , Queen Elizabeth II , and are both active members within the Commonwealth of Nations .
In 2006 , British Prime Minister Tony Blair became the first British head of government to address the Australian Parliament .
Australia maintains a High Commission in London .
The United Kingdom , in turn , maintains a High Commission in Canberra .
In September 2012 , the UK and Canada signed a Memorandum of Understanding on diplomatic cooperation , with the intention of extending the scheme to include Australia and New Zealand .
After the UK voted to leave the European Union in July 2016 , Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull phoned British Prime Minister Theresa May to float the idea of a free trade agreement between the two nations post - Brexit .
Australia was one of the first nations to publicly express interest in such an agreement after the vote .
The Australian Prime Minister has also suggested that an immigration and commercial accords could be negotiated with the two nations and New Zealand .
Proposed
closer ties and a customs union between Australia , the United Kingdom , New Zealand and Canada named CANZUK has been argued for by numerous individuals in both countries for several years .
Gallery SPORT Section::::Sport .
Australia excels in many sports that originate in England , and the two countries enjoy a close sporting rivalry .
The rivalry is typified by their Test cricket series for The Ashes ; there were ticker - tape parades when England won the 2005 series after 18 years of Australian domination .
The finest moment of the England rugby union team was beating Australia to win the 2003 Rugby World Cup in Sydney ; their rugby league counterparts have been far less successful .
The two countries usually vie for leadership of the medal table at the Commonwealth Games .
In 2014 England came top with 174 medals and Australia second with 137 medals .
Melbourne golfer Peter Thomson is the second - most successful at The Open Championship with 5 wins .
The two share a similar rivalry at the Olympic Games : throughout the latter half of the 20th Century , Australia was the more successful , finishing above Britain at all but three Olympic Games between 1956 and 2012 , the nadir occurring in 1996 when Australia finished in 7th place and Great Britain finished in 36th place .
Australian tennis players have been particularly successful in the men 's doubles at Wimbledon with pairings such as Mark Woodforde and 9-time winner Todd Woodbridge ; Rod Laver , John Newcombe and Margaret Court all won multiple singles titles at Wimbledon but no British player has won the Australian Open since 1934 .
CULTURE
Section::::Culture .
There is a long history of cultural exchange between the two countries , and Australians often use Britain as a stepping - stone to international success , whether these are artists such as Barry Humphries or businessmen such as Rupert Murdoch who controls flagship newspapers such as The Times and has a large stake in pay - TV company BSkyB. Australian soap operas became particularly popular in the late 1980s and 1990s , with Neighbours commanding British daily audiences of 19 million in 1990 although this declined to 5 million by 2007 , still nearly ten times the Australian audience .
Soap alumni such as Kylie Minogue and Jason Donovan have continued to have successful careers in music and on the stage in Britain , while Neighbours has even been held responsible for introducing the rising inflection to England .
Australian comedians have thrived in the UK , from Clive James to Adam Hills and Tim Minchin .
Academic Germaine Greer played a leading rôle in British gender politics after the publication of The Female Eunuch in London in 1970 .
Vassilie Trunoff led tours of his native Australia as ballet master of what became the English National Ballet .
In autumn 2013 , the Royal Academy held a major survey of Australian art .
INDUSTRY Section::::Industry .
The City of London has been funding the development of resources in Australia since colonial times , and Anglo - Australian companies have become some of the biggest multinational mining companies such as Rio Tinto Group and BHP Billiton .
The oil industry in Australia started with Commonwealth Oil Refineries , a collaboration between the Australian government and the Anglo - Persian Oil Company ( later BP ) .
Ties are strong in the media industry ; Rupert Murdoch 's involvement in British newspapers and BSkyB is mentioned above , but FremantleMedia has gone the other way to acquire and merge Crackerjack Productions with the creators of Neighbours .
The relationship is supported through the " Australian British Chamber of Commerce " in Australia and " Australian Business in the UK " based in the Australia Centre in London .
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING Section::::Science and engineering .
The two countries jointly operated the Anglo - Australian Observatory until 2010 including the Anglo - Australian Telescope and UK Schmidt Telescope at Siding Spring Observatory in New South Wales .
The Anglo - Australian Joint Project set up Woomera Test Range in South Australia in 1946 to test missiles such as Blue Steel ; more recently it has been used to test the BAE Systems Taranis , a prototype unmanned combat aircraft .
SISTER CITIES
* Berwick - upon - Tweed , Northumberland and Casey , Victoria
* Bexley , Greater London and Footscray , Victoria * Coventry , West Midlands and Parkes , New South Wales
* Fenland , Cambridgeshire and Maroochy Shire , Queensland
* Helston , Cornwall and Port Augusta , South Australia
* King 's Lynn , Norfolk and Sandringham , Victoria * Launceston , Cornwall and Launceston , Tasmania * Lincoln , Lincolnshire and Port Lincoln , South Australia
* Newcastle upon Tyne , Tyne and Wear and Newcastle , New South Wales * Penrith , Cumbria and Penrith , New South Wales
* Penzance , Cornwall and Bendigo , Victoria * Perth , Perth and Kinross and Perth , Western Australia
* Portsmouth , Hampshire and Sydney , New South Wales
* Whitby , North Yorkshire and Cooktown , Queensland * Whitby , North Yorkshire and West Wyalong , New South Wales * Tamworth , Staffordshire and Tamworth , New South Wales SEE
ALSO
* Anglosphere
* Britain – Australia Society * Anglo - Celtic
Australian *
English Australian *
Scottish Australian
* Welsh Australian
* Australians in the United Kingdom REFERENCES Section::::References .