INTERSTATE 70 IN KANSAS
In the U.S. state of Kansas , Interstate 70 contains the first segment to start being paved and to be completed in the Interstate Highway System .
It extends from the Colorado border near the town of Kanorado to the Missouri border in Kansas City .
The route covers and passes through several of the state 's principal cities in the process including Kansas City , Topeka , and Salina .
The route also passes through the cities of Lawrence , Junction City , and Abilene .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
I-70 is concurrent with US-24 from the Colorado state line until US-24 splits at Levant and runs north of I-70 .
At Colby , I-70 begins to turn southeast until it reaches Oakley , where US-40 joins with I-70 for a concurrent journey through most of the state .
The route remains flat until it reaches the county line between Russell and Ellsworth counties , where the road begins to traverse the Smoky Hills .
At Salina , Interstate 135 begins its journey southward toward Wichita , and I-70 continues through Abilene and Junction City , where the road begins to run through the Flint Hills .
In Topeka , I-70 intersects a child route , I-470 , twice .
The second time it is intersected , the Kansas Turnpike merges , making I-70 into a toll road .
This is one of only two sections of I-70 that are tolled ( the other is along the Pennsylvania Turnpike ) , with the maximum toll distance costing $ 17.50 as of 2016 .
I-70 carries this designation from Topeka to Bonner Springs .
It is the eastern terminus of the turnpike , and from there to 18th Street and extending on to the Kansas eastern border , the highway is free .
I-70 enters Missouri via a main northern route on the Lewis and Clark Viaduct above the confluence of the Kansas River and Missouri River and a route designated " Alternate I-70 " which has signs for I-70 as well as Interstate 670 just south of Kansas City main downtown area .
From Exit 275 at Abilene to the Missouri state line , the road is named the Dwight D. Eisenhower - Harry S. Truman Presidential Highway .
It retains the designation until Exit 16 in Missouri at Independence , the location of Truman 's presidential library .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The section of
I-70 that is now the Kansas Turnpike was finished by 1956 and opened to traffic .
West of Topeka , the freeway was constructed from Topeka west to Salina at its junction with U.S. Route 81 , as well as from Ogallah to Grainfield .
From Salina , the freeway was completed through Wilson the next year .
A segment of I-70 from Levant through Ogallah was finished by 1965 .
Another section was built the following year connecting Wilson to Grainfield .
The freeway was completed through Kansas with a last section near the Colorado border in 1970 .
EXIT LIST Section::::Exit list .
Exit numbers correspond to the mileposts where they 're located ( numbered east from the Colorado border ) , except for those at miles 381 , 386 , 388 , 396 , and 408 , which are part of the Kansas Turnpike and use its mileposts ( numbered nominally north from the Oklahoma border ) instead .
AUXILIARY ROUTES
Section::::Auxiliary routes .
I-70 has two auxiliary routes in Kansas : * - a loop around the southern side of Topeka , signed as the Dr. Martin Luther King ,
Jr. Memorial Highway and overlapping the Kansas Turnpike on the southeast side of town .
* - an alternate route for I-70 travelers through downtown Kansas City , signed as the Dillingham Freeway and as Alternate I-70 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Kansas Highway Maps :
Current , Historic , KDOT * - video of the Smoky Hills Wind Farm around mile 230 on Interstate 70 , near Ellsworth