NINETEEN MINUTES
Nineteen Minutes , published on March 9 , 2007 , is a novel by Jodi Picoult .
It was her first book to debut at # 1 on the New York Times Best Seller list .
This book is about a school shooting , and focuses on the events leading up to and following the incident .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story begins on March 6 , 2007 in the small town of Sterling , New Hampshire , tracking the lives of a number of characters on an " ordinary day . "
The characters include Alex Cormier , a superior court judge ; her daughter Josie , a junior in high school ; Lacy , Lewis , and Peter Houghton ; Detective Patrick Ducharme ; and several victims - to - be .
At the local high school , Sterling High , the story follows a routine day of students in classes , at the gym , and in the cafeteria .
Suddenly , a loud bang is heard from the parking lot , which turns out to be a bomb set off in Matt Royston 's car .
As the students are distracted by the noise , gunshots are fired .
When Patrick , the only detective on the Sterling police force , arrives at Sterling High , he searches the school to seek out the gunman , who is alleged to be a student .
After passing several dead and wounded victims , Patrick traps and arrests the shooter , Peter Houghton , in the locker room , where he finds two students , Josie Cormier and Matt Royston , lying on the floor surrounded in blood .
While Matt is dead , having been the only victim shot twice , Josie is not seriously injured , but only shocked : she can not remember what happened .
The shooting kills ten people ( nine students and one teacher ) and wounds many other people .
Throughout the book , time flashes back and forth between events before and after the shooting .
In the past , the reader learns that Peter and Josie were once close friends .
Peter was frequently the target of severe bullying at school , and Josie often stuck up for him .
The friends slowly drifted apart as they got older : Josie joined the popular crowd in order to protect her own interests , seeing her relationship to Peter as embarrassing .
The story pictures Peter as an outcast at home as well ; Peter believes his older brother Joey is favored by their parents .
Joey is a popular straight - A student and athlete , but feels it necessary to ridicule Peter to protect his reputation , even fabricating a story that Peter was adopted .
When Joey is killed in a car accident in 2006 , Lacy and Lewis Houghton are too upset to pay attention to their remaining son , causing a bigger rift between Peter and his parents .
In their sophomore year , Josie begins dating Matt , a popular jock who leads his friends Drew Girard and John Eberhard in bullying Peter .
Matt often calls Peter " homo " and " fag , " leading Peter to question his sexual orientation .
The bullying intensifies once Matt begins dating Josie , in his possessive efforts to keep her away from other boys .
On one occasion , Peter approaches Josie after school to try talking to her .
Matt beats him up , leaving Peter humiliated in front of the school .
The flashbacks also reveal several subplots : the difficult relationship between Josie and her single mother Alex , Alex 's dilemma of being a judge and a mother , Peter 's escape from bullying into the world of video games , Josie 's fear of falling out of the popular crowd and her suicide back - up plan when she does , Matt 's abusive behavior toward Josie , Josie 's pregnancy and subsequent miscarriage , as well as Lewis Houghton 's hunting lessons with his son Peter .
One month before the shooting , Peter realizes that he has feelings for Josie , and sends her an email expressing his love .
Courtney Ignatio reads this email before Josie and has Drew forward it to the entire school .
Courtney then convinces Peter that Josie likes him .
Peter asks Josie to join him later during lunch , only to suffer public humiliation as Matt pulls down Peter 's pants and exposes his genitals to a cafeteria full of students .
Peter 's psychotic break is triggered on the morning of the shooting when he turns on his computer and accidentally opens the email he wrote to Josie .
After the shooting , Peter is sent to jail while the trial proceeds .
The probable cause hearing is waived as Peter admits to killing ten people and wounding nineteen others .
Jordan , Peter 's defense attorney , uses battered person syndrome caused by severe bullying and abuse as a basis to convince the jury that Peter 's actions were justified as a result of his suffering from post - traumatic stress disorder .
Jordan argues that he was in a dissociative state at the time of the shooting .
In the final stage of the trial , Josie reveals that she was the one who shot Matt the first time after grabbing a gun that fell out of Peter 's bag .
He was abusive .
Peter later fired the fatal second shot .
Peter promised her he would n't tell anyone what she had done , and he kept this promise , happy to have Josie as his friend again .
Peter is convicted of eight counts of first - degree murder and two counts of second - degree murder and is sentenced to life in prison .
A month afterward , Peter commits suicide by stuffing a sock into his throat .
At the end of the book , one year from the date of the massacre , Josie has received a five - year sentence for accessory of manslaughter and is regularly visited in jail by her mother .
Throughout the book , Josie never told the whole story , instead repeating , " I ca n't remember . "
When Josie admits to shooting Matt , Peter 's sentence is reduced .
Alex and Patrick , who are expecting their first child , walk the halls of the high school .
Sterling High has been extensively remodeled after the shooting .
The cafeteria , the gym and locker room where the massacre took place have been replaced by a large glass atrium with a memorial to the dead in the center , a row of ten white chairs bolted to the floor .
A plaque declares the building " A Safe Harbor . "
CHARACTERS * Peter Houghton : An odd kid , he has been bullied for a majority of his life .
He has an avid interest in computers and video games and wears glasses , making him a frequent target of teasing .
He maintained a friendship with Josie Cormier until middle school , with her ultimately choosing popularity over her one true friend .
After Josie 's departure , he befriends Derek , often creating video games with him .
His home life was equally upsetting ; he never seemed to relate to his parents , despite his mother 's best efforts .
His older brother Joey teased Peter himself and even egged on the bullying , making up lies about him not even being a biological family member .
During his high school years , he realizes he is in love with Josie , sparking a drastic chain of events .
A love email he sends to her and the popular students interception of it is the catalyst in Peter 's actions .
After a lengthy trial and a conviction , Peter commits suicide by stuffing a sock down his throat .
* Josie Cormier : Once Peter 's loyal , sweet best friend , she stops hanging out with him in middle school for the popular crowd .
Josie has great difficulty maintaining her image over the years , torn between what she is expected to be and how she wants to be .
She realizes the shallowness of her clique and even acknowledges it on occasion , but she is too afraid to leave , fearing social obscurity at best .
She hates her friends and boyfriend Matt 's nasty behavior toward the less popular students , but never stands up for them .
Josie 's home life is n't too good either ; she has a very weak connection with her mother and never knew her father .
She clings to Matt for emotional support and comfort .
He becomes physically abusive towards her
and she never leaves him , possibly leading her to shoot him in the stomach the day of Peter 's rampage .
By the end , she is sentenced to five years in prison .
* Alex Cormier : Josie 's mother .
Throughout the novel , it is shown before and after the shooting that she has a great deal of trouble connecting to Josie .
The judge assigned to Peter 's case , until Josie is called in as a witness .
* Patrick Ducharme : Detective on the Sterling Police Force and Alex 's love interest .
He is a recurring character , appeared before in Perfect Match .
Is the head detective on the Sterling High case .
At the end of the book , he and Alex are romantically involved and expecting their first child * Lacy Houghton : Peter 's mother .
She is a midwife , and struggles to understand her son 's actions .
Also , when she discovers Joey was a heroin addict , she disposes of the evidence , as she can not bring herself to accept her deceased son
was anything other than perfect .
* Lewis Houghton : Peter 's father .
A happiness economist and college lecturer .
He owns many guns in his house and frequently goes hunting .
Lewis tried to introduce Peter to hunting , and often took him on trips , but Peter never liked the sport .
When Peter was in jail , he never visited him , instead , he went to the grave of the victims of the shooting .
It is revealed that he favored Joey over Peter , but he only acknowledges it at the end .
* Matt Royston : Josie 's boyfriend .
He is the most popular boy in school and is an aggressive hockey player .
Matt and his friend Drew always would bully Peter from kindergarten , shoving , elbowing and hitting him , pulling his pants down and calling him names .
He is very abusive to Josie , causing her to break her leg one time .
The final victim in the shooting , and the only victim shot twice .
*
Jordan McAfee :
Peter 's defense attorney .
He is a recurring character , appeared before in The Pact and Salem Falls .
Has a baby son and an older son Thomas ( also appears in the Pact and Salem Falls ) and is married to Selena McAfee .
He takes on Peter 's case because he believes that Peter deserves a fair trial .
* Selena McAfee :
Jordan 's wife who assists with her husband 's case and one of the few people who are sympathetic towards Peter .
She appeared before in the same books as her husband did , along with Jordan 's child from his first marriage , Thomas .
* Drew Girard : One of the popular kids and Matt 's best friend .
He , along with Matt , would constantly bully Peter .
Was shot in the shoulder while he was running with Matt and Josie .
* John Eberhard : One of the popular kids who was wounded in the head during the shooting .
He is left with severe brain damage , and is now mentally handicapped .
*
Brady Pryce : Another popular kid who dated Haley Weaver .
He and Haley were considered " The Brangelina of Sterling High "
He was injured protecting Haley in the shooting .
* Haley Weaver : Girlfriend of Brady Pryce and Sterling High senior .
She and Brady were considered " The Brangelina of Sterling High " .
Prior to the shooting , she was elected Homecoming Queen .
She was badly injured in the shooting , resulting in many plastic surgery operations on her face .
* Derek Markowitz : Peter 's only friend after Josie leaves him for the popular crowd .
He and Peter met when their mothers forced them to play soccer together and became friends since .
Derek enjoys making computer games , several were co - created with Peter .
*
Ed McCabe : A closeted gay math teacher who ends up dying during the shooting .
He offered support for Peter , who was confused about his sexuality during the book .
* Courtney Ignatio : Popular girl who hangs out with Josie
after she and Peter have a falling - out .
Courtney dies after being shot in the chest in the shooting .
She badly bullied Peter ; convincing him that Josie had feelings for him and then publicly humiliating him .
*
Joey Houghton :
Peter 's dead brother .
Joey was seen as the " all American son " , good grades , great athlete , etc .
However , this is contradicted by his actions later in the story ( such as when he bullied Peter or when he used heroin . )
Joey was killed by a drunk driver .
* Logan Rourke : Josie 's biological father .
Married , and not interested in Josie 's life .
Tried to bribe Josie with money to leave him alone .
VICTIMS Section::::Victims .
In order of death : * Maddie Shaw , Josie 's friend and a popular student .
She is the first to die .
* Courtney Ignatio , Josie 's friend and a popular student , she and Matt Royston were the catalysts that caused the shooting .
* Whit Obermeyer , a student shot in the hallways .
*
Topher McPhee , the school 's pot dealer .
* Grace Murtaugh , daughter of the town 's minister .
* Kaitlyn Harvey , a freshman with Down 's syndrome .
* Edward McCabe , the only teacher killed and Peter 's former math teacher .
* Noah James , senior and a jock .
* Justin Friedman , fluent in Elvish and unathletic , Jewish .
* Matt Royston , a popular jock , Josie 's boyfriend .
He was shot once in the stomach by Josie and once in the head by Peter .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The book received generally favorable reviews by critics , for the writing , character development , plot twists , and the moral issues raised , including peer pressure , popularity , self - image , school bullying , betrayal and deception , sexual orientation doubt , teen dating violence , suicide , video game violence , single parenthood and communication barriers between adolescents and adults .
The Associated Press acknowledged that although Peter 's guilt can not be in doubt from a legal perspective , it is hard for readers to know where to put the blame as the story unfolds .
Rocky Mountain News agreed , stating that while the beginning shooting scene makes it " painfully clear who the victims and killer are .
As the novel unfolds , Picoult succeeds in lifting those assumptions up for scrutiny , until villains and victims seem to blend into a motley jumble of alliances and rejection . "
The Free Lance - Star mentioned that Nineteen Minutes created a two - sided story that helps readers understand everything about the school shooting , which is more than what normal media coverage will provide about this type of tragedy .
The New York Times praised Picoult 's writing , commenting that she " writes articulately and clearly , making her all too much of a rarity among popular authors .
"
The Washington Post called the book not only a thriller that is " complete with dismaying carnage , urgent discoveries and 11th - hour revelations " , but also a source of serious moral questions about relationships between children and adult , and among children themselves .
The Boston Globe considered Nineteen Minutes " an insightful deconstruction of youthful alienation , of the shattering repercussions of bullying , and the disturbing effects of benign neglect . "
An ambiguous point in the story is the identity of the author of the handwritten journal entries at the start of the book chapters , with New York Times saying this writer may or may not be Peter , although " it does n't sound like him " , and Hippo Press analyzing that whether or not the writer is identified " does n't matter " ; the author maybe either Josie or Peter , and the point is that the diary pieces " provide insight into the workings of the teenage mind " , showing that they are " not all that different . "
Peter , the shooter , is also noted by USA Today as a lonely bullied student more similar to the offender in Heath High School shooting in Paducah , Kentucky than the offenders in Columbine High School massacre ( Both shooting incidents are mentioned in the story and used by Picoult as materials for research ) .
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ELEMENTS Section::::Autobiographical elements .
Jodi Picoult says her " children struggled with fitting in and being bullied " which made them " guinea pigs " for her characters in the novel .
She knew the topic , bullying , was a universal one because everyone has experienced it in some way .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Official Nineteen Minutes entry on MySpace