THE TERROR ( NOVEL )
The Terror is a 2007 novel by American author Dan Simmons .
It is a fictionalized account of Captain Sir John Franklin 's lost expedition of HMS Erebus and HMS Terror to the Arctic , in 1845–1848 , to locate the Northwest Passage .
In the novel , while Franklin and his crew are plagued by starvation and illness , and forced to contend with mutiny and cannibalism , they are stalked across the bleak Arctic landscape by a monster .
Most of the characters featured in The Terror are actual members of Franklin 's crew , whose unexplained disappearance has warranted a great deal of speculation .
The main characters in the novel include Sir John Franklin , commander of the expedition and captain of Erebus ; Francis Crozier , captain of Terror ; Dr. Harry D. S. Goodsir ; and Captain James Fitzjames .
The Terror was nominated for the British Fantasy Award in 2008 and adapted for the first season of an eponymous television series that aired on AMC TV in 2018 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The novel follows a non - linear narrative structure , beginning at a point approximately midway through the overall plot .
The narrative switches among multiple viewpoint characters and uses both third- and first - person narrative ( the latter in the form of Dr. Goodsir 's diary entries ) .
The story begins in the winter of 1847 .
For more than a year , HMS Terror and HMS Erebus have been trapped in ice , 28 miles north - northwest of King William Island .
The weather has been much colder than normal , the ships ' tinned provisions are dwindling and often putrid , and the sea ice and landmasses are mysteriously devoid of any wildlife that can be hunted .
In addition to the natural dangers , the crews are being stalked and attacked by a monster resembling an immense polar bear .
In flashbacks , the novel relates some of the backstory behind the expedition 's current predicament .
The Franklin expedition is the latest in a series of attempts to forge the Northwest Passage , all of which have ended in failure .
Sir John Franklin , having been recalled in disgrace from a government posting in Van Diemen 's Land , views the expedition as his last chance for glory and recognition .
Captain Francis Crozier , embittered by romantic rejection at the hands of Franklin 's niece , seeks to distract himself by again venturing into the Arctic .
The rest of the crew have signed on for adventure .
Although the expedition begins auspiciously enough , three men die of disease during their first winter in the ice , and soon afterward , Franklin makes the fateful decision to travel around the northeast coast of King William Island , which results in the ships ' becoming trapped .
In the summer of 1847 , Franklin sends out parties in various directions across the ice , in hopes of finding open water .
None of the parties succeeds in this goal .
However , one of the parties encounters a pair of " Esquimaux " on the ice , a young woman and an old man .
They accidentally shoot the man , whereupon they are set upon by the monster , who kills Lt . Graham Gore , the leader of the party .
When the party returns to the ships , the girl follows them .
Crozier names her " Lady Silence " , as her tongue appears to have been bitten off in the past , rendering her mute .
After the Esquimaux man dies aboard Erebus , the monster begins stalking and attacking the crews .
Although the beast shows signs of intelligence , the men believe it is nothing more than an unusually aggressive bear .
This assumption leads them to underestimate the creature .
Franklin is killed in a botched attempt to bait the creature out in the open , and a number of other officers and men are killed as the months progress .
Following Franklin 's death , Crozier becomes the expedition commander , with Captain James Fitzjames assuming the role of executive officer .
Despite some initial tension between them , the two men gradually become friends as they attempt to deal with the threats of the monster , disease , and impending starvation .
By 1848 , the crews become further debilitated by the extreme cold and lack of fresh food , and the monster continues to prey on them .
An ill - fated ' morale boosting ' New Year 's Eve carnivale masque ends with a large number of the expedition , including three of the four surgeons , being killed by the monster and friendly fire from the expedition 's Royal Marines detachment .
Crozier subsequently orders punished Caulker 's Mate Cornelius Hickey ( for wearing a white polar bear costume ) and two other men ( for unbecoming behavior ) with 50 lashes of the cat o ' nine tails .
Hickey begins to plot against the officers , especially Crozier and Lt .
John Irving , who had earlier discovered Hickey copulating with another member of the crew in Terrors hold .
As spring approaches , Erebus is eventually crushed and sunk by the relentless ice .
Its remaining crew decamps to Terror for a short time , until Crozier finally orders the ship abandoned .
The expedition 's 105 survivors relocate to ' Terror Camp ' , a tented refuge on King William Island .
After ruling out an attempt to reach the far side of the Boothia Peninsula , Crozier and Fitzjames conclude that their best hope is to man - haul the lifeboats of both ships south to the Canadian mainland and then down Back 's River to an outpost on Great Slave Lake , an arduous journey of several hundred miles .
However , before they can set out , Irving is set upon and murdered by Hickey .
Hickey lays the blame for Irving 's death on a band of Esquimaux hunters whom Irving had in fact befriended , and the Esquimaux are attacked and massacred in revenge .
From this point on , the crews fear and avoid the native population .
With all hope of outside rescue eliminated , the crews begin hauling the boats across King William Island .
The trek is brutal , and many of the men die from exhaustion , exposure , and disease , including Fitzjames .
There are rumblings of mutiny from Hickey and his growing entourage , and the monster continues to appear with deadly frequency , at one point slaughtering an entire boat crew as they explore an open lead in the ice .
With no other options , and despite mounting casualties , the crew continues to press south and eventually reach a position on the southern shore of the island that they name ' Rescue Camp ' .
From there , the survivors splinter into several groups .
Hickey and his faction declare their intent to return to Terror Camp , while another group opts to return to Terror herself , despite the possibility that she has been crushed by the ice .
Crozier agrees to let them go , but later he and Goodsir are lured away from the camp and ambushed by Hickey 's men .
Crozier shoots and fatally wounds Magnus Manson , Hickey 's lover and chief crony , and is then shot and apparently killed by Hickey , while Goodsir is taken hostage .
The remainder of the crew decides to keep marching south .
All three groups eventually meet with disaster .
Hickey 's group , despite resorting to cannibalism , is stopped short of its goal by a blizzard , and most of the men either starve or freeze to death , while the remainder are murdered by Hickey , who has begun to suffer delusions of godhood .
Goodsir commits suicide by poisoning himself , ensuring that any of Hickey 's crew who eats his body will die .
The monster delivers a death blow to Hickey , but pulls away and does not consume his soul , seemingly because Hickey 's soul is befouled
( a later vision relayed to Crozier suggests that the monster will eventually become sick and die from consuming the souls of white explorers ) .
The other groups ' fates are not revealed , but it is implied that they all die as well , rendering Crozier the expedition 's sole survivor .
Crozier is rescued by Lady Silence , who treats his wounds with native medicine and brings him with her on her travels .
As he recovers from his injuries , Crozier experiences a series of dreams or visions which finally reveal the true nature of the creature .
It is called the Tuunbaq , a demon created millennia ago by the Esquimaux goddess Sedna to kill her fellow spirits , with whom she had become angry .
After a war lasting 10,000 years , the other spirits defeated the Tuunbaq , and it turned back on Sedna , who banished it to the Arctic wastes .
There , the Tuunbaq began preying on the Esquimaux , massacring them by the thousands , until their most powerful shamans discovered a way to communicate with the demon .
By sacrificing their tongues to the beast and promising to stay out of its domain , these shamans , the sixam ieua , were able to stop the Tuunbaq 's rampage .
Lady Silence is revealed to be one of these shamans , and she and Crozier eventually become lovers .
He chooses to abandon his old life and join her as a sixam ieua .
CHARACTERS Captain Francis Crozier Commander James Fitzjames
Dr Harry D.S. Goodsir
Lieutenant John Irving Caulker 's Mate Cornelius Hickey Seaman Magnus Manson Ice Master Thomas Blanky Captain of the Foretop Harry Peglar Subordinate Officers '
Steward John Bridgens Ship 's Boy Robert Golding Lady Silence ( Silna ) Sir John Franklin
The Tuunbaq TELEVISION SERIES
ADAPTATION Section::::Television series adaptation .
After the success of the show
The Walking Dead , the US network AMC produced a horror TV series based on this novel .
In March 2016 , it was confirmed that AMC had ordered 10 episodes of the show , which premiered on March 26 , 2018 .
David Kagjanich and Soo Hugh served as co - showrunners , with Kagjanich also penning the adaptation .
Ridley Scott , Alexandra Milchan , Scott Lambert , David Zucker , and Guymon Casady served as executive producers .
PUBLICATION INFORMATION * 784 pages .
REFERENCES