DOLORES CLAIBORNE ( FILM )
Dolores Claiborne is a 1995 American psychological thriller drama film directed by Taylor Hackford and starring Kathy Bates , Jennifer Jason Leigh , and David Strathairn .
It is based on the novel of the same name by Stephen King .
The plot focuses on the strained relationship between a mother and her daughter , largely told through flashbacks , after her daughter arrives to her remote hometown on a Maine island where her mother has been accused of murdering the elderly woman for whom she cared .
The screenplay for Dolores Claiborne was adapted by Tony Gilroy , and the film was shot in Nova Scotia in 1994 .
Kathy Bates stated in a retrospective interview that her performance as the titular Dolores was her favorite performance she had ever given .
In 2013 , Time magazine named the film among the top ten greatest Stephen King film adaptations .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1995 , Dolores Claiborne works as a domestic servant on Little Tall Island in Maine .
Dolores has a struggle with her elderly , paralyzed employer , Vera Donovan , in her mansion .
Vera falls down the staircase and Dolores ransacks the kitchen .
She is caught by a mailman , who sees her standing over Vera with a rolling pin , apparently intending to kill her .
Vera dies and the police begin a murder investigation .
Dolores ' daughter , Selena St. George , is a successful journalist , living in New York City , who battles depression and substance abuse .
Selena arrives in town to support her mother , despite her own doubts about Dolores ' innocence .
Dolores insists she did not kill her employer .
Selena finds little sympathy for Dolores , as the entire town believes she murdered her husband , Joe St. George , almost 20 years earlier .
Some of the town 's inhabitants harass her by vandalizing her home , taunting her in the street , and driving by her house and screaming at her .
Detective John Mackey , who was the chief detective in her husband 's murder case , is determined to put Dolores away for life .
Selena also believes Dolores killed her father , and has not spoken to her mother in over a decade .
In 1975 , Joe was an abusive alcoholic , and one night Dolores had threatened to kill him if he ever harmed her again .
Selena , then 13 years old , was unaware her mother was being abused .
Dolores went to work as a housemaid for millionaire Vera Donovan in order to raise enough money to pay for Selena 's education .
Dolores went to the bank to withdraw her money so she and Selena could flee Joe 's abuse .
The plan backfired , however , when the bank notified Dolores that Joe stole the money from Selena 's savings account .
Dolores says Vera threw herself down the staircase and begged Dolores to put her out of her misery .
Mackey refuses to believe her , and reveals that Vera has left her entire fortune to Dolores .
Mackey informs them the will is eight years old , which nearly convinces Selena her mother is guilty .
Dolores eventually tells Selena that before he died , Dolores realized Joe was sexually abusing Selena when he gave her an heirloom locket .
Selena has always furiously denied any abuse , and after a fierce argument , she storms out , leaving Dolores to fend for herself .
Back in 1975 , Dolores broke down and confessed Joe 's abuses to Vera , who remained characteristically cold until Dolores mentioned that he was molesting Selena .
Turning unusually sympathetic , Vera implied she killed her own late , unfaithful husband , Jack , and engineered it to look like an accident .
Vera 's confession formed a bond between the two women and convinced Dolores to take control of her situation .
As a total solar eclipse approached , Dolores was pointedly given the rest of the day off by Vera .
Dolores and Selena had an argument about Dolores ' suspicions regarding Joe 's sexual abuse .
Selena fled home for the weekend to work at a hotel , where guests had flocked for the eclipse .
Joe soon returned from working on a fishing boat , and Dolores offered him a bottle of Scotch to celebrate the eclipse .
After Joe got drunk , Dolores revealed she knew he stole from Selena 's account and molested his own daughter , then provoked him into attacking her and falling down an old well , leaving him to die as he plunges to the stone bottom .
Selena hears this entire story on a tape left for her by Dolores , who had foreseen her departure .
While on the ferry , Selena suddenly uncovers a repressed memory of her father forcing her to give him a handjob .
Realizing everything , Selena rushes back to Dolores as she is attending the coroner 's inquest .
As Mackey makes a case to be sent to a grand jury in an attempt to indict Dolores for murder , Selena arrives and tells him he has no admissible evidence , he is only doing this because of his personal vendetta against Dolores , and that despite an often stormy relationship , Vera and Dolores loved each other .
Realizing that the case would likely end with either a dismissal or acquittal , Mackey reluctantly drops the charges .
Dolores and Selena reconcile on the ferry wharf before Selena returns to New York .
CAST * Kathy Bates as Dolores Claiborne
* Jennifer Jason Leigh as Selena St. George * Ellen Muth as Young Selena
* Taffara Jessica Stella Murray as 5-year - old Selena
* Judy Parfitt as Vera Donovan * Christopher Plummer as Detective John Mackey * David Strathairn as Joe St. George * Eric Bogosian as Peter * John C. Reilly as Constable Frank Stamshaw * Bob Gunton as Mr. Pease * Roy Cooper as Magistrate * Wayne Robson as Sammy Marchant * Ruth Marshall as Secretary
* Weldon Allen as Bartender
* Tom Gallant as Searcher
* Kelly Burnett as Jack Donovan PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Dolores Claiborne was filmed in Nova Scotia , Canada .
THEMES AND INTERPRETATIONS Section::::Themes and interpretations .
Though typically classified as a drama and psychological thriller , some critics , such as Roger Ebert , have classified Dolores Claiborne as a horror film , while it has also been identified as a Gothic romance .
REPRESSION Section::::Repression .
Film theorist Kirsten Thompson identifies the film as a melodrama , " produced by the repression of specific traumas , [ in this case ] domestic violence and incest . "
According to Martha McCaughey and Neal King , the film 's use of flashbacks suggest a specific narrative point of view when considering the film 's themes of abuse and incest between Dolores , as well as Selena and Joe : " That all the flashbacks save one belong to Dolores tells us that not only are we watching her story ; it also tells us of the unavailability of the past to Selena , and of the displacement and repression forced into play by the girl 's experience of incest . "
The flashback scene in which Selena recalls her father 's forcing her to masturbate him on the ferry has been particularly noted by critics : " Here , Selena and the viewer alike come finally to see Joe 's transgressions and , by implication , to understand the truth of Dolores ' tale .
Throughout this scene the perspective offered by the camera remains firmly focused on the reactions of the victim of the sexual crime . "
FEMINIST INTERPRETATION Section::::Feminist interpretation .
Dolores Claiborne has been cited as a " self - consciously feminist " film that " combines the melodramatic impulse with the investigative structure of a noir crime thriller and a contemporary feminist consciousness .
" The film has also been read as an example of a maternal melodrama that features an " idealized mother - figure " who sacrifices the needs of her own for others .
In the book Screening Genders , it is noted that one scholar considered Dolores Claiborne and Stage Door ( 1937 ) to be the only " truly feminist " films made in Hollywood , in that they " do n't cop out at the end . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Dolores Claiborne received mostly positive reviews from critics ; it currently holds an 83 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 40 reviews with an average rating of 6.6 .
The film also has a rating of 62 on metacritic citing generally favorable reviews .
Janet Maslin of The New York Times called it " a vivid film that revolves around Ms. Bates 's powerhouse of a performance ...
Only after the film has carefully laid the groundwork for a story of old wounds and violent mishaps does the anticlimactic truth become apparent .
"
Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars and praised the performances of Bates and Leigh , saying : " This is a horror story , all right , but not a supernatural one ; all of the elements come out of such everyday horrors as alcoholism , wife beating , child abuse and the sin of pride . "
Entertainment Weekly , however , gave the film a negative review , awarding it a D+ rating and saying : " This solemnly ludicrous " psychological " thriller is like one of Hollywood 's old - hag gothics turned into a therapeutic grouse - a - thon – it 's Hush … Hush , Sweet Charlotte for the Age of Oprah . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The movie debuted at number three for the week of March 26 , 1995 with $ 5,721,920 .
It went on to make $ 24,361,867 domestically .
That ranks it as the 15th highest - grossing film based on a Stephen King novel , unadjusted for inflation .
Adjusting for inflation , it ranks as the 17th highest .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
Kathy Bates and Jennifer Jason Leigh were nominated for the Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress awards at the 22nd Saturn Awards .
Ellen Muth also won the Tokyo International Film Festival Award for Best Supporting Actress .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring eclipses NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS