THIS LITTLE LIGHT OF MINE "
This Little Light of Mine " is a gospel song written for children in the 1920s by Harry Dixon Loes .
It was later adapted by Zilphia Horton , amongst many other activists , in connection with the civil rights movement .
Although the words of the song have a Biblical theme , it is unclear as to which specific Bible verse it is based upon .
Today , many versions of the song are available .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Harry Dixon Loes , who studied at the Moody Bible Institute and the American Conservatory of Music , was a musical composer and teacher , who wrote or co - wrote several other gospel songs .
The song has since entered the folk tradition , first being collected by John Lomax in 1939 .
Often thought of as a Negro spiritual , it can be found in The United Methodist Hymnal , # 585 , adapted by William Farley Smith in 1987 .
The song takes its theme from some of Jesus 's remarks to his followers .
Matthew 5:14 - 16 gives : " Ye are the light of the world .
A city that is set on an hill can not be hid .
Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel , but on a candlestick ; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house .
Let your light shine before men , that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heaven .
" The parallel passage in Luke 11:33 gives : " No man , when he hath lighted a candle , putteth it in a secret place , neither under a bushel , but on a candlestick , that they which come in may see the light . "
VERSIONS Section::::Versions .
The song has also been secularised into " This Little Girl of Mine " as recorded by Ray Charles in 1956 and later The Everly Brothers .
It has often been published with a set of hand movements to be used for the instruction of children .
Under the influence of Zilphia Horton , Fannie Lou Hamer , and others , it eventually became a Civil Rights anthem in the 1950s and 1960s , especially the version by Betty Fikes .
The Seekers recorded it for their second UK album , Hide & Seekers ( also known as The Four & Only Seekers ) in 1964 .
Over time it also became a very popular children 's song , recorded and performed by the likes of Raffi in the 1980s .
Odetta and the Boys Choir of Harlem performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman on September 17 , 2001 , on the first show after Letterman resumed broadcasting , after having been off the air for several nights following the events of 9/11 .
LZ7 took their version of the song named " This Little Light " to number 26 in the UK Singles Chart .
The song is sung in several scenes of the 1994 film Corrina , Corrina starring Whoopi Goldberg and Ray Liotta .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Spiritual lyrics
* Top 10 Civil Rights songs
*
This Little Light of Mine for choir .
* recording by Derek Lee Ragin of " This Little Light of Mine " *
" This Little Light of Mine " Doris McMurray , Goree Farm , Huntsville , TX : John and Ruby Lomax 1939 Southern States Recording Trip .