PAT VENDITTE Patrick Michael Venditte ,
Jr. (; born June 30 , 1985 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher who currently plays for the San Francisco Giants .
He has played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Oakland Athletics , Toronto Blue Jays , Seattle Mariners and Los Angeles Dodgers .
After attending Creighton University , Venditte was drafted by the New York Yankees in 2008 .
He signed with the Athletics as a free agent before the 2015 season , and made his MLB debut that year .
Venditte is a switch pitcher , capable of pitching proficiently with both arms .
He is recognized as the only active professional pitcher who is able to do this .
Venditte 's rare ability to pitch with either arm required both Major and Minor League Baseball to create a rule for ambidextrous pitchers , known colloquially as the " Pat Venditte Rule " .
This rule essentially requires any ambidextrous pitcher to declare which hand he will use to pitch to a batter before the at - bat starts , and to throw with that hand through the entire at - bat ( unless he is injured during the at - bat ) .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Pat Jr. was born on June 30 , 1985 in Omaha , Nebraska , one of four children of Pat Sr . and Janet Venditte .
Pat Sr .
played college baseball as a catcher .
Though his son is naturally right - handed , Pat Sr . trained his son to throw with both arms to give his son an edge in athletic competitions .
Toward this end , the Venditte backyard included astroturf , a batting cage , a radar gun , and a pitching machine .
In addition to training both arms from a young age , Pat Jr. practiced punting footballs with both legs to establish the leg motion needed when pitching with each arm .
Venditte used both arms when playing in Little League , which sometimes caused him to be confused for twins .
Venditte attended Omaha Central High School .
He had a 15–4 win – loss record during his senior year , earning All - Nebraska second - team honors .
COLLEGE CAREER
Section::::College career .
Venditte joined the Creighton Bluejays in 2005 as a walk - on .
Creighton head coach Ed Servais did not allow Venditte to pitch with both arms during his five appearances his freshman year , fearing the spectacle would become a " circus " .
Starting with his sophomore season , Venditte regularly used both arms in collegiate play ; he posted a 3.02 earned run average ( ERA ) in innings pitched .
After the season , he played collegiate summer baseball for the Quincy Gems of the Central Illinois Collegiate League .
In his junior year , Venditte appeared in 36 of Creighton 's 58 games before appearing in the 2007 NCAA Division I Baseball Tournament .
His opponents batting average ( OBA ) of .185 was the fourth - best in the nation , and he posted a 1.85 ERA .
At one point during the season , Venditte had a streak of scoreless innings .
On May 28 , 2007 , Collegiate Baseball named Venditte the national player of the week .
For the season , Venditte earned first - team All - Conference honors for the Missouri Valley Conference and was named Most Valuable Player of the conference tournament , in which Creighton won its first conference championship .
He was named to the All - American third team for the 2007 season .
Venditte was also voted Midwest Region Pitcher of the Year by online pitching magazine InsidePitching.com .
After the season , he played collegiate summer baseball for the Wisconsin Woodchucks in the Northwoods League .
As the Woodchucks ' closer , he had a 4–1 record , 9 saves , a 1.76 ERA , and a .154 opponents ' batting average .
On June 8 , 2007 , the New York Yankees selected Venditte in the 45th round of the 2007 Major League Baseball draft with the 1,345th overall pick .
Venditte was surprised by the pick , because he had told all major league scouts that he intended to return to Creighton for his senior year .
The Yankees called him during the 30th round of the draft , asking him how much it would take to sign him , but Venditte refused to set a price .
Ultimately , the Yankees were unable to sign Venditte before the August 15 , 2007 , signing deadline .
Venditte said that he was not quite ready to turn professional and wanted to build velocity with his left arm and add another pitch with his right .
Venditte was once again drafted by the Yankees in the 2008 Major League Baseball draft , this time in the 20th round with the 620th overall pick , and this time , he decided to sign .
PROFESSIONAL CAREER
NEW YORK YANKEES Section::::Professional career .
Section::::New York Yankees .
His initial assignment was to the Staten Island Yankees of the Class - A Short - Season New York – Penn League .
On June 19 , 2008 , in his first minor league appearance with Staten Island against the Brooklyn Cyclones , Venditte pitched a scoreless ninth inning for a Yankees win .
Before Venditte faced the last Cyclone batter , Ralph Henriquez , a switch - hitter , upon choosing to bat left- or right - handed ( with Venditte subsequently choosing to pitch with the same hand ) , Henriquez would then go to the other side of the plate ( and adjust his shin guard — which is worn on the front leg when a batter takes his stance ) to regain the advantage .
After this had happened several times the teams appealed to the umpiring crew , which ruled that the batter must first select from which side of the plate he intended to hit , and that the pitcher would then be allowed to declare with which arm he would pitch ( the Venditte Rule , adopted several weeks later by the umpires ' association , would make the opposite determination and preserve the traditional right of a switch - hitter to choose an opposite - handed match - up ) .
Venditte subsequently struck out Henriquez , who slammed his bat against the dirt , to end the game .
A film of the incident received notoriety on the Internet and the tale was recounted in a number of places , including within the baseball compendium Rollie 's Follies .
Venditte completed the 2008 season with 23 saves in 30 appearances with a 0.83 ERA .
His performance earned him a spot on the New York – Penn League
All - Star team and the Minor League Baseball Yearly Award for Best Short - Season Reliever .
For the 2009 season , he was assigned to the Charleston RiverDogs of the Class A South Atlantic League .
He was promoted to the Tampa Yankees of the Class A - Advanced Florida State League on June 26 , 2009 .
He finished the regular season with a 2.21 ERA and 2 saves in 21 appearances .
In October , Venditte pitched for Águilas del Zulia in the Venezuelan Winter League .
Venditte pitched for the Yankees in a spring training game against the Atlanta Braves on March 30 , 2010 , giving up one earned run on two hits and a walk in innings .
He started the 2010 season in Tampa , posting a 1.73 ERA through innings in 41 appearances .
On August 31 , 2010 Venditte was promoted to the Trenton Thunder of the Class - AA Eastern League .
Venditte pitched to a 3.41 ERA in 51 appearances with Trenton in 2011 .
Though Venditte was eligible to be selected in the Rule 5 draft during the 2011–12 offseason , the Yankees chose not to protect him .
However , he was not chosen by any MLB team .
During the 2011–12 offseason , Venditte pitched in the Mexican Pacific League .
Venditte was promoted to the Scranton / Wilkes - Barre Yankees of the Class - AAA International League for Opening Day in 2012 .
He suffered a torn labrum in his right shoulder .
He spent most of the 2013 season rehabilitating his shoulder , while also pitching exclusively with his left arm .
He pitched for the Italian national baseball team in the 2013 World Baseball Classic , and for Trenton in the 2013 postseason .
He then pitched in the Mexican Pacific League over the winter , and struggled .
The Yankees did not invite Venditte to spring training in 2014 .
Though Venditte had excellent minor league numbers , he was not considered a top prospect because of his age and , scouts believed , underwhelming fastball velocity .
He started the 2014 season with Trenton , but was called up again to Scranton / Wilkes - Barre after a month , in which he pitched to a 0.82 ERA and 0.73 walks plus hits per inning pitched ratio in 22 innings .
In his first outing after the promotion , he struck out all five batters that he faced , three throwing left - handed and two throwing right - handed .
OAKLAND ATHLETICS Section::::Oakland Athletics .
After the 2014 season , Venditte became a free agent .
During the offseason , he signed a minor league contract with the Oakland Athletics , receiving an invitation to spring training in 2015 .
Venditte began the 2015 season with the Nashville Sounds of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League .
He pitched to a 1.36 ERA with 33 strikeouts in 17 games for Nashville before he was promoted to the Athletics for his first major - league stint on June 5 .
He pitched two scoreless innings , and got his first strikeout in his major league debut .
Venditte pitched in four games , not allowing a run in innings pitched , before he strained his right shoulder and the Athletics placed Venditte on the disabled list on June 12 .
Venditte was reactivated by the A 's on August 3 , 2015 and optioned to AAA Nashville .
He was recalled to the A 's on August 15 and earned his first major league win on August 30 .
Overall , Venditte posted an ERA of 4.40 in 26 games for Oakland in 2015 .
TORONTO BLUE JAYS Section::::Toronto Blue Jays .
On October 19 , 2015 , Venditte was claimed off waivers by the Toronto Blue Jays .
He was assigned to the Triple - A Buffalo Bisons to start the 2016 season , and was recalled by the Blue Jays on April 13 after Arnold León was designated for assignment .
Venditte made his Blue Jays debut on April 13 , 2016 against the New York Yankees , pitching one scoreless inning to finish a 7–2 Blue Jays win .
On April 27 , he was optioned back to Triple - A. Venditte was recalled on May 17 , and sent back on May 25 .
On June 7 , Venditte was recalled once again .
Overall , Venditte posted an ERA of 5.19 in 8 games for Toronto in 2016 .
SEATTLE MARINERS Section::::Seattle Mariners .
On August 6 , 2016 , Venditte was traded to the Seattle Mariners for a player to be named later .
He was optioned to the Triple - A Tacoma Rainiers on August 6 , and was recalled on August 27 .
The Mariners outrighted Venditte off of the 40-man roster to Tacoma after the season .
PHILADELPHIA
PHILLIES Section::::Philadelphia Phillies .
On March 12 , 2017 , the Mariners traded Venditte to the Philadelphia Phillies in exchange for minor league player Joey Curletta .
He elected free agency on November 6 , 2017 .
LOS ANGELES DODGERS Section::::Los Angeles Dodgers .
On November 27 , 2017 , Venditte signed a minor league contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers .
After beginning the season with the AAA Oklahoma City Dodgers , he was called up to the majors on May 12 , 2018 .
He was selected to represent the Pacific Coast League at the Triple - A All - Star Game .
He was designated for assignment by the Dodgers on November 28 .
PITCHING STYLE
Section::::Pitching style .
When using his right arm , Venditte used to deliver over the top and could throw a slider and curveball , as well as a fastball at around that topped out at .
His left - handed delivery is side - armed in which he throws a slider and a fastball that reaches the low - to - mid 80 's .
Following Venditte 's 2012 surgery on his right shoulder , Gil Patterson worked with him on a right - handed sidearm delivery .
Although the injury slowed his right arm , Venditte 's delivery is now almost identical from either side , and observers have mistaken him for identical twins because he warms up one hand with the starting pitchers and the other with the relievers .
Venditte is only ambidextrous when pitching ; he is exclusively right - handed when performing tasks such as swinging a golf club , writing , or eating .
Venditte generally pitches with his right arm against right - handed batters and left - handed against left - handed batters , which minimizes his opponent 's advantage when strategically ordering batters in the line - up based on which side of the plate they hit from .
Mizuno has custom - made six - fingered gloves for Venditte since the age of seven with a thumb - hole on each side , allowing him to easily switch back and forth .
By splitting his pitches between his arms , he is able to pitch longer than traditional pitchers before becoming fatigued ; ESPN in 2015 speculated that Venditte " has quite possibly thrown more baseballs than any other man his age in history because he 's had twice as many arms with which to throw them " .
THE PAT VENDITTE RULE Section::::The Pat Venditte Rule .
Venditte 's rare ambidextrous abilities prompted the Professional Baseball Umpire Corporation ( PBUC ) to issue a new rule for dealing with ambidextrous pitchers , limiting the number of times that a switch - pitcher and switch - hitter can change sides during one at - bat .
After consulting with a variety of sources , including the Major League Baseball Rules Committee , the PBUC issued its new guidelines on July 3 , 2008 .
OBR Rule 8.01(f )
currently reads : * A pitcher must indicate visually to the umpire - in - chief , the batter and any runners the hand with which he intends to pitch , which may be done by wearing his glove on the other hand while touching the pitcher 's plate .
The pitcher is not permitted to pitch with the other hand until the batter is retired , the batter becomes a runner , the inning ends , the batter is substituted for by a pinch - hitter or the pitcher incurs an injury .
In the event a pitcher switches pitching hands during an at - bat because he has suffered an injury , the pitcher may not , for the remainder of the game , pitch with the hand from which he has switched .
The pitcher shall not be given the opportunity to throw any preparatory pitches after switching pitching hands .
Any change of pitching hands must be indicated clearly to the umpire - in - chief .
Both NCAA and the National Federation of State High School Associations ( NFHS ) have adopted similar rules .
NCAA rule 9 - 2k and NFHS rule 6–1–1 .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Venditte is married to Erin , whom he met while they were both enrolled at Creighton .
They reside in Omaha during the offseason .
SEE ALSO
* Greg A. Harris , the only other " switch - pitcher " in Major League Baseball 's modern era .
Harris enjoyed a 15-year career as a right - handed pitcher and threw left - handed to only two batters in a single MLB game due to his teams not allowing him to pitch left - handed once he had developed the skill to do so .
* Tony Mullane , a dead - ball - era pitcher who routinely switch - pitched
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
E:60 Pat Venditte
* Pat Venditte –
MiLB statistics