LOWER MOTOR NEURON LESION
A lower motor neuron lesion is a lesion which affects nerve fibers traveling from the ventral horn or anterior grey column of the spinal cord to the relevant muscle(s ) – the lower motor neuron .
One major characteristic used to identify a lower motor neuron lesion is flaccid paralysis – paralysis accompanied by loss of muscle tone .
This is in contrast to an upper motor neuron lesion , which often presents with spastic paralysis – paralysis accompanied by severe hypertonia .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
* Muscle paresis or paralysis * Fibrillations * Fasciculations – caused by increased receptor concentration on muscles to compensate for lack of innervation .
* Hypotonia or atonia – Tone is not velocity dependent .
* Hyporeflexia – Along with deep reflexes even cutaneous reflexes are also decreased or absent
* Strength – weakness is limited to segmental or focal pattern , Root innervated pattern
The extensor Babinski reflex is usually absent .
Muscle paresis / paralysis , hypotonia / atonia , and hyporeflexia / areflexia are usually seen immediately following an insult .
Muscle wasting , fasciculations and fibrillations are typically signs of end - stage muscle denervation and are seen over a longer time period .
Another feature is the segmentation of symptoms – only muscles innervated by the damaged nerves will be symptomatic .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
Most common causes of lower motor neuron injuries are trauma to peripheral nerves that serve the axons – a virus that selectively attacks ventral horn cells .
Disuse atrophy of the muscle occurs i.e.
, shrinkage of muscle fibre finally replaced by fibrous tissue ( fibrous muscle )
Other causes include Guillain –
Barré syndrome , C. botulism , polio , and cauda equina syndrome ; another common cause of lower motor neuron degeneration is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis .
DIAGNOSIS DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
* Myasthenia gravis – synaptic transmission at motor end - plate is impaired * Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis – causes death of motor neurons , although exact cause is unknown it has been suggested that abnormal build - up of proteins proves toxic for the neurons .
SEE ALSO
*
Lower motor neuron *
Upper motor neuron * Upper motor neuron lesion
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://library.med.utah.edu/neurologicexam/html/motor_anatomy.html#06