FRENCH FASHION Fashion in France is an important aspect in the spectrum of culture and social life , as well as being an important aspect of the economy .
Fashion design and production gained prominence in France from the 15th century .
From the 17th century , it exploded into a rich industry both for local consumption and for export .
The Royal Minister of Finances , Jean - Baptiste Colbert , expressed it as " Fashion is to France what the gold mines of Peru are to Spain ... " .
During the 19th century , fashion transitioned into many styles .
The modern term of haute couture originated in the 1860s , for fashion in good taste .
The term prêt - à - porter was born in the 1960s , reacting against the traditional notions of fashion and garment - making process , satisfying the needs of pop culture and mass media .
Paris acts as the center of the fashion industry and holds the name of global fashion capital .
The city is home to many prime designers , including Chanel , Louis Vuitton , Givenchy , Pierre Cardin , Yves Saint Laurent , Dior , Jean Paul Gaultier , Hermès , Lanvin , Chloé , Rochas , and Céline .
With the decentralization of the fashion industry , many cities including : Lyon , Marseille , Bordeaux , Toulouse , Lille and Strasbourg have their own luxury districts and avenues .
In recent times , these have become important customers and significant producers .
Île - de - France , Manosque ,
La Gacilly ( near Rennes ) , and Vichy lead the cosmetic industry , and house well - known international beauty houses such as L'Oreal , Lancôme , Guerlain , Clarins , Yves Rocher , L'Occitane , Vichy , etc .
The cities of Nice , Cannes and St. Tropez among others in the French riviera are well known as places of pleasure , annually hosting many media celebrities and personalities , potentates , and billionaires .
HISTORY 17TH CENTURY , THE BARROQUE AND CLASSICISME FASHION PRINTS Section::::History .
Section::::17th century , the Barroque and Classicisme .
Section::::Fashion prints .
The association of France with fashion and style ( la mode ) is widely credited as beginning during the reign of Louis XIV when the luxury goods industries in France came increasingly under royal control and the French royal court became , arguably , the arbiter of taste and style in Europe .
The rise in prominence of French fashion was linked to the creation of the fashion press in the early 1670s ( due in large part to Jean Donneau de Visé ) , which transformed the fashion industry by marketing designs to a broad public outside the French court and by popularizing notions such as the fashion " season " and changing styles .
The prints were usually 14.25 X 9.5 and depicted a man or woman of quality wearing the latest fashions .
They were usually shown head to toe , but with no individuality or defined facial features .
Sometimes the figure would be depicted from behind in order to showcase a different side of the clothing .
Although the individual in the prints was often crudely sketched , the garment itself was impeccably drawn and detailed .
Accessories to the garment also received nuanced attention .
Louis XIV , although later hailed as a patron of fashion , did not actually have a large role in its spread and proliferation — which was due to the fashion prints .
The fashion prints were ubiquitous , but Louis XIV neither sponsored nor hindered their production and proliferation , and largely stayed out of it unless the prints of himself specifically were treasonous , satirical , or caricatures .
FASHION IN ROYAL PORTRAITS Section::::Fashion in royal portraits .
Over his lifetime , Louis commissioned numerous works of art to portray himself , among them over 300 formal portraits .
The earliest portrayals of Louis already followed the pictorial conventions of the day in depicting the child king as the majestically royal incarnation of France .
This idealisation of the monarch continued in later works , which avoided depictions of the effect of the smallpox that Louis contracted in 1647 .
In the 1660s , Louis began to be shown as a Roman emperor , the god Apollo , or Alexander the Great , as can be seen in many works of Charles Le Brun , such as sculpture , paintings , and the decor of major monuments .
The depiction of the King in this manner focused on allegorical or mythological attributes , instead of attempting to produce a true likeness .
As Louis aged , so too did the manner in which he was depicted .
Nonetheless , there was still a disparity between realistic representation and the demands of royal propaganda .
There is no better illustration of this than in Hyacinthe Rigaud 's frequently - reproduced Portrait of Louis XIV of 1701 , in which a 63-year - old Louis appears to stand on a set of unnaturally young legs .
In 1680 , Louis began to be portrayed directly rather than in a mythological setting .
This began the " fashion portraits " , which were prints that depicted the King wearing the notable fashions of the season .
These prints were also largely unofficial , which meant printers were unaffiliated with the Crown .
They largely went unchallenged by authorities , however , as long as they portrayed the King in a positive light .
Those who did portray the King satirically or with the use of caricature faced imprisonment .
Rigaud 's portrait exemplified the height of royal portraiture in Louis 's reign .
Although Rigaud crafted a credible likeness of Louis , the portrait was neither meant as an exercise in realism nor to explore Louis 's personal character .
Certainly , Rigaud was concerned with detail and depicted the King 's costume with great precision , down to his shoe buckle .
However , Rigaud 's intention was to glorify the monarchy .
Rigaud 's original , now housed in the Louvre , was originally meant as a gift to Louis 's grandson , Philip V of Spain .
However , Louis was so pleased with the work that he kept the original and commissioned a copy to be sent to his grandson .
That became the first of many copies , both in full and half - length formats , to be made by Rigaud , often with the help of his assistants .
The portrait also became a model for French royal and imperial portraiture down to the time of Charles X over a century later .
In his work , Rigaud proclaims Louis 's exalted royal status through his elegant stance and haughty expression , the royal regalia and throne , rich ceremonial fleur - de - lys robes , as well as the upright column in the background , which , together with the draperies , serves to frame this image of majesty .
TRENDS Section::::Trends .
Louis XIV notably introduced one of the most noticeable feature of the men 's costume of the time : immense wigs of curled hair .
A commonly held belief is that Louis XIV started to wear wigs due to balding , and to imitate this his courtiers put on false hair .
The wearing of wigs lasted for over a century ; they went through many changes , but they were never quite so exaggerated as during this period .
Despite the rise of la mode during Louis XIV 's reign , many of the clothes he wore did not survive or were taken from the monarchy 's possession .
Much like the Crown Jewels , a French king did not actually own any of his clothes .
They belonged to the Garde - robe du roi ( King 's Wardrobe ) , which dated back to the 16th century .
Due to Louis XIV 's changes to the King 's Wardrobe , officers had a right to the clothes once the monarch died , as long as they would not be used by the king 's successor .
Furthermore , although the Louis XIV 's formal clothing would change along with the rest of la mode , his ceremonial clothing did not , and remained with tradition .
The king also used fashion to create a certain effect or theme .
During the marriage of his great - grandson Louis , Duke of Burgundy to Princess Marie Adélaïde , the French entourage dressed in bright colors and fashions to contrast with the more soberly dressed Spanish .
This was in order to seem younger and more virile than the Spanish courtiers .
18TH CENTURY , THE ROCOCÓ AND EARLY NEW CLASSICISM Section::::18th century , the Rococó and early New classicism .
The extravagant styles of the French Royal court racked up enormous debts to keep up its pace , at the peasants ' expense .
Such fashion sprees notably ruined Marie Antoinette 's reputation , and were one of the many factors paving the way for the French Revolution .
Long after her death , Marie Antoinette remains a major historical figure linked with conservative and the Catholic Church positions ; and a major cultural icon associated with high glamour , wealth and a certain style of life based on luxury and celebrity appealing today to the social and cultural elites ; frequently referenced in popular culture , being the subject of several books , films and other forms of media .
Most academics and scholars , have deemed her the quintessential representative of class conflict , western aristocracy and absolutism government in addition to being frivolous , superficial ; and have attributed the start of the French Revolution .
The phrase " Let them eat cake " is often attributed to Marie Antoinette , but there is no evidence she ever uttered it , and it is now generally regarded as a " journalistic cliché " .
It may have been a rumor started by angry French peasants as a form of libel .
This phrase originally appeared in Book VI of the first part ( finished in 1767 , published in 1782 ) of Rousseau 's putative autobiographical work , Les Confessions :
" Enfin je me
rappelai le pis - aller d'une grande princesse à qui l'on disait que les paysans n'avaient pas de pain
, et qui répondit : Qu'ils
mangent de la brioche "
( " Finally I recalled the stopgap solution of a great princess who was told that the peasants had no bread , and who responded : ' Let them eat brioche ) .
Apart from the fact that Rousseau ascribes these words to an unknown princess , vaguely referred to as a " great princess " , some think that he invented it altogether as Confessions was largely inaccurate .
The Sans - culottes ( lit . " without knee - breeches " ) rejected the powdered wigs and the knee - breeches assimilated to the nobility , and instead favored informal styles ( full - length trousers , and natural hair ) , which finally triumphed over the brocades , lace , periwig , and powder of the earlier eighteenth century .
19TH CENTURY , FULL NEOCLASSICISM AND EMPIRE STYLE Section::::19th century , full Neoclassicism and Empire style .
After the fall of the Jacobins and their Sans - culottes supporters , the supporters of the Thermidorian Reaction were known as the Incroyables and Merveilleuses .
They scandalized Paris with their extravagant clothes .
The Merveilleuses wore dresses and tunics modeled after the ancient Greeks and Romans , cut of light or even transparent linen and gauze .
Sometimes so revealing they were termed " woven air " , many gowns displayed cleavage and were too tight to allow pockets .
To carry even a handkerchief , the ladies had to use small bags known as reticules .
They were fond of wigs , often choosing blonde because the Paris Commune had banned blonde wigs , but they also wore them in black , blue , and green .
Enormous hats , short curls like those on Roman busts , and Greek - style sandals were the rage .
The sandals were tied above the ankle with crossed ribbons or strings of pearls .
Exotic and expensive scents fabricated by perfume houses like Parfums Lubin were worn as both for style and as indicators of social station .
Thérésa Tallien , known as " Our Lady of Thermidor " , wore expensive rings on the toes of her bare feet and gold circlets on her legs .
The Incroyables wore eccentric outfits : large earrings , green jackets , wide trousers , huge neckties , thick glasses , and hats topped by " dog ears " , their hair falling on their ears .
Their musk - based fragrances earned them too the derogatory nickname muscadins among the lower classes , already applied to a wide group of anti - Jacobins .
They wore bicorne hats and carried bludgeons , which they referred to as their " executive power .
"
Hair was often shoulder - length , sometimes pulled up in the back with a comb to imitate the hairstyles of the condemned .
Some sported large monocles , and they frequently affected a lisp and sometimes a stooped hunchbacked posture .
In addition to Madame Tallien , famous Merveilleuses included Anne Françoise Elizabeth Lange , Jeanne Françoise Julie Adélaïde Récamier , and two very popular Créoles : Fortunée Hamelin and Hortense de Beauharnais .
Hortense , a daughter of the Empress Josephine , married Louis Bonaparte and became the mother of Napoleon III .
Fortunée was not born rich , but she became famous for her salons and her string of prominent lovers .
Parisian society compared Germaine de Staël and Mme Raguet to Minerva and Juno and named their garments for Roman deities :
gowns were styled Flora or Diana , and tunics were styled à la Ceres or Minerva .
The leading Incroyable , Paul François Jean Nicolas , vicomte de Barras , was one of five Directors who ran the Republic of France and gave the period its name .
He hosted luxurious feasts attended by royalists , repentant Jacobins , ladies , and courtesans .
Since divorce was now legal , sexuality was looser than in the past .
However , de Barras ' reputation for immorality may have been a factor in his later overthrow , a coup that brought the French Consulate to power and paved the way for Napoleon Bonaparte .
FINAL 19TH AND EARLY 20TH CENTURY , BELLE ÉPOQUE AND ANNÉES FOLLES Section::::Final 19th and early 20th century , Belle époque and Années folles .
France renewed its dominance of the high fashion ( ) industry in the years 1860–1960 through the establishing of the great couturier houses , the fashion press ( Vogue was founded in 1892 in USA , and 1920 in France ) and fashion shows .
The first modern Parisian couturier house is generally considered the work of the Englishman Charles Frederick Worth , who dominated the industry from 1858–1895 .
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century , the industry expanded through such Parisian fashion houses as the house of Jacques Doucet ( founded in 1871 ) , Rouff ( founded 1884 ) , Jeanne Paquin ( founded in 1891 ) , the Callot Soeurs ( founded 1895 and operated by four sisters ) , Paul Poiret ( founded in 1903 ) , Louise Chéruit ( founded 1906 ) , Madeleine Vionnet ( founded in 1912 ) , House of Patou by Jean Patou ( founded in 1919 ) , Elsa Schiaparelli ( founded in 1927 ) or Balenciaga ( founded by the Spaniard Cristóbal Balenciaga in 1937 ) .
Chanel founded by Mademoiselle Coco Chanel , it first came to prominence in 1925 , its philosophy was to emphasize understated elegance through her clothing .
Her popularity thrived in the 1920s , because of innovative designs .
Chanel 's own look itself was as different and new as her creations .
Instead of the usual pale - skinned , long - haired and full - bodied women preferred at the time , Chanel had a boyish figure , short cropped hair , and tanned skin .
She had a distinct type of beauty that the world came to embrace .
The horse culture and penchant for hunting so passionately pursued by the elites , especially the British , fired Chanel 's imagination .
Her own enthusiastic indulgence in the sporting life led to clothing designs informed by those activities .
From her excursions on water with the yachting world , she appropriated the clothing associated with nautical pursuits : the horizontal striped shirt , bell - bottom pants , crewneck sweaters , and espadrille shoes — all traditionally worn by sailors and fishermen .
WORLD WAR II , TRENTE GLORIEUSES AND NEW LOOK Section::::World War II , Trente Glorieuses and New Look .
Many fashion houses closed during the occupation of Paris in World War II , including the Maison Vionnet and the Maison Chanel .
In contrast to the stylish , liberated Parisienne , the Vichy regime promoted the model of the wife and mother , the robust , athletic young woman , a figure who was much more in line with the new political criteria .
Germany , meanwhile , was taking possession of over half of what France produced , including high fashion , and was considering relocating French haute couture to the cities of Berlin and Vienna , neither of which had any significant tradition of fashion .
The archives of the Chambre Syndicale de la Couture were seized , mostly for their client lists as Jews were excluded from the fashion industry at this time .
During this era , the number of employed models was limited to seventy - five and designers often substituted materials in order to comply with wartime shortages .
From 1940 onward , no more than thirteen feet ( four meters ) of cloth was permitted to be used for a coat and a little over three feet ( one meter ) for a blouse .
No belt could be over one and a half inches ( four centimeters ) wide .
As a result of the frugal wartime standards , the practical zazou suit became popular among young French men .
In spite of the fact that so many fashion houses closed down or moved away during the war , several new houses remained open , including Jacques Fath , Maggy Rouff , Marcel Rochas , Jeanne Lafaurie , Nina Ricci , and Madeleine Vramant .
During the Occupation , the only true way for a woman to flaunt her extravagance and add color to a drab outfit was to wear a hat .
In this period , hats were often made of scraps of material that would have otherwise been thrown away , sometimes incorporating butter muslin , bits of paper , and wood shavings .
Among the most innovative milliners of the time were Pauline Adam , Simone Naudet , Rose Valois , and Le Monnier .
Post - war fashion returned to prominence through Christian Dior 's famous " New Look " in 1947 : the collection contained dresses with tiny waists , majestic busts , and full skirts swelling out beneath small bodices , in a manner very similar to the style of the Belle Époque .
The extravagant use of fabric and the feminine elegance of the designs appealed greatly to a post - war clientele .
Other important houses of the period included Pierre Balmain and Hubert de Givenchy ( opened in 1952 ) .
The fashion magazine Elle was founded in 1945 .
In 1952 , Coco Chanel herself returned to Paris .
FROM ' 60S
TO TODAY Section::::From ' 60s to today .
Post - war fashion returned to prominence through Christian Dior 's famous " New Look " in 1947 : the collection contained dresses with tiny waists , majestic busts , and full skirts swelling out beneath small bodices , in a manner very similar to the style of the Belle Époque .
The extravagant use of fabric and the feminine elegance of the designs appealed greatly to a post - war clientele .
Other important houses of the period included Pierre Balmain and Hubert de Givenchy ( opened in 1952 ) .
The fashion magazine Elle was founded in 1945 .
In 1952 , Coco Chanel herself returned to Paris .
In the 1960s , " high fashion " came under criticism from France 's youth culture ( including the yé - yés ) who were turning increasingly to London and to casual styles .
In 1966 , the designer Yves Saint Laurent broke with established high fashion norms by launching a prêt - à - porter ( " ready to wear " ) line and expanding French fashion into mass manufacturing and marketing ( member houses of the Chambre Syndicale were forbidden to use even sewing machines ) .
In 1985 , Caroline Rennolds Milbank wrote , " The most consistently celebrated and influential designer of the past twenty - five years , Yves Saint Laurent can be credited with both spurring the couture 's rise from its sixties ashes and with finally rendering ready - to - wear reputable . "
He is also credited with having introduced the tuxedo suit for women and was known for his use of non - European cultural references , and non - white models .
Further innovations were carried out by Paco Rabanne and Pierre Cardin .
In post-1968 France , youth culture would continue to gravitate away from the " sociopolitically suspect " luxury clothing industry , preferring instead a more " hippy " look ( termed baba cool in French ) .
With a greater focus on marketing and manufacturing , new trends were established by Sonia Rykiel , Thierry Mugler , Claude Montana , Jean - Paul Gaultier and Christian Lacroix in the 1970s and ' 80s .
The 1990s saw a conglomeration of many French couture houses under luxury giants and multinationals such as LVMH .
Fashion is so important to the French that , as The New York Times in 1995 quoted in an article on users of online dating services on Minitel , " Where else but in France would people describe themselves to potential partners in terms of their clothes ?
"
Since the 1960s , France 's fashion industry has come under increasing competition from London , New York , Milan and Tokyo .
Nevertheless , many foreign designers still seek to make their careers in France : Karl Lagerfeld ( German ) at Chanel , John Galliano ( British ) and later , Raf Simons ( Belgian ) at Dior , Paulo Melim Andersson ( Swedish ) at Chloe , Stefano Pilati ( Italian ) at Yves Saint Laurent , Marc Jacobs ( American ) at Louis Vuitton , and Kenzo Takada ( Japanese ) and Alexander McQueen ( English ) at Givenchy ( until 2001 ) . CITIES AND TOWNS Section::::Cities and towns .
France is known as a country of luxury , fashion and beauty , with Paris as one of the world 's fashion capitals .
It also has many cities and towns with an important history and industry of the entry , with various sized events and shows as fashion weeks and fests .
PARIS - THE WORLD 'S FASHION CAPITAL Section::::Paris - The World 's fashion capital .
Paris is regarded as the world fashion capital , and spread throughout the city are many fashion boutiques .
Most of the major French fashion brands , such as Chanel , Louis Vuitton , Dior , and Lacroix , are currently headquartered here .
Numerous international fashion labels also operate shops in Paris , such as Valentino , Gucci , Loewe , Escada , Bottega Veneta , and Burberry , as well as an Abercrombie & Fitch flagship store which has become a main consumer attraction .
Paris hosts a fashion week twice a year , similar to other international centers such as Milan , London , Tokyo , New York , Los Angeles and Rome .
The Avenue des Champs - Élysées is the avenue of luxury and beauty of France and is the location of many headquarters of upscale fashion , jewelry and beauty houses .
It is often compared with the 5th Avenue of New York City and the Avenue Montaigne , an adjacent avenue that is also known for its prestigious fashion headquarters since the 1980s .
The fashion houses have been traditionally situated since the 17th century in the quarter around the Rue du Faubourg Saint - Honoré .
Other areas , such as Le Marais , a traditional Jewish quarter , have also included the clothing industry .
The city 's numerous fashion districts consolidate it as a fashion capital .
MARSEILLE
Section::::Marseille .
Marseille , the oldest and second largest city of France is well known for the principal port of the country and of the second Mediterranean , and fourth of all Europe .
The city is affectionately called " The Old Lady of the Mediterranean " or " The City of Contrasts " .
The city has enjoyed its position on the continent being a fluvial port with ships full of fashion products .
The avenue Canebière is called the " Champs Elysées of Marseille " .
Rue Paradis and the Rue Grignan are known for being the avenues of luxury in the city , holding high fashion boutiques such as Louis Vuitton , Hermès , YSL , Chopard , Kenzo , Tara Jarmon , Gérard Darel and many others .
Local fashion and art brand Kulte belongs to the French label Kaporal .
The Rue de la Tour is called La Rue de la Mode ( " The Fashion Street " ) , where the newest Marsellaises fashion designers and artisans are supported by the city government , for creating and growing the fashion industry in the city .
Some of the famous fashion houses here are Diable Noir and Casa Blanca .
In the Centre and Vieux Port ( downtown and old port ) are other of the city shopping districts , in these areas are a lot of fashion houses for both nationals and internationals .
LYON Section::::Lyon .
Lyon , the third largest city of France , is a growing fashion industry center .
It has been the world 's silk capital since the 17th century , with an important textile industry and a strong fashion culture .
It is the second biggest luxury goods consumer of the country , with major streets and districts holding houses of high fashion .
The Presqu'île is the upscale district of the city , containing luxurious malls , streets and avenue .
The famous Rue de la République is compared with Avenue des Champs - Elysées of Paris .
The Rue Édouard - Herriot , the Avenue des Cordeliers Jacobines , the Place Bellecour among others , with elegant boutiques of Armani , Dior , Prada , Dolce & Gabbana , Calvin Klein , MaxMara , Armand Ventilo , Sonia Rykiel , and Cartier .
La Croix - Rousse is a fashion district heavily marked by the silk industry , and known for receiving government support for the newcomer fashion designers .
The city is the home of the headquarters of international fashion houses such as Korloff , Millesia and the jeweler Augis .
Other famous Lyonnaise fashion houses in France include Nicholas Fafiotte , Nathalie Chaize and Garbis Devar .
OTHER CITIES AND TOWNS
Section::::Other cities and towns .
Although biggest cities , there are a lot " fashionable " cities and towns in France , there are fashion districts , avenues , streets , shopping malls and many places specialized for all the needs of customer .
Cannes , Nice , St. Tropez and Monte Carlo , year by year host thousands of socialites , artists , potentates and personalities who come up for events including the Cannes Film Festival and the NRJ Music Awards .
For that reason , the fashion houses have taken advantage of establishing boutiques in ostentatious districts of the French riviera , Bordeaux is classified " City of Art and History " .
The city is home to 362 monuments historiques ( only Paris has more in France ) with some buildings dating back to Roman times .
Bordeaux has been inscribed on UNESCO World Heritage List as " an outstanding urban and architectural ensemble " and is the world 's top prime wine tourism place , focus its luxury district around the Cours de l'intendance .
Toulouse with pink and stylish architecture , Rennes with antique and medieval beauty ( around the " rue de la Monnaie " ) , Nantes with its passage Pommeraye , Strasbourg offering French - German architecture and Lille 's downtown in north France holds several luxury houses .
FASHION SHOWS Section::::Fashion shows .
The Paris Fashion Week takes place twice a year after the Milan Fashion Week .
It is the last and usually the most anticipated city of the fashion month .
Dates are determined by the French Fashion Federation .
Currently , the Fashion Week is held in the Carrousel du Louvre .
* Africa Fashion Week Paris
* Bordeaux Fashion Week * Elite Model Look
* Cannes - Nice Fashion Week
* Bal des débutantes
* Lille Fashion Week
* Lyon Fashion Week ( FashionCity Show )
* Marseille Fashion Week * Nantes Fashion Week
* Rennes Fashion Week
* Toulouse Fashion Week
* Strasbourg Fashion Week ( EM Fashion Week )
* St. Tropez Fashion Week
* Spring 2004
Dior couture collection
MONACO
Section::::Monaco . Montecarlo Fashion Week ( Fashion Fair Week ) NOTES
REFERENCES
* Dauncey , Hugh , ed . , French Popular Culture : An Introduction , New York :
Oxford University Press ( Arnold Publishers ) , 2003 .
* DeJean , Joan , The Essence of Style : How The French Invented High Fashion , Fine Food , Chic Cafés , Style , Sophistication , and Glamour , New York :
Free Press , 2005 , * Kelly , Michael , French Culture and Society :
The Essentials , New York : Oxford University Press ( Arnold Publishers ) , 2001 , ( a reference guide )
* Nadeau , Jean - Benoît and Julie Barlow , Sixty Million Frenchmen Ca n't Be Wrong :
Why We Love France But Not The French , Sourcebooks Trade , 2003 , * Norberg , Kathryn & Rosenbaum , Sandra ( editors ) , and various authors .
Fashion Prints in the Age of Louis XIV ( Texas Tech University Press , 2014 ) FURTHER READING
* Bourhis , Katell le : The Age of Napoleon : Costume from Revolution to Empire , 1789 - 1815 , Metropolitan Museum of Art , 1989 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* La Fédération française de la couture , du prêt - à - porter des couturiers et des créateurs de mode - main page * La Fédération française de la couture - member fashion houses
* News about French fashion industry FashionUnited * French Fashion Guide French Fashion History