CANARIAN SPANISH Canarian Spanish ( Spanish :
español de las Canarias , español canario , habla canaria , isleño , dialecto canario or vernacular canario ) is a variant of standard Spanish spoken in the Canary Islands by the Canarian people .
The variant is similar to the Andalusian Spanish variety spoken in Western Andalusia and ( especially ) to Caribbean Spanish and other Hispanic American Spanish vernaculars because of Canarian emigration to the Caribbean and Hispanic America over the years .
Canarian Spanish is the only Spanish dialect in Spain to be called usually español , instead of castellano .
Canarian Spanish heavily influenced the development of Caribbean Spanish and other Latin American Spanish vernaculars because Hispanic America and the Spanish - speaking Caribbean islands were originally largely settled by colonists from the Canary Islands and Andalusia ; those dialects , including the standard language , were already quite close to Canarian and Andalusian speech .
In the Caribbean , Canarian speech patterns were never regarded as either foreign or very different from the local accent .
The incorporation of the Canary Islands into the Crown of Castile began with Henry III ( 1402 ) and was completed under the Catholic Monarchs .
The expeditions for their conquest started off mainly from ports of Andalusia , which is why the Andalusians predominated in the Canaries .
There was also an important colonising contingent from Portugal in the early conquest of the Canaries , along with the Andalusians and the Castilians from mainland Spain .
In earlier times , Portuguese settled alongside the Spanish in the north of Gran Canaria , but they died off or were absorbed by the Spanish .
The population that inhabited the islands before the conquest , the Guanches , spoke a variety of Berber ( also called Amazigh ) dialects .
After the conquest , the indigenous Guanche language was rapidly and almost completely eradicated in the archipelago .
Only some names of plants and animals , terms related to cattle ranching and numerous island placenames survive .
Their geography made the Canary Islands receive much outside influence , with drastic cultural and linguistic changes .
As a result of heavy Canarian emigration to the Caribbean , particularly during colonial times , Caribbean Spanish is strikingly similar to Canarian Spanish .
GRAMMAR
* Like for most other varieties of Spanish outside Mainland Spain , the preterite is generally used instead of the perfect : hoy visité a Juan
( " today I visited John " ) for hoy he visitado a Juan ( " today I have visited John " ) .
* Like for most other varieties of Spanish outside central and northern Spain , ustedes is used for all second - person plurals :
ustedes están is used for vosotros estáis .
Only on a few parts of the islands of El Hierro , La Palma and La Gomera is the pronoun vosotros still sometimes used , and even there , it is decreasingly and generally only by older speakers .
In La Gomera and some parts of La Palma , ustedes vos vais is used .
Archaic forms like vaivos are still used in some areas .
* Like for most other varieties of Spanish outside Mainland Spain , syllables are suppressed in some diminutives : cochito for cochecito ( " small car " ) and florita for florecita .
* Like for many other varieties of Spanish outside Mainland Spain , de ( " of " ) is deleted in some expressions : casa Marta for casa de Marta and gofio millo for gofio de millo .
PRONUNCIATION
* Seseo , the lack of distinction between the pronunciation of the letters < s > and or " soft " , is the most distinctive non - mainland characteristic ; caza ( ' hunt ' ) is pronounced exactly like casa ( ' house ' ) , which occurs in Andalusia as well .
The feature is common to most parts of the Spanish - speaking world outside of the northern three quarters of Mainland Spain ( Castile and the surrounding provinces have adopted the feature ) .
* is debuccalized to at the end of syllables , as is common in Andalusia , Extremadura , and Murcia and much of Spanish America .
* ( spelled as or , before or < i > , as ) is usually aspirated ( pronounced ) , as is common in Andalusia ( especially in its west ) as well as in much of Spanish America .
* Word - final is realized as a velar nasal .
VOCABULARY Section::::Vocabulary .
Canarian vocabulary has its own regionalisms different from standard Castilian Spanish vocabulary .
For example , guagua ( ' bus ' ) differs from standard Spanish autobús .
The word guagua is an onomatopoeia stemming from the sound of a Klaxon horn ( " wawa " ) .
An example of Canarian usage for a Spanish word is the verb fajarse ( ' to fight ' ) .
In standard Castilian Spanish , the verb would be pelearse , and fajar exists as a non - reflexive verb related to the hemming of a skirt .
The term of endearment socio is a very popular Canarian term .
The Canarian vocabulary has a notable influence from the Guanche language , especially in the toponymy .
In addition , many Canarian names come from the Guanche language , such as Airam , Gara , Acerina , Beneharo , Jonay , Tanausú , Chaxiraxi , Ayoze and Yaiza .
As Canarian Spanish was influenced by Andalusian Spanish , a few words of Andalusi Arabic origin are found , and there are some doublets of Arabic - Latinate synonyms with the Arabic form being more common in Canarian like alcoba for standard habitación or dormitorio ( ' bedroom ' ) , alhaja for standard joya ( ' jewel ' ) , or alacrán for standard escorpión " ( scorpion ) .
SEE ALSO
* Nationalisms and regionalisms of Spain REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY