ARMY COMBAT SHIRT
The Army Combat Shirt ( ACS ) is a flame - resistant shirt developed and used by the United States Army as a supplementary addition to the Army Combat Uniform .
The ACS is a stand - alone shirt designed specifically for use with Improved Outer Tactical Vest armor in warm and hot weather instead of the blouse .
It is intended to greatly increase user comfort through the use of lightweight , moisture - wicking , and breathable fabrics .
The ACS was created in conjunction with the USMC 's Flame Resistant Organizational Gear ( FROG ) .
The ACS , in conjunction with the Fire Resistant ACU ( FRACU ) trousers , provides head - to - toe protection against burns .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Traditionally , flame - resistant uniforms have been reserved for military personnel such as aviators , fuel handlers and combat vehicle crew who were most likely to encounter fuel - related fires .
However , the increasing frequency of improvised explosive devices in Afghanistan and Iraq during the 2000s greatly increased the number of troops in need of flame - resistant clothing and uniforms .
HISTORY 2000S 2004–2005 : DEVELOPMENT Section::::History .
Section::::2000s .
Section::::2004–2005 : Development .
Early prototype versions of the Army Combat Shirt in the MultiCam camouflage pattern were unveiled by the Army in July 2004 at a military technology convention held at the U.S. Capitol as a part of the Future Force Warrior program .
A year later in June 2005 , prototypes were again displayed during a Future Force Warrior convention at the U.S. Capitol .
2007 :
INTRODUCTION Section::::2007 : Introduction .
In January 2007 , the Army began shipping 160,000 flame - resistant Nomex uniforms for soldiers assigned to at - risk convoy operations .
However , the Nomex uniforms restricted air movement more than the traditional Cotton / Nylon ACU and were hotter for soldiers to wear .
Army equipment officials developed the ACS to provide soldiers with a lightweight , breathable alternative to the Nomex ACU .
2010S
2016–2017
: BALLISTIC COMBAT SHIRT Section::::2010s .
Section::::2016–2017 : Ballistic Combat Shirt .
Currently the U.S. Army is working on an armored variant of the Army Combat Shirt known as the " Ballistic Combat Shirt " , which adds ballistic protection to the upper thorax , lower neck , and upper sleeve areas while sacrificing as little arm mobility as possible .
This has been desirable due to the increasing prevalence of low - profile body armor which does not support the additional extremity protection the IBA system does , as well as ergonomic issues with the extremity protection that causes soldiers to choose not to use them even when wearing compatible armor .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Initially , the torso of the shirt was foliage green with the Army Strong logo centered on the chest ( removed in later versions ) ; the arms are in the Universal Camouflage Pattern similar to the Army Combat Uniform , with integrated anti - abrasion elbow pads .
No - seam shoulders minimize rubbing or chafing against armor .
With the adoption of the MultiCam uniform for wear in Afghanistan , there is now a version made with a tan body and MultiCam sleeves .
Other features include a double pen pocket on the lower arm , zippered storage pockets on the upper arm , concealable infrared identification tabs , and a place to attach name , rank , and flag on the upper arm .
The features of both shirts are the same .
The ACS is constructed of three flame - resistant performance fabrics proprietary to TenCate Protective Fabrics or Massif Mountain Gear Company .
The shirt 's torso is constructed of two highly breathable flame - resistant fabrics with advanced moisture management capabilities .
Both fabrics wick moisture away from the skin and dry rapidly , preventing the fabrics from sticking to the user 's skin and greatly increasing comfort under body armor .
The sleeves and side panels of the shirt are constructed of a lightweight , but durable and abrasion - resistant fabric designed to provide extra protection for areas not protected by body armor .
All three fabrics feature 4-way stretch for enhanced performance and user comfort .
SEE ALSO
* Airman Battle Uniform * Interceptor Body Armor REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* PEO Soldier to Unveil New Army Combat Shirt by Debi Dawson , 4 May 2007
* USMC Program Manager FROG brief * New Fireproof Army Shirt More Breathable by Matthew Cox , 19 September 2007 *
[ Matthew Cox , " Stopping the Burn , " Army Times , 7 May 2007 ]
*
*
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
Army Combat Shirt Factsheet * Massif * Program Executive Office Soldier