50 TO 1 50 to 1 is a 2014 American drama film based on the true story of Mine That Bird , an undersized thoroughbred racehorse who won the 2009 Kentucky Derby in one of the biggest upsets in the history of the race .
The film received a limited release on March 21 , 2014 .
It was directed by Jim Wilson , who also co - wrote the script with Faith Conroy , and stars Skeet Ulrich , Christian Kane and William Devane .
Jockey Calvin Borel , who rode Mine that Bird to his upset Derby win , plays himself in the film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A misfit group of New Mexico cowboys find themselves on the journey of a lifetime when their undersized thoroughbred racehorse qualifies for the Kentucky Derby .
Based on the inspiring true story of Mine That Bird , the cowboys face a series of mishaps on their way to Churchill Downs , becoming the ultimate underdogs in a final showdown with the world 's racing elite .
Mine
That Bird pulls off a monumental upset ( at 50-to-1 odds ) by winning the 2009 Kentucky Derby .
CAST * Skeet Ulrich as Chip Woolley * Christian Kane as Mark Allen * William Devane
as Leonard Doc Blach * Madelyn Deutch as Alex * Todd Lowe as Kelly * Calvin Borel as Himself RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Gary Goldstein of the Los Angeles Times thought the film was slow - moving and the characters lacked interest , and the film " an idea better in theory than in practice " .
Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post said that as with real - life horse racing , " the exciting part lasts only a minute or two , and then it 's over .
The rest of the movie is filler ( or maybe foreplay ) . "
Bill Edelstein of Variety commented that the film 's attempt to appeal to a faith - based audience seemed " a rather calculated play near the finish " .
On the other hand , he thought Calvin Borel turned out to be " adept at slapstick " and found Borel 's character to be " more compelling than the leads " .
Lawrence Toppman of The Charlotte Observer gave the film a positive review , finding the film 's " old - fashioned " qualities appealing .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS