DINERS , DRIVE - INS AND DIVES Diners , Drive - Ins and Dives ( often nicknamed Triple D and stylized as Diners , Drive - Ins , Dives ) is an American food reality television series that premiered on April 23 , 2007 , on the Food Network .
It is hosted by Guy Fieri .
The show originally began as a one - off special that aired on November 6 , 2006 .
The show features a " road trip " concept , similar to Road Tasted , Giada 's Weekend Getaways , and $ 40 a Day .
Fieri travels around the United States ( although he has also featured some restaurants in European cities , including London , England and Florence , Italy ) looking at various diners , drive - in restaurants , and dive bars .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Each episode generally has a unifying theme ( such as burgers , ribs , or seafood ) with the host visiting multiple restaurants within a single city to sample the food that corresponds to this theme .
The program focuses on small , independent eateries featuring traditional comfort foods ( such as barbecue , smoked meat , hamburgers , deep - fried food , pizza , steak , and bacon - and - egg breakfast ) , regional styles , or ethnic specialties .
Often , the chosen restaurants will use fresh ingredients , home - style recipes , and gourmet culinary approaches to what is usually not considered gourmet food .
The host interacts with both the customers , to get their opinion on the food , and with the kitchen staff , who demonstrate how to prepare one or more of the dishes .
GUEST APPEARANCES
Section::::Guest appearances .
The show has had various stars appear in the kitchen alongside Guy Fieri , including fellow chefs Robert Irvine , Andrew Zimmern , Michael Symon , Emeril Lagasse , and Geoffrey Zakarian , as well as celebrities such as Matthew McConaughey , Gene Hackman , Rosie O'Donnell , Joe Theismann , Kid Rock , Chris Rock , Adam Sandler , Kevin James , Clint Bowyer , Gene Simmons of KISS , Steve Harwell of Smash Mouth , and Mick Fleetwood of Fleetwood Mac .
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit .
In May 2011 , Page Productions , the original producers of the show filed a lawsuit against Food Network .
The lawsuit alleges that the network failed to pay required production costs , and failed to make the show 's host , Guy Fieri , available for taping .
The producer also alleges that Guy Fieri harassed crewmembers and " raided their fridges " .
A week after Food Network counter - sued the producer , a settlement was reached in August 2011 , allowing the 12th season of the show to resume , with a new production company , Citizen Pictures .
SEE ALSO
* List of diners REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS