FOX SPORTS WISCONSIN
Fox Sports Wisconsin is an American regional sports network that is owned by Fox Cable Networks , a unit of the Fox Entertainment Group division of 21st Century Fox , and operates as an affiliate of Fox Sports Networks .
Operating as the " Wisconsin " sub - feed of Fox Sports North until 2007 , the channel broadcasts regional coverage of sports events throughout the state of Wisconsin , with a focus on professional sports teams based in Milwaukee .
It primarily operates from a studio / office facility in downtown Milwaukee , with secondary offices and production studio / office hub based in downtown Minneapolis , Minnesota .
Fox Sports Wisconsin is available on cable providers throughout Wisconsin , extreme eastern Minnesota , the western Upper Peninsula of Michigan , northwestern Illinois , and Iowa ; it is also available nationwide on satellite via DirecTV .
Fox Sports Wisconsin broadcasts 2,600 hours of locally produced programming per year and reaches more than 1.7 million homes .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first regional sports network in the state was the Wisconsin Sports Network ( unrelated to the current - day high school - focused sports publishing operation ) , a gametime - only network that broadcast Milwaukee Brewers baseball and Milwaukee Bucks basketball games .
The channel was owned by Time Warner Cable 's Milwaukee franchise and Group W.
In 1996 , it was taken over by the Minneapolis - based Midwest Sports Channel , which was owned by CBS owned - and - operated station WCCO - TV ( channel 4 ) in Minneapolis and CBS Cable ( which was formed following CBS ' 1995 merger with Group W 's corporate parent Westinghouse ) .
Shortly afterward , MSC became an affiliate of the fledgling Fox Sports Net in the fall of 1996 .
From then on until 2007 , Wisconsin was served by one of three regional subfeeds of MSC / FSN North ; the other two being a feed for the Twin Cities metropolitan area and a feed for the rest of Minnesota ( as well as Iowa , North Dakota and South Dakota ) .
CBS sold the network to News Corporation in 2000 , ultimately rebranding as FSN North in April 2001 .
Despite being well out of the station 's market area , MSC 's late night encore of WCCO 's 10:00 p.m. newscast also aired on the Wisconsin network until the Fox purchase .
The network then began maintaining offices at the studios of Fox owned - and - operated station WITI ( channel 6 , now an affiliate of the network ) in the Milwaukee suburb of Brown Deer , along with sharing limited programming with that station .
FSN North converted the Wisconsin feed into a separate channel , FSN Wisconsin .
The channel launched on April 1 , 2007 , coinciding with the start of the 2007 Milwaukee Brewers season , originating from facilities in Milwaukee .
After Fox Television Stations sold WITI to Local TV in 2008 , FSN Wisconsin relocated its operations to facilities in downtown Milwaukee .
As part of the national rebranding of the Fox Sports Networks in 2012 , FSN Wisconsin was rebranded as Fox Sports Wisconsin .
On December 14 , 2017 , as part of a merger between both companies , The Walt Disney Company announced plans to acquire all 22 regional Fox Sports networks from 21st Century Fox , including Fox Sports Wisconsin .
However , on June 27 , 2018 , the Justice Department ordered their divestment under antitrust grounds , citing Disney 's ownership of ESPN .
It is unknown whether the networks will be divested to other parties , or be retained by the proposed " New Fox " ( which will consist of the assets excluded from Disney 's purchase , including the Fox broadcast network , Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network , and the remainder of the Fox Sports division ) .
PROGRAMMING Section::::Programming .
Fox Sports Wisconsin holds the regional cable television rights to Major League Baseball games from the Milwaukee Brewers , NBA games from the Milwaukee Bucks ( whose telecasts became exclusive to the network starting with the 2007–08 season ) and since 2000 , simulcasts most of the NHL games from the Minnesota Wild televised by Fox Sports North ( usually through Fox Sports Wisconsin Plus ) , as well as pre - game , post - game and fan shows for all three teams .
In 2018 , simulcasts of Major League Soccer 's Minnesota United FC matches were added to Fox Sports Wisconsin after Fox Sports North assumed that team 's rights .
The channel also carries high school sports competitions sanctioned by the Wisconsin Interscholastic Athletic Association ( WIAA ) ( the girls ' and boys ' state tournament final rights are held by Quincy Media and a statewide network of broadcast stations , though Fox Sports Wisconsin is allowed to carry replays of the tournament ) , weekend outdoor sports programming , and many of national programs distributed by Fox Sports .
It also airs NCAA competitions from the Big East Conference , Big Ten Conference and the Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference , and a limited schedule of Marquette men 's games through a sub - licensing deal with sister network Fox Sports 1 in which some games not of national interest are distributed to their regional sports network partners , CBS Sports Network and the ESPN family of networks as part of the " new " Big East 's television contract ( Fox Sports Wisconsin acquired the partial rights to Marquette sports events from Time Warner Cable Sports ( the current - day Spectrum Sports ) , a regional network available only on Time Warner systems in eastern Wisconsin , which had been carrying the games since 2006 until 2013 ) .
From 2007 to 2011 , Fox Sports Wisconsin sub - licensed a package of fifteen Milwaukee Brewers games for broadcast on Milwaukee independent station WMLW - CA ( channel 41 , now Me - TV owned - and - operated station WBME - CD ) ; the Fox Sports - produced broadcasts aired outside of the Milwaukee market on Fox Sports Wisconsin , while WMLW owner Weigel Broadcasting sold advertising for those telecasts .
The deal was discontinued after the 2011 season due to the Brewers wanting a schedule of games entirely in high definition ( until a move of WMLW 's schedule to a full - power signal in August 2012 , this was impossible for them to do , along with multiplexing limitations ) and the launch of a secondary feed allowing live coverage of both Brewers and Bucks games , making the team exclusive to the network .
TEAM AND CONFERENCE COVERAGE Major League
Baseball
* Milwaukee Brewers
Major League Soccer * Minnesota United FC ( through Fox Sports North )
NBA * Milwaukee Bucks
NHL
* Minnesota Wild ( through Fox Sports North ) NCAA Division
I athletics * Wisconsin Badgers ( via Fox / Big Ten Conference - owned Big Ten Network ; BTN game rebroadcasts and coaches shows only )
* Big East , Big 12 and Pac-12 football and basketball ( through Fox Sports 1 and ESPN Plus )
* Marquette Golden Eagles men 's basketball ( limited schedule via sublicensing by Fox Sports 1 , holder of Big East Conference television rights )
* WCHA Hockey .
NCAA Division III
athletics * Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference
High school athletics * WIAA Wisconsin State Tournaments ( exclusive rights to all
but the boys ' and girls ' basketball championships , whose rights are held by Quincy Media and air over a local broadcast station network ; tape - delayed replays air on Fox Sports Wisconsin ) OTHER SERVICES FOX SPORTS WISCONSIN HD Section::::Other services .
Section::::Fox Sports Wisconsin HD .
Fox Sports Wisconsin HD is a 720p high definition simulcast feed of Fox Sports Wisconsin .
All Bucks and Brewers games are broadcast in HD , as well as sports and magazine programs distributed nationally by FSN .
Depending on the market , Fox Sports Wisconsin Plus is also transmitted in high definition .
Since 2012 , the HD feed has been downscaled in letterbox on the channel 's standard definition feed , as had become standard for all of Fox 's cable networks .
FOX SPORTS WISCONSIN
PLUS Section::::Fox Sports Wisconsin
Plus .
Fox Sports Wisconsin
Plus is an overflow feed that launched on April 9 , 2012 , and is available in both high definition and standard definition on most cable and satellite providers .
The channel is mainly used to allow the network to air games that can not air on Fox Sports Wisconsin due to events with conflicting scheduling – for example , when a Brewers game airs on Fox Sports Wisconsin , a Milwaukee Bucks game scheduled to start during the duration of the game is carried over Fox Sports Wisconsin
Plus ( this example often occurs from March to April ( or as late as June ) , when the NBA and Major League Baseball ( MLB ) seasons overlap , although the reverse situation may occur whenever the Bucks are involved in a pre - Conference Final playoff game ) .
It also carries national college sports rights Fox holds such as the lower - interest Big 12 Conference matchups which would usually be pre - empted locally , and are of spare interest to Wisconsin viewers .
Fox Sports Wisconsin Plus also airs Minnesota Wild hockey games simulcast from Fox Sports North that can be shown in - market when Fox Sports Wisconsin is airing a game of local interest .
Due to blackout restrictions imposed by MLB and the NBA , Minnesota Twins and Timberwolves games are not broadcast on Fox Sports Wisconsin , although games from both teams are cleared to air via Fox Sports North in parts of Wisconsin .
Some systems carry the Plus channel on a full - time basis , while others carry it only for game telecasts ; non - game Plus programming contains a loop of national Fox Sports Networks programming such as the World Poker Tour .
ON - AIR STAFF CURRENT MILWAUKEE BUCKS TELECASTS
* Jim Paschke – play - by - play announcer ( primary announcer )
* Jon McGlocklin – color analyst
* Marques Johnson- color analyst
* Craig Coshun – Bucks Live host
* Jeff Grayson – Bucks Live host ( mostly for road games )
* Steve Novak –
Bucks Live analyst * Katie George – field reporter
MILWAUKEE BREWERS TELECASTS
* Brian Anderson – play - by - play
announcer
* Matt Lepay - play - by - play announcer ( substitute announcer )
* Bill Schroeder – color analyst
* Craig Coshun –
Brewers Live host , and field reporter *
Dario Melendez
– Brewers Live host ( mostly for road games )
* Jerry Augustine –
Brewers Live analyst
* Telly Hughes – field reporter *
Sophia Minnaert – field reporter WISCONSIN BADGERS TELECASTS
* Matt Lepay – host of syndicated Badger Sports Report , for Wisconsin Badgers athletics FORMER * Davey Nelson – Brewers Live analyst ( deceased ) SEE ALSO * Fox Sports 1 * Fox Sports Networks * NBC Sports Regional Networks
* Victory Sports One REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS