NICOLE WALKER
Nicole Walker is a fictional character on the NBC soap opera , Days of Our Lives , a long - running series about working - class life in the fictional town of Salem .
She was introduced in 1998 by head writer Sally Sussman Morina , and executive producer Ken Corday .
Actress Arianne Zucker has portrayed the character since her introduction to the series in 1998 .
In 2006 , Zucker left the soap in pursuit of other acting possibilities .
She returned to the role in 2008 .
In March 2017 , Zucker announced she would once again leave the role .
She made her final appearance in the role on October 20 , 2017 .
Following her departure , media outlets began to report that Zucker was to reprise the role for a short - term visit in December 2017 after being spotted on - set ; Zucker explained her visit , stating that her daughter was included in the annual telling of the Christmas Story at the University Hospital .
In June 2018 , it was announced that Zucker would reprise the role of Nicole later the same year .
Many of Nicole 's storylines have often focused on treachery , death , and love , with the character being portrayed as always in pursuit of finding true love and having the family she never had as a child growing up .
The character is the daughter of Fay Walker and Paul Mendez .
During her childhood , Nicole was a victim of child sexual abuse at the hands of her father , Paul , who forced her to do pornography in her adolescence under the name " Misty Circle " .
The character came to Salem as a small town waitress , but almost immediately started getting involved with the major families that the show revolved around .
While once being seen as a scheming gold - digger , Nicole has grown into a woman committed to finding love and being a good mother .
She is known for her longstanding feud with her enemy , Sami Brady , her relationships with Eric Brady , Victor Kiriakis , Brady Black and EJ DiMera , and the 2009 Baby Switch story line which featured Nicole having a miscarriage ; lying to her husband ; and stealing Sami 's baby , Sydney .
STORYLINES 1998–2006 Section::::Storylines .
Section::::1998–2006 .
Overworked and underpaid
waitress
Nicole comes to Salem with dreams of becoming a model and meets Eric Brady ( Jensen Ackles ) .
Eric convinces his sister Sami ( Alison Sweeney ) to give Nicole a modeling contract landing Nicole on the cover of Bella magazine .
Despite her success , Nicole seems to be hiding something .
It is eventually revealed that Nicole is being followed by her ex - boyfriend , Jay .
As Eric and Nicole fall in love , a jealous Jay threatens to tell Nicole 's secrets .
Nicole develops friendships with Sami and Kate Roberts ( Lauren Koslow ) , even planning out Sami 's bachelorette party .
Kate 's son and Sami 's ex - boyfriend Lucas ( Bryan Dattilo ) starts showering Nicole with gifts despite his mother 's disapproval ; Lucas wants to use Nicole to get custody of his son Will from Sami .
Meanwhile , Nicole 's sister , Taylor Raines ( Katherine Ellis ) comes to Salem and befriends Eric and Lucas uses the relationship to keep Nicole and Eric apart so he can have her for himself .
Taylor catches on to Lucas 's schemes and skips town while Nicole agrees to marriage in exchange for $ 5 million leaving Eric devastated and running him out of town .
When Victor Kiriakis ( John Aniston ) takes the money away from her , Nicole decides to help Sami regain custody of Will .
Also , a brief cancer scare forces Nicole to realize the error of her ways .
She shares a brief reunion with Eric and divorces Lucas .
However , Eric helps Nicole open up about her troubled past and being forced into porn as a teenager by her father , Paul Mendez .
Nicole cozies up to Victor by exposing Kate 's plot to kill him and also uses his grandson
Brady Black ( Kyle Lowder ) in her schemes .
Victor and Nicole eventually marry on New Year 's Eve in 2002 only for Nicole to fake his death with the help of Jan Spears ( Heather Lauren Olson ) , leaving Nicole as the wealthy grieving widow who has fallen for her step grandson .
However , Nicole 's plans begin to unravel when Victor is discovered alive .
Meanwhile , in an effort to keep Brady for herself , Nicole tries to disfigure his presumed dead first love , Chloe Lane ( Nadia Bjorlin ) during surgery with help from Stan ( Dan Wells ) and Tony DiMera ( Thaao Penghlis ) .
Nicole learns that Stan is actually Sami in disguise and threatens to expose her .
However , Sami exposes Nicole 's schemes instead and Brady kicks her out of his life believing she was behind Chloe 's " death .
" Nicole later goes into business with Sami and Austin Reed ( Austin Peck ) .
In 2006 , she agrees to move to Los Angeles to manage the newly acquired branch of the company .
Before leaving town , Nicole has a one - night stand with Sami 's father , Roman Brady ( Josh Taylor ) .
After her departure , it is mentioned that Nicole had plans to marry " some soap actor .
" This was presumably a nod to Zucker 's marriage to her former Days of Our Lives costar , Kyle Lowder , who played Brady .
2008–17 Section::::2008–17 .
Nicole resurfaces in 2008 and announces that she and Victor are still legally married .
Nicole hires EJ DiMera ( James Scott ) to help her with the divorce only for Nicole to discover that she is still married to her first husband , Trent Robbins ( Roscoe Born ) , making her subsequent marriages to Lucas and Victor invalid .
Nicole had married Trent when she was in college
but she left him because he was abusive ; however , she never filed for divorce .
EJ starts using Nicole to make his soon to be ex - wife Sami jealous and after Sami dumps him , EJ and Nicole end up having sex in an elevator .
Nicole is a prime suspect when Trent is found dead in September 2008 , but she is exonerated .
Nicole later discovers she is pregnant , and knowing she was not supposed to have children , Nicole considers the child to be a " miracle . "
EJ and Nicole move in together only for her to miscarry .
Realizing that EJ loved their baby and not her , Nicole fakes her pregnancy fearing he will leave her .
Nicole discovers that EJ is still in love with Sami , so she adopts Mia McCormick ( Taylor Spreitler ) 's baby with help from Dr. Richard Baker ( John Callahan ) and passes the child off as her own .
To make matters worse , Nicole switches Mia 's child with Sami and EJ 's baby allowing EJ to raise the child even though Sami planned to keep him from the child .
Nicole names the child , Sydney only for her lies to be exposed when the child 's father , Chad Peterson - Woods ( Casey Deidrick ) tries to sue for custody .
Nicole is sent to prison for her crimes and later released with the help of Anna DiMera ( Leann Hunley ) .
Seeing that Nicole is still attached to Sydney , EJ arranges for her to be a part of Sydney 's life and live in the mansion leading him to propose to her in order for Nicole to be a " mother figure " to EJ 's children .
Nicole accepts leading her to start falling in love with him again .
On their wedding day , EJ meets Nicole 's sister Taylor ( Natalia Livingston )
and it is love at first sight .
After weeks of cheating , EJ asks Nicole for a divorce and she is left shattered .
Nicole is employed as EJ 's secretary and they start working together for EJ to win the election and become Mayor of Salem .
During the election their romantic relationship evolves but Nicole holds back fearing that EJ will end up hurting her again .
When he proposes to her in February 2012 , Nicole accepts only to find out that EJ had cheated on her once again with Sami .
She storms out of the mansion and goes to the Town Square where she meets Daniel Jonas ( Shawn Christian ) .
During their talk Nicole faints and Daniel takes her to the hospital only to find out that Nicole is pregnant .
Nicole worries about her pregnancy ending up in a miscarriage again and wanting to get away from EJ
she hides her pregnancy from him with the help of Daniel and Rafe Hernandez ( Galen Gering ) .
EJ finds out that Nicole is pregnant and Rafe steps in claiming the child is his leading him and Nicole to fabricate this story to keep the baby from EJ .
In May 2012 , Nicole stresses over EJ and starts having pains in her stomach but gets to the hospital in time and everything turns out to be fine .
Nicole begins a romantic relationship with Daniel but due to his daughter 's priorities at the time , he broke it off .
In August 2012 , an earthquake hits Salem and Nicole goes into preterm labor but luckily enough Daniel manages to stop the contractions and keep the pregnancy healthy .
She then starts a rivalry with Jennifer Horton ( Melissa Reeves ) fearing that Daniel will get back together with Jenn .
In October 2012 and at 37 weeks pregnant , Nicole goes to her prenatal visit but her doctor informs her that her baby is dead .
A distraught Nicole grieves her second loss but does not tell Daniel fearing that he will get back together with Jenn seeing there is no baby .
That same day Nicole gets into a fight with Jennifer on the stairs of the Town Square and Nicole falls down going into labor .
Nicole gives birth to her stillborn son and seeing the opportunity she blames Jennifer in pushing her .
A month later the truth comes out and seeing she is left with nothing , she tries to commit suicide but Rafe and Daniel step in just in time to stop her .
Nicole 's first love , Eric Brady ( Greg Vaughan ) , returns to Salem as a priest .
He offers her a job as his secretary at the church , which Nicole accepts .
As the two continue working together , Nicole 's old feelings for Eric resurface .
Knowing that he is a priest and can not be with her , Nicole aches about not being with him .
In June 2013 , Eric is drugged and seduced by Kristen DiMera .
Due to coincidences that happened that night , such as Nicole finding a delirious Eric in his hotel room shortly after Kristen leaves , Eric is led to believe that it was Nicole who raped him .
He confronts her about the matter .
While Nicole admits her feelings towards him during the confrontation , she repeatedly denies any wrongdoing .
Eric does not believe her , concluding that Nicole acted on her feelings .
Dismayed by Eric 's false accusation , Nicole does not want to have anything to do with Eric .
After Eric is suspended from the priesthood due to the sex scandal , Nicole forgives him , and together with Daniel , they work together to prove Eric 's innocence .
Knowing that Eric would deny her help due to her feelings for him , Nicole fabricates a fake romance with Daniel , assuring Eric she is over him .
The lie shocks both Daniel and Eric .
Daniel is initially reluctant at first , as Nicole had made up the lie before informing him , but he agrees to play along , blindsiding Eric .
Since finding out about Nicole 's new romance , Eric begins to have dreams about Nicole and is unsure how he feels about her .
As Nicole and Eric begin spending more time together to clear his name , Eric 's old feelings for Nicole resurface .
This becomes especially apparent after Nicole 's photo shoot , when Eric reminisces about an old photo shoot with Nicole during her modeling days with Countess Wilhelmina .
Nicole and Eric 's relationship becomes more mutual , leaving both of them confused and unsure how to react .
On January 13 , 2014 , Nicole and Eric are kidnapped by Kristen 's potion doctor , as the two have gotten too close to the truth about the night Eric was drugged .
The doctor tied them together in the basement of Daniel 's apartment complex .
He initially was going to wipe their memories with his drugs , but instead opens a gas line in the basement and leaves Nicole and Eric to die , either by asphyxiation or an eventual explosion .
It is in this dire situation Eric confesses he loves Nicole .
She was engaged to Eric briefly but they broke up and now she is currently engaged to Daniel .
Sadly , on New Year 's Eve of 2015 , Brady , his brother Eric , Jennifer Horton , and Daniel are involved in a tragic car accident due to Eric driving drunk .
The accident leaves Daniel brain dead , and Brady in need of a heart transplant .
With Maggie 's permission , Daniel is taken off of life support and his heart is donated to Brady .
Eric is later sent to prison for causing Daniel 's death , leaving Nicole heartbroken .
Nicole was in a relationship with Deimos Kiriakis and then they were engaged
and then she dumped him .
In October 2018 , it is revealed that Nicole has been living in Chicago at Sarah Horton ( Linsey Godfrey ) 's apartment with Holly .
When Eric arrives to confess his love for her , she reveals she is married to Xander , who is blackmailing her with a recording that reveals her as Deimos ' killer .
When Nicole escapes Xander 's hold , she travels to a warehouse to meet with Eric ; there , she becomes trapped , and is revealed to have died following an explosion .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Nicole Walker at SoapCentral.com
* Nicole Walker at Soaps.com * Nicole Walker at nbc.com/days of our lives