DIARY OF A WIMPY KID Diary of a Wimpy Kid is a satirical realistic fiction comedy novel for children and teenagers written and illustrated by Jeff Kinney .
It is the first book in the Diary of a Wimpy Kid series .
The book is about a boy named Greg Heffley and his struggles to fit in as he begins middle school .
Diary of a Wimpy Kid first appeared on FunBrain in 2004 , where it was read 20 million times .
The abridged hardcover adaptation was released on April 1 , 2007 .
The book was named a New York Times bestseller , among other awards and praise .
A film of the same name was released on March 19 , 2010 .
The sequel to the film is , followed by and .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
As Greg Heffley is getting ready for his first day of middle school , he is teased by his teenage brother Rodrick , because his mom bought him his supplies for school .
He has a little brother , a toddler named Manny , who is " spoiled rotten " because he gets everything he wants and also gets away with everything he does wrong .
His father , named Frank Heffley , does not encourage Greg 's way of life - playing video games all day - rather than going outside and playing sports .
During the first day of school , Greg is immediately rejected and is forced to sit with another outcast named Fregley , from whom Greg tries to keep " a safe distance " .
He is initially unsure whether his best friend Rowley Jefferson will be able to fit in , as he considers Rowley to be immature .
However , Greg strongly believes that he can become popular .
He and Rowley decide to take part in wrestling at school , although Greg quits after losing a match against Fregley .
On Halloween , Greg and Rowley go trick - or - treating , but are challenged by teens who spray Greg and Rowley with a water - filled fire extinguisher .
Greg tries to threaten them by saying he 's going to call the police , but the teenagers start to chase them .
The two friends escape and go to Greg 's grandmother 's house until the teens leave .
After getting few presents for Christmas , Greg decides to play a game with Rowley in which Rowley must ride a bike while Greg tries to knock him off .
On one of Greg 's tries , the ball gets under the front wheel , which causes Rowley to fall off and break his arm .
When Rowley goes to school with a plaster cast , the girls take care of him ( carrying his books , feeding him food ) which makes Greg jealous .
After Rowley 's arm heals , he and Greg decide to enroll in the safety patrol program in which they walk younger kids to their homes .
One day , as Greg is walking the kids by himself he chases the young children after scaring them with a stick with worms on it .
A neighbour contacts the school and tells them about Greg 's unusual behavior .
The principal suspects Rowley , as Greg was wearing Rowley 's jacket .
Rowley is suspended from the safety patrol .
Greg later decides to confess the truth , but Rowley has already informed on him , resulting in their friendship breaking off .
Greg tries to befriend Fregley to make Rowley jealous , although he is uncomfortable around Fregley .
Resorting to auditioning for the school play ( based on The Wizard of Oz )
Greg lands the role as a tree , while Patty Farrel is cast as Dorothy , the protagonist of the novel .
During the show 's opening performance , Rodrick brings a camera to film the play .
Greg becomes too nervous to sing , confusing the other " trees " who also fail to sing .
Patty gets frustrated and angers Greg , who throws props at Patty , and then everyone gets in the fight , ending the play in chaos .
Feeling desolate from being blatantly rejected by everyone , Greg is surprised and a little happy to see Rowley approaching him at recess , until , he discovers that he 's only there to demand back a CD he 'd left with Greg .
They get into an awkward fist - fight .
While they are fighting , the teens who chased them at halloween are drawn to the chaos crowding around Greg and Rowley tumbling around in the dirt .
When the leader of the teen gang scares away the rest of the students , they force Greg and Rowley to eat a moldy piece of cheese that has been left on the school grounds for years .
Rowley is the first to eat the cheese - except when it comes to Greg 's turn , he claims that he 's lactose intolerant and that eating cheese will kill him .
The principal turns up and the teens disappear .
The other students see the cheese in front of Rowley and believe he has eaten from it .
Greg takes the blame and claims he ate the cheese .
Greg and Rowley mend their friendship .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In 2004 , FunBrain and Jeff Kinney released an online version of Diary of a Wimpy Kid .
The website made daily entries until June 2005 .
The book became an instant hit and the online version had received about 20 million views as of 2007 .
Many online readers requested a printed version .
At the 2006 New York Comic - Con Kinney proposed Diary to Charles Kochman , Editorial Director of the ComicArts division of Abrams Books , who purchased the rights to the book .
According to Kochman , the two initially conceived it as a book for adults , believing it would appeal to audiences similar to that of the TV series The Wonder Years .
Kochman brought it before the Abrams publishing board , which convinced Kinney and Kochman that it would be better aimed toward children .
In 2007 , Diary of a Wimpy Kid , an abridged version of the original online book , was published .
CHARACTERS Gregory Heffley :
The main character , Greg , has trouble with family , friends , and his local middle school .
He is very concerned about how popular he is at school , and he daydreams a lot about being rich and famous when he grows up .
He tries to fit in at his school , but usually he does not succeed .
Facing many challenges , Greg attempts to handle them very creatively , but unfortunately his antics often backfire on him .
Rowley Jefferson :
Greg 's best friend has a larger than average frame .
He is always willing to do what Greg tells him , including dangerous stunts .
Rowley goes on vacations all the time , which annoys Greg .
Rowley is a loyal friend , but he sometimes behaves in an immature or childish manner .
He also dresses in an unusual way .
Manny Heffley :
Greg 's " spoiled " little brother , a three - year - old toddler .
He never gets in trouble no matter what , even when he really deserves it .
Manny is just getting toilet trained .
Rodrick Heffley :
Rodrick is Greg 's teenage brother and he never misses a chance to be cruel to Greg .
He is known for sleeping excessively in the morning and for his rebellious attitude .
Rodrick is part of a basement band ( garage band in the movies ) called " Löded Diper " .
Rodrick will do anything to embarrass Greg and will even cause problems for Manny to make everyone 's life miserable .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
Diary of a Wimpy Kid is the first book in an ongoing franchise .
The second , , was released February 1 , 2008 , and was listed on the New York Times Best Sellers list for 117 weeks .
, the third book in the series , released on January 13 , 2009 was on the New York Times Best Sellers list for 65 weeks , peaking at number one .
, was released October 12 , 2009 with 217 pages .
The book was ranked at number one on the New York Times Best Sellers List for all 25 weeks of inclusion , making it the # 1 best selling book of 2009 .
was released November 9 , 2010 with 217 pages .
The sixth , , was released November 15 , 2011 .
The seventh , , was released on November 13 , 2012 .
The eighth , , was released on November 5 , 2013 , in the United States and on November 6 in the United Kingdom .
The ninth , , was released on November 4 , 2014 , in the US and November 5 , 2014 , in the UK .
The tenth , , was released globally on November 3 , 2015 .
The eleventh , , was published on November 1 , 2016 .
The twelfth book , , was published on November 7 , 2017 , followed by the thirteenth , , on October 30 , 2018 .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The book won the Blue Peter Book Award 2012 , revealed live on British kids channel CBBC on March 1 , 2012 .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Diary of a Wimpy Kid is a 2010 American comedy directed by Thor Freudenthal and based on Jeff Kinney 's book .
The film was released on March 19 , 2010 .
It was released on DVD , iTunes , and Blu - ray on August 3 , 2010 .
The movie stars Zachary Gordon as Greg Heffley , Robert Capron as Rowley Jefferson , Steve Zahn as Frank Heffley ( Dad ) , Rachael Harris as Susan Heffley ( Mom ) , Devon Bostick as Rodrick Heffley , Chloë Grace Moretz as Angie Steadman , and Connor & Owen Fielding as Manny Heffley , Greg 's brother .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Diary of a Wimpy Kid on FunBrain.com * Diary of a Wimpy Kid - Channel One News Interview with Jeff Kinney on Channel One News
* The Wonderful World of Wimpy - Parade magazine An interview with Jeff Kinney in Parade Magazine