PUBLIC AND BANK HOLIDAYS IN SCOTLAND Bank and public holidays in Scotland are determined under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 and the St Andrew 's Day Bank Holiday ( Scotland ) Act 2007 .
Unlike the rest of United Kingdom , most bank holidays are not recognised as statutory public holidays in Scotland , as most public holidays are determined by local authorities across Scotland .
Some of these may be taken in lieu of statutory holidays , while others may be additional holidays , although many companies , including Royal Mail , do not follow all the holidays listed below ; and many swap between English and local holidays .
Many large shops and supermarkets continue to operate normally during public holidays , especially since there are no restrictions such as Sunday trading rules in Scotland .
BANK HOLIDAYS Section::::Bank holidays .
Since Easter 1996
the Scottish clearing banks have harmonised the days on which they are closed with those in England and Wales , and are therefore closed on Easter Monday and the last Monday in August ( rather than the first ) .
This has resulted in a number of local authorities creating a public holiday on Easter Monday .
Previously Easter Monday had not been a public holiday in Scotland .
There have been many protests about banks opening on 2 January since this decision was taken .
This has resulted in many banks now providing only a limited service on 2 January , with most members of staff still entitled to the holiday .
Schedule 1 to the 1971 Act states that the following days are official bank holidays in Scotland : !
Date ! !
Name NOTES
* Certain bank branches in Edinburgh are open on the last Monday in August when the Edinburgh Festival is taking place * * When the stated date falls on a Saturday or Sunday , the following Monday is normally designated a public holiday instead .
When Christmas Day falls on a Saturday ( and thus Boxing Day on a Sunday ) , the following Monday and Tuesday are normally designated public holidays instead
*
*
In 1995 , May Day holiday was moved to the second Monday in May – i.e. , from 1 May to 8 May – to commemorate the 50th anniversary of VE Day
* *
In 1999 , an additional bank holiday was given to enable people to prepare for the festivities to mark the arrival of the year 2000
* *
In 2002 , the Spring Holiday was moved to 4 June .
This caused it to follow an extra bank holiday on 3 June , making a four - day weekend to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II
*
*
In 2011 , a public holiday was given to ensure most people would have a chance to celebrate the Wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton , making a four - day weekend as May Day was on the following Monday
* * In 2012 the Spring Holiday was moved to 4 June .
It was then followed by an extra holiday on 5 June , making a four - day weekend to celebrate the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II .
Unfortunately only Fife , Inverclyde and Scottish Borders were affected as they already take the first Monday in June as a public holiday .
Most areas in Scotland did not have the four - day weekend and only had the Tuesday official holiday * Section::::Notes .
If New Year 's Day or 2 January fall on a Saturday or Sunday then the holidays will be taken on Monday or and Tuesday .
The St Andrew 's Day Bank Holiday ( Scotland ) Act 2007 , passed by the Scottish Parliament on 29 November 2006 , added St Andrew 's Day ( 30 November ) , or the following Monday should 30 November fall on a weekend SPECIAL DAYS AND SUBSTITUTE BANK
HOLIDAYS
Section::::Special days and substitute bank holidays .
Section 1 of the 1971 Act also provides that special days may be appointed as bank holidays ( either additional or in place of bank holidays which fall on a Saturday or Sunday ) subject to Royal Proclamation each year .
These include Boxing Day , which has been an additional bank holiday in Scotland since 1974 and the last Monday in May which has been a bank holiday since 1978 .
Section 1 of the 1971 Act also enables the Queen to appoint substitute bank holidays in any one year by Royal Proclamation .
Substitute days are customarily appointed for all UK bank holidays which fall on a Saturday or Sunday .
Where any of the dates fall on a Sunday , the Act substitutes the following Monday for that date .
If any fall on a Saturday ( or if Boxing Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday ) , the Royal Proclamation includes substitute days for these days .
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
Section::::Public holidays . !
Date ! !
Name ! !
Major Towns / Cities rowspan="2 " Easter holiday ( variable ) Good Friday Aberdeen , Ayr , Dumfries and Galloway , East Dunbartonshire , Edinburgh , Falkirk , Inverclyde , Kilmarnock , Paisley , Stirling , South Lanarkshire , West Dunbartonshire SOURCES
* Scottish Government article on St Andrew 's Day Bank Holiday ( Scotland ) Act 2007
* Scottish Government article on bank holidays SEE ALSO
* Bank holiday
* Public holidays in the United Kingdom REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Bank holidays in Scotland – Scottish Government