BENJI ( 1974 FILM )
Benji is the first film in a series of five theatrical features about the golden mixed breed dog named Benji .
It was written , produced , and directed by Joe Camp , and filmed in 1973 in and around McKinney , Texas and Denton , Texas .
Filmed in 1973 and released in 1974 , it was a critical and box - office success , grossing $ 45 million on a budget of $ 500,000 .
The film also received an Academy Award nomination for the Best Original Song for the theme song "
I Feel Love , " written by Euel Box and performed by country singer Charlie Rich .
The film was turned down for distribution by every studio in Hollywood ; Camp had to form his own distribution company to distribute the film worldwide .
This film is also Frances Bavier 's and Edgar Buchanan 's last film before they retired from acting .
Buchanan died on April 4 , 1979 and Bavier died on December 6 , 1989 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Benji , a stray dog who lives in an abandoned house on the outskirts of a small town , sets about his daily ritual of visiting human friends ; he has no fixed home but he desires one , and he likes the children of the Chapman family , Paul and Cindy , best .
Mary , their housekeeper , ( Patsy Garrett ) feeds him , but she knows that the children 's father , Dr. Chapman , must not find out about him because he 'll fire her on the spot .
One day their father is about to appear , so they hide Benji under the table .
After outwitting Dr. Chapman ( Peter Breck ) , the children leave for school and Mary explains to Benji that Dr. Chapman stubbornly dislikes dogs , but he is a nice man .
Continuing on his route , Benji chases a cat and greets Officer Tuttle ( Terry Carter ) , who announces his wedding engagement and tells Benji that he , too , will soon meet the lady of his dreams .
At Bill 's Café , Benji wakes Bill ( Edgar Buchanan ) from his morning nap and receives a bone as payment .
Returning home , Benji finds three suspicious characters , Linda ( Deborah Walley ) , Henry ( Christopher Connelly ) and Riley ( Tom Lester ) , breaking in .
Although Henry and Riley are spooked by legends that the house is haunted , Linda intends to propose the location as a hideout to their boss Mitch ( Mark Slade ) , mastermind of their illicit activities .
Henry leaves a bag of groceries behind and Benji eagerly consumes an open pudding cup .
The next morning at the Chapman home , the children brush Benji , hoping their father will accept him into the family , but Mary tells them that the doctor will not change his mind .
After impressing his human friends with his new hairstyle , Benji encounters a pretty white dog in the park who is scavenging through his favorite trashcan .
Benji presents her with the bone he received from Bill and she follows him back to the Chapman house where Mary brushes her , brings her food and names her Tiffany after the jewelry store .
Benji and Tiffany frolic in the park , but when they return to Benji 's home , they find that Riley and Henry have returned .
Riley points out that Henry 's groceries have been overturned and becomes increasingly anxious that the house is haunted .
As Mitch and Linda arrive to survey the property , Riley tells Henry that a pudding cup is missing , but Henry warns him against upsetting their plans .
The following morning , Dr. Chapman tells his despondent children that Benji carries diseases and forbids them from keeping him as a pet in spite of Cindy 's tearful pleas .
Later , Riley writes a ransom note to extort money from Dr. Chapman by threatening his children , but Henry throws it on the ground , writes a new one , and orders Riley to deliver it when he gives him the signal .
Meanwhile , Mitch surprises Henry and Linda by actually kidnapping the Chapman children .
Benji races to the Chapman home to alert the humans but is shooed out by Mary , not understanding his message .
Benji returns to steal the ransom note , hoping that by doing that , he 'll make the police follow him to the source of trouble , but he is stopped and the note is taken from him .
Benji is at a loss at what to do next .
He then follows Officer Tuttle into the police station but gets locked in .
When he barks through an intercom , he is released by a passing policeman .
Returning to the crime scene , he snatches Riley 's first ransom note and is grabbed by Mitch .
Tiffany rushes out and bites him and gets a vicious kick in return ; she is not killed , but her leg is sore and bruised .
Benji runs home where he finds that Linda has preceded him in an attempt to cut off his efforts .
She snatches the note from Benji and puts it in her purse .
He growls and barks , and Mary berates him and carries him away , but he bites her and lunges at Linda , causing the note to fall out .
Mary reads it and finally wakes up to what Benji has been on about and rushes it to Dr. Chapman , who demands to know where his children are , and she breaks down in tears .
Benji leads the police , the FBI , Dr. Chapman , and Mary back to the hideout .
Meanwhile , the kidnappers are concerned that Linda has not returned , and Henry and Riley argue that they should leave .
As they walk outside , however , the police hold them at gunpoint and the children are reunited with their father and Mary .
Their father is so proud of the dogs that he says they can stay with them permanently , much to their and the children 's delight .
CAST * Higgins as Benji * Patsy Garrett as Mary * Cynthia Smith as Cindy Chapman * Allen Fiuzat as Paul Chapman * Peter Breck as Dr. Chapman * Christopher Connelly as Henry
* Tom Lester as Riley * Mark Slade as Mitch * Deborah Walley as Linda
* Herb Vigran as Lt .
Samuels * Frances Bavier as Lady with Cat
* Edgar Buchanan as Bill * Terry Carter as Officer Tuttle * Larry Swartz as Floyd
* J.D. Young as Second Policeman * Tiffany as White Dog
* January L'Angelle as Student ( uncredited ) * John P. Biff Painter as
Store Burglar THEME SONG Section::::Theme song .
The movie 's theme song , " I Feel Love " , recorded by the country music star Charlie Rich , won a Golden Globe award for Best Original Song in 1975 .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The outdoor scenes were filmed primarily in McKinney , Texas ; and the house located at 1104 South Tennessee served as the " haunted house " where the Chapman kids were held hostage , as well as serving as production headquarters during the filming .
The house has since been renovated into a bed and breakfast .
The park scenes were in Dallas .
The municipal building was filmed in Denton , Texas .
The film and the ensuing franchise was created after Joe Camp expressed concern over the overabundance of family films released through the four wall distribution concept .
He told Variety magazine in 1977 : " It has become an industry - caused thing , but the G rated classification has to some degree become ' if it 's G , it ca n't be for me ' .
" Camp observed that four - wall companies had saturated the market for G - rated product ; in response to the lowered - down quality of their films , he created Benji .
Higgins appeared on screen with Edgar Buchanan , with whom he had appeared in the TV series Petticoat Junction ; this was the final film for both .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Produced on a budget of $ 500,000 , it grossed $ 39.6 million in the United States , making it the ninth highest - grossing film of 1974 .
The film grossed a total of $ 45 million in worldwide receipts .
The film received mostly positive reviews from critics , earning an 86 % approval rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes .
Variety called the film " a very superior piece of family fare .
Its star is a dog , ragtag in appearance and with a winning way that should endear it to every audience fortunate enough to catch the picture . "
Gene Siskel gave the film two - and - a - half stars out of four , calling it " agreeable " but criticizing " a few cheap grabs for emotion .
" Linda Gross of the Los Angeles Times called it a " cheery family film " that was " prettily photographed . "
Michael Grossbard of The Monthly Film Bulletin described the film as " quite effectively told from a doggy - eye view " and wrote that Joe Camp " seems to have cracked the Disney monopoly on family entertainment with his first effort , though the Master in his heyday had more wit , originality and artistry . "
Higgins was nominated for a PATSY Award for the best animal performance of the year in a feature film , but lost out to Tonto the cat from Harry and Tonto .
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists :
* 2006 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Cheers – Nominated SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1974 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS