LEXIE GREY Alexandra Caroline " Lexie " Grey , M.D. is a fictional character from ABC 's medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , portrayed by actress Chyler Leigh .
Created by showrunner Shonda Rhimes , the character is introduced in season three as protagonist Meredith Grey 's younger half - sister , who has transferred to Seattle Grace Hospital as a new surgical intern after her mother 's sudden death .
Lexie is eventually named a surgical resident in season six .
Leigh was originally contracted to appear for a multi - episode story arc , but ultimately received star billing from seasons four to eight .
Leigh has also reprised her role as Lexie on the spin - off show Private Practice .
Characterized by Rhimes as a dork with issues expressing her feelings , Lexie 's focal storyline in the series involved her romantic relationship with plastics attending Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) .
Both she and Mark sustained life - threatening injuries during an aviation accident in the eighth - season finale , which resulted in their deaths .
Seattle Grace Mercy West is later renamed Grey - Sloan Memorial Hospital in their memory .
The reason given for Lexie 's departure after more than five years on the show was Leigh 's desire to spend more time with her family .
Both the character and Leigh 's performance received positive feedback and acclaim .
Leigh was among the cast to receive a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2007 .
STORYLINES BACKGROUND Section::::Storylines .
Section::::Background .
Alexandra Caroline " Lexie " Grey ( born 1984 ) was the daughter of Susan ( Mare Winningham ) and Thatcher Grey ( Jeff Perry ) , and the elder sister of Molly Grey - Thompson ( Mandy Siegfried ) .
Throughout her childhood , Lexie remained unaware that she also had an older half - sister , Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , born to Thatcher and his first wife Ellis ( Kate Burton ) , a famed surgeon .
Lexie was extremely intelligent as a child , having skipped third grade and " aced " her psych clerkship .
When she turned seven , her parents threw her a surprise party that she always remembered as one of her best birthdays .
She was very popular and had a great group of friends in high school , where she was crowned prom queen and class valedictorian .
In contrast to Meredith , Lexie came from a loving home with a happy and idealistic upbringing .
Meredith once said of Lexie , " She was raised right .
With parents and rules and smiley face posters on her wall . "
Despite this , the Grey sisters ultimately form a close familial bond , with Lexie eventually moving into Meredith 's house .
Lexie possessed an eidetic memory , which was often used as a valuable resource and earned her the nickname " Lexipedia " .
She demonstrated a high aptitude for both plastics and neurosurgery and was generally viewed as one of the better young surgeons at the hospital , often being asked to assist on many high profile surgeries ; she was considered the best of the interns in her year .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Near the end of Meredith 's intern year , Molly mentions that Lexie is a student at Harvard Medical School .
After she graduates , Lexie is accepted by Massachusetts General Hospital , which she initially chooses as her residency spot .
Following her mother 's sudden death of complications stemming from the hiccups , however , Lexie decides to move back to Seattle to care for her father , taking up a surgical internship at Seattle Grace Hospital instead , one year behind Meredith who is due to begin her second year of residency .
On the day of her mother 's funeral , Lexie waits in the car when Thatcher , accompanied by Molly , goes to tell Meredith that she is n't welcome at the ceremony , thus missing the opportunity to meet her older half - sister .
Later that night , before her internship at Seattle Grace begins , Lexie meets Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) at Joe 's Bar , mirroring Derek 's initial meeting with Meredith .
The pair flirt and Lexie forwardly offers to buy Derek a drink , but Derek says that he is there with some friends and declines .
Upon arriving at the hospital 's intern locker room the next day , Lexie meets George O'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) during the end of his first year as an intern .
After Lexie introduces herself , George immediately realizes her identity as Meredith 's half - sister .
SEASON 4
Section::::Season 4 .
Lexie quickly befriends George and promises not to tell anyone that he is repeating his internship after failing his intern exam .
Lexie 's assigned supervising resident is Meredith 's best friend Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , who does n't take the time to learn her interns ' names and thus , dubs Lexie as " Three " .
Although Cristina is initially rude and strict with her , Lexie eventually stands up for herself and manages to earn her mentor 's respect , with Yang going so far as to acknowledge Lexie as her best student .
Lexie is eager to get to know Meredith but receives a hostile response when she first introduces herself , and her later attempts to bond with her half - sister are similarly rebuffed .
"Love / Addiction " ( 4.02 ) , October 4 , 2007 .
Lexie begins sleeping with resident Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) , who discovers that Thatcher has descended into alcoholism following his wife 's death and often unreasonably lashes out at Lexie .
When Lexie is lectured by Meredith for not looking after Thatcher , she finally retaliates and decides to stop pursuing a relationship with Meredith .
After ending the emotionless sex with Alex , Lexie bonds with patient Nick Hanscom ( Seth Green ) and is present when his exposed artery blows , causing him to suffer massive blood loss .
She manages to stop the bleeding but is distraught when Nick later dies anyway .
Feeling sympathy , Cristina invites Lexie to join her and Meredith in drinking and dancing , causing the sisters ' relationship to begin to thaw .
The following morning , Meredith goes out of her way to make Lexie breakfast , which Lexie politely eats despite being allergic to eggs , resulting in her having to be treated at the hospital .
Lexie and George later agree to rent a place together , but they are only able to afford a dilapidated apartment that Lexie attempts to improve by stealing decorations and furniture from the hospital .
Lexie begins to develop romantic feelings for George and secretly steals his personnel files from Chief Richard Webber 's ( James Pickens Jr. ) office , discovering that George had only failed his intern exam by one point .
She encourages George to try and convince the Chief that he deserves a second chance , to which the Chief agrees .
An ecstatic George then casually plants a kiss on Lexie , completely unaware of her feelings for him .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
Lexie continues to harbor romantic feelings for an oblivious George ; their relationship is a reflection of George 's previous infatuation with an oblivious Meredith .
She prioritizes helping George study over taking part in a rare surgery offered to her by plastics attending Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , but feels betrayed when George fails to even request that she become one of his interns after he passes his exam .
Finally realizing that George does n't feel the same way about her , Lexie gives up on her feelings for him and the pair 's friendship begins to fizzle out .
She soon discovers that some of her fellow interns have secretly been practicing simple procedures on each other , and begins taking part in these unauthorized operations to prove that she 's " hardcore " .
Seeking a more daring procedure , Sadie Harris ( Melissa George ) later suggests that they remove her appendix .
Although Lexie agrees , she quickly finds herself out of her depth and is forced to seek the aid of Meredith and Cristina to save Sadie 's life , after which all of the interns in the " cabal " are put on probation .
Derek finds Lexie exhausted and distraught at the day 's events and allows her to move into the attic at his and Meredith 's house .
Lexie then begins a flirtation with Mark , and is highly impressed after watching him successfully perform a cutting - edge surgery .
Later that night , she shows up at Mark 's hotel room and undresses herself while repeating to him , " Teach me .
" The pair grow close very quickly and enter a romantic relationship , though they are forced to keep it a secret when Derek warns Mark away from Lexie due to their large age gap and the latter being Meredith 's younger sister ( earning Lexie the nickname " Little Grey " ) .
When Derek 's mother ( Tyne Daly ) visits Seattle , Mark is initially fearful that she will disapprove of his relationship with Lexie .
After meeting Lexie , however , Mrs. Shepherd tells Mark that she is exactly the kind of youthful person he should be with .
When Lexie and Mark are making out in an on - call room , she accidentally gives him a penile fracture and has to seek the help of Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) to treat him .
Sadie then publicly takes the blame for Mark 's injury to spare Lexie the burden of suffering further humiliation and guilt .
Lexie later wins an intern competition organized by Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Hiegl ) and is congratulated by Mark .
Wanting to date Mark in public , Lexie convinces him to come clean to Derek about their relationship , to which Mark agrees .
But during his confession , Mark does not realize that Derek has just been devastated by the loss of a patient , and they then get into a fist fight .
The two men continue to feud , resulting in Lexie beginning to stress eat until they eventually reconcile .
Lexie is chosen by Mark to assist him with an extremely rare facial transplant surgery only to be judged and mocked by her peers ; they believe that Mark is taking advantage of her and that she is using him .
Lexie then kisses Mark in front of the other interns before stating , " They think that we 're ugly
but I know that we 're beautiful , and we can adapt to a hostile environment .
" Lexie is delighted when Meredith asks her to be a bridesmaid at her and Derek 's wedding , though they ultimately give the ceremony to Alex and cancer - stricken Izzie , which Lexie attends with Mark .
Lexie later asks Mark to meet her newly - sober father , which Mark initially refuses as he states that fathers have never liked him .
However , Mark realizes how much he wants to build a future with Lexie , so he ends up going for dinner with her and Thatcher .
Soon after , Mark decides to purchase a house and invites Lexie to move in with him only for her to decline , concerned about how fast their relationship is progressing .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Lexie feels immense guilt following George 's death , having abandoned their friendship after he failed to reciprocate her romantic feelings towards him .
She is consoled by Mark and , after becoming a surgical resident , agrees to move into his new apartment with him .
Lexie and the other residents grow increasingly stressed in the wake of Chief Webber 's announcement that there will be a merger with Mercy West Hospital , meaning that Seattle Grace will have to layoff a large portion of its staff members .
Mark encourages Lexie to relax and just try her best during this period , advising her not to worry as she deserves her job .
Lexie soon finds that while she is safe from the layoffs , many of her friends have been cut from the program .
To take everyone 's minds off the merger , Owen takes Lexie , Mark , Derek , Meredith , and Cristina to play baseball together .
Thatcher is later admitted into the hospital with liver failure stemming from his former alcoholism .
When Lexie discovers that she is not a suitable transplant candidate , Meredith steps in and donates part of her liver to Thatcher to spare Lexie the grief of losing her father .
Following the merger , Lexie develops a rivalry with Mercy West resident April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) , who desperately attempts to undermine Lexie while they are both on Derek 's service .
Lexie retaliates by stealing April 's notebook and using its personal contents to humiliate her , though Lexie later apologizes .
When a patient dies from a medical negligence mistake committed by one of the many surgeons who treated her , Webber starts a witch hunt to trace back the culprit and identify the cause of death , and Lexie is among the doctors who are questioned .
It is ultimately discovered that April was the one at fault , after which Lexie and the other residents muse over the absurdity of her mistake .
Despite Webber 's objections , Derek recruits Lexie for his " rogue surgery " on hospital technician Isaac 's ( Faran Tahir ) " inoperable " tumor , with Lexie acting as Derek 's own caregiver during the long and exhausting procedure .
Lexie is supported by Mark and , to avoid having to leave the operating room , resorts to using a diaper so that she can sufficiently hydrate herself before and during the surgery .
Near the year 's end , Mark and Lexie receive a shock when a pregnant teenage girl named Sloan Riley ( Leven Rambin ) shows up claiming to be Mark 's daughter , and her parentage is soon confirmed .
Mark quickly agrees to let Sloan and the baby move in permanently without consulting Lexie , resulting in her ending their relationship as she feels she is still too young to be a grandmother .
An upset and drunk Lexie then engages in a one - night stand with Alex but feels guilty and confesses to Mark , who becomes furious with her despite also admitting that he had a one - night stand with Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) .
Although she secretly suppresses her feelings for Mark , Lexie and Alex assume a casual relationship that Lexie flaunts to make Mark jealous .
Lexie later breaks down in front of Meredith when Alex tells her that Mark has started dating Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) .
After Sloan gives her baby up for adoption and leaves Seattle , however , Mark approaches Lexie and confesses his love to her .
A stunned Lexie hesitantly states that Alex is now her boyfriend , to which Mark replies , " I know .
I 'm just saying you could have a husband .
" Lexie takes part in a surgery on Alison Clark ( Caroline Williams ) and informs her husband Gary Clark ( Michael O'Neill ) that it was a success , only for Alison to suffer a stroke and fall into a coma that Derek and Webber state she is unlikely to wake from .
As Alison had signed a DNR form , Lexie is forced to turn off the machines keeping her alive despite Gary begging her to stop .
After failing in an attempt to sue Seattle Grace Mercy West , a grief - stricken Gary Clark later returns to the hospital with a gun , seeking revenge on Derek , Webber , and Lexie .
Mark shields Lexie during the shooting and the pair attempt to save a critically wounded Alex .
Lexie heads out into the evacuated hospital to search for supplies and comes face - to - face with Clark .
Before Clark can shoot her , however , a SWAT team member wounds him and Lexie manages to escape .
Lexie and Mark proceed to save Alex 's life , during which Lexie realizes that Alex is still in love with his ex - wife Izzie , as he calls for her while delirious and on the verge of death .
After having a conversation with Webber , Gary Clark eventually commits suicide , having killed eleven people and wounded another seven as well as causing Meredith to suffer a miscarriage .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
After openly acknowledging the shooting as a mass murder during a therapy session with trauma counselor Andrew Perkins ( James Tupper ) and the other residents , Lexie experiences a psychotic breakdown stemming from PTSD and sleep deprivation while she is treating a patient .
She is admitted to the hospital 's psychiatric ward , where she is sedated for over fifty hours with Meredith remaining by her side .
Alex breaks off his relationship with Lexie because he can not handle having to care for a person going through PTSD and he enjoys sleeping with women that find having been shot to be attractive .
Lexie , after recovering and being cleared for surgery , confronts Alex at Cristina and Owen 's wedding and knocks him down a peg by telling him that the reason he is alive is because of her .
Lexie becomes irritated when others at the hospital view her as fragile and incompetent due to her breakdown and works hard to repair her image ; she saves a woman from being paralyzed when no one else caught the issue .
She continues to gain her confidence throughout the season and helps attending Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) discover a cure for hospital fistulas .
Lexie 's rivalry with April intensifies when the latter begins growing closer to Meredith , but Meredith later assures Lexie that she will always be her sister .
Meanwhile , Lexie and Mark continue to work together but never seem to get their timing right , with Lexie acting hostile towards Mark when he wishes to reconcile , and Mark being caught sleeping with a flavor of the day when Lexie wants to rekindle their romance .
When Lexie and Mark both realize that they continue to have feelings for each other , however , they resume their relationship .
Lexie nearly suffers another breakdown when the victims of a school shooting are sent to Seattle Grace Mercy West for treatment , which reminds her of her near - death experience during the shooting at the hospital .
Mark comforts Lexie and the doctors ultimately manage to save all the victims of the shooting , after which Lexie tells Mark that she loves him .
Lexie and Mark 's happiness once again comes to a halt when she discovers that during their break - up , Mark had unintentionally impregnated Callie , and she ends their relationship once more because she is not ready for children .
Thatcher is admitted to the hospital with kidney stones and Lexie is shocked to discover that he is dating a 20-year - old girl .
Concerned about Lexie 's well - being and eager to win her back , Mark recruits his protégé Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) to find out what is upsetting her .
Lexie reveals to Jackson that she is frustrated with the people she cares about , specifically Mark and her father , making major life - changing decisions without considering her feelings .
When Lexie overhears Mark saying that he will take care of his and Callie 's child regardless of what sickness it is born with , she expresses regret for neglecting to even let Mark explain the situation before she walked away from him .
However , Jackson manages to convince Lexie that nobody simply has one soulmate and the two subsequently begin dating .
Mark is furious and distraught when he discovers that Jackson has entered a relationship with Lexie and desperately attempts to win her back but shortly after , Callie is involved in a severe car accident and Lexie consoles Mark .
After Mark and Callie 's baby is born , Mark tells Lexie that she is the only thing missing to make his life perfect .
Lexie explains that she will always love Mark and will go back to him if he continues to pursue her , but she believes that they are n't suited because they have different desires .
Mark then agrees to let her go , giving her and Jackson his blessing .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
Although initially happy in her relationship with Jackson , Lexie grows increasingly distraught and frustrated when she discovers that Mark has started dating an ophthalmologist named Julia .
When she sees Mark and Julia flirting during a charity softball match , Lexie 's jealousy gets the better of her and she throws a ball at Julia , injuring the latter 's chest .
Jackson senses that Lexie is still in love with Mark and ends their relationship .
Lexie begins working under Derek 's service and becomes increasingly proficient in neurosurgery , helping Derek with a set of " hopeless cases " - high risk surgeries for patients who had otherwise run out of options .
During a surgery , Derek is called away on an emergency , leaving Lexie and Meredith to carry out the procedure on their own .
Though Derek had instructed them to merely reduce the patient 's brain tumor , Meredith allows Lexie to remove it completely , despite not being authorized by either the patient or Derek to do so .
The sisters celebrate the successful surgery but Lexie is devastated when she discovers that the patient suffered severe brain damage , thus losing the ability to speak .
Alex , Jackson and April move out of Meredith 's house without inviting Lexie to join them , and with Derek and Meredith settling down with baby Zola , Lexie begins to feel lonely and isolated .
After being left babysitting Zola on Valentine 's Day , she contemplates confessing her true feelings to Mark .
However , after plucking up the courage to visit his apartment , she finds Mark studying with Jackson and loses her nerve , instead claiming that she wanted to set up a play date for Zola and Sofia .
When Mark confides in Derek that he and Julia have been discussing moving in together , Derek warns Lexie not to miss her chance again , resulting in her professing her love to a shell - shocked Mark , who merely thanks her for her candor .
Mark later confesses to Derek that he feels the same way about Lexie , but is unsure of how to go about things .
Days later , Lexie is named as part of a team of surgeons that will be sent to Boise to separate conjoined twins , along with Mark , Meredith , Derek , Cristina and Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) .
However , while flying to their destination , the doctors ' plane crashes in the wilderness and Lexie is crushed under debris from the aircraft but manages to alert Mark and Cristina to help her .
The pair try in vain to free Lexie , who realizes that she is suffering from a hemothorax and is unlikely to survive .
While Cristina tries to find an oxygen tank and water to save Lexie , Mark holds Lexie 's hand and professes his love for her , telling her that they will get married , have kids and live the best life together , as they are " meant to be " .
While fantasizing about the future that she and Mark could have had together , Lexie succumbs to her injuries and dies moments before Meredith arrives .
The remaining doctors are left stranded in the woods waiting for rescue , with a devastated Meredith crying profusely and Mark refusing to let go of Lexie 's hand .
SEASON 9
ONWARDS
Section::::Season 9 onwards .
In season 9 , the remaining surgeons are rescued from the wilderness days later , and Lexie 's body is returned to Seattle .
Still devastated by Lexie 's passing , Mark advises his protégé Jackson , ' when you love someone , tell them ' , which Mark felt that he did not tell Lexie enough when she was alive .
Mark subsequently makes a clean break with Julia , stating that he had always only truly loved Lexie .
Mark is soon placed on life support due to the extensive internal injuries he sustained during the plane crash and , as determined by his will , the machines keeping him alive are eventually turned off as he showed no signs of waking after 30 days .
After Mark 's death , flashbacks of several moments in his life showed him being videotaped at Callie and Arizona 's wedding ; at the end of his congratulations speech , Mark declares that Lexie was the partner he wanted to grow old and dance with at their granddaughter 's wedding .
When the remaining survivors of the plane crash pool their compensation money to purchase the hospital , they agree to rename it " Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital " in tribute to Lexie and Mark .
Following Lexie and Mark 's deaths , series producer Shonda Rhimes mused regarding the pair 's relationship : ' ...
he [ Mark ] and Lexie get to be together in a way .
Their love remains true . "
Lexie 's spirit appears in the season 15 episode " Flowers Grow Out of My Grave " .
She is seen alongside the ghosts of Mark , Derek , and George as they watch Meredith leave the hospital after treating a patient whose family celebrates the Day of the Dead .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
Leigh first appeared on the show during the last two episodes of the third season as Meredith 's half - sister , Lexie Grey .
Following Isaiah Washington 's departure who portrayed Preston Burke , it was reported that show 's executives were planning on adding new cast members , such as Lexie .
She was officially upgraded to a series ' regular on July 11 , 2007 , for the fourth season .
On casting Chyler Leigh as Lexie ,
Grey 's Anatomy creator Shonda Rhimes said : " We met with a lot of young actresses , but Chyler stood out
— she had a quality that felt right and real to me .
It felt like she could be Meredith 's sister , but she had a depth that was very interesting . "
In September 2011 , Leigh requested an extended summer hiatus to spend more time with her family .
This was granted by Rhimes , though the actress returned in mid - October .
Leigh 's character died in the eighth - season finale .
In May 2012 , Rhimes revealed why she decided to have Lexie die : "
I love Chyler
and I love the character of Lexie Grey .
She was an important member of my Grey 's family .
This was not an easy decision .
But it was a decision that Chyler and I came to together .
We had a lot of thoughtful discussion about it and ultimately we both decided this was the right time for her character 's journey to end .
As far as I 'm concerned , Chyler will always remain a part of the Shondaland family and I ca n't wait to work with her again in the future . "
Following the death of her character , Leigh released a statement saying : CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Leigh 's character has been called " reliable , trustworthy , timid , and apprehensive " by Grey 's Anatomy executives .
In her early appearances , it was learned that Lexie has a photographic memory , which she applied to her surgical career .
This led her to being nicknamed " Lexipedia " by Alex Karev .
The character has also been described as an " innocent young intern " by Alex Keen of The Trades .
Of the character , Leigh said : " She 's a very vulnerable person from a very healthy background — she knows how to make good relationships but at this point [ season four ] , she 's coming into so much opposition she 's trying to adjust to it . "
Debbie Chang of BuddyTV commented on Lexie 's early characterization , including her sexual relationship with Karev :
Similarities have been established between Lexie and Meredith .
Series writer , Stacy McKee , commented on this :
Lexie entertained several relationships throughout her time on Grey 's Anatomy .
In her early appearances , she maintained a friendship with George O'Malley , until developing romantic feelings towards him .
Rhimes offered the insight : " I love them as friends .
They make good friends .
We all have that friend we met in school or the gym or somewhere – we just hit it off right away .
And right away there was no pretense or airs .
Just pure honesty .
That 's Lexie and George .
They 're really good friends
and I can see the friendship evolving into something even greater .
At least , that 's what Lexie is hoping .
She is my kind of girl .
The girl who likes the guy because he is a GOOD guy and that 's what George is .
He is a good guy and that 's something that Lexie could use now .
She 's going through her own challenges what with Meredith and losing her own mother and trying to keep things afloat .
I 'm rooting for Lexie .
She 's my kind of girl
and I hope that she gets what she deserves : love .
And more kisses .
There should always be that .
" Lexie 's most significant relationship was with Mark Sloan .
Following her death , Rhimes said : RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
While reception to Lexie Grey was initially mixed , both the character and Chyler Leigh 's performance garnered positive feedback and acclaim as her role on the series progressed , and Lexie soon became a favorite of critics and fans of the show .
Eileen Lulevitch , entertainment reviewer for TV Guide , praised Lexie 's introduction in season four .
Former The Star - Ledger columnist Alan Sepinwall was also favorable of Lexie 's arrival at Seattle Grace , feeling that " she 's still being written as Meredith circa season one in an attempt to make us like her , but I did n't mind the manipulation , if only because there are so few characters left on this show to like .
The Buzzsugar television reviewer also praised Lexie 's introduction in the Buzzsugar review .
On the other hand , People was initially less than impressed with Lexie and criticized the way Leigh 's character first approached her sister , calling it " rude " .
Laura Burrows from IGN wrote : " Everything she says and does is obnoxious and does harm to someone .
Lexie is an idiot and should be shot or drowned or exploded . "
Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly was also critical of Leigh 's early appearances , referring to her as " awkward " .
However , Armstrong later noted that the " sparkling " friendship development between Lexie and O'Malley " won her over " .
The character 's transition from seasons four to five was positively reviewed , with Alex Keen of The Trades writing : " Her presence and confidence have increased quite a bit since last season , and actress , Chyler Leigh , does a fantastic job of making this progression feel seamless .
Since the series has defused the tension between Little Grey and Big Grey ( aka Meredith ) , Lexie has clear sailing through the season and steals the show as one of the best current characters on the series .
" The character 's romantic relationship with Eric Dane 's Mark Sloan has been acclaimed , with Chris Monfette of IGN writing : " Sloan 's honest relationship with Lexie helped to make both characters infinitely more interesting and mature . "
BuddyTV lauded the development and progression of Lexie and Mark 's relationship throughout season five , saying , " They are beautiful , and they can adapt to a hostile environment .
"
The Huffington Post Michael Pascua praised Leigh 's performance and Lexie 's evolution in season six .
Pascua wrote that he enjoyed Lexie 's " humorous " and " emotionally connective " role as a " genuine character " during the merger and layoffs , commenting : " She still maintained that book - smart ability to repeat facts ( like the merger cases ) and shows a command of medical situations ...
She should n't be worried about the merger because she 's a good doctor . "
TV Guide Adam Bryant praised Leigh 's " powerful performance " in season six , writing : " The bond that is growing between Lexie and Meredith is nice to see .
From Meredith finally saying out loud how she feels about Lexie , to Lexie being at Mer 's side when she wakes up , I am really glad to see these sisters ' happy .
"
Lexie 's storyline in season six was also praised by PopSugar .
Leigh served as a primary vocalist in season seven 's musical episode , " Song Beneath the Song " , and received rave reviews from television critics , including the Boston Heralds Mark Perigard .
Leigh 's performance in the season eight finale , which was also her character 's final appearance , was deemed as " phenomenal " by Digital Spy Ben Lee .
Lexie Grey was listed in Wetpaint 's " 10 Hottest Female Doctors on TV " .
In 2007 , at the 14th Screen Actors Guild Awards , Leigh and the rest of the cast of Grey 's Anatomy received a nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Grey 's Anatomy at ABC.com