CARBON – OXYGEN BOND
A carbon – oxygen bond is a polar covalent bond between carbon and oxygen .
Oxygen has 6 valence electrons and prefers to either share two electrons in bonding with carbon , leaving the 4 nonbonding electrons in 2 lone pairs :O : or to share two pairs of electrons to form the carbonyl functional group .
=
O : Simple representatives of these two bond types are the OH in alcohols such as the ethanol in beverages and fuels and the C = O in ketones ( as well as many other related carbonyl compounds ) .
ELECTRONEGATIVITIES AND BOND LENGTHS Section::::Electronegativities and bond lengths .
The C – O bond is strongly polarized towards oxygen ( electronegativity of C vs O , 2.55 vs 3.44 ) .
Bond lengths for paraffinic C –
O bonds are in the range of 143 pm – less than those of C – N or C – C bonds .
Shortened single bonds are found with carboxylic acids ( 136 pm ) due to partial double bond character and elongated bonds are found in epoxides ( 147 pm ) .
The C – O bond strength is also larger than C – N or C – C.
For example , bond strengths are /mol ( at 298 K ) in methanol , /mol in methylamine , and /mol in ethane .
Carbon and oxygen form terminal double bonds in functional groups collectively known as carbonyl compounds to which belong such compounds as ketones , esters , carboxylic acids and many more .
Internal C
= O bonds are found in positively charged oxonium ions .
In furans , the oxygen atom contributes to pi - electron delocalization via its filled p - orbital and hence furans are aromatic .
Bond lengths of C = O bonds are around 123 pm in carbonyl compounds .
The C = O bond length in carbon dioxide is 116 pm .
The C = O bonds in acyl halides have partial triple bond character and are subsequently very short : 117 pm .
Compounds with formal C –
O triple bonds do not exist except for carbon monoxide , which has a very short , strong bond ( 112.8 pm ) .
Such triple bonds have a very high bond energy , even higher than N – N triple bonds .
Oxygen can also be trivalent , for example in triethyloxonium tetrafluoroborate .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
Carbon
– oxygen bond forming reactions are the Williamson ether synthesis , nucleophilic acyl substitutions and electrophilic addition to alkenes .
The Paternò –
Büchi reaction involves carbonyl compounds .
OXYGEN FUNCTIONAL GROUPS
Section::::Oxygen functional groups .
Carbon – oxygen bonds are present in these functional groups : !
Chemical class !
Bond order !
Formula !
Structural Formula !
Example REFERENCES