MARE 'S LEG
The Mare 's Leg is the name given to a customized shortened rifle used by Steve McQueen 's character on the television series ( 1958–1961 ) .
McQueen 's character was named Josh Randall , and the gun has also been referred to as a Winchester Randall , or a Randall Special .
Mare 's Leg is now a generic term for a Winchester Model 1892 ( or modern derivative ) with a shortened barrel and stock .
PROP GUN Section::::Prop gun .
The term " mare 's leg " was introduced in 1957 in the TV series Trackdown , where Steve McQueen first appeared as a bounty hunter .
Steve McQueen and his Mare 's Leg went on to star in the CBS TV series Wanted Dead or Alive .
Designed by Kenny " Von Dutch " Howard , an experienced artist and gunsmith , the original Mare 's Leg was made by cutting down a .44 - 40 caliber Winchester Model 1892 rifle to a size that could be worn in a large leg holster and used with one hand .
The barrel was cut to a length of nine inches , and much of the butt - stock was removed .
The original Mare 's Leg did not have sights .
McQueen was involved in the final design , suggesting the duck - bill hammer and enlarged lever loop , and initiating a redesign of the custom holster .
The Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , and Firearms was not consulted before the program aired and producers had to pay taxes totaling $ 1,100 in connection with the National Firearms Act of 1934 .
During filming three guns were made , each with an enlarged loop on the cocking lever .
After filming started , the size of the levers was made smaller on all 3 guns .
The second and third guns bore octagonal barrels instead of a round one .
In a continuity oversight , a gun sometimes changed partway through a given scene .
While the guns were chambered for the .44 - 40 round , McQueen wore more impressive looking .45 - 70 rounds in the loops of his gun belt .
In season one a doctor , after removing a bullet fired from the Mare 's Leg from the back of a criminal , identified the removed bullet as a 30 - 30 round .
As of the 1980s , one of the original guns was on display at the Fort Spaghetti Restaurant and Museum ( 999 Ball Road , Anaheim , California ) .
Another is in the Autry National Center of the American West .
There have been a number of toys based on the Mare 's Leg , from small cap guns to larger detailed toys complete with a holster .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
In the 1987 film , a sequel to the series starring Rutger Hauer as Nick Randall , the grandson of Josh Randall , Nick keeps his grandfather 's Mare 's Leg in a display case in his office .
Similar shortened rifles have appeared in : * Once Upon a Time in the West ( 1968 film ) used by Woody Strode in a cameo , when sent to kill Charles Bronson 's character " Harmonica " .
*
My Name Is Nobody ( 1973 ) Used by a rustler 18 minutes into the film .
* Boss Nigger ( 1975 blaxploitation western ) used by the main character .
* The Adventures of Brisco County , Jr. ( 1993–1994 television series ) featured Crystal Hawks , a bounty hunter played by Sheena Easton , who used a Mare 's Leg .
* ( 1999 survival horror video game ) had main character Jill Valentine use this weapon as an unlockable item after defeating the Nemesis a certain amount of times .
Here , it is treated as a shotgun , and is given the designation
M-37 .
*
The Magnificent Seven ( 1998–2000 television series ) featured Eric Close as Mare 's Leg wielding Vin Tanner , reminiscent of McQueen 's character Vin in the original film .
* Firefly ( 2002 television series ) and Serenity ( 2005 film ) starred Gina Torres as Zoe Alleyne Washburne , who used the same Mare 's Leg prop created for Brisco County , Jr. * Umineko no Naku Koro ni ( 2007 - 2010 visual novel ) had appearances of this specific rifle in nearly all of the episodes .
* Fistful of Frags ( 2007 first person shooter video game ) as a low - tier starter weapon with high damage and low rate of fire .
*
Zombieland ( 2009 film ) used by Woody Harrelson throughout the film .
* ( 2009 ) as the Model 1887 , a shotgun unlocked in multiplayer when the player reaches Level 67 .
*
Archer
( Season 5 , Episode 3 )
Archer uses this gun in this episode .
* ( 2014 )
Antagonist Skull Face uses this weapon .
* ( 2015 )
Antagonist Skull Face uses this weapon .
* Battlefield 4 ( 2013 )
A modernised .44
Magnum Winchester Model 1892 , available via an expansion pack , is referred to by this name .
* State of Decay ( video game ) ( 2013 survival horror game )
The rifle is one of several accessible weapons used by the survivors .
*
Warframe has the Grinlok rifle and the cut down version , known as the Marelok .
*
In 2016 Pawan Kalyan a popular Indian film actor used mare 's leg rifle as a stylish weapon in his film Sardaar Gabbar Singh * The Magnificent Seven ( 2016 )
remake Faraday grabs one out of a leg holster from one of Bogue 's dead henchmen * Westworld ( 2017 )
Hector uses this weapon in season 1 and 2 MANUFACTURED REPLICAS Section::::Manufactured replicas .
A number of companies have marketed functional reproductions of the Mare 's Leg , making them the same way as the original , by cutting down Winchester rifles .
These reproductions also have the same legal restrictions as the original : a rifle may not have a barrel length less than 16 inches ( 41 cm ) without obtaining a tax stamp from the ATF , in accordance with the National Firearms Act .
Other companies have marketed reproductions originally made and sold as handguns .
Because of the legal restrictions , non - functional prop - quality replicas have been produced by some of the same companies that make functional copies .
CARBINE
Section::::Carbine .
Since before 2000 , Eagle Squadron Productions has produced and sold an authentic 1892 Winchester Mare 's Leg carbine .
It uses a Winchester 1892 carbine in the correct caliber of .44 - 40 , and is based on one of the original prop guns .
They also produce replica gun belt and a non - firing replica carbine .
HANDGUN Section::::Handgun .
In 2005 , J.B. Custom began marketing a " 1892 Mares Leg Lever Action Pistol " .
This pistol is a fully functional copy of Randall 's weapon , available in a number of calibers .
Since they are newly manufactured as pistols and sold subject to handgun regulations , rather than cut down rifles , they avoid legal difficulties .
Like the original weapon , the J.B. Custom version has a 12-inch ( 30 cm ) barrel , and an overall length of 24 inches ( 61 cm ) .
The pistol was available in .45 Colt , .44 - 40 Winchester , and .38 - 40 Winchester .
Early promotional material specified a limited production run of 50 units based on the number of available 1892 actions that could be used legally .
Later versions of the weapons use a slightly different action that while not exactly like the 1892 model , cycles more reliably , and is commercially available .
This version is available in .44 Magnum , and .357 Magnum .
In 2008 , Legacy Sports International introduced their version of the Mare 's Leg , made by Chiappa Firearms , in Italy , imported for Legacy , and sold under the brand name " Puma " .
This Puma 92 pistol is named the Bounty Hunter .
It is available in several calibers including ; .44 Magnum , .45 Colt , and .44 - 40 .
With a 12-inch ( 30 cm ) barrel , no shoulder stock , and a receiver that has never been built into a rifle , it is considered a pistol by the ATF .
In 2010 Rossi Firearms began offering a Mare 's Leg under the name " Ranch Hand " .
The Rossi version is chambered in .45 Colt , .44 Magnum/.44 Special , and .357
Magnum/.38 Special .
The Rossi Ranch Hand is manufactured by Taurus in Brazil .
Henry Repeating Arms manufactures two versions of the Mare 's Leg .
The rimfire model has a blued receiver and barrel and chambers .22
Long Rifle , .22
Long , and .22 Short .
The centerfire model has a brass receiver and blued barrel and is available in .357 Mag , .44 Mag , and .45 Colt .
SHOTGUN
Section::::Shotgun .
The Italian firms , such as Chiappa Firearms , manufacture modern reproductions of the Winchester Model 1887 series shotguns .
The shotguns appeared on the Australian and the European firearms markets in late 2008 .
Chiappa 's replicas are offered with barrels ranging from 28 to 18.5 inches .
They also offer a model with a rifled barrel and two models with pistol grips .
The Model 1887 Mare 's Leg was prominently used by the title character in the film , portrayed by Arnold Schwarzenegger .
One of the guns used in the film was modified with a pistol grip and an oversized loop on the trigger guard , allowing the character to fire and cycle the action with a one hand reverse spin .
This in turn has popularised the gun 's portrayal in various pop culture , mostly in shooter video games , where they mimic the cycling and reloding actions from the movie .
LEGAL STATUS Section::::Legal status .
In the United States under the National Firearms Act , to make a short barreled rifle from a firearm originally made and sold as a rifle requires payment of $ 200 for a tax stamp , approval from the BATFE and federal registration .
However , a " lever action pistol " made and sold subject to BATFE regulations is treated as a pistol by federal law .
While most states allow the purchase of Mare 's Leg lever action pistols , New York State has banned this gun from being sold there .
They are also not approved for sale in Massachusetts .
It is hard to get in California since it is not on the CA Roster of Approved Handguns ( California Penal Code § 32015 ) and therefore can not be sold or transferred to a civilian unless the gun is already privately owned within the state , having been previously imported under one of the narrow exemptions to the handgun roster ( see https://www.oag.ca.gov/firearms/certguns ) .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES