POKÉMON MYSTERY DUNGEON :
EXPLORERS OF TIME AND EXPLORERS OF DARKNESS Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Time and Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Darkness are a matched pair of Pokémon games for the Nintendo DS .
The two games were released in Japan on September 13 , 2007 , and were released in North America on April 20 , 2008 .
They were released in Europe on July 4 , 2008 .
A third version , Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Sky , was released in 2009 .
As a sequel to , new features include the addition of Generation IV Pokémon , improved Wi - Fi functionality , and more touch - screen options .
491 of the 493 Pokémon are featured , as Shaymin and Arceus were not officially released at the time of the game 's launch .
A 21-minute TV special based on the game starring Kurumi Mamiya aired in Japan on September 9 , 2007 as a content of the program relating Pokémon , " Pokémon Sunday " produced by TV Tokyo Corporation .
It was later dubbed in English in 2008 .
In terms of gameplay and premise , the Explorers installments are largely similar to their Rescue Team predecessors ; where a human - turned - Pokémon joins an Exploration Society and explores shifting dungeons , fighting hostile Pokémon through turn - based combat .
In terms of critical review , it was criticized for repetitive gameplay while receiving praise for its storyline and Wi - Fi functionality .
As of 2010 , the three games had accumulated worldwide sales in excess of 5.9 million copies .
GAMEPLAY
PLAYABLE POKÉMON
Section::::Gameplay .
Section::::Playable Pokémon .
As with the , the player takes on the role of a human who has been turned into a Pokémon , whose type is determined by a personality test .
A partner Pokémon is also selected who will henceforth be referred to as " the partner " .
Unlike Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team , the gender does not restrict the available selection of Pokémon for either the player or the partner , though both player and partner may not be of the same type .
The test sets the player as one of the many natures in the mainstream games , and two Pokémon will be set to that nature , one for male , one for female .
The player may be Bulbasaur , Charmander , Squirtle , Pikachu , Meowth , Chikorita , Cyndaquil , Totodile , Treecko , Torchic , Mudkip , Skitty , Turtwig , Chimchar , Piplup and Munchlax ; a total of 16 Pokémon to choose from .
Once chosen , the partner may be any of the above Pokémon , with the exception of Pokémon of the same type of the player , Meowth , Skitty and Munchlax .
Eevee , Machop , Cubone and Psyduck were removed as starter Pokémon , though Eevee was again made available in the game 's .
Riolu was debated for a player Pokémon in Explorers of Time and Darkness , but the idea was eventually dropped , and Riolu was selected for the Explorers of Sky list .
BASIC GAMEPLAY Section::::Basic gameplay .
The basic gameplay is unchanged from Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team - players may use shops in Treasure Town to save money , buy items , store items , and train in special " maze " levels ( although the Pokémon running almost all of these shops have changed ) .
Players enter dungeons to complete missions and encounter hostile Pokémon during the exploration .
During the story portion , if either the player or their partner is defeated by running out of health , the team will be removed from the dungeon and lose all their money and half ( or more ) of their items .
However , after beating the main story , the team will only be removed if the team leader faints .
NEW FEATURES Section::::New features .
New to this series is the option to temporarily send a team member to aid a friend who is in need , which allows a team to have more than four members .
Defeated teams awaiting rescue may also engage in a " standby adventure " mode in which players may revisit previous dungeons to raise funds and collect items , but without the ability to level up .
Among new items introduced are treasure boxes , which require money to be opened and may contain rare items that may only affect certain Pokémon and can be used to trade for rarer and more valuable items using a new shop .
New items are also introduced to account for new evolution methods which do not translate well from the main series to Mystery Dungeon , like Probopass , Magnezone , Leafeon , or Glaceon .
VERSION EXCLUSIVES
Section::::Version exclusives .
As with all Pokémon games , some Pokémon are exclusive to one version , although they may be unlocked on the other through the exchange of Wonder Mail codes .
The Pokémon exclusive to Explorers of Time are Celebi , Combee , Lucario , Pachirisu , and Riolu , while the Pokémon exclusive to Explorers of Darkness are Burmy , Buneary , Lopunny , Mewtwo , and Rotom .
PLOT FIRST DAYS IN THE TEAM
Section::::Plot .
Section::::First Days in the Team .
The story begins with the player having been washed ashore by a storm .
Meanwhile , the partner stands at the gates of the Wigglytuff Guild , a prominent organization that provides training to prospective explorers .
Nervous and unable to go through with entering the Guild 's door , the partner leaves for the beach , where they find the hero .
After teaming up to recover the partner 's Relic Fragment from some thieves , the player , who has lost all memories except their name and the fact that they used to be human , agrees to form an exploration team to piece together their identity .
The first proper mission the team goes on is to Drenched Bluff to recover a Spoink 's missing pearl .
Upon finishing , the hero and partner receive a large reward , a large percentage of which is promptly taken by the guild 's second - in - command , Chatot , as collateral for guild training .
The player discovers not too long after that they can see things in the past and future through contact with people or things , which leads to them rescuing an Azurill from Drowzee , a wanted criminal .
Some time after , the partner tells the player the story of the Time Gears , artifacts that all Pokémon are to avoid because time will stand still if they do .
When a Time Gear is stolen , time in that area is frozen .
Despite this , it is soon revealed that a mysterious thief is stealing the Time Gears , causing time to stop in various areas .
After completing a few minor jobs , the player and partner get excited when Chatot gives them a mission to explore the unexplored Waterfall Cave .
After Waterfall Cave , the player pieces together several visions and finds out that the guildmaster , Wigglytuff , had previously explored this cave but forgot about it prior to telling them to explore it .
TIME GEAR SEARCH Section::::Time Gear Search .
A short time later , the guild mounts an expedition to Fogbound Lake .
During this time , the player 's team draws the ire of Team Skull , a band of thugs who make their lives miserable .
Upon arrival , the player recalls the place as being familiar , but can not explain why .
The guild encounters Uxie and discovers a Time Gear , but are allowed to return home on the condition that they not reveal it to anybody else .
The guild meets a famous explorer named Dusknoir , who explains that the player 's ability to see through time is called the Dimensional Scream .
Not long after , Azurill and his brother Marill come to the guild , showing them a ransom note for a Water Float that they had been looking for .
They then go to the Amp Plains and fight Luxray and the Luxio tribe , but get saved by Dusknoir and chase off Team Skull , who took the Water Float in order to get revenge on the team .
Dusknoir offers his help in uncovering the secret behind the player 's transformation and also offers his assistance in the hunt for Grovyle , who is stealing the Time Gears .
Soon , the Time Gear at Fogbound Lake is stolen , and the whole guild splits up to look for Time Gears .
The player 's team eventually discover an underground lake , which is home to Mesprit and another Time Gear .
However Grovyle appears and steals the Time Gear after Mesprit mistakes the team as the thieves .
Dusknoir determines that the third lake guardian Azelf , the being of willpower , is likely guarding another Time Gear and is also likely to be found in a lake area .
The team arrives at the lake in the middle of Crystal Cave , where they find Azelf about to be defeated by Grovyle .
However , just as Grovyle is about to steal the Time Gear , Azelf activates a fail - safe trap , which prevents it from doing so .
Grovyle then escapes , but with Dusknoir in pursuit .
Back in town , Dusknoir reveals that he and Grovyle are from the future , and Grovyle fled to the past to prevent being captured and intends to steal the Time Gears to turn the Pokémon world into a dark , dismal region filled with scared and corrupted Pokémon .
Everyone creates a plan to capture Grovyle , by luring him in with the remaining Time Gear , but Dusknoir adds that he and the Lake Trio alone must battle Grovyle for capture .
A few days later a report indicates that Grovyle has been captured , and that Dusknoir plans to take Grovyle back to the future to face justice .
The Time Gears have been returned to their rightful places , and Dusknoir has opened a Dimensional Hole to take Grovyle back to the future .
Dusknoir bids farewell to the villagers , but suddenly grabs the player and partner , and drags them with him into the portal .
ESCAPE THE FUTURE Section::::Escape the Future .
The player and partner awaken , finding themselves in a prison .
After escaping a near execution with Grovyle , they discover their world has become paralyzed , despite the Time Gears being placed back in their respective spots .
The two traverse through several dungeons until they catch up to Grovyle , having to rescue him from a rogue Spiritomb .
After coming to compromise , Grovyle offers to share what he knows with the two heroes .
They learn that the paralysis was caused by time breaking down before the theft of the Gears because of Temporal Tower , which gives structure to time itself .
When the tower collapsed , its head occupant , Dialga , survived but was corrupted by the flow of darkness .
Now a tyrannical being known as Primal Dialga , it swore to preserve the dark future to maintain its fearsome form .
It is also established that Grovyle has pure motives for collecting Time Gears , so as to prevent the planet 's paralysis in Temporal Tower .
This story contradicts Dusknoir 's fallacies , and Grovyle exposes Dusknoir as a villainous agent sent to the partner 's world to capture him .
Unsure but determined , the player 's team searches for a way back to the past .
However , they are being pursued by Dusknoir and his Sableye minions .
The group eventually manage to find a shiny Celebi , a friend of Grovyle , and finally arrive at the Passage of Time .
Dusknoir ambushes the group , but Grovyle expresses hope when he traveled back to the past , he was joined by a human companion who was lost during their time travel , though Grovyle believes that even if he dies , the partner will be able to fulfill his mission for him .
Dusknoir asks Grovyle to divulge the name of his friend , revealing that the partner is actually the player .
Dusknoir reveals he has known about this for a long while : he was scouting all over the past world , collecting all of its history and information in order to find the two .
He came across the player 's exploration duo at one point , and eventually discovered one of them had the Dimensional Scream .
After revealing their ability and name , Dusknoir carried out a plan which had the player itself betray Grovyle unknowingly and blackened Grovyle 's reputation further .
This plan worked out smoothly because the player could not recognize their foe when they saw him .
Not defeated by the grim circumstances , the partner urges Celebi to transport them ahead of Dusknoir and into the Passage .
With little interference from Primal Dialga , they succeed , and Celebi escapes .
THE HUNT FOR THE HIDDEN LAND Section::::The Hunt for the Hidden Land .
Arriving back to the present , the group decides to stay at the partner 's old home , due to Grovyle 's presence potentially landing them in trouble .
They plan to take the Time Gears .
Grovyle tells the team that the player was his partner before the player turned into a Pokémon , explaining the strange voice heard near the Time Gear locations , the Dimensional Scream , and the lack of Screams in the future due to there being no Gears there .
They soon discover through reconnaissance that time has still stopped in places where Time Gears are present , despite them being returned .
It appears that the only way to restore time is to take the Time Gears to Temporal Tower , but the Tower is located in the Hidden Land , and no one knows where the Hidden Land is .
They eventually decide to reveal their return to the guild , so they can convince the guild to help them , and receive the lake guardians ' Time Gears .
They talk with Torkoal , the town elder , who tells them that to get to the Hidden Land , they need an item with an inscription on it , which is on the partner 's Relic Fragment .
Inside Brine Cave 's Depths , Chatot is injured protecting the team from a Kabutops and two Omastar .
The team manages to defeat the bandits and drive them off .
Wigglytuff comes with the rest of the guild with Grovyle in tow , having collected the five Time Gears needed to stop Temporal Tower 's collapse .
Leaving Chatot in the Guild 's care , the team and Grovyle forge ahead .
THE SAVIORS OF TIME
Section::::The Saviors of Time .
In Brine Cave , the team discovers a rock wall with a pattern similar to the one on the Relic Fragment .
When the Relic Fragment is presented , a light shines out towards the sea .
Just then , a Lapras arrives and ferries the team and Grovyle to the Hidden Land .
Arriving at the Hidden Land , Lapras tells them that in order to reach the Temporal Tower , they must take the Rainbow Stoneship , located inside an old ruin .
Finding the ruin , they find a temple where , at the top , they find the Relic Fragment pattern .
The team discovers that the temple itself is the Rainbow Stoneship , and in order for the ship to operate , the Relic Fragment must be slotted in one of the indentations .
But before the partner can do so , they are captured by Dusknoir and the Sableye entourage .
The team is able to defeat Dusknoir and the Sableye in battle , but while the partner goes to activate the Rainbow Stoneship , Dusknoir warns that should they succeed in their quest , the Pokémon of the future , including the player and Grovyle , will be erased from existence , from being from a future that will no longer exist .
Grovyle admits that this is the case , but that their sacrifice is worth the trouble if it means that the future can be saved .
The player accepts this fate , even though the player knows that the partner will not take it as easily as the player or Grovyle .
Meanwhile , the partner succeeds in activating the Rainbow Stoneship , by putting their Relic Fragment in it , but Dusknoir manages to recover and attack the player before either the player or Grovyle is on board .
Just as Dusknoir tries to finish off the player , Grovyle intervenes , taking the blow .
Dusknoir angrily decides to slay Grovyle first , but Grovyle pushes Dusknoir towards the Dimensional Hole , hoping to ensure the success of the mission .
Dropping the Time Gears , Grovyle pushes Dusknoir and himself through the Dimensional Hole , transporting them into the future .
The partner recovers the Time Gears , and the team proceed on the Rainbow Stoneship , with the player keeping silent to the partner about their fate .
With a heavy heart , the team head towards Temporal Tower to take on their final mission .
The team is able to defeat Primal Dialga , and head home , but on the way back , the player begins to feel the effects of being slowly erased from existence .
The player says goodbye to the partner and , in the only open dialogue spoken by the player character , conveys his / her last wish , to " tell everyone about what happened , so nothing like this will ever happen again " , as the player fades out of existence .
After the credits , Dialga feels the partner 's sorrow all the way from Temporal Tower .
Deeply moved by the partner 's devotion and grief , Dialga intervenes and restores the player to the timeline , as thanks for bringing time back in control .
The player reappears at the beach , where the partner is crying in front of Bidoof .
The partner runs over to embrace their best friend , overjoyed that they are alive .
AFTER STORY Section::::After Story .
After the main credits , the player and partner are told by Chatot at the next briefing that they may take an exam to graduate from the guild .
Wigglytuff comments that they must search for a treasure in Mystifying Forest , but may have to defeat a " grandmaster of all things bad " .
The player goes to Mystifying Forest , where they fall into a trap .
The cover to the trap closes and the " grandmaster of all things bad " sneaks in and circles around them .
Bidoof lifts the lid of the cave , revealing that it is just the guild , with Wigglytuff as the " grandmaster of all things bad " and the others as back - up , though they all attempt ( poorly ) to convince the player otherwise .
The player and partner defeat them , allowing them to continue forward to find a treasure chest containing a Perfect Apple .
They continue further with Teddiursa and Ursaring to Luminous Spring , where Teddiursa evolves into Ursaring .
The partner goes forward to evolve , but is told that neither the partner nor the player can evolve due to a distortion in space that they create .
After returning to the guild , the player and the partner graduate- the player 's team moves their own base of operations to Sharpedo Bluff .
Afterward the player must rescue Scizor from a Froslass to get the Secret Rank .
They are slowly given more dungeons to explore , including a new training dungeon known as the Final Maze .
Eventually , the player is told by Sunflora about a dungeon known as the Surrounded Sea .
The player 's team goes to the dungeon and finds an egg that hatches into a baby Manaphy .
They must feed it with Blue Gummis , but it eventually falls sick after being away from the ocean for so long .
The player 's team goes to Miracle Sea to acquire the cure - all Phione Dew .
After fending off a Gyarados , the Phione give a Phione Dew to the player and Manaphy is cured .
However , at Chatot 's insistence , Manaphy is put in the care of a Walrein and returns to the ocean .
After a few more days , Team Charm comes to the guild .
It is revealed here that Wigglytuff was once a member of Team Charm .
Lopunny , the leader of Team Charm , asks Wigglytuff for a key shaped like an Unown they found in previous travels , saying that they think they found where it should go .
Wigglytuff goes into his quarters , rummages around for the key , and returns with the key .
Team Charm thanks Wigglytuff and begins to head out .
The partner asks Lopunny if the player 's team can come along .
This provokes the entire guild to ask if they could come .
Team Charm agrees and heads out to open the door to Aegis Cave .
Inside , they come across a room with a stone tablet in the middle bearing the inscription " ROCK ( in Unown letters ) Close your eyes and submit your proof .
"
The guild and Team Charm proceed into the dungeon with the player 's team following .
Upon completing Aegis Rock Cave , the player 's team will come back to the stone tablet room .
The player 's team finds Team Charm inspecting the stone tablet .
After a brief conversation , Team Charm proceeds .
If the player has picked up Unown Stones R , O , C , and K dropped by the corresponding Unoun in the dungeon , the player should interact with the stone tablet in the middle of the room and close their eyes .
Following this , the stone tablet disappears and reveals a staircase , which a Regirock is waiting to battle in .
This process is repeated with ICE and STEEL with Regice and Registeel as bosses respectively .
The player 's team catches up with Team Charm , who took advantage of the player sorting out what to expect but were unable to beat Registeel .
In the final section of the dungeon , The statues in the room come alive , revealing 4 Bronzong , 4 Hitmonlee and a Regigigas which are defeated with the help of Team Charm .
After the battle is completed , Regigigas faints and a massive stone tablet appears , instructing the player to let its aura flow into the ground .
The player does so and Regigigas gets up and tremors begin .
The player 's team and Team Charm flee the dungeon .
Though the group is initially disheartened that the search was a failure , Medicham notices a cave that appeared .
Team Charm theorizes that Aegis Cave was just a distraction for where the actual treasure was , but concedes the glory to the player 's team as a thank you and heads off to find another treasure .
Over the course of a few days , the player has dreams in which Cresselia tells the player that , as the player was not originally from this world , they are creating a distortion of space merely by existing there .
Finally , one day the Azurill they assisted a while back has a nightmare that he can not awake from , so the team locates the old criminal Drowzee , who is able to send the player and partner into Azurill 's nightmare .
At the end of this dream ( a dungeon in itself known as The Nightmare ) the player sees Cresselia , who attempts to destroy them and the partner ( whom was told by Cresselia that they 're also causing the distortion due to having gone through time ) .
Cresselia is interrupted by Drowzee and disappears .
Back in the guild , the player and partner report their findings to the guild .
However , when asked about a way to undo the distortion of space , the partner says that there is no way .
The next morning , the partner suggests that they go talk to Lapras for more information .
Lapras is able to tell them that Palkia is the ruler of space and that he resides in Spacial Rift .
However , Lapras does n't know where it is .
The player and partner wake up the during the night and see Palkia whisking in and taking them away to Spacial Rift to destroy them .
They fall into a chasm and proceed to complete Spacial Rift and defeat Palkia , who suddenly falls into a nightmare .
They are asked by an unknown voice if they want to enter Palkia 's nightmare and end up consenting .
In Palkia 's nightmare , Cresselia appears and proceeds to destroy them .
However , when Palkia grows suspicious of Cresselia 's ascertations of the team 's intentions , another Cresselia appears and they then find out the Cresselia in their dreams was actually Darkrai .
Darkrai flees from the room and tells the partner and player they must come to defeat him .
They must venture with Cresselia to defeat Darkrai , who was behind the transformation of Primal Dialga , the player 's transformation into a Pokémon and memory loss , and the break in space .
After defeating Darkrai , they may recruit Palkia , which allows the player and partner to evolve .
Also , after some events in the post - story - mode , Manaphy returns and asks to join your exploration team .
If this option is accepted , Manaphy leads to player to a new dungeon called the Marine Resort after a few days .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
As of September 30 , 2008 , Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness combined to sell 4.12 million copies worldwide , according to Nintendo .
The reviews for the game were average to positive .
The games were scored as 59 out of 100 by Metacritic 's review .
GameSpy gave the games a 4/5 star rating .
Both Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness have received a rating of 7.5 from Nintendo Power .
The game is usually criticized on its repetitive game play , but heavily praised for its mature , heartwarming story .
The story has been acclaimed as one of the best in the series , further inclining on how Mystery Dungeon continues to be a more favored spin - off of the original Pokémon games .
Combined worldwide sales for Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness passed 4.5 million copies on March 31 , 2009 .
GameSpot gave a game a 6.5 out of 10 praising the games ' touching stories , Wi - Fi features and difficulty .
GamesRadar+ on the other hand gave it 2.5 out of 5 ( below average ) , saying that " Explorers of Darkness / Time is rental at best " and that " Pokémon fans are better served by playing more Diamond / Pearl while waiting for the next Pokémon Ranger game " .
ANIME TIE IN
Section::::Anime tie in .
A special episode of the Pokémon anime , Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Time & Darkness ( Japanese : ポケモン不思議のダンジョン 時の探検隊・闇の探検隊 Pokémon Mystery Dungeon Time Expedition & Darkness Expedition ) , was developed based on the game plot .
Unlike previous special episodes , this does not take place in any continuity of the main storyline .
It was first broadcast in Japan on September 9 , 2007 , as part of Pokémon Sunday .
ENHANCED VERSION
Section::::Enhanced version .
Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Sky is an enhanced version of Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness for the Nintendo DS .
It was released in Japan on April 18 , 2009 ; North America on October 12 , 2009 ; Australia on November 12 , 2009 ; and Europe on November 20 , 2009 .
It has since been re - released on the Wii U Virtual Console in North America on June 23 , 2016 , in Japan on July 20 , 2016 , and in the PAL region on August 18 , 2016 .
As with its predecessors , the game follows the story of a human who is mysteriously transformed into a Pokémon ( determined by a personality test at the game 's start - up ) .
Along with the starters from the previous game , five more are included as playable choices ; Phanpy , Riolu , Shinx , Eevee , and Vulpix .
Some , however , are only available to certain genders ; Eevee , Skitty , and Vulpix are always female .
Riolu , Phanpy , and Shinx are always male .
However , 2 starters , Munchlax and Meowth were removed and can only be played as the partner .
Many new gameplay features were incorporated into the game .
There were extra dungeons added , the titular event Pokémon Shaymin featured on the box was added , and alternate forms introduced in Pokémon Platinum ( except for Rotom ) were included .
Explorers of Sky expands on the plot of Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness , as well as exploring the background of several characters .
New cutscenes were added and some were changed .
Five new Special Episodes are unlocked at certain points in the game which add to the overall game ( such as Wigglytuff 's inspiration to become an explorer , the induction of Bidoof into the guild , the formation of Team Charm , a special mission for guild member Sunflora , and the investigation of Grovyle and Dusknoir who team up after the battle at the Hidden Land , which shows how Primal Dialga was defeated simultaneously in the present and the future and how the future continued to thrive ) .
1.40 million copies of Explorers of Sky had been sold by March 31 , 2010 , adding up the total sales of the three games to over 5.90 million copies .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Site
* Pokémon Mystery Dungeon Official Site
* Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness at Bulbapedia
* Personality Test