MARCUS JORDAN Marcus James Jordan ( born December 24 , 1990 ) is an American former college basketball player who played for the UCF Knights men 's basketball team of Conference USA .
He is the son of retired Hall of Fame basketball player Michael Jordan .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Jordan was born December 24 , 1990 , to Michael Jordan and Juanita Vanoy .
He has an older brother , Jeffrey .
Marcus along with Jeffrey both played for Loyola Academy ( graduated in 2007 ) , and transferred from Illinois to UCF to play his final season of college basketball with Marcus .
However , Jeffrey left UCF in January 2012 .
BASKETBALL CAREER HIGH SCHOOL Section::::Basketball career .
Section::::High school .
Marcus Jordan originally played high school basketball with his older brother Jeffrey Jordan at Loyola Academy in Wilmette , Illinois .
In Marcus ' sophomore year , the pair led the school to the conference championships and the best season in school history .
Marcus then transferred to Whitney Young High School in Chicago for his junior and senior seasons .
On March 22 , 2009 , he led the Whitney Young Dolphins to the Illinois State 4A Championship title .
Jordan scored a game - high 19 points leading Whitney Young to a 69–66 victory over Waukegan .
Jordan was rated as the 60th - best shooting guard in the country as a high school senior by ESPNU , averaging 10.0 points , 4.5 rebounds , and 3.2 assists per game , and earning state tournament MVP honors .
COLLEGE Section::::College .
Marcus Jordan played college basketball at the University of Central Florida in Orlando , Florida .
During his freshman year , UCF was in the final year of a five - year contract with Adidas , but Jordan insisted on wearing Nike Air Jordan shoes out of loyalty to his father .
This eventually prompted Adidas to terminate its sponsorship deal with UCF .
Jordan scored 8.0 points per game in his true freshman year in 2009–10 , including 10.3 points and 3 assists per game in conference play .
On November 12 , 2010 , the opening game of the 2010–11 season , Jordan led UCF to victory against University of West Florida scoring a career high 28 points on 8–11 field - goal shooting and 5–7 from the 3-point line .
He also had a team - high 18 points in upsetting number-16 ranked Florida on December 1 , 2010 .
In August 2012 , Jordan decided to leave the UCF basketball team , but he would continue to take classes at the school .
BUSINESSES Section::::Businesses .
Jordan opened his shoe store " Trophy Room " on May 23 , 2016 .
The chosen date pays reverence to his and his father 's jersey numbers .
The store is located in Orlando , Florida at Disney World in the Disney Springs retail location .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Jordan on scout.com * Jordan on rivals.com
* Jordan on ESPN * * Loyola Academy 's Basketball Page * University of Central Florida 's Men 's Basketball Page *
Marcus Jordan 's University of Central Florida 's Men 's Basketball Profile *