ALCOHOL LAWS IN GERMANY
The German laws regulating alcohol use and sale are some of the least restrictive in the world .
The foremost function of restraints , as far as they exist , is youth protection .
In contrast to many other countries , the legislation is not designed to keep young people away from alcohol completely , but rather to teach them an appropriate approach to alcohol consumption .
DRINKING AGE
Section::::Drinking age .
Underage drinking in private is not regulated by a specific legal restriction .
However , protection from physical and mental harm is part of parents ' general obligation to care for a child .
Regarding alcohol purchase and alcohol consumption in public places ( such as pubs and restaurants ) , Germany has three drinking ages regulated by § 9 Jugendschutzgesetz ( Protection of Young Persons Act ) :
* At 14 minors are allowed to consume and possess undistilled ( fermented )
alcoholic beverages , such as beer and wine , as long as they are in the company by a Custodial Person .
( § 9 JuSchG ( 2 ) Sub - Clause 1 , No . 2 )
* At 16 - minors are allowed to consume and possess undistilled ( fermented )
alcoholic beverages , such as beer and wine without their parents or a Custodian .
( § 9 JuSchG ( 1 ) 2 . )
* At 18 - having become adults , people are allowed access to distilled spirits , beverages containing distilled spirits , and food products containing non - negligible amounts of distilled spirits .
" ( § 9 JuSchG ( 1 ) 1 . )
Those limits do not apply to married adolescents . "
( § 1 JuSchG ( 5 ) )
Because of moral panic involving alcohol abuse among minors ( a 16-year - old boy died after having consumed 45 shots of tequila in a bar in early 2007 ) , some people demanded that the drinking age be raised .
Most politicians , however , spoke against that notion , pointing out instead that such abuse was already forbidden according to current laws , which simply needed to be enforced .
In Germany and the rest of Europe , alcohol consumption by adolescents is traditional and generally accepted .
ENFORCEMENT Section::::Enforcement .
In 2008 , the federal state of Lower Saxony started a series of trap purchases , conducted by specially trained police cadets , aged 16 or 17 , who pose as customers .
In 77 % of all tests alcohol was sold illegally in shops , filling stations and kiosks .
In 2009 , about 3000 trap purchases were carried out in Lower Saxony , in 1327 cases ( 44 % )
alcohol was sold without age verification to underage persons .
Hundreds of summary proceedings led to administrative fines ranging from 500 to 3000 euros .
The standard rate for the illegal sale of one bottle of spirits is 1500 euros .
Thus , alcohol trap purchases bring a return of around € 2 million annually .
Other German states , especially Schleswig - Holstein , are considering implementing the Lower Saxony model , but states like Berlin , Brandenburg , Saxony - Anhalt , Thuringia and Baden - Württemberg object to it .
Violation of restraints will involve prosecution for vendors who sell alcohol to underage persons and also for bystanders who do not intervene in underage drinking .
Although restrictions are nationwide and well - known , some salespersons violate the law at times .
Minors themselves can never be prosecuted for alcohol consumption under age .
Supermarkets and stores generally check minors for their identity card .
The law is less thoroughly enforced in many bars and restaurants , but this can vary by location .
FINES FOR VIOLATION Section::::Fines for violation .
The " Bußgeldkatalog " of each state sets the possible fines for each violation of the act and varies slightly by state .
In Baden - Württemberg the Bußgeldkatalog for violation against the " Protection of Young Persons Act " provides following fines : !
Misdemeanor ! !
Law ! !
Possible fine ( retailer & business operator ) ! !
Standard fine ( retailer & business operator ) ! !
Possible fine ( other ) ! !
Standard fine ( other ) OTHER LEGISLATION ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
IN PUBLIC
Section::::Other legislation .
Section::::Alcohol consumption in public .
Public parties are prohibited nationally on Good Friday , and regionally on other holidays such as All Saints ' Day .
Buying alcohol remains possible at these times .
The government maintains the right to restrict or ban the sale of alcohol for a certain time to maintain public order ( § 19 GastG ) .
Beyond this , Germany has very few restrictions on alcohol consumption in public .
Exceptions are sometimes made in the context of football ( soccer ) matches involving rival teams , where police executives may ban the sale of alcoholic drinks inside stadiums and deny entrance to drunk fans .
In 2009 , the private railway company Metronom , which operates in parts of Northern Germany , introduced a much - discussed complete ban on alcohol in its trains .
Some cities have banned alcohol consumption in certain areas and at certain times , such as Göttingen in Nikolaistraße between midnight and 8:00 am on Saturdays and Sundays , or in Hannover Hauptbahnhof .
Until 2009 , it was acceptable for employees in many fields of work ( especially construction workers , gardeners and the like ) to consume medium quantities of alcohol during work hours .
However , occupational safety legislation has since tightened down and has induced a significant decrease of alcohol consumption during work hours .
DRINKING AND DRIVING
Section::::Drinking and driving .
Germany has strict laws regarding operation of motor vehicles under the influence of alcohol and other psychoactive substances .
There are a series of different rules and penalties tied to various blood alcohol levels .
* 0.00 % for those under the age of 21 or with less than two years ' experience , professional drivers , bus drivers , truck drivers , and drivers transporting passengers commercially ; * 0.03 % in conjunction with an accident or traffic offense ; * 0.05 % otherwise .
* 0.16 % for cyclists , where not in conjunction with any other traffic offense or accident .
From 0.16 % , cyclists face the same penalties as driving a car at that limit .
Penalties start at a € 500 fine and one - month license suspension .
Above 0.11 % , the penalty is a € 500 fine and the withdrawal of the driver 's licence for at least six months , but usually about one year ( penalty is set by the court ) ; from 0.16 % , reissue of the licence requires a successful Medical Psychological Assessment ( MPU ) , often referred to as the " Idiot test " .
For violators above 0.11 % within ten years of a prior offence above 0.05 % , there is a minimum € fine and a one - year licence withdrawal ; the driver has to successfully pass an MPU and is required to prove to the court that they have been sober for the last twelve months , before they can get their licence back .
For repeat offenses , the fine is multiplied by the ordinal of the offence ( doubled , tripled , etc . ) , regardless of the amount by which the driver was over the limit .
These minimum penalties are usually exceeded by the German courts .
From 0.11 % , the courts usually also require the DUI offender to do unpaid community service .
In addition to fines , impaired drivers are generally given points on their Verkehrssünderkartei ( literally : " traffic sinner card " ) which are managed by the Federal Motor Transport Authority in Flensburg .
It is however legal to consume alcohol while driving , provided the driver remains under the legal blood alcohol limits .
LICENSING LAWS ON - LICENSE
Section::::Licensing laws .
Section::::On - license .
The permit is not required if alcohol - free beverages , free samples , prepared food is sold or administered or in connection with an accommodation establishment beverages and prepared food is delivered to residents .
Every other establishment which does not apply to this scheme requires a .
A liquor license is generally required when alcoholic beverages are served or sold for consumption on premises .
RULES AND REGULATIONS Section::::Rules and Regulations .
On - licence premises have to place a clearly legible notice with the restrictions of the Protection of Young Persons Act ( Jugendschutzgesetz ) and the bartender must ensure that alcoholic beverages may not be sold or served to underage or visibly intoxicated persons .
Operator of a licensed premises are not allowed to force their customers to buy a meal with a drink or change prices if a customer does not order a meal .
Changing prices if a customer does not buy an alcoholic drink is also against the law , and every licensee must ensure that there ist at least one non alcoholic drink that is cheaper than the cheapest alcoholic drink .
CLOSING HOURS
Section::::Closing hours .
Closing hours for bars and discotheque OFF - LICENCE
Section::::Off - licence .
Germany does not require any licenses for the production , wholesale , or retail sale of alcoholic beverages .
SEE ALSO
* Alcohol belts of Europe
* Beer in Germany
* Reinheitsgebot REFERENCES