CHEVROLET TRAVERSE
The Chevrolet Traverse is a full - size crossover SUV built by General Motors .
The Traverse is built on the GM Lambda platform that is also used on the GMC Acadia and on the Buick Enclave .
It is the successor to the Chevrolet TrailBlazer .
Originally marketed as a mid - size crossover SUV , the Traverse was built at GM 's Spring Hill , Tennessee assembly plant during 2009 , but then production of the Traverse had moved to GM 's Delta Township , Michigan assembly plant in 2010 .
The 2009 Chevrolet Traverse debuted at the 2008 Chicago Auto Show and the Traverse had arrived at every Chevrolet dealer in October 2008 .
The second generation model debuted in showrooms in the summer of 2017 .
Starting with the 2019 model year , the Traverse will be slotted above the new mid - size Chevrolet Blazer as part of Chevrolet 's plans to expand its CUV lineup .
POWERTRAIN Section::::Powertrain .
The Chevrolet Traverse features the LLT engine , a DOHC V6 with VVT and direct injection .
The other Lambda - based vehicles also have this powertrain in the 2009 model year .
A 6-speed automatic transmission gives power to the front or all wheels .
The Traverse delivers with the torque at 266 lb·ft .
in the LS and LT models .
The LTZ model , with dual exhaust , delivers and the torque comes in at 270 lb·ft . !
Year!!Exhaust!!Engine!!Power!!Torque!!Transmission 2009–Single3.6
L LLT V6281
hp ( 210 kW)266 lb·ft ( 361 N·m)rowspan=26-speed
6T75 2009–Dual3.6 L LLT V6288 hp ( 215 kW)270 lb·ft ( 366 N·m ) DESIGN Section::::Design .
The Traverse name was originally used for a concept car at the 2003 North American International Auto Show in Detroit , but that concept gave way when the Chevrolet Equinox launched for the 2005 model year .
The production Traverse 's design was inspired by the 2005 Chevrolet Sequel concept , and has a chevron - shaped grille similar to the 2008 Chevrolet Malibu .
The Traverse has unique sheet metal different from the other Lambda crossovers , with the exception of the doors .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
The Traverse was part of a product placement by GM in the NBC drama
My Own Worst Enemy , along with the new Chevrolet Camaro ; the show was cancelled in mid - November 2008 .
The vehicle also appears on the remake of Hawaii Five-0 and The Mentalist .
The Traverse is also used in the Minnie Van Service in conjunction with Lyft at the Walt Disney World Resort in Florida .
Gothic black colors of the Chevrolet Traverse are commonly used by federal agencies , such as Secret Service .
FIRST GENERATION ( 2009–2017 ) 2010 Section::::First generation ( 2009–2017 ) .
Section::::2010 .
On the LT models , the early 2010 update removed the " TRAVERSE " badges on the front doors .
Beginning on late 2010 models , the GM logos were removed from the vehicle 's front doors .
2013 FACELIFT Section::::2013 facelift .
A facelift of the Chevrolet Traverse was unveiled at the 2012 New York Auto Show .
The 2013 Traverse receives a new grille and front fascia , a redesigned rear liftgate , and reworked Camaro - inspired tail lights , and the transmission has been reworked for improved shift quality and timing .
Pictures were released by GM on March 28 , 2012 .
Chevrolet 's new color touch - screen and MyLink radios are standard , as well as wood interior trim .
Both cloth and leather seating surfaces will be available , depending on the model .
Cloth is standard on the LS and 1LT models , and leather is standard on the LTZ .
Both are available on the 2LT model .
Some new wheels will be available , and models will continue to be offered in both front wheel drive and all wheel drive versions , ranging from the base LS to the top - of - the - line LTZ .
Base price for the 2013 Traverse LS is at $ 30,510 .
A Bose audio system will be standard on 2LT and LTZ models .
2014
Section::::2014 .
While there were no cosmetic changes made for the 2014 model year , Chevrolet did add new features to the Traverse :
Forward Collision Alert and Lane Departure Warning .
Also , the audio system feature was updated , with a dual charge USB port now located at the rear of the center console .
2015
Section::::2015 .
No cosmetic changes .
Only two new features , a revised 18-inch wheel appearance and Siri Eyes Free , were added .
Siren Red Tintcoat , Sable Metallic , and Blue Velvet Metallic became available as exterior colors , while Ebony / Saddle Up became available as an interior color option .
2016
Section::::2016 .
The 2016 Traverse received minor changes .
The trim level were reduced to LS , LT1 , LT2 , and LTZ .
New features include OnStar 4 G LTE connectivity with Wi - Fi hotspot , Iridescent Pearl and Mosaic Black Metallic as color palettes , Leather and Driver Confidence Packages for the LT trims , and 20-inch aluminum wheel designs , painted and machined finishes .
2017 AND 2018
LIMITED Section::::2017 and 2018 Limited .
For the 2017 model year , the Traverse LTZ trim is renamed to Premier .
However , most of the features from the 2016 model year Traverse had been carried over to the 2017 Traverse models , which will be its last before becoming a fleet exclusive vehicle .
Although the Traverse is redesigned for the 2018 model year , the previous Traverse model will still be available in 2018 as the Traverse Limited , and it will be sold to rental car companies and other fleets .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
+2016 Chevrolet Traverse on NHTSA Overall : Frontal Driver : Frontal Passenger : Side Driver : Side Passenger : Side Pole Driver :
Rollover AWD : +2015 Chevrolet Traverse on IIHS SECOND GENERATION ( 2018–PRESENT ) Section::::Second generation ( 2018–present ) .
On January 9 , 2017 , General Motors unveiled the second generation Traverse at the 2017 North American International Auto Show in Detroit .
Introduced as a 2018 model , it went on sale in July 2017 .
While Chevrolet is making the vehicle available in North America , plans include expanding the Traverse to the Middle East , and selected South American countries .
The Traverse was launched to the Russian market in 2018 , and will enter South Korea in late 2018 as a 2019 model .
The updated Traverse abandoned the egg shaped design and now adopts a more truck - like design , similar to the Tahoe , while taking some cues from the now mid - size Acadia , with the Chevrolet front grille design .
It is similar in dimension to the first generation model , adding an extra 2.0 inches of wheelbase and 0.7 inch more overall length , and it loses to come in at a weight of .
It remains an 8-seat ( or 7-seat optional ) passenger vehicle .
As part of GM 's plans to expand its range of crossovers by size in order to be competitive within the segments , Chevrolet re - positioned the Traverse as a full - size ( previously mid - size ) crossover SUV this time around due to the launch of the mid - size Blazer that will debut in 2019 .
There are 5 trim levels available for the 2nd generation
Traverse :
L , LS , LT , Premier , and High Country ( see below for trim level content ) .
All the trim levels are available in either Front Wheel Drive ( FWD ) or All Wheel Drive ( AWD ) drive type configurations except for the L trim level which is only available in FWD and the High Country trim level which is only available in AWD .
In an addition , there are 2 types of AWD system available for this generation of Traverse : the standard AWD system that allows user to disconnect the prop - shaft until rear traction is needed and the twin - clutch Twinster version ( available only with High Country trim ) with two rear clutches to more directly apply torque to the rear wheel that needs it most , both are developed by GKN Driveline .
At introductory period , the new 310-horsepower 3.6L V6 gasoline engine will be the only available engine option , mated to a nine - speed automatic transmission with either Front Wheel Drive or All Wheel Drive .
Additionally , a turbocharged four - cylinder engine will also become available in early 2018 with the introduction of the RS model .
The new Traverse gains some new technology , some of which is currently available on other models such as the Chevrolet Equinox , Chevrolet Tahoe , and Chevrolet Suburban .
Some of this technology includes : a hands - free power tailgate , the latest - generation Chevrolet MyLink infotainment systems with standard Apple CarPlay and Android Auto , a power - folding 60/40 split third - row rear bench seat , and standard keyless access with push - button start .
TRIM LEVELS Section::::Trim levels .
The second - generation Chevrolet Traverse is offered in several different trim levels ( all of which are available in front - wheel drive ( FWD ) or all - wheel drive ( AWD ) , except for the base L , which is only available with FWD , and the top - of - the - line High Country , which is only available with AWD ) , and each offering their own distinct level of standard equipment :
L :
The L is the least expensive trim level of the Traverse .
It offers the following standard equipment : a 3.6L V6 gasoline engine with Stop - Start Technology , a nine - speed automatic transmission , a dual - outlet exhaust system , Traction Mode Select , StabiliTrak Electronic Stability and Traction Control System , dual frontal and front and rear SRS side - impact airbags , tire pressure monitoring system with Tire Fill Alert , OnStar , LATCH system for rear child safety seats , Teen Driver Technology , a rear vision camera , LED daytime running lamps ,
High - Intensity Discharge ( HID ) headlamps , black power - adjustable and manually - folding exterior side view mirrors , exterior color - keyed door handles , a seven - inch Chevrolet MyLink infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto , Bluetooth with streaming audio , steering wheel - mounted audio system controls , six standard USB ports , a driver information center with a 3.5-inch monochrome display screen , a digital compass , keyless access with push - button start , a tri - zone automatic climate control system , interior lighting with theater dimming , premium cloth seating surfaces , eight - passenger seating , and ten standard cup holders .
LS :
The LS is the second least expensive trim level of the Traverse .
It adds deep - tinted glass and optional AWD to the base L. LT Cloth :
The LT Cloth adds comfort and convenience features to the LS , such as : eighteen - inch Bright Silver - finished aluminum - alloy wheels , exterior color - keyed heated , power - adjustable , and manually - folding exterior side view mirrors , front fog lamps , roof rails ,
SiriusXM Satellite Radio , seven - passenger seating with second - row rear captain 's chairs , an eight - way , power - adjustable front driver 's bucket seat with power lumbar support , a three - spoke , leather - wrapped steering wheel , and power windows with front driver 's express up / down and front passenger 's express up functionality .
LT Leather :
The LT Leather adds luxury features to the LT Cloth , such as : Surround Vision with Bird's - Eye View , side blind zone and rear cross - traffic alert , rear park assist , twenty - inch machined aluminum - alloy wheels , an eight - inch Chevrolet MyLink infotainment system with GPS navigation , Apple CarPlay , and Android Auto , a ten - speaker Bose premium audio system , leather - trimmed seating surfaces , an enhanced driver information center with a 4.2-inch color display , a six - way , power - adjustable front passenger 's bucket seat with power lumbar support , heated dual front bucket seats , a 120-volt AC rear power outlet , and HomeLink .
Premier : The Premier is the " luxury " model of the Traverse , and adds the following features to the LT Leather : a dual - outlet exhaust system with rectangular exhaust tips , LED " D - Optic " projector - beam front headlamps , exterior color - keyed , power - adjustable , heated manually - folding exterior side view mirrors , exterior color - keyed body side molding with chrome inserts , chrome exterior door handles , twenty - inch Argent Metallic - finished aluminum - alloy wheels , a hands - free power tailgate with Chevrolet emblem projection , a driver 's memory system , a power tilt - and - telescopic steering column , a heated leather - wrapped steering wheel , perforated leather - trimmed seating surfaces with heated and ventilated dual front bucket seats , heated second - row rear captain 's chairs , and wireless charging for compatible devices .
High Country : The High Country is the top - of - the - line Traverse trim level , and adds the following features to the Premier , such as : standard All Wheel Drive , a tow package , IntelliBeam automatic front high beam assist , forward collision warning and lane departure warning , adaptive cruise control with autonomous emergency braking , twenty - inch polished aluminum - alloy wheels , a SkyScape panoramic moonroof , and a power - folding third - row 60/40 split rear bench seat .
There are also two appearance packages available on the 2nd generation Traverse :
RS :
Based on the LT trim with leather seating adds black bowties , Black Ice grille and foglamp bezel , 20 inch Dark Android - painted aluminum wheels , Gloss Black window trims , and Black roof rails .
The RS also has a turbocharged four - cylinder engine instead of the 3.6L V6 gasoline engine vs other trim levels .
Redline Edition :
Available on the Premier in the following exterior colors only ( Iridescent Pearl Tricoat , Mosaic Black Metallic , Silver Ice Metallic , and Summit White ) , adds Driver Confidence II package , dual SkyScape panoramic moonroof , black - chromed mirrorcaps and door handles , 20 inch gloss black wheels with red stripes , black bowties with red and black badging , Black Ice grille and foglamp bezel , gloss black window trim , black roof rails , smoked dark tailamps , and black - painted lower moldings with black ice inserts .
At time of introduction , the 2018 Chevrolet Traverse is available exclusively with a 3.6L V6 gasoline engine with Stop - Start technology , and a nine - speed automatic transmission .
Future engine and transmission options ( one of which includes a turbocharged four - cylinder engine ) may become available for the Traverse in the future .
The RS Model will also be available after introduction , based on one of the LT trim levels , as will a new Redline Edition based on the Premier trim level ( see above for appearance package content ) .
MY 2019 Section::::MY 2019 .
There were no major changes .
The Saddle Brown Metallic color will be replaced by Havana Brown Metallic and the Roadside Assistance package is available on all trim levels .
The Blackout Package is added as an available option on LS , LT , and Premier trim levels .
SALES IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Sales in the United States . !
Year !
Sales 2016 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Chevrolet Traverse website
* Edmunds InsideLine : 2008
Chicago Auto Show : 2009 Chevrolet Traverse
* Chevy Traverse wins SEAMO 2009 Family Car of the Year Award