PEPSI ZERO SUGAR Pepsi Zero Sugar ( sold under the names Diet Pepsi Max until early 2009 and then Pepsi Max until August 2016 ) , is a zero - calorie , sugar - free , carbohydrate - free , ginseng - infused cola sweetened with aspartame , marketed by PepsiCo .
In Fall 2016 , PepsiCo renamed the drink Pepsi Zero Sugar from Pepsi Max .
It has nearly twice the caffeine of Pepsi 's other cola beverages .
Pepsi Zero Sugar contains 69 milligrams of caffeine per 355ml ( 12 fl oz ) , versus 36 milligrams in Diet Pepsi .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Diet Pepsi Max was introduced in the United States on June 1 , 2007 , and in Canada in March 2008 .
" Diet " was dropped from the name in early 2009 .
On June 29 , 2015 , PepsiCo announced several product changes which , among other changes , announced that Pepsi Max would be renamed in North America as Pepsi Zero Sugar .
It is not known if it will come into trademark conflict with Coca - Cola , which uses the " zero " moniker for Pepsi Max 's primary competitor Coca - Cola Zero , as well as Sprite Zero .
The unrelated international drink will retain the Pepsi Max name .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Pepsi Zero Sugar competes in the energy drink market , as is implied by it being marketed as an ' Invigorating Cola . '
Compared with other common energy drinks , Pepsi Zero Sugar gives the consumer a relatively low dose of caffeine .
Pepsi Zero Sugar provides 5.75 mg caffeine per 30ml , while Red Bull provides 9.64 mg/30ml , AMP Energy provides 8.93 mg/30ml , Monster Energy provides 10 mg/30ml and Cocaine provides 33.14 mg/30ml .
Pepsi Zero Sugar commercials present the beverage as an alternative to Diet Pepsi .
In 2007 , the official marketing website for the product contained an ' odd cast ' featuring a spoofed telethon urging viewers to donate yawns and uses the slogan ' WAKE UP PEOPLE ' .
Also , there was a featured commercial of a spoof on the Dallas Cowboys offensive coordinator yawning , when calling a play , thus , causing Tony Romo to be sacked , he was then replaced by Cowboys ' owner Jerry Jones who gives him a Diet Pepsi Max .
The scene then cuts away to the words " WAKE UP PEOPLE " while a voiceover shouts the slogan .
An ad for the product that ran during the 2007 Super Bowl featured the song " What Is Love " by Haddaway , and showed people sleeping in inappropriate places and at inappropriate times , while bobbing their heads to the rhythm of the song .
After the 2009 Super Bowl commercial aired , another , more recent campaign ( including television and radio advertisements ) has emphasized that the product is intended to be a men 's diet cola .
In one commercial , entitled " I 'm Good , " men are shown in various dangerous and painful situations , and after each brief sequence , the " injured " actor states , " I 'm good ! "
The take - away message is that men can handle anything , except for the taste of the average diet cola .
Pepsi Max is intended to be the diet cola that men will enjoy .
Another commercial entitled " Ingredients " shows men in various situations listing fictitious ingredients that essentially make Pepsi Max seem " tough . "
The fictitious ingredients include pepper spray ( as a sweetener ) , scorpion venom , crushed Viking bones , and the saliva of a rabid wolverine .
The actors also state that the can is made from the hull of a nuclear submarine , and subsequently crush the cans in their bare hands , stating , " I just crushed the hull of a nuclear submarine .
" This commercial ends with " Maximum Taste , No Sugar , and Maybe Scorpion Venom .
Pepsi Max , the First Diet Cola for Men , " signaling a definitively different message than the one used in the " WAKE UP PEOPLE " advertisements .
These more recent commercials have portrayed Pepsi Zero Sugar consumers as unremarkable , average , and heavy men , explicitly identifying the target market .
For Super Bowl XLIV in July 2010 , Pepsi Max did a reboot of a well - received ad that ran during the 1995 Super Bowl XXIX .
In the original ad , a pair of delivery drivers from Coca - Cola and Pepsi began a tentative friendship while listening to"Get Together " by The Youngbloods ; in a peacemaking gesture , the two rivals taste each other 's soda .
But the friendship ends in humorous conflict when the Coca - Cola driver refuses to return the ( superior ) Pepsi product .
The new ad riffed on the same story , with the drivers this time coming to blows over the then - Pepsi MAX at the expense of Coca - Cola 's much more popular Coke Zero , with the song
" Why Ca n't We Be Friends ? "
by the American funk band War as the soundtrack .
In 2011 , Snoop Dogg was featured in an ad campaign around the time of Super Bowl XLV .
In early 2010 , Pepsi released a limited edition called " Pepsi Max Cease Fire .
" It is Diet Pepsi Lime in the Pepsi Max formula , and is being cross - promoted with Doritos Burn flavors .
In July 2010 , Pepsi Zero Sugar , then under the Pepsi Max name , was once again redesigned , this time to match its global branding .
In the process , Pepsi Max began using the medium - sized " smile .
" The " Max " typeface was changed to appear similar to what is used worldwide , and a distorted blue background borders the Pepsi globe .
Pepsi MAX was also advertised by " Uncle Drew " with the slogan " Get Buckets . "
Richard Speight , Jr. is the " Pepsi Max " delivery guy for all commercials the last two years , with ads featuring major baseball and football stars , and also with Snoop Dogg and 4-time NASCAR Sprint Cup Series champion Jeff Gordon , who worked with Pepsi Max in 2013 to create , along with Road Trip to the Race Track two years prior .
Pepsi Max also sponsored Gordon 's Hendrick Motorsports teammate Kasey Kahne during the 2013 Cup Series season .
Pepsi Max 's current slogan in the US is " Maximum taste .
Zero calories . "
Coca - Cola Zero is Pepsi Zero Sugar 's primary competing product , which was introduced in 2008 .
INGREDIENT LIST Section::::Ingredient list .
Carbonated Water , Caramel Color , Phosphoric acid , Aspartame , Potassium Benzoate , Caffeine , Natural flavor , Acesulfame potassium , Citric acid , Calcium disodium EDTA , Panax ginseng extract .
SEE ALSO
* List of energy drinks * List of Pepsi types REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * PepsiCo