LIST OF ALCATRAZ ESCAPE ATTEMPTS
There were 14 escape attempts to escape from Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary over the 29 years that Alcatraz served as a federal penitentiary .
According to the prison 's correctional officers , once a convict arrived on the Alcatraz wharf , his first thoughts were on how to leave .
During its 29 years of operation , the penitentiary claimed that no prisoner successfully escaped .
A total of 36 prisoners made 14 escape attempts , two men trying twice ; twenty - three were caught , six were shot and killed , two drowned , and five are listed as " missing and presumed drowned " .
It had seemed impossible to escape from Alcatraz by swimming .
The seasonal water temperature in the San Francisco Bay is about 53 ° F ( 12 ° C ) in December and the current can exceed 6 knots .
Citing these facts , as well as occasional visits from Great White Sharks and razor - sharp rocks , prison officers had discouraged most escape attempts .
ATTEMPTED ESCAPES APRIL 27 , 1936 Section::::Attempted escapes .
Section::::April 27 , 1936 .
The first attempt to escape the prison was made on April 27 , 1936 , by Joseph Bowers , who was assigned the duty of burning trash at the incinerator .
He was working burning garbage at the island 's incinerator during duty hours when he suddenly ran and began scaling a chain link fence at the edge of the island in an apparent attempt to make for the shore .
When he was caught in this act and refused orders of the correctional officer located at the West Road guard tower to come down , he was shot .
He was seriously injured in the fall from over 15 m ( 50 ft ) and consequently died .
The incident termed Bowers ' " Desperate Escape " was variously deemed by inmates to have been an actual escape attempt , a deliberate suicide ( Bowers had made multiple suicide attempts , and was deemed by some prisoners to be criminally insane ) , an attempt to climb up to grab garbage wedged in the chain link fence ( Bowers was assigned to the garbage incinerator detail ) , or an attempt to climb the fence to feed a seagull .
However , regardless of Bowers ' initial motive , it is indisputable that Bowers ignored the guards ' forceful signals to halt and he kept climbing even after the guards began firing , such that he fell on the outside of the fence .
DECEMBER 16 , 1937 Section::::December 16 , 1937 .
Theodore Cole and Ralph Roe had gradually filed through iron bars in the prison 's mat shop in the industries building and escaped on a very foggy day , preventing them from being spotted by guards in the watch towers .
The two jumped into the water and were never seen again , but the severe weather conditions at the time have led to a consensus that they drowned in the bay and their bodies were swept out to sea by the strong current in San Francisco Bay .
However , they were listed as # 1 and # 2 on the FBI Most Wanted List .
MAY 23 , 1938
Section::::May 23 , 1938 .
Rufus Franklin , Thomas R. Limerick , and James C. Lucas attacked and killed a guard with a claw hammer in the woodwork shop in the industries building and then proceeded to the roof , where an armed guard shot Franklin and Limerick .
Other guards arrived at the scene .
Lucas was cornered and surrendered to the guards .
JANUARY 13 , 1939
Section::::January 13 , 1939 .
Arthur ' Doc ' Barker , William Martin , Rufus McCain , Henri Young , and Dale Stamphill were inmates of the prison 's supposedly most - secure unit , D - Block , when they managed to escape the cell house and reach the Alcatraz shore on the night of January 13 , 1939 ( Friday ) .
As they were putting a makeshift raft together , they were spotted and fired on by a guard in a watch tower .
Barker was killed , Stamphill was wounded , and the others were sent to solitary confinement .
MAY 21 , 1941 Section::::May 21 , 1941 .
Joe Cretzer , Sam Shockley , Arnold Kyle , and Lloyd Barkdoll were working in the industries area when they jumped the guards on duty and attempted to saw through window bars to reach the shore .
The tool - proof bars foiled the attempt and they surrendered when this became apparent .
Both Cretzer and Shockley would try to escape again in the Battle of Alcatraz .
SEPTEMBER 15 , 1941
Section::::September 15 , 1941 .
John Richard Bayless ( May 16 , 1915 – July 30 , 1981 ) was working on the garbage detail and managed to elude the guards and reach the Alcatraz shore .
He jumped into the water and tried swimming to San Francisco but quickly gave up the attempt .
APRIL 14 , 1943 Section::::April 14 , 1943 .
James Boarman ( January 1 , 1919 – April 14 , 1943 ) , Harold Martin Brest ( January 2 , 1914 – May 31 , 1979 ) , Floyd Garland Hamilton ( June 13 , 1908 – July 24 , 1984 ) , and Fred John Hunter ( October 13 , 1899 – November 30 , 1982 ) , managed to cut window bars in the industries building 's mat shop without being noticed and assemble four cans that contained army uniforms and could serve as flotation devices .
They then overpowered two guards and bound and gagged them , then escaped out the window , leaving behind two of the four cans .
However , one of the overpowered guards managed to get his whistle loose and the other managed to slip his gag and blow the first guard 's whistle , alerting the tower guards who opened fire on the prisoners .
Boarman was hit by gunfire and floated in the water unconscious , supported by Brest .
As a prison launch picked up Brest , he let go of Boarman , who sank beneath the surface .
Boarman 's body was never recovered .
Hunter , who had injured his back and hands in the escape attempt , gave up on swimming and sought refuge in a nearby cave , but was discovered by the guards two hours later and surrendered .
Hamilton was wrongly assumed by the guards to have been hit by gunfire along with Boarman and his body to have similarly sunk , but had actually been hiding in the same cave as Hunter .
Two days later , he climbed back up the cliff and through the same window from which he had jumped , then hid under a pile of material in the storeroom .
He was found there the next morning .
AUGUST 7 , 1943 Section::::August 7 , 1943 .
Huron Ted Walters , who was doing 30 years for robbery , assault , and auto theft , noticed that on weekends , fewer guards were on duty , and their attention tended to be focused on the recreation yard .
On Saturday , August 7 , he took advantage of the situation to slip out of the New Industries building , where he was working in the laundry .
His plan was to cut through the two security fences that separated him from freedom , make his way to the water , and swim the 1.4 miles to San Francisco .
His plan went sideways early .
The contraband wire cutters failed him , so he had to climb both fences , which cost him valuable time ; then , he fell from the second fence onto the rocks and injured his back .
Although he made it to the island 's shoreline , he could go no farther , and was picked up by Captain of the Guards Henry Weinhold and Associate Warden E. J. Miller .
He was returned to the cell house , where he spent some time in the prison hospital , then in solitary .
JULY 31 , 1945 Section::::July 31 , 1945 .
John K. Giles , a prisoner working at the Alcatraz wharf , managed to assemble a U.S. Army technical sergeant 's uniform ( probably from pieces stolen from bags of army laundry sent to the island to be cleaned ) and board a ferry that provided service between government facilities around San Francisco Bay .
Shortly after the ferry 's departure for Angel Island , headcounts on the Alcatraz wharf and aboard the ferry revealed the discrepancy , and Giles was apprehended at Angel Island and returned to Alcatraz .
MAY 2–4 , 1946 Section::::May 2–4 , 1946 .
The most violent escape attempt occurred on May 2–4 , 1946 , when a failed attempt by six prisoners led to the Battle of Alcatraz , also known as the " Alcatraz Blastout " .
It was carried out by six prisoners : Bernard Coy , Joseph Cretzer , Sam Shockley , Clarence Carnes , Marvin Hubbard and Miran Thompson .
They daringly took control of the cell house by overpowering correctional officers , and were able to enter the weapons room and obtain the keys to the recreation yard door .
Their aim was to escape by boat from the dock , but when they failed to obtain the keys to the outside door , they decided to battle it out .
In the fight that ensued , they managed to hold two correctional officers hostage whom they eventually killed after two days .
Prompted by Shockley and Thompson , Cretzer shot the hostages at very close range .
One of the guards , William Miller , succumbed to his injuries while the second guard , Harold Stites , was also killed at the cellhouse .
Although Shockley , Thompson , and Carnes returned to their cells , the other three , Coy , Cretzer and Hubbard , persisted with their fight .
The U.S. Marines intervened to help the correctional officers and killed the three prisoners .
In this battle , apart from the guards and prisoners killed , 17 other guards and one prisoner were also injured .
Shockley , Thompson , and Carnes were tried for the killing of the correctional officers .
Shockley and Thompson were sentenced to death through the gas chamber , an action which was carried out at San Quentin in December 1948 .
However , Carnes , who was only 19 years old , was given a second life sentence .
JULY 23 , 1956 Section::::July 23 , 1956 .
Floyd Wilson disappeared from his job at the dock but was discovered after hiding for 12 hours among large rocks along the shoreline after giving up his plan to make a raft out of driftwood .
SEPTEMBER 29 , 1958 Section::::September 29 , 1958 .
Aaron Burgett and Clyde Johnson were working on the garbage detail when they overpowered a guard .
Both jumped into the water , trying to swim off the island .
A police launch intercepted Johnson , but Burgett disappeared .
He perished in the attempt and his body washed up on San Francisco 's shoreline , 2 weeks later . JUNE 11 , 1962 Section::::June 11 , 1962 .
Frank Morris , John Anglin and Clarence Anglin successfully carried out one of the most intricate escapes ever devised , on June 11 , 1962 .
Behind the prisoners ' cells in Cell Block B ( where the escapees were interned ) was an unguarded wide utility corridor .
The prisoners chiseled away the moisture - damaged concrete from around an air vent leading to this corridor , using tools such as metal spoons and forks soldered with silver from a dime and an electric drill improvised from a stolen vacuum cleaner motor .
The noise was disguised by accordions , played during music hour ( about 1 hour and a half ) , and their progress was concealed by false walls , which , in the dark recesses of the cells , fooled the guards .
The escape route then led up through an air vent , a shaft large enough for a man to climb through .
Stealing a carborundum cord from the prison workshop , the prisoners had removed the rivets from the grille and substituted dummy rivets made of soap .
The escapees were given over 50 rubber raincoats from other inmates to use as a raft for the trip to the mainland , which they prepared on the top of the cellblock , concealed from the guards by sheets which had been put up over the sides .
Leaving papier - mâché heads in their cell bunks , they escaped through a vent in the roof and departed Alcatraz .
The official investigation by the FBI was aided by another prisoner , Allen West , who also was part of the escapees ' group but was left behind .
West could n't fit through his hole so he had to keep chipping to break through .
When Morris and the Anglin brothers ( John & Clarence ) accelerated the schedule , West desperately chipped away at the wall ; however , by the time he made it through the wall , his companions were gone .
Articles belonging to the prisoners ( including plywood paddles and parts of the raincoat raft ) were later found floating in the bay , and the official report on the escape states that the prisoners drowned in the cold waters of the bay while trying to reach the mainland .
However , there were sightings of the men over the years .
Friends and family members have received many unsigned postcards and messages .
The mother of the Anglin brothers received flowers anonymously every Mother 's Day and two very tall unusual women were reported to have attended her funeral before disappearing .
The Discovery TV show MythBusters investigated the escape , and concluded it is " plausible " that the prisoners may have survived their escape attempt .
The 1962 escape was examined in a 2011 National Geographic Channel program entitled Vanished from Alcatraz .
According to the newly uncovered official records discussed on the program , a raft was discovered on Angel Island with footprints leading away .
Furthermore , there was also a report of a stolen car in the area that night , which could have been used by Morris and the other escapees .
However , while confirming these facts , which were hidden from the officials for quite some time , the findings of further investigations remain inconclusive .
As a result , the U.S. Marshal 's office is still investigating this case , which will remain open on all three escapees until their 100th birthdays .
A 2015 History Channel documentary presented further circumstantial evidence gathered over the years by the Anglin brothers ' family , including Christmas cards allegedly sent by the brothers for three years after their escape .
It featured an interview with family friend Fred Brizzi , who claimed to have met the brothers in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil in 1975 .
To support his story , he offered a photograph of two men resembling John and Clarence Anglin , taken , he said , during the encounter .
A facial recognition analyst who had examined the photo asserted that the two men were " more than likely " the Anglins .
The film also presented an alternate escape theory , involving the use of an electrical cord , which was reported missing from the prison 's dock , tied to a passenger ferry that left the island just after midnight on the night of the men 's escape .
DECEMBER 16 , 1962 Section::::December 16 , 1962 .
John Paul Scott and Darl Lee Parker were the last two prisoners to attempt to escape from Alcatraz .
Scott and Parker used a makeshift saw to cut through the bars on a kitchen window in the cell house , then ran to the edge of the island and jumped into the water .
Parker was found 100 yards from the main island on the rock formation Little Alcatraz , but Scott reached Fort Point beneath the Golden Gate Bridge where he was found by teenagers , suffering from hypothermia and exhaustion .
After recovering in Letterman General Hospital , he was immediately returned to Alcatraz .
It is the only proven case of an Alcatraz inmate reaching the shore by swimming .
ESCAPE FROM ALCATRAZ ( TRIATHLON ) Section::::Escape from Alcatraz ( triathlon ) .
Today , multitudes of athletes swim the same Alcatraz – Fort Point route as part of one of two annual triathlon events .
SEE ALSO
* Escape from Alcatraz ( book ) * Birdman of Alcatraz ( film ) * The Rock ( film ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* FBI file on Alcatraz escape attempts