PERFECT ROUND
In golf , a perfect round is a round of eighteen holes where all holes were played on average at one under par ( average of birdie on every hole ) resulting in a score of 55 on a par 73 course , 54 on a par 72 course , 53 on a par 71 course , and 52 on a par 70 course .
The term ' perfect round ' is used for a 54 as the lowest score generally accepted as being in the realm of possibility among professional golfers on a par 72 course .
This has remained the standard and has never been achieved by a professional golfer in a professional event .
LOWEST
SCORES OVERALL
Section::::Lowest scores overall .
The lowest officially recorded score is 55 by Rhein Gibson ( 12 birdies and 2 eagles on a par 71 ) and this score is recognized by the Guinness World Records .
Four other rounds of 55 are documented , but these are commonly discounted due to the quality of the course or the nature of the round ( e.g. , a non - competitive round ) .
LOWEST SCORES IN PROFESSIONAL GOLF Section::::Lowest scores in professional golf .
In official golf tournaments on major tours : !
Player ! !
Score ! !
To par ! !
Rnd ! !
data - sort - type="number"Finish ! !
Year ! !
Tour ! !
Tournament ! !
Ref
In unofficial tournaments or on minor tours : !
Player ! !
Score ! !
To par ! !
Rnd ! !
Finish ! !
Year ! !
Tour ! !
Tournament ! !
Ref Notes :
*
Rnd is the round in which the score was shot , i.e. 2/4 means the round was shot in the second of four rounds .
*
Finish is the final tournament finish of the player COMMENTS AND QUOTES ABOUT ACHIEVING THE PERFECT ROUND Section::::Comments and quotes about achieving the perfect round .
Annika Sörenstam has commented on many occasions about her desire to shoot the perfect round saying , " I believe I can hit 18 greens , hit every fairway , you know — Vision 54 , which means you birdie every hole ,
that 's in the back of my mind .
I want to putt better , chip better .
That day when I hit 18 greens and one putt , I 'll know I 'm a complete golfer .
Will that ever happen ?
I 'm not sure , but it 's possible .
The 54 vision is always in the back of my mind . "
In another interview she said , " How do you shoot a 54 ?
Hit one fairway .
Hit one green .
Make one putt .
Do that 18 times
and you have achieved golf perfection .
" She even has a knitted blue and yellow head cover in her bag with the number 54 on it .
Cecilia Ekelundh , of the Ladies European Tour keeps the perfect round on her mind by drawing a 54 on the ball she plays in competition .
" There is no reason why you ca n't birdie every hole , " Ekelundh said .
" I got the idea when Swedish speed skater Tomas Gustafson came and spoke at one of our national team days .
He said he wrote his ultimate lap time on his shoe so that every time he put his shoes on he visualised making that time .
Now every time I pick up a ball I have that vision . "
There is an emerging philosophy among top rated golf schools popularized by Pia Nilsson 's Vision 54 that concentrates on achieving the perfect round , the basic ideology being that striving for perfection results in better scores even if the goal is not met .
REFERENCES