CLEARWATER BEACH Clearwater Beach includes a resort area and a residential area on the Gulf of Mexico in Pinellas County on the west central coast of Florida .
Located just west over the Intracoastal Waterway by way of the Clearwater Memorial Causeway from the city of Clearwater , Florida , of which it is part , Clearwater Beach is at a geographic latitude of 27.57 N and longitude 82.48 W. Clearwater Beach is characterized by white sand beaches stretching for along the Gulf and sits on a barrier island .
It has a full marina on the Intracoastal Waterway side and is linked on the south by a short bridge to another barrier island called Sand Key , where Sand Key Park is located .
The area offers shopping , restaurants , and activities such as parasailing , jet ski rentals , boat tours ( with a common sighting of dolphins in the Gulf waters ) , miniature golf , fishing charters , and " pirate ship " cruises .
Clearwater has frequently been ranked one of the best beaches in the United States .
Its Sandpearl resort was named one of the best beach resorts in the U.S.
In January 2013 , Clearwater Beach was awarded the designation of Florida 's Best Beach Town by a USA Today reader poll ranking 10 Florida beach destinations .
In February 2018 , Clearwater Beach was named the best beach in the United States and seventh - best in the world by TripAdvisor .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Clearwater Beach is officially classified as having a humid subtropical climate .
Clearwater Beach experiences warm and humid summers with frequent thunderstorms and drier winters .
The area experiences a significant summer wet season , as nearly two - thirds of the annual precipitation falls in the months of June through September .
The area is listed by the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) as being in hardiness zone 10 , which is about the northern limit of where coconut palms and royal palms can be grown .
Highs usually range between 65 and 95 ° F ( 18 and 35 ° C ) year round .
TRANSPORTATION Section::::Transportation .
Clearwater Beach is approximately from Tampa International Airport and from downtown Tampa .
St. Pete - Clearwater International Airport is also within close proximity of Clearwater Beach .
The Clearwater Jolley Trolley has provided transportation up and down the beach since 1982 .
It currently runs to North Clearwater Beach and down to Sand Key , including Island Estates .
Mandalay Avenue is the main drag on the north end of the beach with Gulfview Boulevard being so on the south .
Both areas feature a variety of businesses .
RECREATION , ENTERTAINMENT , AND SHOPPING Section::::Recreation , entertainment , and shopping .
Pier 60 , named for State Road 60 which terminates in Clearwater Beach , is a central spot for beachgoers and has a playground , a snack bar with attached souvenir shop , and a long fishing pier .
There are professional entertainers who perform on the pier every day , along with children 's acts .
It 's the site of a daily event called Sunsets at Pier 60 , which includes street performers and musical acts .
On the pier itself is a nightly display of goods sold by local artisans such as jewelry , candles , and other gift items .
Numerous restaurants and shops can be found adjacent to the beach , whose attractiveness was greatly improved in recent years with a beautification project called Beach Walk .
The Beach Walk is located just south of Pier 60 .
There are drinking fountains , shower nozzles for beachcombers to rinse the sand off , and bicycle racks , as part of the upgrade .
It also is a great spot for fishing .
Beach " renourishment " efforts such as dune restoration enhance the area 's natural beauty along a wide curving sidewalk .
In addition , directly across from the pier is the Clearwater Municipal Marina , which offers deep sea fishing and boating activities for visitors .
In July 2008 the long - anticipated Beach Walk project was completed , featuring a compact pedestrian zone with high - end hotels and condos .
The beach is also known for its nightlife scene .
Shephard 's Beach Resort and the Palm Pavilion Inn are two of the area 's popular night spots .
There are also several Frenchy 's restaurant locations and retail stores including Surf Style and Ron Jon Surf Shop .
A paved bicycle trail lined by mangrove trees is available nearby which parallels the Clearwater Memorial Causeway to the city .
Just up the causeway from the Beach , in the Island Estates area , is the Clearwater Marine Aquarium ( home of Winter , the bottlenose dolphin featured in the movie Dolphin Tale ) , as well as a grocery store and other amenities .
SEE ALSO * St. Pete Beach * Treasure Island
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Clearwater Beach webcams
* Clearwater Beach Live HD Streaming Beach Cam
* Clearwater Beach Weather Station REFERENCES