CALIFORNIA CRIMINAL LAW California criminal law generally follows the law of the United States .
However , there are both substantive and procedural differences between how the United States Federal Government and California prosecute alleged violations of criminal law .
This article focuses exclusively on California criminal law .
TYPES OF CRIMES Section::::Types of crimes .
California defines a " Crime " or " Public Offense " as an act committed or omitted in violation of a law forbidding or commanding it which can be punished upon conviction with either death , imprisonment , fine , removal from office or disqualification to hold any office of honor , trust or profit in California .
In California , there are three different types of crimes and public offenses:(1 )
Infractions,(2 ) Misdemeanors , and ( 3 ) Felonies .
INFRACTIONS Section::::Infractions .
An infraction is a public offense , but arguably not a crime , and is not punishable by imprisonment .
Any person convicted of an infraction may only be punished by a fine , removal and/or disqualification from public office .
Typically , most infractions are punished with a fine only .
Examples of infractions in California are traffic violations such as exceeding the posted speed limit , etc .
Persons charged with infractions do not have the same right to trial by jury as misdemeanor defendants , notwithstanding laws that imply otherwise .
Similarly , Defendants generally do not have a right to court - appointed counsel .
Infraction trials may be heard by non - judges , such as magistrates .
Infractions were created in 1968 , originally only including parking violations , but was gradually broadened to include running stop lights and eventually most common traffic offenses .
Beginning in 1993 , those accused of parking violations can not generally contest them in a court of law until exhausting administrative procedures .
See e.g. MISDEMEANORS Section::::Misdemeanors .
A misdemeanor is a crime punishable by imprisonment in a county or city jail or detention facility not to exceed one year .
Except where the law specifies a different punishment , a misdemeanor is punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six months and/or a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars .
However , many misdemeanor offenses specifically list a punishment that exceeds the punishment listed in Penal Code section 19 .
For example , a misdemeanor violation of Battery on a Peace Officer is punishable by imprisonment in a county jail for up to one year and/or a two thousand dollar fine .
Instead of imprisonment , most defendants have the option to serve probation , with restrictions set forth by the prosecuting attorney and , upon agreement with the defendant , and the courts .
FELONIES
Section::::Felonies .
A felony is a more serious crime that can be punished by death or imprisonment in a state prison .
A person convicted of a felony can also be granted probation instead of a prison sentence .
If a person is granted probation , the court can impose many conditions on a grant of probation , including up to one year in county jail , money fines up to the maximum allowed by state law , and restitution to the victim for actual losses .
In addition , the court may impose other conditions as long as the conditions are reasonably related to the defendant 's crime , or to future criminality .
SEE ALSO
* Law of California REFERENCES