DEEP - CYCLE BATTERY
A deep - cycle battery is a lead - acid battery designed to be regularly deeply discharged using most of its capacity .
In contrast , starter batteries ( e.g. most automotive batteries ) are designed to deliver short , high - current bursts for cranking the engine , thus frequently discharging only a small part of their capacity .
While a deep - cycle battery can be used as a starting battery , the lower " cranking current " implies that an oversized battery may be required .
A deep - cycle battery is designed to discharge between 45 % and 75 % of its capacity , depending on the manufacturer and the construction of the battery .
Although these batteries can be cycled down to 20 % charge , the best lifespan vs cost method is to keep the average cycle at about 45 % discharge .
There is an inverse correlation between the depth of discharge ( DOD ) of the battery , and the number of charge and discharge cycles it can perform .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Deep - cycle lead - acid batteries generally fall into two distinct categories ; flooded ( FLA ) and valve - regulated lead - acid ( VRLA ) , with the VRLA type further subdivided into two types , Absorbed Glass Mat ( AGM ) and Gel .
The reinforcement of absorbed glass mat separators helps to reduce damage caused by spilling and jolting vibrations .
Further , flooded deep - cycle batteries can be divided into subcategories of Tubular - plated Opzs or flat plated .
The difference generally affects the cycle life and performance of the cell .
The structural difference between deep - cycle batteries and cranking batteries is in the lead battery plates .
Deep cycle battery plates have thicker active plates , with higher - density active paste material and thicker separators .
Alloys used for the plates in a deep cycle battery may contain more antimony than that of starting batteries .
The thicker battery plates resist corrosion through extended charge and discharge cycles .
APPLICATIONS
* Cathodic protection , which might include marine use * Other marine use , especially on a sailboat lacking power generation capability , generally smaller vessels
* Trolling motors for recreational fishing boats
*
Industrial electrically - propelled forklifts and floor sweepers
* Motorized wheelchairs * Off - grid energy storage systems for solar power or wind power , especially in small installations for a single building or motorhome * Power for instruments or equipment at remote sites * Recreational vehicles * Traction batteries to propel vehicles , such as golf carts , and other highway electric vehicles
* Traffic signals
* Uninterruptible power supply ( ' UPS ' ) , usually for computers and associated equipment , but also sump pumps
* Audio equipment , similarly to a UPS but also in certain ' clean power ' devices to supply clean DC power isolated from the public electric supply for inversion to AC to maximize audio signal reproduction FLOODED Section::::Flooded .
The term " flooded " is used because this type of battery contains a quantity of electrolyte fluid so that the plates are completely submerged .
The electrolyte level should be above the tops of plates which serves as a reservoir to make sure that water loss during charging does not lower the level below the plate tops and cause damage .
Flooded batteries will decompose some water from the electrolyte during charging , so regular maintenance of flooded batteries requires inspection of electrolyte level and addition of water .
Major modes of failure of deep - cycle batteries are loss of the active material due to shedding of the plates , and corrosion of the internal grid that supports active material .
The capacity of a deep cycle battery is usually limited by electrolyte capacity and not by the plate mass , to improve life expectancy .
RECYCLING
Section::::Recycling .
The vast majority of deep cycle batteries on the market today are lead acid batteries .
Lead acid batteries are recycled 98 % by volume , 99.5 % by weight .
The plastic cases , lead plates , sulfuric acid , solder , and other metals are 100 % recovered for reuse .
The only part of a battery that is not recyclable is the paper separators that wrap the plates .
Due to the acid bath the paper sits in , the fiber length is reduced so far that it can not be rewoven .
Industry
wide , there is a greater than 98 % rate of recovery on all lead acid batteries sold in the United States , resulting in a virtually closed manufacturing cycle .
SEE ALSO * Desulfation * Electric vehicle battery
* Gel battery * VRLA battery *
Opzs * List of battery types REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Northern Arizona Wind & Sun Deep Cycle Battery Overview
* Battery Council International
* Car and Deep - Cycle Battery FAQ 7.0
* How To Choose Deep Cycle Tubular Battery *
Deep cycle batteries and AGM battery information