ELDERFLOWER CORDIAL Elderflower cordial is a soft drink made largely from a refined sugar and water solution and uses the flowers of the European elderberry , ( Sambucus nigra L. ) .
Historically the cordial has been popular in North Western Europe where it has a strong Victorian heritage .
However , versions of an elderflower cordial recipe can be traced back to Roman times .
Nowadays it can be found in almost all of the former Roman Empire territory , predominantly in Central Europe , especially in England , Germany , Austria , Slovenia , Romania , Hungary and Slovakia , where people have acquired a special taste for it and still make it in the traditional way .
In some countries the drink can be found as an aromatic syrup , sold as a concentrated squash that is mixed with still or sparkling water .
Elderflower pressé is a premixed form of this .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In the northern hemisphere , elderflowers are in season from the end of May to the beginning of June or later and grow in most of Europe , northwest Africa and southwest Asia .
They grow in a variety of conditions including both wet and dry fertile soils , though they primarily prefer sunny locations .
The elderberry 's hermaphrodite flowers are borne in large corymbs , 10–25 cm in diameter , where the individual flowers are white with five petals , 5–6 mm in diameter , and pollinated by flies .
The cream coloured flowerheads are honey scented blossoms that are crisp and somewhat juicy , with a highly aromatic smell and flavour .
The leaves on the other hand are bitter - smelling .
Elderflower cordial can be made relatively easily at home , though it is also produced and sold commercially .
The flowerheads are best collected fresh and new when the tiny buds have just opened and come to bloom before the fragrance is tainted with bitterness .
The cordial is made by steeping the elderflower heads in a concentrated sugar solution so the flavour is infused into the syrup .
A source of citric acid and lemon juice is added to help preserve the cordial and add tartness .
The mixture is then covered and left to infuse before being strained to release as much juice as possible .
For drinking the cordial is typically diluted with either water or sparkling water though tonic , soda or gin are also used .
Commercial production of elderflower cordial uses a scaled - up version of the process described .
Commercially produced cordials are generally sold as a concentrated squash and are usually diluted by one part cordial and ten parts water , thus a 500 ml bottle of cordial would be enough for 5.5 litres diluted .
The high concentration of sugar in elderflower cordial gives it a long shelf life .
There are many commercial producers of elderflower cordial , and cheaper canned fizzy " elderflower drinks " and " elderflower sodas " often use a synthetic cheap elderflower flavouring to save money and labour , as well as a real elderflower extract .
Elderflower teas and cordial are traditionally used in herbal medicine of Bulgaria and the ex - Yugoslavia region .
SEE ALSO
* Squash ( drink ) * Cordial REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* BBC GoodFood Recipe Retrieved 2011 - 06 - 23 .
*
The Cottage Smallholder :
Fiona 's Elderflower Cordial Recipe