SALE OF GOODS ACT 1979
The Sale of Goods Act 1979 ( c 54 ) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom which regulated English contract law and UK commercial law in respect of goods that are sold and bought .
The Act consolidated the original Sale of Goods Act 1893 and subsequent legislation , which in turn had codified and consolidated the law .
Since 1979 , there have been numerous minor statutory amendments and additions to the 1979 Act .
It was replaced for consumer contracts from 1 October 2015 by the Consumer Rights Act 2015(c 15 ) but remains the primary legislation underpinning B2B transactions for selling / buying goods .
The Act implied to contracts where property in ' goods ' were transferred or agreed to be transferred for a monetary consideration , in other words : where property ( ownership ) in personal chattels was sold .
PART II , CONTRACT FORMATION Section::::Part II , contract formation .
Sections 2 to 15B concern how a contract is formed and , in particular , contains standardised implied terms in all contracts for sale .
Section 3(2 ) provides that if goods are sold and delivered to minors or those mentally incapacitated the minor will be liable to pay a reasonable price if the goods are necessaries .
Necessaries are goods suitable to the persons ' condition of life and actual requirements at the time of contracting .
Under sections 6 and 7 , concerning specific goods that perish , a contract is void where they perish before and avoided where they perish after contract formation .
( See Mistake ( contract law ) ) .
Under section 8(2 )
the price is a money consideration given in exchange for property in goods .
If the price , or means to ascertain a price , is not agreed , the buyer will be required to pay a reasonable price .
Breach of these terms by the seller may give rise to an action for damages , and in the case of those terms which are also conditions , termination of the contract .
Where the slightness of the breach renders it unreasonable for a non - consumer buyer to reject the goods , for breach of the implied terms as to description , quality or fitness or sample , then the buyer can only claim damages for a breach of warranty .
This amendment moderates the traditionally strict approach of English Law to contractual breach in a commercial context .
Section 12 incorporates into the contract a term that the seller either has legal title to the property to be sold or that he will have title at the time when property is to pass .
Section 13(1 ) provides that where the buyer is sold goods by description , the goods must correspond with this description .
Harlingdon v Christopher Hull held that this implied term may only be breached if the buyer relied upon the description .
Therefore , if the buyer is an expert , reliance may not be established .
Section 14 states that terms are implicitly about quality and title and are only relevant where the seller is acting in the course of a business .
There is no requirement as to the status of the buyer .
The phrase " in the course of a business " has received much judicial consideration .
Some judges have applied definitions found in other acts , but the recent case of Stevenson v Rogers gives a wide definition to this requirement .
It will encompass activity which is ancillary or loosely related to the business of a company .
To use Richards ' example , a bank that sells a company car will be acting in the course of a business .
Satisfactory quality , s 14(2 )
: The quality of the goods sold must be satisfactory ( prior to 1994 , this provision required ' merchantable ' quality ; this requirement has been retained in most Commonwealth versions of the Act ) .
The Act provides an objective test to determine satisfactory quality ; the standard that a reasonable person would regard as satisfactory , taking into account the price , description and any other relevant factors .
The courts have identified certain factors that may raise or lower the expectation of satisfaction .
Second hand goods , per Bernstein v. Pamson Motors Ltd. , will attract a lower expectation .
On the other hand , goods of a reputable brand may attract a higher expectation , the judge in Bernstien used the example of a small ping on a Rolls - Royce being unsatisfactory . '
Other relevant factors ' may include advertising in the case of consumer contracts .
Fitness for purpose , s14(3 ) : If the buyer expressly or implicitly makes his purpose for the goods known to the seller , the seller is obliged to make sure the goods provided are fit for that purpose , if it is reasonable for the buyer to rely on the seller 's expertise .
An example of the application of this provision can be found in Godley v
Perry
Under section 15 , when goods are bought by bulk and the buyer has tested or examined a small number of those goods , the seller is obliged to make sure that every item in the bulk corresponds with the quality of the sample tested or examined .
PART III , EFFECTS OF THE CONTRACT Section::::Part III , effects of the contract .
Sections 16 to 26 concern a contract 's effects , and in particular the transfer of property and title .
Under section 16 , property ( ownership ) can not pass unless the goods are ascertained ( the actual goods to be sold are identified ) .
Section 18 provides presumptions to determine when property will pass , both for specific goods ( ascertained at the time of the contract ) and goods unascertained at the time of contracting .
These ' rules ' can be excluded by contrary implication or express agreement .
Seller does not have title : if the seller does not own the goods , the buyer generally can not gain title , but he can sue for breach of the implied term as to title .
This is subject to numerous exceptions in closely defined circumstances , for example :
s.2
Factors Act 1889 , ss .
21 , 24 , 25 SGA 1979 .
Seller has voidable title : where the seller holds voidable title , title can pass to a buyer in good faith .
If title is voided before the contract of sale is concluded , title can not pass .
PART IV , CONTRACT PERFORMANCE
Section::::Part IV , contract performance .
Sections 27 to 39 concern performance of the contract .
Under section 29 , concerning the place of transfer , where location is not stipulated , the buyer must collect the goods at the sellers ' place of business .
The seller must be prepared to deliver them to the entrance of his place of business .
If the contract was concluded by a means of communication at a distance and the buyer is a consumer , this provision is disapplied and the Consumer Protection ( Distance Selling )
Regulations 2000 apply instead .
However , it is changed today and what applies is The Consumer Contracts ( Information , Cancellation and Additional Charges ) Regulations 2013 .
* J & H Ritchie Ltd v Lloyd Ltd [ 2007 ]
UKHL 9 PART V , RIGHTS OF UNPAID SELLER Section::::Part V , rights of unpaid seller .
Within six months , beginning at the time at which the goods were delivered , the buyer can require the seller to repair the goods , reduce the price , or rescind ( revesting property and requiring the return of any payment )
the contract where the buyer successfully claims that the goods were not in accordance with the contract at the time of delivery .
The seller can defeat this claim if ( a ) " it is established that the goods did so conform " at the time of delivery , or ( b )
the measure is " incompatible with the nature of the goods or the nature of the lack of conformity .
Consumer requires repair or replacement : The seller must repair or replace the goods within a reasonable amount of time , incurring all costs necessary to perform this task .
This can not be required if it is impossible or disproportionate in consideration of other available remedies .
Consumer requires reduction or rescission : This is only available where repair or replacement is impossible or the seller is taking an unreasonable amount of time to perform these requirements .
Any reimbursement must take into account any use that the buyer has had out of the goods .
PART VI , ACTIONS FOR CONTRACT BREACH
Section::::Part VI , Actions for contract breach .
Sections 49 to 54 concern actions for breach of contract .
PART VII , SUPPLEMENTARY Section::::Part VII , supplementary .
Terms from the Sale of Goods Act will not be incorporated into the contract where they have been expressly excluded , or express terms conflict with them .
These exclusions may be invalid under common law , the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 , or in consumer cases the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 .
If the term excluding these implied terms is struck out , the implied term will be effective .
Under the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 , section 12 may never be excluded , and sections 13 to 15 may never be excluded where the buyer is a consumer .
FUTURE PROSPECTS
Section::::Future prospects .
The 1979 Act was preceded by the original Sale of Goods Act 1893 , a statute drafted by Sir Mackenzie Chalmers , ( who also wrote the Marine Insurance Act 1906 ) .
The success of both the 1893 and 1979 statutes was largely down to their conciseness and to Sir Mackenzie 's clarity of expression .
In the 1990s , a number of short statutes were passed to amend the 1979 Act , and a new updated and consolidated Act is considered to be overdue .
SEE ALSO * English contract law
* UK commercial law *
Sale of Goods Act * Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977
* Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999
NOTES
REFERENCES
* PS Atiyah , J Adams and H MacQueen , Atiyah 's Sale of Goods ( 12th edn Longman )
* R Goode and E McKendrick , Goode on Commercial Law ( 4th edn
Penguin )
* L Sealy and RJA Hooley , Commercial Law : Texts , Cases and Materials ( EXTERNAL LINKS