MUSIC OF NEW ORLEANS
The music of New Orleans assumes various styles of music which have often borrowed from earlier traditions .
New Orleans , Louisiana , is especially known for its strong association with jazz music , universally considered to be the birthplace of the genre .
The earliest form was dixieland , which has sometimes been called traditional jazz , ' New Orleans ' , and ' New Orleans jazz ' .
However , the tradition of jazz in New Orleans has taken on various forms that have either branched out from original dixieland or taken entirely different paths altogether .
New Orleans has also been a prominent center of funk , home to some of the earliest funk bands such as The Meters .
EARLY 19TH CENTURY
Section::::Early 19th century .
The African influence on New Orleans music can trace its roots at least back to Congo Square in New Orleans in 1835 , when slaves would congregate there to play music and dance on Sundays .
African music was played as well as local music , including that of local white composers , such as Louis Moreau Gottschalk .
Along with European musical forms that were popular in the city , including the brass band traditions , the cultural mix laid the groundwork for the New Orleans musical art forms to come .
By 1838 , the local paper — the daily Picayune — ran a scathing article complaining about the emergence of brass bands in the city , which it stated could be found on every corner .
JAZZ Section::::Jazz .
The term " jazz " ( early on often spelled " jass " ) did not become popular until the mid and late 1910s , when New Orleans musicians first rose to prominence in other parts of the USA and the New Orleans style needed a new name to differentiate it from the nationally popular ragtime .
Before then , the New Orleans style was frequently simply called " ragtime " ( Sidney Bechet continued to call his music " ragtime " throughout his life ) , along with such local terms as " hot music " and " ratty music " .
The local New Orleans dance music style was already distinctive in the 19th century .
When this style became what was later known as " jazz " remains a matter of debate and definition , although most New Orleans music historians believe what became known as New Orleans style jazz was the product of a series of developments , probably reaching its famous form no earlier than the 1890s and no later than the mid 1910s .
By the 1890s a man by the name of Poree hired a band led by cornetist Buddy Bolden , many of whose contemporaries as well as many jazz historians consider to be the first prominent jazz musician .
The music was not called jazz at this time , consisting of marching band music with brass instruments and dancing .
If anything , Bolden could be said to have been a blues player .
The actual term " jazz " was first " jass " , the etymology of which is still not entirely clear .
The connotation is sexual in nature , as many of the early performers played in rough working class venues .
Despite colorful stories of mid-20th century writers , the prostitution district known as Storyville was no more important in the development of the music than the city 's other neighborhoods , but did play a role in exposing some out of town visitors to the style .
Many instruments used were often acquired second - hand at pawn shops , including used military band instruments .
The Creole people of New Orleans also contributed greatly to the evolution of the artform , though their own music became heavily influenced by the pioneering work of Bolden .
New Orleans - born musicians such as Louis Armstrong , Sidney Bechet and Jelly Roll Morton all recalled the influence Bolden had on the direction of the music of New Orleans .
( Armstrong himself had no memory of Bolden , but was told about him by his mentor King Oliver ) , and jazz itself .
SICILIAN INFLUENCE
Section::::Sicilian influence .
New Orleans had experienced a large wave of migration from the Italian region of Sicily between the late 1800s and early 1900s .
The Sicilian capital of Palermo had long held cotton and citrus fruit trade with New Orleans .
This resulted in the establishment of a direct shipping line between the two port cities which enabled a vast number of Sicilians to migrant to New Orleans , as well as other American cities .
As a result of this migration , much of New Orleans jazz was modeled from the music of Sicily .
This was shown in the New Orleans group the Original Dixieland Jass Band .
Bandleader Nick LaRocca and drummer Tony Sbarbaro were both born to parents who were Sicilian migrants .
The band 's " Livery Stable Blues " became the first jazz record ever issued .
CUBAN INFLUENCE
Section::::Cuban influence .
African American music began incorporating Afro - Cuban musical motifs in the nineteenth century , when the habanera ( Cuban contradanza ) gained international popularity .
The habanera was the first written music to be rhythmically based on an African motif .
From the perspective of African American music , the habanera rhythm ( also known as congo , tango - congo , or tango . ) can be thought of as a combination of tresillo and the backbeat .
Whether tresillo was directly transplanted from Cuba , or if the habanera merely reinforced tresillo - like " rhythmic tendencies " already present in New Orleans music is probably impossible to determine .
It is reasonable to assume that tresillo - based rhythms were performed in Congo Square by Caribbean slaves .
There are examples of tresillo - like rhythms in a few African American folk musics such as the foot stomping patterns in ring shout and the post - Civil War drum and fife music .
Tresillo is also heard prominently in New Orleans second line music .
Early New Orleans jazz bands had habaneras in their repertoire and the tresillo / habanera figure was a rhythmic staple of jazz at the turn of the 20th century .
Comparing the music of New Orleans with the music of Cuba , Wynton Marsalis observes that tresillo is the New Orleans " clave . "
Although technically , the pattern is only half a clave , Marsalis makes the important point that the single - celled figure is the guide - pattern of New Orleans music .
The New Orleans musician Jelly Roll Morton considered the tresillo / habanera ( which he called the Spanish tinge ) to be an essential ingredient of jazz .
The habanera rhythm and tresillo can be heard in his left hand on songs like " The Crave " ( 1910 , recorded 1938 ) .
Morton stated , " Now in one of my earliest tunes , " New Orleans Blues " , you can notice the Spanish tinge .
In fact , if you ca n't manage to put tinges of Spanish in your tunes , you will never be able to get the right seasoning , I call it , for jazz . "
Although the exact origins of jazz syncopation may never be known , there 's evidence that the habanera / tresillo rhythm was there at its conception .
Buddy Bolden , the first known jazz musician , is credited with creating the big four , the first syncopated bass drum pattern to deviate from the standard on - the - beat march .
As the example below shows , the second half of the big four pattern is the habanera rhythm .
In Early Jazz ; Its Roots and Musical Development , Gunther Schuller states : SECOND LINE Section::::Second line .
The use of brass marching bands came long before jazz music through their use in the military , though in New Orleans many of the best - known musicians had their start in brass marching bands performing dirges as well as celebratory and upbeat tunes for New Orleans jazz funeral processions from the 1890s onward .
The tradition drove onward with musicians such as Louis Armstrong , Henry " Red " Allen and King Oliver .
The presence of marching bands lives on today in The Big Easy , with musicians such as the Marsalis family doing some of their earliest work in such bands .
Much of New Orleans music today owes its debt to the early marching bands , even those marching bands which predate the birth of jazz music .
In the late 19th century marching bands would often march through the streets of the city in second line parades .
Some of the earliest bands originated from the Tremé neighborhood , and the city gave birth to such bands as the Excelsior , Onward and Olympia brass bands .
The Onward and Olympia bands each have sustained incarnations that continue performing to this day .
Modern examples of the brass band tradition can be heard in the playing of groups like the Dirty Dozen Brass Band , or the Rebirth Brass Band led by trumpeter Kermit Ruffins .
The history of the marching band in New Orleans is a rich one , with the various bands performing at virtually every major social event the city has to offer .
They perform at funerals , picnics , carnivals and parades .
The relationship between jazz bands and brass bands is one of co - influence .
Jazz bands of this era began to go beyond the confines of the 6/8 time signature the marching bands utilized .
Instead , New Orleans jazz bands began incorporating a style known as " ragging " ; this technique implemented the influence of ragtime 2/4 meter and eventually led to improvisation .
In turn , the early jazz bands of New Orleans influenced the playing of the marching bands , who in turn began to improvise themselves more often .
Again , yet another indication that jazz music is symbolic of freedom .
DIXIELAND
Section::::Dixieland .
The term dixieland was first coined by Dan Emmett in his song " Dixie 's Land " in 1859 .
It was not a positive term for African - Americans , as its usage defined any area of the south where slaves had not yet received emancipation .
Dixieland music can be defined in a number of ways , though its origin is to be found in New Orleans , present first in the music of King Oliver .
It quickly spread north and became popularized along with the migration of southern blacks to areas like Chicago .
Today the term is used in reference to the music , which provides a general description of any form of jazz that is derived from early New Orleans jazz .
The term dixieland is generally not used very much by New Orleans - based musicians , for there is good evidence that the term was imposed on them .
For instance , the first band to actually use the term in reference to the music in their name was the all - white Original Dixieland Band .
This band played no small role in the coinage of the term dixieland in reference to jazz in New Orleans , though they were not the innovators of the music .
The only true barrier this band broke was being the first to record New Orleans music , which happened in New York City of all places in 1917 .
It should be noted that despite the criticism Paul Barnes made about them , he also said that they had a " first class band " .
An early student of Dixieland was the young Louis Prima , as well as his older brother Leon , both of whom lived outside the French Quarter in a working - class neighborhood populated by Italian - American and African - American musicians .
Into his early 20s , Louis Prima performed on trumpet and cornet throughout New Orleans before following in the path of his idol Armstrong , and moving North for career reasons , where he appeared at the Famous Door in New York City , eventually relocating to Las Vegas where , beginning in the mid-1950s , he regularly appeared with another New Orleans musician , saxophonist Sam Butera .
RHYTHM & BLUES AND ROCK & ROLL Section::::Rhythm & blues and rock & roll .
A new style came out of New Orleans after World War II .
Prominent musicians such as Fats Domino helped shape what was first widely known as " rhythm and blues " , which was an important ancestor of rock and roll , if not the first form of the music .
In addition to the local talent , early rockers from elsewhere recorded many of their early hits in New Orleans using bands of New Orleans musicians .
In 1949 , New Orleans jazz musician , and Fats Domino producer Dave Bartholomew brought the tresillo directly from Cuban music into early R&B.
In a 1988 interview with Robert Palmer , Bartholomew revealed how he initially superimposed tresillo over swing rhythm .
Bartholomew referred to the Cuban son by the misnomer rumba , a common practice of that time .
On Bartholomew 's 1949 tresillo - based " Oh Cubanas " we clearly hear an attempt to blend African American and Afro - Cuban music .
HIP - HOP Section::::Hip - hop .
Pivotal in the emergence of New Orleans into the mainstream hip hop community was the establishment of No Limit Records ( now New No Limit Records ) and Cash Money Records .
These labels produced dozens of albums by young New Orleans rappers beginning in the mid-1990s .
Some seminal New Orleans artists from No Limit included Mystikal , Master P , Soulja Slim , C - Murder , and Silkk the Shocker .
Cash Money likewise signed and released albums by several New Orleans artists including BG , Juvenile , Turk , Big Tymers , and Lil ' Wayne .
The city is also the birthplace of bounce music which is gaining popularity .
Former Cash Money
in - house producer Mannie Fresh is often credited for much of the popularity for Bounce outside of New Orleans .
Drake , also signed to Cash Money recently collaborated with New Orleans Bounce producer Blaqnmild on his international hits " Nice For What " and " In My Feelings " .
Jay Electronica , signed to Jay - Z 's Roc Nation record label , has projected into the hip - hop scene .
Eastside New Orleans Rapper Currensy resides in New Orleans .
Rappers Corner Boy P , Young Roddy , Trademark Da Skydiver , and Fiend are from New Orleans .
Most of the Jet Life collective is from New Orleans or surrounding areas .
New Orleans is also known for a hip hop duo known as the $ UICIDEBOY$ , who are known for rapping about suicide , hence their name , and depression .
HEAVY METAL Section::::Heavy metal .
New Orleans has an active metal scene which began to take real form in the late 1980s .
Bands such as Eyehategod , Down , Exhorder , Crowbar , Acid Bath , Soilent Green , Goatwhore , Kingdom of Sorrow , Graveyard Rodeo and Superjoint Ritual are either based in the city , or have a majority of their members hailing from the area .
Artists such as Mike Williams , Jimmy Bower , Brian Patton , Phil Anselmo , Kirk Windstein , Pepper Keenan , Pat Bruders , Stanton Moore and Kyle Thomas are New Orleans residents .
The city is known for the " Louisiana sound " , which was pioneered by Exhorder , who was the first band to combine doom metal and up - tempo thrash metal .
As a result , New Orleans is often recognized as the place where sludge metal was born .
Several of these metal groups share a style which draws inspiration from Black Sabbath , Melvins , hardcore punk as well as Southern rock .
There is still variance within the sounds of the scene , however .
Eyehategod features very harsh vocals and guitar distortion ; Down has a style closer to classic rock ; Crowbar 's music has mostly slow tempos and a downtuned guitar sound ; and Soilent Green has a sound which is closer to grindcore .
It 's quite usual for a member of one of these bands to be part of another band from New Orleans or Louisiana .
Collaborations by members of a band on another are also fairly common .
In addition to being one of the founding members of Eyehategod , Jimmy Bower is also a member of Down , a member of Superjoint Ritual and has worked several times with Crowbar .
Pepper Keenan , member of Corrosion of Conformity , is a member of Down and also worked on Eyehategod 's album Dopesick .
Kirk Windstein is a founding member of Crowbar and a member of Kingdom of Sorrow and was a member of Down .
Phil Anselmo is a member of Down , a member of Superjoint Ritual as well as various metal acts based in New Orleans ; he also has a hardcore punk side project along with Mike Williams of Eyehategod and Hank Williams III named Arson Anthem .
Brian Patton is a member of Eyehategod and Soilent Green .
L. Ben Falgoust II is the singer of Goatwhore and Soilent Green .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * A History of New Orleans Music in 100 Tracks , edited by Ted Gioia ( jazz.com ) * Clarence 's Greater New Orleans Area Cajun and Zydeco Schedule
* New Orleans composer Edmund Dédé
* New Orleans composer Basile Barés * Biographical sketches of New Orleans African American composers B. Barés , E. Dédé , L. Lambert , S. Lambert , J. W. Nickerson , A. J. Piron , and F. V. Seymour , and notes regarding their downloadable music .
Site also has notes on 22 downloadable Creole melodies .
* NOLA Underground *
No Questions , No Answers New Orleans Punk Compilation 1980 * The WTUL New Wave Hour - 1978 * List of past and present New Orleans musical artists
* One Note at a Time - Film 2017 - covers New Orleans Musicians
post Katrina and the struggling healthcare system