MICHIGAN IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR Michigan made a substantial contribution to the Union during the American Civil War .
While the state itself was far removed from the combat theaters of the war , Michigan supplied a large number of troops and several generals , including George Armstrong Custer .
When , at the beginning of the war , Michigan was asked to supply no more than four regiments , Governor Austin Blair sent seven .
BEFORE THE WAR Section::::Before the war .
Before the Civil War , President James Buchanan took a weak position amid a looming South secession crisis .
Secretary of State Lewis Cass of Michigan , a 78-year - old elder statesman who has been Michigan 's U.S. senator and governor of Michigan Territory , resigned from Buchanan 's cabinet in protest , remarking that " he had seen the Constitution born and now feared he was seeing it die " .
In December 1860 , South Carolina became the first state to secede from the Union .
Outgoing Governor Moses Wisner delivered a speech to a Michigan Legislature in defense of the Union and the Constitution , stating : " This is no time for timid and vacillating councils , when the cry of treason and rebellion is ringing in our ears . "
On January 2 , 1861 , Austin Blair was sworn in as governor , vowing strong action to maintain the Union and punish secession .
The Legislature was also firmly pro - Union ; when Virginia invited Michigan to send delegates to the Washington Peace Conference , the Legislature passed a refusal resolution stating that " concessions and compromise are not to be entertained or offered to traitors . "
MILITARY CONTRIBUTION Section::::Military contribution .
At the beginning of the Civil War , regiments from Michigan were raised to answer Lincoln 's call for men .
The first volunteers from Michigan were mustered into the Army as the 1st Michigan Infantry on May 1 , 1861 .
On May 16 , the regiment arrived in Washington ; Lincoln was said to have exclaimed " Thank God for Michigan ! "
upon the troops ' arrival .
Over the course of the war , some 90,000 Michigan men ( about 23 percent of the 1860 male population of the state ) served in the Union forces .
This figure includes some 1,600 black soldiers .
Michigan raised a total of 30 infantry regiments , eleven cavalry regiments , one light artillery regiment , two light batteries , two companies of sharpshooters , and the 1st Michigan Engineers .
According to Frederick H. Dyer , a total of 14,753 officers and men from Michigan died during the war , but a " Roll of Honor " prepared upon order of the Michigan Legislature in 1869 contains 14,855 names .
Among the more celebrated units was the 24th Michigan Volunteer Infantry , which , as a part of the famed Iron Brigade , suffered considerable losses at the Battle of Gettysburg while defending McPherson 's Ridge .
George Armstrong Custer 's " Michigan Wolverine " Cavalry effectively battled J.E.B. Stuart at Gettysburg on the East Cavalry Field .
Several Union generals hailed from Michigan , including : Custer , Elon J. Farnsworth , Byron Root Pierce , Orlando Metcalfe Poe , Israel Bush Richardson , and Orlando B. Willcox .
In a letter to his wife , one Union soldier from Michigan detailed his motivations for fighting for the U.S. in the war , before dying in 1864 : CASUALTIES Section::::Casualties .
14,753 Michigan soldiers died in service , roughly one of every six who served .
A total of 4,448 of these deaths were combat deaths while the rest , over 10,000 , were from disease , a constant fear in crowded army camps with poor food , sanitation and exposure issues and pre - modern medicine .
Michigan suffered the sixth - highest losses among the Union states ( the non - state U.S. Colored Troops losses also exceeded Michigan 's ) .
HOMEFRONT Section::::Homefront .
Michigan actively participated in the American Civil War sending thousands of volunteers .
A study of the cities of Grand Rapids and Niles shows an overwhelming surge of nationalism in 1861 , whipping up enthusiasm for the war in all segments of society , and all political , religious , ethnic , and occupational groups .
However , by 1862 the casualties were mounting and the war was increasingly focused on freeing the slaves in addition to preserving the Union .
Copperhead Democrats called the war a failure , and it became more and more a partisan Republican effort .
Michigan voters in remained evenly split between the parties in the presidential election of 1864 .
SEE ALSO
* List of Michigan Civil War Units * History of Michigan REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Bak , Richard .
A Distant Thunder : Michigan in the Civil War ( 2004 ) .
239 pp .
* Bratt , Peter . "
A Great Revolution in Feeling : The American Civil War in Niles and Grand Rapids , Michigan , " Michigan Historical Review vol .
31#2 ( 2005 )
pp 43
+ .
online
* Dilla , Harriette M. Politics of Michigan , 1865–1878 ( Columbia University Press , 1912 )
online at Google books * Hershock , Martin J. " Copperheads and Radicals : Michigan Partisan Politics during the Civil War Era , 1860–1865 , " Michigan Historical Review 18
( Spring 1992 )
* Taylor , Paul . "
Old Slow Town " : Detroit during the Civil War ( Detroit : Wayne State University Press , 2013 ) .
x , 248 pp .
* Bruce A. Rubenstein & Lawrence E. Ziewacz , Michigan : A History of the Great Lakes State ( 5th ed . ,
Wiley : 2014 ) .