WEEPING ANGEL
The Weeping Angels are a race of predatory creatures from the long - running sci - fi series Doctor Who , resembling stone statues .
They were introduced in the 2007 episode " Blink " , making repeat appearances in " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " ( 2010 ) and " The Angels Take Manhattan " ( 2012 ) as well as cameo appearances in " The God Complex " ( 2011 ) , " The Time of the Doctor " ( 2013 ) and " Hell Bent " ( 2015 ) .
They also feature in the spin - off series Class , in the first series finale
" The Lost " ( 2016 ) .
Since their initial appearance , they have been persistently nominated as one of the most popular and frightening Doctor Who monsters .
Steven Moffat , their creator , attributes their appeal to childhood games such as Grandmother 's Footsteps and the notion that every statue might secretly be a disguised Weeping Angel .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
According to the Doctor , the Weeping Angels " are as old as the universe ( or very nearly ) , but no one really knows where they come from . "
He also describes them as " the deadliest , most powerful , most malevolent life - form evolution has ever produced . "
Weeping Angels are unusual as predators in that they neither kill nor directly parasitize their prey .
Their usual mode of feeding is to make use of time paradoxes - with a single touch , a Weeping Angel can send a person into the past to a point before his / her own birth , and can then feed off the " potential energy " of the years which that victim would have lived in the present .
The Doctor describes the Angels as " the only psychopaths in the universe to kill you nicely " because their victims are otherwise uninjured and may live out their lifespans in the past .
In their usual form , Weeping Angels resemble silent human - sized stone statues in the form of winged angels in draped clothing ( such as might appear as tomb statuary in a Victorian graveyard ) .
Apart from the wings , their standard form appears to mimic Earth humans ( two arms , two legs , two eyes )
even when they are infiltrating worlds on which the inhabitants differ from this form .
Generally , their facial features are bland and serene and their proportions human - normal .
However , as they close in on more aware victims they transform to a more horrific , bestial and demonic aspect with wide - open mouths , vampiric teeth , and clawed hands .
In the episode " The Angels Take Manhattan " , another form of Weeping Angel is shown , the cherubim .
Unlike the Weeping Angels , the cherubim are not silent , making a childlike giggling and having audible footsteps .
It is not explicitly stated that these are young Angels , but they are referred to as " the babies " .
It is also implied that Angels can mimic the forms or dimensions of a broader range of statuary if required : in " The Angels Take Manhattan " , one Angel takes the form ( or hijacks the existing form ) of the Statue of Liberty ( manifesting as a full - size Liberty with Weeping Angel features ) and the final moments of " Blink " suggest that any statue might be a disguised Angel .
When they are not being observed by another being , Weeping Angels can move very quickly and silently .
Their phenomenal speed allows them to close distances of meters literally in the blink of an eye .
However , when they are being observed they become " quantum - locked " , occupying a single position in space and becoming stone .
In this state , they are frozen and difficult to destroy .
They can not suppress this reaction .
If two Weeping Angels were to look at each other at the same time , they would be trapped in stone form until an outside force moves them apart .
To prevent this , they often cover their eyes while moving , which makes them look as though they are weeping .
When stalking a victim , Angels will generally take advantage of their speed to avoid being trapped in the quantum lock .
Weeping Angels are physically very strong , although they rarely physically kill a victim since this wastes the time - potential energy which the Angels would otherwise consume .
One exception to this behaviour is when an Angel or group of Angels wishes to communicate with other beings - in these instances , they select a victim and snap their neck prior to " rearranging the brains " for their own purposes ; the Angels are then capable of speaking and conversing via their victim 's voice and senses .
In the episode " The Time of Angels " , a soldier of the Church nicknamed " Angel Bob " suffers this fate , becoming the " voice " of a group of Angels and explaining their motives and thoughts to the Doctor before disappearing in the rip in the fabric of time and space .
Weeping Angels appear to have little culture or motivation other than those serving their basic predatory requirement of gaining energy .
The Doctor has described them as the loneliest beings in the universe since their quantum - lock reaction makes it impossible for them to socialise with other creatures .
However , Angels are capable of communication , as they often work in groups and clearly communicate with each other .
On those occasions when they have chosen to communicate with their prey or foes ( using the gruesome proxy method mentioned above ) they have demonstrated a cold and impersonal intelligence , but exhibit no empathy and no emotions beyond hunger , determination , and occasional predatory sadism .
While Angels can recognise individuals in other species when the situation requires it , they themselves speak collectively and appear to have little or no concept of themselves as individuals .
Weeping Angels prefer to take their energy from live victims , but if required , they can drain other forms such as that from electric lights ( as seen in " Blink " ) or other electronics .
In " Blink , " the Angels attempted to steal the Doctor 's TARDIS after trapping him in the past .
The engine of the vehicle contained enough time energy to feed them forever , but The Doctor stated that the possible damage they could cause " could switch off the sun " .
Without power , an Angel will start to decay and revert to a stone state even when not being watched .
While still initially capable of movement , its speed will also be extremely hindered when close to a starvation point ( as seen in " The Time of Angels " ) , with its range lessened from meters to a partial step .
The effects of starvation can be undone by providing the Angel with energy , but it is implied that Angels can no longer acquire energy themselves in this state .
A starving Angel becomes less and less active , and if dormant for too long will erode as a stone statue does , or even lose its physical existence altogether ( although it can still exist in an image - based or conceptual state ) .
Weeping Angels have also exhibited a startling ability to project themselves through images , suggesting that they are as much conceptual entities as physical ones .
A warning in an ancient book on the Angels , found by River Song , states that " that which holds the image of an angel becomes itself an angel " .
Using this ability , the Angels appear to be able to hijack both audio - visual equipment and organic memory .
In " The Time of Angels " , an Angel trapped in the vault of the starship Byzantium took advantage of a video screen which was playing footage of it elsewhere in the vessel : the creature escaped by overriding the screen controls and nearby electronic equipment , took over the screen , and passed through it to physically manifest in another location .
Weeping Angels can also imprint a mental image of themselves into a person 's mind by looking straight into their eyes : the image then gestates and takes over the person 's body to manifest as a new Angel .
Amy Pond was infected in such a manner where an involuntary verbal count - down indicated her remaining open - eyed moments as a human .
She was able to suspend the Angel 's gestation ( but not eliminate it ) by closing her eyes , refusing to let it breach the ' filter ' of her optic nerve .
In the novel Touched by an Angel , a starving angel is reduced to the point where it no longer has a physical being , and instead exists in the image viewed by cameras .
As such , whatever is within the sight of the camera is within the range of the angel which retains fast movement , but at the cost of range .
Normally , as in " The Time of Angels " , the Angel image would walk right out of the screen ; but when it is starving , it can not do so .
To stop movement , simply viewing the screen is enough to lock the angel .
The Weeping Angels are well known to Doctor Who companion River Song , who appeared in two of the three major stories to date .
Professor River Song has mentioned that she studied the Weeping Angels and wanted to learn more about them .
In the seventh series episode " The Angels Take Manhattan " , despite being removed from New York 's history , a lone angel gained a small victory in permanently trapping the Doctor 's companions , Amy Pond and her husband Rory Williams , in the past .
In " The Time of the Doctor " , the finale for the Eleventh Doctor , at least two Weeping Angels were present when The Doctor and Clara Oswald teleported down to the planet Trenzalore .
The Angels emerged from the snow - covered ground of a frozen forest during a swirling blizzard ; both Clara and the Doctor were thus blinded to their presence , unable to see them as they approached .
They were , however , able to escape the angels despite this .
In the ninth series finale episode " Hell Bent " , a Weeping Angel is shown to be in the cloisters of Gallifrey .
A Weeping Angel briefly appears in the Doctor Who spin - off Class , in the first series finale " The Lost " , where the headmistress of Coal Hill Academy , Dorothea Ames , is killed by a Weeping Angel , as she was deemed to have made too many mistakes by the Governors .
APPEARANCES
DOCTOR WHO * " Blink " ( 2007 ) *
" The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " ( 2010 ) *
" The Angels Take Manhattan " ( 2012 )
CAMEOS *
" The God Complex " ( 2011 ) *
" The Time of the Doctor " ( 2013 ) * " Hell Bent " ( 2015 )
CLASS
* " The Lost " ( 2016 ) DETAILS Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Details .
In " Blink " , a quartet of Weeping Angels send the Doctor and his companion Martha Jones to the year 1969 , and seek to feed off the vast " time energy " reserves of the TARDIS he left behind in the present .
But though they found the key to the TARDIS , they can not find the machine itself .
Sally Sparrow takes the key from one of them while it is in stone form , leading them to stalk Sally to recover it .
During their pursuit , Sally inadvertently leads them to the TARDIS .
Eventually , the four Angels , having surrounded the TARDIS , are tricked into looking at each other when the box disappears , leaving them quantum locked in their stone forms forever .
In The End of Time , the President of the Time Lords refers to the two dissenters on the return of Gallifrey as being forced to stand like the weeping angels , and the two Time Lords are posed with their hands over their eyes .
In " The Time of Angels " , in the distant future , a large group of Weeping Angels have been trapped in a catacomb for centuries , slowly losing their form due to starvation .
When a rogue angel causes a starship to crash into the catacomb , the Angels feed off its leaking radiation and revive .
The Weeping Angels are seen moving on - screen for the first time when they realise that Amy Pond can not see them .
They are defeated when they fall into a crack in time and are erased from existence .
In " The Angels Take Manhattan " , numerous Weeping Angels including one in the form of the Statue of Liberty have taken control of a building in New York , holding victims captive so they can repeatedly feed off their time energy .
Rory Williams and Amy Pond create a paradox by having Rory kill himself before he can be fed off to death .
This paradox kills all but one of the Angels and erases the events from history .
However , this surviving Angel encounters the Doctor and his companions in 2012 and sends Amy and Rory back in time , separating them from the Doctor forever .
In " The Time of the Doctor " , Weeping Angels are discovered on Trenzalore by Clara Oswald buried in mounds of snow .
After Clara touches the hand of the Weeping Angel , believing it to be a statue , the Weeping Angels start digging their way out of the snow and surround The Doctor and Clara , the snowstorm making it difficult for either Clara or The Doctor to keep eye contact .
They escape by summoning the TARDIS with the TARDIS key which the Doctor has concealed in his wig .
Later in the episode another Weeping Angel ( unspecified if it is one from earlier or not ) is seen in the town of Christmas as one of the many species that have managed to bypass the forcefield around Trenzalore in an attempt to silence the Doctor .
The Angel is seen staring into a mirror the Doctor has placed , thus remaining quantum - locked whilst it looks at its reflection .
NOVELS
* Touched by an Angel * Magic of the Angels
* The Angel 's Kiss SHORT STORIES
* " Living History " *
" Suddenly in a Graveyard ... " * " The Garden of Statues " AUDIOS * The Side of the Angels RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In a poll conducted by the BBC , taking votes from 2,000 readers of the Doctor Who Adventures magazine , the Weeping Angels were voted the scariest monsters of 2007 with 55 % of the vote ; the Master and the Daleks took second and third place with 15 % and 4 % of the vote .
The Daleks usually come out on top in such polls .
Moray Laing , Editor of Doctor Who Adventures , praised the concept of escaping a monster by not blinking , something both simple and difficult to do .
In a 2012 poll of over ten thousand respondents conducted by the Radio Times , the Weeping Angels were again voted the best Doctor Who monster with 49.4 % of the vote .
The Daleks came in second place with 17 % .
The Weeping Angels came in at number three in Neil Gaiman 's " Top Ten New Classic Monsters " in Entertainment Weekly .
They were also rated the third " baddie " in Doctor Who by The Telegraph , behind the Nestene Consciousness and Daleks .
The Angels were listed as the third scariest television characters by TV Squad .
In 2009 , SFX named the climax of " Blink " with the Weeping Angels advancing on Sally and Larry the scariest moment in Doctor Who history .
They also listed the Angels in their list of favourite things of the revival of Doctor Who , writing , " Scariest .
Monsters .
Ever .
"
" Blink " won the Hugo award for Best Dramatic Presentation ( short form ) in 2008 .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
Weeping Angel is the name of a hacking tool revealed in Vault 7 , co - developed by the CIA and MI5 , used to exploit smart TVs for the purpose of covert intelligence gathering .
Once installed in a suitable TV , the tool enables the television to record its surroundings while appearing to be turned off ( so - called " Fake - Off " ) .
The tool was developed in 2014 as part of a joint CIA / MI5 workshop , and there 's no evidence that it was ever operational .
QUANTUM MECHANICS Section::::Quantum mechanics .
Weeping Angels are described as quantum - locked entities that do not exist if one attempts to observe them .
Observation also plays an important role in the theory of quantum mechanics ( see Schrödinger 's cat ) .
Bell 's theorem is a no - go theorem of quantum mechanics that concerns the existence or non - existence local hidden variables .
It can be argued that hidden variables do not exist until they are observed .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS