WHISPERING
Whispering is an unvoiced mode of phonation in which the vocal folds ( vocal cords ) are abducted so that they do not vibrate ; air passes between the arytenoid cartilages to create audible turbulence during speech .
Supralaryngeal articulation remains the same as in normal speech .
In normal speech , the vocal folds alternate between states of voice and voicelessness .
In whispering , only the voicing segments change , so that the vocal folds alternate between whisper and voicelessness ( though the acoustic difference between the two states is minimal ) .
Because of this , implementing speech recognition for whispered speech is more difficult , as the characteristic spectral range needed to detect syllables and words is not given through the total absence of tone .
More advanced techniques such as neural networks may be used , however , as is done by Amazon Alexa .
There is no symbol in the IPA for whispered phonation , since it is not used phonemically in any language .
However , a sub - dot under phonemically voiced segments is sometimes seen in the literature , as for whispered should .
SOCIAL ROLE Section::::Social role .
Whispering is generally used quietly , to limit the hearing of speech to listeners who are nearby ; for example , to convey secret information without being overheard or to avoid disturbing others in a quiet place such as a library or place of worship .
Whispering is also used to speak to someone quietly in a school especially when a teaching assistant or a support worker in an alternative room is reading questions to someone during an exam .
Loud whispering , known as a stage whisper , is generally used only for dramatic or emphatic purposes .
Whispering also takes less effort to vocalize than a normal speech pattern .
This is because less air needs to be used to vocalize the sound .
However , while it takes less effort to produce a whisper , it tires out the vocal folds more quickly .
IN
ANIMALS Section::::In animals .
A number of species of animals have been observed to whisper , including the cotton - top tamarin and the barbastelle bat .
The reasons for animal whispering vary , and are not fully understood , but whispering among the tamarins appears to serve a social purpose , while the species of bats appears to whisper in order to evade detection by its particular prey , eared moths .
SEE ALSO
* Aspiration ( phonetics ) * Chinese whispers * Cocktail party effect * Egressive sound vs. ingressive speech
* Whispering campaign
* Whispering gallery * Whispery voice * Other forms of unvoiced vocalization : gasping , sighing and panting REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Functional Neuroanatomy of Human Vocalization :
An H215O PET Study