SEAT BELT LAWS IN THE UNITED STATES
Most seat belt laws in the United States are left to the states .
However , the first seat belt law was a federal law , Title 49 of the United States Code , Chapter 301 , Motor Vehicle Safety Standard , which took effect on January 1 , 1968 , that required all vehicles ( except buses ) to be fitted with seat belts in all designated seating positions .
This law has since been modified to require three - point seat belts in outboard - seating positions , and finally three - point seat belts in all seating positions .
Initially , seat belt use was voluntary .
New York was the first state to pass a law which required vehicle occupants to wear seat belts , a law that came into effect on December 1 , 1984 .
Officer Nicholas Cimmino of the Westchester County Department of Public Safety wrote the nation 's first ticket for such violation .
New Hampshire is the only state that has no enforceable laws for the wearing of seat belts in a vehicle .
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY ENFORCEMENT
Section::::Primary and secondary enforcement .
U.S. seatbelt laws may be subject to primary enforcement or secondary enforcement .
Primary enforcement allows a police officer to stop and ticket a driver if he or she observes a violation .
Secondary enforcement means that a police officer may only stop or cite a driver for a seatbelt violation if the driver committed another primary violation ( such as speeding , running a stop sign , etc . )
at the same time .
New Hampshire is the only U.S. state that does not by law require adult drivers to wear safety belts while operating a motor vehicle .
In 15 of the 50 states , the seat belt law is considered a secondary offense , which means that a police officer can not stop and ticket a driver for the sole offense of not wearing a seatbelt .
( One exception to this is Colorado , where children not properly restrained is a primary offense and brings a much larger fine . )
If a driver commits a primary violation ( e.g. , for speeding ) he may additionally be charged for not wearing a seatbelt .
In most states the seat belt law was originally a secondary offense ; in many it was later changed to a primary offense : California was the first state to do this , in 1993 .
Of the 30 with primary seat belt laws , all but 8 , Connecticut , Hawaii , Iowa , New Mexico , New York , North Carolina , Oregon , and Texas , originally had only secondary enforcement laws .
LAWS BY STATE Section::::Laws by state .
This table contains a brief summary of all seatbelt laws in the United States .
This list includes only seatbelt laws , which often do not themselves apply to children ; however , all 50 states and the District of Columbia have separate child restraint laws .
Keep in mind these fines are the base fines only .
In many cases considerable extra fees such as the head injury fund and court security fees can mark up the fine to almost five times as much in some cases .
These are also " first offense " fines ; a subsequent offense may be much higher . !
State!!Type of law!!Date of first law!!Who is covered!!Base fine before fees!!Seat Belt Usage under 18 in all seats $ 20 for age 18 + ;
$ 25 + 1 point on license for under 1874.8 % 1
Colorado and Missouri 's law is Secondary for adults but Primary for under the age of 16 .
• County penalty required by GC 76000(e ) , $ 7 • Court facilities construction penalty required by GC 70372(a),$ 3 • DNA Identification Fund penalty required by GC 76104.6 and 76104.7,$ 2 •
Emergency medical services penalty required by GC 76000.5,$ 2Penal Code § 1465.8 requires imposition of an additional fee of twenty dollars ( $ 20 ) for court security on every conviction for a criminal offense , including a traffic offense , except parking offenses as defined in Penal Code § 1463,$20 DAMAGES REDUCTION Section::::Damages reduction .
A person involved in a car accident who was not using a seatbelt may be liable for damages far greater than if they had been using a seatbelt .
However , when in court , most states protect motorists from having their damages reduced in a lawsuit due to the nonuse of a seatbelt , even if they were acting in violation of the law by not wearing the seatbelt .
Currently , damages may be reduced for the nonuse of a seatbelt in 16 states : Alaska , Arizona , California , Colorado , Florida ( See F.S.A. 316.614(10 ) ) , Iowa , Michigan , Missouri , Nebraska , New Jersey , New York , North Dakota , Ohio , Oregon , West Virginia , and Wisconsin .
EFFECTIVENESS Section::::Effectiveness .
Seat belt laws are effective in reducing car crash deaths .
One study found that mandatory - seatbelt laws reduced traffic fatalities by 8 % and serious traffic - related injuries by 9 % , respectively .
Primary - seatbelt laws seem to be more effective at reducing crash deaths than secondary laws .
SEE ALSO * Seat belt legislation
* Seat belt use rates in the United States * Transportation safety in the United States REFERENCES