CLIMATE OF BRAZIL
The climate in Brazil varies considerably mostly from tropical north ( the equator traverses the mouth of the Amazon ) to temperate zones south of the Tropic of Capricorn ( 23 ° 26 '
S latitude ) .
Temperatures below the equator are high , averaging above , but not reaching the summer extremes of up to in the temperate zones .
There is little seasonal variation near the equator , although at times it can get cool enough to need to wear a jacket , especially in the rain .
Average temperatures below the Tropic of Capricorn are mild , ranging from to .
At the country 's other extreme , there are frosts south of the Tropic of Capricorn and during the winter ( June – September ) .
Snow falls on the high plateau and mountainous of the mountains of the states of Rio Grande
do Sul , Santa Catarina , and Paraná and it is possible , but very rare , in the states of São Paulo , Rio de Janeiro , Minas Gerais , and Mato Grosso
do Sul .
The cities of Belo Horizonte and Brasília have moderate temperatures , usually between , because of their elevation of approximately .
Rio de Janeiro , Recife , and Salvador on the coast have warm climates , with average temperatures of each month ranging from , but enjoy constant trade winds .
The cities of São Paulo , Curitiba , Florianópolis and Porto Alegre have a subtropical climate similar to that of southern United States , and temperatures can fall below freezing in winter .
Precipitation levels vary widely .
Most of Brazil has moderate rainfall of between a year , with most of the rain falling in the summer ( between December and April )
south of the Equator .
The Amazon region is notoriously humid , with rainfall generally more than per year and reaching as high as in parts of the western Amazon and near Belém .
It is less widely known that , despite high annual precipitation , the Amazon forest has a three- to five - month dry season , the timing of which varies according to location north or south of the equator .
High and relatively regular levels of precipitation in the Amazon contrast sharply with the dryness of the semiarid Northeast , where rainfall is highly erratic and there are severe droughts in cycles averaging seven years .
The Northeast is the driest part of the country .
The region also constitutes the hottest part of Brazil , where during the dry season between May and November , temperatures of more than have been recorded .
However , the sertão , a region of semidesert vegetation used primarily for low - density ranching , turns green when there is rain .
Most of the Center - West has of rain per year , with a pronounced dry season in the middle of the year , while the South and most of the East is without a distinct dry season .
Because the South Atlantic basin is generally not a favorable environment for their development , Brazil has only rarely experienced tropical cyclones .
The country 's coastal population centers are therefore not as burdened with the need to prepare for cyclones , as are cities at similar latitudes in the United States and Asia .
GENERAL CLIMATE Section::::General climate .
Although most of Brazil lies in the tropics , more than 60 percent of the population live in areas which are cooled either by altitude , sea winds or polar fronts .
While the coastal cities of Rio de Janeiro , Recife and Salvador can get extremely hot , plateau cities such as São Paulo , Brasília and Belo Horizonte have mild climates , and the southern cities of Porto Alegre and Curitiba have mild winters , but while Curitiba has a warm summer due to the average elevation of , Porto Alegre has a hot summer , with an average elevation of only .
Despite the popular image of the Amazon as a region of blistering heat , temperatures of more than are in fact rare .
The annual average temperature in the region is , with not much variation between the warmest and the coldest months .
The hottest part of Brazil is the northeast , where temperatures of more than 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) are frequently recorded during the dry season between May and November .
Along the Atlantic coast from Recife to Rio de Janeiro , average temperatures range from .
Inland , on higher ground , temperatures are lower , ranging from .
South of Rio the seasons are more defined and the range of temperatures significantly wider , with the annual average falling between .
Brazil 's most intense rain falls around the mouth of the Amazon near the city of Belém , and also in the upper regions of Amazonia where more than of rain fall every year .
The warm weather lets many plant grow here .
Most of Brazil has moderate rainfall of between a year , most of it coming between December and April .
The driest part of the country is the northeast , where rainfall is erratic and the evaporation rate very high , making it difficult to grow crops .
The highest temperature officially registered in Brazil was in Bom Jesus , Piauí state on 21 November 2005 .
The lowest temperature officially recorded in Brazil was in Caçador , Santa Catarina state , on 11 June 1952 .
However , the summit of Morro da Igreja , a mountain situated in the municipality of Urubici , also in Santa Catarina , recorded a temperature of on 30 June 1996 unofficially .
CLIMATE BY REGION
SOUTHEAST REGION Section::::Climate by region .
Section::::Southeast Region .
The latitudinal position around the Tropic of Capricorn , the very uneven topography and disturbed circulation systems greatly influence the climatology of the Southeast and it is quite diverse in temperature .
The annual medium temperature ranges from as seen on the border between São Paulo and Paraná to in the north of Minas Gerais , while in the elevated areas of the Serra do Espinhaço , Serra da Mantiqueira and Serra do Mar the average medium temperature can be below due to the combined effect of the latitude with the frequency of the polar currents .
In the summer , mainly in the month of January , the normal average temperatures range from in the valleys of the rivers São Francisco and Jequitinhonha , in the Zona da Mata ( Forest Zone ) of Minas Gerais , in the coastal lowlands and to the west of the state of São Paulo .
In the winter , the normal average temperatures range from with minimum absolute from , the lowest temperatures being at the highest elevations .
Vast areas of Minas Gerais and São Paulo register occurrences of frosts , after the passage of the polar fronts .
As far as the incidence of rain is concerned , there are two areas with heavy precipitation : one following the coast and the Serra do Mar , where the rains are precipitated by the southerly currents ; and the other from the west of Minas Gerais to the Municipal district of Rio de Janeiro , where the rains are brought by the Westerly system .
The annual precipitation total in these areas is in excess of .
In the Serra da Mantiqueira these indexes surpass , and at the summit of Itatiaia , .
In the Serra do Mar , in São Paulo , it rains on the average more than .
Near Paranapiacaba and Itapanhaú maximum rainfall was measured at in one year .
In the valleys of the rivers Jequitinhonha and Doce
the smallest annual pluviometric indexes are recorded at around .
The maximum pluviometric index of the Southeast area usually occurs in January and the minimum in July , while the dry period is usually concentrated in the winter , lasting six months in the case of the valleys of the rivers Jequitinhonha and São Francisco , to as little as two months in the Serra do Mar and Serra da Mantiqueira .
CHARTS OF SELECTED CITIES NORTHEAST REGION Section::::Northeast Region .
The climatic characterization of the Northeast area is a little complex , and the four systems of circulation that influence the region are denominated Systems of Disturbed Currents of South , North , East and West .
The System of disturbed currents of South is represented by the polar masses that reach the area in the spring - summer , acts in the coastal areas until the south of Bahia , bringing frontal and back - frontals rains .
In the winter the polar masses reach even the coast of Pernambuco , while the hinterlands regions remain under the influence of the tropical mass .
The system of disturbed currents of North , represented by Convergence Intertropical ( CIT ) , produces rain from the summer to the autumn even in Pernambuco , in the vicinity of the Raso da Catarina .
On the other hand , the currents of the East are more frequent in the winter and they usually produce abundant rains in the coastal regions , rarely reaching the scarps of the Plateau of Borborema ( ) and of Chapada Diamantina ( ) .
Finally , the system of currents of the West , brought by the lines of Tropical Instability ( IT ) , occur from the end of spring to the beginning of autumn , rarely reaching the states of Piauí and Maranhão .
Temperatures are high , with annual averages between , maxima of around having been observed in the south of Maranhão and Piauí .
The months of winter , mainly June and July , produce minimum temperatures between in the coastal regions , much lower in the plateau regions where temperatures of have been recorded in Chapada Diamantina after the passage of a polar front .
The pluviosity of the area is complex and is source of concern : its annual totals vary from to values even lower than , as verified in the Raso da Catarina , between Bahia and Pernambuco , and in the depression of Patos in Paraíba .
In a general way , the annual medium precipitation in the northeast area is lower than - in the city of Cabaceiras , interior of Paraíba , was observed the smallest annual pluviometric index registered in Brazil , /year .
Besides it in the interior of this area the rainy period is usually of just two months in the year , sometimes not coming in some years , causing then the denominated regional droughts .
CHARTS OF SELECTED CITIES
SOUTH REGION Section::::South Region .
The South region is located below the Tropic of Capricorn , in a temperate zone .
It is influenced by the system of disturbed circulation of the South , which produces the rains , mainly in the summer .
It is also influenced by the system of disturbed circulation of the West , that brings rains and storms , sometimes hail , producing winds with bursts of .
Regarding temperatures : the winter is cool and the summer is hot .
The annual medium temperatures range from , and in places with altitudes above , drops to approximately .
Some parts of the southern region also have an oceanic climate .
In the summer , mainly in January , in the valleys of the rivers Paranapanema , Paraná and Ibicuí - Jacuí , the medium temperature is in excess of , and the medium temperature of the river Uruguay surpasses .
The average maximum temperature stays around on the elevated surfaces of the plateau and , in the lowest areas , between .
In the winter , mainly in July , the medium temperature stays relatively low , oscillating between , except for the valleys of the rivers Paranapanema and Paraná , besides the coast of Paraná and Santa Catarina , where the averages are approximately .
The average maximum temperature is also low , around , in the big valleys and in the coast , and in the plateau region .
The average minimum temperature varies from , and the thermometer frequently registers temperatures near 0 ° C or below , accompanied by frost and snow , in consequence of the invasion of polar masses .
The annual medium pluviosity oscillates from , except along the coast of Paraná and west of Santa Catarina , where the values are in excess of , and in the north of Paraná and in a small coastal area of Santa Catarina , which have lower recordings down to .
The maximum pluviometric indexes occur in the winter and the minimum in the summer throughout almost the whole area .
CHARTS OF SELECTED CITIES NORTH REGION Section::::North Region .
The north area of Brazil embraces a great part of the Amazon Basin , representing the largest extension of hot and humid forest on the planet .
The region has a low elevation ( ) and is crossed by the Equator .
There are four main systems of atmospheric circulation that act in the area , they are : system of winds of Northeast ( NE ) to East ( E ) of the Atlantic South and Azores , subtropical anticyclones , generally stable in nature ; system of winds of West ( W ) of the mass equatorial continental ( mEc ) ; system of winds of North ( N ) of the Convergence Intertropical ( CIT ) ; and system of winds of South ( S ) of the Polar anticyclone .
These last three systems are responsible for variability of the climate and for the rains in the area .
With regard to temperatures , the climate is hot , with annual medium temperatures ranging from .
Regarding pluviosity , there is not a homogeneity as it occur with the temperature .
In the mouth of the river Amazonas , in the coast of Pará and in the western section of the area , the total annual pluviometric index exceeds in general .
In the direction NO - SE , of Roraima to east of Pará there is less rain , with annual totals in the order of .
The rainy period of the area occurs in summer & autumn , the exception being Roraima and of the north part of Amazonas , where the maximum pluviometric indexes occurs in winter , due to influence of the climatic conditions of the Northern Hemisphere .
CHARTS OF SELECTED CITIES CENTER - WEST REGION Section::::Center - West Region .
Three systems of circulation occur in the Center - West region : the system of disturbed currents of the West , represented by unstable events during the summer ; system of disturbed currents of the North , represented by Convergence Intertropical ( CIT ) , that produces rains in the summer , autumn and winter in the north of the region ; and the system of disturbed currents of the South , represented by the polar fronts , invading the area in the winter with great frequency , producing rains of one to three days duration .
In the north and south extremes of the region , the annual medium temperature is and in the Chapadas it varies from .
In the spring and summer , temperatures are commonly high , the average of the hottest month varying from .
The average of the maximum temperatures of September ( hotter month ) oscillates between .
Winter is an interesting season , low temperatures occurring quite frequently .
This is caused by the polar invasion , that produces the cold weather which is very common at this time of the year .
The medium temperature of the coldest month oscillates between , and the average of the minimum temperatures ranges from .
Minimum temperatures are sometimes negative .
The characterization of the pluviosity of the region is almost exclusively due to the system of atmospheric circulation .
The annual medium pluviosity varies from in the north of Mato Grosso , to in the Pantanal mato - grossense .
In spite of this inequality the region is well provided with rain .
Its seasonality is typically tropical , with maximum in the summer and minimum in the winter .
More than 70 % of the total rain that is accumulated during the year falls from November to March .
The winter is excessively dry , because the rains are very rare .
CHARTS OF SELECTED CITIES SEE ALSO
* Geography of Brazil REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* https://web.archive.org/web/20101206014542/http://www.brazil.org.uk/brazilinbrief/climate.html