HORSE THEFT
Horse theft is the crime of stealing horses .
A person engaged in stealing horses is known as a horse thief .
Horse theft was very common throughout the world prior to widespread car ownership .
Punishments were often severe for horse theft , with several cultures pronouncing the sentence of death upon actual or presumed thieves .
Several societies were formed in the US to prevent horse theft and apprehend horse thieves .
However , horse theft continues to occur throughout the world , as horses are stolen for their meat , for ransom , or in disputes between their owners and other persons .
Horse theft today is comparable to Automobile theft ; a crime punishable by felony jail time .
Both horse and car are valuable commodities .
HISTORY EUROPE Section::::History .
Section::::Europe .
Horse theft was a well - known crime in medieval and early modern times and was severely prosecuted in many areas .
While many crimes were punished through ritualized shaming or banishment , horse theft often brought severe punishment , including branding , torture , exile and even death .
According to one 18th century treatise , the use of death as a punishment for horse theft stretches back as far as the first century AD , when the Germanic Chauci tribe would sentence horse thieves to death , while murderers would be sentenced to a fine .
This practice derived from the wealth of the populace being in the form of livestock which ranged over large areas , meaning that the theft of animals could only be prevented through fear of the harsh punishment that would result .
Horse theft was harshly punished in the French Bordeaux region in the 15th–18th centuries .
Punishments ranged from whipping to a lifetime sentence of service on a galley ship .
This latter punishment was also given to perpetrators of incest , homicide and poisoning , showing the severity with which horse theft was viewed by the judiciary .
For the rural English county of Berkshire in the 18th century , horse theft was considered a major property crime , along with stealing from dwellings or warehouses , sheep theft , highway robbery and other major thefts .
In 19th - century Russia , horse theft made up approximately 16 percent of thefts of peasant property ; however , there were no reported thefts of horses from estate property .
The offense of stealing a horse was the most severely punished of any theft on Russian estates , due to the importance of horses in day - to - day living .
Flogging was the usual punishment for horse thieves , combined with the shaving of heads and beards , and fines of up to three times the value of the horse if the animal had been sold .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The term horse thief came into great popularity in the United States during the 19th century .
During that time the Great Plains states , Texas , and other western states were sparsely populated and negligibly policed .
As farmers tilled the land and migrants headed west through the Great Plains , their horses became subject to theft .
Since these farmers and migrants depended on their horses , horse thieves garnered a particularly pernicious reputation because they left their victims helpless or greatly handicapped by the loss of their horses .
The victims needed their horses for transportation and farming .
Such depredation led to the use of the term horse thief as an insult , one that conveys the impression of the insulted person as one lacking any shred of moral decency .
In the United States , the Anti Horse Thief Association , first organized in 1854 in Clark County , Missouri , was an organization developed for the purposes of protecting property , especially horses and other livestock , from theft , and recovering such property if and when it was stolen .
Originally conceived by farmers living in the area where Missouri , Illinois and Iowa intersect , it soon spread , with the first charter organization in Oklahoma Territory being created in 1894 .
By 1916 the associated numbered over 40,000 members in nine central and western US states , and a drop in horse thefts had been noted .
Between 1899 and 1909 , members of the Oklahoma branch of the AHTA recovered $ 83,000 worth of livestock and saw the conviction of over 250 thieves .
A similar group , which operated mainly in Ohio , was the Bentonville Anti - Horse Thief Society .
Men suspected of being thieves would be pursued by members of the organization , and often hanged without trial .
The Society in Dedham for Apprehending Horse Thieves was a third such organization that operated in the United States , this one in Dedham , Massachusetts .
It is today " the oldest continually existing horse thief apprehending organization in the United States , and one of Dedham 's most venerable social organizations .
" Most of these clubs became defunct or developed into social clubs with the decline of horse theft in the US .
PRESENT DAY
Section::::Present day .
Horse theft is still relatively common , with an estimated 40,000 horses a year being taken from their lawful owners by strangers or opponents in civil or legal disputes .
Stolen Horse International is one modern - day organization in the US that works to reconnect stolen horses with their owners .
Horses are sometimes stolen for their meat , or sometimes for ransom .
Punishment for horse theft can still be severe , as one woman in Arkansas was sentenced to 60 years in prison for the 2011 theft of five horses and equestrian equipment ; one of the horses was later found dead , while the others were recovered .
Horse thefts today can in some cases be solved through the use of microchips , which is required in the European Union on horses born after 2009 and also often seen in other countries .
SEE ALSO
*
Cattle rustling FOOTNOTES