ANDREI NIKOLAYEVICH BOLKONSKY
Prince Andrei Nikolayevich Bolkonsky ( ) is a fictional character in Leo Tolstoy 's novel War and Peace .
He is the son of famed Russian general Nikolai Bolkonsky , who raises Andrei and his sister Maria Bolkonskaya on a remote estate .
Andrei is best friends with Pierre Bezukhov .
He is based on Tolstoy 's cousin Prince Sergey Volkonsky , who was a hero of the Napoleonic Wars and later a Decembrist .
Author Laura Jepsen explains that unlike " many of the other characters for whom the author found living prototypes , Prince Andrei is entirely fictitious " .
LIFE AND DEATH Section::::Life and death .
At the beginning of the novel , the handsome and intellectual Andrei , disillusioned with married life and finding his wife preoccupied with trivialities , becomes an officer in the Third Coalition against his idol , Napoleon Bonaparte .
When he goes to war , he leaves his pregnant wife , Lise , at Bald Hills in the countryside with his father and sister .
Andrei is wounded at the Battle of Austerlitz .
He has an epiphany while lying on the battlefield gazing up at the vastness of the blue sky , realising that he has the potential to be happy .
Shortly afterwards , Andrei is rescued from the battlefield by Napoleon , who takes a liking to him .
However , Prince Andrei is not listed among the dead or the officers taken prisoner , leading his father and sister to assume the worst .
Neither inform Lise that he is unaccounted - for , fearing to cause her any anxiety in the final stages of her pregnancy .
Andrei arrives , fully recovered , while his wife is in labour and sees her briefly before she dies in childbirth .
The child , a boy , survives .
Andrei , who , despite everything , had cared deeply for his wife ( as he confides later to Pierre ) , is guilt - stricken and depressed .
Completely disillusioned with his former wartime ambitions , Andrei spends the following few years at home , raising his son and serving under his father .
In 1809 , Andrei is recalled to Petersburg , where he is formally introduced to Countess Natasha Rostova for the first time .
Andrei wishes to marry Natasha , but his father expresses concern : he does not wish to see his son rush into a marriage with a woman half his age , and socially below him .
Old Prince Bolkonsky demands that they wait a year before marrying .
Andrei proposes marriage to Natasha , who happily accepts , though she is upset by the one - year wait .
In the meantime Andrei decides to tour Europe .
In Andrei 's absence however , Natasha develops an infatuation with the libertine Prince Anatole Kuragin .
She breaks off the engagement with Andrei and plans to elope with Kuragin .
Natasha is stopped by her cousin Sonya and Marya Dmitrievna , who suspect Anatole 's intentions .
They later find out from Pierre Bezukhov that Anatole is already secretly married to a Polish woman .
Andrei wants to take revenge on Kuragin , who flees after Pierre warns him .
Not having found Kuragin and in the light of Napoleon 's 1812 invasion , he decides to join the army again .
When Kutuzov is appointed commander - in - chief , he offers Andrei a position in his personal staff .
Andrei declines as he is a well - liked regimental commander , considering his role there to be more important than what he could possibly accomplish as a staff officer .
During the Battle of Borodino he is hit by an exploding shell and seriously wounded in the stomach .
While in agony , he sees Anatole , whose leg is amputated due to war wounds , and realizes that he has the capability to forgive both Anatole and Natasha , and that he still loves her .
He is driven back to Moscow , where Sonya ( Natasha 's cousin ) notices him when the Rostovs are helping transport wounded soldiers .
Eventually , Natasha discovers , and they are reunited .
She tries to nurse him back to his health .
Although Prince Andrei 's wounds begin to heal and health slowly returns , he eventually loses the will to live and dies in Natasha 's care .
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Character development .
Prince Andrei is one of the most elaborated personages in the novel , together with Count Pierre Bezukhov , to whom he serves as a philosophical opposite .
He is introduced as a slightly cynical character , disillusioned in his marriage by what he sees as the simple - mindedness of his wife .
He 's depicted as an atheist , sceptical of his sister Marya 's strong religious beliefs .
Andrei enlists in the army and desperately tries to reach a high rank because he believes history is made at the top of command .
He often dreams of being in command of the army and wishes he could make his imaginative plans become a reality .
Andrei is shown to have great respect for Napoleon , as his view on historic events being the will of a few important people is embodied best by Napoleon .
While lying wounded on the Austerlitz battlefield , Andrei meets Napoleon and realizes the nature of his hero , who is excited by the carnage on the battlefield .
He loses his belief in the importance of single personages compared to the whole world .
After his return home and the death of his wife , Andrei becomes more cynical , losing his interest in war and politics .
The Battle of Austerlitz made him see the chaos in war , and the inability of even the great figures of history to change the course of events .
Focusing completely on the education of his son , he only enters public service under his father because the latter wished so .
A visit by Pierre Bezukhov , who recently joined the Freemasons and attempts to explain his philosophies to the pessimistic and disillusioned Andrei , makes Andrei realise that his life is not over yet .
Although Pierre 's philosophies fail to convince him , he finds joy in his life again .
Andrei regains the will to live and becomes more optimistic .
During this period he is also shown to be fairly humanist , he frees his serfs and tries to improve their living conditions under influence of the thoughts Pierre expressed to him .
Reflecting on his experiences at Austerlitz , he now becomes convinced that in order to prevent the chaos on the battlefield he experienced , the military code needs to be changed .
After meeting Natasha Rostova , he becomes enchanted with her liveliness , which contrasts with his life after the death of his wife .
He proposes to her but his father disapproves , and suggests that Andre should wait a year and receive treatment abroad for his wound .
While Andre is away , Natasha disgraces herself by attempting to elope with Anatole Kuragin .
Andre is too proud to forgive her .
When back in the army , Andrei realises that his previous visions on historic events were false , that the course of historic events is not decided by the actions of a few , as he thought before Austerlitz , nor by the laws ( he tried to change ) by which they operate , but by the decisions and actions of every single individual .
He adopts the same deterministic view of history that Tolstoy himself expresses in the narrative chapters .
For this reason he declines to join Kutuzov 's staff to remain in command of his regiment , where he feels his actions are just as important , if not more important , than trying to change the course of events from a distance .
In the hospital at the Borodino , Andrei meets Kuragin , on whom he wanted to take revenge .
However , seeing the horribly wounded Kuragin 's suffering makes him realise the meaning of forgiveness and absolute love .
Recovering from his wound , he starts believing that the love he felt for his former enemy Kuragin , is the same love expressed in the Gospels .
Following this change , he starts to recover and meets Natasha again , whom he forgives stating he loves her now more than ever .
After having a dream that parallels dying with awakening in a new reality , he loses his will to live and dies .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Andrei Bolkonsky ( Character ) from Voyna
i mir ( 1967 ) , " The Internet Movie Database