SUMMER SOLSTICE
The summer solstice ( or estival solstice ) , also known as midsummer , occurs when one of the Earth 's poles has its maximum tilt toward the Sun .
It happens twice yearly , once in each hemisphere ( Northern and Southern ) .
For that hemisphere , the summer solstice is when the Sun reaches its highest position in the sky and is the day with the longest period of daylight .
At the pole , there is continuous daylight around the summer solstice .
On the summer solstice , Earth 's maximum axial tilt toward the Sun is 23.44 ° .
Likewise , the Sun 's declination from the celestial equator is 23.44 ° .
The summer solstice occurs during the hemisphere 's summer .
This is the June solstice in the Northern Hemisphere and the December solstice in the Southern Hemisphere .
Depending on the shift of the calendar , the summer solstice occurs sometime between June 20 and June 22 in the Northern Hemisphere and between December 20 and December 23 in the Southern Hemisphere .
The same dates in the opposite hemisphere are referred to as the winter solstice .
Since prehistory , the summer solstice has been seen as a significant time of year in many cultures , and has been marked by festivals and rituals .
Traditionally , in many temperate regions ( especially Europe ) , the summer solstice is seen as the middle of summer and referred to as " midsummer " .
Today , however , in some countries and calendars it is seen as the beginning of summer .
DISTINCTIONS Section::::Distinctions .
Although the summer solstice is the longest day of the year for that hemisphere , the dates of earliest sunrise and latest sunset vary by a few days .
This is because the earth orbits the sun in an ellipse , and its orbital speed varies slightly during the year .
See the Equation of time for details .
Although the sun appears at its highest altitude from the viewpoint of an observer in outer space or a terrestrial observer outside tropical latitudes , the highest altitude occurs on a different day for certain locations in the tropics , specifically those where the sun is directly overhead ( maximum 90 degrees elevation ) at the subsolar point .
This day occurs twice each year for all locations between the Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn because the overhead sun appears to cross a given latitude once before the day of the solstice and once afterward .
For example , Lahaina Noon occurs in May and July in Hawaii .
See solstice article .
For all observers , the apparent position of the noon sun is at its most northerly point on the June solstice and most southerly on the December solstice .
FULL MOON Section::::Full moon .
2016 was the first time in nearly 70 years that a full moon and the Northern Hemisphere 's summer solstice occurred on the same day .
The 2016 summer solstice 's full moon rose just as the sun set .
CULTURAL ASPECTS
Section::::Cultural aspects .
The significance given to the summer solstice has varied among cultures , but most recognize the event in some way with holidays , festivals , and rituals around that time with themes of religion or fertility .
In some regions , the summer solstice is seen as the beginning of summer and the end of spring .
In other cultural conventions , the solstice is closer to the middle of summer .
Solstice is derived from the Latin words sol ( sun ) and sistere ( to stand still ) .
DATE CELEBRATIONS
* Midsummer * Dragon Boat Festival ( East Asia )
*
Christmas typically marks the southern summer solstice .
* Guru Purnima ( India , Cape Verde )
* Day of Private Reflection ( Northern Ireland )
* Juhannus ( Finland ) *
Jāņi ( Latvia ) * National Aboriginal Day ( Canada ) * Tiregān ( Iran ) * Fremont Solstice Parade ( Fremont , Seattle , Washington , United States ) * Santa Barbara Summer Solstice Parade ( Santa Barbara , California , United States ) * International Surfing Day * International Yoga Day * World Music Day WINTER SOLSTICE IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE
* Inti Raymi , Machu Picchu , Peru
* We Tripantu , ( Mapuche , southern Chile )
* Willkakuti , an Andean - Amazonic New Year ( Aymara ) LENGTH OF THE DAY ON THE SUMMER SOLSTICE OF THE NORTH
SEE ALSO * Daytime * Equinox
*
Stonehenge * Tekufah * Xiazhi ( Summer solstice in Chinese culture )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Table of dates / times from 1600–2400