ACTH STIMULATION TEST
The ACTH test ( also called the cosyntropin , tetracosactide , or Synacthen test ) is a medical test usually ordered and interpreted by endocrinologists to assess the functioning of the adrenal glands stress response by measuring the adrenal response to adrenocorticotropic hormone ( ACTH ; corticotropin ) or another corticotropic agent such as tetracosactide ( cosyntropin , tetracosactrin ; Synacthen ) or alsactide ( Synchrodyn ) .
ACTH is a hormone produced in the anterior pituitary gland that stimulates the adrenal glands to release cortisol , dehydroepiandrosterone ( DHEA ) , dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate ( DHEA - S ) , and aldosterone .
During the test , a small amount of synthetic ACTH is injected , and the amount of cortisol ( and sometimes aldosterone ) that the adrenals produce in response is measured .
This test may cause mild side effects in some individuals .
This test is used to diagnose or exclude primary and secondary adrenal insufficiency , Addison 's disease , and related conditions .
In addition to quantifying adrenal insufficiency , the test can distinguish whether the cause is adrenal ( low cortisol and aldosterone production ) or pituitary ( low ACTH production ) .
The Insulin tolerance test is recognized as the gold standard assay of adrenal insufficiency , but due to the cumbersome requirement for a two - hour test and the risks of seizures or myocardial infarction , the ACTH stimulation test is commonly used as an easier , safer , though not as accurate , alternative .
The test is extremely sensitive ( 97 % at 95 % specificity ) to primary adrenal insufficiency , but less so to secondary adrenal insufficiency ( 57 - 61 % at 95 % specificity ) ; while secondary adrenal insufficiency may thus be dismissed by some interpreters on the basis of the test , additional testing may be called for if probability of secondary adrenal insufficiency is particularly high .
Adrenal insufficiency is a potentially life - threatening condition .
Treatment should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed , or sooner if the patient presents in apparent adrenal crisis .
VERSIONS OF THE TEST Section::::Versions of the test .
This test can be given as a low - dose short test , a conventional - dose short test , or as a prolonged - stimulation test .
In the low - dose short test , 1ʵg of an ACTH drug is injected into the patient .
In the conventional - dose short test , 250ʵg of drug are injected .
Both of these short tests last for about an hour and provide the same information .
Studies have shown the cortisol response of the adrenals is the same for the low - dose and conventional - dose tests .
The prolonged - stimulation test , which is also called a long conventional - dose test , can last up to 48 hours .
This form of the test can differentiate between primary , secondary , and tertiary adrenal insufficiency .
This form of the test is rarely performed because earlier testing of cortisol and ACTH levels in association with the short test may provide all the necessary information .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
The test should not be given if on glucocorticoids or adrenal extract supplement , as these will affect test results .
Stress and recently administered radioisotope scans can artificially increase levels and may invalidate test results .
Spironolactone , contraceptives , licorice , estrogen , androgen ( including DHEA ) and progesterone therapy may also affect both aldosterone and cortisol stimulation test results .
To stimulate aldosterone , consumption of salt should be reduced to a minimum and foods high in sodium avoided for 24 hours prior to testing .
Women should ideally undergo testing during the first week of their menstrual cycle as aldosterone ( and occasionally cortisol ) may be falsely elevated in the luteal cycle secondary to progesterone inhibition , leading to a compensatory rise in aldosterone levels .
ADMINISTRATION Section::::Administration .
Traditionally , cortisol and ACTH levels ( separate lavender top tube ) are drawn at baseline ( time = 0 ) .
Next , synthetic ACTH or another corticotropic agent is injected IM or IV , depending on the agent .
Approximately 20 mL of heparinized venous blood is collected at 30 and 60 minutes after the synthetic ACTH injection to measure cortisol levels .
ACTH samples are kept on ice and sent immediately to the laboratory , whereas cortisol does not need to be kept on ice .
POTENTIAL SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Potential side effects .
Commonly reported reactions are nausea , anxious sweating , dizziness , itchy skin , redness and or swelling of injection site , palpitations ( a fast or fluttering heart beat ) and facial flushing ( may also include arms and torso ) , but should disappear within a few hours .
Rarely seen , but serious side effects include rash , fainting , headache , blurred vision , severe swelling , severe dizziness , trouble breathing , irregular heartbeat .
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS COSYNTROPIN STIMULATION TESTING Section::::Interpretation of results .
Section::::Cosyntropin stimulation testing .
In healthy individuals , the cortisol level should increase above 18 - 20 µg / dl within 60 minutes on a 250 mcg cosyntropin stimulation test .
Interpretation for primary adrenal insufficiency , Addison 's disease
In Addison 's disease , both the cortisol and aldosterone levels are low , and the cortisol will not rise during the cosyntropin stimulation test Interpretation for secondary adrenal insufficiency In secondary adrenal insufficiency , due to exogenous steroid administration suppressing pituitary production of ACTH or due to primary pituitary disorder causing insufficient ACTH production , the adrenal glands will atrophy over time and cortisol production will fall and patients will fail stimulation testing .
Early in the development of secondary adrenal insufficiency , the adrenals may not have atrophied and can still stimulate , resulting in a normal cosyntropin stimulation test .
If secondary adrenal insufficiency is diagnosed , the insulin tolerance test ( ITT ) or the CRH ( corticotropin - releasing hormone ) stimulation test can be used to distinguish between a hypothalamic ( tertiary ) and pituitary ( secondary ) cause , but is rarely used in clinical practice .
ACTH PLASMA TEST PLUS
CORTISOL STIMULATION Section::::ACTH plasma test plus cortisol stimulation .
Measuring a morning , fasting ACTH level helps assess for the etiology of adrenal insufficiency .
Interpretation for primary adrenal insufficiency and Addison 's disease ACTH will be high - usually well above upper limits of reference range .
Interpretation for secondary adrenal insufficiency ACTH will be low - usually below 35 , but most people with secondary fall within the range limit .
This is inappropriately normal for the low cortisol level In some cases , actual cause of low ACTH is from low CRH in the hypothalamus .
It is possible to have separate ACTH and CRH impairment such as can happen in a head injury .
ALDOSTERONE STIMULATION
Section::::Aldosterone stimulation .
The ACTH stimulation test is occasionally used to test adrenal production of aldosterone at the same time as cortisol to also help in determining if primary ( hyperreninemic ) or secondary ( hyporeninemic ) hypoaldosteronism is present .
Human ACTH has a slight stimulatory effect on aldosterone , but the amount of synthetic ACTH given in the stimulation is equivalent to more than a whole days production of natural ACTH , so the aldosterone response can be easily measured in blood serum .
Same as cortisol , aldosterone should double from a respectable base value ( around 20 ng / dl , must fast salt 24 hours and sit upright for blood draw ) in a healthy individual .
Interpretation for primary aldosterone deficiency
The aldosterone response in the ACTH stimulation test is blunted or absent in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency including Addison 's disease .
The base value is usually in the mid teens or less and rise to less than double the base value thus indicating primary hypoaldosteronism (
sodium low , potassium and renin enzyme will be high ) and is an indicator of primary adrenal insufficiency or Addison 's disease .
Interpretation for secondary aldosterone deficiency
Aldosterone response of several factors from a low base value .
This factoring indicates secondary hypoaldosteronism (
sodium low , potassium and renin enzyme will be low ) .
Usually doubling to quadrupling from a low base aldosterone value is what is seen in secondary adrenal insufficiency .
Decoupling of aldosterone in the ACTH stimulation test is possible ( i.e. 2 ng / dl stimming to 20 ) .
A result of doubling or more of aldosterone may help in tandem with a cortisol stimulation that doubled or more confirm a diagnosis of secondary adrenal insufficiency .
In rare cases , an aldosterone stimulation which did not double , but with the presence of low potassium , low renin and low ACTH indicates atrophy of aldosterone production from the prolonged lack of renin .
Similar to the cortisol stimulation in ACTH deficiency , the test interpreter may lack knowledge of how to properly interpret for secondary hypoaldosteronism and think a result of aldosterone doubling or more from a low base value is good .
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES Section::::Future Perspectives .
Recent data showed that Synacthen test results can be used to predict future recovery of HPA axis function in patients with reversible causes of Adrenal Insufficiency .
OTHER HORMONES AND CHEMICALS THAT WILL RISE IN THE ACTH STIMULATION TEST
* Progesterone - precursor to cortisol and aldosterone * Luteinizing hormone - a pituitary hormone that stimulates sex hormone production *
21-Hydroxylase * DHEA and DHEA - S - androgen hormones produced in the adrenal glands SIMPLE DIAGNOSTIC CHART VETERINARY MEDICINE Section::::Veterinary medicine .
The test is also used to diagnose hypoadrenocorticism in dogs and sometimes cats .
SEE ALSO
* Dexamethasone suppression test *
Insulin tolerance test , another test used to identify sub - types of adrenal insufficiency * Metyrapone , a drug used in the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency * Triple bolus test * Renin , enzyme that converts angiotensinogen 1 to angiotensin 2 , a precursor to aldosterone
* Renin – angiotensin – aldosterone system * HPA axis , explains the connections of the hypothalamus , pituitary and adrenal glands * Hypopituitarism * Pituitary adenoma * Adrenal adenoma * Corticorelin REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * ACTH stimulation
test - Procedures / Diagnostic tests Warren Grant Magnuson Clinical Center National Institutes of Health .