PRETTY LITTLE LIARS ( BOOK SERIES )
Pretty Little Liars is a series of young adult novels by Sara Shepard .
Beginning with 2006 's initial novel of the same name , the series follows the lives of four girls – Spencer Hastings , Hanna Marin , Aria Montgomery and Emily Fields .
The novels have appeared on The New York Times Best Seller list .
A television series adaptation loosely based on the novels debuted on June 8 , 2010 , on ABC Family .
The franchise has been licensed by Amazon.com 's Kindle Worlds range of non - canon ebooks .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The series is loosely divided into four arcs , chronicling the introduction and reveal of each " A " .
Set in the suburbs of Philadelphia , the series follows the lives of four teenage girls nicknamed the Pretty little Liars or simply the Liars , whose clique falls apart after the disappearance of their Queen bee leader , " Alison DiLaurentis " .
Three years after her disappearance , the girls begin receiving threatening messages from an anonymous character named " A , " who threatens to expose their secrets , including long - hidden ones they thought only Alison knew .
Shortly after the messages begin , Alison 's body is discovered buried in her yard .
The books progress with the four girls trying to figure out the identity of " A " and facing many dangerous obstacles and twists as they do so .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The series has many characters , most of them recurring .
The main characters are : Spencer Hastings
: Spencer is a headstrong , intelligent , overachieving girl who comes from the wealthy Hastings family .
Aria Montgomery :
Aria is a quirky and artsy girl who , at the beginning of the books , is trying to find herself .
Emily Fields : Emily is considered the jock of the group , being a physical , loyal girl who struggles with her sexuality .
Alison DiLaurentis :
Alison is the former " Queen Bee " of her clique , consisting of Spencer , Hanna , Aria and Emily .
She had supposedly been killed at the beginning of the series however is revealed to have been alive and also their tormentor " A " as she was mistaken for her twin sister Courtney who pretended to be like her and was sent to The Preserve at Addison - Stevens , which she believed was the Liars ' fault and has been plotting revenge ever since .
Her identical twin sister Courtney DiLaurentis is not crazy but she debuted inWanted after the TV show began in 2010 .
In the prequel , Courtney - as - Ali started disappearing in the last chapter and getting almost killed numerous times , until the end of the series ( Vicious ) when Ali - as - Courtney came out and started becoming friends with her twin " Ali " again after rehab with Iris and Tabitha , two lookalikes of Ali , all in the penultimate chapter .
In the book , their older brother 's name is Jason DiLaurentis and their half - sisters are Melissa and Spencer Hastings .
Courtney DiLaurentis :
Alison is really Courtney in the books .
She used to be sweet , until she started pretending to be her twin , where her personality morphed into her .
She is the third child to Jessica and Kenneth and was sent to The Preserve at Addison - Stevens after a physical argument with Alison who she eventually turned into and befriended the Liars up until the night of her infamous disappearance when she was killed and buried by the real Alison DiLaurentis and her accomplice Nick Maxwell .
A :
A is the main antagonist of the series , being , for the most part , an anonymous character who relentlessly torments many characters , in particular the Liars .
Mona Vanderwaal , Alison DiLaurentis and Nick Maxwell are discovered to be
A. Mona became A due to Alison and the Liars being responsible for The Jenna Thing , which burned her too .
However , she is killed when Spencer pushes her off a cliff face and her neck is caught between rocks .
However , a new " A " rises , this time even more determined to hurt the Liars .
This A is revealed to be Alison herself who wanted revenge on the Liars for ruining her life and Nick , who is revealed to be her accomplice .
NOVELS
FIRST ARC
Pretty Little Liarsalign="center " October 3 , 2006align="center "
align="center " 304 colspan="6
" The story introduces an exclusive group of friends : Alison DiLaurentis , the popular yet manipulative queen bee ; Aria Montgomery , an independent girl who is considered to be the oddball in Rosewood who also went to Iceland for the summer ; Emily Fields , a swimmer who holds secret feelings for Alison ; Hanna Marin , who strives to be thin and popular like Alison ; and Spencer Hastings , an overachiever who is brave enough to stand up against Alison 's manipulative ways .
Alison mysteriously disappears during a sleepover with the girls in the summer before 8th grade .
The story then jumps 3 years later , when the girls are living their own lives and do n't speak to each other .
Aria returns to Rosewood from a 3-year trip to Iceland with her family and comes back much more sophisticated than before she left .
She meets and makes out with a guy in a local bar who is revealed later to be her English teacher , Ezra Fitz .
Emily befriends the new girl in town , Maya St. Germain , and soon develops romantic feelings for her , even though Emily has a boyfriend , Ben .
Ben later finds Maya and Emily kissing in the photo booth at a party and dumps beer on them .
Hanna is the new popular girl in town alongside the former nerd , Mona Vanderwaal .
However , she and Mona sometimes shoplift though both can clearly afford their steals .
Hanna battles the urge to turn back to bulimia , and struggles to manage the stress of keeping her queen bee status .
Spencer continues to struggle in her long - standing rivalry with Melissa Hastings , her perfect older sister .
Problems occur when she begins to feel attracted to Melissa 's new boyfriend , Wren Kim .
Throughout the story , the liars get messages threatening to reveal their secrets of the present and past , including a terrifying incident the girls refer to as " The Jenna Thing " .
They automatically believe it is their missing friend , Alison , because she is the only one each of them confided in regarding their darkest secrets .
However , they are shocked when the police find her corpse buried in the gazebo of her former house .
The book ends with the liars receiving a text at Alison 's funeral saying , " I 'm still here , bitches .
And I know everything .
-A " .
The girls have made up at this point .
colspan="6
" bgcolor="#FF8C00 " align="center " 2 align="center " Flawless align="center "
March 27 , 2007align="center "
align="center " 330 colspan="6"Spencer Hastings , Hanna Marin , Aria Montgomery , and Emily Fields continue to receive text messages from an unknown person , " A " , and are more desperate than ever to discover the identity of " A " , who is still taunting them with the threat of exposing their many secrets .
At first the girls think " A " is Alison , because she is the only person who knew their secrets , but then they start to believe the person behind the threats is Toby , because some messages they receive refer to ' The Jenna Thing ' and with Alison dead , he is the only other person who was a part of the incident , although everyone but Spencer is unaware of why he took the blame for what happened to Jenna .
" The Jenna Thing " is revealed to be an incident in which Ali had set off a stink bomb in Jenna Cavanaugh 's step - brother Toby 's treehouse to get revenge after supposedly spying on her , only to see the treehouse burst into flames , not knowing that Jenna was inside , and due to that , she was permanently blinded .
Toby was framed for the garage fire by Alison .
" A " sends Emily a text message hinting that " A " knows about Emily and Maya 's romantic relationship and threatens to tell everyone about it .
Emily becomes close with Toby and goes to a big benefit party with him but then later tells him that she thinks she might be gay .
" A " leaves a note for Hanna that forces her to tell Naomi and Riley that she makes herself throw up and that Sean was the one who broke up with her .
Later on , she receives a text that tells her Sean is at Foxy with another girl .
Hanna is shocked to discover her former boyfriend Sean Ackard ignoring his Virginity Club vows and nearly having sex with Aria .
" A " continuously tells Aria to either ' get rid of the problem ' or to tell her mom the truth about Byron , her father , that he is seeing another woman .
Aria goes to confront the other woman , Meredith , but
when she does Meredith tells her that she and Aria 's father are in love .
Ella finds out that Byron is having an affair with a student named Meredith Gates and kicks him out , leaving Ella and Aria 's mother - daughter relationship shattered .
Spencer continues to date with
her sister Melissa 's now ex - boyfriend Wren and later loses her virginity to him .
However , Melissa starts to hook - up with him as well and eventually makes sure that he will be out of both of their lives for good .
Emily blames herself for Toby 's suicide .
In this book it is revealed that Toby was forcing himself on Jenna when they were in middle school and Ali and Spencer were the only ones who knew about it , which is how Alison forced Toby to take the blame .
colspan="6 " bgcolor="#FF1493 " align="center " 3 align="center " Perfect align="center "
August 21 , 2007 align="center "
align="center " 298 colspan="6"Now homeless , Aria goes to live with her new boyfriend , Sean Ackard .
Still seeing Ezra , their relationship is broken up when Sean informs the police , having found out the secret from " A " .
Emily plans to go to the police to stop " A " , which leads to " A " taking revenge by outing her to the whole school .
Emily 's parents threaten to send her away if she does not attend a " de - gaying " program , however ,
Emily realizes
she ca n't change who she is .
Spencer is nominated for a Golden Orchid Award for the essay she copied from her sister Melissa , which " A " threatens to expose .
Spencer 's family discovers she cheated on her Golden Orchid essay , but keep it quiet to protect their reputation .
Spencer comes to believe she might have killed Alison after discovering she suffers from rage - induced blackouts .
Hanna and Mona get into a fight , and Hanna seeks comfort with an " uncool " boy named Lucas .
She goes to Mona 's birthday party but gets humiliated , but she receives a text from " A " and recognizes the number .
She intends to reveal the true identity of " A " to the other girls , but is run down by " A " before she can do so .
The girls recognize it is A from the eerie text : She Knew Too Much - A colspan="6 " bgcolor="#ADFF2F " align="center
" 4 align="center " Unbelievable align="center " May 27 , 2008 align="center "
align="center " 335 colspan="6"Hanna barely survives being rundown by " A " , and due to a head injury , she loses her memory of the previous day , thus forgetting " A " 's identity .
Emily 's parents catch her with Maya at a party and send her to Iowa to live with her strict , religious relatives .
She is glad to be safe from " A " , but after Emily is accused of threatening her cousins , she runs away .
Emily returns home when she sees her parents on TV , who tell her that they love her and accept her for who she is .
Emily and Maya are reunited , but Trista , a girl who Emily had met and flirted with in Iowa comes to visit , their relationship is shattered , and Emily is saddened further when she sees Trista and Noel hooking up .
After being kicked out of Sean 's house , Aria reluctantly moves in with Byron and Meredith , who announces that she is pregnant and when Bryon 's and Ella 's divorce is finalized , they are to be married .
While at Hollis College , Aria takes an art class and befriends Jenna , who she suspects could be " A " .
" A " reveals to Melissa ( Spencer 's sister )
that Spencer stole her essay for the Golden Orchid competition , but the family keeps quiet to protect their reputation .
Melissa and Spencer grow closer , and Spencer confesses that she kissed Ian , and that he and Alison were secretly dating .
When fragments of her memory from the night Alison died are restored , Spencer is horrified when it dawns on her that she may have accidentally killed Alison .
Mona and Hanna 's friendship is restored , and to celebrate Hanna 's recovery , Mona and Spencer plan a party for her .
Spencer is surprised to discover that she enjoys Mona 's company , and even more so when Mona tells her that she has been receiving messages from " A " .
Hanna is thrilled that Spencer approves of Mona , and they consider letting her join their clique .
" A " tells Aria that Meredith has a secret job at Hooters , and she goes there with Mike , only to discover that " A " was lying .
Darren Wilden and several other cops are there , and Aria is tempted to tell them about " A " .
When Mike realizes that something is troubling his sister , he urges her to tell Darren , and she eventually does .
On the night of Hanna 's party , Aria tells Jenna what happened the night she was blinded and apologizes for not stopping Alison , but Jenna reveals that she and Alison had planned it together to get rid of Toby .
Aria asks Jenna about " A " , but Jenna becomes scared and quickly leaves , hinting that she knows who " A " is .
Melissa confronts Spencer about seeing Ian behind her back , which Spencer denies , and when she leaves , Spencer and Mona discover another note from " A " and suspect that Melissa killed Alison because she was jealous of her relationship with Ian .
They inform the others , and decide to turn Melissa in .
Mona drives Spencer to the police station , and Aria tells Emily and Hanna the truth about The Jenna Thing .
When Hanna says that one in four boys sexually abuse their sister , Emily tells her not to believe everything she hears , which causes Hanna 's memory to return , and she is horrified when she remembers who " A " is : Mona .
Spencer is hesitant about turning in Melissa , but Mona comforts her and convinces her otherwise .
Moments later , Spencer receives a text from Emily , telling her that Mona is " A " .
When she receives several more from the girls , who are worrying about what Mona will do , Mona realizes that they finally figured it out .
While Aria , Emily and Hanna go to the police station to tell Darren that Mona is " A " , Mona drives Spencer to Floating Man 's Quarry , where she explains that she saw what happened on the night of The Jenna Thing , and when Maya moved in , she found Alison 's diary , which contained the girls ' secrets .
Using the information to her advantage , she got a new phone and became " A " to get revenge on the girls for blinding Jenna .
Spencer accuses Mona of killing Alison , but Mona says that it was Ian who killed her , as Alison had blackmailed him about their relationship .
Spencer secretly calls Darren , who overhears her conversation with Mona and learns of their location .
Mona tells Spencer that she originally planned to frame her for Alison 's murder , but recently grew to like her , and thus decided to frame Melissa to do Spencer a favor .
She then offers Spencer her life in return that she becomes " A " with her , as they could pin the blame on someone else .
Spencer refuses and Mona attacks her .
They fight on the cliff 's edge , and in the struggle , Spencer accidentally pushes Mona off the cliff to her death .
Aria , Emily and Hanna arrive on the scene with Darren and police , and find Mona 's body and an unconscious Spencer .
SECOND ARC
THIRD ARC
Penn , she began taking speed pills as a way to help with studying .
After being arrested by the police for possession , she arranges for Hanna to help her frame her roommate , Kelsey , as a dealer , in order for Spencer to not face charges .
After landing the role of Lady Macbeth in the school play , the stress and guilt begin to take their toll on Spencer , causing her to have frequent hallucinations in which she is haunted by Kelsey and Tabitha .
She becomes paranoid and begins to believe Kelsey is " A " and is taking revenge on her for being framed .
Emily accidentally meets Kelsey at a party and is instantly smitten with her .
She and Kelsey grow close , much to Spencer 's disapproval .
After Emily is hurt by Spencer 's remarks about her love for Alison , she angrily tells Kelsey that Spencer framed her for the drug possession .
Depressed , Kelsey overdoses and attempts to throw herself into the quarry where Mona died , but Emily saves her and Kelsey is sent to the Preserve for treatment .
While visiting Kelsey , the girls realize that Tabitha was also a patient at the Preserve and was the same age as Alison and Courtney .
Hanna 's father asks her to help with the social media aspect of his campaigning .
She meets a boy named Liam , who she falls for , despite knowing he is the son of her father 's political opponent .
They break up when she learns he has been seeing multiple other girls while dating her , and reconciles with Mike .
After Aria is dumped by Noel , she seeks out comfort in Ezra , in hopes of rekindling their romance .
However , things are strained between them , and Aria eventually goes back into a relationship with Noel , after discovering Ezra and Klaudia being intimate .
The Liars attempt to circumvent " A 's " threats by coming clean about their secrets , with varied success .
Meanwhile , " A " becomes more violent , shoving Emily down a hill at Stockbridge trail .
"
A " sends Spencer an email of Tabitha on the beach with a head injury , indicating that " A " was the one who disposed of Tabitha 's body .
"
A " taunts the Liars , stating they will never discover " A 's " true identity .
Kelsey can not be A. Emily and Spencer have their biggest rivalry .
colspan="6
" bgcolor="#FF82AB " align="center " 11 align="center
" Stunning align="center
"
June 5 , 2012align="center "
align="center " 302 colspan="6"The Liars begin to suspect a woman , Gayle , might be " A " , when she comes to Rosewood and begins to harass them ; it is revealed that Emily backed out of a deal to let Gayle adopt her daughter in exchange for $ 50,000 paid under the table .
Emily finds herself reconnecting with Isaac while attempting to tell him about her pregnancy , but she fears the repercussions of such a confession .
Spencer visits Princeton hoping to join an Eating Club , but " A " interferes and spikes Spencer 's pot brownies with LSD and Ritalin .
Aria panics when she finds out Noel 's father is a drag queen and ends up putting her relationship with Noel at risk when " A " threatens Aria to expose Noel 's father photo publicly .
On a tip from " A " , Hanna begins spying on Mike 's new girlfriend , Colleen .
Later she becomes publicly humiliated by " A " when she sends everybody a video of Hanna stalking Colleen , and her desperate ways of getting Mike back .
Gayle is murdered by " A " and it is revealed that she was Tabitha 's stepmother .
Tabitha 's father speaks at Gayle 's funeral , and announces that Tabitha 's autopsy showed no trace of alcohol , meaning that she was murdered .
He thus plans to re - open the investigation into her death , and threatens the killer that he will find him , both Gayle 's and Tabitha 's killer .
The girls get very nervous about this .
colspan="6 " bgcolor="#4F94CD
" align="center " 12 align="center
" Burned align="center " December 4 , 2012 align="center "
align="center " 319 colspan="6"It is revealed that prior to the events of Twisted , the Liars covered up Hanna 's involvement in a car accident that left another girl , Madison , badly injured .
While on a school - sponsored cruise in the Caribbean , the Liars uncover clues that suggest " A " is more than one person .
They begin to suspect Naomi Zeigler of being " A " , after she befriends Hanna ( who is unaware that Madison is Naomi 's cousin ) and attempts to sabotage Spencer 's new relationship .
Aria becomes friends with a boy named Graham , only to discover he is Tabitha 's ex - boyfriend , leading the Liars come to believe that Naomi and Graham are working together as " A " .
Meanwhile , Emily falls for a stowaway , Jordan , unaware that she is a thief on the run from the authorities .
After an explosion on the boat , the Liars go off on their own to bury " evidence " of their connection to Tabitha ( Tabitha 's locket , which " A " had planted for Noel to find ) .
" A " tampers with their lifeboat , nearly stranding them in the middle of the ocean .
The near - death experience pushes the girls into wanting to confess about killing Tabitha .
However , as they make plans to come clean about everything , they discover that they were not responsible for Tabitha 's death at all : She had been bludgeoned to death by " A " .
The Liars finally come to believe that " A " is , in fact , Alison , as Emily reveals that she may have helped Alison escape the burning Poconos house in Wanted .
Suspiciously though Naomi was at Gayle 's funeral .
FOURTH ARC
The Starry Night with while vacationing in Iceland .
Right as they realized what was happening Alison shows up with a gun and tells the girls to get in the basement .
They girls do as they are told and the go down .
They see a mural of Ali on the wall and they are confused .
Ali tells them that after she kills them that it is going to look like they did it to be with Ali because they were sad that she was gone .
Astonished the girls ask questions .
After , Nick and Ali grab gas masks and turn on a poisonous gas .
They girls awake in the hospital and Agent Fuji tells them that Nick Maxwell was caught but not Ali .
In the epilogue Ali is running away and goes to a little house that Nick did n't know of .
She has money and reveals that she is going to lure someone else to kill with her again .
colspan="6 " bgcolor="#9370DB " align="center
" 15 align="center
" Toxic align="center "
June 3 , 2014 align="center " 9780062287014 align="center "
336 colspan="6"With A apparently arrested , the girls attempt to move on with their lives .
Hanna gets a film offer , and Spencer starts an anti - bullying campaign .
However , it is soon revealed that the real A is still seeking vengeance .
colspan="6
" bgcolor="#000000 " align="center " 16 align="center
" Vicious align="center " December 2 , 2014 align="center " 9780062287045 align="center " colspan="6 " After being falsely accused of killing Alison , the girls seek to outwit her and avoid jail time .
COMPANION NOVELS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS