GLOWPLUG
A glowplug ( alternatively spelled as glow plug or glow - plug ) is a heating device used to aid starting diesel engines .
In cold weather , high speed diesel engines can be difficult to start because the mass of the cylinder block and cylinder head absorb the heat of compression , preventing ignition ( which relies on that heat ) .
Pre - chambered engines use small electric heaters ( glowplugs ) inside the pre - chambers .
Direct - injected engines have these glowplugs in the combustion chamber .
The glowplug is a pencil - shaped piece of metal with a heating element at the tip .
This heating element , when electrified , heats due to its electrical resistance and begins to emit light in the visible spectrum , hence the term glowplug .
The visual effect is similar to the heating element in a toaster .
The fuel injector spray pattern then impinges directly upon the hot tip of the glow plug during the injection of fuel at top dead center .
This ignites the fuel even when the engine is insufficiently hot for normal operation , which reduces the cranking time to start the engine .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Diesel engines , unlike gasoline engines , do not use spark plugs to induce combustion .
Instead , they rely solely on compression to raise the temperature of the air to a point where the diesel combusts spontaneously when introduced to the hot high pressure air .
The high pressure and spray pattern of the diesel ensures a controlled , complete burn .
The piston rises , compressing the air in the cylinder ; this causes the air 's temperature to rise .
By the time the piston reaches the top of its travel path , the temperature in the cylinder is very high .
The fuel mist is then sprayed into the cylinder ; it instantly combusts , forcing the piston downwards , thus generating power .
The pressure required to heat the air to that temperature , however , requires a large and strong engine block .
The temperature at the top of the compression stroke depends on many factors , particularly the compression ratio of the cylinder and the starting temperature of the inducted air .
When the engine is cold , the temperature of the inducted air is low and it receives little heat from the engine cylinder walls .
In addition , as the air is compressed and becomes heated , some of this heat is lost to the cold cylinder walls , further reducing the temperature at the top of the compression stroke .
The glow plug solves this .
There are two different glow plug types : the in - cylinder variety and the in - manifold ( " Thermostart " ) variety .
In the case of in - cylinder , there is a plug in every cylinder direct injected ( or in the case of indirect injected , the glow plug is in the prechamber providing a hot spot to encourage ignition ) .
In the case of the in - manifold one , there is only one for all the cylinders .
METHOD OF OPERATION PRE - HEATING Section::::Method of operation .
Section::::Pre - heating .
In older generation diesel - engine vehicles , unlike in a gasoline - engine vehicle , for a ' cold start ' the operator did not simply turn the key to the " start " position and have the engine immediately start .
Instead , the operator activated the glow plug(s ) for a time first .
Early diesels used the ' Thermostart ' type glowplug in the inlet manifold .
These take 20 seconds to achieve working temperature and the vehicle operator had to manually time ( or guess ) when the 20 seconds had elapsed .
With in - cylinder glow plugs , technological improvements included a warning light on the dash to indicate how long the preheating should last .
The preheating phase was also made to be automatically activated when the operator turned the key to the " on " position for a long duration ; the glowplug relay switches the glowplugs on , and a light ( see picture at right ) on the instrument cluster illuminates .
This process is called " pre - heating " or " glowing " .
Many modern diesels automatically activate their glow plugs when the operator unlocks the vehicle or opens the door to the car , thus simplifying the process and shortening the time the operator has to wait before the engine will start .
According to Bosch : " Older engines with Thermostart manifold plugs used a glow period of up to 20 seconds whereas more modern engines use around a 6 to 8 second heat period and provide after glow at a reduced voltage . "
STARTING Section::::Starting .
Before any attempt is made to start a vehicle engine , the vehicle 's parking brake should be firmly applied and gear selection should be in Neutral ( or Park ) .
Any engine stop control should be returned to the run position and in cold weather , any ' excess fuel ' starting aid should be set or used - such as Ki - Gass .
With in - cylinder glow plugs , when a pre - set time has elapsed , the glowplug relay switches off the " wait - to - start " light .
A pre - heating cycle usually lasts for 2 to 5 seconds .
The operator then proceeds to turn the key to the " start " position .
The relay switches off the glowplugs after the engine is running ( or , in older cars , at the same time the " wait to start " light goes out ) .
In some cars , in order to maintain compliance with emissions regulations , the glow plugs may be operated immediately after engine start , or during periods of extended idle where engine temperature has decreased , as combustion efficiency is greatly reduced when the engine is below operating temperature .
With a Thermostart plug in the inlet manifold , within a few seconds diesel vapours start to fill the inlet manifold .
As the plug continues to heat up , it opens a valve permitting diesel from a special reservoir mounted directly above the Thermostart into the Thermostart plug .
This fresh diesel is also vaporised and adds to that in the inlet manifold .
At 20 seconds , provided air is available , the diesel near the plug ignites and as the engine is cranked , the ignited diesel is drawn into the combustion chambers - to which more diesel is added after the compression stroke .
This additional diesel immediately ignites , starting the engine with ease .
Vehicles fitted with Thermostart glow plugs do not usually activate via the normal ignition switch .
A button elsewhere is provided ( along with , in some cases , the button to activate the starting motor ) .
Where a Thermostart is activated by the same switch as the ignition , it is usually activated by turning the switch one ' notch ' counter - clockwise .
After the 20 second period has elapsed , cranking is achieved by turning the ignition switch a further notch counter - clockwise .
Once the engine has fired and is running , the ignition switch is released , allowing it to spring back to the off position .
The operator should then turn the ignition switch to the on position - usually one notch clockwise
WARM ENGINE START Section::::Warm engine start .
If the car had been running very recently , or if the ambient temperature was hot , the " wait to start " light might not come on .
In this case , the operator may proceed to turn the key to the " start " position and start the engine without having to wait .
With a Thermostart , it is entirely up to the operator to choose whether to activate the glow plug .
In the case of ignition key controlled Thermostart , turning the key two notches to the right initiates unheated cranking .
CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Construction .
A glowplug resembles a short metal pencil .
The heating filament is fitted into its tip .
Glowplug filaments must be made of certain materials , such as platinum and iridium , that resist oxidation and high temperature .
MODEL ENGINES Section::::Model engines .
Glow
plugs in model engines differ from those in full - size diesel engines .
Full - size engines only use the glow plug for starting .
Model engines use a glow plug as an integral part of the ignition system because of the catalytic effect of the platinum wire , on the methanol - base fuel they are designed to run on .
Model engine glow plugs are also used as re - usable igniters in theatrical pyrotechnics and the special effects industry to remotely ignite pyrotechnic devices using flash and smoke composition powders .
SEE ALSO * Block heater REFERENCES