CYCLIN D1
Cyclin D1 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the CCND1 gene .
GENE EXPRESSION
Section::::Gene expression .
The CCND1 gene encodes the cyclin D1 protein .
The human CCND1 gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 11 ( band 11q13 ) .
It is 13,388 base pairs long , and translates into 295 amino acids .
Cyclin D1 is expressed in all adult human tissues with the exception of cells derived from bone marrow stem cell lines ( both lymphoid and myeloid ) .
PROTEIN STRUCTURE
Section::::Protein structure .
Cyclin D1 is composed of the following protein domains and motifs :
* retinoblastoma protein ( pRb ) binding motif ; * cyclin box domain for cyclin - dependent kinase ( CDK )
binding and CDK inhibitor binding ; * LxxLL binding motif for co - activator recruitment ; * PEST sequence that may mark the protein for degradation ; * threonine residue ( threonine 286 ) that controls nuclear export and protein stability .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The protein encoded by this gene belongs to the highly conserved cyclin family , whose members are characterized by a dramatic periodicity in protein abundance throughout the cell cycle .
Cyclins function as regulators of CDKs ( Cyclin - dependent kinase ) .
Different cyclins exhibit distinct expression and degradation patterns which contribute to the temporal coordination of each mitotic event .
This cyclin forms a complex with and functions as a regulatory subunit of CDK4 or CDK6 , whose activity is required for cell cycle G1 / S transition .
This protein has been shown to interact with tumor suppressor protein Rb and the expression of this gene is regulated positively by Rb .
Mutations , amplification and overexpression of this gene , which alters cell cycle progression , are observed frequently in a variety of tumors and may contribute to tumorigenesis .
Immunohistochemical staining of cyclin D1 antibodies is used to diagnose mantle cell lymphoma .
Cyclin D1 has been found to be overexpressed in breast carcinoma .
Its potential use as a biomarker was suggested .
NORMAL FUNCTION
Section::::Normal function .
Cyclin D1 was originally cloned as a breakpoint rearrangement in parathyroid adenoma and was shown to be required for progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle to induce cell migration , angiogenesis and to induce the Warburg effect .
Cyclin D1 is a protein required for progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle .
During the G1 phase , it is synthesized rapidly and accumulates in the nucleus , and is degraded as the cell enters the S phase .
Cyclin D1 is a regulatory subunit of cyclin - dependent kinases CDK4 and CDK6 .
The protein dimerizes with CDK4/6 to regulate the G1 / S phase transition and entry into the S - phase .
CDK DEPENDENT
FUNCTIONS Section::::CDK dependent functions .
The cyclin D1-CDK4 complex promotes passage through the G1 phase by inhibiting the retinoblastoma protein ( pRb ) .
Cyclin D1-CDK4 inhibits pRb through phosphorylation , allowing E2F transcription factors to transcribe genes required for entry into the S phase .
Inactive pRb allows cell cycle progression through the G1 / S transition and allows for DNA synthesis .
Cyclin D1-CDK4 also enables the activation of cyclin E - CDK2 complex by sequestering Cip / Kip family CDK inhibitory proteins p21 and p27 , allowing entry into the S phase .
Cyclin D1-CDK4 also associates with several transcription factors and transcriptional co - regulators .
CDK INDEPENDENT FUNCTIONS Section::::CDK independent functions .
Independent of CDK , cyclin D1 binds to nuclear receptors ( including estrogen receptor α , thyroid hormone receptor , PPARγ and AR ) to regulate cell proliferation , growth , and differentiation .
Cyclin D1 also binds to histone acetylases and histone deacetylases to regulate cell proliferation and cell differentiation genes in the early to mid - G1 phase .
SYNTHESIS AND DEGRADATION Section::::Synthesis and degradation .
Increasing cyclin D1 levels during the G1 phase is induced by mitogenic growth factors primarily through Ras mediated pathways , and hormones .
These Ras - mediated pathways lead to the increase in transcription of cyclin D1 , and inhibit its proteolysis and export from the nucleus .
Cyclin D1 is degraded via an ubiquitin - mediated proteolysis pathway at the end of the S - phase .
Phosphorylation of cyclin D1 's threonine residue T286 marks the protein for export from the nucleus and proteolytic degradation .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE DEREGULATION IN CANCER Section::::Clinical significance .
Section::::Deregulation in cancer .
Cyclin D1 overexpression has been shown to correlate with early cancer onset and tumor progression and it can lead to oncogenesis by increasing anchorage - independent growth and angiogenesis via VEGF production .
Cyclin D1 overexpression can also down - regulate Fas expression , leading to increased chemotherapeutic resistance and protection from apoptosis .
An abundance of cyclin D1 can be caused by various types of deregulation , including : * amplification of the CCND1 gene / overexpression of cyclin D1 ; * chromosomal translocation of the CCND1 gene ; * disruption of nuclear export and proteolysis of cyclin D1 * induction of transcription by oncogenic Ras , Src , ErbB2 and STATs ; Cyclin D1 overexpression is correlated with shorter cancer patient survival and increased metastasis .
Amplification of the CCND1 gene is present in : * non - small cell lung cancers ( 30 - 46 % ) * head and neck squamous cell carcinomas ( 30 - 50 % ) * pancreatic carcinomas ( 25 % ) * bladder cancer ( 15 % ) * pituitary adenomas ( 49 - 54 % ) * breast carcinoma ( 13 % ) Cyclin D1 overexpression is strongly correlated to
ER+ breast cancer and deregulation of cyclin D1 is associated with hormone therapy resistance in breast cancer .
Overexpression of Cyclin D1b , an isoform , is also present in breast and prostate cancers .
Chromosomal translocation around the cyclin D1 gene locus is often seen in B mantle cell lymphoma .
In mantle cell lymphoma , cyclin D1 is translocated to the IgH promoter leading to cyclin D1 overexpression .
Chromosomal translocation of the cyclin D1 gene locus is also observed in 15 – 20 % of multiple myelomas .
THERAPEUTIC TARGET IN CANCER Section::::Therapeutic target in cancer .
Cyclin D1 and the mechanisms it regulates have the potential to be a therapeutic target for cancer drugs : !
Target !
Methods of Inhibition INTERACTIONS Section::::Interactions .
Cyclin D1 has been shown to interact with : * NR3C4 , * BRCA1 , * CCNDBP1 , * CDK4 , * CDK6 , * ESR1 * HDAC3 , * HDACs * NEUROD1 , * NCOA1 , * NRF1 , * p300 , * PACSIN2 ,
* PCNA , * PPARG ,
* RAD51 , * RB1 , * TAF1 , and *
NR1A2 . SEE ALSO
*
Parathyroid adenoma * Mantle Cell Lymphoma
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING