XBOX 360 CONTROLLER
The Xbox 360 controller is the primary controller for the Microsoft Xbox 360 video game console that was introduced at E3 2005 .
The Xbox 360 controller comes in both wired and wireless versions .
Original Xbox controllers are not compatible with the Xbox 360 .
The wired and wireless versions are also compatible with Microsoft PC operating systems , such as Windows XP , Windows Vista , Windows 7 , Windows 8 , and Windows 10 .
The wireless controllers run on either AA batteries or a rechargeable battery pack .
The wired controllers may be connected to any of the USB ports on the console , or to an attached USB hub .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The Xbox 360 controller has the same basic familiar button layout as the Controller S except that a few of the auxiliary buttons have been moved .
The " back " and " start " buttons have been moved to a more central position on the face of the controller , and the " white " and " black " buttons have been removed and replaced with two new bumpers that are positioned over the analog triggers on the back of the controller .
The controller has a 2.5 mm TRS connector on the front , allowing users to connect a headset for voice communication .
It also features a proprietary serial connector ( which is split into 2 parts on either side of the headset connector ) for use with additional accessories , such as the chatpad .
On August 31 , 2010 , Microsoft 's Larry Hryb ( a.k.a . Major Nelson ) revealed a new design of the Xbox 360 controller which is set to replace the Wireless controller bundled with the Play & Charge Kit .
Among small changes such as the shape of the analog stick tops and grey - colored face buttons , the new controller features an adjustable directional pad which can be changed between a disc type D - pad or a plus shaped D - pad .
The control pad was released in North America exclusively with Play & Charge Kits on November 9 , 2010 and was released in Europe during February 2011 .
The Xbox 360 controller provides a standard USB Human interface device software interface , but is designed for the Microsoft XInput interface library .
Although many PC video games support the XInput library , some games might not work with this controller .
LAYOUT Section::::Layout .
A standard Xbox 360 controller features eleven * digital buttons , two analog triggers , two analog sticks , and a digital D - pad .
The right face of the controller features four digital action buttons : a green button , red button , blue button , and amber button .
The lower right houses the right analog stick , in lower left is a digital D - pad and on the left face is the left analog stick .
Both analog sticks can also be " clicked in " to activate a digital button beneath .
In the center of the controller face are digital " Start " , " Back " and " Guide " buttons .
The " Guide " button is labelled with the Xbox logo , and is used to turn on the console / controller and to access the guide menu .
It is also surrounded by the " ring of light " , which indicates the controller number , as well as flashing when connecting and to provide notifications .
The left and right " shoulders " each feature a digital shoulder button , or " bumper " , and an analog trigger .
STANDARD COLORS Section::::Standard colors .
Wired controllers are only available in white and black ( Xbox 360 S color scheme ) .
However , wireless controllers are available in numerous different colors including : * White controllers were bundled with the Arcade and Pro consoles ; also sold separately .
*
Black controllers came with the Elite to match the case ; also sold separately .
( UPC / EAN 0885370145717 , 885370239393 )
* Dark Blue controllers were released in October 2007 ( US only )
* Light Blue controllers were released in October 2007 ( Europe and Japan only )
* Pink controllers were also released in October 2007 .
* Black S and White S controllers are bundled with Xbox 360 S consoles .
These differ from their original counterparts in that they are completely one color , rather than with grey accents .
The guide button has a mirror like finish , and the analog sticks and D - pad are color matched .
The bottom edge of this controller also features a gloss finish to match the Xbox 360 S 250 GB case design .
" S " controllers also replace the Microsoft branding above the charging port with an Xbox 360 logo .
LIMITED AND SPECIAL EDITION
COLORS
* Halo 3 * " Spartan Green " controllers were included with the Halo 3 Special Edition Xbox 360 systems released in September 2007 .
* " Limited Edition " " Spartan " and " Brute " controllers were released in September 2007 .
Two versions were available , each of which feature Halo 3 themed artwork ( with either a " Spartan " or " Brute " design ) from artist Todd McFarlane .
Each version of the controller also included a Master Chief Figurine ( a different figure was included with each version ) .
* Red " Limited Edition " controllers were released in September 2008 .
The controller features ' black accents ' with the D - Pad , analog sticks , triggers and parts of the casing all changed to black instead to the usual gray .
It comes bundled with a Play & Charge Kit with a red rechargeable battery pack .
The red controller is also included with the Limited Edition Resident Evil Xbox 360 Elite console released in March 2009 .
* Green " Limited Edition " controllers were released in mid October 2008 in Europe , Asia , and Latin America .
The green controller has a direction pad with 16-way functionality , instead of the 8-way direction pad used on all previous controllers .
This controller was released alongside Pro Evolution Soccer 2009 .
* Dragon Design " Limited Edition " White and Black controllers were released in October 2008 and are available only through Wal - Mart and Sam 's Club .
The controller features a black dragon ( and other symbols ) on a white background , along with a white D - pad and black analog sticks .
It comes bundled with a black wired headset .
*
Halo 3 : ODST " Special Edition " controllers were released in September 2009 in a " Collector 's Pack " including the game .
The pack was originally exclusive to GameStop and retailed for US$ 99.99 in North America .
* Radioactive Design " Exclusive " controllers were released in October 2009 and are available exclusively at GameStop , or ( in Australia ) at EB Games .
The design features a carbon black pad with a red radiation symbol emanating from the right analog stick .
The left analog stick is black and the right analog stick and D - pad are red .
This controller was announced at Major Nelson 's website and is said to be limited edition although the packaging makes no reference to this .
It comes bundled with a Play & Charge Kit with a black rechargeable battery pack .
*
Halo :
Reach " Special Edition " controllers are to be released on September 14 , 2010 , coinciding with the game 's release .
The controller is based around the Black S design ( black analog sticks , d - pad , battery pack , etc . ; glossy black front ; shiny guide button ) with the matte black shell replaced with a satin silver shell , which also features a custom design based on the game .
It will be available separately and with the Halo :
Reach Special Edition console bundle , which will come bundled with two of the controllers .
* Fable III " Special Edition " controllers were released on October 5 , 2010 , 3 weeks before the release of Fable III itself .
The controller is based around the Black S design ( black analog sticks , d - pad etc . ; glossy black front ; shiny guide button ) and features a custom gold - colored shell and artwork .
It also comes bundled with an exclusive downloadable tattoo set for use within the game .
* TRON controllers were created by PDP and released in December 2010 to coincide with the film " TRON : Legacy " .
The controllers were offered in two limited edition variations -- one with blue LED illumination ( 20,000 units made ) and the other with orange LED illumination ( 250 units made ) .
Both versions are wired and feature textured grips and a raised , 4-way d - pad .
* Blue controllers were released in a bundle with Call of Duty : Ghosts and Black Ops II and a 500 GB Blue Xbox 360 and both the console and the controller had Arctic Blue accents and was released on October 7 , 2014 exclusively at Walmart for a limited time .
TRANSFORMING D - PAD CONTROLLERS
* Transforming d - pad " special edition " controllers were released in the US on November 9 , 2010 and in Europe during February 2011 .
The main feature of this controller is a d - pad that can be rotated to adapt to the user 's gameplay , becoming either a " plus " ( 4-way ) or a " disk " ( 8-way ) d - pad .
The controller also features new concave analog stick tops and grey tone
face buttons ( A , B , X and Y ) .
The main shell of the controller is matte silver , with gloss black accents ( triggers , bumpers and both front and rear panels ) like the " Black S " design and a matte black battery pack .
This controller comes bundled with a ( matte ) black improved Play & Charge Kit , offering up to 35 hours of play ; it is not available sans the play and charge kit .
The codename for the controller during development was " Aberdeen " .
* Gears of War 3 " Limited Collector 's Edition " controllers were released on September 20 , 2011 to coincide with the launch of Gears of War 3 .
The controllers are metallic red with a black " Infected Omen " symbol and feature a transforming d - pad .
Unlike the " Transforming D - Pad " Special Edition controller , the Gears of War 3 LCE controller features the standard colored face buttons and analog stick tops found on other controllers .
* Call of Duty : Modern Warfare
3 " Limited Edition " controllers were released on November 8 , 2011 in North America , Australasia and the EMEA ( Europe , Middle East and Africa ) region .
It features custom Modern Warfare 3 artwork ( predominantly matte grey ) , a transforming d - pad and the same concave analog stick tops found on the original transforming d - pad controller .
All ( non - face ) buttons , as well as the analog sticks , are black .
* Star Wars C-3PO " Limited Edition " controllers were released in April 2012 as part of a limited edition Star Wars console bundle .
The controller is mirrored gold and black , and features a transforming d - pad .
The black panel at the front of the controller also features " wiring " artwork , resembling the parts of C-3PO that are not covered in gold plating in the original Star Wars movies .
* Chrome Series " Special Edition " controllers were released in May 2012 .
The chrome series controllers are available in six colors : Blue , Red , Silver , Gold , Black and Purple .
These controllers feature standard colored face buttons .
* Halo 4 " Limited Edition " controllers were released in November 2012 .
Two different controllers are available :
* Halo 4 branded " Limited Edition " ' exclusive controllers inspired by the game ' will come bundled with the Limited Edition Halo 4 console , two are included .
These feature a glowing blue Xbox guide button instead of the traditional green glow .
* UNSC Halo 4 " Limited Edition " controllers were released in November 2012 .
These feature
the United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) emblem on a dark grey translucent case , and also feature the glowing blue Xbox Guide button .
* Black S controllers with a transforming d - pad , concave analog sticks and bundled with a play and charge kit were released in October 2012 .
* Tomb Raider " Limited Edition " controllers were released in early March 2013 to complement the launch of Tomb Raider .
The controllers are red and feature a two layer color finish with laser etching to create a realistic and tactile warn appearance inspired by Lara 's climbing axe from the game .
The controllers also come bundled with a downloadable token for an Xbox 360 exclusive playable Tomb Raider character .
NON - RETAIL COLORS
* Launch Team Edition controllers were bundled with the " Xbox 360 - Launch Team Edition " , given exclusively to members of the Xbox launch team by Microsoft in November 2005 .
These white wireless controllers feature green accents at the front in place of the standard grey .
*
Yellow controllers were included with the 100 Limited Edition
The Simpsons Movie Xbox 360 systems announced in May 2007 , and given away as prizes in special events and promotions .
*
Orange coloured LIVE
TURNS FIVE controllers were released in November 2007 , and were given away to selected members of the media .
GUIDE BUTTON Section::::Guide button .
The Xbox 360 controller has a guide button in the center of its face that provides a new functionality .
This button is surrounded by a ring of lights divided into four quadrants that provide gamers with different types of information during game play .
For instance , during a split screen multiplayer match , a particular quadrant will light up to indicate to a player which part of the screen
he or she is playing on at that time .
In this case , when the user pushes the button , he or she accesses the Xbox guide ; a menu which provides access to features like messaging friends , downloading content , voice chat and customizing soundtracks , while staying in the game .
The Guide button also allows users to turn off the controller or the console by holding the button for a few seconds ( rather than simply pressing it ) .
ACCESSORIES RECHARGEABLE BATTERY PACK
Section::::Accessories .
Section::::Rechargeable Battery Pack .
The Rechargeable Battery Pack is a nickel metal hydride ( NiMH ) battery pack , which provides up to 24 hours of continuous gaming for the wireless controller .
It is recommended in place of disposable AA batteries , which differ slightly in voltage and have higher disposal costs ( financial and environmental ) .
It ships as part of , and can be charged by , the Play & Charge Kit and the Quick Charge Kit .
To fully charge the battery pack takes approximately 2 hours with the Quick Charge Kit ; the Play & Charge Kit takes longer ( and depends on whether the controller is being used ) .
An upgraded , 35-hour version is included with " transforming d - pad " controllers .
WIRELESS GAMING RECEIVER
Section::::Wireless Gaming Receiver .
The Wireless Gaming Receiver ( sold as " Crossfire Wireless Gaming Receiver " in the UK ) allows wireless Xbox 360 accessories , such as wireless gamepads , racing wheels and headsets , to be used on a Windows - based PC .
The device acts in a similar manner to an Xbox 360 , allowing up to 4 controllers and 4 headsets at a time to be connected to the receiver .
The device has a 30-foot ( 10 meter ) range and a six - foot ( 2 meter ) USB cable .
It is specifically designed to work with games bearing the " Games for Windows " logo , but will function with most games that permit a standard PC gamepad .
The official Xbox website noted that the adapter will work with " all future wireless devices " .
MESSENGER KIT Section::::Messenger Kit .
The Messenger Kit consists of a wired Xbox 360 headset and a small keyboard known as the " Chatpad " .
The Chatpad connects to the front of the controller and may be used for any standard text input on the console .
It is not currently compatible with the wireless gaming receiver .
NON - GAMING USES Section::::Non - gaming uses .
The United States Navy has announced that it plans to use Xbox 360 controllers to control periscopes on new Virginia - class submarines , for both cost and familiarity reasons .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Xbox 360 controller received positive reviews when it was released .
Before then , as IGN stated , the original Xbox controller was " huge , ugly , cheap , and uncomfortable " and concluded to be an " abomination " .
Many of these problems were corrected with Microsoft 's releases of the Xbox controller S and then the Xbox 360 controller .
IGN credited the Xbox 360 controller for its being one of " the most ergonomically comfortable console controllers around " .
It was also praised for its improved button placement , its functioning logo as a button , and Microsoft 's choice of bottom - mounting headset ports as opposed to top - mounting them so as to minimize snagged wire problems .
SEE ALSO * Kinect * Sixaxis * DualShock * PlayStation Move *
Wii Remote * List of XInput enabled games REFERENCES