EASY - TO - READ VERSION
The Holy Bible : Easy - to - Read Version ( ERV ) is an English translation of the Bible compiled by the World Bible Translation Center .
It was originally published as the English Version for the Deaf ( EVD ) by BakerBooks .
Deaf readers sometimes struggle with reading English because sign language is their first language .
The World Bible Translation Center ( WBTC ) decided to do a translation that would make reading the Bible easier for them .
The EVD uses simpler vocabulary and shorter sentences to make it simpler to understand .
Ervin Bishop did most of the translating for the WBTC .
He used a thought - for - thought or functional equivalence method of translation .
It was found to be useful for others who struggle with reading and is often used in prisons and literacy programs .
The ERV uses the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia ( 1984 ) as its Old Testament text with some readings from the Dead Sea Scrolls .
Also , it follows the Septuagint when its readings are considered more accurate .
( The Septuagint is the ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew scriptures . )
For the New Testament , the ERV uses the United Bible Societies ' Greek New Testament ( fourth revised edition , 1993 ) and Nestle - Aland Novum Testament Graece ( twenty - seventh edition , 1993 ) .
The ERV caused controversy in the Churches of Christ .
( The WBTC is an outreach of the Churches of Christ . )
Goebel Music wrote a book critiquing this translation titled Easy - to - Read Version :
Easy to Read or Easy to Mislead ?
It criticized the ERV 's method of translation , textual basis , and wording of certain passages .
In 2004 , a major revision of the ERV was finished .
It used broader vocabulary and greater use of gender - inclusive language .
The EVD was left unchanged , so it and the ERV now have different texts .
Both Bibles are available online from the WBTC 's website .
SEE ALSO
* List of English Bible translations REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Wbtc.org
* Innvista 's EVD / ERV page