RUGBY UNION BONUS POINTS SYSTEM Bonus points are group tournament points awarded in rugby union tournaments in addition to the standard points for winning or drawing a match .
Bonus points were implemented in order to encourage attacking play throughout a match , to discourage repetitive goal - kicking , and to reward teams for " coming close " in losing efforts .
STANDARD SYSTEM Section::::Standard system .
The most common bonus point system is : * 4 points for winning a match * 2 points for drawing a match * 0 points for losing a match * 1 losing bonus point for losing by 7 points ( or fewer ) * 1 try bonus point for scoring 4 tries ( or more )
In this system , winning teams get 4 or 5 points ; drawing teams 2 or 3 points ; and losing teams 0 , 1 , or 2 points .
VARIANT SYSTEMS FRANCE Section::::Variant systems .
Section::::France .
The French professional league , Ligue Nationale de Rugby ( LNR ) , uses a similar system in its two competitions , the Top 14 and Rugby Pro D2 .
After trialling the system in 2007–08 , LNR adopted the new system permanently after that season .
The French system awards points in this manner :
* 4 points for a win .
* 2 points for a draw .
* 1 " bonus " point for winning while scoring at least 3 more tries than the opponent .
* 1 " bonus " point for losing by no more than a specified margin .
Through the 2013–14 season , the margin was 7 points ; starting in 2014–15 , the margin was reduced to 5 .
This system prevents a losing team from picking up two bonus points in the same match , as is possible under the normal system .
It also means that neither team earns a bonus point in a drawn match .
AUSTRALIAN NRC ( 2014–2016 ) Section::::Australian NRC ( 2014–2016 ) .
For its first three seasons from 2014 to 2016 , the National Rugby Championship of Australia used a system somewhat similar to that of France : * 4 points for a win .
* 2 points for a draw .
* 1 " bonus " point for winning while scoring at least 3 more tries than the opponent .
* 1 " bonus " point for losing by no more than 8 points ( the value of a converted try under the law variations used during those seasons ) .
In 2017 the NRC ( including a team in Fiji ) reverted to the standard scoring values of five points for a try , two for a conversion and three for a penalty or drop goal .
The bonus point system therefore fell into line with the SANZAAR system widely adopted in that year .
SANZAAR
Section::::SANZAAR .
In 2016 , Super Rugby in the SANZAAR countries of Argentina , Australia , New Zealand and South Africa , also with a team in Japan , switched from the standard system to the original French system , i.e. * 4 points for a win .
* 2 points for a draw .
* 1 " bonus " point for winning while scoring at least 3 more tries than the opponent .
* 1 " bonus " point for losing by no more than 7 points ( the value of a converted try ) .
SANZAAR extended this change to The Rugby Championship , contested by the men 's national teams of its four member countries , in 2017 .
SIX NATIONS Section::::Six Nations .
The 2017 Six Nations Championship used the standard bonus points system on a trial basis , with the added feature that a team winning the Grand Slam would earn three extra bonus points .
The system has been retained for 2018 and presumably beyond that time .
TABLES Section::::Tables .
Bonus points are typically listed in the group standings table , as for example the BP column in 2015 Rugby World Cup Pool B : More detailed tables may list losing - bonus points and tries - bonus points separately , as respectively the TB and LB columns in the 2015–16 European Rugby Champions Cup Pool 2 table : DETAILS Section::::Details .
This format was created for New Zealand 's domestic competition , the National Provincial Championship , in 1995 and subsequently adopted in the inaugural Super 12 in 1996 .
It was first used at the Rugby World Cup in 2015 , and has been the staple for international and club competition since .
OTHER FORMS OF RUGBY Section::::Other forms of rugby .
Rugby sevens , while still under the rugby union banner , does not use this system , and instead gives points for wins and draws .
Sevens is a faster , more try - friendly game with a shorter time limit and a tendency to have runaway results .
Sevens competitions are also usually one or two day affairs with an emphasis on the final bracket .
All of this means there is little reason in using the bonus point system for the seven - a - side game .
Rugby league has tried out similar bonus point systems in some competitions , but most competitions only give points for wins and draws .
However , from 2007 season through to 2014 , the Championship and League 1 ( the two levels below Super League ) , primarily in England but also featuring teams in France and Wales during this time frame , gave 3 points for a win , 2 for a draw , and 1 for a loss by 12 points or fewer
( this amounts to two converted tries in rugby league , which gives four points for a try instead of the five points awarded in union ) .
This changed in the 2015 season when the points system was brought into line with that of Super League , thereby standardising the system across Britain 's three professional Rugby League divisions , abandoning the bonus points system .
NOTES AND REFERENCES