BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL 2 Beyond Good and Evil 2 is an upcoming action - adventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montpellier and published by Ubisoft .
It is a prequel to Beyond Good & Evil released in 2003 .
Its development was characterized in the media by uncertainty , doubt and rumors about the game 's future , until it was officially announced at Ubisoft 's E3 2017 conference , although no release window or target platform has been revealed .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Beyond Good and Evil 2 is an action - adventure game set in an open world environment and played from a third - person perspective which takes place at least one generation prior to the events of Beyond Good & Evil .
It has more traditional role - playing elements compared to the first game ; the player generates a character that starts the game " at the very bottom of the social system " .
The character can be male or female .
As the players completes various tasks , they improve in various attributes , and gain spacecraft and crew members which they can also improve over time .
Players visit planets that have their own societies , and by completing tasks on these planets , gain new technologies or other facets to improve their spacecraft .
Its director , Michel Ancel , said that they do anticipate that there will be a narrative element that includes fixed story events , as well as events based on what decisions the player had made in exploring planets .
The game will have single - player and cooperative player support ; even as a single - player , the player can participate in a shared universe , with some events affecting all players at the same time .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Beyond Good and Evil 2 has languished for several years , and considered to have been in development hell .
The original Beyond Good & Evil game , released in 2003 , was critically praised and gained a cult following , but was considered a commercial failure .
Ancel explained that as he wrote out the game 's universe , he found it was bigger than what he could practically include within a single game , and thus anticipated the game to be the first of a trilogy of works .
However , the poor sales of this game left its publisher Ubisoft reluctant to invest in a sequel .
Rumors about a sequel began to circulate around 2007 , starting with a Nintendo Power interview with Ancel who stated he was working on a new project that was very personal to him , and mentioned his hopes to reuse Jade , the player - character from Beyond Good & Evil , in a future project without changing her personality .
Ancel said in a May 2008 interview with the French magazine that the Beyond Good & Evil sequel had been in pre - production for a year , but was yet to be approved by Ubisoft .
Later that month , as part of their " Ubidays " event , Ubisoft released a trailer for the next , yet - named project from Ancel and their Ubisoft Montpellier studio , which had worked on Beyond Good & Evil .
The trailer used Beyond Good & Evil music assets and showed characters that appeared to be Jade and Pey'j from the original Beyond Good & Evil .
Ubisoft reported that the trailer had all been recorded within the game engine , showcasing high - resolution graphics representative of seventh generation consoles capabilities .
A second , leaked trailer appeared for the game on the Internet around May 2009 , showing a character that appeared to be Jade running through a crowded street .
The trailer was confirmed to be authentic by Ancel , while Ubisoft denied that they had purposely released the footage .
Since these trailers , up until 2016 , the state of program with Beyond Good and Evil 2 was unclear , with conflicting statements made by both Ubisoft and Ancel .
While Ancel and Ubisoft reported several times that the game was still in development , rumors circulated that Ubisoft had put the game on hold , that Ubisoft had yet to officially announced the title and thus production was not officially started , and that Ancel had left Ubisoft Montpellier , By 2016 , Ancel affirmed that they had put aside work on Beyond Good and Evil 2 to develop Rayman Legends ( 2013 ) which enabled them to produce tools that would help with the production of Beyond Good and Evil 2 ; once work for Rayman Legends was completed , they returned to Beyond Good & Evil sequel .
Ubisoft later noted that with Ancel 's time was split between Beyond Good and Evil 2 and Wild , a title developed by Ancel 's Wild Sheep Studios outside of Ubisoft .
In late 2016 , Ancel used social media to post images from the game , showing a younger Pey'j , hinting that Beyond Good and Evil 2 may be a prequel .
Ubisoft shortly followed by officially announcing the game .
Ubisoft showed the first new trailer for Beyond Good and Evil 2 during their E3 2017 conference and was announced as a prequel to the first game .
During E3 2017 , Ancel confirmed that the 2008 and 2009 trailers were from initial work as a narrative sequel to Beyond Good & Evil , but during development they opted to change direction and make it a prequel , and thus the work previously shown was from an effectively different game .
The platforms for release have not been announced .
There had been rumors that it would have been released as a timed exclusive for the Nintendo Switch ( under its codename NX ) in the prior year , but Ancel confirmed this was not the case .
The " Space Monkey Program " lists the game for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , however Michel Ancel stated that the platforms have not been announced yet , and that the listing was due to a bug .
Ancel later told Kotaku that the game is designed to run on many platforms .
GAMEPLAY DEVELOPMENT Section::::Gameplay development .
Ubisoft CEO Yves Guillemot stated that Beyond Good and Evil 2 will be made more accessible to the new generation of players , in an effort to make sure the sequel does not suffer the same commercial failure the original did .
Guillemot clarified that statement later on , saying that they do not intend to make the game more casual player - oriented .
A core element of the game is the ability to explore several different planets via space travel .
To power this , Ancel and the Ubisoft Montpellier team started building a solar system simulation tool about three years prior to the E3 2017 reveal to be used in the game 's own engine called Voyageur .
This tool uses a combination of designed elements and procedural generation to assemble those elements for a given planet .
The development team completed the preliminary work on the tool just before E3 2017 , allowing them to start building the rest of the game around it ; at that point , Ancel considered that they were only at " day zero " of the game 's development .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Composer Christophe Héral , who scored the music for the original game , will be returning for Beyond Good and Evil 2 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
In an interview with Jeux Vidéo Magazine , Michel Ancel stated : " [ Beyond Good and Evil 2 will ] be in continuity with the first game , with a big variety of levels , lots of emotion in the gameplay , and characters we care about .
This time we are dealing with the planet 's future , and the relationship with animals ... "
On April 3 , Eurogamer published a translated interview with Ancel talking about the inspirations behind Beyond Good & Evil and its sequel : " It was a mix of experiences .
It was a phantasm to create an adventure game , a universe too .
It was the game I wanted to create for a long time .
[ ... ] There were a lot of inspirations : the Miyazaki universe , my own inspirations , politics and the media ; the theme of September 11 – the CNN show with army messages and the fear climate .
And it was a mix from other universes . "
He also answered the question of whether or not the game will be a direct sequel to the first game :
" Yes !
But it is better to discover that when you play , ha ha !
But it is clear we want to continue the story – we wo n't create characters , story .
The story continues and we 'll react on important events of the first . "
However in June 2017 narrative director Gabrielle Shrager said that the game would be a prequel with the action taking place " about a generation before Jade was born " .
Ancel indicated that the characters from the previous game will be referenced in some way : " You do n't play them , but they are in the world , and they are key to making this world unique ...
the DNA will be there . "
Ancel also talked about the sequel being more immersive and complex compared to the original , largely because of the possibilities of current - generation hardware , but as a result will take longer to develop .
" We 'll conserve the spirit of the first game , but the form will change .
For [ BG&E ] , we wanted to create a more cinematographic game , but we did n't have the technical ability to do that .
So we simplified .
It was fun , because I remember we had to work for Sony to demonstrate how original our game was in order to get the development kit .
We wrote BG&E like we were in a film .
After , we understood it would be very tricky to reach that immersion on that console !
But now , with the next - gen consoles , we feel it is possible to develop the game we thought of for the first .
[ ... ] It is very difficult to answer [ when the game 's going to be released ] : there is an unknown aspect . "
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS