QUEEN ANT
A queen ant ( formally known as a gyne ) is an adult , reproducing ant in an ant colony ; generally she will be the mother of all the other ants in that colony .
Some female ants , such as Catagly , do not need to mate to produce offspring , reproducing through asexual parthenogenesis or cloning , and all of those offspring will be female .
Others , like those in the genus Crematogaster , mate in a nuptial flight .
Queen offspring develop from larvae specially fed in order to become sexually mature among most species .
Depending on the species , there can be either a single mother queen , or potentially , hundreds of fertile queens in some species .
Queen ants have one of the longest life - spans of any known insect – up to 30 years .
A queen of Lasius niger was held in captivity by German entomologist Hermann Appel for 28¾ years ; also a Pogonomyrmex owyheei has a maximum estimated longevity of 30 years in the field .
LIFE CYCLE
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Life cycle .
Section::::Development .
Ants go through four stages of development : egg , larva , pupa ( sometimes cocoon , called metamorphosis depending on the species ) and adult .
The larvae have no legs but are capable of some minor movement , such as bending their head toward a food source when fed .
During this stage , the level of care and nourishment the larvae receive will determine their eventual adult form .
When resources are low , all larvae will develop into female worker ants ; however , if the parent of a sexually reproducing colony has a plentiful supply of food , some of the larvae will receive better nourishment than others , and develop into winged , sexually mature female ants destined to leave the colony .
At this stage , the winged female ants are sometimes known as " princess ants " .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
When conditions are hot and humid after rain and there is minimal wind , masses of winged sexually reproducing ants or " flying ants " will leave their parent nest and take flight .
The mating flights occur simultaneously in all ant nests of the particular species .
The female " queen " ants will fly a long distance , during which they will mate with at least one winged male from another nest .
He transfers sperm to the seminal receptacle of the queen and then dies .
Once mated , the " queen " will attempt to find a suitable area to start a colony and , once found will detach her wings .
AN ESTABLISHED COLONY Section::::An established colony .
The term " queen " is not particularly apt , as the queen ant has very little control over the colony as a whole .
She has no known authority or decision - making control ; instead , her sole function is to reproduce .
Therefore , the queen is best understood as the reproductive element of a colony rather than a leader .
Once a colony is established , the worker ants meet the queen 's needs such as giving her food and disposing of her waste .
Because ant social structure is very complex and individual ants are relatively simple , an ant colony can be thought of as a single organism , and the individual ants as cells or limbs of the organism , as the individuals can rarely survive on their own .
In a colony , some ants may be unrelated to the queen(s ) , such as when a brood is captured in a raid and raised as the colony 's own .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Once the colony has established itself , the queen ant will lay eggs continuously .
Among species that reproduce sexually , the queen selectively uses the sperm cells retained from the nuptial flight , laying fertile or unfertile eggs depending upon the cyclic needs of the colony ; the sex of each individual ant is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilized .
The fertile eggs become female worker ants and unfertilized eggs develop as males ; if the fertilized eggs and pupae are well - nurtured , they potentially become queens .
This system of sex determination , haplodiploidy , is generally true for all Hymenoptera -- ants , bees , and wasps .
However , a few ant species do not reproduce sexually and members of these clonal colonies are all female .
SEE ALSO
* Ergatoid
* Nuptial flight *
Queen bee REFERENCES