HISTORY OF FORT LAUDERDALE , FLORIDA
The history of Fort Lauderdale , Florida began more than 4,000 years ago with the arrival of the first aboriginal natives , and later with the Tequesta Indians , who inhabited the area for more than a thousand years .
Though control of the area changed among Spain , England , the United States , and the Confederate States of America , it remained largely undeveloped until the 20th century .
The first settlement in the area was the site of a massacre at the beginning of the Second Seminole War , an event which precipitated the abandonment of the settlement and set back development in the area by over 50 years .
The first United States stockade named Fort Lauderdale was built in 1838 , and subsequently was a site of fighting during the Second Seminole War .
The fort was abandoned in 1842 , after the end of the war , and the area remained virtually unpopulated until the 1890s .
The Fort Lauderdale area was known as the " New River Settlement " prior to the 20th century .
While a few pioneer families lived in the area since the late 1840s , it was not until the Florida East Coast Railroad built tracks through the area in the mid-1890s that any organized development began .
The city was incorporated in 1911 , and in 1915 was designated the county seat of newly formed Broward County .
Fort Lauderdale 's first major development began in the 1920s , during the Florida land boom of the 1920s .
The 1926 Miami Hurricane and the Great Depression of the 1930s caused a great deal of economic dislocation .
When World War II began , Fort Lauderdale became a major US Navy base , with a Naval Air Station to train pilots , radar and fire control operator training schools , and a Coast Guard base at Port Everglades .
After the war ended , service members returned to the area , spurring an enormous population explosion which dwarfed the 1920s boom .
In the 1970s , Ft .
Lauderdale beach became a mecca for runaways and a group of approximately 60 - 150 runaways formed a group called " The Family" .
Most resorted to petty crimes to support themselves and others .
Today , Fort Lauderdale is a major yachting center , one of the nation 's biggest tourist destinations , and the center of a metropolitan division of 1.8 million people .
PRIOR TO 1820 Section::::Prior to 1820 .
Archaeological evidence indicates that the first natives in the Broward County area arrived approximately 4,000 years ago .
At the time of initial European exploration , the area was occupied by the Tequesta tribe of Native Americans .
Contact by Spanish explorers beginning in the 16th century proved disastrous for native tribes , including the Tequesta , as the Europeans unwittingly brought with them diseases to which the native populations possessed no resistance , such as smallpox .
For the Tequesta , disease , coupled with continuing conflict with their Calusa neighbors , contributed greatly to their decline over the next two centuries .
By 1763 , there were only a few Tequesta left in Florida , and most of them were evacuated to Cuba when the Spanish ceded Florida to the British in 1763 , under the terms of the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) , which ended the Seven Years ' War .
Bernard Romans reported sighting many abandoned Tequesta villages when he visited the area in the 1770s .
Subsequently , Florida returned to Spanish control under the terms of the Treaty of Paris in 1783 , which ended the American Revolutionary War .
In the early 18th century , Creek Indians had moved down from Alabama and joined the Oconee , themselves recent immigrants from Georgia ; together , they formed the core of the Seminole tribe .
Settlements by the English , and later Americans , gradually pushed the Seminoles southward .
In 1788 , roughly the same time that the Seminoles began to arrive in what was eventually to become Broward County , two families arrived and set up homes along the New River — the Lewis family and the Robbins family , who had arrived in Florida from the Bahamas .
1820 - 1892
Section::::1820 - 1892 .
Under the terms of the Adams - Onís Treaty , ratified in 1821 between Spain and the United States , Florida was ceded to the United States in exchange for U.S. forfeiture of a $ 5 million debt owed by Spain .
Florida became a U.S. Territory in 1821 .
By 1830 , the de facto leader among the approximately 70 people living at the " New River Settlement " ( present day Fort Lauderdale ) was William Cooley .
Cooley was appointed by Governor William Pope Duval as Justice of the Peace for the region .
In 1835 , white settlers killed a Seminole chief named Alibama and burned his hut in a dispute .
As Justice of Peace , Cooley jailed the settlers , but they were released after a hearing at the Monroe County Court in Key West ; the justification was insufficient evidence .
The Seminoles blamed Cooley , saying he withheld evidence .
The growing uneasiness between the Seminoles and the whites led to the Seminole migration to the Lake Okeechobee area .
On 28 December 1835 , a Seminole ambush known as the Dade Massacre started the Second Seminole War .
On 3 January 1836 , Cooley led a large shipwrecking expedition from the settlement to free the Gil Blas , a ship that had beached the previous September ; the scale of the operation required most of the settlement 's able men .
The following day , a group of 15 to 20 Seminoles invaded the Cooley house , killed Cooley 's wife and children , scalped the children 's tutor , and burned the house to the ground .
Although the Indians did not attack any other families , the massacre triggered the departure of the white settlers from the area .
During the second Seminole War , Major William Lauderdale led his Tennessee Volunteers into the area .
In 1838 , Lauderdale erected a fort on the New River at the site of the modern city of Fort Lauderdale ( where SW 9th Avenue meets SW 4th Court ) .
Lauderdale left after one month , but his name remained .
The Seminoles destroyed the fort a few months later .
Two more forts were built sequentially , each closer to the ocean .
After the end of the Second Seminole War in 1842 , the fort was abandoned , and the area remained largely empty , as the remaining Seminoles withdrew to Pine Island ( near present - day Hollywood Seminole Indian Reservation ) , and only a handful of settlers were known to live in all of what eventually became Broward County .
While the area was technically a part of the Confederacy during the US Civil War , the only known white settlers in the area during the war was pro - unionist Isaiah Hall and his family , who had been run out of Miami by pro - confederacy sympathizers in 1863 , and settled on the New River .
As there was no overland route into or out of the area , no significant settlement was undertaken until the 1890s .
In 1892 , however , the first road through the county was built , when a road was constructed from Lemon City , a settlement near the town of Miami , to Lantana , on the southern shore of Lake Worth , in Palm Beach County .
A ferry crossing was established across the New River .
1893 - 1925 Section::::1893 - 1925 .
In 1893 a young Ohioan named Frank Stranahan arrived to operate the ferry across the New River ; he built a house that served as the first trading post , post office , bank and hotel in the area .
He later built three more houses on the original site along present - day U.S. 1 , the last of which was constructed in 1901 .
That house stands today as a museum and is Broward County 's oldest standing structure .
In 1896 , the Florida East Coast Railway ( FEC ) extended its line south from West Palm Beach to Miami , with a station in Fort Lauderdale .
The first train stopped in Fort Lauderdale on 22 February 1896 .
Further development was spurred by the construction of the first automobile bridge across the New River in 1904 .
Fort Lauderdale was incorporated in 1911 .
In 1915 , it became the county seat of the newly established Broward County , which also consisted of the incorporated towns of Dania , Deerfield , Hallandale , and Pompano ( all four towns later added " Beach " to their names ) and the unincorporated settlement of Davie .
The first census after the city 's incorporation , the 1920 census , documented a population of 2,065 .
In 1920 , construction of the first canals in the city began , clearing the mangroves and creating the first " finger islands " that became synonymous with the city .
In February 1925 , a state - commissioned census recorded 5,625 people in Fort Lauderdale , and a real - estate boom was in progress in South Florida .
While the land rush was focused on the Miami area , communities throughout the region , including Fort Lauderdale , Pompano Beach and Boca Raton were swept up in the speculative buying frenzy .
A census undertaken by the city during the first week of December 1925 counted a population of 15,315 , an increase of 300 % in less than 10 months .
By the end of the year , however , the region 's infrastructure , unable to cope with the sudden influx , began to crack under the strain .
Faced with a supply of materials which far exceeded its shipping capacity , the FEC instituted an embargo on shipping on 18 August 1925 , restricting transport to fuel , petroleum , livestock , and perishable goods .
On 29 October , all shipments except foodstuffs were eliminated , in an effort to reduce the transport backlog the railroad was experiencing . 1926 - 1945 Section::::1926 - 1945 .
The Florida land boom collapsed in 1926 .
At that time , the only methods of bringing supplies into the area were on the FEC 's single track or through the Port of Miami , as Port Everglades was not yet completed .
On 10 January 1926 , the schooner Prinz Valdemar sank in the channel of the Port of Miami , trapping eleven vessels and effectively blockading the port until 29 February , when the Army Corps of Engineers dug a new channel around the capsized vessel .
Real estate firms solely financed by continuous development began to fail , and the financial crisis began to extend to larger developers .
The Miami Hurricane of 1926 , with the highest sustained winds ever recorded in the state of Florida , was the final blow .
Fort Lauderdale suffered extensive damage from the hurricane , which killed 50 people and destroyed an estimated 3500 structures in the city .
In February 1928 , Port Everglades was opened .
The city had just begun to recover from the 1926 hurricane when another devastating hurricane struck , this time to the north , in Palm Beach County .
The 1928 Okeechobee Hurricane only slightly damaged Fort Lauderdale , but the enormous death toll contributed to the perception that Florida was not the paradise that had been promoted by developers .
When the Great Depression struck in 1929 , it had little effect on the city , which was already in a depression from the real estate bubble burst three years earlier .
While the collapse of the land boom and the depression had reversed the sharp growth of 1925 , the population of the city began to grow at a moderate pace .
In 1930 , there were 8666 people in the city .
That number had risen to 17,996 by 1940 .
The United States did not enter World War II until 1941 , but Fort Lauderdale felt the effect of the war sooner than most of the rest of the country .
In December 1939 , a British cruiser chased the German freighter Arauca into Port Everglades , where she remained until the US seized her in 1941 , when Germany declared war on the US .
The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States ' subsequent entry into the war had almost immediate effects on the city .
Blackouts were imposed , and several allied vessels were torpedoed by German U - boats , including at least one ship within sight of the shoreline .
The first Medal of Honor recipient in World War II was a graduate of Fort Lauderdale High School ; Second Lieutenant Alexander R. Nininger Jr. was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor on 29 January 1942 for his actions on 12 January 1942 in Abucay , Bataan , Philippines , during the Japanese invasion .
By mid-1942 , the United States Navy had converted Merle Fogg Field into Naval Air Station Fort Lauderdale , and had constructed two satellite landing fields , one at West Prospect Field , and the other in Pompano Beach ( which later became Pompano Beach Airpark , home of one of the Goodyear Blimps ) .
By the end of the war , the station had trained thousands of Navy pilots , including future congressman , UN Ambassador , Director of Central Intelligence , and President of the United States George H. W. Bush .
Additional facilities in the city included radar and range finding schools and a base at Port Everglades .
On 5 December 1945 , the five planes of Flight 19 departed on a routine training mission from NAS Fort Lauderdale and were never seen again .
It is presumed that the flight leader became disoriented and led the other planes out of range of land , causing the planes to run out of fuel and crash , but no wreckage has been found .
The strange disappearance of the flight and the coincidental explosion which destroyed Training 49 , a plane involved in a search for the missing squadron , contributed to the Bermuda Triangle myth .
AFTER 1945 Section::::After 1945 .
In 1946 , the Navy decommissioned its airfields in the area ; NAS Fort Lauderdale became Broward County International Airport ( later Fort Lauderdale - Hollywood International Airport ) and West Prospect Field became Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport , the eleventh - busiest general aviation airport in the country .
One year later , the 1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane , an unusually large ( 120 mile radius )
Category 4 hurricane , came ashore just north of the city , causing extensive damage due to flooding .
Earlier storms that year had saturated the ground , and the tremendous rainfall from this slow - moving storm left the city ( and much of the state ) under several inches of water for weeks .
In the 1950s , the city became a favorite destination for college students for spring break , a tradition immortalized in the 1960 film Where the Boys Are .
Every year in February , March , and April , tens of thousands of college students would come to relax at the beaches and party at the many bars along A1A.
The 1960 Census counted 83,648 people in the city , about 230 % of the 1950 figure .
A 1967 report estimated that the city was approximately 85 % developed , and the 1970 population figure was 139,590 After 1970 , as Fort Lauderdale became essentially built out , growth in the area shifted to suburbs to the west .
As cities such as Coral Springs , Miramar , and Pembroke Pines experienced explosive growth , Fort Lauderdale 's population stagnated , and the city actually shrank by almost 4,000 people between 1980 , when the city had 153,279 people , and 1990 , when the population was 149,377 .
A slight rebound brought the population back up to 152,397 at the 2000 census .
Since 2000 , Fort Lauderdale has gained slightly over 18,000 residents through annexation of seven neighborhoods in unincorporated Broward County .
Beginning in 1986 , with the passage of a bond issue , the city of Fort Lauderdale began an aggressive effort to connect the city 's arts and entertainment district , the historic downtown area , and the Las Olas shopping and beach district , and to shake its long - standing reputation as a cultural wasteland and college - student party town .
The centerpiece of the cultural renaissance was the Riverwalk project , which runs along the New River from the Broward Center for the Performing Arts to the Stranahan House , with work in progress to extend the walk to Las Olas Boulevard .
The Museum of Art | Fort Lauderdale , which moved into its current location in 1986 , and the Museum of Discovery and Science , which opened in its current location in 1992 , are cornerstones of the Riverwalk project .
A number of upscale high - rise residential towers along the river have encouraged the development of high - end shopping and entertainment throughout the downtown region .
After a rowdy 1985 spring break season , in which an estimated 350,000 college tourists caused disruption for several weeks in the spring , the city passed a series of restrictive laws in an effort to reduce the mayhem caused by the spring break throngs , and the mayor , Robert Dressler , appeared on Good Morning America to tell college students they were not welcome any longer in Fort Lauderdale .
Overnight parking was banned near the beach and an open - container law prohibiting the consumption of alcohol in public places was enacted .
The following spring , the city denied MTV a permit to set up their stage on the beach , and approximately 2,500 people were arrested as the new laws were strictly enforced .
In 1985 , 350,000 college students spent about $ 110 million during the nine - week spring break season ; by 2004 , 700,000 visitors , mostly families or European tourists , spent $ 800 million during the same period .
By 2006 , the number of college students visiting for spring break was estimated at approximately 10,000 .
The 2017 Fort Lauderdale airport shooting resulted in five deaths .
SEE ALSO
* Fort Lauderdale , Florida
* Timeline of Fort Lauderdale , Florida * South Florida metropolitan area * Broward County , Florida * History of Florida * New River , Broward County ,
FL REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Fort Lauderdale Historical Society official website