ENROLLMENT ACT
The Enrollment Act , , enacted March 3 , 1863 , also known as the Civil War Military Draft Act , was legislation passed by the United States Congress during the American Civil War to provide fresh manpower for the Union Army .
A form of conscription , the controversial act required the enrollment of every male citizen and those immigrants who had filed for citizenship between ages twenty and forty - five .
Federal agents established a quota of new troops due from each congressional district .
In some cities , particularly New York City , enforcement of the act sparked civil unrest as the war dragged on , leading to the New York City draft riots on July 13–16 .
It replaced the previous Militia Act of 1862 .
ORGANIZATION Section::::Organization .
The Provost Marshal General
James Barnet Fry administered the national implementation of the Enrollment Act and answered directly to Secretary of War Edwin Stanton .
Beneath Provost Marshal General Fry were the State Acting Assistant Provost Marshal Generals .
The State Provost Marshal Generals were not authorized by the Enrollment Act , but were appointed personally by James Fry to attend to matters in each individual state .
New York and Pennsylvania were the only states that had more than one State Acting Assistant Marshal general ; New York had three and Pennsylvania had two .
Each state was divided along district lines with each district under the jurisdiction of an enrollment board .
The enrollment boards were headed by a district provost marshal and also included a surgeon and a commissioner .
Each enrollment board employed clerks , deputies , and special agents as needed .
The enrollment boards divided themselves into sub - districts along ward ( in cities ) and township ( in rural areas ) lines .
In each sub - district a census was conducted by an enrollment officer to document every man eligible for the draft in the sub - district .
CAUSES OF UNREST Section::::Causes of unrest .
The policies of substitution and commutation were controversial practices that allowed drafted citizens to opt out of service by either furnishing a suitable substitute to take the place of the draftee or paying $ 300 .
Both provisions were created with the intention of softening the effect of the draft on pacifists , the antidraft movement , and the propertied classes .
The result however was general public resentment of both policies .
The two practices were major points of contention among the general public and led directly to the slogan " rich man 's war , poor man 's fight . "
SUBSTITUTION Section::::Substitution .
The policy of substitutions was continued throughout the war .
The problem with substitution was that it provided substitutes with powerful incentives to desert soon after enlisting .
Career " jumpers " made a living off of enlisting as a substitute , collecting their compensation , deserting before their units were dispatched to the front , and repeating the process .
The problem was well known to the military commanders who regularly saw the same recruits repeatedly .
In addition , troops furnished by substitution were considered to be of an inferior quality in comparison to regulars and volunteers .
COMMUTATION Section::::Commutation .
Commutation ( paying $ 300 to escape the draft ) was created in an effort to keep substitution prices low .
If commutation were not instated , the price of a substitute would have quickly soared past $ 300 .
Also , commutation was intended to raise money for the war effort .
While commutation raised war funds , it was often a criticism of the draft that it was better at raising money than troops .
The rationalization for commutation was that unwilling troops were ineffective so the government might as well extract funds from the unwilling if it got poor service .
Despite the good intentions behind commutation , it was one of the most hated policies of the war .
1864
AMENDMENT Section::::1864 amendment .
Congress passed an amendment to the Enrollment Act in 1864 .
Section 5 limited the length of an exemption from the draft by payment of a commutation fee to one year .
Then , those drafted were required to serve or to furnish substitutes .
1865
AMENDMENT Section::::1865 amendment .
Congress passed another amendment to the Enrollment Act on March 3 , 1865 ; this is sometimes referred to itself as the Enrollment Act of 1865 .
Section 21 of the Act ( ) imposed denationalization ( loss of citizenship ) as a penalty for draft evasion or desertion .
Justice John Marshall Harlan II 's dissent in Afroyim v. Rusk mentioned the Enrollment Act of 1865 as an example of a law in which citizenship could be revoked without a person 's consent and that the Congress then regarded it as constitutional .
SEE ALSO * Gangs of New York – a film depicting the riots the Act caused in New York City * Conscription in the United States
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Congressional Record - A full text of version of the 1863 Enrollment Act * Commentary on the 1863 Enrollment Act on Answers.com * Enrollment Act Riots on MrLincolnAndNewYork.org
* Map of Riot Locations - " Mr Lincoln and New York " web site ( under grant from The Lehrman Institute )