TELL ME
YOU LOVE ME ( TV SERIES )
Tell Me
You Love Me is an American cable television drama series that premiered on HBO and on The Movie Network on September 9 , 2007 .
The series was created by Cynthia Mort and originally conceived as Sexlife .
The pilot episode was produced and directed by Patricia Rozema and shot in Winnipeg , Manitoba .
The series was picked up by HBO for a second season in October 2007 , but was ultimately canceled in July 2008 when Mort said she and the network " were unable to find the direction of the show for the second season " .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Tell Me
You Love Me revolves around three couples , Jamie and Hugo ( Borth and Kirby ) , Katie and David ( Walker and DeKay ) , and Carolyn and Palek ( Walger and Scott ) , each with their own problems concerning intimacy in their relationships .
They seek the help of therapist May Foster ( Alexander ) , who herself has relationship problems with her partner Arthur ( Selby ) .
CAST REGULAR CAST
* Jane Alexander as Dr. May Foster
* Michelle Borth as Jamie * Tim DeKay as David
* Aislinn Paul as Isabella
* Adam Scott as Palek * Katharine Towne as Mason * Sonya Walger as Carolyn * Ally Walker as Katie * Julie Mond as Nicole RECURRING GUEST STARS
* David Selby as Arthur Foster * Luke Kirby as Hugo
* Ryan Wynott as Joshua * Ian Somerhalder as Nick * Sherry Stringfield as Rita * Ronny Cox as John STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Each episode screens without any introduction , no title cards , and no opening credits .
The episodes are also shot with handheld cameras , giving the show a somewhat documentary - like feel .
No episode has a music score or soundtrack , except for one song which generally starts in the last two to three scenes and carries over the closing credits .
The title card for the show is not shown until immediately before the closing credits .
DEPICTION OF SEX Section::::Depiction of sex .
The series gained early publicity because of its extremely realistic depictions of sexual intercourse , oral sex and masturbation .
Despite persistent rumors to the contrary , and a notable lack of comment on the matter from either HBO or the production team , the sex scenes were simulated .
Director Patricia Rozema was among those to have addressed this issue directly : With regard to these controversial scenes actress
Jane Alexander has said the following :
Michelle Borth , whose scenes were the most explicit , said , " We tried to do it as authentic as possible , but we were not having sex . " RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Times James Poniewozik named it one of the Top 10 New TV Series of 2007 , ranking it at # 3 .
The first episode of the show only attracted a total of about 910,000 viewers — far fewer than what the network had been pulling in for previous series such as Rome , Deadwood , and even the ill - fated John from Cincinnati .
A month after its debut , HBO claimed the show had drawn a total of 3.1 million viewers across seven broadcasts .
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release . !
DVD
name!!Country!!Release date!!Ep
# ! !
Additional information
The Complete First SeasonUnited StatesFebruary 11 , 2008align="center " 10Four audio commentaries
The Complete First SeasonAustraliaApril 29 , 2009align="center"10
The Complete First Season ( כל פרקי העונה הראשונה)Israel2008align="center"10
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Overview of Tell Me You Love Me : " Everything About HBO 's Tell Me You Love Me "