COUNTY COURT BUSINESS CENTRE
The County Court Business Centre ( CCBC ) is a centre of the County Court of England and Wales created to deal with claims by the use of various electronic media .
Unlike other County Court centres the CCBC does not physically hear cases .
If any case might require a hearing it is transferred to another centre .
CREATION Section::::Creation .
The increasing ubiquity of computers and Internet access led to public discussion of allowing greater use of information technology to run court proceedings .
In January 1990 the Claim Production Centre ( CPC ) ( originally called the Summons Production Centre ) was created , with the power to issue and serve claims through information technology .
This is currently enshrined within Rule 7.10 of the Civil Procedure Rules 1998 ( CPR ) .
This states that " … there shall be a Production Centre for the issue of claim forms and other related matters … " and that the relevant practice direction makes provision for its use and any modification or disapplication of the CPR .
All claims issued through the CPC were originally issued in the name of a county court in the same way as claims issued in the traditional manner .
In March 1992 the CCBC was created to remove the burden of routine matters in simple CPC cases from the other county court .
The current definition of such matters is contained in Practice Direction
7C. LOCATION Section::::Location .
Currently both the CPC and CCBC are located in Northampton .
ACCESS Section::::Access .
Use of the CCBC is available only to members .
Membership is free and is available to anyone who successfully demonstrates they can meet the IT requirements of the CCBC .
Continued use of the CCBC is subject to the Rules of Membership and Code of Conduct .
USE Section::::Use .
Cases can be issued through the CCBC in two different ways .
MONEY CLAIM ONLINE
Section::::Money Claim
Online .
Money Claim
Online ( MCOL ) was created in February 2002 .
It provides users who wish to issue a limited number of claims to commence and manage County Court proceedings using a website , and to pay court fees online using a credit card .
BULK ISSUE Section::::Bulk issue .
Instead of submitting an individual claim form along with an individual payment of the correct fee for each case , CCBC users submit a single file containing each of the claims they wish to issue on a particular day as a data record in a specified format .
Fees for all of these cases can be paid in a lump sum .
Files are submitted electronically in XML format via a secure API gateway using a system known as Secure Data Transfer ( SDT ) , developed under contract to Her Majesty 's Courts and Tribunals Service in 2013 by a third party supplier .
Previously files could be submitted on floppy disk or magnetic tape .
For this reason long - standing users of the CCBC may still refer to the data file as the " tape " .
In 2012 a secure email transfer system was implemented as an interim measure until the new SDT system was completed .
Once this was done the secure email transfer option was removed .
CCBC users may poll the SDT API to request updates on the status of their cases .
Depending on the nature of the original request some information ( i.e. basic validation ) may be available within a few minutes of data having been uploaded , whilst other information may not be available until the request has been fully processed by the Court Service internal systems - this can take 24 hours or longer .
As well as issuing claim forms , the CCBC also handles requests for judgments and warrants of execution in the same manner .
DEFENDANT RESPONSES
Section::::Defendant responses .
Claim forms issued by the CCBC are served upon the defendant(s ) in the same manner as other courts .
However , the response pack also includes a password to allow the defendant to file their response via a website .
Where the defendant contests some , or all , of the claim , the claimant is required ( if they wish to continue ) to request the case be transferred out of the CCBC .
LIMITATIONS Section::::Limitations .
Rule 7 allows for limits to be placed on the types of claim that may be issued via the CCBC .
These are currently : *
The claim must be for issue in the County Court and not the High Court ; *
The claim form can not refer to separate particulars of claim ; *
The claim must be for a specified sum of money less than £ 100,000 sterling , and expressed in sterling ; *
The claim can not be against more than two Defendants ; * Where there are two defendants
the claim against each of them must be for the same amount ; *
The defendants must not be a child or patient ( within the meaning of Rule 21 of the Civil Procedure Rules ) or a legally assisted person ( within the meaning of the Legal Aid Act 1988 ) ;
* The defendant can not be the Crown ; *
The defendants ' address for service must be within England or Wales .
In addition the CCBC can not be used to issue claims under Part 8 of the CPR .
REFERENCES * Northampton Bulk Centre
* Money Claim Online
* Civil Procedure Rules 1998 online