PAINT
YOUR WAGON ( FILM ) Paint Your Wagon is a 1969 Western musical film starring Lee Marvin , Clint Eastwood , and Jean Seberg .
The film was adapted by Paddy Chayefsky from the 1951 musical Paint Your Wagon by Lerner and Loewe .
It is set in a mining camp in Gold Rush - era California .
It was directed by Joshua Logan .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
When a wagon crashes into a ravine , prospector Ben Rumson finds two adult male occupants , brothers , one of whom is dead and the other of whom has a broken arm and leg .
While burying the dead man , gold dust is discovered at the grave site .
Ben stakes a claim on the land and adopts the surviving brother as his " Pardner " while he recuperates .
Pardner is innocent and romantic , illustrated by him singing a love song about a girl named Elisa ( " I Still See Elisa " ) , who he later confesses exists only in his imagination .
Pardner is a farmer who hopes to make enough in the gold rush to buy some land , and is suspicious of the drunken and seemingly amoral Ben .
Ben claims that while he is willing to fight , steal , and cheat at cards , his system of ethics does not allow him to betray a partner .
Ben will share the spoils of prospecting on the condition that Pardner takes care of him in his moments of drunkenness and melancholy .
After the discovery of gold , " No Name City " springs up as a tent city with the miners alternating between wild parties ( " Hand Me Down
That Can o ' Beans " ) and bouts of melancholy ( " They Call the Wind Maria " ) .
The men become frustrated with the lack of female companionship , so the arrival of a Mormon , Jacob Woodling , with two wives is enough to catch the attention of the entire town .
The miners persuade Woodling to sell one of his wives to the highest bidder .
Elizabeth , Jacob 's younger and more rebellious wife , agrees to be sold based on the reasoning that whatever she gets , it ca n't be as bad as what she currently has .
A drunken Ben winds up with the highest bid for Elizabeth .
Ben is readied for the wedding by the other miners ( " Whoop - Ti - Ay " ) , and is married to Elizabeth under " mining law , " with Ben being granted exclusive rights to " all her mineral resources .
" Elizabeth , not content to be treated as property , threatens to shoot Ben on their wedding night if she is not treated with respect .
While she believes Ben is not the type to truly settle down , this is acceptable if he builds a proper wooden cabin to provide her with some security for when he inevitably leaves .
Ben , impressed by Elizabeth 's determination , enlists the miners to keep this promise , and Elizabeth rejoices in having a proper home ( " A Million Miles Away Behind the Door " ) .
Sensing the other miners becoming obsessed with her , Ben is consumed by jealousy and paranoia .
News comes of the pending arrival of " six French tarts " to a neighboring town and a plan is hatched to kidnap the women and bring them to " No Name City "
( " There 's a Coach Comin ' In " ) , thus providing the other miners with female companionship .
Ben heads up the mission and leaves Elizabeth in the care of Pardner .
The two fall in love ( " I Talk to the Trees " ) , whereupon Elizabeth , saying she also still loves Ben , convinces them that " if a Mormon man can have two wives , why ca n't a woman have two husbands ? "
As the town booms , the arrangement with Ben , Pardner , and Elizabeth works well for a while .
But soon the town becomes large enough that civilized people from the East begin to settle there .
A parson begins to make a determined effort to persuade the people of No Name City to give up their evil ways , warning the townsfolk that they will be swallowed up by God 's wrath if they do not repent ( " The Gospel of No Name City " ) .
As the gold plays out , Ben and a group of miners discover that gold dust is dropping through the floor boards of many of the saloons .
They tunnel under all the businesses to get the gold ( " The Best Things in Life Are Dirty " ) .
Meanwhile , a group of new settlers is rescued from the snow , and the strait - laced family is invited to spend the winter with Elizabeth and Pardner , who is assumed to be her only husband .
Ben is left to fend for himself ( " Wand'rin ' Star " ) .
In revenge , he introduces one of the family , naive young Horton Fenty , to the pleasures of Rotten Luck Willie 's saloon and cat house .
This leads to Elizabeth dismissing both Ben and Pardner from the log cabin .
Pardner takes to gambling in Willie 's ( " Gold Fever " ) .
During a bull - and - bear fight , the streets collapse into the tunnels dug by Ben and the others and the town is destroyed .
A reprise of " The Gospel of No Name City " plays as the town is literally swallowed by the earth .
Ben departs for other gold fields , commenting that he never knew Pardner 's real name , which Pardner then reveals : Sylvester Newel .
Elizabeth and Pardner reconcile and plan to stay .
CAST * Lee Marvin as Ben Rumson * Clint Eastwood as Sylvester Newel/"Pardner
" * Jean Seberg as Elizabeth
* Harve Presnell as Rotten Luck Willie
* Ray Walston as " Mad Jack " Duncan * Tom Ligon as Horton Fenty * Alan Dexter as The Parson
* William O'Connell as Horace Tabor
* Ben Baker as Haywood Holbrook * Alan Baxter as Mr. Fenty * Paula Trueman as Mrs. Fenty
* Robert Easton as Atwell * Geoffrey Norman as Foster
* H.B. Haggerty as Steve Bull * Terry Jenkins as Joe Mooney
* Karl Bruck as Schermerhorn * John Mitchum as Jacob Woodling * Sue Casey as Sarah Woodling * Eddie Little Sky as Native American ( Originally credited as " Indian " )
* Harvey Parry as Higgins * H. W. Gim as Wong
* William Mims as Frock - coated man * Roy Jenson as Hennessey
* Pat Hawley as Clendennon MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
All songs written by Lerner and Loewe unless otherwise noted .
*
" I 'm on My Way " –
Chorus * *
" I Still See Elisa " –
Pardner
* * " The First Thing You Know " ( Lerner / Previn ) –
Ben * * " Hand Me
Down
That Can o ' Beans " – Chorus including the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band
* *
" They Call the Wind Maria " –
Rotten Luck Willie , Chorus
* * " Whoop - Ti - Ay ! "
– Chorus * * " A Million Miles Away Behind the Door " ( Lerner / Previn ) – Elizabeth
*
* " I Talk to the Trees " –
Pardner * *
" There 's a Coach Comin ' In " –
Rotten Luck Willie , Chorus
* * " The Gospel of No Name City " ( Lerner / Previn ) –
Parson * * " Best Things " ( Lerner / Previn ) – Ben , Mad Jack , Pardner * * " Wand'rin ' Star " – Ben , Chorus * * " Gold Fever " ( Lerner / Previn ) – Pardner ,
Chorus
*
* " Finale ( I 'm on My Way ) " – Ben , Mad Jack , Chorus * DIFFERENCES BETWEEN STAGE AND FILM VERSIONS Section::::Differences between stage and film versions .
Chayefsky provided a significantly changed storyline from the stage musical version .
In the film " Rumson City " is simply called " No Name City , " and Ben Rumson has no daughter .
In the stage show , " Elisa " is Ben 's departed wife , but in the film , she is Pardner 's fantasy .
The character " Julio " is replaced by " Pardner " , now an American and Ben 's partner in the gold claim .
Additionally , in the film it is Pardner who falls in love with Elizabeth , Ben 's wife under mining law , rather than the stage musical character Edgar Crocker .
The temporary solution to the love triangle among Ben , Pardner and Elizabeth appears only in the film as well .
In the stage version , Ben Rumson dies at the end ; in the film he survives .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Lee Marvin accepted the lead role instead of appearing in The Wild Bunch .
He received $ 1 million while Eastwood was paid $ 750,000 .
Faye Dunaway turned down the role of Elizabeth before Seberg was cast .
Diana Rigg and Julie Andrews were also considered for the role .
Eastwood and Marvin did their own singing , while Seberg 's songs were dubbed .
The early incarnation of the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band had a cameo in the song " Hand Me
Down
That Can o ' Beans .
"
Some songs from the original musical were dropped , some were added by Alan Jay Lerner and André Previn , and others were used in different contexts .
Paint
Your Wagon was shot near Baker City , Oregon , with filming beginning in May 1968 and ending that October .
Other locations include Big Bear Lake , California and San Bernardino National Forest ; the interiors were filmed at Paramount Studios , with Joshua Logan directing .
The film 's initial budget was $ 10 million , before it eventually doubled to $ 20 million .
A daily expense of $ 80,000 was incurred to transport cast and crew to the filming location , as the closest hotel was nearly 60 miles away .
The elaborate camp used in the film cost $ 2.4 million to build .
The film was released at a time when movie musicals were going out of fashion , especially with younger audiences .
Its overblown budget and nearly three - hour length became notorious in the press .
Eastwood was frustrated by the long delays in the making of the film , later saying that the experience strengthened his resolve to become a director .
According to Robert Osborne , Marvin drank heavily during the filming , which may have enhanced his screen appearance , but led to delays and many retakes .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Paint
Your Wagon was released in United States theaters in October 1969 .
The film became Paramount 's sixth largest success up to that point ( and the sixth highest - grossing film of 1969 )
when it earned $ 31.6 million over its release , although the earnings never offset the cost of production and marketing .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critical reception was mostly negative .
Paint Your Wagon currently maintains a 27 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
In the UK , Paint Your Wagon had a 79-week 70 mm roadshow run at The Astoria Theatre ; London and Marvin 's deep - voiced rendition of " Wand'rin ' Star , " accompanied by the film 's choir , became a number one hit .
His voice was described by Jean Seberg as " like rain gurgling down a rusty pipe " .
Interviewed on NPR , Marvin said that the song was a hit in Australia , and someone there described it as " The first 33⅓ recorded at 45 . "
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The film is briefly parodied in the 1998 Simpsons episode
All Singing , All Dancing .
REFERENCES
Notes Bibliography EXTERNAL LINKS