COMPREHENSIVE METABOLIC PANEL
The comprehensive metabolic panel , or chemical screen , ( CMP ; CPT code 80053 ) is a panel of 14 blood tests which serves as an initial broad medical screening tool .
The CMP provides a rough check of kidney function , liver function , diabetic and parathyroid status , and electrolyte and fluid balance , but this type of screening has its limitations .
Abnormal values from a CMP are often the result of false positives and thus the CMP may need to be repeated ( or a more specific test performed ) , requiring a second blood drawing procedure and possibly additional expense for the patient , even though no disease is present .
This test is also known as SMA12 + 2 test .
The CMP is an expanded version of the basic metabolic panel ( BMP ) , which does not include liver tests .
A CMP ( or BMP ) can be ordered as part of a routine physical examination , or may be used to monitor a patient with a chronic disease , such as diabetes mellitus or hypertension .
Previous names for the panel of tests have been Chem 12 , Chemistry panel , Chemistry screen , SMA 12 , SMA 20 and SMAC ( Sequential Multiple Analysis - Computer ) .
The tests are performed on machines based on the AutoAnalyzer invented in 1957 .
TESTING Section::::Testing .
Typically , the patient fasts for ten or twelve hours before the blood is drawn for the test — this is particularly important for getting a useful blood glucose measurement .
CMPs are also frequently performed on nonfasting patients , but the glucose level in those cases is not as useful .
The following tests are then performed : GENERAL TESTS Section::::General tests .
These tests help screen for a wide variety of problems .
The glucose test in particular helps screen for diabetes mellitus and pre - diabetes .
The calcium test can indicate or monitor bone diseases or diseases of the parathyroid gland or kidneys .
Calcium salts , lithium , thiazide diuretics , thyroxine , and vitamin D can all increase levels and may interfere with this test .
* Serum glucose
* Calcium KIDNEY
FUNCTION ASSESSMENT
* Blood urea nitrogen ( BUN )
* Creatinine ELECTROLYTES Section::::Electrolytes .
Electrolyte levels and the balance among them are tightly regulated by the body .
Both individual values and ratios among the values are significant ; abnormalities among either can indicate problems such as an electrolyte disturbance , acid - base imbalance , or kidney dysfunction .
* Sodium * Potassium * Chloride * Carbon dioxide ( CO )
PROTEIN TESTS
Section::::Protein tests .
Tests of protein levels in the blood help screen for both kidney and liver disorders .
* Serum total protein ( TP )
* Human serum albumin
LIVER
FUNCTION ASSESSMENT
* Bilirubin
* Alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) * Aspartate amino transferase ( AST or SGOT )
* Alanine amino transferase ( ALT or SGPT )
RESULTS Section::::Results .
The U.S. NIH provides ranges considered within normal limits , though optimal levels may vary by individual .
Compare also the ranges given at Reference ranges for blood tests .
+ Normal CMP Results !
Specimen !
Normal Range !
Units 0.7 - 1.3 ( men ) SEE ALSO
* Automated analyzer *
Basic metabolic panel * Medical technologist
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Comprehensive Metabolic Panel American Association for Clinical Chemistry 2012