UNITED STATES ARMY BASIC TRAINING United States Army Basic Training ( also known as Initial Entry Training , IET ) is the recruit training program of physical and mental preparation for service in the United States Army , United States Army Reserve or Army National Guard .
Carried out at several different Army posts around the United States , Basic Training is designed to be highly intense and challenging .
The challenge comes as much from the difficulty of physical training as it does from the psychological adjustment to an unfamiliar way of life .
Basic Training is divided into two parts : Basic Combat Training ( BCT ) and Advanced Individual Training ( AIT ) .
BCT consists of the first ten weeks of the total Basic Training cycle and is identical for all Army , Army Reserve and Army National Guard recruits .
AIT instead consists of the remainder of the total Basic Training period and is where recruits train in the specifics of their chosen fields .
As such , AIT is different for each available Army career path , or Military Occupational Specialty ( MOS ) .
AIT courses can last anywhere from 4 weeks to 7 months , and possibly more for foreign language training .
Soldiers are still continually tested for physical fitness and weapons proficiency and are subject to the same duties , strict daily schedule and disciplinary rules as in BCT .
OVERVIEW
DRILL SERGEANTS Section::::Overview .
Section::::Drill sergeants .
Drill sergeants are the instructors responsible for most of the recruit training that takes place in Initial Entry Training .
They accompany recruits throughout the training process , instructing and correcting them in everything ( from firing weapons to the correct way to address a superior ) and are also largely responsible for the safety of recruits .
They are recognizable by their distinctive headgear ( campaign hats ) , often called " brown rounds " or " Smokey Bear " hats , as they resemble that character 's round park ranger - style hat .
BATTLE BUDDIES
Section::::Battle buddies .
Battle buddies generally refer to partners in a combat scenario .
However , throughout Basic Training the term is used to describe a disciplinary principle whereby recruits are generally prohibited from walking anywhere alone .
When traveling away from the platoon or a drill sergeant , recruits are expected to travel in pairs , known as battle buddies .
Battle buddies are sometimes assigned , or can be chosen by recruits when the need to travel arises .
DAILY SCHEDULE calisthenics FIRE GUARD AND CHARGE OF QUARTERS Section::::Fire guard and charge of quarters .
Every night , at least two recruits from the platoon must be awake at any given time , patrolling their barracks area , watching for fires , cleaning the barracks and watching for recruits attempting to leave the barracks area .
They wake the next pair of recruits at the end of their one - hour shift .
This duty is called fire guard .
Fire guard stems back to the days of wooden barracks and wood - burning stoves .
The fire guard would watch the stoves to make sure that the barracks would not catch fire .
Since open flames are not generally used to heat sleeping areas any longer , present - day fire guard during Basic Training is more an exercise in discipline than a practical necessity , although if the weather gets cold enough , some groups conducting overnight outdoor training will still use a kerosene " pot bellied " stove which must be watched to prevent accidental fires .
Charge of quarters , commonly called CQ , functions in a somewhat similar manner .
CQ shifts rotate throughout the entire company , with just two recruits from the company staying awake per shift .
The actual charge of quarters is the drill sergeant and the pair of recruits staying awake are the " runners " , meaning that they perform tasks for the CQ .
They perform some of the same duties as the fire guard shift .
Only the CQ on duty is permitted to open the barracks doors and the runners must alert the CQ if someone else attempts to enter or leave the barracks .
HANDS - ON TRAINING Section::::Hands - on training .
For many hands - on instructional sessions , recruits are transported to other locations on - post that specialize in the given subject .
For instance , a class on the use of the Claymore anti - personnel land mine is given at a location where a field is already set up with the appropriate props for the simulation , including fake claymores that recruits can practice on .
Classes are also given in the use of the AT4 shoulder - fired anti - tank missile launcher .
For this class , recruits are brought to a mock battlefield riddled with decommissioned tanks and other vehicles .
Each recruit fires a trainer AT4 weapon , loaded with tracer ammunition , at various targets on the battlefield .
For weaponry training that involves only the use of fake weapons , one real demonstration of the actual weapon is usually performed .
For example , at claymore training one real claymore may be rigged and remotely detonated ; and at AT4 training one recruit ( usually the one with the highest rifle qualification score ) is chosen to fire a live AT4 .
SPLIT TRAINING OPTION
Section::::Split training option .
The Split Training Option ( also known as STO or Split - Op ) is an enlistment option available for Army National Guard and Army Reserve recruits .
This program allows individuals to attend Basic Training during one summer , drill with their respective units once a month on weekends while attending school , and then attend Advance Individual Training after graduation .
This enlistment option is popular among high school students who want to enlist right away while still attending school .
LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
The United States picks where a Soldier goes to Basic Combat Training based on openings and is not MOS dependent , unless the Soldier selected an MOS that requires OSUT .
( Infantry , Military Police , Combat Engineer )
However , the location where a recruit is sent for Advanced Individual Training depends on his or her chosen Military Occupational Specialty , or MOS , which is selected upon enlistment .
Recruits requiring air transportation to their training locations are flown via commercial flight at the U.S. Army 's expense .
ONE
STATION UNIT TRAINING Section::::One Station Unit Training .
With some MOSs , both the BCT and AIT phases of training are accomplished back - to - back at the same location , with the same instructors , as well as with the same fellow recruits .
This is called One Station Unit Training , or OSUT .
For example , the Infantry MOS consists of the usual BCT followed by five weeks of AIT , all within the same location .
A similar program is followed for cavalry scouts , tank crewmen , military police , field artillery and some engineer MOSs .
BASIC COMBAT TRAINING SITES Section::::Basic Combat Training sites .
The U.S. Army has four sites for BCT :
* Fort Benning in Columbus , Georgia ; also provides Infantry and Armor OSUT * Fort Jackson in Columbia , South Carolina ; largest of all BCT locations * Fort Leonard Wood in St. Robert , Missouri ; also provides Corps of Engineers , Chemical Corps and Military Police OSUT * Fort Sill in Lawton , Oklahoma ; also provides Artillery OSUT ADVANCED INDIVIDUAL TRAINING Section::::Advanced Individual Training .
AIT is held at the corresponding school for the recruit 's MOS ( see Advanced Individual Training ) .
RECEPTION BATTALION Section::::Reception Battalion .
Reception Battalion ( RECBN ) is the period that begins when the recruit arrives at the Army post where he or she is to undergo Basic Training .
It typically lasts 4 to 10 days and is where initial preparations for training are performed , including : * Haircut ( head shave or buzz cut for men ; women must either cut hair short or wear pinned up ) * Physical examination ( including blood and urine tests )
* Inoculations * Distribution of uniforms and personal gear , such as duffel bag and mouth guard
* Instruction in basic marching and standing , as well as upkeep of barracks FITNESS TRAINING COMPANY Section::::Fitness Training Company .
The recruits who fail the physical assessment test can be held back at Reception Battalion , where they are placed in Fitness Training Company ( FTC ) , sometimes referred to in slang form as " Fat Camp .
" FTC involves daily , rigorous physical training and diet monitoring by Master Fitness Trainers ( MFTs ) .
Recruits in FTC are given two chances each week to complete the physical assessment test and upon passing are allowed to move on to the next phase of Basic Training .
Recruits that spend four weeks in FTC without passing the physical assessment test ( failing the test eight times ) may be discharged from the Army via an Entry Level Separation ( see Discharge from Basic Training below ) .
Recruits that sustain injuries during Basic Training , such as a broken arm , may also be assigned to a FTC for rehabilitation .
BASIC COMBAT TRAINING Section::::Basic Combat Training .
Basic Combat Training , or BCT , is a ten - week training cycle that teaches identical skills for all MOSs ( Military Occupational Specialties ) .
This is because the Army believes that no matter the soldier 's specialty , they should all be taught the same basic procedures and skill set
so they are ready to properly work together and defend themselves , as well as their fellow soldiers , if / when necessary .
BCT is divided into three phases .
The three phases are each represented by a color : red , white and blue for Phase I , II and III , respectively .
BCT trainees are progressively allowed more responsibility , privileges and independence each time they achieve a new phase of training .
Whereas trainees in Phase I are constantly monitored and led around by their drill sergeants , Phase III trainees are largely responsible for making sure tasks are completed correctly and on - time and keeping themselves on - schedule .
At some Basic Training stations , the current phase is denoted by the color of guidon carried by the platoon .
Following the recruits ' successful completion of the Field Training Exercise ( a final exercise just before graduation ) , the Phase III blue guidon is sometimes traded for a tri - color red , white and blue guidon that symbolizes successful completion of all three BCT phases .
PHASE
I
Section::::Phase I.
During Phase I or the " Red Phase , " recruits are subject to " Total Control , " meaning their every action is monitored and constantly corrected by drill sergeants .
Recruits are often subjected to group corrective action for even minor infractions , the purpose being to develop an acute attention to detail and foster a sense of common responsibility among the unit .
WEEK 1
Section::::Week 1 .
Week 1 begins with the recruits meeting the drill sergeants who will be responsible for their training throughout BCT .
The drill sergeants pick up their recruits from Reception Battalion and either transport or march them to their company area .
The company area is the common area for the entire company ( 200 recruits ) and is surrounded by four barracks — one for each platoon ( 50 recruits each ) in the company .
Upon arrival at the company area , recruits are subjected to exercises such as the " bag drill .
" This is a training exercise in which all the recruits ' duffel bags are dumped into one large pile and the recruits are told to find their personal duffel bags simultaneously and within a set time limit .
Following the bag drill , the recruits are divided into platoons .
Drill and ceremony training begins during week 1 .
This refers to correct procedures for marching and body movements such as standing at attention , " facing " ( right - face / left - face ) , " at ease , " " to the rear " and others .
For this and many other exercises , soldiers are sometimes issued fake rifles known as " rubber ducks , " so that they can become familiar with the proper handling and added weight of their weapon before they have actually been trained to use it .
More recently , recruits have begun to be issued fully functional
M16A2 / A4s
during the first week of BCT to allow for early familiarization with the weapon .
Classroom instructions are given in each of the seven " Army Core Values , " which include loyalty , duty , respect , selfless service , honor , integrity and personal courage ( meant to spell out the mnemonic LDRSHIP , or leadership ) .
There are also classes held on subjects that involve day - to - day personal life in the Army , such as sexual harassment awareness / prevention and race relations .
WEEK 2
Section::::Week 2 .
During week 2 , recruits begin unarmed combat training , also known as hand - to - hand combat , Combatives or Ground Fighting Technique ( GFT ) .
The training often culminates in a competition where each platoon chooses one recruit to compete .
At gender - integrated training stations , the platoons each choose one male and one female .
Recruits are also instructed in map reading , land navigation and compass use .
These skills are put to the test at the compass course , where recruits are divided into groups and must navigate their way to a series of points throughout a wooded area .
Recruits will also tackle Victory Tower and the Teamwork Development Course during week 2 .
Victory Tower is an exercise where recruits must navigate through several obstacles at extreme heights , including climbing and traversing rope ladders and bridges .
They must then rappel down a 50-foot wall ( back - first , with rope harness ) .
In the Teamwork Development Course , squads must navigate a series of obstacles , with emphasis on working as a team rather than as individuals .
First aid training , known as Combat Life Saver ( CLS ) , is also given during this period .
Recruits are trained in evaluating and properly treating casualties , ranging from dressing a wound to application of a tourniquet and dehydration treatment .
WEEK 3 Section::::Week 3 .
Recruits begin training with pugil sticks , methods for carrying an unconscious or immobile person and physical problem solving , such as finding a way to carry equipment from point A to point B given specific obstacles and constraints .
Recruits are also commonly sent to a gas chamber during this week , which is a large , sealed chamber where soldiers are subjected to CS gas while wearing their protective masks .
The gas chamber is the culmination of a series of classroom instructions on gas mask use .
Recruits are forced to unmask just before exiting the chamber so that they can briefly experience the effects of the gas .
Drill sergeants will usually ask each recruit to recite information while they are unmasked , such as name , social security number or the Pledge of Allegiance , so that the recruit is forced to open their mouth / eyes and/or take a breath while demonstrating continued focus .
Week 3 is also when the recruits are introduced to their standard - issue weapon , the M16A2 assault rifle or the M4 carbine .
This does not yet involve the actual firing of the rifle .
It does include basic rifle marksmanship ( BRM ) fundamentals training ( instruction in marksmanship techniques without firing the rifle .
For instance , trigger control is practiced by placing a wooden dowel down the barrel of the rifle with a coin placed on the exposed end .
If the recruit can pull the trigger without the coin falling from the dowel , their trigger control is satisfactory ) , as well as maintenance tasks , including " field stripping " ( quickly disassembling , cleaning , and reassembling )
the rifle .
Many of these tasks are now done during Week 1 as a part of the initial round of classroom instruction .
PHASE II Section::::Phase II .
Phase II , or the " White Phase " , is where soldiers begin actually firing weapons .
With the service rifle ( M16A2 ) , they will fire at various targets , which are progressively further downrange , making each successive target more difficult to hit , with additional pop - up targets at long range .
Other weapons the soldier becomes familiar with include various hand grenades ( such as the M67 ) , grenade launchers ( such as the M203 ) and machine guns ( such as the M240 , M249 and M2 ) .
The second week of Phase II involves familiarization with anti - tank / armor weaponry and other heavy weapons .
There is also an obstacle course which the soldiers are expected to negotiate within a certain time limit , known as the " confidence course " , since the main objective is to build self - confidence .
There is also the expectation of working as a team with the assigned battle buddy .
Additionally , there is continual , intense physical training as well as drill and ceremony training .
At the conclusion of Phase II , soldiers are expected to demonstrate proficiency with the various weaponry in which they trained , using numerous " go or no - go " ( pass / fail ) exercises prior to being allowed to move on to Phase III .
PHASE III Section::::Phase III .
Phase III , or the " Blue Phase , " is the culmination and possibly the most challenging of all the training phases .
During this phase , an Army Physical Fitness Test is administered to determine whether the recruit has successfully met the requirements for graduation .
Although not previously mentioned , an APFT is given at a minimum at every phase of training .
This is conducted to ensure that all recruits are meeting the standard along the way .
Recruits failing to meet the standard of the APFT will be locally retrained by their drill sergeants and a specialized fitness program is developed to focus on the recruits weaknesses while continuing to maintain and improve upon those events the recruit has successfully passed .
When a recruit has successfully passed the APFT , the recruit will have one of the critical benchmark requirements for graduation .
At some locations , soldiers who fail are not allowed to go into the field with the rest of the platoon .
The final APFT Test consists of the Standard Army Annual APFT Examination .
A minimum of 180 points is required to pass U.S. Army Basic Training .
Those who pass will move on to " Bivouac " ( camping ) and FTX ( Field Training Exercises ) , such as nighttime combat operations and MOUT ( Military Operations in Urban Terrain ) training .
There is no access to the dining facility during these exercises , so meals are given in the form of either MREs ( Meal Ready to Eat ) or field chow .
Drill sergeants will make much of this in adversarial process , working against the recruits in many of the night operations by trying to foil plans , et cetera .
Other BCT companies also in their FTX weeks may join in simulated combat scenarios , generally at night , with intense competition to prove their particular company the better trained . Week 2 of Phase III ( the 8th week of Basic Training ) culminates in a special tactical FTX during which the drill sergeants will advise , but allow recruit platoon leaders and squad leaders to exercise primary decision - making .
They attempt to make virtually every one of these exercises different .
Because being a soldier is potentially an extremely hazardous job , recruits must demonstrate extreme aggression and fearlessness , tempered by intelligence and common sense .
Only those that demonstrate these vital attributes will be permitted to move on to AIT ( Advanced Individual Training ) .
Following their FTX , recruits then move into the final week of training , often called " recovery week , " At this time , soldiers must service and/or repair any items they are not taking on to AIT including weapons , bedding , issued equipment ( helmet , canteen , gas mask , et cetera ) as well as ensuring the platoon barracks is in good order to receive the next platoon of trainees .
This week also includes a final fitting of the recruit 's dress uniform as well as practice for the graduation ceremony , which takes place at the end of the cycle .
DISCHARGE FROM BASIC TRAINING Section::::Discharge from Basic Training .
A recruit can be discharged from the Army before the conclusion of Basic Training .
Discharges that occur before the completion of 180 days ( approximately 6 months ) of training are considered uncharacterized , which are neither honorable nor less than honorable .
* An Entry Level Separation ( ELS ) can occur when a recruit demonstrates unsatisfactory performance and/or misconduct .
A recruit can only be ELSed after at least 4 weeks of training and 2 counseling sessions , except under extreme circumstances , such as the recruit being deemed suicidal .
*
If it is found that a recruit is unable to train due to a chronic medical condition , he or she may obtain a medical discharge by the recommendation of an Army medical doctor .
* A discharge due to any condition Existing Prior To Service ( EPTS ) may occur when a recruit is found to have a prior medical condition existing before enlistment .
A recruit may receive a rare honorable discharge for an EPTS condition if they have been in Basic Training for more than 180 days .
SEE ALSO
* Basic Training – Initial Military Training
* Recruit training * Recruit Training Command , Great Lakes , Illinois
* United States Air Force Basic Military Training
* United States Coast Guard Training Center Cape May , New Jersey * United States Marine Corps Recruit Training
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The United States Army Initial Military Training ( DCG - IMT )
* U.S. Army Basic Training Website ( unofficial )