IN - N - OUT BURGER PRODUCTS
When In - N - Out Burger first opened in 1948 , the company only provided a basic menu of burgers , fries and beverages .
The foods it prepared were made on - site from fresh ingredients , including its french fries which were sliced and cooked to order .
Unlike other major competitors in the hamburger fast food restaurant business ( Burger King , McDonald 's and Wendy 's ) , as the chain expanded over the years , it has not added products such as chicken or salads to its menu since 1976 and has never changed its preparation methods .
The company utilizes a vertical integration model for its raw ingredients , procuring and manufacturing much of its food supplies in - house .
The company does not utilize freezers in its operations , shipping food daily to its stores from its facilities .
Instead of a broad menu like other competitors , In - N - Out has become known for its " secret menu " , or unadvertised variations of its burgers that are based on customer preferences , such as the popular " Animal Style . " BURGERS Section::::Burgers .
All burgers consist of zero ( in the case of a ' grilled cheese ' ) or more beef patties cooked to " medium - well " , and served on a toasted bun .
The standard style of burger includes tomato , hand - leafed lettuce and " spread " , a sauce similar to Thousand Island dressing .
MEAT Section::::Meat .
For most of its history , In - N - Out has produced its own meat in company - owned facilities .
The chain has a policy of using only fresh meat , and all of its stores are supplied by its California manufacturing operations located in Baldwin Park .
With its expansion into Texas , the restaurant opened its first production plant outside of California in a suburb of Dallas in order to increase its geographic footprint .
By keeping the manufacturing process in house , the chain is able to maintain strict quality control standards .
Beginning in March 2016
the company announced that it would move forward to sourcing its beef from cows that have not been treated with antibiotics .
The chain did not announce a timeframe for the switch , but that it would move forward at an expedited pace .
Part of the reason for the switch was that California passed a series of laws to ban the use of antibiotics in non - medical , prophylactic treatments .
Additionally , several groups of consumer advocacy NGOs , led by CalPIRG , had been pressuring a number of restaurant chains to stop using meat raised with low - dose antibiotics .
SECRET MENU
VARIATIONS Section::::Secret menu variations .
The bulk of the secret menu revolves around the burgers .
In - N - Out 's own website acknowledges the existence of this secret menu , publicizing " some of the most popular items " on what it calls the company 's " not - so - secret menu .
" " Animal Style " is one of the most popular " secret " styles ; in addition to the standard toppings , Animal Style burgers include mustard fried onto each meat patty , pickles , grilled onions , and extra spread .
" 3×3 " ( pronounced 3-by-3 ) , " 4×4 " , or variations of " m " × " c " , refers to a burger with a varied amount of meat patties , " m " , and slices of cheese , " c " : e.g. a burger with six meat patties and three slices of cheese is a " 6×3 " .
The In - N - Out " secret menu " section of the website only mentions the " 3×3 " and " 4×4 " , which are registered trademarks of the company .
Until 2004 , In - N - Out accommodated burger orders of any size by adding patties and slices of cheese at an additional cost .
However , on October 31 , 2004 , a group of friends ordered a 100×100 from a location in Las Vegas , Nevada , posting photos on the web of the burger .
Once word got out of the incredibly large sandwich , In - N - Out management disallowed any sandwich larger than a 4x4 .
In - N - Out has two low carbohydrate offerings .
" Protein Style " , introduced in the 1970s , replaces the bun with large leaves of lettuce ; while the " Flying Dutchman " is a 2x2 with no bun , no vegetables , and no spread with the cheese slices placed between both patties .
Health.com rated the protein - style sandwich as the best low - carb sandwich in the United States .
ONION STYLES Section::::Onion styles .
In - N - Out 's burger customization offers customers a choice of six different onion styles - three variations of the two ways that onions can be cut ( sliced versus chopped ) .
" With onion " or " Chopped onion " - standard placement , onion is put on top of the meat / cheese as the burger is cooking .
" Raw onion " or " Raw chopped onion " - onion is cold and more crisp , placed on top of the spread .
" Whole grilled onion " or " grilled onion " - onions are grilled until brown , placed on top of meat .
FRENCH FRIES Section::::French fries .
In - N - Out uses the Kennebec variety of potato for its fries and prepares them on - site as opposed to purchasing them pre - made from other companies .
The company 's french fries are cooked in " 100 % pure , cholesterol - free sunflower oil .
" Fries can also be cooked to order , with cooking times ranging from " light " to " extra well done " .
BEVERAGES Section::::Beverages .
The company offers lemonade , unsweetened iced tea ( though sweet tea is available at Texas stores only ) , coffee , three flavors of milk shakes ( chocolate , vanilla , and strawberry ) which can be mixed in any combination desired , and soda .
In - N - Out serves soda from two different companies .
It serves Coca - Cola Classic , Diet Coke , and Barq 's Famous Olde Tyme Root Beer from the Coca - Cola Company , and 7 Up and Dr Pepper from the Dr Pepper Snapple Group .
The company advertises that its milkshakes are made with " 100 % real ice cream . " NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING