THE CHRONICLES OF RIDDICK ( FRANCHISE )
The Chronicles of Riddick , also called Pitch Black , is a science fiction action media franchise created in 2000 by David Twohy spanning three live - action feature films , a direct - to - DVD animated film , two video games for PC and consoles , one motion comic , one mobile game , and two novelizations .
The series follows the adventures of antihero character Riddick ( either portrayed or voiced by Vin Diesel ) in the 28th century .
The Chronicles of Riddick fictional universe was initially created with the release of Pitch Black , which was written by director Twohy , Ken Wheat , and his brother Jim Wheat .
Since then Twohy has written and directed the two live action sequels and was involved in the development of the storyline of a number of the franchise 's offshoots .
FILMS
Section::::Films .
!
rowspan="2
" Role !
colspan="3
" Films !
Pitch Black(2000 ) !
The Chronicles of Riddick(2004 ) !
Riddick(2013 ) !
Director !
Producer(s ) !
Writer(s ) !
Composer(s ) !
Cinematographer(s ) !
Editor(s ) !
Production company(s ) !
Distributor !
Runtime !
Release date PITCH BLACK ( 2000 )
Section::::Pitch Black ( 2000 ) .
The first installment of the franchise , Pitch Black , was a lower budget production compared to the later ones .
The story involved Riddick being transported to prison on the Hunter Gratzner , a commercial cargo ship .
When the spaceship is damaged in the wake of a comet and makes an emergency crash landing on an isolated desert planet , Riddick escapes .
However , when flying creatures begin attacking all the survivors , Riddick joins forces with the others to escape the planet .
After the release of the sequel titled The Chronicles of Riddick , in the hopes of building a franchise , this film has often been referred to as The Chronicles of Riddick : Pitch Black in subsequent home video re - releases .
It received mixed reviews but today is considered a cult classic .
THE CHRONICLES OF RIDDICK ( 2004 ) Section::::The Chronicles of Riddick ( 2004 ) .
The second feature film in the series , The Chronicles of Riddick was a considerably more expensive production and was more action oriented than its predecessor .
It takes place four years after Pitch Black and involved Riddick 's meeting with Jack and Imam , survivors from the first film , his escape from the prison planet Crematoria , and his battle with the Necromonger fleet , which ended with the defeat of the Lord Marshal and Riddick taking his place .
Critically it was n't received as well as the first film in the franchise , but the release of a director 's cut DVD received strong sales and a cult following .
RIDDICK ( 2013 )
Section::::Riddick ( 2013 ) .
Encouraged by high DVD sales and Vin Diesel 's newly restored box office success , David Twohy wrote a script for a third film in the Riddick series .
The film was produced by Media Rights Capital and distributed by Universal , and was released on September 6 , 2013 .
Karl Urban returned to reprise his role as Vaako from The Chronicles of Riddick .
Katee Sackhoff and Matt Nable also joined the cast of the film .
Reviews were mixed , but it was considered a moderate success at the box - office and an improvement over the previous film .
RIDDICK :
FURIA
Section::::Riddick : Furia .
In January 2014 , Diesel announced on his Facebook page that Universal wishes to develop a fourth Riddick film , again prompted by robust DVD sales of the most recent film in the series .
They were looking into Media Rights Capital or Legendary Pictures to co - finance it .
Diesel announced on his Facebook page that the fourth film is titled Furia and will have an R rating .
In April 2016 , Vin Diesel confirmed that he and writer - director David Twohy were developing a fourth Riddick movie titled The Chronicles of Riddick : Furia .
In May 2016 , he explained that production on The Chronicles of Riddick : Furia may begin in early 2017 .
In a video , Vin Diesel asked : " Are you guys excited to hear about Furia ?
Do you want to know where it all began with that dark character Riddick ? " .
David Twohy confirmed that the new film would be rated R. As of August 2018 , no further information about Furia has been released .
TV SERIES Section::::TV series .
Diesel announced on his Instagram account that both he and Twohy developed a TV series titled Merc City that will follow the Mercs and Bounty Hunters of the Riddick Universe .
The posts did not elaborate on how , if at all , Merc City would be connected to the upcoming film .
CHARACTERS
Section::::Characters .
!
rowspan="2 " width="15 % " Character !
colspan="5 " align="center " Film !
align="center " width="17 % " Pitch Black(2000 ) ! align="center " width="17 % " ( 2004 ) ( Animated ) ! align="center " width="17 % " The Chronicles of Riddick(2004 ) ! align="center " width="17 % " Riddick(2013 ) !
Richard B. Riddick !
Jack B. Badd / Kyra !
Abu ' Imam ' al - Walid !
Carolyn Fry !
William J. Johns !
Paris P. Ogilvie !
Sharon " Shazza " Montgomery
Claudia BlackSimon BurkeYorick van WageningenKim
HawthorneChristina CoxRaoul TrujilloConrad PlaNolan
Gerard Funk * Richard B. Riddick ( Vin Diesel ) , more commonly known as Riddick , is the protagonist of the series .
He is shown to be a highly skilled predator , extremely mobile and stealthy , has a vast knowledge of how to kill almost any humanoid in a variety of ways , is an extreme survivalist , and is notoriously hard to contain .
He is also self - admittedly a dangerous convict and murderer , yet despite this , he is sometimes shown to perform moral or even atypically heroic actions , usually against his own better judgment and survivalist nature .
Riddick is a Furyan , a member of a warrior race obliterated by a military campaign that left Furya desolate , and is one of the last of his kind .
One of his most defining features are his eyes , a characteristic inherent in a certain caste of his species ( The Alpha - Furyans ) , although he implies in Pitch Black that they were " shined " by a back - alley surgical operation .
This allows him to see in the dark with no difficulty at all , but also renders his eyes incredibly sensitive to concentrated light , therefore he wears tinted welding goggles for protection .
Riddick was once a mercenary , then part of a security force , and later on a soldier .
He is also an experienced pilot .
* Carolyn Fry ( Radha Mitchell ) , is a docking pilot for the commercial transport ship Hunter - Gratzner .
She has a moment of moral weakness during the emergency landing attempt , intending to sacrifice the ship 's passenger section to save herself .
A relationship develops between Fry and Johns , until she finds out who he really is .
the group , now down to Riddick , Fry , Jack and Imam , finds shelter inside a cave not far from the settlement .
Riddick leaves them there and takes the power cells to the dropship .
Inside the cave , they discover bio - luminescent worms , which they stuff in bottles to use as light .
Fry leaves the cave and finds Riddick powering up the ship , ready to leave without them .
She pleads with him to help her rescue the others , but instead he just offers to take her with him .
Eventually , Riddick has a change of heart , and they return for Imam and Jack and take them to the ship , but Riddick is separated from the group and wounded by the predators .
Fry goes back to help Riddick but is killed after finding him .
* William J. Johns ( Cole Hauser ) is a war veteran and mercenary who was trusted to track down Riddick after he escaped from Slam City and the primary human antagonist of Pitch Black .
He captured Riddick and brought him to Butcher Bay , but upon discovering that he could not get as much of a reward as he wanted , helped Riddick escape .
The Johns Chase Log on the Pitch Black special features tells of the events afterward : Riddick stabs Johns and leaves him for dead .
Johns becomes a morphine addict after having it prescribed to him because of the wound , and then chases Riddick down while also avoiding other mercenaries on Riddick 's trail .
He eventually catches Riddick on the planet Aquila Major ( featured in the opening scene of Chronicles of Riddick ) by killing two children and threatening to kill two more unless Riddick surrenders .
He gets a seat on the transport vessel Hunter Gratzner , which crashes onto Hades in Pitch Black .
After the crash , Johns convinces the survivors to help him hunt down Riddick .
Johns initially disbelieves Riddick 's claims of the bio - raptors .
After their discovery , Johns makes a deal with Riddick , so they could work together to survive .
Riddick ultimately betrays Johns when Johns decides to use Jack as bait for the bio - raptors , resulting in Johns and Riddick fighting .
Johns is defeated and left to the bio - raptors , one of which attacks Johns and rips him apart .
* Abu " Imam " al - Walid ( Keith David ) is an Imam who was looking for New Mecca when the Hunter - Gratzner crashed in Pitch Black .
He was traveling with three young boys and despite everything he went through , including the deaths of the boys , he never lost his faith and believed there was goodness in Riddick .
Imam was one of the three survivors of the first movie along with Jack and Riddick .
* Jack B. Badd / Kyra ( Rhiana Griffith and Alexa Davalos ) is a character from the first three Riddick movies ( See above ) .
In Pitch Black she went by the name Jack after the crash of the Hunter - Gratzner and pretended to be a boy so that everyone would take her seriously .
Jack befriended Riddick and was enamoured by him .
In Chronicles of Riddick , it is revealed that Riddick left her with Imam behind on Helion Prime .
Wanting to find Riddick , she joined a mercenary crew , got caught and got sent to one of the worst prisons in existence : Crematoria .
According to what she told Riddick later , she did what he said in an attempt to get the eye - shine like him : she killed a few people , got sent to a prison where it 's said you can never escape from but could n't find a doctor that could do an eye - shine .
* Siberius Vaako ( Karl Urban ) is a Necromonger Commander from The Chronicles of Riddick , serving as Zhylaw 's right - hand man .
Though sent to kill Riddick , confused of his leader 's sudden fear , Vaako uses it as an excuse to get close enough to assassinate Zhylaw to become Lord Marshal .
However , once the chance to kill Zhylaw presents itself , Riddick beats Vaako to the punch and becomes Lord Marshal .
But when Riddick eventually renounces the title and gives it to him in exchange to for an escort to take him to Furya , unbeknownst to Vaako , instead of Furya , his lieutenant takes Riddick to the planet where Riddick takes place and tries to assassinate him as the lieutenant disagrees with what he perceives to be a weakness on the part of Vaako .
* Alexander Toombs ( Nick Chinlund ) is the mercenary from Chronicles of Riddick and Dark Fury .
Toombs is shown to be highly arrogant and incompetent , failing to capture Riddick and having his ship stolen from him , and once again being humiliated during Riddick 's escape from Crematoria .
Toombs was last seen locked inside the Crematoria kennels surrounded by vicious guard dog - creatures .
His current status is unknown , but it can be assumed that he was never rescued and is most likely dead .
* Zhylaw or Lord Marshal ( Colm Feore ) is the main antagonist of Chronicles of Riddick .
Before Riddick 's birth , Zhylaw consulted an Elemental seer , who told him that a Furyan male would be born that would kill him in the future .
In retaliation , Zhylaw attacked Furya in an attempt to massacre all male children , going so far as to personally strangle newborn infants with their own umbilical cords .
He strangled Riddick with his umbilical cord and believed him dead but Riddick actually survived .
At some point , he traveled to the Underverse and afterwards returned not completely human .
He is referred to by the Necromongers as the " Holy Half - Dead " and possesses powers such as incredible strength , the ability to pull souls from bodies and to separate his soul partially from his body and then pull his body where his soul is , resulting in a kind of super - speed that makes him hard to hit .
* Shirah ( Kristin Lehman ) is a Furyan seen in the Director 's Cut of The Chronicles of Riddick .
and the video game The Chronicles of Riddick : Escape from Butcher Bay .
* Purifier ( Linus Roache ) was a member of the Necromonger fleet .
It is revealed that he , too , was Furyan like Riddick , before being converted .
When Riddick falls unconscious after fighting the Necromonger soldiers chasing him , the Purifier pulls him into the safety of the hangar and tells Riddick , " We all began as something else " .
Regretting what he has done under a faith he did not believe in , the Purifier tells Riddick that the Furyan in him hopes that Riddick goes after the Lord Marshal , before committing suicide by walking into the sunlight of Crematoria .
* Pope Joe is a hermit , and former Bovine Veterinarian , that lives in the sewers of Butcher Bay .
After Riddick retrieved his radio from the sewers , he heals Riddick , and is credited with giving him his " eyeshine " that he uses throughout the franchise to see in the dark , but may not be the actual source , as the prior information comes from the 2004 videogame , which may or may not be canon .
* R. " Boss " Johns ( Matthew Nable ) is William J. John 's father and a mercenary , who seeks revenge on Riddick for his son 's death .
ADDITIONAL MEDIA OTHER FILMS
PITCH BLACK :
SLAM CITY ( 2000 ) Section::::Additional media .
Section::::Other films .
Section::::Pitch Black :
Slam City ( 2000 ) .
Slam City is a short flash film prequel to Pitch Black by animator Brian Murray with David Twohy which had been available for download at the Pitch Black website .
Slam City is in the form of an official , confidential prison record detailing Riddick 's arrival and escape from the Ursa Luna Slam City facility , in eleven hours and twenty - two minutes .
Notably , it shows Riddick undergoing the surgery that gives him " eyeshine " — the ability to see in the dark — and paying for this with a pack of Kool cigarettes , as mentioned in Pitch Black .
William J. Johns is seen at the end of the film and is charged with capturing Riddick .
INTO PITCH BLACK ( 2000 ) Section::::Into Pitch Black ( 2000 ) .
Into Pitch Black is a Sci - Fi channel special which aired before Pitch Black , and was about lawmen investigating Riddick 's past as well as an investigation into the crash of The Hunter Gratzner .
It shows several inconsistencies with the official storyline of the other films and video games .
There are five different sequences , that of the investigator , a psychiatrist evaluating Riddick , the alleged doctor who gave Riddick his trademark eyeshine , the team that investigated the disappearance of the Hunter - Gratzner , as well as various clips of the actual movie Pitch Black .
THE CHRONICLES OF RIDDICK :
DARK FURY ( 2004 ) Section::::The Chronicles of Riddick : Dark Fury ( 2004 ) . , a made - for - DVD animated film , acts as a bridge between the live - action films of Pitch Black and The Chronicles of Riddick .
It takes place shortly after Pitch Black and involves Riddick and the other two survivors of Pitch Black , Jack and Imam , and their run - in with a mercenary ship , as well as its captain who wishes to keep Riddick frozen as part of her collection of warriors from around the universe .
It received mixed reviews .
RIDDICK :
BLINDSIDED ( 2013 )
Section::::Riddick : Blindsided ( 2013 ) .
Riddick :
Blindsided is a motion comic based on storyboarded scenes of the third film that did n't make the theatrical cut .
It takes place shortly before the events of Riddick and bridges that film with the previous one .
The director 's cut of Riddick reinserts most of the material covered in Blindsided back into the film .
It was released online a month before the release of the third film to generate buzz and it is also included with the movie 's home video release .
VIDEO GAMES ESCAPE FROM BUTCHER BAY ( 2004 ) Section::::Video games .
Section::::Escape from Butcher Bay ( 2004 ) .
Escape from Butcher Bay is a video game based on the Riddick series , released for the Xbox and Windows PC .
It acts as a prequel to Pitch Black , and involves Riddick 's escape from the eponymous prison , Butcher Bay .
The game was very well received and it is often listed among " the greatest Xbox games of all time " .
ASSAULT ON DARK ATHENA ( 2009 ) Section::::Assault on Dark Athena ( 2009 ) .
Assault on Dark Athena is a video game for the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , Windows , and Mac OS X computers .
It includes an enhanced remake of Escape from Butcher Bay , and covers events between the previous game and Pitch Black .
Reviews were mostly positive .
RIDDICK :
THE MERC FILES ( 2013 )
Section::::Riddick :
The Merc Files ( 2013 ) .
Riddick :
The Merc Files is a touch - based stealth action game for Android and iOS devices .
It was developed by Gaming Corps , a game developer founded by some of the original developers of the previous Riddick games .
NOVELIZATIONS Section::::Novelizations .
Pitch Black and The Chronicles of Riddick have received novelizations of their scripts , by Frank Lauria and Alan Dean Foster respectively .
These expand on elements of the films , most notably Pitch Black providing character backstory for Riddick and The Chronicles of Riddick describing the Necromongers and their religion in greater detail .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS