ANTIHISTAMINE Antihistamines are drugs which treat allergic rhinitis and other allergies .
Antihistamines can give relief when a person has nasal congestion , sneezing , or hives because of pollen , dust mites , or animal allergy .
Typically people take antihistamines as an inexpensive , generic , over - the - counter drug with few side effects .
As an alternative to taking an antihistamine , people who suffer from allergies can instead avoid the substance which irritates them .
However , this is not always possible as some substances , such as pollen , are carried in the air , thus making allergic reactions caused by them generally unavoidable .
Antihistamines are usually for short - term treatment .
Chronic allergies increase the risk of health problems which antihistamines might not treat , including asthma , sinusitis , and lower respiratory tract infection .
Doctors recommend that people talk to them before any longer term use of antihistamines .
Although people typically use the word " antihistamine " to describe drugs for treating allergies , doctors and scientists use the term to describe a class of drug that opposes the activity of histamine receptors in the body .
In this sense of the word , antihistamines are subclassified according to the histamine receptor that they act upon .
The two largest classes of antihistamines are H - antihistamines and H - antihistamines .
Antihistamines that target the histamine H - receptor are used to treat allergic reactions in the nose ( e.g. , itching , runny nose , and sneezing ) as well as for insomnia .
They are sometimes also used to treat motion sickness or vertigo caused by problems with the inner ear .
Antihistamines that target the histamine H - receptor are used to treat gastric acid conditions ( e.g. , peptic ulcers and acid reflux ) .
H - antihistamines work by binding to histamine H receptors in mast cells , smooth muscle , and endothelium in the body as well as in the tuberomammillary nucleus in the brain ; H - antihistamines bind to histamine H receptors in the upper gastrointestinal tract , primarily in the stomach .
Histamine receptors exhibit constitutive activity , so antihistamines can function as either a neutral receptor antagonist or an inverse agonist at histamine receptors .
Only a few currently marketed H - antihistamines are known to function as inverse agonists .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Histamine produces increased vascular permeability , causing fluid to escape from capillaries into tissues , which leads to the classic symptoms of an allergic reaction — a runny nose and watery eyes .
Histamine also promotes angiogenesis .
Antihistamines suppress the histamine - induced wheal response ( swelling ) and flare response ( vasodilation ) by blocking the binding of histamine to its receptors or reducing histamine receptor activity on nerves , vascular smooth muscle , glandular cells , endothelium , and mast cells .
Itching , sneezing , and inflammatory responses are suppressed by antihistamines that act on H1-receptors .
In 2014 antihistamines such as desloratadine were found to be effective as adjuvants to standardized treatment of acne due to their anti - inflammatory properties and their ability to suppress sebum production .
TYPES H - ANTIHISTAMINES Section::::Types .
Section::::H - antihistamines .
H - antihistamines refer to compounds that inhibit the activity of the H receptor .
Since the H receptor exhibits constitutive activity , H - antihistamines can be either neutral receptor antagonists or inverse agonists .
Normally , histamine binds to the H receptor and heightens the receptor 's activity ; the receptor antagonists work by binding to the receptor and blocking the activation of the receptor by histamine ; by comparison , the inverse agonists bind to the receptor and reduce its activity , an effect which is opposite to histamine 's .
The vast majority of marketed H - antihistamines are receptor antagonists and only a minority of marketed compounds are inverse agonists at the receptor .
Clinically , H - antihistamines are used to treat allergic reactions and mast cell - related disorders .
Sedation is a common side effect of H - antihistamines that readily cross the blood – brain barrier ; some of these drugs , such as diphenhydramine and doxylamine , are therefore used to treat insomnia .
H - antihistamines can also reduce inflammation , since the expression of NF - κB , the transcription factor the regulates inflammatory processes , is promoted by both the receptor 's constitutive activity and agonist ( i.e. , histamine ) binding at the H receptor .
A combination of these effects , and in some cases metabolic ones as well , lead to most first - generation antihistamines having analgesic - sparing ( potentiating ) effects on opioid analgesics and to some extent with non - opioid ones as well .
The most commonly used for the purpose include hydroxyzine , promethazine ( enzyme induction especially helps with codeine and similar prodrug opioids ) , phenyltoloxamine , orphenadrine , and tripelennamine ; some may also have intrinsic analgesic properties of their own , orphenadrine being an example .
Second - generation antihistamines cross the blood – brain barrier to a much lower degree than the first - generation antihistamines .
Their main benefit is they primarily affect peripheral histamine receptors and therefore are less sedating .
However , high doses can still induce drowsiness through acting on the central nervous system .
Some second - generation antihistamines , notably cetirizine , can interact with CNS psychoactive drugs such as bupropion and benzodiazepines .
H ANTAGONISTS Section::::H antagonists .
Examples of H antagonists include : * Acrivastine ( see Benadryl entry in this section ) * Azelastine * Benadryl is a brand name for different H antagonist antihistamine preparations in different regions : acrivastine is the active component of Benadryl Allergy Relief and cetirizine of Benadryl One a Day Relief in the UK ; Benadryl is diphenhydramine in the US and Canada ( see http://www.benadryl.ca/adult-allergy-medicine/benadryl-caplets ) .
* Bilastine * Bromodiphenhydramine * Brompheniramine
* Buclizine * Carbinoxamine * Cetirizine ( Zyrtec )
*
Chlorodiphenhydramine *
Chlorpheniramine *
Clemastine * Cyclizine * Cyproheptadine *
Desloratadine ( Aerius )
*
Dexbrompheniramine * Dexchlorpheniramine * Dimenhydrinate ( most commonly used as an antiemetic )
* Dimetindene * Diphenhydramine ( see Benadryl entry in this section )
* Doxylamine ( most commonly used as an over - the - counter drug sedative ) * Ebastine *
Embramine * Fexofenadine ( Allegra / Telfast )
* Hydroxyzine ( Vistaril ) *
Levocabastine *
Levocetirizine ( Xyzal ) * Loratadine ( Claritin ) * Meclizine ( most commonly used as an antiemetic )
* Mirtazapine ( primarily used to treat depression , also has antiemetic and appetite - stimulating effects )
* Olopatadine ( used locally ) * Orphenadrine ( a close relative of diphenhydramine used mainly as a skeletal muscle relaxant and anti - Parkinsons agent )
* Phenindamine * Pheniramine * Phenyltoloxamine
* Promethazine * Quetiapine ( antipsychotic ; trade name Seroquel )
* Rupatadine ( Alergoliber )
*
Tripelennamine
*
Triprolidine H INVERSE AGONISTS Section::::H inverse agonists .
The H receptor inverse agonists include : * Cetirizine ( does not cross the blood – brain barrier ) *
Levocetirizine * Desloratadine ( does not cross the blood – brain barrier )
* Pyrilamine ( crosses the blood – brain barrier ; produces drowsiness ) H - ANTIHISTAMINES Section::::H - antihistamines .
H - antihistamines , like H - antihistamines , occur as inverse agonists and neutral antagonists .
They act on H histamine receptors found mainly in the parietal cells of the gastric mucosa , which are part of the endogenous signaling pathway for gastric acid secretion .
Normally , histamine acts on H to stimulate acid secretion ; drugs that inhibit H signaling thus reduce the secretion of gastric acid .
H - antihistamines are among first - line therapy to treat gastrointestinal conditions including peptic ulcers and gastroesophageal reflux disease .
Some formulations are available over the counter .
Most side effects are due to cross - reactivity with unintended receptors .
Cimetidine , for example , is notorious for antagonizing androgenic testosterone and DHT receptors at high doses .
Examples include : *
Cimetidine * Famotidine
* Lafutidine * Nizatidine
*
Ranitidine
* Roxatidine * Tiotidine RESEARCH Section::::Research .
These are experimental agents and do not yet have a defined clinical use , although a number of drugs are currently in human trials .
H - antihistamines have a stimulant and nootropic effect , whereas H - antihistamines appear to have an immunomodulatory role .
H - ANTIHISTAMINES Section::::H - antihistamines .
An H - antihistamine is a classification of drugs used to inhibit the action of histamine at the H receptor .
H receptors are primarily found in the brain and are inhibitory autoreceptors located on histaminergic nerve terminals , which modulate the release of histamine .
Histamine release in the brain triggers secondary release of excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate and acetylcholine via stimulation of H receptors in the cerebral cortex .
Consequently , unlike the H - antihistamines which are sedating , H - antihistamines have stimulant and cognition - modulating effects .
Examples of selective H - antihistamines include :
* Clobenpropit , * ABT-239
* Ciproxifan , * Conessine * A-349,821 . * Thioperamide H - ANTIHISTAMINES Section::::H - antihistamines . H - antihistamines inhibit the activity of the H receptor .
Examples :
* Thioperamide * JNJ 7777120 * VUF-6002 RELATED AGENTS HISTIDINE
DECARBOXYLASE INHIBITORS Section::::Related agents .
Section::::Histidine decarboxylase inhibitors .
Inhibit the action of histidine decarboxylase :
* Tritoqualine * Catechin MAST CELL STABILIZERS Section::::Mast cell stabilizers .
Mast cell stabilizers are drugs which prevent mast cell degranulation .
* cromolyn sodium
* Nedocromil * β - agonists HISTORY Section::::History .
Currently most people who use an antihistamine to treat allergies use a second generation drug .
The first generation of antihistamine drugs became available in the 1930s .
This marked the beginning of medical treatment of nasal allergies .
Research into these drugs led to the discovery that they were H1 antagonists and also to the development of H2 antagonists , where H1 antihistamines affected the nose and the H2 antihistamines affected the stomach .
This history has led to contemporary research into drugs which are H3 receptor antagonist and which affect the Histamine H4 receptor .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE Section::::Society and culture .
Antihistamines can vary greatly in cost .
Some patients consult with their doctor about drug prices to make a decision about which antihistamine to choose .
Many antihistamines are older and available in generic form .
Others are newer , still under patent , and generally expensive .
The newer drugs are not necessarily safer or more effective .
Because so many antihistamines are available , patients can have conversations with their health care provider to choose the right drug for them .
The United States government removed two second generation antihistamines , terfenadine and astemizole , from the market based on evidence that they could cause heart problems .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Not much published research exists which compares the efficacy and safety of the various antihistamines available .
The research which does exist are mostly short term studies or studies which look at too few people to make general assumptions .
Another gap in the research is in information reporting the health effects for individuals with long term allergies to take antihistamines for a long period of time .
Newer antihistamines have been demonstrated to be effective in treating hives .
However , there is not research comparing the relative efficacy of these drugs .
SPECIAL POPULATIONS Section::::Special populations .
Most studies of antihistamines reported on people who are younger , so the effects on people over age 65 are not as well understood .
Older people are more likely to experience drowsiness from antihistamine use than younger people .
Also , most of the research has been on white people and other ethnicities are not as represented in the research .
The evidence does not report how antihistamines affect women differently than men .
Different studies have reported on antihistamine use in children , with various studies finding evidence that certain antihistamines could be used by children 2 years of age , and other drugs being safer for younger or older children .
SEE ALSO
* Antileukotriene
* Immunotherapy REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Antihistamine information at Allergy UK