EXPLORATION OF NEPTUNE
The exploration of Neptune has only begun with one spacecraft , Voyager 2 in 1989 .
Currently there are no approved future missions to visit the Neptunian system .
NASA , ESA and also independent academic groups have proposed future scientific missions to visit Neptune .
Some mission plans are still active , while others have been abandoned or put on hold .
Neptune has also been scientifically studied from afar with telescopes , primarily since the mid 1990s .
This includes the Hubble Space Telescope but most importantly ground - based telescopes using adaptive optics .
VOYAGER 2 Section::::Voyager 2 .
After having visited Saturn successfully , it was decided to continue and fund further missions by Voyager 2 to Uranus and Neptune .
These missions were conducted by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Neptunian mission was dubbed " Voyager Neptune Interstellar Mission " .
Voyager 2 observation phase of Neptune began 5 June 1989 , the spacecraft officially reached the Neptunian system on 25 August and the data collection stopped on 2 October .
Initially it was planned to use a trajectory that resulted in Voyager 2 passing around from Neptune and from Triton .
The need to avoid ring material detected by stellar occultations resulted in this trajectory being abandoned and a trajectory that largely avoided the rings but resulted in more distant flybys of both targets .
On 25 August , in Voyager 2 last planetary encounter , the spacecraft swooped only above Neptune 's north pole , the closest approach it made to any body since it left Earth in 1977 .
When the spacecraft visited the Neptunian system , Neptune was the farthest known body in the Solar system .
It was not until 1999 , that Pluto was further from the Sun in its trajectory .
Voyager 2 studied Neptune 's atmosphere , Neptune 's rings , its magnetosphere , and Neptune 's moons .
The Neptunian system had been studied scientifically for many years with telescopes and indirect methods , but the close inspection by the Voyager 2 probe settled many issues and revealed a plethora of information that could not have been obtained otherwise .
The data from Voyager 2 are still the best data available on this planet in most cases .
The exploration mission revealed that Neptune 's atmosphere is very dynamic , even though it receives only 3 % of the sunlight that Jupiter receives .
Winds on Neptune were found to be the strongest in the Solar System , up to three times stronger than Jupiter 's and nine times stronger than the strongest winds on Earth .
Most winds blew westward , opposite the planets rotation .
Separate cloud decks were discovered , with cloud systems emerging and dissolving within hours and giant storms circling the entire planet in 16–18 hours in the upper layers .
Voyager 2 discovered an anticyclone dubbed the Great Dark Spot , similar to Jupiter 's Great Red Spot .
However , images taken by the Hubble Space Telescope in 1994 , revealed that the Great Dark Spot had disappeared .
Also seen in Neptune 's upper atmosphere at that time was an almond - shaped spot designated D2 , and a bright , quickly moving cloud high above the cloud decks , dubbed " Scooter " .
The fly - by of the Neptunian system provided the first accurate measurement of Neptune 's mass which was found to be 0.5 percent less than previously calculated .
The new figure disproved the hypothesis that an undiscovered Planet X acted upon the orbits of Neptune and Uranus .
Neptune 's magnetosphere was also studied by Voyager 2 .
The magnetic field was found to be highly tilted and largely offset from the planet 's centre .
The probe discovered auroras , but much weaker than those on Earth or other planets .
The radio instruments on board found that Neptune 's day lasts 16 hours and 6.7 minutes .
Neptune 's rings had been observed from Earth many years prior to Voyager 2 visit , but the close inspection revealed that the ring systems were full circle and intact , and a total of four rings were counted .
Voyager 2 discovered six new small moons orbiting Neptune 's equatorial plane , and they were named Naiad , Thalassa , Despina , Galatea , Larissa and Proteus .
Only three of Neptune 's moons were photographed in detail :
Proteus , Nereid , and Triton ; of which the last two were the only Neptunian moons known prior to the visit .
Proteus turned out to be an ellipsoid , as large as gravity allows an ellipsoid body to become without rounding into a sphere .
It appeared very dark in color , almost like soot .
Nereid , though discovered in 1949 , still has very little known about it .
Triton was revealed as having a remarkably active past .
Active geysers and polar caps were discovered and a very thin atmosphere as well , with thin clouds of what is thought to be nitrogen ice particles .
At just , it is the coldest known planetary body in the Solar System .
The closest approach to Triton was about
and it was the last solid world that Voyager 2 explored close - by .
FUTURE MISSIONS Section::::Future missions .
Currently there are no approved future missions to visit the Neptunian system .
NASA , ESA and independent academic groups have proposed and worked on future scientific missions to visit Neptune .
Some mission plans are still active , while others have been abandoned or put on hold .
After the Voyager flyby , NASA 's next step in scientific exploration of the Neptune system is considered to be a flagship orbiter mission .
Such a hypothetical mission is envisioned to be possible in the late 2020s or early 2030s .
Another one proposed for the 2040s is called the Neptune - Triton Explorer ( NTE ) .
NASA has researched several other project options for both flyby and orbiter missions ( of similar design as the Cassini –
Huygens mission to Saturn ) .
These missions are often collectively called " RMA Neptune - Triton - KBO " missions , which also includes orbital missions that would not visit Kuiper belt objects ( KBOs ) .
Because of budgetary constraints , technological considerations , scientific priorities and other factors , none of these have been approved .
Specific exploration missions to Neptune include : * Neptune Orbiter mission — An orbiting mission concept focusing on Neptune and Triton .
*
Argo — A mission concept New Frontiers flyby mission to visit Jupiter , Saturn , Neptune ( with Triton ) and the Kuiper belt with launch in 2019 .
* ODINUS — A mission concept based on a twin spacecraft mission to investigate the Neptunian and Uranian systems .
Launch date would be 2034 .
* OSS mission — A proposed collaborative flyby mission by ESA and NASA .
Its main focus would be to map the gravitational fields in deep space , including the Outer Solar System ( up to 50 AU ) .
Direct flyby missions to Neptune are only preferable in window gaps with a 12-year interval , due to the complexity of planetary positions .
There is currently a window open for launching a Neptune mission from 2014 to 2019 , with the next opportunity occurring from 2031 .
These constraints are based on current rocket technology which relies on gravity assists from Jupiter and Saturn .
With the new Space Launch System ( SLS ) technology in development at Boeing , deep space missions with heavier payloads could potentially be propelled at much greater speeds ( 200 AU in 15 years ) and missions to the outer planets could be launched independently of gravity assistance .
SCIENTIFIC STUDIES FROM AFAR Section::::Scientific studies from afar .
Space telescopes such as the Hubble Space Telescope has signified a new era of detailed observations of faint objects from afar in all of the electromagnetic spectrum .
This includes faint objects in the Solar system , such as Neptune .
Adaptive optics technology has also allowed for detailed observations of faint objects from ground - based telescopes and this technology has been used since 1997 to obtain scientific information on Neptune and its atmosphere .
These image recordings now exceed the capability of HST by far and in some instances even the Voyager images , such as Uranus .
Ground - based observations are however always limited in their registration of electromagnetic waves of certain wavelengths , due to the inevitable atmospheric absorption , in particular of high energy waves .
REFERENCES SOURCES
* Neptune Voyager 2 - The Interstellar Mission , Jet Propulsion Laboratory , California Institute of Technology
* Neptune :
In Depth Planets , NASA EXTERNAL LINKS * 25 Years After Neptune : Reflections on Voyager NASA Voyager website * Images of Neptune and All Available Satellites Photojournal , JPL