2007
BROOKLYN TORNADOES
The 2007 Brooklyn tornado was the strongest tornado on record to strike in New York City .
It formed in the early morning hours of August 8 , 2007 , skipping along an approximately -long path , from Staten Island across The Narrows to Brooklyn .
The worst damage was in and around Sunset Park and Bay Ridge , in Brooklyn .
The U.S. National Weather Service estimated its strength there as an EF2 on the Enhanced Fujita scale .
No serious injuries or fatalities were reported as a result of the tornado , but several people were treated at area hospitals for flying glass injuries .
At least 40 buildings and 100 cars were damaged .
New York State Senator Martin Golden 's office estimated damages in the tens of millions of U.S. dollars .
The storm system produced severe street flooding , and disrupted all modes of transportation throughout the city .
Service was delayed or suspended on all 24 New York City Subway services during the morning rush hour , and nine services were still not running by the evening rush .
TIMELINE Section::::Timeline .
The typical summer storm system that spawned the tornado gathered strength over Pennsylvania , caused heavy rain over New Jersey and continued its eastward movement , reaching New York City at sunrise .
According to the National Weather Service , the first tornado first touched down in Staten Island at approximately 6:22 am EDT ( 1022 UTC ) in the vicinity of St. Austins Place in the Livingston - Randall Manor area , before moving east , with additional damage occurring in the Tompkinsville area , probably from a subsequent tornado that formed from a new area of circulation just north of the first tornado .
Most of the damage on Staten Island was to trees , and was rated EF1 intensity with estimated winds of .
The circulation intensified , and headed east across The Narrows tidal strait , just north of the Verrazano - Narrows Bridge , and the tornado re - developed and touched down again in Brooklyn , at Bay Ridge at 6:32 am EDT .
It continued on an east - northeast path across 68th Street between Third and Fourth Avenues , damaging the roofs of 11 homes .
The storm continued to move east - northeast into Leif Ericson Park Square , where severe damage to trees occurred , and where winds blew out a stained glass window valued at $ 300,000 at the nearby Fourth Avenue Presbyterian Church
It then crossed the Brooklyn Queens Expressway .
The tornado touched down farther northeast with scattered tree damage along Sixth Avenue .
Based on the assessed damage this stage of the tornado was classified EF2 with wind speeds of 111 to 135 mph ( 161 to 215 km / h ) .
The tornado returned to the ground with another pocket of significant damage on 58th Street between Sixth and Seventh Avenues .
Roofs were ripped off of 5 homes , with tree damage indicating strong EF1 damage .
The tornado then headed east and touched down again in Kensington and the Flatbush neighborhood of Prospect Park South at approximately 6:40 am EDT .
Approximately 30 trees were uprooted along Ocean Parkway .
The National Weather Service had issued a tornado warning for portions of Staten Island and Brooklyn at 6:28 am .
Tornado warnings were also briefly issued for eastern Brooklyn and Southern Queens and Nassau County on Long Island , but no tornadoes were reported in those areas .
MEDIA COVERAGE Section::::Media coverage .
New York media coverage of the event focused on the novelty of the event and its disruption of subway service ( this was the third time in 2007 when heavy rain had caused disruptions in subway service ) .
TABLOIDS Section::::Tabloids .
The New York Post and New York Daily News tabloids both ran the front page headline " Twister ! "
The main article in the Daily News was headlined " Brooklyn becomes Tornado Alley ! "
with a subheading of " First twister to rip through boro since 1889 ; S.I. driver dies " .
The main article inside the Post read : " Brooklyn Cyclone " ( playing on the pun of the famous Coney Island Cyclone in Brooklyn and the baseball team of the same name ) .
The teaser on the front page depicted Dorothy Gale from The Wonderful Wizard of Oz proclaiming " This ai n't Kansas " .
An inside side bar in the Post had eyewitness accounts headlined " Wet & Wild " .
The Long Island based Newsday front page headline was " What 's Up With the Weather ? –
LI Drenched Again –
Tornado in City – Subways Swamped . "
BROADSHEETS Section::::Broadsheets .
The New York Times front page main headline was " Subways to Rooftops , a Storm Brings Havoc to New York
" The three front page stories were headlined " Transportation Paralysis " , " Déjà vu Down Under " , " Yes a Tornado in Brooklyn . "
The New York Times quoted an eyewitness , who said , " It was a funnel shape ...
It looked kind of black and blue ...
it was way up high and came right down on the roof of ( a department store) ...
Pieces of the roof were all over the place .
It was a big bang . "
The New York Sun read : "
It 's Frustrating , It 's Insanity " with a subhead " Anger Erupts At Subway ;
Tornado Hits " .
GLOBAL WARMING
Section::::Global warming .
The press coverage also examined the link between the storm and global warming , given the tornado 's historic nature , and the other recent subway service interruptions caused by torrential rain on July 18 and the previous winter .
Official statements alluded to this as well .
" We may be dealing with meteorological conditions that are unprecedented , " said Metropolitan Transportation Authority Executive Director Elliot G. Sander in the immediate aftermath , and New York Governor Eliot Spitzer said the day after , " This is supposed to be a rainfall event that is a once - in - a - decade occurrence -- we 've had three in the past seven months .
"
Climate scientist James E. Hansen of the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies at Columbia University in New York City cautioned against linking any single event with global warming , but did say that the probability of severe weather events is related .
" You can not blame a single specific event , such as this week 's storm , on climate change .
However , it is fair to ask whether the human changes have altered the likelihood of such events .
There the answer seems to be ' yes . '
" , he was quoted as saying .
SEE ALSO
OTHER TORNADOES Section::::See also .
Section::::Other tornadoes .
There were five previous tornadoes in New York City on record , but none as strong as this one .
The New York City borough of Staten Island has had the most tornadoes on record of any of the five boroughs , with a total of three , all since 1990 .
Meteorologists believed this storm produced the first tornado in Brooklyn since 1889 , before reliable records were kept .
The five previous twisters on record are : * October 27 , 2003 — An F0 tornado touches down briefly in Staten Island * October 28 , 1995 — An F1 tornado touches down in Staten Island with light damage
* August 10 , 1990 —
An F0 tornado on Staten Island injures three people * October 5 , 1985 — An F1 tornado in Fresh Meadows Park , Queens injures six people .
* September 2 , 1974 —
An F1 tornado moved from Westchester into the Bronx
OTHER LINKS
* List of North American tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
* List of tornadoes striking downtown areas
* Tornadoes of 2007 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Public Information Statement ...
Revised , Tornado Damage Survey , National Weather Service , Upton NY , issued 2:32 PM EDT Tuesday August 14 , 2007