GANGLIONIC BLOCKER
A ganglionic blocker ( or ganglioplegic ) is a type of medication that inhibits transmission between preganglionic and postganglionic neurons in the Autonomic Nervous System , often by acting as a nicotinic receptor antagonist .
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are found on skeletal muscle , but also within the route of transmission for the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system ( which together comprise the autonomic nervous system ) .
More specifically , nicotinic receptors are found within the ganglia of the autonomic nervous system , allowing outgoing signals to be transmitted from the presynaptic to the postsynaptic cells .
Thus , for example , blocking nicotinic acetylcholine receptors blocks both sympathetic ( excitatory ) and parasympathetic ( calming ) stimulation of the heart .
The nicotinic antagonist hexamethonium , for example , does this by blocking the transmission of outgoing signals across the autonomic ganglia at the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor .
Because ganglionic blockers block both the parasympathetic nervous system and sympathetic nervous system , the effect of these drugs depends upon the dominant tone in the organ system .
The opposite of a ganglionic blocker is referred to as a ganglionic stimulant .
Some substances can exhibit both stimulating and blocking effects on autonomic ganglia , depending on dosage and/or duration of action .
An example for such a " dual " action is nicotine , which does this via depolarization block ( see classification below ) .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
The first ganglion - blocker to be used clinically was tetraethylammonium , although it was soon superseded by better drugs .
Nicotinic receptor antagonists :
* hexamethonium * pentolinium *
mecamylamine * trimetaphan * tubocurarine *
pempidine *
benzohexonium *
chlorisondamine * pentamine Nicotinic receptor agonists ( acting through depolarization block ) : *
nicotine
Blocking ACh release in autonomic ganglia ( although these have many other actions elsewhere ) :
*
botulinum toxin USES Section::::Uses .
Ganglionic blockers are used less frequently now than they were in the past , because antihypertensives with fewer side effects are now available .
Hexamethonium has been described as the " first effective antihypertensive drug " .
However , they are still used in some emergency situations , such as aortic dissection or autonomic dysreflexia .
SIDE EFFECTS
* Cardiovascular : Orthostatic hypotension with or without reflex tachycardia
* ENT / glands : xerostomia , dry eyes , blurred vision , reduced bronchial secretion , hypohidrosis
* GIT : gastroparesis , constipation , urinary retention
* Sexual dysfunction : failure of erection and ejaculation * in overdose risk of peripheral circulatory collapse ( shock ) and paralytic ileus REFERENCES