DEEPWATER HORIZON
Deepwater Horizon was an ultra - deepwater , dynamically positioned , semi - submersible offshore drilling rig owned by Transocean .
Built in 2001 in South Korea by Hyundai Heavy Industries , the rig was commissioned by R&B Falcon ( a later asset of Transocean ) , registered in Majuro , and leased to BP from 2001 until September 2013 .
In September 2009 , the rig drilled the deepest oil well in history at a vertical depth of and measured depth of in the Tiber Oil Field at Keathley Canyon block 102 , approximately southeast of Houston , in of water .
On 20 April 2010 , while drilling at the Macondo Prospect , an uncontrollable blowout caused an explosion on the rig that killed 11 crewmen and ignited a fireball visible from away .
The fire was inextinguishable and , two days later , on 22 April , the Horizon sank , leaving the well gushing at the seabed and causing the largest oil spill in U.S. waters .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Deepwater Horizon was a fifth - generation , RBS-8D design ( i.e. model type ) , deepwater , dynamically positioned , column - stabilized , semi - submersible mobile offshore drilling unit , designed to drill subsea wells for oil exploration and production using an , blowout preventer , and a outside diameter marine riser .
Deepwater Horizon was the second semi - submersible rig constructed of a class of two , although Deepwater Nautilus , its predecessor , is not dynamically positioned .
The rig was and capable of operating in waters up to deep , to a maximum drill depth of .
In 2010 it was one of approximately 200 deepwater offshore rigs capable of drilling in waters deeper than .
Its American Bureau of Shipping ( ABS ) class notations were " A1 , Column Stabilized Drilling Unit , AMS , ACCU , DPS-3 " .
In 2002 , the rig was upgraded with " e - drill " , a drill monitoring system whereby technical personnel based in Houston , Texas , received real - time drilling data from the rig and transmitted maintenance and troubleshooting information .
Advanced systems played a key role in the rig 's operation , from pressure and drill monitoring technology , to automated shutoff systems and modelling systems for cementing .
The OptiCem cement modelling system , used by Halliburton in April 2010 , played a crucial part in cement slurry mix and support decisions .
These decisions became a focus for investigations into the explosion on the rig that month .
HISTORY CONSTRUCTION AND OWNERSHIP Section::::History .
Section::::Construction and ownership .
Deepwater Horizon was built for R&B Falcon ( which later became part of Transocean ) by Hyundai Heavy Industries in Ulsan , South Korea .
Construction started in December 1998 , the keel was laid on 21 March 2000 , and the rig was delivered on 23 February 2001 , after the acquisition of R&B Falcon by Transocean .
Until 29 December 2004
the rig was registered in the Republic of Panama .
Transocean , through its Steinhausen , Switzerland subsidiary Triton Asset Leasing GmbH , operated the rig under the Marshallese flag of convenience .
The rig was leased to BP on a 3-year contract for deployment in the Gulf of Mexico following construction .
The lease was renewed in 2004 for a year , 2005 for 5 years , and 2009 for 3 years covering 2010 to 2013 .
The last contract was worth $ 544 million , or $ 496,800 a day , for a " bare rig " , with crew , gear and support vessels estimated to cost the same .
According to R&B Falcon 's filings to SEC in 2001 , the transfer document between R&B Falcon and Transocean was dated 17 August 2001 , and the rig was specified as " official registration number of 29273-PEXT-1 , IMO number of 8764597 , with gross tonnage of 32,588 and net tonnage of 9,778 " and the transfer value as .
, the rig was insured for covering the replacement cost and wreckage removal .
DRILLING OPERATIONS
Section::::Drilling operations .
Deepwater Horizon worked on wells in the Atlantis ( BP 56 % , BHP Billiton 44 % ) and Thunder Horse ( BP 75 % , ExxonMobil 25 % ) oil fields .
It was described at times as a " lucky " and " celebrated " rig , and in 2007 was still described as " one of the most powerful rigs in the world " .
In 2006 it discovered oil in the Kaskida oil field , and in 2009 the " giant " Tiber field .
The well in the Tiber field has a vertical depth of and a measured depth of , below of water .
The well was the deepest oil well in the world , and more than further below the seabed than the rig 's official drilling specification stated on the company 's fleet list .
In February 2010 , Deepwater Horizon commenced drilling an exploratory well at the Macondo Prospect ( Mississippi Canyon Block 252 ) , about off the southeast coast of Louisiana , at a water depth of approximately .
The Macondo prospect exploration rights were acquired by BP in 2009 , with the prospect jointly owned by BP ( 65 % ) , Anadarko ( 25 % ) and MOEX Offshore 2007 ( 10 % ) .
Deepwater Horizon was still working on the Macondo site on 20 April 2010 , when a violent explosion occurred leading to destruction of the rig and resulting oil spill .
The well was in the final stages of completion at the time ; its cement casing was injected and hardening , and the rig was due to move shortly to its next role as a semi - permanent production platform at the Tiber site followed by a return to the Kaskida field ; squatting semi - permanently over an oil dome 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana .
The exploratory work was described as " concluded " and permission had already been requested from MMS to terminate operations at the Macondo site .
During its operational lifetime , the rig was actively in operation for 93 % of its working life ( 2,896 of 3,131 days ) .
The remainder partly relates to time spent between sites .
REGULATION , SAFETY , AND INSPECTION Section::::Regulation , safety , and inspection .
The Minerals Management Service ( renamed on 18 June 2010 to the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement , or Bureau of Ocean Energy ( BOE ) ) is the regulatory and inspecting body for offshore oil drilling and rigs in the United States of America .
According to an Associated Press investigation , certain safety documentation and emergency procedure information , including documentation for the exact incident that later occurred , was absent .
The exact number of required monthly inspections performed varied over time ; the inspections were carried out as required for the first 40 months , but after that around 25 % of inspections were omitted , although the investigation notes this is partly expected , since there are circumstances such as weather and movement which preclude an inspection .
Reports of the last three inspections for 2010 were provided under Freedom of Information legislation .
Each of these inspections had taken two hours or less .
During its lifetime the rig received 5 citations for non - compliance , 4 of which were in 2002 ( safety , including the blowout preventer ) and the other in 2003 ( pollution ) .
A sixth citation in 2007 related to non - grounded electrical equipment was later withdrawn when the equipment was determined to be compliant with regulations .
Overall the Deepwater Horizon safety record was " strong " according to a drilling consultant reviewing the information .
In 2009 the Minerals Management Service " herald[ed ] the Deepwater Horizon as an industry model for safety " .
According to AP 's investigation " its record was so exemplary , according to MMS officials , that the rig was never on inspectors ' informal ' watch list ' for problem rigs " .
EXPLOSION AND OIL SPILL Section::::Explosion and oil spill .
At CDT on 20 April 2010 , during the final phases of drilling the exploratory well at Macondo , a geyser of seawater erupted from the marine riser onto the rig , shooting into the air .
This was soon followed by the eruption of a slushy combination of drilling mud , methane gas , and water .
The gas component of the slushy material quickly transitioned into a fully gaseous state and then ignited into a series of explosions and then a firestorm .
An attempt was made to activate the blowout preventer , but it failed .
The final defense to prevent an oil spill , a device known as a blind shear ram , was activated but failed to plug the well .
At the time of the explosion , there were 126 crew on board ; seven were employees of BP , 79 of Transocean , there were also employees of various other companies involved in the operation of the rig , including Anadarko , Halliburton and M - I SWACO .
Eleven workers were presumed killed in the initial explosion .
The rig was evacuated , with injured workers airlifted to medical facilities .
After approximately 36 hours , Deepwater Horizon sank on 22 April 2010 .
The remains of the rig were located resting on the seafloor approximately deep at that location , and about ( quarter of a mile ) northwest of the well .
The resultant oil spill continued until 15 July when it was closed by a cap .
Relief wells were used to permanently seal the well , which was declared " effectively dead " on 19 September 2010 .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Transocean received an early partial insurance settlement for total loss of the Deepwater Horizon of around 5 May 2010 .
Financial analysts noted that the insurance recovery was likely to outweigh the value of the rig ( although not necessarily its replacement value ) and any liabilities the latter estimated at up to .
Litigation , ultimate roll call of damage , and the scope of final insurance recovery were all unknown , with analysts reporting that the aftermath was of unprecedented scale and complexity compared to previous disasters which themselves took many years to unfold and resolve .
A July 2010 analysis by the Financial Times on the aftermath cited legal sources as saying that " at some point the scale of the litigation becomes so large that it really is novel " , that " the situation is likely to be complicated further because the variety of probable cases means it will be hard to aggregate them into so - called class actions " and that there was " no way to put this in historical context because we have never faced anything like this before " .
As with the Exxon Valdez disaster , litigation was being discussed in terms of a 20-year timescale .
In January 2013 , Transocean agreed to pay US$ 1.4 billion for violations of the US Clean Water Act .
BP had earlier agreed to pay $ 2.4 billion but faced additional penalties that could range from $ 5 billion to $ 20 billion .
In September 2014 , Halliburton agreed to settle a large percentage of legal claims against them by paying $ 1.1 billion into a trust by way of three installments over two years .
On 4 September 2014 , U.S. District Judge Carl Barbier ruled BP was guilty of gross negligence and willful misconduct under the Clean Water Act ( CWA ) .
He described BP 's actions as " reckless , " while he said Transocean 's and Halliburton 's actions were " negligent . "
He apportioned 67 % of the blame for the spill to BP , 30 % to Transocean , and 3 % to Halliburton .
BP issued a statement strongly disagreeing with the finding , and saying the court 's decision would be appealed .
On 8 December 2014 , The US Supreme Court rejected BP 's legal challenge to a compensation deal over the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill .
The settlement agreement had no cap , but BP initially estimated that it would pay roughly $ 7.8bn ( £ 6.1bn ) to compensate victims .
SEE ALSO
* Ixtoc I oil spill * Ocean Ranger * Piper Alpha
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Transocean official website * Deepwater Horizon detail at Transocean 's website and at RigZone.com * Photograph of Deepwater Horizon in 2004 at Geographic.org
* - detailed media description of the events of the day of the Deepwater Horizon explosion
( yahoo news mirror )
* Photo history of the fire and loss *
BOEM reading room on Deepwater Horizon , including Freedom of Information publications