SQUARE ROOT OF 5 Binary
The square root of 5 is the positive real number that , when multiplied by itself , gives the prime number 5 .
It is more precisely called the principal square root of 5 , to distinguish it from the negative number with the same property .
This number appears in the fractional expression for the golden ratio .
It can be denoted in surd form as :
It is an irrational algebraic number .
The first sixty significant digits of its decimal expansion are : which can be rounded down to 2.236 to within 99.99 % accuracy .
The approximation ( ≈ 2.23611 ) for the square root of five can be used .
Despite having a denominator of only 72 , it differs from the correct value by less than ( approx . ) .
As of December 2013 , its numerical value in decimal has been computed to at least ten billion digits .
PROOFS OF IRRATIONALITY Section::::Proofs of irrationality .
1 .
This irrationality proof for the square root of 5 uses Fermat 's method of infinite descent : 2 .
This irrationality proof is also a proof by contradiction :
CONTINUED FRACTION Section::::Continued fraction .
It can be expressed as the continued fraction
The convergents and semiconvergents of this continued fraction are as follows ( the black terms are the semiconvergents ) :
Convergents of the continued fraction are colored red ; their numerators are 2 , 9 , 38 , 161 , ... , and their denominators are 1 , 4 , 17 , 72 , ... .
Each of these is the best rational approximation of ; in other words , it is closer to than any rational with a smaller denominator .
BABYLONIAN METHOD Section::::Babylonian method .
When is computed with the Babylonian method , starting with and using , the th approximant is equal to the th convergent of the convergent sequence : NESTED
SQUARE EXPANSIONS
Section::::Nested square expansions .
The following nested square expressions converge to formula_12 :
RELATION TO THE GOLDEN RATIO AND FIBONACCI NUMBERS Section::::Relation to the golden ratio and Fibonacci numbers .
The golden ratio is the arithmetic mean of 1 and .
The algebraic relationship between , the golden ratio and the conjugate of the golden ratio ( ) is expressed in the following formulae :
The quotient of and ( or the product of and ) , and its reciprocal , provide an interesting pattern of continued fractions and are related to the ratios between the Fibonacci numbers and the Lucas numbers :
The series of convergents to these values feature the series of Fibonacci numbers and the series of Lucas numbers as numerators and denominators , and vice versa , respectively : GEOMETRY Section::::Geometry .
Geometrically , corresponds to the diagonal of a rectangle whose sides are of length 1 and 2 , as is evident from the Pythagorean theorem .
Such a rectangle can be obtained by halving a square , or by placing two equal squares side by side .
Together with the algebraic relationship between and , this forms the basis for the geometrical construction of a golden rectangle from a square , and for the construction of a regular pentagon given its side ( since the side - to - diagonal ratio in a regular pentagon is ) .
Forming a dihedral right angle with the two equal squares that halve a 1:2 rectangle , it can be seen that corresponds also to the ratio between the length of a cube edge and the shortest distance from one of its vertices to the opposite one , when traversing the cube surface ( the shortest distance when traversing through the inside of the cube corresponds to the length of the cube diagonal , which is the square root of three times the edge ) .
The number can be algebraically and geometrically related to and , as it is the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with catheti measuring and ( again , the Pythagorean theorem proves this ) .
Right triangles of such proportions can be found inside a cube : the sides of any triangle defined by the centre point of a cube , one of its vertices , and the middle point of a side located on one the faces containing that vertex and opposite to it , are in the ratio
This follows from the geometrical relationships between a cube and the quantities ( edge - to - face - diagonal ratio , or distance between opposite edges ) ,
( edge - to - cube - diagonal ratio ) and ( the relationship just mentioned above ) .
A rectangle with side proportions 1 : is called a root - five rectangle and is part of the series of root rectangles , a subset of dynamic rectangles , which are based on and successively constructed using the diagonal of the previous root rectangle , starting from a square .
A root-5 rectangle is particularly notable in that it can be split into a square and two equal golden rectangles ( of dimensions ) , or into two golden rectangles of different sizes ( of dimensions and ) .
It can also be decomposed as the union of two equal golden rectangles ( of dimensions ) whose intersection forms a square .
All this is can be seen as the geometric interpretation of the algebraic relationships between , and mentioned above .
The root-5 rectangle can be constructed from a 1:2 rectangle ( the root-4 rectangle ) , or directly from a square in a manner similar to the one for the golden rectangle shown in the illustration , but extending the arc of length to both sides .
TRIGONOMETRY Section::::Trigonometry .
Like and , the square root of 5 appears extensively in the formulae for exact trigonometric constants , including in the sines and cosines of every angle whose measure in degrees is divisible by 3 but not by 15 .
The simplest of these are As such the computation of its value is important for generating trigonometric tables .
Since is geometrically linked to half - square rectangles and to pentagons , it also appears frequently in formulae for the geometric properties of figures derived from them , such as in the formula for the volume of a dodecahedron .
DIOPHANTINE APPROXIMATIONS Section::::Diophantine approximations .
Hurwitz 's theorem in Diophantine approximations states that every irrational number can be approximated by infinitely many rational numbers in lowest terms in such a way that and that is best possible , in the sense that for any larger constant than , there are some irrational numbers for which only finitely many such approximations exist .
Closely related to this is the theorem that of any three consecutive convergents , , , of a number , at least one of the three inequalities holds :
And the in the denominator is the best bound possible since the convergents of the golden ratio make the difference on the left - hand side arbitrarily close to the value on the right - hand side .
In particular , one can not obtain a tighter bound by considering sequences of four or more consecutive convergents .
ALGEBRA Section::::Algebra .
The ring contains numbers of the form , where and are integers and is the imaginary number .
This ring is a frequently cited example of an integral domain that is not a unique factorization domain .
The number 6 has two inequivalent factorizations within this ring :
The field , like any other quadratic field , is an abelian extension of the rational numbers .
The Kronecker – Weber theorem therefore guarantees that the square root of five can be written as a rational linear combination of roots of unity : IDENTITIES OF RAMANUJAN Section::::Identities of Ramanujan .
The square root of 5 appears in various identities discovered by Srinivasa Ramanujan involving continued fractions .
For example , this case of the Rogers – Ramanujan continued fraction : SEE ALSO * Golden ratio * Square root * Square root of 2
* Square root of 3 REFERENCES