HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP
The High School Football National Championship is a national championship honor awarded to the best high school football team(s ) in the United States of America based on rankings from USA Today and the National Prep Poll .
There have been some efforts over the years at organizing a single - game playoff for the national championship .
Sometimes a dominant team in one state would defeat a dominant team in a neighboring state after the regular season and then would self - claim the national championship .
However , sometimes such a game could not be scheduled , like in 1936 after Washington High School of Massillon , Ohio refused to withhold its black players in a proposed game with segregated Central High School of Knoxville , Tennessee .
Central High subsequently proclaimed itself national champion that year .
On December 31 , 1938 , duPont Manual of Louisville , Kentucky and New Britain of Connecticut played in an actual national championship game in Baton Rouge with the Louisiana Sports Association as the formal sponsor – and , by extension , the Sugar Bowl Committee , which held a series of sporting events leading up to the Sugar Bowl game itself .
Manual won , 28–20 .
The following year , on December 30 , the game featured Pine Bluff , Arkansas , which defeated Baton Rouge High School by a score of 26–0 .
This series of games proved difficult to organize , due to some states ' prohibition of postseason play .
Pine Bluff , for example , had to receive a special waiver from its state to participate in the game .
In 1962 , Florida state champion Miami Senior High beat Baltimore Polytechnic in the Orange Bowl and was recognized by Imperial Sports Syndicate of California as a national champion .
SELECTORS
Section::::Selectors . !
Selector Years
NATIONAL CHAMPIONS
BY YEAR Section::::National Champions by year . !
Year Champion(s )
Record Coach Selector(s )
Scott , Toledo , Ohio 10 - 0 - 0 Tom Merrell NSNS Downey HS , Downey , California 11–0 NSNS Fargo , ND 13–0
Sid Sichy AP NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIPS BY SCHOOL (
MULTIPLE WINNERS ONLY )
Section::::National Championships by school ( multiple winners only ) . !
School Championships Years
SEE ALSO
* USA Today All - USA high school football team ( including Super 25 teams in U.S. and Top 10 teams in East , South , Midwest , and West regions )
* USA Today High School Football Coach of the Year SOURCES
* http://www.highschoolsports.net/super25/Football/Varsity/Boys * Huff , Doug & Tennis , Mark .
( 2001 ) National High School Football Record Book , Student Sports .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
http://www.ohsaa.org/sports/ft/boys/PastResults/results98.PDF