BLEACH Bleach is the generic name for any chemical product which is used industrially and domestically to whiten clothes , lighten hair color and remove stains .
It often refers , specifically , to a dilute solution of sodium hypochlorite , also called " liquid bleach " .
Many bleaches have broad spectrum bactericidal properties , making them useful for disinfecting and sterilizing and are used in swimming pool sanitation to control bacteria , viruses , and algae and in many places where sterile conditions are required .
They are also used in many industrial processes , notably in the bleaching of wood pulp .
Bleaches also have other minor uses like removing mildew , killing weeds , and increasing the longevity of cut flowers .
Bleaches work by reacting with many colored organic compounds , such as natural pigments , and turning them into colorless ones .
While most bleaches are oxidizing agents ( chemicals that can remove electrons from other molecules ) , some are reducing agents ( that donate electrons ) .
Chlorine , a powerful oxidizer , is the active agent in many household bleaches .
Since pure chlorine is a toxic corrosive gas , these products usually contain hypochlorite which releases chlorine when needed .
"
Bleaching powder " usually means a formulation containing calcium hypochlorite .
Oxidizing bleaching agents that do not contain chlorine are usually based on peroxides such as hydrogen peroxide , sodium percarbonate , and sodium perborate .
These bleaches are called ' non - chlorine bleach , ' ' oxygen bleach ' or ' color - safe bleach . '
Reducing bleaches have niche uses , such as sulfur dioxide used to bleach wool , either as gas or from solutions of sodium dithionite ; and sodium borohydride .
Bleaches generally react with many other organic substances besides the intended colored pigments , so they can weaken or damage natural materials like fibers , cloth , and leather , and intentionally applied dyes such as the indigo of denim .
For the same reason , ingestion of the products , breathing of the fumes , or contact with skin or eyes can cause health damage .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The earliest form of bleaching involved spreading fabrics and cloth out in a bleachfield to be whitened by the action of the sun and water .
By the 17th century , there was a significant cloth bleaching industry in Western Europe , using alternating alkaline baths ( generally lye ) and acid baths ( such as lactic acid from sour milk , and later diluted sulfuric acid ) .
The whole process lasted up to six months .
Chlorine - based bleaches , which shortened that process from months to hours , were invented in Europe in the late 18th century .
Swedish chemist Scheele discovered chlorine in 1774 , and in 1785 French scientist Claude Berthollet recognized that it could be used to bleach fabrics .
Berthollet also discovered sodium hypochlorite , which became the first commercial bleach , named Eau de Javel ( " Javel water " ) after the borough in Paris where it was produced .
Scottish chemist and industrialist Charles Tennant proposed in 1798 a solution of calcium hypochlorite as an alternative for Javel water , and patented bleaching powder ( solid calcium hypochlorite ) in 1799 .
Around 1820 , French chemist Labarraque discovered the disinfecting and deodorizing ability of hypochlorites , and was instrumental in popularizing their use for such purpose .
His work greatly improved medical practice , public health , and the sanitary conditions in hospitals , slaughterhouses , and all industries dealing with animal products .
Louis Jacques Thénard first produced hydrogen peroxide in 1818 by reacting barium peroxide with nitric acid .
Hydrogen peroxide was first used for bleaching in 1882 , but did not become commercially important until after 1930 .
Sodium perborate as a laundry bleach had been used in Europe since the early twentieth century , but did not become popular in North America until the 1980s .
MECHANISM OF ACTION
WHITENING Section::::Mechanism of action .
Section::::Whitening .
Colors of natural organic materials typically arise from organic pigments , such as beta carotene .
Chemical bleaches work in one of two ways :
* An oxidizing bleach works by breaking the chemical bonds that make up the chromophore .
This changes the molecule into a different substance that either does not contain a chromophore , or contains a chromophore that does not absorb visible light .
This is the mechanism of bleaches based on chlorine but also of oxygen - anions which react through initial nucleophilic attack .
* A reducing bleach works by converting double bonds in the chromophore into single bonds .
This eliminates the ability of the chromophore to absorb visible light .
This is the mechanism of bleaches based on sulfur dioxide .
Sunlight acts as a bleach through a process leading to similar results : high energy photons of light , often in the violet or ultraviolet range , can disrupt the bonds in the chromophore , rendering the resulting substance colorless .
Extended exposure often leads to massive discoloration usually reducing the colors to white and typically very faded blue spectrums .
ANTIMICROBIAL EFFICACY Section::::Antimicrobial efficacy .
The broad - spectrum effectiveness of most bleaches is due to their general chemical reactivity against organic compounds , rather than the selective inhibitory or toxic actions of antibiotics .
They irreversibly denature or destroy many proteins , making them extremely versatile disinfectants .
However , hypochlorite bleaches in low concentration were found to also attack bacteria by interfering with heat shock proteins on their walls .
CLASSES OF BLEACHES Section::::Classes of bleaches .
Most industrial and household bleaches belong to three broad classes :
* Chlorine - based bleaches , whose active agent is chlorine , usually from the decomposition of some chlorine compound like hypochlorite or chloramine .
* Peroxide - based bleaches , whose active agent is oxygen , almost always from the decomposition of a peroxide compound like hydrogen peroxide .
* Sulfur dioxide based bleaches , whose active agent is sulfur dioxide , possibly from the decomposition of some oxosulfur anion .
CHLORINE - BASED BLEACHES Section::::Chlorine - based bleaches .
Chlorine - based bleaches are found in many household " bleach " products , as well as in specialized products for hospitals , public health , water chlorination , and industrial processes .
The grade of chlorine - based bleaches is often expressed as percent active chlorine .
One gram of a 100 % active chlorine bleach has the same bleaching power as one gram of elemental chlorine .
Mixing these bleaches with an acid such as vinegar can liberate chlorine gas , which is a respiratory irritant that attacks mucous membranes and burns the skin .
Mixing these bleaches with other common household chemicals , such as ammonia , can produce other toxic gases .
The most common chlorine - based bleaches are : * Sodium hypochlorite ( ) , usually as a 3–6 % solution in water , usually called " liquid bleach " or just " bleach " .
Historically called " Javel water " .
It is used in many households to whiten laundry , disinfect hard surfaces in kitchens and bathrooms , treat water for drinking and keep swimming pools free of infectious agents .
* Bleaching powder ( formerly known as " chlorinated lime " ) , usually a mixture of calcium hypochlorite ( ) , calcium hydroxide ( lime , ) , and calcium chloride ( ) in variable amounts .
Sold as a white powder or in tablets , is used in many of the same applications as sodium hypochlorite , but is more stable and contains more available chlorine .
* Chlorine gas ( ) .
It is used as a disinfectant in water treatment , especially to make drinking water and in large public swimming pools .
It was used extensively to bleach wood pulp , but this use has decreased significantly due to environmental concerns .
* Chlorine dioxide ( ) .
This unstable gas is generated in situ or stored as dilute aqueous solutions .
It finds large - scale applications for the bleaching of wood pulp , fats and oils , cellulose , flour , textiles , beeswax , skin , and in a number of other industries .
Other examples of chlorine - based bleaches , used mostly as disinfectants , are chloramine , halazone , and sodium dichloroisocyanurate .
PEROXIDE - BASED BLEACHES Section::::Peroxide - based bleaches .
Peroxide - based bleaches are characterized by the peroxide chemical group , namely two oxygen atoms connected by a single bond , ( – O – O – ) .
This bond is easily broken , giving rise to very reactive oxygen species , which are the active agents of the bleach .
The main products in this class are : *
Hydrogen peroxide itself ( ) .
It is used , for example , to bleach wood pulp and hair or to prepare other bleaching agents like the perborates , percarbonates , peracids , etc .
* Sodium percarbonate ( ) , an adduct of hydrogen peroxide and sodium carbonate ( " soda ash " or " washing soda " , ) .
Dissolved in water , it yields a solution of the two products , that combines the degreasing action of the carbonate with the bleaching action of the peroxide .
* Sodium perborate ( ) .
Dissolved in water it forms some hydrogen peroxide , but also the perborate anion ( ) which can perform nucleophilic oxidation .
* Peracetic ( peroxoacetic ) acid ( ) .
Generated in situ by some laundry detergents , and also marketed for use as industrial and agricultural disinfection and water treatment .
* benzoyl peroxide ( ) .
It is used in topical medications for acne and to bleach flour .
* Ozone ( ) .
While not properly a peroxide , its mechanism of action is similar .
It is used in the manufacture of paper products , especially newsprint and white Kraft paper .
In the food industry , other oxidizing products like bromates are used as flour bleaching and maturing agents .
REDUCING BLEACHES Section::::Reducing bleaches .
Sodium dithionite ( also known as sodium hydrosulfite ) is one of the most important reductive bleaching agents .
It is a white crystalline powder with a weak sulfurous odor .
It can be obtained by reacting sodium bisulfite with zinc
It is used as such in some industrial dyeing processes to eliminate excess dye , residual oxide , and unintended pigments and for bleaching wood pulp .
Reaction of sodium dithionite with formaldehyde produces Rongalite , which is used in bleaching wood pulp , cotton , wool , leather and clay .
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
Section::::Environmental impact .
A Risk Assessment Report ( RAR ) conducted by the European Union on sodium hypochlorite conducted under Regulation EEC 793/93 concluded that this substance is safe for the environment in all its current , normal uses .
This is due to its high reactivity and instability .
Disappearance of hypochlorite is practically immediate in the natural aquatic environment , reaching in a short time concentration as low as 10 μg / L or less in all emission scenarios .
In addition , it was found that while volatile chlorine species may be relevant in some indoor scenarios , they have negligible impact in open environmental conditions .
Further , the role of hypochlorite pollution is assumed as negligible in soils .
Industrial bleaching agents can also be sources of concern .
For example , the use of elemental chlorine in the bleaching of wood pulp produces organochlorines and persistent organic pollutants , including dioxins .
According to an industry group , the use of chlorine dioxide in these processes has reduced the dioxin generation to under detectable levels .
However , respiratory risk from chlorine and highly toxic chlorinated byproducts still exists .
A recent European study indicated that sodium hypochlorite and organic chemicals ( e.g. , surfactants , fragrances ) contained in several household cleaning products can react to generate chlorinated volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) .
These chlorinated compounds are emitted during cleaning applications , some of which are toxic and probable human carcinogens .
The study showed that indoor air concentrations significantly increase ( 8–52 times for chloroform and 1–1170 times for carbon tetrachloride , respectively , above baseline quantities in the household ) during the use of bleach containing products .
The increase in chlorinated volatile organic compound concentrations was the lowest for plain bleach and the highest for the products in the form of " thick liquid and gel " .
The significant increases observed in indoor air concentrations of several chlorinated VOCs ( especially carbon tetrachloride and chloroform ) indicate that the bleach use may be a source that could be important in terms of inhalation exposure to these compounds .
While the authors suggested that using these cleaning products may significantly increase the cancer risk , this conclusion appears to be hypothetical :
DISINFECTION Section::::Disinfection .
Sodium hypochlorite solution , 3–6 % , ( common household bleach ) is typically diluted for safe use when disinfecting surfaces and when used to treat drinking water .
A weak solution of 2 % household bleach in warm water is typical for sanitizing smooth surfaces prior to brewing of beer or wine .
US Government regulations ( 21 CFR Part 178 ) allow food processing equipment and food contact surfaces to be sanitized with solutions containing bleach , provided that the solution is allowed to drain adequately before contact with food , and that the solutions do not exceed 200 parts per million ( ppm ) available chlorine ( for example , one tablespoon of typical household bleach containing 5.25 % sodium hypochlorite , per gallon of water ) .
A 1-in-5 dilution of household bleach with water ( 1 part bleach to 4 parts water ) is effective against many bacteria and some viruses , and is often the disinfectant of choice in cleaning surfaces in hospitals ( primarily in the United States ) .
Even " scientific - grade " , commercially produced disinfection solutions such as
Virocidin - X usually have sodium hypochlorite as their sole active ingredient , though they also contain surfactants ( to prevent beading ) and fragrances ( to conceal the bleach smell ) .
See Hypochlorous acid for a discussion of the mechanism for disinfectant action .
Treatment of gingivitis Diluted sodium hypochlorite at a rate of 2000–1 ( 0.05 % concentration ) may represent an efficacious , safe and affordable antimicrobial agent in the prevention and treatment of periodontal disease .
COLOR SAFE BLEACH
Section::::Color safe bleach .
Color safe bleach is a chemical that uses hydrogen peroxide as the active ingredient ( to help remove stains ) rather than sodium hypochlorite or chlorine .
It also has chemicals in it that help brighten colors .
Hydrogen peroxide is also used for sterilization purposes and water treatment , but its disinfectant capabilities may be limited due to the concentration in the colorsafe bleach solution as compared to other applications .
HEALTH HAZARDS
Section::::Health hazards .
The safety of bleaches depends on the compounds present , and their concentration .
Generally speaking , ingestion of bleaches can cause damage to the esophagus and stomach , possibly leading to death .
On contact with the skin or eyes , they may cause irritation , drying , and potentially burns .
Inhalation of bleach fumes can damage the lungs .
SEE ALSO
*
Tooth whitening REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Bodkins , Dr. Bailey .
Bleach .
Philadelphia :
Virginia Printing Press , 1995 .
* Trotman , E.R. Textile Scouring and Bleaching .
London :
Charles Griffin & Co. , 1968 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bleach in Britannica * Bleach ( MSDS )