PINKY RING
A pinky ring is a ring worn on the little finger of either hand , which is also called the " fifth finger " .
PROFESSIONAL RINGS Section::::Professional rings .
A variety of pinky rings are awarded to graduating engineering students in North America , generally intended to serve as a reminder of the significance and impact of their chosen profession .
In Canada , these include the Iron Ring , made of either crudely worked iron or stainless steel and worn on the dominant hand , presented to engineering students during the Ritual of the Calling of an Engineer , and the silver , but otherwise similar Earth Ring , associated with the geologists and geophysicists of the Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Alberta .
In the United States , the Engineer 's Ring , awarded by the Order of the Engineer , is similar to the Canadian Iron Ring .
Human ecology and home economics graduates also receive a pinky ring symbolizing their profession .
The Human Ecology Ring was first instigated by a group of young graduates at Macdonald College , Quebec , in 1968 .
INDICATIONS OF AFFILIATION OR CONVEYING MESSAGES Section::::Indications of affiliation or conveying messages .
At times , pinky rings have been worn with the intent to convey a message or indicate affiliation .
During the Victorian era , both single men and women uninterested in pursuing marriage could wear a ring on the little finger of their left hand .
Especially in the United States , pinky rings also developed an association with criminal activity .
Grifters were thought to wear such rings , sometimes to provide their associates with a source of funding for their funeral expenses in case of their death , as were made men in the American Mafia .
Movies such as Little Caesar and The Godfather contributed to the association of this style of jewellery with organized crime .
FASHION Section::::Fashion .
The more modern use of the pinky ring has weakened its traditional historic symbolism .
In the early 20th century , these rings were popular in Parisian fashion , especially among the youth .
In the United States , such rings have become a " fundamental of American style " , in some way due to its symbolic past .
SIGNET AND WEDDING RINGS Section::::Signet and wedding rings .
Pliny the Elder noted , according to the 1938 Loeb Classical Library translation by Harris Rackham , " Some people put all their rings on their little finger only , while others wear only one ring even on that finger , and use it to seal up their signet ring , which is kept stored away as a rarity not deserving the insult of common use , and is brought out from its cabinet as from a sanctuary ; thus even wearing a single ring on the little finger may advertise the possession of a costlier piece of apparatus put away in store . "
Some British men wear a signet ring on the little finger of the left hand , which is considered to be the correct place for it .
In common with many American families , in homage to the British tradition , President Franklin D. Roosevelt wore a signet ring handed down to him by his father James , and which was inherited by FDR 's son James Roosevelt .
All three generations wore the signet on top of their wedding bands , on their left pinkies .
FDR 's pinky signet was noted and admired by Sir Winston Churchill ( who wore his own gold signet on a different finger ) .
Wedding bands ( always a gift from wife to husband ) were usually worn by Western men in the Victorian age on the left hand pinky finger , although few British men wore wedding rings until World War II .
Because of masculine limitations , men were encouraged to wear a second ring if they desired , but it was to be worn on top of the wedding band so as to keep both rings confined to one finger .
It appears the custom for men to wear their two rings on the left pinky was purely British and German ; in America , men either followed the British tradition or wore no ring at all until much later .
USE IN THE BRITISH ROYAL FAMILY Section::::Use in the British Royal Family .
The use of the left - hand pinky finger as the wedding ring and royal signet or initial ring of the British Royal Family is an ironclad tradition dating back to the sons of Queen Victoria , who favored pinky rings in imitation of their mother as well as following German custom .
REFERENCES