CHINA SYNDROME ( THE KING OF QUEENS )
" China Syndrome " is the series finale of the long - running American sitcom The King of Queens .
The finale has the length of two regular episodes , being counted as the twelfth and thirteenth episodes of the ninth season , running about 45 minutes without commercials .
It was taped March 15 , 2007 ; it originally aired on May 14 , 2007 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After Doug learns that his wife Carrie has not given up the apartment in Manhattan as she promised , though he quit his job as an IPS driver for a job as a salesperson , which she requested that he do , he is furious .
Doug does not want to attend her father Arthur 's wedding to Ava St. Clair ( Lainie Kazan ) , which takes place in Poughkeepsie .
However , his best friend Deacon Palmer takes him there anyway .
Ava St. Clair reveals to Carrie that after a few failed marriages , she now only marries gay men .
Ava later learns that Arthur is not gay and promptly leaves the ceremony , without informing Arthur .
Carrie attempts to comfort Arthur by telling him , " She had wanted a companion .
"
Arthur refuses to announce that the wedding is off , and proposes to Veronica Olchin , Spence 's mother ( Anne Meara ) in the men 's room .
She at first declines , but later accepts .
Carrie and Spence are both surprised and against the decision .
The ceremony is performed by Rabbi Feldman ( Josh Cooke ) , because the original bride Ava was Jewish , although neither Arthur nor Veronica is Jewish .
The wedding ends with Arthur smashing a glass with his foot , while everyone cheers , " Mazel tov ! " .
Immediately afterward , Carrie is notified that the baby she and Doug wanted to adopt is waiting for them in Beijing .
However , Doug does not want to have a baby with her anymore because of her betrayal regarding the apartment .
A very pregnant Holly ( Nicole Sullivan ) also shows up at the wedding , as does the Heffernans ' neighbor Lou Ferrigno .
At this point , it is also revealed that Holly 's husband recently left her .
When Lou tries to cheer everyone up with " Such a Happy Day , " he is greeted by very unhappy expressions .
Doug , who sits outside in the back of the building where the ceremony is performed , makes an offer to Spence to become his new roommate , since he is divorcing Carrie , but later retracts the offer when Holly tells him her story .
Very drunk , he challenges each of them to a wrestling match , but falls asleep while fighting with Holly .
When Arthur learns that Doug will not toast him as his best man , he pitches the role to Spence , who turns it down , and ultimately , Deacon is forced to make the toast , though Deacon pleads that he does n't know him that well .
Spence tries to move back in with Doug 's cousin Danny because Arthur will be living with his wife Veronica now .
He learns , however , that Danny has a new girlfriend Sandy ( Jillian Bach ) who is living with him .
Holly and Spence begin talking and realize that they both do n't have a place to stay , so they decide to get an apartment together .
Danny returns without Sandy , and suggests that Spence and he move back in together .
Spence accepts , leaving Holly alone without a place to stay .
Meanwhile , Kelly points out to Carrie that she should n't feel so guilty about keeping the apartment , because Doug let Carrie down many times in the past .
Carrie is convinced and tells Doug off .
Both decide that they want to get the baby for themselves and board the same plane , although Carrie leaves the house first , and Doug has to find his passport , which Deacon finds in the vegetable crisper .
Holly met Rabbi Feldman and they hit it off .
Holly is going to move in with him and convert to Judaism .
Doug later surprises Carrie on board the plane , by greeting her with a gruff " Hello ! "
and showing her his passport in triumph .
He also adds that " Deacon 's BLT was delicious , as is my revenge . "
They use the long flight to sort out their problems and remain together .
After getting baby Ming - Mei from the adoption agency , Carrie finds out that she is pregnant .
She is scared about the changes to come , but Doug is optimistic that they will be able to handle it together .
The episode fast - forwards one year and shows Doug and Carrie with their two small children in their living room .
Arthur comes in with a suitcase , announcing that his marriage " did n't work out . "
The episode ends with a three - minute montage of scenes from the show 's nine seasons to A Million Billion 's song " Milk & Honey " .
As the song concludes , the series ends with a final screen shot : "
thanks for the ride ... " .
CAST * Kevin James as Doug Heffernan * Leah Remini as Carrie Heffernan * Jerry Stiller as Arthur Spooner * Victor Williams as Deacon Palmer * Patton Oswalt as Spence Olchin
* Gary Valentine as Danny Heffernan * Merrin Dungey as Kelly Palmer * Nicole Sullivan as Holly Shumpert * Anne Meara as Veronica * Lou Ferrigno as Himself * Lainie Kazan as Ava St. Clair * Josh Cooke as Rabbi Feldman * Jillian Bach as Sandy * Jackie Flynn as Band Leader * Adam Ferrara as Waiter * Carla Ferrigno as Carla * Shelby Adamowsky as Eloise * Shannon Farrara as Shannon ORIGINAL AIRINGS BY COUNTRY * USA –
The episode originally aired on CBS on May 14 , 2007 .
It ranked # 12 in the Nielsen ratings that week , with 13.61 million viewers .
The ninth season average was # 33 , with 11.4 million viewers , which was higher than the previous two seasons .
CBS also aired an encore of the episode on May 24 , 2007 .
* Germany – The dubbed double episode was aired at 9:15pm on October 15 , 2007 , on Kabel 1 .
It was watched by 2.49 million viewers .
In the target group 14 - 49 , the episode had 16.4 % market share , winning the night in this important demo and beating Lost .
* AUS – In the regular 7:00 pm timeslot on Weeknights during summer ( non - ratings period ) on the Nine Network , episode 11 was shown at 7:00 pm followed by the finale as an hour - long special at 7:30pm on December 18 , 2007 .
Nine showed the three - minute montage at 8:30pm , titled " The King of Queens : Farewell " .
Late - season 4 - mid - season 5 repeats continued to air at 7 pm until January 25 , 2008 and was replaced by season 2 repeats of Two and a Half Men , another US sitcom on January 28 , 2008 .
Foxtel , subscription TV distributor also showed hour - long special on June 12 , 2009 at 6:00pm , as well as the three - minute montage at 7:00pm on 111 Hits .
* UK – In a regular hour - long slot on Tuesdays at 21:00 on Paramount Comedy 1 , episodes 11 and 12 were shown on March 11 , 2008 .
Rather than showing the finale as an hour - long special , episode 13 ( minus the three - minute montage ) was shown the following week on March 18 , followed by the first episode of season 1 .
SEE ALSO
* List of The King of Queens episodes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Episode information at TV.com : part 1 , part 2 * Finale wrap - up : " The King of Queens " by Sarah Karnasiewicz for Salon.com ( May 15 , 2007 )
* A Farewell Fit for The King of Queens by Joal Ryan for E !
Online ( May 15 , 2007 )
* ' King of Queens ' finale by David Bianculli for New York Daily News
( May 14 , 2007 )