SALT AND PEPPER SHAKERS Salt and pepper shakers ( or in the UK , salt and pepper pots ) are condiment dispensers used in Western culture that are designed to allow diners to distribute grains of edible salt and ground peppercorns .
Salt and pepper shakers are sometimes held in a cruet - stand .
HISTORY AND USAGE Section::::History and usage .
Salt and pepper shakers can be made from a variety of materials , including plastic , glass , metal , and ceramic .
Salt shakers became increasingly common after anti - caking agents were introduced by the Morton Salt company in the 1920s .
The Great Depression of the 1930s boosted the popularity of salt and pepper shakers as global ceramics producers concentrated on inexpensive items .
Except in the most casual dining establishments , they are usually provided as a matched set , sometimes distinguishable only by the number of holes on the top of the shaker .
Designs range from small , plain glass screw cap containers ( invented by John Landis Mason , inventor of the Mason jar ) to more ornate works of art .
Sometimes the design refers to some pair of related objects — such as a replica of a West Highland White Terrier containing salt and a Scottish Terrier containing pepper .
Designs may also relate to specific occasions or holidays .
As a result of this diversity of design , collecting salt and pepper shakers is a hobby .
Design of salt and pepper shakers has also been used to transmit cultural perspectives about race and other cultural values .
There are two Museums of Salt and Pepper Shakers dedicated to showing the variety and history of salt and pepper shakers through the ages .
DISTINGUISHING SALT FROM PEPPER
Section::::Distinguishing salt from pepper .
The number of holes varies by culture , health and taste .
In the United States where excessive salt is considered unhealthy , salt is stored in the shaker with the fewest holes , but in parts of Europe where pepper was historically a rare spice , this is reversed .
In the UK , salt was often poured onto the side of one 's plate and used for dipping , rather than shaken across the whole dish , hence salt cellars having a single , larger , hole .
As an alternative to salt and pepper shakers , pepper may be distributed at the table by use of a pepper grinder , while salt may be distributed from a salt cellar or a salt mill .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Would You Like Some Salt and Pepper ?
How About 80,000 Shakers Worth ?