THE TALE OF DESPEREAUX ( FILM )
The Tale of Despereaux is a 2008 British - American computer - animated adventure fantasy family film directed by Sam Fell and Robert Stevenhagen and produced by Gary Ross and Allison Thomas .
Loosely based on the 2003 book of the same name by Kate DiCamillo , the movie is narrated by Sigourney Weaver and stars Matthew Broderick , Robbie Coltrane , Frances Conroy , Tony Hale , Ciarán Hinds , Dustin Hoffman , Richard Jenkins , Kevin Kline , Frank Langella , William H. Macy , Charles Shaughnessy , Stanley Tucci , Tracey Ullman , and Emma Watson .
It was released on December 19 , 2008 , by Universal Pictures .
The movie is the second theatrically released computer - animated film distributed by Universal Studios .
It was also produced by Universal Animation Studios , Framestore Feature Animation , and Relativity Media .
The film grossed $ 86.9 million on a $ 60 million budget and received mixed reviews .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Sailor Pietro and his rat companion Roscuro dock in the kingdom of Dor , famous around the world for its delicious soups , during the " Royal Soup Day .
"
The chief cook , Chef Andre , makes good soup due to Boldo , a magical genie that emerges from his pot and is made entirely out of food .
Enchanted by the smell of the delicious soup , Roscuro slips away and ends up in the royal banquet hall , on a chandelier above the royal family 's table .
He slips and falls into the Queen 's soup , giving her such a fright that she has a heart attack and dies .
The entire hall goes into panic , as the guards pursue Roscuro .
He attempts to flee the castle but sees Pietro 's ship has already sailed away .
He narrowly escapes capture by falling down a sewer drain , which leads to the castle dungeons , where he 's found and taken in by Botticelli , the leader of the dungeon 's large rat population .
Distraught over his wife 's death , the king forbids any and all things related to soup and makes rats illegal .
Without its soup , Dor becomes impoverished and dreary .
Andre is banned from making any more soup and Boldo stops appearing .
The king 's daughter , Princess Pea , despairs over the sad state of the kingdom and how her father has shut out both her and the world in his grief .
In a mouse village in the castle 's abandoned kitchen storage room , a baby is born to the Tilling family .
They name him Despereaux .
As he grows up , it becomes clear Despereaux 's not like other mice : he is n't meek and timid , but brave and curious , unnerving other mice around him .
In an effort to teach him to behave like a proper mouse , his brother Furlough takes him to the castle library to show him how to chew books , but Despereaux is more interested in reading than eating them .
He becomes fascinated by fairytale books about daring knights and trapped princesses .
One day while reading , he comes across Princess Pea , and the two speak .
She makes him promise to finish reading the story about a trapped princess so he may tell her how it ends .
Upon discovering Despereaux has violated mouse law by talking to a human , his parents turn him in to the mouse council .
The council banishes Despereaux to the dungeons , where he meets and tells the princess ' story to the castle jailor , Gregory , but he does n't listen and leaves Despereaux alone .
There , he is captured by the rats and thrown into their arena with a cat .
As Despereaux is about to be eaten , Roscuro saves his life by asking Botticelli to give Despereaux to him to eat .
Having been unable to adjust to being a sewer rat , Roscuro is desperate to hear about the outside world .
The two become friends , as every day Despereaux tells him the stories and of the princess and her sadness .
Hoping to make amends for all the trouble he 's caused , Roscuro sneaks up to Princess Pea 's room and tries to apologize , but she 's frightened by him and lashes out .
Hurt by this , Roscuro decides he wants to hurt Pea .
He enlists the help of Miggery " Mig " Sow , Princess Pea 's slightly deaf young maid who longs to be a princess herself , by convincing her she can take Pea 's place if she kidnaps her .
After Mig drags Pea down to the dungeons , Roscuro double - crosses her and locks her in a cell .
Meanwhile , Despereaux ( who has been punished by the mouse council again for his bravery by learning to be afraid by the threadmaster , Hovis , but after being lost in a cave , the mice thought he was dead ) realizes that the princess is in danger , he tries to tell the king
but he was too despondent to listen .
Despereaux tries to get help elsewhere ; he tries to tell his people to help , but they are afraid to see him alive ( thinking that he is a ghost . )
So Despereaux decides to ring the town 's bell to prove to his people that he is still alive .
A sleeping Andre heard the bell and dreams of his days before soups were illegal .
After dreaming , Andre decided that he had enough of this law and gets back to make some soup , which brings the enchanted smell back to the kingdom and brings back Boldo .
Back in the rat colony , Roscuro sees the apologetic sincerity in Pea 's eyes and regrets his actions , but is unable to stop the rats , to whom he has given her , from clambering over her .
Roscuro tries to tell the rats that Pea is not bad , but Botticelli does not let him because he wants Pea dead , even going as far as allowing the rats to eat or trample over Pea .
Back at the castle , Despereaux tried to get help from Andre and Boldo , but Andre does n't listen .
Boldo , wanting to help , turns into a knight by Despereaux .
As for Roscoro , he figures out that Botticelli is a double - crossing traitor and that Pea is doomed .
However , Boldo sacrifices himself against the rats to let Despereaux escaped them and lets loose a cat and brings sunshines to the rat world , and the rats run away .
As the cat runs back to its cage , Roscuro then forces Botticelli into it , where he is eaten by the cat .
Mig is later reunited with her long - lost father Gregory , who recognizes the heart - shaped birthmark on the back of her neck .
It finally stops raining and the sun shines after soup is made for the first time in years .
The mice all then try to be braver like Despereaux .
The king is able to overcome his grief and soup and rats are allowed back in the kingdom .
Roscuro returns to a life at sea , where there is always light and a gentle breeze and Despereaux himself takes off on a journey to see the world as the film ends .
CAST
* Matthew Broderick as Despereaux Tilling , the brave but nonconforming mouse who does not run from danger as a mouse should .
His big ears are in great use for flying and listening to things other mice can not .
* Dustin Hoffman as Chiaroscuro " Roscuro " , the rat who once lived at sea , and is currently working for Botticelli * Emma Watson as Princess Pea , the human princess who befriends Despereaux * Tracey Ullman as Miggery " Mig " Sow , Princess Pea 's servant girl
* Ciarán Hinds as Botticelli , the leader of the rat world
* Robbie Coltrane as Gregory , the jailer and Mig 's father
* William H. Macy as Lester Tilling , Despereaux 's father * Tony Hale as Furlough Tilling , Despereaux 's older brother * Kevin Kline as Chef Andre , the cook .
* Stanley Tucci as Boldo , Andre 's Arcimboldo - like soup genie and friend * Frank Langella as The Mayor of the mouse world * Frances Conroy as Antoinette Tilling ,
Despereaux 's mother * Charles Shaughnessy as Pietro , the sailor who Roscuro accompanied to Dor * Christopher Lloyd as Hovis , the threadmaster in the mouse world
* Richard Jenkins as The Principal at Despereaux 's school
* Sam Fell as Ned and Smudge , two rats * Patricia Cullen as The Queen * Bronson Pinchot as The Town Crier * Sigourney Weaver as The Narrator PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film 's production was marred by disagreements and malpractice , or accusations thereof , between the French , British and North American staff involved .
Sylvain Chomet was employed by Gary Ross and Allison Thomas as director early on , before the film was approved for funding by Universal Pictures , with pre - production ( including character design , the first drafts of the screenplay written by Will McRobb and Chris Viscardi and the addition of the original character of Boldo the soup spirit ) taking place at his studio Django Films in Edinburgh .
Chomet came up against creative and ethical differences with the producers and was eventually fired from the project and thrown out of the studio space allocated to Despereaux .
Mike Johnson was also hired as director before the role eventually went to Sam Fell and Robert Stevenhagen , who , reportedly , had not read the original novel and directed the film , made at Framestore in London , via speakerphone and e - mail .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The score to The Tale of Despereaux was composed by William Ross , who recorded his score with the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Sony Scoring Stage .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Tale of Despereaux was theatrically released on December 19 , 2008 , by Universal Pictures .
HOME VIDEO RELEASE Section::::Home video release .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray on April 7 , 2009 .
The Blu - ray release also includes a standard - definition DVD of the film in addition to the Blu - ray Disc .
The film brought in a revenue of $ 25,531,805 in the US DVD sales market .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A video game based on the film was released on December 2 , 2008 for the PlayStation 2 , Wii , Nintendo DS , and Microsoft Windows .
All of those versions were developed by Brash Entertainment .
An Xbox 360 version was originally announced , but it was cancelled .
The few critics that reviewed the game have agreed that the Nintendo DS version , a 2.5D side - scrolling platformer , is superior to the three other versions , which were otherwise panned .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Rotten Tomatoes reported that 56 % of critics gave positive reviews based on 109 reviews , with an average rating of 5.7/10 .
The website 's consensus reads , " Despite its striking visuals , The Tale of Despereaux as a story feels familiar and unimaginative . "
Another review aggregator , Metacritic , gave the film a 53/100 approval rating based on 25 reviews .
Many critics praised the film for its excellent animation and the charming title character but complained that it had an unoriginal and scrambled story .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times awarded three stars and wrote in his review that " The Tale of Despereaux is one of the most beautifully drawn animated films I 've seen " , but he also wrote , " I am not quite so thrilled by the story " .
Christy Lemire of the Associated Press was more critical , writing that the film " feels obvious , preachy and heavy - handed . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film opened at the third position behind Seven Pounds and Yes Man with $ 10,507,000 in 3,104 theaters with an $ 3,385 average ; on Monday , Tuesday , and Wednesday , the film was in second .
The film closed in March 2009 after grossing $ 50 million domestically .
The film grossed an additional $ 37 million overseas for a total of $ 87 million .
AWARDS Annie Awards 2009 {
class="wikitable sortable " Section::::Awards . !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result Casting Society of America , USA 2009 { class="wikitable sortable " !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result
Chicago Film Critics Association Awards 2008
{ class="wikitable sortable " !
Award !
Category !
Result Motion Picture Sound Editors , USA 2009 {
class="wikitable sortable " !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result San Diego Film Critics
Society Awards 2008 { class="wikitable sortable " !
Award !
Nominee !
Result
Satellite Awards 2008
{ class="wikitable sortable " !
Award !
Category !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS