UNIQUE LOCAL ADDRESS
A unique local address ( ULA ) is an Internet Protocol version 6 ( IPv6 ) address in the address range .
Its purpose in IPv6 is analogous to IPv4 addressing in private networks .
Unique local addresses may be used freely , without centralized registration , inside a single site or organization or spanning a limited number of sites or organizations .
They are routable only within the scope of such private networks , but not in the global IPv6
Internet .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1995 , the IPv6 address block was reserved for site - local addresses , that could be used within a " site " for private IPv6 networks .
However , insufficient definition of the term site led to confusion over the governing routing rules .
In September 2004 , the Internet Engineering Task Force ( IETF ) deprecated the definition of this address range , and postulated solutions to its problems .
As a result , the IETF reserved the address block in October 2005 for use in private IPv6 networks and defined the associated term unique local addresses .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
The address block is divided into two parts , and .
The block is undefined .
It has been proposed to be managed by an allocation authority , but this has not gained acceptance in the IETF ..
The block is defined for prefixes , formed by setting the forty least - significant bits of the prefix to a randomly generated bit string .
This results in the format for a prefix in this range .
RFC 4193 offers a suggestion for generating the random identifier to obtain a minimum - quality result if the user does not have access to a good source of random numbers .
EXAMPLE Section::::Example .
A routing prefix in the range may be constructed by generating a random 40-bit hexadecimal string , taken for this example to be 0xe48dba82e1 .
The string is appended to the prefix .
This forms the 48-bit routing prefix .
With this prefix , subnets of size are available for the private network : to .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Prefixes in the range have similar characteristics as those of the IPv4 private address ranges : They are not allocated by an address registry and may be used in networks by anyone without outside involvement .
They are not guaranteed to be globally unique .
Reverse Domain Name System ( DNS ) entries ( in ip6.arpa ) for ULAs can not be delegated in the global DNS .
As ULAs are not meant to be routed outside their administrative domain ( site or organization ) , administrators of interconnecting networks normally do not need to worry about the uniqueness of ULA prefixes .
However , if networks require routing ULAs between each other in the event of a merger , for example , the risk of address collision is small if the RFC 4193 selection algorithm was used .
ATTEMPTS OF REGISTRATION AND ALLOCATION Section::::Attempts of registration and allocation .
SixXS attempted to maintain a voluntary registration database for ULA prefixes to reduce the risk of duplication .
When the SixXS services were discontinued on 6 June 2017 , the database became read - only .
For the range , different design decisions have been proposed to the IETF , trading the non - uniqueness for the requirement that the range be managed by a central allocation authority .
However , such attempts at standardizing this range have not resulted in a Request for Comments .
SEE ALSO
* Link - local address
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
( readonly since SixXS sunset , 6 June 2017 )
* Internet Draft