LIST OF RUGBY WORLD CUP FINALS
The Rugby World Cup is an international rugby union competition established in 1987 .
It is contested by the men 's national teams of the member unions of the sport 's governing body , World Rugby , and takes place every four years .
The winners of the first final were New Zealand , who beat France 29–9 .
They are also the current champions , beating Australia 34–17 in the 2015 final in London .
The next Rugby World Cup in 2019 , will be hosted in Japan .
The Rugby World Cup final is the last match of the competition .
The winning team is declared world champion and receives the Webb Ellis Cup .
If the score is a draw after 80 minutes of regular play , an additional 20-minute period of play , called extra time , is added .
If the score remains tied , an additional 10 minutes of sudden - death extra time are played , with the first team to score points immediately declared the winner .
If no team is able to break the tie during extra time , the winner is ultimately decided by a penalty shootout .
Two of the eight finals contested have gone to extra time : South Africa 's victory against New Zealand in the 1995 final , and England 's triumph against Australia in the 2003 final .
New Zealand are the most successful team in the history of the tournament , with three wins .
They are also the only team to have won consecutive tournaments , with their victories in the 2011 and 2015 Rugby World Cup .
Australia and South Africa have won the competition twice , while England have one win .
They are the only nation from the northern hemisphere to have won the competition .
France are the only team to appear in a final without winning , losing all three finals they have contested .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first final of the Rugby World Cup was contested in June 1987 , in Auckland , between New Zealand and France .
The host team opened the scoring in the 14th minute , following a drop goal by fly - half Grant Fox .
They extended their lead later in the first half when Michael Jones scored a try , which was converted by Fox .
Losing 9–0 at half - time , the French opened their scoring in the second half , through a penalty by Didier Camberabero .
Following this , New Zealand controlled the match and tries from David Kirk , John Kirwan and the goal kicking of Fox extended their lead to 29–3 .
A try by Pierre Berbizier in the final minutes , which was converted by Camberabero , reduced the deficit to 29–9 , as New Zealand won the tournament 's inaugural final .
As the hosts , England reached the final of the 1991 tournament at Twickenham , where they faced Australia .
Fly - half Michael Lynagh opened the scoring for Australia with a penalty in the 27th minute .
They extended their lead before half - time when prop Tony Daly scored a try , which was converted by Lynagh .
England scored two penalties in the second half , courtesy of full - back Jonathan Webb , but a further penalty by Lynagh sealed Australia 's victory at 12–6 .
The tournament hosts reached the final again in 1995 , as South Africa faced New Zealand in Johannesburg .
Fly - half Andrew Mehrtens opened the scoring for New Zealand in the 6th minute after scoring a penalty .
His opposite number , Joel Stransky , levelled the score five minutes later .
The pair swapped successful penalty attempts before Stransky gave South Africa a 9–6 lead with a 32nd - minute drop goal just before half - time .
New Zealand equalized in the 55th minute with a drop goal by Mehrtens , and as no further points were scored , the final went into extra time for the first time .
Mehrtens converted a penalty to put New Zealand back the lead , but Stransky replied minutes later .
With seven minutes to the end of extra time , Stransky scored a drop goal to secure a 15–12 victory for South Africa .
Nelson Mandela , the South African President , wearing a Springboks jersey , presented the Webb Ellis Cup to South Africa captain François Pienaar .
The 1999 final saw Australia face France at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff .
Two tries by Owen Finegan and Ben Tune , and seven penalties by Matt Burke contributed to Australia 's 35–12 win , as they became the first nation to win the Rugby World Cup twice .
Australia also became the first side to contest successive finals when they faced England in the 2003 final at the Telstra Stadium in Sydney .
The hosts opened the scoring in the sixth minute through a Lote Tuqiri try .
England responded and scored three penalties by fly - half Jonny Wilkinson and a try by winger Jason Robinson to achieve a 14–5 lead at half - time .
Three penalties from Elton Flatley in the second half allowed Australia to level the score and send the final into extra time .
Wilkinson and Flatley scored a penalty apiece before the former scored a drop goal in the last minute of the match to give England a 20–17 victory .
They became the first side from the Northern hemisphere to win the tournament .
England reached the final again in 2007 , where they faced South Africa , who had won 36–0 when the two teams met during the pool stage .
South African full - back Percy Montgomery scored three penalties to Wilkinson 's one to give South Africa a 9–3 lead at half - time .
England had a try disallowed in the first minutes of the second half , when Mark Cueto was adjudged to be in touch before scoring .
A penalty from Wilkinson and a further two from Montgomery reduced the gap but did not prevent South Africa from winning 15–6 and secure their second World Cup victory .
The 2011 final pitted hosts New Zealand against France for the second time in the tournament , after their first encounter in the pool stage resulted in a 37–17 win for New Zealand .
The host team scored the first points of the match , with a try in the 15th minute through prop Tony Woodcock .
Nine minutes later , New Zealand 's third - choice fly - half Aaron Cruden went off injured and was replaced by Stephen Donald , who had only been called into the squad following injuries to first - choice fly - halves Dan Carter and Colin Slade .
Donald extended New Zealand 's lead in the second half with a penalty ; a minute later , French captain Thierry Dusautoir scored a try , which was converted by François Trinh - Duc to leave France one point behind New Zealand .
Despite constant pressure from the French for the remainder of the final , they were unable to score more points and New Zealand won the match 8–7 to lift their second World Cup trophy .
New Zealand reached the final again in 2015 , where they faced Australia at Twickenham .
Tries from Nehe Milner - Skudder , Ma'a Nonu and Beauden Barrett , along with four penalties , two conversions and one drop goal from fly - half Dan Carter produced a 34–17 win for New Zealand .
With this victory , they became the first team to win the World Cup three times and the first holders to retain the trophy .
It was also the first time that New Zealand won the competition outside of their country .
FINALS Section::::Finals .
+ Key * The " Year " column refers to the year the Rugby World Cup was held , and s to the article about that tournament .
* Links in the " Winners " and " Runners - up " columns point to the articles for the national rugby teams of the countries , not the articles for the countries .
*
The wikilinks in the " Final score " column point to the article about that tournament 's final game .
1987 align = center Eden Park1991 align = center Twickenham1995
align = center bgcolor=#FBCEB1 Ellis
Park1999 align = center Millennium Stadium2003 align = center bgcolor=#FBCEB1
Telstra Stadium2007 align = center
Stade de France2011 align = center
Eden
Park2015
align = center Twickenham London ,
England align =
center80,125 align = center RESULTS
BY NATION Section::::Results by nation . !
scope =
colNational team !
scope = colWins !
scope
= colRunners - up !
scope =
colTotal finals !
scope = col class="unsortable"Years won !
scope =
col class="unsortable"Years runners - up !
scope = row align = center 3
align = center 1 align = center 4 1987 , 2011 , 2015 1995 !
scope
= row align
= center 2 align
= center 2 align = center 4 1991 , 1999 2003 , 2015 !
scope
= row align
= center 2 align = center 0 align = center 2 1995 , 2007 !
scope
= row align = center 1 align
= center 2 align = center 3 2003 1991 , 2007 !
scope
= row align = center 0 align
= center 3 align = center 3 1987 , 1999 , 2011 SEE ALSO
* Women 's Rugby World Cup NOTES Section::::Notes .
A. Prior to 1992 , a try was worth four points .
B. Score was 9–9 after 80 minutes .
C. Score was 14–14 after 80 minutes .
REFERENCES