BICYCLE LAW IN THE UNITED STATES Bicycle law in the United States is the law of the United States that regulates the use of bicycles .
Although bicycle law is a relatively new specialty within the law , first appearing in the late 1980s , its roots date back to the 1880s and 1890s , when cyclists were using the courts to assert a legal right to use the roads .
In 1895 , George B. Clementson , an American attorney , wrote The Road Rights and Liabilities of Wheelmen , the first book on bicycle law , in which he discussed the seminal cases of the 1880s and 1890s , which were financed by Albert Pope of Columbia Bicycles , and through which cyclists gained the right to the road .
By the mid-1980s , a substantial body of law pertaining to bicycles had developed , and a few attorneys had begun specializing in bicycle law .
Today , attorneys specializing in bicycle law represent professional athletes , as well as average cyclists , on issues ranging from professional contracts , to traffic accidents , to traffic tickets .
In addition , attorneys specializing in bicycle law may advise cyclists on other legal issues , such as bicycle theft , insurance , harassment of cyclists , defective products law , and non - professional contractual issues .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The development of the bicycle occurred over a period of some seventy years , during which time it enjoyed three separate booms in popularity .
And yet , throughout that seventy - year period , cyclists had no legal right to use the roads or walkways .
With the twin developments of the safety bicycle and the pneumatic tire , bicycles enjoyed a new boom of popularity , beginning in the 1880s , and culminating in the bicycle craze of the 1890s .
Until the 1890s , the bicycle had been the plaything of wealthy young men .
Now , for the first time , the bicycle came within reach of the middle class , and by the end of the decade , within the reach of the working class .
The resulting tidal wave of popularity meant that roads which had hitherto been the province of horses and horse - drawn carriages were now increasingly crowded with cyclists ; in some large cities , recreational cyclists numbered in the hundreds of thousands on the weekends .
This enormous surge in new cyclists inevitably led to chaotic conditions and conflict between cyclists , horses and horse - drawn carriages , and pedestrians .
This conflict was exacerbated by the fact that few traffic laws were in place to regulate traffic .
Furthermore , nobody really knew if existing laws even applied to cyclists .
Unused to sharing the roads , carriage - drivers challenged the right of cyclists to even be on the road , sometimes with physical force , and sometimes with the force of law .
Municipalities passed restrictive ordinances , and eager to collect a new source of revenue from fines , law enforcement agencies set creative traps to ensnare unwary cyclists .
Thus , the stage was set for a legal battle cyclists asserting their right to use the roads , and those who would ban them from the roads .
THE RIGHT TO THE ROAD Section::::The
right to the road .
The New York State Legislature took the first step toward resolving the conflict , with the passage in 1887 of An Act in Relation to the Use of Bicycles and Tricycles .
This statute established for the first time that bicycles are " carriages , " and that cyclists are " entitled to the same rights and subject to the same restrictions " as drivers of carriages .
THE STATUTORY RIGHT TO THE ROAD Section::::The statutory right to the road .
A basic statement of cyclists ' rights and responsibilities has been adopted in the vehicle codes of most American states , as well as in the Uniform Vehicle Code .
It says that bicyclists have the same rights and responsibilities as operators of automobiles , except where the law specifies otherwise or where it can naturally have no applicability .
THE CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO THE ROAD Section::::The constitutional right to the road .
While there are no sections in the United States Constitution explicitly mentioning bicycles , bicycles are recognized as [ non - motorized ] vehicles nationally , and several states align bicycles with the same rights and privileges as horses and horse carriages , which may be limited from state to state and from city to city .
Bicycles can generally travel on basic streets and highways .
THE RIGHT TO THE ROAD
BY TREATY Section::::The
right to the road by treaty .
Cyclists ' right to the road has also been enshrined in international law since 1968 , with the accession of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic .
Under that treaty , bicycles have the legal status of vehicles , and cyclists enjoy the legal status of vehicle operators .
There are over 150 contracting parties to the treaty , including the United States , Canada , Mexico , the United Kingdom , Ireland , almost all of Europe , Australia , New Zealand , Japan , and China .
In countries that are contracting parties , the treaty has the force of law , and its provisions have been incorporated into national law .
TYPES OF LAWS BICYCLE REGISTRATION Section::::Types of laws .
Section::::Bicycle registration .
Some laws require bicycles to be registered ( i.e. , before residing in a city for more than 30 days ) , and some require the display of identifying imprints or publicly visible license plates .
The main purpose is usually to facilitate the quick identification and return of stolen property , since bicycle theft is one of the most common crimes in many areas .
Some laws also require the reporting of new and used bicycle sales .
BICYCLE PARKING Section::::Bicycle parking .
Many laws allow police to confiscate bicycles parked illegally .
Other laws require bicycles to be confiscated and returned to their registered owners if they are " abandoned " , which can mean parked for an extended period of time ( like 7 days ) .
Bicycle theft is so common in some areas that simply parking a bicycle but not locking with a theft - deterrent device such as a padlock can be considered abandonment .
In most cases , it is legal for cyclists to ride on roads in the United States .
However , only vehicles that meet certain specifications are required to bear a license plate .
This can make it very difficult to report violations of state vehicle codes to police .
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS Section::::Traffic signs and signals .
Many states require bicyclists to follow the same signs and signals as automobile operators , with some notable exceptions .
These include laws allowing cyclists to follow the pedestrian ( rather than automobile ) signals at some intersections , as well as the " Idaho stop " and similar stop - as - yield laws allowing cyclists to pass through stop signs and red lights when it is safe to do so .
REMAINING ON THE EDGE OF THE ROADWAY Section::::Remaining on the edge of the roadway .
In every state there is a provision in the statutes which stipulates occupying a lane as nearly as practicable .
Riding on the edge of a travel lane is a modern phenomenon based on the often misunderstood statute " As far to the right hand side of the boundary or curb as practicable " .
This is a throwback to the predominant mode of transportation at the time traffic laws were formulated , namely the horse and cart .
The horse and cart would often take up an entire half of a width of road space if not more .
Bicycles by their very nature can not take up more than half and all statutes mandating " As far to the right as practicable " leave the caveat of " Allowing reasonably free passage to the left " .
This modern day misunderstanding of a statute which was a product of its time , has led to many a cyclist being killed or critically injured .
The basis of this misunderstood statute has also led to the production of bike lanes which do not take into account the safety of the cyclist .
Many laws require bicyclists to remain as close to the edge of the roadway as practicable , in the normal direction of travel .
Exceptions are common for preparing for a cross - traffic turn ( left in the United States ) , going straight on the left side of a right - turn - only lane , avoiding hazards , and going the speed of other traffic .
Another common exception is where there is no room for an automobile to safely pass .
Some of these laws specify distances , such as from the curb , or using no more than 1/3 of the navigable lane .
BICYCLE PATHS Section::::Bicycle paths .
Many municipalities have specially marked bicycle lanes on the roadway , or special bicycle - only paths .
These are for bicyclists only , and no car may be operated on them ( except to cross over them in making a turn ) .
Other paths are marked as multi - use paths and set aside for pedestrians , bicyclists , and users of non - road - worthy devices such as skateboards and scooters .
Some laws require bicyclists to use a bicycle path if one is available on the same roadway .
SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS Section::::Sidewalks and crosswalks .
The law on sidewalks and crosswalks is not always well - developed , since other vehicles are not allowed there .
Some states and municipalities forbid bicycle riding on sidewalks unless otherwise marked .
Others allow it unless otherwise marked .
Some require that riders use only the sidewalk on the right or left side of the roadway ( whichever is the normal direction of travel on the roadway ) .
A few laws may prohibit riding in crosswalks .
Many laws specify that right - of - way must be given to pedestrians , and that an audible signal must be given when overtaking a pedestrian on a sidewalk .
Motor vehicles are often prohibited from crossing a sidewalk until right - of - way has been given to approaching pedestrians and bicyclists .
Most bicycle safety manuals recommend stopping and walking at crosswalks when riding down a sidewalk .
But few laws actually make that requirement .
When it has come up in courts , many judges have decided that riding a bicycle across a crosswalk is covered under the specific laws for pedestrians rather than those concerning vehicles .
Some municipalities have push buttons for pedestrians to receive a pedestrian crossing signal .
When a bicyclist is using a crosswalk , it is advisable to follow the pedestrian laws .
Some municipalities have push buttons or automatic sensors labeled for bicyclists only .
In many cases , there is no specific law requiring the bicyclist to push the button when riding on the street , and in many cases the buttons are so awkwardly positioned that the bicyclist does not encounter them as a road sign , and does not encounter them when preparing for a left turn .
The light may not change without an automobile waiting at the same light .
Many bicyclists seek " no action " letters from those municipalities saying that they will not get a ticket if they treat such intersections safely as a 4-way stop , proceeding only when safe to proceed .
The results are not yet clear .
FREEWAYS Section::::Freeways .
Bicyclists are often prohibited from using freeway ramps , and , sometimes , the freeways themselves ( controlled entry , controlled exit roadways ) .
The main exception is usually that if there is no alternative road then a bicyclist may use the freeway .
This is usually between cities .
Some places may have signs saying that bicycle riding ends and all bicyclists must exit at the next ramp .
Many have signs on the entry ramps prohibiting bicycle riding .
Some laws require bicyclists not only to remain as far to the edge of the freeway as possible , but to actually ride off the freeway , on the shoulder , if one is available .
Some freeways have minimum speeds to use the normal lane , but it rarely effects bicyclists because they virtually always use the shoulder , except when crossing over entry and exit ramps .
Cyclists are always advised to give right - of - way to motor vehicle operators in these situations , even stopping and waiting if necessary , for safety .
OFF - ROAD CYCLING Section::::Off - road cycling .
Bicyclists are prohibited from using certain areas , usually for reasons of conservation or to preserve trails for pedestrians only .
PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Public transportation .
Many municipalities allow bicycles to be attached to or carried onto buses and trains .
The guidelines and requirements for safely moving and stowing the bicycle are sometimes incorporated into the general law on using the public transportation .
For example , in Tempe , AZ , USA , failing to follow the storage rules on the light rail can be considered being on the train without paying the proper fare .
PROHIBITIONS IN CERTAIN AREAS Section::::Prohibitions in certain areas .
Some laws prohibit bicycle riding in commercial areas , such as on the sidewalks in front of stores .
In other places a sign erected by a government must be followed , such as with no - riding zones in a college campus .
Private signs are common that prohibit riding in certain areas .
Specific laws may prohibit riding on store - front sidewalks or where private or government prohibitive signs are posted .
In the absence of such laws , trespassing laws , although vague in scope , are sometimes used to charge the bicyclist with criminal trespassing , that is , entering the property without permission , when a no trespassing sign is posted at the property line , with permission considered withheld at the first breaking of a posted rule .
SEE ALSO * Bicycle law in California
REFERENCES PUBLICATIONS * The Road Rights and Liabilities of Wheelmen , by George B. Clementson ( Chicago :
Callaghan & Co. , 1895 )
* Bicycle Law and Practice , by Paul F. Hill ( 1985 , 1986 )
* Bicycle Accident Reconstruction and Litigation , by James M. Green , Paul F. Hill , and Douglas Hayduk ( Tucson , Arizona : Lawyers & Judges Publishing Co. , 1996 )
* Bicycle Accident Reconstruction for the Forensic Engineer , by James M. Green and Bob Mionske ( 2001 ) * , by Jeffrey P. Broker and Paul F. Hill ( Tucson , Arizona : Lawyers & Judges Publishing Co. , 2006 )
* , by Bob Mionske ( Boulder , Colorado : VeloPress , 2007 )
* Pedal Power : A Legal Guide for Oregon Bicyclists by Ray Thomas EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bicycle Helmet use Laws