GERMAN ARMED FORCES BADGE FOR MILITARY PROFICIENCY
The German Armed Forces Badge for Military Proficiency ( German : ) is a decoration of the Bundeswehr , the armed forces of the Federal Republic of Germany .
The decoration is awarded to and worn by German service members of all ranks .
Allied service members may also be awarded the badge , subject to their nations ' uniform regulations .
In the United States Army , the German Armed Forces Badge for Military Proficiency is one of several hundred foreign awards approved for wear on the uniform .
REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements .
To earn the award one must complete the following requirements : 1 .
Evaluation Report : 2 .
First Aid Course : 3 .
NBC Test : 4 .
Basic
Fitness Test Three events completed within 90 minutes . !
GOLD !
SILVER !
BRONZE !
GOLD !
SILVER !
BRONZE !
GOLD !
SILVER !
BRONZE 5 .
Marksmanship :
In order to qualify for the German Armed Forces Badge for Military Proficiency , it is necessary to demonstrate marksmanship skills .
The individual must demonstrate their skill with different weapons , one light ( pistole or MP ) , a rifle and one heavy weapon ( MG or AT - launcher ) .
There are several shooting exercises in the German Armed Forces use for each weapon which vary distance , number of targets , position of firing ( standing , prone , lying down ) and number of shots .
The individual must reach a specified score in each of them .
6 .
Foot March
7 . 100 meter swim in Military Uniform GRADES * Grade III = German Armed Forces Badge for Military Proficiency in Gold
( Das Abzeichen für
Leistungen
i m Truppendienst in Gold ) .
* Grade II =
German Armed Forces Badge for Military Proficiency in Silver
( Das Abzeichen für
Leistungen
i m Truppendienst in Silber ) .
* Grade I = German Armed Forces Badge for Military Proficiency in Bronze
( Das Abzeichen für Leistungen i m Truppendienst in Bronze ) .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The metallic badge is an approximately 55 mm high by 43 mm wide oval wreath of oak leaves with the German eagle at its center .
The badge can be in gold , silver or bronze .
A 1 cm by 1 cm square bearing a number in increments of five ( 5 , 10 , 15 ... ) is added at the bottom when the gold grade badge is awarded for multiple years of achieving this grade .
A capital letter " R " is added at the bottom for those who have earned the badge while a Reservist .
Reservist recipients of the gold grade for multiple years receive a badge with the " R " at the bottom and the numbered square at the top of the badge .
The ribbon is all black with a small device in the shape and colour of the badge affixed to it .
The ribbon is for civilian wear only and is not permitted for wear on the uniform of the Bundeswehr .
WEAR BY ALLIED MILITARY FORCES
CORRECT WEAR ON THE US ARMY UNIFORM
Section::::Wear by allied military forces .
Section::::Correct wear on the US Army uniform .
The regulation for authorization for wear can be found in AR 670 - 1 , section 22 - 18 and guidance for wear in DA Pam 670 - 1 , section 20 - 18 which states the following :
SEE ALSO
* Awards and decorations of the German Armed Forces * Dutch Military Proficiency Badge ( Netherlands )
* Expert Infantryman Badge ( United States )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Appendix D ( Updated as of 17 February 2017 )
* Fort Leavenworth Soldiers train hard to earn German badge * Virginia troops vie for German Armed Forces Badge
* Bliss Soldiers compete for coveted German proficiency badge
*
The German Armed Forces Proficiency Badge : not a piece of cake
* Soldiers Compete for Coveted Foreign Award * Regulations IGF / KLF