THE LAST WISH ( BOOK )
The Last Wish ( ) is the first ( in its fictional chronology ; published second in original Polish ) of the two collections of short stories ( the other being Sword of Destiny ) preceding the main Witcher Saga , written by Polish fantasy writer Andrzej Sapkowski .
The first Polish edition was published in 1993 , the first English edition was first published in 2007 .
The book has also been translated into several other languages .
The collection contains six short stories interspersed with a continuing frame story ; Geralt of Rivia , after having been injured in battle , rests in a temple .
During that time he has flashbacks to recent events in his life , each of which forms a story of its own .
STORIES
" THE VOICE OF REASON " Section::::Stories .
Section::::"The Voice of Reason " .
Głos rozsądku - frame story
The Voice of Reason begins with Geralt , slumbering , awakened by the entrance of Iola , who proceeds to make love to him .
Afterwards , he falls asleep .
Here Geralt dreams of his encounter in Wyzim with a striga ( " The Witcher " ) .
In the morning , he is woken up by Nenneke , the priestess of Melitele .
He is in the Temple of Melitele in Ellander .
Iola leaves , with Geralt musing that in the early morning , she reminded him of Yennefer .
She talks with him , worried that he was horrifically injured by a normal striga .
Geralt and Nenneke argue about Geralt taking part in a trance .
Geralt argues that his inability to be hypnotised and his lack of faith makes it pointless .
Here , the second short story , " A Grain of Truth " , is introduced .
Afterwards , he meets with Count Falwick and Sir Tailles , both knights of the Order of the White Rose .
They are here to chase Geralt from Ellander in the name of Prince Hereward .
Geralt says he will leave after three days .
Falwick tells him to leave immediately .
Geralt and Tailles almost come to blows when the latter insults Nenneke .
Tailles and Falwick leave , warning that they will be back ( at this point , the third short story , " The Lesser Evil " , is introduced ) .
Later , he meets Iola , and carries a monologue explaining himself to her ( she unable to talk due to a vow she has made ) .
At the end , he muses on his destiny ( introducing the short story , " A Question of Price " ) .
Some time later , Dandelion , a poet friend of Geralt 's , arrives .
Together , they reminisce on times gone past , and of how Geralt 's profession as a witcher is growing less and less profitable .
Finally , they reminisce on their first adventure ( " The Edge of the World " ) .
Geralt talks to Nenneke about Yennefer , wishing to give some of his payment to her .
Nenneke dismisses it , and asks him how he met Yennefer .
He recounts the story to her ( " The Last Wish " ) .
When Geralt and Dandelion venture out of the temple , Geralt is waylaid by Falwick and Tailles , accompanied by a lot of lancers and the captain of Hereward 's guards , a dwarf named Dennis Cranmer .
They explain Geralt 's options to him .
If he does not accept Tailles 's challenge , he will be hanged .
If he touches Tailles with his sword , he will be dragged to Hereward to be tortured .
Geralt chooses to fight , and causes Tailles to hit himself with his own sword .
Dennis Cranmer , stating that he obeys his orders to the letter , allows Geralt to go , as Geralt did not actually touch Tailles .
Geralt chooses to leave , and just before he leaves , when he touches Iola 's hand ( Iola was bringing him his box of elixirs )
she has a vision of him .
Geralt dismisses it , saying he 's seen it before , and leaves .
Nenneke says goodbye , but does not look him in the face .
"
THE WITCHER " Section::::"The Witcher " .
Wiedźmin
The story begins with Geralt entering Vizima .
Shortly afterwards , he kills three men in a bar fight .
He is escorted to Velerad , the elderly castellan of Vizima .
Near the beginning of King Foltest 's reign , he got his sister , Adda , pregnant .
Both Adda and her baby daughter died shortly after birth and were buried together in a double coffin .
Seven years later , the daughter awoke , having become a striga , and slaughtered the inhabitants of the palace .
Geralt meets with Foltest , who warns him not to harm the striga , for a wizard had told him that if someone prevented the striga from returning to her coffin by the third crowing of the rooster , then she would be cured , turning into an ordinary little girl .
Geralt asks to see a miller ( a survivor of one of the striga 's earlier attacks ) .
The soldier that brings him to Geralt is Foltest , disguised .
He gives Geralt leave to kill his daughter if he found that she was an incurable case .
Geralt spends the night at the old palace ( Foltest having moved to a new palace , unplagued by the striga 's attacks ) .
During the early night , Lord Ostrit , a magnate , tries to bribe Geralt into running away , as he wishes the striga to survive .
This would eventually horrify the inhabitants of Vizima , who would more easily support Vizimir of Novigrad 's rule .
Geralt refuses , knocks Lord Ostrit out , and ties him up .
At midnight , he cuts Ostrit loose , using him as bait .
He is soon found and killed by the striga .
Geralt fights with the striga , reluctant to use his silver sword .
He ties the striga with a silver chain , which she breaks free of , despite silver being an antithesis to monsters of magic .
She is eventually scared off when Geralt projects the hate and malice in the Striga 's mind back at her .
Geralt settles down in the double coffin to wait for morning .
In the morning , he sees an ordinary little girl who is lying on the floor .
Leaning over her , he sees too late that her eyes are open .
Using the last remnants of her talons , the striga slashes Geralt 's throat .
As he subdues the girl / striga , Geralt hears the third crowing of the rooster .
Finally , he binds his neck , knowing he will faint .
The witcher wakes up , his neck bandaged , with Velerad ( who was part of the group that had planned to just have the striga killed ) admitting he was in the wrong .
He assures Geralt that his silver sword , his three thousand oren reward and his possessions are safe .
Geralt , soothed , falls asleep .
" A GRAIN OF TRUTH " Section::::"A Grain of Truth " .
Ziarno prawdy
While travelling through the forest , Geralt comes to the corpses of a man and a woman that seem at first glance to have been killed by wolves , but the wounds tell a different story .
Looking closer , Geralt notices that the woman has a blue rose pinned to her dress .
Heading in the direction the pair must have come from , the witcher arrives at a seemingly deserted mansion , in front of which he sees a strange woman who runs from him .
The owner of the house , a beast called Nivellen , allows our hero to enter his house , which is enchanted to obey his every whim , and in the end tells Geralt his story : coming from a line of robbers , Nivellen at some point was cursed by a priestess to be a beast in human form until some conditions are fulfilled , something related to blood and love .
So for some time , Nivellen has tried to undo the curse by entertaining relationships with different women , all merchant daughters , but to no avail .
Geralt asks Nivellen if there is anyone currently living with him , which insults Nivellen as they both know that there is someone else , the reason merchants have recently been turned away .
Before departing , Geralt warns Nivellen that his newest lady friend , Vereena , may be a rusalka ( water nymph that lures men and children to their deaths ) .
Nivellen replies that he knows this and is hesitant to attempt to break the curse now , since rusalkas generally avoid contact with humans , and he insists that he and Vereena are in love .
Geralt 's horse interacts strangely with Nivellen and Nivellen mentions that both he and Vereena like animals , and that animals like them , too .
Geralt leaves and somewhere along the road , Geralt 's horse acts strangely and Geralt realizes what it was his horse had sensed at Nivellen 's manor and along the road and returns promptly to warn him , but is greeted by Vereena , who turns out to be a bruxa ( a pale skinned female vampire - like creature that has a telepthic ability of suggestion and uses sound as a powerful weapon to knock people unconscious ) and a fight ensues .
In the middle of the fight , just when Geralt gets overwhelmed , Nivellen shows up and joins the fight .
At some point during the fight , Nivellen impales the bruxa on a pole , enabling Geralt to finish it off .
But before the final blow is struck , Vereena confesses her love for Nivellen , which breaks the curse .
The story ends with the key to the curse : " There is a grain of truth in every fairy tale , " said the witcher quietly .
" Love and blood .
They both possess a mighty power .
Wizards and learned men have been racking their brains over this for years , but they have n't arrived at anything , except that- " Except what , Geralt ? "
" It has to be true love . "
" THE LESSER EVIL " Section::::"The Lesser Evil " .
Mniejsze zło
On the eve of market day , Geralt rides into Blaviken with a kikimore - carcass in tow .
He seeks out Caldemeyn , the town 's alderman , to try to get a reward for the dead critter .
He 's out of luck , though , and Caldemeyn suggests throwing the carcass in the local cesspool .
However , one of the alderman 's staff , Carrypebble , mentions that the local wizard , Master Irion , might fancy a look at the creature .
All agree it 's worth a try and head to Irion 's tower to find the mage .
Master Irion is far more interested in Geralt than in some kikimore carcass , however .
When Geralt steps inside the tower , he steps straight into an illusion .
Finding the wizard surrounded by a veritable garden of Eden ( complete with a naked , young woman casually picking apples ) , Geralt recognizes the man as Stregobor , a mage whom he 'd last seen in King Idi 's court in Kovir , and not " Master Irion " at all .
The wizard explains that since he is occupying Irion 's tower , that it seemed a fitting tribute to call himself by that name .
It also did not hurt to conceal his true identity .
After a few pleasantries , Stregobor finally gets to the point .
He pleads for Geralt 's help claiming that a " monster " is pursuing him , seeking to kill him .
After a little bit of prodding , the wizard confesses to Geralt that the monster is in fact a young woman , whom he says was born under the Curse of the Black Sun .
Geralt scoffs at the idea , calling it absurd .
Stregobor begs the witcher to help him , to kill the girl
saying that she is far more of a monster than the kikimore the witcher recently slew .
He insists that it would be " the lesser evil " to kill her .
Geralt refuses , and leaves .
Meanwhile , Renfri , the young woman in question , has entered Blaviken along with her band of miscreants .
Geralt meets them all in the tavern and is about to be drawn into a fight when Renfri herself steps in .
She asks Geralt to hear her out , and while they are at it , to let the alderman know of her plans .
She proceeds to explain that she bears a letter from King Audoen which essentially makes her and her band untouchable .
Caldemeyn confirms this .
That night , when Geralt withdraws to his attic room at Caldemeyn 's home , he finds Renfri has beaten him there .
They talk , the young woman proceeds to tell the witcher her life story .
She also compares Stregobor to the kikimore that Geralt brought into town , saying he is a worse monster and offers Geralt the same deal Stregobor did : choose the lesser evil , kill the other , receive any reward within reason .
Geralt refuses , again .
He pleads with Renfri to forgive Stregobor , to prove the wizard and the alleged Curse were wrong .
She refuses but before she leaves , she gives the impression that she and her band will leave town peacefully , possibly to meet Stregobor somewhere else for a final showdown .
Then , she and Geralt make love .
In the morning , during breakfast with Caldemeyn and his family , the alderman casually mentions Tridam , which immediately piques the witcher 's interest as Renfri had specifically mentioned a certain " Tridam ultimatum " the night before .
When Caldemeyn relates the full story , Geralt suddenly realizes what Renfri 's real plan is , and that she is not in fact preparing to leave town at all .
She plans to use the fact that the local mage in any given town is duty bound to do what he can to protect the town , so she plans to massacre the townsfolk in the marketplace to draw the wizard out .
Geralt races immediately to the marketplace and finds Renfri 's band sizing it up .
He chooses to engage them in battle rather than wait for them to fulfill their plan and start killing the townsfolk .
Renfri is not with them as she is trying to lure Stregobor from his tower , but she has left a message for the witcher , one final plea to side with her .
Civril decides to finish off the witcher with a swift crossbow bolt but is surprised to learn that the witcher can deflect these in flight with his blade .
He then orders the band to close ranks and charge the witcher as one .
Their plan is quickly and decisively thwarted by our hero and Renfri only returns in time to see the last of her men fall .
She reveals that Stegobor ignored her ultimatum , telling her to do as she will to the townsfolk .
She then confronts Geralt and they cross blades .
When it 's all over , Stregobor approaches the witcher , intent on performing an autopsy on the girl 's body , to prove his theory that the Curse was the cause .
But , surprising even himself , Geralt refuses to let him touch her body .
Stregobor leaves telling the witcher that he 's free to follow , just as the townsfolk begin hurling rocks at the witcher .
Geralt protects himself with the Quen sign until Caldemeyn orders them to stop .
That is however the last favour the alderman plans to extend to Geralt and he tells the witcher to leave Blaviken and never come back .
From this moment onward , Geralt will be known by another name to the people of the Northern Kingdoms : The Butcher of Blaviken .
" A QUESTION OF PRICE " Section::::"A Question of Price " .
Kwestia ceny
The story begins with Geralt being clean - shaven , washed and nicely clothed by the servants and castellan of the royal family 's castle in Cintra .
Cintra 's crown - princess , Pavetta , has turned fifteen years old and as is the custom , contenders for her hand have turned up in their dozens .
Geralt , who is officially invited to the party as the honourable Lord Ravix of Fourhorn , sits next to Queen Calanthe , yet has not been told what is the reason of his invitation .
During dinner , he has a long discussion with the queen as to how she sees witchers , what she thinks is their profession , and if she invited him for the right reasons .
Suddenly an uninvited guest enters the room : a helmed spiked knight who introduces himself as the Urcheon of Erlenwald .
Granted to speak by the queen , he tells that he has come to collect the promised reward for saving King Roegner 's life ; by the Law of Surprise , princess Pavetta has belonged to him from the day of her birth .
Although Queen Calanthe admits that what he says is true , she does not have the intention of giving her daughter away to a stranger .
Barons and Lords alike cause a considerable raucous discussing if the Queen 's actions would be noble and just if she were to de - legitimate Urcheon 's claim to her daughter , with one knight in particular bringing up the issue of royal promises are what kingdoms are built upon .
Geralt , the voice of reason , brings up that to fully comply with the Law of Surprise , Pavetta would need to agree to leave with Urcehon as well .
Just then , the toll of midnight strikes , and the knight , who previously claimed he could not remove his helm until midnight , was forced to remove his helm by Calanthe .
To everyone 's shock , Urcheon 's visage was that of a beast , furry , with whiskers , and snout like a mountain cat .
The other suitors in the room , which include Crach an Craite , in an uproar , seriously consider engaging Urcheon .
Regardless , the Queen now asks Princess Pavetta if she chooses to leave with the knight , and she answers yes .
The queen collapses in her chair and a fight breaks out , with the guards , ordered by the Queen , and knights attacking Urcheon .
Geralt and the uncle of Crach an Craite , who secretly loves Queen Calanthe , defend the creature called Urcheon .
Just then , Pavetta gets on top of a chair and lets out " pure , primordial Force . "
A force that Geralt and the druid Mousesack have already felt for some time , explodes from princess Pavetta as she sees her lover being attacked .
As the guests fought , the princess ' power grew and became very dangerous to everyone , the castle might even come down .
When Pavetta is distracted by Coodcoodak , Geralt broke through the magic and got Pavetta back to her senses .
As Pavetta approaches Urcheon , his visage starts transforming back to that of a man , and he answers now to the name of " Duny . "
When the ruckus had calmed down , Duny and Pavetta explain the situation .
They had been seeing each other for over a year now , and had fallen in love .
Having calmed down , queen Calanthe agreed with their love , and their forthcoming marriage .
Eist Tuirseach , who came that night for the hand of princess Pavetta , ended up accepting the proposal to marry Queen Calanthe .
Thanking Geralt for saving his life earlier , Duny offered him whatever he asked for .
Geralt asked for " that which you already have but do not know " , breaking the news to everyone , including Duny and Pavetta , that the princess was pregnant .
He asked that their child was to be raised as a witcher .
" THE EDGE OF THE WORLD " Section::::"The Edge of the World " .
Kraniec świata
The story opens with Geralt and Dandelion having stopped in Upper Posada to look for work .
After spending a good deal of time trying to find out if there are any paying jobs to be had , the witcher concludes that the tales of the locals are nothing more than superstition and constitute no real work for a witcher .
The pair decide to move on , heading towards the " edge of the known world " .
As they approach Lower Posada , Dandelion notices a horse - drawn cart seemingly trying to overtake them .
Nettly , a local farmer , catches up with them , saying there is indeed work for a witcher and that he too thought the folk in Upper Posada were talking utter nonsense .
He suggests they continue on their way and discuss things in relative comfort .
Once in the village , the local elder , Dhun , tells of a ' deovel ' whose mischief has become a problem , but under no circumstances should the creature be killed .
Despite Dandelion 's claims that there are no devils , Geralt agrees to take a look and see what he can do .
Out in the fields , amidst the hemp and hops , Geralt and Dandelion find the ' deovel ' .
Dandelion and the bleating ' devil ' exchange a few words which only serve to provoke the latter ; he takes aim and starts throwing iron balls at the witcher and his friend with a fair degree of accuracy , and they flee .
Back in the village , Geralt confronts Dhun and Nettly , and meets the community 's old wise woman and Lille .
After some discussion , an ancient book is brought forth , and the old woman ' reads ' appointed entries from it .
This way , the witcher and the bard learn that the devil is , in fact , a sylvan .
The villagers had tried using the book 's suggestions for ousting the beast — a suggestion which apparently left it well armed with iron balls .
The old woman and Lille leave , taking the book with them ; Geralt converses with the men some more .
The following day , back in the fields , Geralt tries to draw out the sylvan and speak .
The devil refuses but suggests that if the witcher wants to play games , he 's game .
Geralt is in no mood for games , but suggests one : " do n't do unto others what you would not have them do to you " .
This essentially leads to a tussle in the hemp from which the sylvan narrowly escapes .
Geralt hears a horse and assumes that Dandelion has come to his aid on horseback .
But there 's a twist in the story .
The witcher is actually knocked down , and knocked out , by the unidentified rider .
He stirs to find himself face down on the ground , bound , with the sounds of people talking in the Elder Speech not far away .
He recognizes one of the voices as belonging to the ' devil ' , and soon learns that his name is Torque .
The other speaker is an elf , Galarr .
Next to the witcher , Dandelion is similarly bound .
Their captors , Aen Seidhe elves , notice their captives have awakened , and a bitter she - elf named Toruviel approaches them , aggressively .
She makes some rather disparaging remarks about human musical abilities and breaks Dandelion 's lute .
She then proceeds to torment Geralt .
The witcher , despite being bound , manages to knock her off her feet and pin her down .
He then headbutts her , breaking her nose , and the other elves draw blades .
They are stopped by the arrival on horseback of an elder elf named Filavandrel .
The relief does n't last long , though , for the bard and the witcher are tied to a pine tree with belts .
Geralt and Torque both try to talk some sense into the elves , but to no avail .
The elves tell Torque to get out of the way and aim their bows .
Fortunately , at this point the legendary Queen of the Fields makes a spectacular entrance .
The elves halt , lower their weapons , and kneel before her .
Filavandrel pleads with her , but while she does n't say a word , she seems to be communicating with him telepathically .
Meanwhile , Torque cuts Geralt and Dandelion , who had fainted , free .
When Torque asks Geralt what to do with the poet , Geralt suggests a few quick slaps about the face , which Torque happily obliges .
After a moment , the elves get up , silent , saddle their horses and start to leave .
Filavandrel bids Geralt farewell , Toruviel gives Dandelion a new lute , and they part ways .
Filavandrel tells Geralt that he has reconsidered and hopes that the witcher will not let him down when they inevitably meet on the fields of battle .
Geralt assures him that he 'll do his best .
The story ends with the witcher , the bard and the sylvan around a campfire , wondering where to go next , reading the villagers ' book .
" THE LAST WISH " Section::::"The
Last Wish " .
Ostatnie życzenie One morning , while trying to catch fish for breakfast , Dandelion and Geralt instead haul up an ancient , sealed amphora .
Dandelion , in a fit of glee , and ignoring Geralt 's explicit warnings , tries to open the vase .
During a struggle between the two the vase falls to the ground and a large cloud of red mist escapes — a genie ( or djinn , more accurately ) .
Geralt dives for cover , but Dandelion feels he knows exactly what is happening and held his ground , beginning to recite his list of three wishes .
The genie does not fulfill even the first one of the bard 's wishes ( that his rival die of apoplexy ) , opting instead to strangle the bard .
Geralt rushes to his friend 's rescue , and after a seemingly fruitless fight , decides to use some folk knowledge he had always considered to be nonsense .
The witcher seizes the ampora seal which has fallen to the ground and shouts out an exorcism .
The genie releases the bard and disappears across the river , but Dandelion is far from well .
It seems his throat and larynx have been seriously affected by the dijnn and
he needs help desperately .
After a day 's ride , they arrive at the gates of Rinde , but are told that no one may pass through the gates between dusk and dawn without a letter of safe conduct from the king or proof of nobility .
The guard offers them the gatehouse until morning , pointing out that Dandelion will fare better there than out of doors .
Having no other option , the witcher agrees .
Waiting for the dawn to break , Geralt makes the acquaintance of two elves Chireadan and his cousin , Errdil and a half - elf knight , Vratimir .
They inform him that there are heavy duties and penalties for spellcasting within the city , and the mages are boycotting Rinde in return .
There is one though , who continues to work her magic within the city limits and generally flouts the law : the sorceress Yennefer of Vengerberg , residing in the sanctuary provided by the Novigradian merchant - ambassabor , Beau Berrant .
When dawn breaks , Geralt enters the city to find the sorceress .
Arriving at Beau Berrant 's home , he is greeted by Cerberus , the doorman of sorts .
After a fruitless discussion , Geralt decides that perhaps gold might open the door and knocks the oaf unconscious with his money purse .
Once inside he drags Cerberus into an open room where one of the female staff is happily snoring away .
The witcher then proceeds to the basement where he meets a very inebriated Berrant .
The ambassador , it seems , is on a mission to get apple juice for his guest and asks Geralt for help .
Geralt fetches the juice only to find Beau unconscious .
Noticing a staircase nearby , the witcher climbs up to what turns out to be Yennefer 's bedchamber .
The sorceress , partly surprised by Geralt 's appearance , appreciates his offering of juice — though she does not appreciate Geralt 's sarcasm in response to her questions .
The sorceress summarily fires a bolt of lighting at Geralt , who absorbs the attack with Quen .
Afterwards , Geralt is able to convince Yennefer to help Dandelion , right after a bath .
While Yennefer takes a bath , Geralt is amazed by her beauty , but also realizes that it is probably a spell , as most girls who become sorceresses are ugly or malformed by nature .
He puts these thoughts aside , and decides to just enjoy her beauty , as they talk over Dandelion 's condition .
Once dressed , Yennefer opens a portal and the two set out for the tavern where Dandelion is laid up .
Back at Errdil 's inn , Chireadan and Geralt sit downstairs waiting to hear about the bard 's condition and chatting a little about Yennefer over a cup of herb tea .
Chireadan tells Geralt in no uncertain terms that Yennefer , while beautiful , is not to be trusted .
After a while , Yennefer summons Geralt upstairs ; Dandelion is happily , safely asleep , and there is only the question of price to be discussed .
Geralt first wants to take Dandelion to safety , and offers a price to guarantee his return .
Yennefer wants her price right away though and reveals that she has in fact trapped Geralt in the room .
The witcher is completely paralyzed .
After a rather fruitless argument , Geralt passes out and the next thing Geralt knows , he is sharing a cell with " honest thieves " , an innocent old man , and Chireadan .
The elf tells Geralt the reason for their presence there : under the influence of Yennefer 's spell , Geralt went rampaging through the town , punishing anyone who had ever insulted Yennefer .
The local apothecary Laurelnose was actually publicly spanked by the witcher for his " crimes " .
As the two men reflect on their situation , their musings are rudely interrupted by the entrance of three guards .
One of them starts taunting Geralt while his friends hold the witcher still , then proceeds to repeatedly punch the witcher in the stomach .
Seeking to get out with the least injuries possible , Geralt tries to goad the man into rendering him unconscious .
He expresses the wish that the guard simply burst , and to everyone 's surprise , the man does so .
Later , the witcher and the elf are brought before the town 's mayor , Neville and the priest Krepp .
The mayor is not happy with the situation , but before he can reach a verdict , Dandelion suddenly drops into the room from a magical portal which suddenly appears on the wall .
The bard shouts with a fully restored voice that he wishes everyone present to believe that the witcher is innocent .
He was instructed to do this by Yennefer , who sent him through this portal , and wanted to clear Geralt 's rap sheet .
Dandelion has hardly had time to explain himself when a roaring commotion is heard outside , loud enough to be heard over the current thunderstorm .
Rushing to the window , the group sees that Yennefer has lured the genie to the town , and is trying to capture it to gain its amazing powers .
The genie is much stronger than expected though , and despite Yennefer 's spells binding it to Errdil 's inn , the genie is trashing the town .
Geralt ushers everyone else to safety and asks Krepp to stabilize the trace of the portal Dandelion just fell through .
After a few protests , the priest obliges and the portal reappears .
Geralt jumps through , intent on saving the sorceress .
Yennefer does not want to be saved though , she is not done trapping her genie and resists Geralt 's help , even opening a portal to get rid of him .
While he falls into the portal , however , the witcher grabs Yennefer , and the sorceress is dragged into the portal with him .
When they exit the portal , they land in a formal banquet and the two have not been invited .
Yennefer immediately shakes off Geralt and goes back through the portal , Geralt following her close behind .
Outside , the people gathered are watching in terror as the genie continues to rampage through the city .
After a scuffle between Yennefer and Geralt , with waning powers , the sorceress traps Geralt .
The witcher tries to talk some sense into her head , but she will not listen to him .
Then , Geralt realizes something .
The genie was fulfilling HIS wishes , since he was the one holding the seal last .
His first wish was the incantation he used on the genie and his second was the wish for the guard to burst , and thus the genie is still awaiting Geralt 's third wish .
Because the genie still has to fulfill his master 's wish , he is not yet freed , and is thus not able to be captured by Yennefer .
While rethinking his possible last wish , he also realizes what Yennefer looked like before she became a sorceress ; she was a hunchback .
Then , he decided upon his last wish .
The next moment , the genie tears free , the inn collapses and silence descends upon the village .
Under the rubble of the inn , Yennefer finds herself in Geralt 's arms , close and intimate .
Just moments later , Yennefer and Geralt begin to make love in the remains of what was the beginning of a stormy relationship .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Several short stories from The Last Wish have been adapted for the TV series and video games .
* Elements of The Voice of Reason were used for The Hexer episodes Human – First Meeting Crossroads and The Temple of Melitele *
The Witcher short story was adapted for the opening cinematic of The Witcher video game and for The Hexer episode Crossroads * The Lesser Evil was adapted in The Hexer episode of the same name as well as elements used in the episodes Dandelion and Human - First Meeting *
A Question of Price was adapted in The Hexer episode Calanthe *
The Edge of the World was adapted in The Hexer episode
The Valley of Flowers TRANSLATIONS Section::::Translations .
The book known in Poland as Ostatnie życzenie ( SuperNOWA , 1993 , ) has been translated into Czech , Russian , Lithuanian , German , Swedish , Spanish , French , Finnish , Slovak , Portuguese , Bulgarian , Hungarian and Traditional Chinese .
An English translation of The Last Wish was published in the United Kingdom by Gollancz in 2007 and in the United States by Orion in May 2008 .
*
Bulgarian :
Последното желание ( ИнфоДАР , 2008 )
* Czech :
Zaklínač I - Poslední přání ( Leonardo , 1999 )
* Dutch : De Laatste Wens - Dutch Media Uitgevers , 2010 ( )
* English : The Last Wish , translated by Danusia Stok * UK - Gollancz , 2007 ( ) * USA - Orbit , 2008 ( ) * Estonian : Viimane Soov , translated by Aarne Puu ( Tiritamm , 2011 , )
* Finnish :
Viimeinen Toivomus ( WSOY , 2010 , , translated by Tapani Kärkkäinen )
* French : Le Dernier Vœu ( 2003 ) * German :
Der letzte Wunsch
* Greek : Η τελευταία ευχή -
The Witcher :
Μια περιπέτεια του γητευτή ( Σελήνη , 2013 , )
*
Hungarian :
Vaják I - Az utolsó kivánság ( PlayON , 2011 , )
*
Lithuanian :
* Eridanas : Paskutinis noras ( 2005 , translated by Vidas Morkūnas )
* Alma littera Raganius : Paskutinis Noras ( 2017 , second edition , translated by Vidas Morkūnas )
* Portuguese : O Último Desejo * Brazil - WMF Martins Fontes , 2011 ( , translated by Tomasz Barcinski )
* Portugal - Livros do Brasil , 2005 ( ) ; Editorial Presença , 2011 ( ) ; Saída de Emergência , 2016 ( published as O Terceiro Desejo , )
* Romanian : Ultima dorință , translated by Mihaela Fiscutean ( Nemira , 2015 , )
* Russian : Последнее желание ( AST , 1996 , ) * Spanish :
El último deseo , translated by Jose María Faraldo ( Bibliópolis fantástica , 2002 )
* Italian : Il Guardiano degli Innocenti ( Casa Editrice Nord , 2010 )
* Serbian : Poslednja želja ( IPS Media , 2009 , )
* Slovak : Zaklínač I - Posledné želanie , Plus , 2015 ( , translated by Karol Chmel )
* Traditional Chinese : " 獵魔士 - 最後的願望 " , translated by 林蔚昀 ( 蓋亞文化 , 2011 , )
* Turkish : Son Dilek ( Pegasus , 2017 , , translated by Regaip Minareci from German )
* Swedish : Den Sista Önskningen
* Korean : 위처 이성의 목소리 ( 제우미디어 , 2011 , )
* Simplified Chinese : " 猎魔人 - 白狼崛起 " , translated by 小龙 ( 重庆出版社 , 2015 , )
AUDIO BOOK Section::::Audio book .
A Polish language audio book based on The Last Wish and The Sword of Destiny was released in 2011 by Fonopolis and audioteka.pl .
The Last Wish , lasting about 12 hours , was voiced by 52 actors , including Krzysztof Banaszyk as Geralt , Anna Dereszowska as Yennefer , Sławomir Pacek as Dandelion , and Krzysztof Gosztyła as narrator .
RECEPTION AND SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Reception and significance .
In 2011 , Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk gave U.S. President Barack Obama diplomatic presents , as is custom , on his visit to Poland .
One of these was a signed copy of The Last Wish .
The English edition was placed on the New York Times Bestseller in June 2015 , coinciding with the release of The Witcher 3 game at the same time .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Review by SFF World
* Review by Fantasy Book Critic
* Review by OF Blog of the Fallen * Review by The Wertzone * Review of the English edition by Asthner i Falka , Biblioteka Światów
* Review of the Polish edition by Michał BAZYL Krupko , Biblioteka Światów