VEHICLE TITLE
In the United States the certificate of title for a vehicle ( also known as a car title or pink slip ) is a legal form , establishing a person or business as the legal owner of a vehicle .
Vehicle titles in the U.S. are commonly issued by the Secretary of State in the state
you purchased the car in the Department of Motor Vehicles ( DMV ) .
Each state in the US has its own distinct process for the Certificate of Title .
When filling out the title during a vehicle transaction , the rules in one state do not always apply to a different state .
For example , most states do not require a notary when filling out the title , while other states in the U.S.A. make this mandatory for most parties when buying or selling a vehicle .
Some states have different versions of the same title .
The certificate of title normally specifies ( in most states & versions ) :
* Identifying information about the vehicle , normally at minimum its vehicle identification number , make , and year of manufacture .
*
* The license plate number .
*
* Technical information about the vehicle to define its taxation regime , e.g. , its gross vehicle weight , motive power , and purchase price when new .
*
* The name and address of the purchaser or " registered owner " who would normally possess and use it .
*
* If money is owed on the vehicle , the name of the lienholder or " legal owner " to whom this money is owed .
* When a vehicle is financed , the certificate of title is normally held by the lender , who must release it to the purchaser once the balance is paid off .
In some states , such as New York and Maryland , the transferred title is sent directly to that individual , but the name of the lender or lienholder appears on the title as well .
In order to release the lien upon full payment , the lender sends a notarized release or other complementary document to the individual .
When a car is sold from one owner to another , the title must be transferred to the new owner .
This is achieved by requesting approval by the state DMV .
When the vehicle title is lost , the owner on record may replace the lost title by completing an application with the state that issued the current title .
Online lost title applications are available for several states including Maine , Wisconsin , Virginia , Michigan , New York , Indiana , Maryland , South Carolina , Massachusetts , and Washington DC .
The name " pink slip " is a reference to California certificates of titles before 1988 , when they were pink ; current California titles have broad vertical stripes of teal , yellow , and pink with a green border ; while Illinois titles are blue , pink , and blue with a purple border ; Pennsylvania and Nevada titles are blue with a blue border .
Many illegal street races of the 1950s , glorified in movies , featured racing for vehicle titles , henceforth the popularity of the term " racing for pink slips , " and the 2005 - 08 Speed series Pinks was developed from it .
Also , in The Price Is Right , the pricing game Gas Money features contestants trying to avoid the actual retail price of the car ; that price is marked with a pink slip .
In the United Kingdom , there is not an equivalent of a vehicle title .
Instead , there is a document known as the ' vehicle registration document ' , and is issued by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency ( DVLA ) .
The current version has the reference number
V5C. Prior to computerisation , the title document was the ' log book ' , and this term is sometimes still used to describe the V5C.
The V5 document records who the Registered Keeper of the vehicle is ; it does not establish legal ownership of the vehicle .
These documents used to be blue on the front .
However , they were changed to red in 2010/11 after approximately 2.2 million blank blue V5 documents were stolen , allowing thieves to clone stolen vehicles much more easily .
CAR TITLE LOANS Section::::Car title loans .
Vehicle titles are also used for car title loans , in which a car owner gives the vehicle lender their vehicle title as collateral in exchange for a loan .
In addition to the vehicle title , lenders often also require the borrower to provide a set of keys for the car and/or purchase a roadside service plan .
Car title loans frequently involve high interest rates , a short time to repay the loan ( often 30 days ) , and a loan amount less than the car 's monetary worth .
The borrower also risks losing the car to the lender if the loan is not paid back .
These type of loans are marketed as small emergency loans .
SEE ALSO
*
Title ( property ) * Vehicle registration certificate NOTES