DUBAI CREEK Dubai Creek
( ) is a saltwater creek located in Dubai , United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) .
Previously it extended to Ras Al Khor Wildlife Sanctuary but as part of the new Dubai canal it extends through to the Persian Gulf .
Some sources say that the creek extended as far inland as Al Ain , and that the Ancient Greeks called it River Zara .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Historically , the creek divided the city into two main sections – Deira and Bur Dubai .
It was along the Bur Dubai creek area that members of the Bani Yas tribe first settled in the 19th century , establishing the Al Maktoum dynasty in the city .
In the early 20th century , the creek , though incapable then of supporting large scale transportation , served as a minor port for dhows coming from as far away as India or East Africa .
Although it impeded the entry of ships due to current flow , the creek remained an important element in establishing the commercial position of Dubai , being the only port or harbour in the city .
Dubai 's pearling industry , which formed the main sector of the city 's economy , was based primarily on expeditions in the creek , prior to the invention of cultured pearls in the 1930s .
Fishing , also an important industry at the time , was also based along the creek , whose warm and shallow waters supported a wide variety of marine life .
Dhows used for purposes of fishing were also built on the foreshore of the creek .
The importance of the creek as a site of commercial activity was a justification to introduce improvements to allow larger vessels to transit , as well as to facilitate loading and unloading activities .
This led , in 1955 , to a plan to develop the creek , which involved dredging shallow areas , building of breakwaters , and developing its beach to become a quay suitable for loading and unloading of cargo .
The creek was first dredged in 1961 to permit draft vessels to cross through the creek at all times .
The creek was dredged again in the 1960s and 1970s so that it could offer anchorage for local and coastal shipping of up to about 500 tons .
The dredging opened up the creek to much more continuous traffic of merchandise , including the development of re - export , and gave Dubai an advantage over Sharjah , the other dominant trading centre in the region at the time .
Al Maktoum Bridge , the first bridge connecting Bur Dubai and Deira was constructed in 1963 .
Although the importance of the creek as a port has diminished with the development of the Jebel Ali Port , smaller facilities , such as Port Saeed , continue to exist along the creek , providing porting to traders from the region and the subcontinent .
Including the most remarkable buildings alongside the Deira side of the Creek are the Deira Twin Towers , the old Dubai Creek Tower , Sheraton Dubai Creek , National Bank , and Chamber of Commerce .
On the other side of Al Maktoum Bridge along Dubai Creek is Dubai Creek Park , one of the largest parks in Dubai .
The creek is also home to the Dubai Creek Golf & Yacht Club , comprising an 18-hole tournament golf course , clubhouses , residential development and the Park Hyatt hotel .
The creek 's initial inlet into mainland Dubai is along the Deira Corniche and Al Ras areas of eastern Dubai and along the Al Shindagha area of western Dubai .
It then progresses south - eastward through the mainland , passing through Port Saeed and Dubai Creek Park .
The creek 's natural ending is at the Ras Al Khor Wildlife Sanctuary , from its origin at the Persian Gulf .
The traditional form of transport between the eastern and western sections of Dubai via the creek was through abras , which continue to operate in Dubai .
In addition , the eastern and western sections are linked via four bridges ( Al Maktoum Bridge , Al Garhoud Bridge , Business Bay Crossing , and Floating Bridge ) and one tunnel ( Al Shindagha Tunnel ) .
CROSSINGS Section::::Crossings .
Present crossings , in order from northwest to southeast : * Al Shindagha Tunnel * Al Maktoum Bridge * Floating Bridge ( temporary ; to be replaced by the " Dubai Smile " in the future )
* Al Garhoud Bridge * Business Bay Crossing Future / planned crossings :
* Dubai Smile ( to replace the Floating Bridge )
* Sheikh Rashid bin Saeed Crossing ( to link Al Jaddaf and Bur Dubai ) 2000S DEVELOPMENTS Section::::2000s developments .
In September 2007 , a Dhs .
484 million ( US$ 132 million ) extension of the creek was finished , which now ends just south of the Metropolitan Hotel and projects on Shaikh Zayed Road .
A final 2.2-kilometre extension , called the Dubai Water Canal was inaugurated 9 November 2016 , crossing Shaikh Zayed Road in a northerly route , passing through Safa Park and then through Jumeirah 2 .
The channel is expected to continue through Jumeirah Beach Park where it will reach the shores of the Persian Gulf .
The extension is part of the Dubai 's Business Bay development .
Additionally , a new project consisting of seven islands known as Dubai Creek Harbour was proposed to be built on Dubai Creek .
The center piece of this project would be the Dubai Creek Tower , which is set to become the tallest building in the world .
Three additional bridges are being planned for Dubai Creek , which are the Seventh Crossing , the Al Shindagha Bridge , and the Fifth Bridge .
* Importance of Creek Bridges Dubai Traffic , Architecture & Creek Bridges
SEE ALSO
*
Dubai Creek Tower REFERENCES