VISA POLICY OF TAIWAN Visitors to Taiwan ( officially known as the Republic of China , or the ROC ) must obtain a visa or authorization in advance , unless they come from one of the visa exempt countries or countries whose nationals are eligible for visa on arrival .
All visitors must hold a passport valid for 6 months ( except the citizens of Japan and the United States who are only required to hold a passport valid for the entire duration of stay ) .
Taiwan has special entry requirements to current or former nationals of the People 's Republic of China ( PRC , commonly known as China ) who reside or previously resided in Mainland China .
Furthermore , nationals of certain countries must follow different requirements for applications of visitor visas .
RIGHT OF ABODE Section::::Right of abode .
Although the ROC has only one type of nationality , not all ROC nationals have the right of abode in Taiwan .
Under the Immigration Act , only those with household registration in Taiwan ( nationals with household registration , or NWHRs ) have the right of abode in Taiwan and can enter Taiwan without prior authorization .
Holding one of the documents listed below is sufficient to demonstrate such status :
* A Taiwan passport with the individual 's National Identification Card number on the biodata page ; * Valid National Identification Card , household registration certificate , or household registration certificate transcript accompanied by a valid Taiwan passport without National ID number on the biodata page .
ROC nationals without household registration in Taiwan ( NWOHRs ) are ineligible to receive a National Identification Card and their passport would not contain their National ID number .
To enter Taiwan , one must , in addition to a Taiwan passport , hold one of the following documents : * A valid or expired entry permit affixed on the passport ; or , * A Taiwanese Resident Certificate .
NWOHRs holding documentations listed below can obtain an entry permit on arrival : * An added signing on the passport stating one 's overseas Chinese status , or a letter stating such status ; or * A long - term residence ( type F-2 ) or permanent residence ( type F-5 ) Certificate of Alien Registration issued by South Korea .
Alternatively , they may enter Taiwan with their non - ROC passports without prior authorization if also having nationalities of a visa exempt country .
NWOHRs are subject to immigration control while in Taiwan , and can only remain in Taiwan for a limited time authorized by the entry permit or the immigration officer .
Those without any of the above - listed documents will be denied entry to Taiwan .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA EXEMPTION Section::::Visa exemption .
Holders of passports of the following 66 jurisdictions do not require a visa to visit Taiwan for trips shorter than the duration of stay indicated ( duration of stay starts from the next day of arrival ) .
Extensions are not possible except for citizens of Canada and the United Kingdom , who may apply to extend the stay from 90 days to 180 days in accordance with the principle of .
Taiwan grants visa - free access to holders of passports of all states which Taiwan has full diplomatic relations with , except Swaziland , as well as two countries in Oceania which are scheduled to receive this privilege in the near future : Kiribati and Solomon Islands .
The visa exemption does not apply for holders of emergency or temporary passports , except for citizens of Japan and the United States .
Other visa exempt nationals holding such passports , however , would still be able to apply for a visa on arrival .
90 DAYS
Section::::90 days .
Holders of passports issued by the following 54 countries do not need a visa to visit Taiwan for trips less than 90 days :
* All European Union citizens valign = top
30 DAYS
Section::::30 days .
Holders of passports issued by the following 8 countries do not need a visa to visit Taiwan for trips less than 30 days : valign =
top }
14 DAYS
Section::::14 days .
Holders of normal passports issued by the 4 following countries do not need a visa to visit Taiwan for trips less than 14 days .
They must hold proof of funds and hotel reservation or contact information in Taiwan .
Holders of diplomatic and official passports are not eligible and must obtain a visa .
Stateless permanent residents of Brunei holding Bruneian International Certificate of Identity ( ICI ) with a validity of at least 6 months are also exempt for 14 days until 31 July 2019 .
They must also hold proof of funds and hotel reservation or contact information in Taiwan .
" Date of visa changes
Visa free * 1 January 1994 : Australia , Austria , Belgium , Canada , France , Germany , Japan , Luxembourg , Netherlands , New Zealand , United Kingdom and United States
* 1 May 1995 : Portugal , Spain and Sweden * 1 January 1998 : Italy * 1 May 1998 : Greece * 1 January 2001 : Switzerland * 1 May 2001 : Singapore * 1 January 2002 : Norway * 1 October 2002 : Finland and Liechtenstein * 1 November 2002 : Malaysia * 25 January 2003 : South Korea * 1 April 2003 : Denmark , Ireland , Iceland , Malta and Monaco * 1 September 2007 : Czech Republic * 1 October 2008 : Poland and Slovakia * 1 November 2008 :
Hungary * 21 November 2008 :
Lithuania * 1 December 2008 : Estonia * 7 January 2009 : Latvia * 15 February 2009 : Slovenia * 28 September 2009 : Holy See * 11 November 2010 : Bulgaria , Cyprus and Romania * 11 August 2011 : Israel * 10 September 2012 : Croatia * 1 June 2014 : Andorra and San Marino * 1 January 2016 :
Chile * 1 August 2016 : Brunei ( resumed ) and Thailand * 1 December 2016 : Brunei Certificate of Identity * 12 July 2017 : Belize , Dominican Republic , El Salvador , Guatemala , Haiti , Honduras , Nicaragua , Paraguay , Saint Vincent , Saint Kitts and Nevis and Saint
Lucia * 1 November 2017
:
Philippines * 21 May 2018 : Macedonia * 1 June 2018 : Nauru , Tuvalu * 6 September 2018 : Russia * 19 November 2018 : Marshall Islands * 1 December 2018 : Palau Cancelled * 1 December 2005 : Brunei ( was resumed in 2016 )
* March 2010 : Costa Rica Visa on arrival unknown : Turkey ; Hong Kong , Macau eVisa * 12 January 2016 : Belize , Brunei , Burkina Faso , Colombia , Dominican Republic , Ecuador , El Salvador , Guatemala , Haiti , Honduras , Kiribati , Macedonia , Marshall Islands ( visa free from 19 Nov 2018 ) , Nauru , Nicaragua , Palau , Panama , Paraguay , Peru , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Sao Tome and Principe ( canceled ) , Solomon Islands , Swaziland , Turkey , and Tuvalu * 7 October 2016 : Bahrain , Dominica , Kuwait , Montenegro , Oman , Philippines ( visa free from 1 Nov 2017 ) , Qatar , Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates } VISA ON ARRIVAL Section::::Visa on arrival .
Nationals of the following countries can obtain a visa on arrival : } In addition , holders of emergency or temporary passports with validity of more than 6 months issued by visa - exempt countries are eligible for visa on arrival for a fee .
The duration of stay is 30 days regardless of nationality and can not be extended .
This measure does not apply to holders of emergency or temporary passports issued by Japan or the United States as they are visa exempt .
Visa on arrival is only available at Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport .
For passengers arriving at Taipei Songshan Airport , Kaohsiung International Airport or Taichung Airport , they would be issued a temporary entry permit and will have to apply for a visa at the Bureau of Consular Affairs ( BOCA ) headquarters in Taipei , any of the offices of Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Taiwan , or the BOCA office at Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport .
Passengers without a visa will not be allowed to depart from Taiwan .
Any passenger arriving at a port of entry other than one listed above will be denied entry .
PERMANENT RESIDENTS OF HONG KONG AND MACAU
Section::::Permanent residents of Hong Kong and Macau .
Permanent residents of Hong Kong and/or Macau , who are either Chinese nationals or British Nationals ( Overseas ) , may be eligible for an Exit & Entry Permit upon arrival for NT$300 or may apply for an Entry Permit online at no cost to visit Taiwan for less than 30 days .
The requirements are : *
They were born in Hong Kong or Macau , or have entered Taiwan at least once as a permanent resident of Hong Kong or Macau and holding proofs of previous visits ; * They hold one of the following travel documents with a remaining validity of no less than 3 months at the time of arrival :
* Hong Kong Special Administrative Region passport * British National ( Overseas ) passport * Macao Special Administrative Region passport ; * They do not hold passports issued by other nations or have additional nationalities ( including other classes of British nationality ) .
If they do , they are required to comply with visa requirements of their additional nationalities , except for Hong Kong residents who are allowed to have dual Chinese nationality and British National ( Overseas ) status ( but not full British citizenship ) .
First time applicants not born in Hong Kong or Macau are also able to apply for Exit and Entry Permit online from 8 February 2017 .
Unlike those qualified for the no - fee Entry Permit or Entry and Exit Permit on arrival , the applicants are required to pay a processing fee of NT$600 .
The processing time is 5 business days .
These visitors are required to hold their Hong Kong Permanent Identity Cards or Macau Permanent Resident Identity Cards , as well as their proof of previous visits to Taiwan , when applying for Exit and Entry Permits on arrival or the no - fee Entry Permits for subsequent visits .
Since 1 January 2017 , Hong Kong and Macau residents are able to apply for double - entry Entry Permits online , providing that they are entering Taiwan by cruise for at least one portion of their trip .
EVISA
Section::::eVisa .
Since 12 January 2016 , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of ROC started to implement the eVisa Program .
Citizens of the following countries can apply for a single - entry eVisa to visit Taiwan for less than 30 days .
The fee for each application is NT$1,632 .
On 7 October 2016 , the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of ROC further expanded the list of countries eligible to apply for eVisa .
valign =
top valign =
top } Nationals of the following countries may apply for a single - entry eVisa for a maximum stay of 30 days if they are travelling with an approved tour group : valign =
top Also , all foreign nationals except Chinese nationals who are invited by the Taiwanese government to attend international conferences , sports events , trade fairs or other activities organized , co - organized or sponsored by Taiwanese government agencies or certain NGOs are also eligible for an eVisa .
Such applicants must obtain an e - code from their host organizations in Taiwan prior to applying for an eVisa .
Nationals of the following countries are eligible for business eVisas if they have obtained recommendations from the local Taiwan External Trade Development Council since 1 June 2017 .
valign =
top APEC
BUSINESS TRAVEL CARD Section::::APEC Business Travel Card .
Holders of passports issued by the following countries who possess an APEC Business Travel Card ( ABTC ) containing the code " TWN " on the back of the card can enter Taiwan visa - free for business trips for up to 90 days .
ABTCs are issued to nationals of : valign = top
} ABTCs are also issued to nationals of China and permanent residents of Hong Kong ; however , Chinese nationals residing in Mainland China are subject to entry restrictions and can not use the card to enter Taiwan .
Chinese nationals permanently residing in Hong Kong are also ineligible and are required to obtain an Exit and Entry Permit .
ONLINE TRAVEL AUTHORIZATION CERTIFICATE Section::::Online Travel Authorization Certificate .
Nationals of the following countries can apply for a no - fee Travel Authorization Certificate online for multiple visits to Taiwan , for a duration of no more than 14 days each visit during the certificate 's 90-day validity period , if they have never been employed as a guest worker to Taiwan and have met the additional requirements listed below : valign = top
They are required to hold a residential or visitor visa ( including Visa Waiver Registration Certificates issued by Japan to Indonesian nationals , and e - Visas ) , or a residential certificate ( including permanent residency ) issued by the following countries .
The visa can be either valid or expired , but it must not have expired for more than 10 years prior to the date of arrival in Taiwan .
Holders of work permits as well as visas marked " void " , " cancelled " or " cancelled without prejudice " are not eligible .
In addition , travelers utilizing the scheme must also hold a return or onward plane or ship ticket and will be required to present it to the immigration officer .
valign =
top * Countries of Schengen Area Frequent visitors to Taiwan from these countries can also receive multiple entry visas with validity of two to five years .
From 1 June 2017 , nationals of these countries who have received a Taiwanese visa ( other than a work visa ) in the last 10 years are eligible for online registration .
As all Filipino nationals were exempt from visa requirements on 1 November 2017 , they were no longer able to register for the certificate from that day onwards .
All certificates were also no longer valid for entry since 31 October 2017 .
Passengers entering Taiwan prior to 1 November 2017 were still allowed to stay for up to 30 days , while those entering Taiwan on or after that day can only stay for up to 14 days .
The period of stay for nationals of all countries was shortened from 30 days to 14 days from 1 August 2018 .
CHINESE TRAVELERS DOMICILED IN MAINLAND CHINA Section::::Chinese travelers domiciled in Mainland China .
Chinese nationals with residency ( hukou ) in Mainland China ( including those who are non - permanent residents of Hong Kong or Macau and have relinquished their hukou in Mainland China ) require prior approvals from Taiwanese government and are required to hold an Exit and Entry Permit prior to travelling to Taiwan .
As of August 2016 , Mainland residents can only visit Taiwan as a part of a pre - approved tour group unless they qualify for one of the exemptions :
* They have hukou in one of the 47 cities that are designated by the Taiwanese and Chinese authorities as eligible for individual tours ; *
They reside outside Mainland China and hold temporary or permanent residence status in Hong Kong , Macau or a third country ( prior approval from the Chinese authorities is not required when departing from a place other than Mainland China ) ; or ,
*
They only visit Quemoy , Matsu and Penghu Islands ( in which case a 15-day Exit and Entry Permit Permit can be obtained on arrival provided holding certain travel documents ) and will not proceed to other parts of Taiwan .
As of May 2016 , Mainland resident visitors applying from Mainland China are subject to a daily quota imposed by Taiwan of 14,600 persons per day , with half of the quota available to individual tour applicants .
Those who applied from Hong Kong , Macau or a third country are not subject to a quota .
It was reported that the Chinese authorities also has an unofficial " soft cap " on the numbers of individual and group tourists , ranging from 40 % to 50 % of the Taiwanese quota .
All Mainland residents can not travel to Taiwan on their passports when departing from Mainland China and must hold a Travel Permit to and from Taiwan ( ) , colloquially known as Mainland Resident Travel Permit ( ) , issued by the Chinese authorities .
The current card - type version of the permit is similar to the design of the Two - way permit while older version is a pink , passport - like travel document .
Permits must have the appropriate valid exit endorsements ( similar to exit visas ) on them for the holder to depart from Mainland China .
Although travelling with the Mainland Resident Travel Permit is not mandatory when departing from Hong Kong , Macau or a third country , the Exit and Entry Permit itself is not a travel document but a de facto entry visa , and is usually tied to the document number of Mainland Resident Travel Permit or the Chinese passport , hence the travelers are still required to carry the travel document they used to apply for the Exit and Entry Permit when travelling to Taiwan .
Since January 2016 , Mainland residents are no longer required to hold a Mainland Resident Travel Permit if they depart from airports in Chongqing , Kunming or Nanchang and are only in transit through Taiwan to a third country .
Otherwise , the Mainland Resident Travel Permit with exit endorsement is also required for transit through Taiwan if departing from Mainland China , but the Exit and Entry Permit is not required if the passengers do not pass immigration control in Taiwan and only remain airside .
From 28 March 2017 , Mainland Chinese residents are able to apply for the Exit and Entry Permit online if they are residing in a third country .
RESTRICTIONS FOR FORMER MAINLAND RESIDENTS Section::::Restrictions for former Mainland residents .
Although the aforementioned restrictions do not apply to former nationals of China with Mainland residency as well as Hong Kong and Macau residents who have relinquished their hukou , they also face entry restrictions and are required to apply for an Exit and Entry Permit unless they meet the following requirements :
* They have resided outside of Mainland China for more than 4 years ;
* They have obtained the nationality of the country in which they reside ( or permanent residence status of Hong Kong or Macau ) ; and *
They have lost their Chinese nationality in pursuant to Article 9 of the Chinese nationality law ( not required for Hong Kong or Macau permanent residents ) .
If the requirements are met , they may enter Taiwan according to the visa requirements of the nationality they have acquired , or as residents of Hong Kong and Macau as listed above .
However , documentation supporting the change in nationality or residence status , such as a naturalization certificate or a Home Return Permit , is required .
SPECIAL VISA REQUIREMENTS FOR NATIONALS OF CERTAIN COUNTRIES Section::::Special visa requirements for nationals of certain countries .
Taiwan has special entry requirements for nationals of certain countries .
Nationals of countries mentioned below may only visit Taiwan when one of the following requirements is met :
* They are invited by Taiwanese government agencies when on official businesses .
*
They are participating in international meetings or activities for the purposes of " religious , athletic , or cultural exchange " and invited by a Taiwanese organization .
* They have dependents with legal residence status in Taiwan ( spouse , family members of " lineal relationship " , or siblings only ) .
*
They are " conducting economic or commercial businesses " in Taiwan .
Accompanied spouse and children may also receive visitor visas .
*
They are crew members boarding a ship docked in Taiwan .
* They are receiving medical treatment in Taiwan .
In addition , those who are visiting Taiwan on business must be interviewed by a Taiwanese consular officer , and their sponsors in Taiwan must submit a guarantee to the Bureau of Consular Affairs in Taiwan .
Countries marked with * may also apply for tourist visas , and they are not required to submit a guarantee from their Taiwanese sponsors when applying for business visas .
The list of the countries is as follows : valign = top
In addition , the requirements also apply to holders of Indian Identity Certificates .
WORKING HOLIDAY
VISA
Section::::Working Holiday Visa .
Nationals of the following 15 countries are eligible to apply for the Taiwanese working holiday visa ( named as " Youth Mobility Scheme " for British and Canadian citizens ) through Taiwanese diplomatic missions of their countries of nationality , if they are ordinary residents in their country of nationality and are within the age limits .
valign = top } STATISTICS SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Taiwanese citizens
* Taiwan passport * Exit & Entry Permit ( Republic of China )
* Foreign relations of Taiwan
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Bureau of Consular Affairs * List of Taiwanese Diplomatic Missions
* National Immigration Agency English Website