COMPOSITION OF THE HUMAN BODY Body composition may be analyzed in terms of molecular type e.g. , water , protein , connective tissue , fats ( or lipids ) , hydroxylapatite ( in bones ) , carbohydrates ( such as glycogen and glucose ) and DNA .
In terms of tissue type , the body may be analyzed into water , fat , muscle , bone , etc .
In terms of cell type , the body contains hundreds of different types of cells , but notably , the largest number of cells contained in a human body ( though not the largest mass of cells ) are not human cells , but bacteria residing in the normal human gastrointestinal tract .
ELEMENTS Section::::Elements .
Almost 99 % of the mass of the human body is made up of six elements : oxygen , carbon , hydrogen , nitrogen , calcium , and phosphorus .
Only about 0.85 % is composed of another five elements : potassium , sulfur , sodium , chlorine , and magnesium .
All 11 are necessary for life .
The remaining elements are trace elements , of which more than a dozen are thought on the basis of good evidence to be necessary for life .
All of the mass of the trace elements put together ( less than 10 grams for a human body ) do not add up to the body mass of magnesium , the least common of the 11 non - trace elements .
OTHER ELEMENTS
Section::::Other elements .
Not all elements which are found in the human body in trace quantities play a role in life .
Some of these elements are thought to be simple bystander contaminants without function ( examples : caesium , titanium ) , while many others are thought to be active toxics , depending on amount ( cadmium , mercury , radioactives ) .
The possible utility and toxicity of a few elements at levels normally found in the body ( aluminium ) is debated .
Functions have been proposed for trace amounts of cadmium and lead , although these are almost certainly toxic in amounts very much larger than normally found in the body .
There is evidence that arsenic , an element normally considered a toxin in higher amounts , is essential in ultratrace quantities , in mammals such as rats , hamsters , and goats .
Some elements ( silicon , boron , nickel , vanadium ) are probably needed by mammals also , but in far smaller doses .
Bromine is used abundantly by some ( though not all ) lower organisms , and opportunistically in eosinophils in humans .
One study has found bromine to be necessary to collagen IV synthesis in humans .
Fluorine is used by a number of plants to manufacture toxins ( see that element ) but in humans only functions as a local ( topical ) hardening agent in tooth enamel , and not in an essential biological role .
ELEMENTAL COMPOSITION LIST Section::::Elemental composition list .
The average adult human body contains approximately atoms and contains at least detectable traces of 60 chemical elements .
About 29 of these elements are thought to play an active positive role in life and health in humans .
The relative amounts of each element vary by individual , mainly due to differences in the proportion of fat , muscle and bone in their body .
Persons with more fat will have a higher proportion of carbon and a lower proportion of most other elements ( the proportion of hydrogen will be about the same ) .
The numbers in the table are averages of different numbers reported by different references .
The adult human body averages ~53 % water .
This varies substantially by age , sex , and adiposity .
In a large sample of adults of all ages and both sexes , the figure for water fraction by weight was found to be 48 ±6 % for females and 58 ±8 % water for males .
Water is ~11 % hydrogen by mass but ~67 % hydrogen by atomic percent , and these numbers along with the complementary % numbers for oxygen in water , are the largest contributors to overall mass and atomic composition figures .
Because of water content , the human body contains more oxygen by mass than any other element , but more hydrogen by atom - fraction than any element .
The elements listed below as " Essential in humans " are those listed by the ( US ) Food and Drug Administration as essential nutrients , as well as six additional elements : oxygen , carbon , hydrogen , and nitrogen ( the fundamental building blocks of life on Earth ) , sulfur ( essential to all cells ) and cobalt ( a necessary component of vitamin B ) .
Elements listed as " Possibly " or " Probably " essential are those cited by the National Research Council ( United States ) as beneficial to human health and possibly or probably essential . !
Atomic number ! !
Element ! !
data - sort - type="number " Fraction of mass ! !
data - sort - type="number"Mass
( kg)!!Atomic percent!!Essential in humans!!Negative effects of excess!!Group * Iron = ~3 g in men , ~2.3 g in women Of the 94 naturally occurring chemical elements , 60 are listed in the table above .
Of the remaining 34 , it is not known how many occur in the human body .
Most of the elements needed for life are relatively common in the Earth 's crust .
Aluminium , the third most common element in the Earth 's crust ( after oxygen and silicon ) , serves no function in living cells , but is harmful in large amounts .
Transferrins can bind aluminium .
PERIODIC TABLE MOLECULES Section::::Molecules .
The composition of the human body is expressed in terms of chemicals :
* Water * Proteins – including those of hair , connective tissue , etc .
* Fats ( or lipids )
* Hydroxylapatite in bones
* Carbohydrates such as glycogen and glucose * DNA * Dissolved inorganic ions such as sodium , potassium , chloride , bicarbonate , phosphate * Gases such as oxygen , carbon dioxide , nitrogen oxide , hydrogen , carbon monoxide , acetaldehyde , formaldehyde , methanethiol .
These may be dissolved or present in the gases in the lungs or intestines .
Ethane and pentane are produced by oxygen free radicals .
* Many other small molecules , such as amino acids , fatty acids , nucleobases , nucleosides , nucleotides , vitamins , cofactors .
* Free radicals such as superoxide , hydroxyl , and hydroperoxyl .
The composition of the human body can be viewed on an atomic and molecular scale as shown in this article .
The estimated gross molecular contents of a typical 20-micrometre human cell is as follows : !
Molecule ! !
Percent of Mass ! !
Mol .
Weight ( daltons ) ! !
Molecules ! !
Percent of Molecules TISSUES Section::::Tissues .
Body composition can also be expressed in terms of various types of material , such as : *
Muscle
* Fat * Bone and teeth * Nervous tissue ( Brain and nerves )
* Hormones * Connective tissue
* Body fluids ( blood , lymph , Urine ) * Contents of digestive tract , including intestinal gas
* Air in lungs
* Epithelium COMPOSITION BY CELL TYPE Section::::Composition by cell type .
There are many species of bacteria and other microorganisms that live on or inside the healthy human body .
In fact , 90 % of the cells in ( or on ) a human body are microbes , by number ( much less by mass or volume ) .
Some of these symbionts are necessary for our health .
Those that neither help nor harm humans are called commensal organisms .
SEE ALSO
* List of organs of the human body
*
Hydrostatic weighing
* Dietary element
* Composition of blood * List of human blood components
* Body composition * Abundance of elements in Earth 's crust * Abundance of the chemical elements REFERENCES