BURNHAM - ON - SEA RAILWAY STATION Burnham - on - Sea railway station located within the town of Burnham - on - Sea , Somerset , was the terminus of the Burnham branch of the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway .
Opened as Burnham by the Somerset Central Railway on 3 May 1858 , it was renamed in 1920 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station , situated behind Abingdon Street , was a terminus although a through platform allowed services to travel on to a S&DJR built stone pier on the River Severn / River Parrett estuary .
For a few years the railway operated steamers across the Bristol Channel to Wales .
Railway operations onto the pier ceased in 1888 although the pier continued in use for vessels until the 1950s .
Perhaps the strangest use of the railway along the pier was by the local area lifeboat , which was pushed on rails from the old lifeboat station ( located behind the former Morrisons supermarket ) and onto the " main line " , across the esplanade , and down the pier where the lifeboat could be launched if the tide was right .
Burnham - on - Sea closed when regular passenger services were curtailed at Highbridge on 28 October 1951 .
Excursion traffic continued until 1962 , and the goods depot remained open until 1963 .
The nearest station to Burnham is now the former joint - GWR junction station known as .
THE SITE TODAY Section::::The site today .
After station 's closure , the platform and goods shed were demolished .
The former trackbed eastwards was developed into Marine Drive , a road which has helped ease traffic flow into the town .
The location of the station itself is on the junction of Old Station Approach and Abingdon Street , and the former goods yard is now a small car park .
An adjacent pub on the High Street was subsequently renamed the Somerset & Dorset .
The new RNLI station and yard occupy land to the south and east of the former main station building , adjacent to the site of the former excursion platform .
The first ever specifically - designed Somerfield supermarket was built to the seaward - west side , which was then sold to Morrisons .
The site is now a B&M store .
FURTHER READING
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
http://www.sdjr.net/locations/burnham.html
* http://www.burnham-on-sea.com/burnham-railway-station.shtml * https://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b03495yn/lets-imagine-a-branch-line-railway-with-john-betjeman