UNTRANSLATED REGION
In molecular genetics , an untranslated region ( or UTR ) refers to either of two sections , one on each side of a coding sequence on a strand of mRNA .
If it is found on the 5 ' side , it is called the 5 ' UTR ( or leader sequence ) , or if it is found on the 3 ' side , it is called the 3 ' UTR ( or trailer sequence ) .
mRNA is RNA that carries information from DNA to the ribosome , the site of protein synthesis ( translation ) within a cell .
The mRNA is initially transcribed from the corresponding DNA sequence and then translated into protein .
However , several regions of the mRNA are usually not translated into protein , including the 5 ' and 3 ' UTRs .
Although they are called untranslated regions , and do not form the protein - coding region of the gene ,
uORFs located within the 5 ' UTR can be translated into peptides .
The 5 ' UTR is upstream from the coding sequence .
Within the 5 ' UTR is a sequence that is recognized by the ribosome which allows the ribosome to bind and initiate translation .
The mechanism of translation initiation differs in prokaryotes and eukaryotes .
The 3 ' UTR is found immediately following the translation stop codon .
The 3 ' UTR plays a critical role in translation termination as well as post - transcriptional gene expression .
These often long sequences were once thought to be useless or junk mRNA that has simply accumulated over evolutionary time .
However , it is now known that the untranslated region of mRNA is involved in many regulatory aspects of gene expression in eukaryotic organisms .
The importance of these non - coding regions is supported by evolutionary reasoning , as natural selection would have otherwise eliminated this unusable RNA .
It is important to distinguish the 5 ' and 3 ' UTRs from other non - protein - coding RNA .
Within the coding sequence there can be found sections of RNA that will not be included in the protein product .
These sections of RNA are called introns .
The RNA that results from RNA splicing are called exons .
The reason why introns are not considered untranslated regions is that the introns are spliced out in the process of RNA splicing .
The introns are not included in the mature mRNA molecule .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The untranslated regions of mRNA became a subject of study as early as the late 1970s , after the first mRNA molecule was fully sequenced .
In 1978 , the 5 ' UTR of the human gamma - globin mRNA was fully sequenced .
In 1980 , a study was conducted on the 3 ' UTR of the duplicated human alpha - globin genes .
EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
The untranslated region is seen in prokaryotes and eukaryotes , although the length and composition may vary .
In prokaryotes , the 5 ' UTR is typically between 3 and 10 nucleotides long .
In eukaryotes , the 5 ' UTR can be hundreds to thousands of nucleotides long .
This is consistent with the higher complexity of the genomes of eukaryotes compared to prokaryotes .
The 3 ' UTR varies in length as well .
The poly - A tail is essential for keeping the mRNA from being degraded .
Although there is variation in lengths of both the 5 ' and 3 ' UTR , it has been seen that the 5 ' UTR length is more highly conserved in evolution than the 3 ' UTR length .
PROKARYOTES Section::::Prokaryotes .
The 5 ' UTR of Prokaryotes consists of the Shine - Dalgarno sequence ( AGGAGGU ) .
This sequence is found 3 - 10 base pairs upstream from the initiation codon .
The initiation codon is the start site of translation into protein .
EUKARYOTES Section::::Eukaryotes .
The 5 ' UTR of Eukaryotes is more complex than prokaryotes .
It contains a kozak consensus sequence ( ACCAUGG ) .
This sequence contains the initiation codon .
The initiation codon is the start site of translation into protein .
LINKS TO DISEASE Section::::Links to disease .
The importance of these untranslated regions of mRNA is just beginning to be understood .
Various medical studies are being conducted that have found connections between mutations in untranslated regions and increased risk for developing a particular disease , such as cancer .
For example , associations between polymorphisms in the HLA - G 3′UTR region and development of colorectal cancer have been discovered .
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in the 3 ' UTR of another gene have also been associated with susceptibility to preterm birth .
Mutations in the 3 ' UTR of the APP gene are related to development of cerebral amyloid angiopathy .
FURTHER STUDY
Section::::Further study .
Through the recent study of untranslated regions , general information has been gathered about the nature and function of these elements .
However , there is still much that is unknown about these regions of mRNA .
Since the regulation of gene expression is critical in the proper function of cells , this is an area of study that needs to be investigated further .
It is important to consider that mutations in 3 ' untranslated regions have the potential to alter the expression of several genes that may appear unrelated .
We are only beginning to understand the links between proper untranslated region function , and disease states of cells .
SEE ALSO
* Atlas of UTR Regulatory Activity
* Coding region * Five prime untranslated region * History of RNA biology * MiRNA * Three prime untranslated region
* Upstream open reading frames ( uORFs ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * http://highered.mheducation.com/sites/0072507470/student_view0/chapter3/animation__mrna_synthesis__transcription___quiz_1_.html * http://highered.mheducation.com/sites/0072507470/student_view0/chapter3/animation__how_translation_works.html
* http://utrsite.ba.itb.cnr.it/index.php/default/
* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kz4f7vlQFnM * UTResource