LAKE ISLE OF INNISFREE
" The Lake Isle of Innisfree " is a twelve - line poem composed of three quatrains written by William Butler Yeats in 1888 and first published in the National Observer in 1890 .
It was reprinted in The Countess Kathleen and Various Legends and Lyrics in 1892 and as an illustrated Cuala Press Broadside in 1932 .
" The Lake Isle of Innisfree " exemplifies the style of the Celtic Revival
: it is an attempt to create a form of poetry that was Irish in origin rather than one that adhered to the standards set by English poets and critics .
It received critical acclaim in the United Kingdom and France .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The Isle of Innisfree is an uninhabited island within Lough Gill , in County Sligo , Ireland , where Yeats spent his summers as a child .
Yeats describes the inspiration for the poem coming from a " sudden " memory of his childhood while walking down Fleet Street in London in 1888 .
He writes , " I had still the ambition , formed in Sligo in my teens , of living in imitation of Thoreau on Innisfree , a little island in Lough Gill , and when walking through Fleet Street very homesick I heard a little tinkle of water and saw a fountain in a shop - window which balanced a little ball upon its jet , and began to remember lake water .
From the sudden remembrance came my poem " Innisfree , " my first lyric with anything in its rhythm of my own music .
I had begun to loosen rhythm as an escape from rhetoric and from that emotion of the crowd that rhetoric brings , but I only understood vaguely and occasionally that I must for my special purpose use nothing but the common syntax .
A couple of years later I could not have written that first line with its conventional archaism --
" Arise and go"—nor
the inversion of the last stanza .
" The poem is featured in passports of Irish citizens . ANALYSIS Section::::Analysis . The twelve - line poem is divided into three quatrains and is an example of Yeats 's earlier lyric poems .
Throughout the three short quatrains the poem explores the speaker 's longing for the peace and tranquility of Innisfree while residing in an urban setting .
He can escape the noise of the city and be lulled by the " lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore . "
On this small island , he can return to nature by growing beans and having bee hives , by enjoying the " purple glow " of noon , the sounds of birds ' wings , and , of course , the bees .
He can even build a cabin and stay on the island much as Thoreau , the American Transcendentalist , lived in this manner on Walden Pond .
During Yeats 's lifetime it was — to his annoyance — one of his most popular poems and on one occasion was recited ( or sung ) in his honor by two ( or ten — accounts vary ) thousand boy scouts .
The first quatrain speaks to the needs of the body ( food & shelter ) ; the second to the needs of the spirit ( peace ) ; the final quatrain is the meeting of the inner life ( memory ) with the physical world ( pavement grey ) .
MUSICAL SETTINGS
* Muriel Herbert set the poem in 1928 .
* Seattle , WA band Fleet Foxes mentions the Isles of Innisfree in many other songs including ' The Shrine / An Argument ' , ' Isles ' and ' Bedouin Dress ' .
* American composer Ben Moore has also composed a setting of the poem .
* Another musical setting is featured in Branduardi canta Yeats ( published by Edizioni Musicali Musiza , 1986 ) , composed and played by Angelo Branduardi on translation of Luisa Zappa .
* Michael McGlynn of the Irish group Anúna arranged this as a choral piece : a " recording " of it is featured on Anúna 's album Invocation .
* Composer and pianist
Ola Gjeilo set this text to music in a piece called " The Lake Isle . "
* Popular settings of the poem have been done by Judy Collins and the Dream Brothers .
*
Australian musician Paul Kelly performs a version on his 2013 album " Conversations with Ghosts " .
*
Shusha Guppy recorded an unaccompanied version on her album '
This is the Day '
( United Artist Records , 1974 ) .
* ' The Lake Isle of Innisfree ' is part of the Songcylcle ' 5 Songs on Poems by W.B.Yeats ' composed by the Dutch composer Carolien Devilee .
* A musical setting of this poem is featured in DUBLIN 1916 , An Irish Oratorio and YEATS SONGS , a song cycle , both composed by Richard B. Evans .
( published by Seacastle Music Company , 1995 ) .
IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::In other media .
In the finale episode of the fourth season of the Fox science - fiction drama television series Fringe entitled Brave New World ( Part 2 ) , Dr. William Bell ( Leonard Nimoy ) narrates the first stanza of the poem , alluding to his plans of collapsing the two universes into a new world where he plays God .
In the film Million Dollar Baby , directed by Clint Eastwood , Frankie Dunn ( portrayed by Eastwood ) reads the first two quatrains to Margaret Fitzgerald ( Hilary Swank ) at the hospital after a fight where her neck has broken .
In the climactic scene from the film
Three And
Out , Tommy recites the poem just before he gets hit by the train .
John Ford 's Academy Award winning film
The Quiet Man ( 1952 ) is set in Innisfree and clearly takes Yeat 's poem as one of its principal subtexts .
Hard rock band Sir Lord Baltimore has a song called " Lake Isle of Innersfree , " presumably inspired by Yeats ' poem .
It appears on their 1970 LP Kingdom Come .
In the song The Shrine / An Argument by Seattle indie folk band Fleet Foxes Innisfree is mentioned in the song 's final lyric :
" Carry me to Innisfree like pollen on the breeze .
" The band also mentions Innisfree in their song Bedouin Dress on the same album , saying frequently : " One day at Innisfree , one day that 's mine there " and " Just to be at Innisfree again .
" In his LP Branduardi canta Yeats ( 1986 ) , Angelo Branduardi sings an italian version of this poem .
In the song " Yeats ' Grave " by Irish band
The Cranberries there is a line that says
And you sit here with me , in the Isle Innisfree .
The poem inspired Philip Gates 's The Lake Isle for oboe and piano .
The Folk singer songwriter and actor Hamid Hamilton Camp Released a beautiful version called Innisfree on his 1964 album Paths of Victory on Electra records .
Composer Ola Gjeilo composed a choral song named The Lake Isle based on the poem .
In his debut novel Ghostwritten the British author David Mitchell quotes the first two quatrains in the chapter " London " and the last in the chapter " Clear Island .
" The third book in Nicolas Freeling 's Henri Castang series is Lake Isle , with explicit reference to Yeats ' poem .
It is referenced in the final line of J.B. Priestley 's 1932 essay " At Thurston 's , " writing that watching a billiards match at Thurston 's Hall is " as near to the Isle of Innisfree as we can get within a hundred miles of Leicester Square .
"
REFERENCES SEE ALSO * 1893 in poetry
* List of works by William Butler Yeats EXTERNAL LINKS