LOSING MY RELIGION ( GREY 'S ANATOMY ) " Losing My Religion " is the twenty - seventh and final episode of the second season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 36th episode overall .
Written by Shonda Rhimes and directed by Mark Tinker , the episode was originally broadcast with " Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response " , in a two - hour season finale event on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on May 15 , 2006 .
Grey 's Anatomy centers around a group of young doctors in training .
In this episode , Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) and her fellow interns have to plan a prom for Dr. Richard Webber 's ( James Pickens , Jr. ) niece Camille Travis ( Tessa Thompson ) .
Further storylines include Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) recovering from his gunshot wound and Denny Duquette 's ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) death following his seemingly successful heart transplant surgery .
The episode marked Sara Ramirez 's ( Dr. Callie Torres )
final appearance with recurring billing , as she would be upgraded to a series regular in season three .
Morgan , Ramirez , Thompson , Brooke Smith , Sarah Utterback , Loretta Devine , and Chris O'Donnell reprised their roles as guest stars , while Hallee Hirsh and Tiffany Hines made their first and only appearances .
The episode received mixed to negative reviews from television critics , who disapproved of the storyline involving Grey and Shepherd and the show 's lack of repercussions for the interns , but lauded Dr. Cristina Yang 's ( Sandra Oh ) storyline along with Heigl 's performance .
" Losing My Religion " was also included in several " best episodes " lists .
Upon its initial airing , the episode was viewed 22.50 million Americans , garnered an 8.0/22 Nielsen rating / share in the 18–49 demographic , ranking fifth for the week in terms of viewership , and registering as the week 's second highest - rated drama .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) finish Dr. Preston Burke 's ( Isaiah Washington ) surgery to remove a pseudo - aneurysm in the subclavian artery that threatened the functioning of his arm and which was caused by a gunshot wound .
At the same time , Dr. Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) successfully transplants a heart into Denny Duquette ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) .
The interns face Webber , who orders them to plan a prom for his dying niece , Camille Travis ( Tessa Thompson ) , until the one who cut Duquette 's left ventricular assist device ( LVAD ) comes forward .
With the instructions of Camille 's friends , Claire ( Hallee Hirsh ) and Natalie ( Tiffany Hines ) , they prepare the prom as they each struggle with their own personal problems .
Trying to recover from his injury , Burke finds a tremor in his right hand .
Dr. Meredith Grey 's ( Ellen Pompeo ) love interest Dr. Finn Dandrige ( Chris O'Donnell ) , the vet of Doc — the dog she shares with Shepherd — informs her that Doc has had several seizures due to his bone cancer and that she and Shepherd have to make a decision .
Webber interrogates the interns individually about Duquette 's LVAD wire , but only learns about their personal problems instead .
Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) finally accepts Duquette 's marriage proposal .
At Dandridge 's office , Grey and Shepherd , joined by Dr. Addison Montgomery - Shepherd ( Kate Walsh ) , decide to put Doc to sleep .
The hospital staff begins to arrive at the prom and Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Dr. George O'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) discuss the status of their relationship , which leads to the former admitting her love and commitment .
During the dance , Grey and Shepherd escape Dandridge and Montgomery to have a heated argument that leads to sexual intercourse .
In the meantime , as Duquette waits for Stevens alone in his room , he experiences a sudden sense of pain , and unexpectedly dies .
While Webber is sitting in the operating room gallery and reflecting on his career , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) announces Duquette 's death .
News of the death spreads , and the interns hurry to his room to find a shocked Stevens , lying on the bed , clinging to his still form .
As they each try to comfort her , the cause of his death is revealed to have been a blood clot that led to a fatal stroke .
Stevens says that if she had taken less time to dress , she would have arrived at his room sooner and could have been with him while he died .
Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) then talks to Stevens , picking her up and hugging her .
Afterward , Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , who did not know how to handle Burke 's situation , goes to his room and puts her hand on his to show him her support .
As the episode ends , Stevens confesses to Webber that she was the one responsible for the LVAD wire cut , and claiming she can not be a surgeon , quits the program .
After everyone begins going their separate ways , Grey remains torn on who she should follow : Shepherd or Dandridge .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The episode was written by series creator Shonda Rhimes and directed by filmmaker Mark Tinker , while Ed Ornelas edited it .
It was the last episode to feature Sara Ramirez as a guest star , as she began receiving star billing in the season three premiere .
Morgan , Ramirez , Thompson , Smith , Utterback , Devine , and O'Donnell reprised their roles as Duquette , Torres , Travis , Hahn , Harper , Adele , and Dandridge , respectively , while Hirsh and Hines made their first and only appearances as Claire and Natalie , respectively .
The soundtrack of the episode consisted of Pete Droge 's " Under the Waves " , Dressy Bessy 's " Side 2 " , Amos Lee 's " Colors " , Masha Qrella 's " Destination Vertical " , Kate Havnevik 's " Grace " , and Snow Patrol 's " Chasing Cars " .
The American profile of Northern Irish band Snow Patrol increased after their single was used in this episode .
Lead singer Gary Lightbody was initially uncertain about licensing a song for the soundtrack , but has since admitted that the publicity had a positive effect .
Rhimes entitled the episode " Losing My Religion " because she felt " that is what happens to each intern in this episode .
Each intern lets go of the things they 've held onto all season .
George lets go of loving Meredith .
Cristina lets go of her well - checked emotions .
Izzie is forced to let go of her idealism .
And that leads to her letting go of medicine .
Alex lets go of his rage against Izzie .
And Meredith ...
well , Meredith just lets go .
"
The costumes were designed by Mimi Melgaard ; Rhimes noted that everyone was dressed in dark funeral colors to the prom , except Stevens who was dressed in pink .
Stevens ' dress was an Amsale creation .
Monologues done by the five main characters were used in this episode .
Rhimes commented : " this was something we 'd never done and I was n't sure would work .
But you place those pages into the hands of the actors and each and every one of them layered their characters ' souls right into the dialogue .
" The episode 's theme was the prom ; Rhimes said she wanted to do it since the beginning of the season .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
" Losing My Religion " was originally broadcast on May 15 , 2006 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , along with " Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response " .
The episodes were watched by a total of 22.50 million Americans .
It represents a slight decrease in comparison to the episode airing the previous night , " 17 Seconds " , which garnered 22.60 million viewers .
The episode received an 8.0/22 Nielsen rating / share in the 18–49 demographic , ranking fifth for the week in terms of viewership , and registering as the week 's second highest - rated drama .
The episode 's rating outranked CBS 's The New Adventures of Old Christine and , the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) 's The Apprentice , and the Fox Broadcasting Company 's 24 .
The episode received mixed to negative reviews among critics .
Joel Keller of The Huffington Post expressed mixed opinions on the episode , putting the emphasis on Yang 's development , whom he deemed " transformed " by the end of the episode .
He applauded Torres ' evolution throughout the episode , and also praised Heigl 's performance and dress .
Keller criticized the non - realism of the punishment the interns received , Grey and Shepherd 's storyline being tiresome , and the cliffhanger , calling it a " lame cliché " .
Writing for the Chicago Tribune , Maureen Ryan gave a negative review of the episode , stating : " overall , the whole thing just fell a little flat . "
Though Ryan appreciated the scene of Doc 's death , she was critical of Torres ' underdevelopment , the lack of chemistry with O'Malley , and her prom dress .
Abigail Chao of Television Without Pity was also critical of Torres ' dress , but liked Heigl 's pink dress .
She also applauded Karev 's intervening to calm Stevens down , and agreed that Grey 's cliffhanger was not good .
Eyder Peralta of The Houston Chronicle criticized Stevens ' ethics for cutting Duquette 's LVAD wire , writing that she " should not be practising medicine " .
Alan Sepinwall , a former television columnist for The Star - Ledger , commented favorably on Karev " finally displaying some humanity " in the scene following Duquette 's death .
He was critical of Shepherd 's arc , however , and on the absence of severe consequences for Stevens having cut the LVAD wire , an action he called " insane and dangerous " .
This episode was included on the list for the " 25 Sexiest TV Shows on DVD " by magazine Entertainment Weekly .
It was also listed in Entertainment Weekly " 20 Unforgettable Proms " and in Starpulse 's " Top Ten TV Proms " .
AOL TV placed the hook - up scene involving Grey and Shepherd on its Top 20 of TV 's Sexiest Scenes .
In 2009 , TV Guide ranked " Losing My Religion " # 63 on its list of the 100 Greatest Episodes .
In 2013 , the magazine named Duquette 's death one of TV 's Most Heartbreaking Deaths .
In December 2011 , Wetpaint named " Losing My Religion " one of the five best episodes of the series .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Losing My Religion " at ABC.com