FREE HIT Free hit is a cricket term , relevant in One Day Internationals and Twenty20 matches .
When a bowler bowls a no - ball , in the immediate next ball the batsman can not be ruled out in any dismissal modes other than those applicable for a no - ball , namely run out , hit the ball twice and obstructing the field .
Additionally , if the ball is delivered full toss above the waist the batsman receives a free hit .
It came into international cricket in October 2007 .
ADVANTAGE GAINED Section::::Advantage gained .
The opportunity afforded by a free hit ball enables the batsman to play a more powerful shot without the fear of getting out by the most common methods ( caught or leg before wicket ) .
The suspension of these opportunities for being out result in the delivery immediately after a foot - fault no - ball being termed a free hit .
The fault lies with the fielding side , and the advantage is to the batting side .
Also , if the ball did hit the stumps , the batsman could afford to steal single runs ( a bye ) because the ball is normally considered a dead ball .
NO BALL Section::::No ball .
If the bowler delivers the ball without some part of his front foot ( either grounded or raised ) behind the popping crease , or if his back foot does not ' land within and not touching the return crease ' , this delivery is ruled a no - ball ( Law 21.5 of The Laws of Cricket ) .
FIELDING RESTRICTIONS
Section::::Fielding restrictions .
The fielding team is not allowed to change the field on the free hit ball , if the same batsman ( who received the original no - ball ) is on strike .
However , for safety reasons , if the wicketkeeper is standing up at the stumps he is allowed to move back to a more traditional position .
SIGNAL Section::::Signal .
The umpire at the bowler 's end signals that the next ball is a free hit by making circular movements in the air with one raised hand .
The free hit is carried over to the next ball if the original free hit ball is bowled wide or a no - ball ; in this case the umpire is required to signal the free hit again .