TRUCK CLASSIFICATION Truck classifications are typically based upon the maximum loaded weight of the truck ( typically using the gross vehicle weight rating ( GVWR ) and sometimes also the gross trailer weight rating ( GTWR ) , and can vary among jurisdictions .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , commercial truck classification is determined based on the vehicle 's gross vehicle weight rating ( GVWR ) .
The classes range from 1–8 .
Trucks are also classified more broadly by the Department of Transportation 's Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) , which groups classes 1–3 as light duty , 4–6 as medium duty , and 7–8 as heavy duty and a Commercial drivers license is generally required The United States Environmental Protection Agency has a separate system of emissions classifications for trucks .
The United States Census Bureau also assigned classifications in its now - discontinued Vehicle Inventory and Use Survey ( VIUS ) ( formerly Truck Inventory and Use Survey ( TIUS ) ) .
TABLE OF US GVWR CLASSIFICATIONS Section::::Table of US GVWR classifications . !
US truck class ! !
Duty classification ! !
data - sort - type="number " Weight limit ! !
Examples NOTES
ON WEIGHT CLASSES CLASS 2 Section::::Notes on weight classes .
Section::::Class 2 .
Class 2 is subdivided into Class 2a ( -ton ) and Class 2b ( -ton ) , with class 2a being , and class 2b being .
Examples of vehicles in Class 2b include the Ram 2500 , Chevrolet Silverado 2500 , and the Ford F-250 .
SUVs in Class 2b include the Ford Excursion and the Chevrolet Suburban 2500 .
Class 2a is commonly referred to as a light duty truck , with class 2b being the lowest heavy - duty class , also called the light heavy - duty class .
MEDIUM DUTY TON RATING Section::::Medium duty ton rating .
When light - duty trucks were first produced in the United States , they were rated by their payload capacity in tons ( e.g. , - , - and 1-ton ) .
Over time , payload capacities for most domestic pickup trucks have increased while the ton titles have stayed the same .
The now - imprecise ton rating is presently used to compare standard sizes , rather than actual capacities .
This has led to categorizing trucks similarly , even if their payload is different .
Therefore , the Toyota Tacoma , Dodge Dakota , Ford Ranger , Honda Ridgeline , Chevrolet S-10 , GMC S-15 and Nissan Frontier are called quarter - tons ( -ton ) .
The Ford F-150 , Chevrolet C10 / K10 , Chevrolet / GMC 1500 , Dodge 1500 , Toyota Tundra , and Nissan Titan are half - tons ( -ton ) .
The Ford F-250 , Chevrolet C20 / K20 , Chevrolet / GMC 2500 , and Dodge 2500 are three - quarter - tons ( -ton ) .
Chevrolet / GMC 's -ton suspension systems were further divided into light and heavy - duty , differentiated by 5-lug and 6 or 8-lug wheel hubs depending on year , respectively .
The Ford F-350 , Chevrolet C30 / K30 , Chevrolet / GMC 3500 , and Dodge 3500 are one tons ( 1-ton ) .
Similar schemes exist for vans and SUVs ( e.g. a 1-ton Dodge Van or a -ton GMC Suburban ) , medium duty trucks ( e.g. the Ford 1-ton ) and some military vehicles , like the ubiquitous deuce - and - a - half .
CLASS 7 Section::::Class 7 . Vehicles in Class 7 and above require a Class - B commercial driver 's license ( CDL ) to operate in the United States .
CLASS 8 Section::::Class 8 .
The Class 8 truck gross vehicle weight rating ( GVWR ) is a vehicle with a GVWR exceeding .
These include tractor trailer tractors as well as single - unit dump trucks of a GVWR over 33,000 lb ; such trucks typically have 3 or more axles .
The typical 5-axle tractor - trailer combination , also called a " semi " or " 18-wheeler " , is a Class 8 vehicle .
Standard trailers vary in length from 8 ' containers to 57 ' van trailers , with the most common length being the 53 ' trailer .
Specialized trailers for oversized loads can be considerably longer .
Commercial operation of a Class 8 vehicle in the United States requires either a Class - B CDL for non - combination vehicles , or a Class - A CDL for combination vehicles ( tractor - trailers ) .
The practical gross vehicle weight limit in the U.S. for Class 8 trucks is determined by per - axle weight limits set by the Federal Bridge Gross Weight Formula on interstate highways .
Longer 18-wheelers can weigh up to 80,000 lbs .
In most states , exceptions to these limits can be made for an Oversize load but they require special permits and handling on a designated route .
CLASS 9 / SUPER HEAVY DUTY
Section::::Class 9 / Super heavy duty .
Usually classifies a heavy , special duty Class 8 truck .
For example the Western Star 6900 is designed for off - highway vocations including logging , mining , and other similar applications .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Vehicle classifications vary among provinces in Canada , due to " differences in size and weight regulations , economic activity , physical environment , and other issues " .
While several provinces use their own classification schemes for traffic monitoring , Manitoba , Ontario , Prince Edward Island and Saskatchewan have adopted the 13-class system from the United States ' Federal Highway Administration — sometimes with modifications , or in Ontario 's case , for limited purposes .
British Columbia and Ontario also distinguish between
short- and long - combination trucks .
In accident reporting , eight jurisdictions subdivide trucks by GVWR into light and heavy classes at approximately .
EUROPEAN UNION Section::::European Union .
In the European scheme the drivers licenses are ( among others ) B for cars , C for trucks ( lorries ) , D for buses , and are limited by the GVWR .
Divides into two types :
* appending a number to the class denotes the " light " versions of said class .
*
* appending the letter E allows for larger trailers ( GTWR ) .
* LIST OF
TRUCK TYPES
* Truck ( Lorry ) See List of truck types * Box truck
* Cab forward
* Chassis cab * Conversion van * Flatbed truck * Logging truck
* Panel van * Platform truck
* Pickup truck * Sport utility vehicle * Tractor unit ( Semi tractor ) * Tow truck * Van GALLERY
SEE ALSO
* Car classification * Corporate Average Fuel Economy ( CAFE ) * Commercial vehicle
* Curb weight
* Driver 's license
* Gross weight : * Gross axle weight rating ( GAWR ) *
Gross combined weight rating ( GCWR ) * Gross trailer weight rating ( GTWR )
* Gross vehicle weight rating ( GVWR ) * Large goods vehicle
* List of truck types * Tow hitch
* Trailer * Vehicle category
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Reducing CO2 emissions from Heavy - Duty Vehicles ( European Union ) .
* Source in german