SERVICE ANIMAL Service animals are animals that have been trained to perform tasks that assist disabled people .
Service animals may also be referred to as assistance animals , assist animals , or helper animals depending on the country and the animal 's function .
Dogs are the most common service animals , assisting people in many different ways since at least 1927 .
Other animals such as pigs , birds , and horses have also been documented .
The service animal is not required by the ADA to wear a vest , ID tag or a specific harness .
In places of public accommodation in the United States , only dogs ( and in some cases miniature horses ) are legally considered service animals .
It is legal in certain states to have service " animals " .
For instance , in Montana all animals are allowed at state level .
Many cats , birds , and even a wolf are working to help mitigate people 's disabilities in Montana .
It is also legal to train your own service animal in the United States .
There is a broader definition for assistance animals under the US Fair Housing Act as well as a broader definition for service animals under the US Air Carrier Access Act .
In the United States , prior to a revision of the Americans with Disabilities Act going into effect March 15 , 2011 types of animals other than service dogs and miniature horses were protected at least on the Federal level ; individual states could expand coverage .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
The international assistance animal community has categorized three types of assistance animals : * Guide animal — to guide the blind * * Hearing animal — to signal the hearing impaired * * Service animal — to do work for persons with disabilities other than blindness or deafness .
* ACCESS Section::::Access .
Despite regulations or rules that deny access to animals in restaurants and other public places , in many countries , guide dogs , other types of assistance dogs , and in cases miniature horses , are protected by law , and therefore may accompany their handlers in most places that are open to the public .
Laws and regulations vary worldwide :
*
In the United States , the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 prohibits any business , government agency , or other organization that provides access to the general public from barring guide dogs .
However , religious organizations are not required to provide such access .
Current federal regulations define " service animal " for ADA purposes to exclude all species of animals other than domestic dogs and miniature horses .
Other laws , though , still provide broader definitions in other areas .
For instance , the Department of Transportation 's regulations enacting the Air Carrier Access Act permit " dogs and other service animals " to accompany passengers on commercial airlines .
The Fair Housing Act also requires housing providers to permit service animals ( including comfort and emotional support animals ) without species restrictions in housing .
* Revised ADA Requirements : " Beginning on March 15 , 2011 , only dogs are recognized as service animals under titles II and III of the ADA .
A service animal is a dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for a person with a disability .
Generally , title II and title III entities must permit service animals to accompany people with disabilities in all areas where members of the public are allowed to go .
In addition to the provisions about service dogs , the Department 's revised ADA regulations have a new , separate provision about miniature horses that have been individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities .
( Miniature horses generally range in height from 24 inches to 34 inches measured to the shoulders and generally weigh between 70 and 100 pounds . )
Entities covered by the ADA must modify their policies to permit miniature horses where reasonable .
The regulations set out four assessment factors to assist entities in determining whether miniature horses can be accommodated in their facility .
The assessment factors are ( 1 ) whether the miniature horse is housebroken ; ( 2 ) whether the miniature horse is under the owner 's control ; ( 3 ) whether the facility can accommodate the miniature horse 's type , size , and weight ; and ( 4 ) whether the miniature horse 's presence will not compromise legitimate safety requirements necessary for safe operation of the facility .
" , * In most South American countries and Mexico , guide dog access depends solely upon the goodwill of the owner or manager .
In more tourist - heavy areas , guide dogs are generally welcomed without problems .
In Brazil , however , a 2006 federal decree requires allowance of guide dogs in all public and open to public places .
The Brasília Metro has developed a program which trains guide dogs to ride it .
*
In Europe , the situation varies by location .
Some countries have laws that govern the entire country and sometimes the decision is left up to the respective regions .
*
In Australia , the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 protects all assistance dog handlers .
Current laws may not ensure that assistance dog users can always have their service animals present in all situations .
Each state and territory has its own laws , which mainly pertain to guide dogs .
Queensland has introduced the Guide Hearing and Assistance Dog Act 2009 that covers all certified assistance dogs .
*
In Canada , guide dogs along with other service animals are allowed anywhere that the general public is allowed , as long as the owner is in control of them .
Fines for denying a service animal access can be up to $ 3000 in Alberta , Canada .
*
In South Korea , it is illegal to deny access to guide dogs in any areas that are open to the public .
Violators are fined for no more than 2 million won .
OVERALL VIEW OF A SERVICE ANIMAL Section::::Overall view of a service animal .
Service animals can be of many species and come in many sizes .
Dogs , cats , dolphins , miniature horses , monkeys , ducks , ferrets , and parrots have all been trained to perform specific duties of a service animal , though the type of animal that may be registered as a " service animal " may vary depending on legal definitions .
The people that can qualify for a service animal can have a range of physical and/or mental disabilities .
A guide animal is an animal specifically trained to assist visually impaired persons to navigate in public .
These animals may be trained to open doors , recognize traffic signals , guide their owners safely across public streets , and navigate through crowds of people .
A mobility animal may perform similar services for a person with physical disabilities , as well as assisting with balance or falling issues .
Hearing animals are trained to assist hearing - impaired or deaf persons .
These animals may be trained to respond to doorbells or a ringing phone or to tug their owners toward a person who is speaking to them .
Psychiatric animals can be trained to provide deep - pressure therapy by lying on top of a person who may be suffering from PTSD flashbacks , overstimulation , or acute anxiety .
Similarly , autism dogs have been recently introduced to recognize and respond to the needs of people with autism spectrum disorder ; some persons with ASD state that they are more comfortable interacting with animals than with human caregivers due to issues regarding eye contact , touch , and socialization.{cnSept=2018 } Medical emergency animals can assist in medical emergency and perform such services as clearing an area in the event of a grand mal seizure , fetching medication or other necessary items , alerting others in the event of a medical episode ; some may even be trained to call emergency services through use of a telephone with specially designed oversized buttons .
The animals also provide important companionship and emotional support for owners who might otherwise be isolated due to disability .
It is important to note , however , that providing " important companionship and emotional support for owners " is not a task that would qualify an animal as a service animal .
In the US , it is illegal to bring an animal to non - pet friendly places simply because it provides companionship or emotional support .
Additionally , saying your animal is a service animal for such reasons is illegal.{cnSept=2018 } The owners in turn often derive a sense of accomplishment and importance from attending to the needs of their animals .
ANIMALS FOR INDIVIDUAL ASSISTANCE Section::::Animals for individual assistance .
Many service animals may be trained to perform tasks to help their disabled partners live independent lives .
Such animals include : *
Seizure sensing dogs , trained to sense epileptic seizures in their partner .
Dogs can support a litany of both physical and mental disabilities .
* Capuchin monkeys , which can be trained to perform manual tasks such as grasping items , operating knobs and switches , and turning the pages of a book .
MINIATURE HORSE Section::::Miniature horse .
A miniature horse can be trained to guide the blind , to pull wheelchairs , or as support for persons with Parkinson 's disease .
A full - grown miniature horse can vary from 26 " to 38 " .
There are two main registering organizations .
The American Miniature Horse Association limits height to 34 " whereas the American Miniature Horse Registry has a division for horses 34 " to 38 " .
There are a number of advantages of miniature horses as service animals .
Miniature horses may be chosen by people whose religion considers dogs to be unclean or who have serious allergies to dogs , as well as phobias .
Miniature horses have average lifespans of 30–40 years ( longer than those of both service dogs and monkeys ) and take 6 months to a year of training , done only by professional trainers .
Guide horse users report they typically are immediately recognized as a working service animal , whereas a dog may be mistaken for a pet .
Miniature horses have been praised for their excellent range of vision ( 350 degrees ) , good memories , calm nature , focused demeanor , and good cost - effectiveness .
HELPER MONKEY Section::::Helper monkey .
A helper monkey is a type of assistance animal , similar to an assistance dog , that is specially trained to help people with quadriplegia , severe spinal cord injuries , or other mobility impairments .
Helper monkeys are usually trained in schools by private organizations , taking 7 years to train , and are able to serve 25–30 years ( two to three times longer than a guide dog ) .
After being socialized in a human home as infants , the monkeys undergo extensive training before being placed with an individual needing assistance .
Around the house , the monkeys assist in daily living by doing tasks including microwaving food , washing their human 's face , and opening drink bottles .
In 2010 , the U.S. federal government revised its definition of service animal under the Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) .
Non - human primates are no longer recognized as service animals under the ADA .
The American Veterinary Medical Association does not support the use of nonhuman primates as assistance animals because of animal welfare concerns , the potential for serious injury to people , and risks that primates may transfer dangerous diseases to humans .
SEE ALSO
* Service dog * Emotional support animal — an animal that makes the owner feel better emotionally * Animal - assisted therapy — therapy that uses contact with animals to improve a patient 's social , emotional , or cognitive functioning * Working animal — an animal that is trained to engage in productive tasks * Guide horse — assistance animal to blind users
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Moorehead , Daniel .
Animals in Human Society : Amazing Creatures Who Share Our Planet .
Lanham , UP of America , 2015 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Disabilities and Medical Conditions - TSA ( Transport Security Administration )
* " Creature Comforts " from the New York Times
* Capuchin monkey helpers
- MSNBC * Americans with Disabilities Act resources
* Guide Horse Foundation * The Miniature Horse as a Service Animal