LIST OF WINNIE - THE - POOH CHARACTERS
This is a list of characters appearing in the Winnie - the - Pooh books and the Disney adaptations of the series .
MAIN CHARACTERS WINNIE - THE - POOH Section::::Main characters .
Section::::Winnie - the - Pooh .
Winnie - the - Pooh , or Pooh for short , is an anthropomorphic , soft - voiced , cuddly , loveable and quiet toy bear and the main protagonist .
Despite being naïve and slow - witted , he is a friendly , thoughtful and sometimes insightful character who is always willing to help his friends and try his best .
A prime motivation is his love for honey , which quite often leads to trouble .
In the books , Pooh is a talented poet , and the stories are frequently punctuated by his poems and " hums . "
He is humble about his slow - wittedness , but comfortable with his creative gifts .
In the Disney adaptations , Pooh has a soft voice , wears a red shirt and his catchphrases are " Oh , Bother ! " and " Think , think , think " .
He has been voiced by Sterling Holloway ( 1965–1977 ) , Hal Smith ( 1981–1986 ) , and by Jim Cummings ( 1988–present ) .
Cummings reprised his role for the Christopher Robin film .
Winnie the Pooh is introduced to readers as a loveable bear but has mental health issues .
Pooh 's love for honey lead to a result in the diagnosis of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder ( OCD ) due to his repetitive eating habits and actions .
CHRISTOPHER ROBIN
Section::::Christopher Robin .
The only human character in the story books , he has a " cheerful " and compassionate personality and is someone whom Pooh and the others look up to .
Despite being a child , he is much wiser and more mature than many of the other characters .
Pooh considers both Christopher Robin and Piglet to be his best friends .
Christopher Robin matures considerably over the course of the books .
Some chapters in The House at Pooh Corner cover Christopher Robin beginning to go to school and his increasing book - learning .
In the final chapter , Christopher Robin leaves his stuffed animals behind and asks Pooh to understand and to always remember him .
In the Disney adaptations , he is 10 years old and only goes to day school .
As in the books , he is best friends with both Piglet and Pooh , and he and Pooh always do nothing together .
He has a best friend , Darby , a 6-year - old girl who hosts My Friends Tigger & Pooh , but he only appeared in the show twice .
Christopher Robin 's is hard to determine .
Because he is the only human character in this series , you would think his mental health diagnosis would be clear .
Christopher Robins diagnosis is unclear because he shows early signs of multiple illness but too early to fully diagnose according to the DSM - IV .
Christopher Robin is voiced by Bruce Reitherman ( 1965–1966 ) , Robie Lester ( A Happy Birthday Party with Winnie the Pooh ) , Jon Walmsley ( 1967–1968 ) , Ginny Tyler ( Disneyland Records ) , Timothy Turner ( 1974 ) , Kim Christianson ( 1983 ) , Tim Hoskins ( 1988–1991 ) , Edan Gross ( 1991 ) , Brady Bluhm ( 1997–1999 ) , Tom Attenborough ( 2000 ) , Tom Wheatley ( 2003 ) , William Green ( 2002 ) , Paul Tiesler ( 2001–2003 ) , Struan Erlenborn ( 2007–2010 ) , Jack Boulter ( 2011 ) , and Oliver Bell ( 2017 ) .
Christopher Robin starred in his own film , portrayed by Ewan McGregor as an adult and Orton O'Brien
a child ( 2018 ) .
PIGLET Section::::Piglet .
Pooh 's best friend besides Christopher Robin .
In the books he is a timorous small animal , who often takes his lead from Pooh unless overcome by fear .
But increasingly through the stories he shows himself to be very brave when faced with a crisis and given sufficient encouragement ( usually by Pooh ) .
He is fond of " haycorns " .
In the Disney series he is kind , gentle and ordinarily quite shy , but with Pooh by his side , he often overcomes his fears .
His catchphrase is " Oh , D - D - Dear ! " .
Piglet lives in a beech tree that he likes to keep neat and tidy , and can sing very well .
He has been voiced by John Fiedler ( 1968–2005 ) , Robie Lester ( Disneyland Records ) , Phil Baron ( 1983–1986 ) , Travis Oates ( 2005–present ) , and in the Christopher Robin film , he was voiced by Nick Mohammed .
Piglet 's classification in the mental illness world is Generalized Anxiety Disorder .
This is his classification due to the fact that Piglet always needs to have Pooh around .
Everything that Pooh does , piglet always makes sure he is included in the plans .
He never wants to lose Pooh as a best friend and always has a flustered appearance .
EEYORE Section::::Eeyore .
Eeyore is Pooh 's ever - glum , sarcastic and pessimistic donkey friend who has trouble keeping his tail attached to his bottom , since the nail keeps falling out .
Eeyore has a house made of sticks , which falls apart ( many times in the Disney films as a running gag ) and has to be rebuilt .
In the Disney cartoons , Eeyore is slow - talking and more cautious than some of the other animals , and is often reluctant to go along with their actions , but usually does not bother trying to oppose anyone because he believes it to be futile to try .
His catchphrase is " Thanks for noticing " as indicated to himself .
He has been voiced by Ralph Wright ( 1966–1983 ) , Thurl Ravenscroft ( Disneyland Records ) , Ron Feinberg ( 1981 ) , Ron Gans ( 1983–1986 ) , Peter Cullen ( 1988–2010 , 2017–present ) , Bud Luckey ( 2011–2014 ) , and in the Christopher Robin film , he was voiced by Brad Garrett .
Eeyore 's signature "
Thanks for noticing " quote is n't something to think lightly about .
He is constantly down throughout the whole Winnie the Pooh series and always chooses to be secluded from the group or from any gatherings his animal friends have .
He clearly shows his lack of interest in pleasurable activities and lack of energy in his daily life .
DSM - IV would confirm Eeyore 's mental health condition as Major Depressive Disorder .
This disease explains all of his melancholy actions .
KANGA
Section::::Kanga .
Kanga is a female kangaroo and the doting mother of Roo .
The two live in a house near the Sandy Pit in the northwestern part of the forest .
Kanga is the only female character to appear in the books .
She was based on a stuffed toy that belonged to Christopher Robin Milne .
When Kanga and Roo first come to the forest in chapter seven of Winnie - the - Pooh , everyone thinks Kanga is a fierce animal , but discover this to be untrue and become friends with her .
In the books , when Tigger comes to the forest , she welcomes him into her home , attempts to find him food he likes and allows him to live with her and Roo .
After this , Kanga treats him much the way she does her own son .
Kanga is kind - hearted , calm , patient and docile .
She likes to keep things clean and organized , and offers motherly advice and food to anyone who asks her .
She is protective over Roo , almost obsessively , and treats him with kind words and gentle discipline .
She also has a sense of humor , as revealed in chapter seven of Winnie - the - Pooh when Rabbit connives to kidnap Roo , leaving Piglet in his place ; Kanga pretends not to notice that Piglet is not Roo and proceeds to give him Roo 's usual bath , much to Piglet 's dismay .
In the Disney adaptations , Kanga 's personality is unchanged ( though she is a little more sensible and does give Roo some level of independence ) , but she plays a slightly lesser role and does not appear as often as Roo does .
Additionally , Tigger lives in his own house instead of with Kanga ( although he is seen frequently visiting her house ) .
Kanga also has a love for carrots .
She has been voiced by Barbara Luddy ( 1965–1977 ) , Robie Lester ( Disneyland Records ) , Julie McWhirter ( 1983 ) , Patricia Parris ( 1988–1991 ) , Tress MacNeille ( 1994–1999 ) , Kath Soucie ( 2000–2010 ) , Kristen Anderson - Lopez ( 2011–present ) , and in the film Christopher Robin ( 2018 ) , she was voiced by Sophie Okonedo .
ROO Section::::Roo .
Kanga 's cheerful , playful and energetic joey , who is her son and moved to the Hundred Acre Wood with her .
His best friend is a young Heffalump named Lumpy who love to play with him .
Roo is the youngest of the main characters .
Voiced in the Disney films by Clint Howard ( 1966–1977 ) , Robie Lester ( Disneyland Records ) , Dori Whitaker ( 1974 ) , Dick Billingsley ( 1983 ) , Kim Christianson ( 1983–1986 ) , Nicholas Melody ( 1988–1990 ) , Nikita Hopkins ( 1994–2005 ) , Jimmy Bennett ( 2004–2005 ) , Max Burkholder ( 2007–2010 ) , Wyatt Hall ( 2011 ) , and Sara Sheen ( 2018 ) .
RABBIT Section::::Rabbit .
Rabbit is one of the characters not based on a toy once owned by Christopher Robin Milne .
He was said to be based on a real rabbit where they lived .
He is friendly , yet capable of being impatient and irritable .
He fancies himself the smartest animal in the Hundred Acre Wood , since he is not scatterbrained like Owl .
He insists on doing things his way and is obsessed with rules , planning and order .
He often bosses others around , but deep down , he cares a lot about his friends .
In the Walt Disney films , he takes pride in his garden and dislikes it when the other characters disrupt it .
Disney 's Rabbit likes gardening , cleaning , and magic tricks .
Voiced in the Disney films by Junius Matthews ( 1965–1977 ) , Robie Lester ( A Happy Birthday Party with Winnie the Pooh ) , Dallas McKennon ( Disneyland Records ) , Ray Erlenborn ( 1983 ) ,
Will Ryan ( 1983–1986 ) , Ken Sansom ( 1988–2010 ) ,
Tom Kenny ( 2011–present ) , and in the Christopher Robin film , he was voiced by Peter Capaldi .
TIGGER Section::::Tigger .
Pooh 's exuberant , happy , less - than - responsible and sometimes trouble - making tiger friend .
He bounces around , especially bouncing on others .
He is full of energy , outgoing , and likes to have fun and is so overconfident that he thinks that any task is " what tiggers do best " .
He becomes Roo 's best friend and later Pooh 's when Roo and Lumpy become best friends .
In the Disney films Tigger commonly mispronounces words , like ' ridickerus ' ( ridiculous ) or ' vill - i - an ' ( villain ) and often causes chaos rather than good .
However , Tigger is also shown to be tough , fearless , optimistic and resourceful ; he is shown to be protective of Roo when Kanga 's not around , as seen in " Too Smart For Strangers " .
His main catchphrase is " Hoo Hoo Hoo Hoo ! "
when he is happy .
He has been voiced by Paul Winchell ( 1968–1999 ) , Sam Edwards ( Disneyland Records ) ,
Will Ryan ( 1983–1986 ) , and Jim Cummings ( 1989–present ) .
Cummings reprised his role for the Christopher Robin film .
He often uses nicknames for the other characters , calling Pooh " Pooh Boy " , " Fluff Boy " and " Buddy Bear " , Rabbit " Ol' Long Ears " , " Fluffface " and " Bunny Boy " , and Eeyore
" Donkey Boy " ( with Tigger pronouncing it as ' dunkey ' ) .
In The Tigger Movie and The Book of Pooh , Tigger also sometimes calls Owl " Beak Lips " .
OWL Section::::Owl .
Owl is the stuffy and talkative eldest main character who presents himself as a mentor and teacher to the others .
He was not based on a stuffed toy , so in the illustrations he looks more like a live animal .
Owl and most of his friends believe that he is the most intelligent animal in the wood , but he is really quite scatterbrained .
He often rambles on into long - winded speeches and uses words that his friends do not understand .
Though Owl likes to present himself as very knowledgeable , like most of the other characters he does not spell very well ; he even spells his own name " Wol " .
When Pooh comes to him for help in writing a birthday greeting for Eeyore , Owl tells Pooh that he is writing , " A very happy birthday with love from Pooh , " but in fact writes " HIPY PAPY BTHUTHDTH THUTHDA BTHUTHDY .
" Pooh , who can not read or write himself , goes on his way happy with Owl 's work and grateful for his help .
When Rabbit ( who is quite literate ) comes to Owl to discuss a notice that Christopher Robin has left , Owl can not read the notice .
But rather than admit this , Owl anxiously bluffs his way through the conversation until he finally tricks Rabbit into reading the notice out loud , at which point Owl resumes his wise demeanor as if he had known all along what it said .
In the books , Owl has a superior but kindly manner towards the others .
He can be cross and easily annoyed , especially when his friends ignore or interrupt his long - winded speeches .
He sometimes wears reading glasses and he uses his talons for hands , not his wings like in the Disney version .
He lives in a tree known as The Chestnuts , described as an " old world residence of great charm " .
That house is blown down by a storm in the eighth chapter of The House at Pooh Corner .
Eeyore eventually discovers what he believes is the perfect new house for Owl , apparently without noticing that it is actually Piglet 's house .
Nonetheless , Piglet offers the house to Owl .
Owl calls his new home " The Wolery " .
In the Disney adaptations , Owl is much more jovial and friendly .
He speaks with a strong Southern English accent .
He enjoys telling stories about his relatives , including his cousin , Dexter , whenever something reminds him of one , but many of his stories are pointless or absurd .
His house blows down and he moves into Piglet 's house in Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day , but these events are disregarded from Winnie the Pooh and a Day for Eeyore onward .
In Welcome to Pooh Corner , Owl always wears glasses and loves to cook .
He does not appear in My Friends Tigger and Pooh .
He has been voiced by Hal Smith ( 1966–1991 ) , Junius Matthews ( A Happy Birthday Party with Winnie the Pooh ) , Sam Edwards ( Disneyland Records ) , Andre Stojka ( 1997–2007 ) , Craig Ferguson ( 2011–present ) , and in the Christopher Robin film , he was voiced by Toby Jones .
MINOR CHARACTERS IN THE BOOKS
BEES Section::::Minor characters in the books .
Section::::Bees .
A swarm of honeybees makes their debut in the very first chapter .
They live in the hive where Pooh tries to get his honey .
They frequently appear in virtually every version of the Disney adaptations .
There appear to be several different beehives in the Hundred Acre Wood .
Whenever Pooh and his friends encounter the bees , trouble usually occurs with the bees going after them .
RABBIT 'S FRIENDS AND RELATIONS Section::::Rabbit 's friends and relations .
Many small mammals and insects in the books are collectively known as Rabbit 's Friends and Relations .
They do not generally do much or have much character development , and only a few of them are named .
* Alexander Beetle is briefly mentioned on page 119 of Winnie - the - Pooh , and he appears to have become upset and hidden himself in a crack for two days , then went to live with his aunt .
He is also the subject of a poem in Now
We Are Six .
* Small ( short for Very Small Beetle ) is the subject of a search that Rabbit organizes to find him .
Making his debut in My Friends Tigger & Pooh , he is the first new Milne character to appear in the Disney adaptations since the debut of Tigger in Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day .
* Henry Rush is a beetle .
He had a brief mention in The House at Pooh Corner , and has been expanded in Return to the Hundred Acre Wood .
He attended the Spelling Bee , kept score at the cricket game , and danced at the Harvest Festival .
*
Late and Early are two friends mentioned briefly at the end of The House at Pooh Corner and expanded in Return to the Hundred Acre Wood .
They attended Christopher Robin 's coming home party and received sugar mice .
They also attended the Spelling Bee .
Although it is never mentioned what species they are , illustrations point to them being mice .
* Smallest - of - All , or S. of A. for short , is mentioned near the end of The House at Pooh Corner and near the beginning of Return to the Hundred Acre Wood .
He has a tendency to be unsure of what he sees .
His species is never revealed .
*
Rabbit 's family appears alongside Rabbit in the books .
Many relatives appear in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh episode " Party Poohper " and he occasionally mentions them at other times in the Disney adaptations .
HEFFALUMPS Section::::Heffalumps .
Heffalumps are elephant - like monsters first mentioned in the fifth chapter of the first book and in the third chapter of the second .
In the books , Piglet twice has a run - in with a Heffalump that is only a figment of his imagination .
The Disney version establishes them as real creatures .
Like Pooh imagined in the books , Heffalumps are fond of honey and like to take it for themselves .
There have been several real Heffalump characters in the Disney version .
Some Heffalumps are villainous creatures and some are genuinely good .
Lumpy
the heffalump is Roo 's good friend , appearing in Pooh 's Heffalump Movie and My Friends Tigger and Pooh .
WOOZLES Section::::Woozles .
A Woozle is a weasel - like monster imagined by the characters in the third and ninth chapters of Winnie - the - Pooh .
No Woozles actually appear in A. A. Milne 's original stories , but the book depicts them as living in cold , snowy places .
They are first mentioned when Pooh and Piglet attempt to capture one , which they assume made the tracks in the snow going around a larch spinney .
The more they follow them , the more sets of tracks they find , but Christopher Robin shows them that the tracks around the spinney are their own .
Woozles appear in the song " Heffalumps and Woozles " in Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day , which establishes their fondness for stealing honey and their association with Heffalumps .
In The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh , Woozles are real creatures .
A Woozle named Stan and his sidekick Heff the Heffalump are recurring villains .
They once recruited a giant Woozle named Wooster ( also voiced by Jim Cummings ) who turned against them when Pooh and his friends taught him the value of friendship .
Woozles do not appear in the Disney adaptations nearly as often as Heffalumps do and , unlike Heffalumps , always attempt to act as villains , with Wooster being the only one to change his mind on this .
JAGULARS Section::::Jagulars .
Jagulars are imagined jaguar - like fierce creatures that are only mentioned in the fourth chapter of The House at Pooh Corner , in which Pooh and Piglet mistake Tigger for one .
According to Pooh , they always yell " Help " ( or " Halloo " in Winnie the Pooh and Tigger Too ! ) , hang in trees , and drop on you when you look up .
Jagulars have yet to actually appear in any Disney adaptations .
Their most prominent role to date is in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh where they are mentioned more often and are the main antagonists in a couple of episodes .
THE BACKSON Section::::The Backson .
The Backson is a creature imagined by the characters after misunderstanding Christopher Robin 's note , which meant he would be " back soon " from school .
He is mentioned but not seen in The House at Pooh Corner as " the Spotted or Herbaceous Backson "
He is the main antagonist in Winnie the Pooh where the animals think he has captured Christopher Robin .
Owl describes him as a large , ugly , mean and scary purple and blue creature who ruins or destroys many everyday items , such as books , socks and crayons .
Pooh and his friends build a trap to try to capture him ( a pit with a trail of books , socks , dishes , toys and other items leading to it ) , but Christopher Robin reveals that he was never captured , just away at school .
At the end of the film , the Backson turns out to be real , but he is a kind and helpful creature who wants to return people 's things to them .
However , the trap does capture him , as he picks up all the items and then falls into the pit .
The Backson is voiced by Huell Howser .
SCARY TREES
Section::::Scary trees .
Evil living trees that tend to frighten those who encounter them .
They first appeared in Boo to You Too !
Winnie the Pooh where Piglet encounters two of them while fleeing in the woods .
They make most of their appearances in video games .
UNCLE ROBERT Section::::Uncle Robert .
Owl 's uncle whose portrait hangs on Owl 's wall .
He is mentioned in the eighth chapter of The House at Pooh Corner , but never actually appears .
His portrait appears in Winnie the Pooh and a Day for Eeyore when Owl says Uncle Robert celebrated his 103rd birthday , despite claiming to be 97 .
Return to the Hundred Acre Wood reveals that Uncle Robert is dead , but Owl keeps his ashes in a vase and attempts to write his biography .
CHARACTERS IN RETURN TO THE HUNDRED ACRE WOOD
LOTTIE Section::::Characters in Return to the Hundred Acre Wood .
Section::::Lottie .
Lottie is an otter and the only new major character in Return to the Hundred Acre Wood .
Lottie is a " feisty " character who is also good at cricket and insists on proper etiquette .
She wears a pearl necklace and can play the mouth organ , but is a little snide and snobby in her remarks .
She makes her home in a wooden trunk filled with water that she calls Fortitude Hall .
According to Benedictus , " Lottie the Otter truly embodies Winnie - the - Pooh 's values of friendship and adventure seen throughout Milne 's work , thus making the perfect companion for everyone 's favourite bear . " GRANDAD BUCK Section::::Grandad Buck .
Grandad Buck is Rabbit 's grandfather .
He wears glasses and is described as " Very Ancient and the Head of the Rabbit Family " .
He does not entirely approve of Rabbit , but gives him advice anyway .
He knew Owl 's late Uncle Robert , who sent him letters .
THESAURUS Section::::Thesaurus .
A Thesaurus is what Piglet imagines to be a large reptilian creature in a similar way to how the characters imagined Heffalumps and other creatures in the original books .
Even after Piglet learns what the word " thesaurus " means , he still imagines it to be an animal .
MAJOR CHARACTERS CREATED BY DISNEY THE NARRATOR Section::::Major characters created by Disney .
Section::::The Narrator .
The storyteller who speaks off - screen .
Sometimes the characters , who are aware that they are in a book , speak with him while facing him .
They sometimes affectionately call him " Mr. Narrator " .
He sometimes uses his position to help the characters , since he can manipulate the book and pages .
Some stories , such as have a narrator , but omit the " book " feature , so the characters are unaware of him .
Welcome to Pooh Corner is the only time when viewers actually see his face .
He does not appear at all in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh , Piglet 's Big Movie and Pooh 's Heffalump Movie ( in Pooh 's Heffalump Movie , Pooh is the narrator ) .
He is the only Disney - only character who returns for Winnie the Pooh .
Typically , he speaks with a Southern English Accent .
Voiced by Sebastian Cabot , Laurie Main , David Warner , John Hurt , David Ogden Stiers , Michael York and
most recently John Cleese GOPHER Section::::Gopher .
Gopher is a fictional gray anthropomorphic bucktoothed gopher with a habit of whistling out his sibilant consonants .
He is based on the beaver in Lady and the Tramp .
He often accidentally falls into one of the many holes he makes in the forest ground by forgetting to watch where he is going .
Gopher first appears in Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree and regularly breaks the fourth wall by pointing out that he is " not in the book " , although this simply means that he is ' not in the Phone Book ' , and the purpose of his statement being to get better business .
Originally , he was intended to replace Piglet , but he later became his own character .
He also appears in Winnie the Pooh and the Blustery Day with a smaller role , warning Pooh about the " Windsday " .
Gopher is a much more prominent character in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh .
The series depicts him as a hard worker who takes pride in building tunnels and doing other work , and enjoys blowing things up with dynamite .
Gopher and Rabbit often disagree with and complain at each other .
In the episode " Lights Out " , he is afraid of the dark ( mostly instigated by Tigger 's claims of dangerous creatures living within his dark tunnels ) .
His grandfather also appears .
Gopher 's most recent appearances were in A Winnie the Pooh Thanksgiving , Winnie the Pooh : A Valentine for You and Boo to You Too !
Winnie the Pooh .
The latter was included as part of Pooh 's Heffalump Halloween Movie .
Gopher was notably absent from the 2011 film .
Voiced by Howard Morris ( 1965–1977 ) , Dallas McKennon ( Disneyland Records ) , and most recently Michael Gough ( 1988–2002 ) KESSIE Section::::Kessie .
Kessie is a blue bird with a white belly .
She debuted in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh episode " Find Her , Keep Her " .
Kessie is cheerful , brave and eager to prove herself .
As a baby , Rabbit saved her from a snowstorm and she came to live with him and nicknamed him " Rabbie " .
Rabbit was very protective of her and initially did not want her to fly .
After she finally learned to fly , she migrated south for the winter , despite a reluctant Rabbit , but returned in " A Bird in the Hand " , where she is now older .
In later appearances , she has reverted to being a young bird .
After appearing in Seasons of Giving , Kessie was relaunched as a main character in The Book of Pooh , her first regular role , though after the series , Kessie is never seen or mentioned again .
Voiced by Laura Mooney , Stephanie D'Abruzzo and Amanda Maddock .
LUMPY
Section::::Lumpy .
Heffridge Trumpler Brompet " Lumpy " Heffalump , IV is a young lavender Heffalump with a tuft of purple hair on his head , a furry bobble - tail and a British accent and is Roo 's closest best friend .
He lives in a part of the forest called Heffalump Hollow with his mother .
He has a stuffed alligator named Alvin and enjoys a snack called rumpledoodles .
Lumpy debuts in Pooh 's Heffalump Movie .
The characters were initially afraid of Heffalumps and set out to capture one .
Likewise , Lumpy 's mother told him not to leave Heffalump Hollow because of scary creatures outside of it .
After Roo " captured " Lumpy , they became best friends and were not afraid of each other any more .
Lumpy also features in Pooh 's Heffalump Halloween Movie and My Friends Tigger & Pooh .
After nearly a decade of absence , Lumpy appears in Kingdom Hearts III in his Kingdom Hearts debut when Sora returns to the 100 Acre Wood reuniting with Pooh and the others .
Voiced by Kyle Stanger .
DARBY Section::::Darby .
Darby is a 6-year - old feisty , imaginative and tomboyish red - headed girl who is the hostess of My Friends Tigger & Pooh and is believed to be Christopher Robin 's younger best friend and sister .
She is the leader of the problem - solving Super Sleuths along with Tigger , Pooh and her pet puppy Buster .
They are the only four characters to appear in every episode .
Darby is brave , inquisitive , clever and imaginative .
Her catchphrases are " Time to slap my cap " and " Good sleuthin ' , everyone ! "
For the most part , she replaced Christopher Robin , who was away at school and rarely appears in the My Friends Tigger and Pooh , but the episode " Christopher Froggin " reveals that she is Christopher Robin 's young best friend .
Christopher Robin only appeared in two episodes .
After the cancellation of the series , she and other new characters from the series ceased appearing , until returning in 2016 when the series returned on Disney Junior for Pooh 's 90th anniversary .
Voiced by Chloë Grace Moretz .
BUSTER
Section::::Buster .
Buster is Darby 's beloved and curious pet puppy and sidekick in My Friends Tigger & Pooh .
He is white and wears a red collar with a gold tag .
He appears in every episode and is a member of the Super Sleuths .
Though he often seems to be only tagging along with the group , he is often a valuable asset in their work .
Buster likes to yap loudly when he is excited or on the scent of something .
Voiced by Dee Bradley Baker RECURRING CHARACTERS IN THE NEW ADVENTURES OF WINNIE
THE POOH BIRDZILLA Section::::Recurring characters in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh .
Section::::Birdzilla .
A Dragon - like monster that appeared in the episode
" Pooh Oughta Be in Pictures " , it was based on Godzilla .
BUGS Section::::Bugs .
A swarm of green insects who invade Rabbit 's garden in several episodes of The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh and try to eat his vegetables .
They resemble caterpillars , but are much shorter and have only six limbs .
The leader wears an old - fashioned bicorne and acts like an army general .
They are the main antagonists in Winnie the Pooh and Christmas Too .
CHRISTOPHER ROBIN 'S MOTHER
Section::::Christopher Robin 's mother .
Appearing only in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh and in , Christopher Robin 's mother 's face is never shown .
She is normally seen from behind , and when we see the front of her , she is usually seen from the chest down .
She enforces the rules on her son , but is usually calm and patient with him and loves him very much .
His father is never seen or mentioned .
Just like her son , she has light brown hair .
Voiced by Patricia Parris and most recently Vicki Kenderes - Eibner .
CROWS Section::::Crows .
A flock of crows appears in several episodes of The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh trying to steal Rabbit 's vegetables .
There are commonly three or four of them .
A bigger and more fiendish version of the crows appear only in " A Very Very Large Animal " stealing food from a picnic and eating corn in Rabbit 's garden .
A redesigned version of the crows appears briefly in Springtime with Roo .
DEXTER Section::::Dexter .
Owl 's young cousin who wears glasses .
He appeared in " Owl in the Family " and " The Bug Stops Here " .
In the former , his parents Torbet and Ophelia appear , and in the latter , he becomes friends with Roo , who is the same age as him , while Pooh babysits them .
He talks in a similar manner to Owl .
Voiced by Hal Smith .
GRANDFATHER GOPHER Section::::Grandfather Gopher .
Gopher 's grandfather who prefers to " dream " rather than " do " .
Gopher calls him " Grandpappy " .
He appears in " To Dream the Impossible Scheme " during the " Pewter Pickaxe " contest that Gopher is desperate to see him win by building an above - ground underground city .
He also appears briefly in " Easy Come , Easy Gopher " and is mentioned in " Grown But Not Forgotten " .
Voiced by Jim Cummings .
FATHER , MOTHER , AND JUNIOR HEFFALUMP Section::::Father , Mother , and Junior Heffalump .
A family of Heffalumps who appeared in "
There 's No Camp Like Home " and " Trap as Trap
Can " .
Piglet was afraid of Heffalumps before they met and became friends .
They live in a house made of logs .
Junior wants to make his father , who has many implausible allergies , proud of him .
NASTY
JACK Section::::Nasty Jack .
The leader of a gang of literal horse thieves who appeared in the episode Paw and Order in the Sheriff Piglet play .
He threatened to trounce Piglet .
After Piglet 's badge fell off , Jack was disappointed that he was n't sheriff anymore .
Piglet made him sheriff , something Jack always wanted to be .
Soon , Jack threatened to trounce his former gang and they ran away .
Voiced by Rob Paulsen .
THE PACK RATS Section::::The Pack Rats .
Three rodents ( all voiced by Jim Cummings ) who appear as recurring antagonists .
They steal anything they can and leave a walnut in exchange , thinking it as payment .
The orange Pack Rat is fat and dimwitted , the brown one is grumpy and complaining , and the gray one is their leader .
They debut in " Nothing But the Tooth " where they are more like real villains , but in " The Rats Who Came to Dinner " , they turn out to be misunderstood and actually help the characters .
However , they always return to their urge to steal .
Their third and final appearance is in " Oh , Bottle ! "
SKIPPY
Section::::Skippy .
A very large sheepdog belonging to a neighbor of Christopher Robin 's .
He appears in " Sorry , Wrong Slusher " and " A Pooh Day Afternoon " .
He is a nice dog , but sometimes makes trouble for the characters .
Piglet is afraid of him ( as shown in " Sorry , Wrong Slusher " , where he thinks Skippy is the " slusher " that Christopher Robin and the animals are afraid of ) .
Unlike other animal characters , Skippy is not anthropomorphized .
STAN AND HEFF Section::::Stan and Heff .
Stan and Heff are gangster - like villains who appeared in the episodes " The Great Honey Pot Robbery " and " A Bird in the Hand " .
They are a Woozle and a Heffalump respectively and try to steal as much honey as they can .
Stan is the smarter and more irritable of the two and does most of the scheming , while his dimwitted sidekick Heff provides the muscle .
He is also afraid of mice and thinks that Roo is a giant mouse .
Voiced by Ken Sansom and Chuck McCann respectively .
WOOSTER Section::::Wooster .
A giant woozle who only appears in " The Great Honey Pot Robbery .
" He is actually revealed to be a nice woozle , despite his size .
Voiced by Jim Cummings .
RECURRING CHARACTERS IN MY FRIENDS TIGGER AND POOH BEAVER Section::::Recurring characters in My Friends Tigger and Pooh .
Section::::Beaver .
Beaver lives in a dam near Poohsticks Bridge .
He bears a strong resemblance to Gopher , who does not appear in My Friends Tigger and Pooh .
Both are hard working rodents with similar appearances and personalities , although Beaver is a little more easygoing .
Voiced by Jim Cummings .
HOLLY
Section::::Holly .
Holly is one of Santa 's reindeer .
She and her mother Vixen appear in Super Sleuth Christmas Movie .
Holly came to the forest to find Santa 's lost magic bag .
The characters rescue her , help her find the bag and accompany her home .
When they reach the North Pole , she flies for the first time .
She returns for a visit in the episode " Home For the Holly Days " .
She is voiced by Makaila Baumel .
MAMA HEFFALUMP
Section::::Mama Heffalump .
Mama Heffalump is Lumpy 's mother and the biggest resident of the Hundred Acre Wood .
She first appears in Pooh 's Heffalump Movie saving Roo from being trapped in a pile of logs , and later appears in episodes of My Friends Tigger and Pooh .
Voiced by Brenda Blethyn / Patricia Parris .
PORCUPINE Section::::Porcupine .
Porcupine can play the flute and has a passion for cooking but can not see without her glasses .
She is a close friend with Turtle , who is the only character who can hug her because of her sharp quills .
They were pen pals before he came to the forest .
Voiced by Tara Strong .
POSSUMS Section::::Possums .
Twin possum siblings first appear in " Topsy Turvy Tigger , " where they attempt to invite others to their birthday party through use of upside - down drawings .
They later appear in " Darby 's Im - possum - ible Case " , in which the characters are shown meeting them for the first time .
They look alike , but have opposite personalities .
The boy is zippy and outgoing , while the girl is shy and flees from crowds .
Voiced by Sydney Saylor .
RACCOON Section::::Raccoon .
Raccoon first appears in " Darby 's Lost and Found " and later makes regular appearances in the series .
He is in charge of a junk / fix - it shop .
He speaks a bit like a hippie , and is annoyed when Tigger refers to his " mask , " which is just part of his fur .
Voiced by Rob Paulsen .
SKUNK
Section::::Skunk .
Skunk first appears in " Skunk 's Non - Scents " .
He is initially upset that he can not produce a skunk 's foul odor .
After it is revealed why and when skunks spray , he accomplishes it , pleasing himself .
In " Beaver Gets Skunked " , Beaver is reluctant to accept him due to skunks ' reputation , but overcomes his prejudice and they become friends .
Voiced by James Arnold Taylor .
SQUIRRELS Section::::Squirrels .
Various unnamed squirrels appear frequently in the Hundred Acre Wood .
They usually do not speak .
They appear numerous times in My Friends Tigger and Pooh , occasionally playing a role in the plot of an episode , and Buster likes to chase them .
Squirrels also appear in The Tigger Movie and Piglet 's Big Movie .
TURTLE Section::::Turtle .
Turtle has been Porcupine 's friend and pen pal since before he came to live in the forest .
He lives a slow and easy life , moves slowly , and speaks with a southeastern United States accent .
Turtle enjoys quiet activities like bird watching or playing checkers with his friends .
Because of his shell , he is the only character who can hug Porcupine .
Voiced by Mark Hamill .
WOODPECKER Section::::Woodpecker .
Woodpecker is an absent - minded woodpecker who irritates Rabbit by pecking on his house and talks in a fast , bouncy and high - pitched voice .
Although Owl does not appear in the series , Woodpecker does share some characteristics with him .
Voiced by Dee Bradley Baker .
SPRINGS Section::::Springs .
A bouncing robot who only appears in " Tigger Gets Bounced .
" Rabbit built Springs to replace Tigger 's bouncing .
Tigger and Springs compete in a bouncing contest that ends with Springs winning , which gratefully hurts Tigger 's feelings .
After Beaver foolishly tries to use Springs to mash dirty water ( even though Rabbit warns him that Springs is n't supposed to get wet ) ,
Springs then short circuits and becomes hostile .
Tigger battles Springs while protecting others .
After Tigger and Springs disappear behind a hill , an unseen fight is heard .
In the end , Tigger comes out from behind the hill , concluding that he had defeated Springs .
OTHER CHARACTERS
PYGMY
PIGLETS Section::::Other characters .
Section::::Pygmy Piglets .
The Pygmy Piglets only appear in " The Piglet Who Would Be King " , an episode of The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh .
They are about half the height of Piglet and are all clad in white clothing .
They reside in the Land of Milk and Honey , which is where Piglet and his friends go to collect more honey for Pooh .
They proclaim Piglet their king and a spring from a broken Jack - in - the - box , given to Piglet as a friendship present from Pooh , is thought to be the tail of a Piglet statue with a honey fountain .
When the spring is removed later , the volcano of honey erupts , but Piglet , with the assistance of the Pygmies , diverts the honey flow using two statues and is hailed as a hero .
LONG JOHN COTTONTAIL Section::::Long John Cottontail .
Long John Cottontail is Rabbit 's deceased great - great uncle .
He only appears in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh episode " Rabbit Marks the Spot " .
Rabbit is annoyed at Pooh , Piglet , Tigger and Gopher for digging up his garden when pretending to be pirates , so he buries a treasure chest full of rocks in the ground and tells them it was the treasure of Long John Cottontail .
He gives them a map showing where it is .
They find it ( despite Rabbit regretting his action and trying to stop them ) .
Rabbit admits that he buried the rocks , but Pooh , Piglet , Tigger and Gopher still believe it was Long John Cottontail , and the rocks were very useful to them .
The ghost of Long John Cottontail then appears and says that the animals found his buried rocks , which scares them all away .
He is confused as to why they are scared of him , ending the episode .
BABYSITTER
Section::::Babysitter .
A babysitter appears in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh episode " Babysitter Blues " .
Christopher Robin , Pooh , Piglet and Tigger repeatedly make a mess at night when his mother is out , and the babysitter gets upset , at one point telling him that if his mother saw the mess she 'd never let her babysit again .
However , at the end of the episode , Christopher Robin does not make a mess and the babysitter thinks he has been swapped with someone else .
Like Christopher Robin 's mother , the Babysitter 's face is not shown .
POOH , PIGLET , AND TIGGER LOOK - ALIKES Section::::Pooh , Piglet , and Tigger look - alikes .
Three stuff animals who look almost like Pooh , Piglet , and Tigger , but resemble gangsters and are partly bad guys .
They only appear in " How Much is That Rabbit in the Window " where they try to steal Rabbit 's tag in hopes of getting someone to buy them from the toy store , but the store 's owner is seemly unaware of them .
After Christopher Robin bought Rabbit , he encouraged them that someone will buy them one day .
They then take Rabbit 's advice and continue to wait for someone to buy them .
REFERENCES