BILIARY REFLUX Biliary reflux , bile reflux or duodenogastric reflux is a condition that occurs when bile flows upward ( refluxes ) from the duodenum into the stomach and esophagus .
Biliary reflux can be confused with acid reflux , also known as gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ) .
While bile reflux involves fluid from the small intestine flowing into the stomach and esophagus , acid reflux is backflow of stomach acid into the esophagus .
These conditions are often related , and differentiating between the two can be difficult .
Bile is a digestive fluid made by the liver , stored in the gallbladder , and discharged into duodenum after food is ingested to aid in the digestion of fat .
Normally , the pyloric sphincter prevents bile from entering the stomach .
When the pyloric sphincter is damaged or fails to work correctly , bile can enter the stomach and then be transported into the esophagus as in gastric reflux .
The presence of small amounts of bile in the stomach is relatively common and usually asymptomatic , but excessive refluxed bile causes irritation and inflammation .
SYMPTOMS
* Intense and lasting abdominal pain
* Abdominal pain after consumption of food
*
Frequent heartburn which is not corrected by treatment for gastric reflux
* Nausea
* Vomiting
* Unintended weight loss CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Most damage to the pyloric valve occurs as a complication of gastric surgery .
Other causes of biliary reflux may be : *
Peptic ulcer
* Gallbladder surgery ( cholecystectomy )
A significant fraction of cases are idiopathic , with no identified specific etiology .
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
Section::::Management .
The treatment for bile reflux is the same as the treatment for acidic reflux .
In general , everything that can reduce acidic reflux can reduce bile reflux .
Examples include lifestyle modification , weight reduction , and the avoidance of eating immediately before sleep or being in the supine position immediately after meals .
In addition , smoking has been found to be a factor in the development of acidic reflux .
Thus , all of these factors should be applied to bile reflux as well .
Likewise , drugs that reduce the secretion of gastric acid ( e.g. , proton pump inhibitors ) or that reduce gastric contents or volume can be used to treat acidic bile reflux .
Because prokinetic drugs increase the motility of the stomach and accelerate gastric emptying , they can also reduce bile reflux .
Other drugs that reduce the relaxations of the lower esophageal sphincter , such as baclofen , have also proven to reduce bile reflux , particularly in patients who are refractory to ( medically unresponsive to )
proton pump inhibitor therapy .
Medications used in managing biliary reflux include bile acid sequestrants , particularly cholestyramine , which disrupt the circulation of bile in the digestive tract and sequester bile that would otherwise cause symptoms when refluxed ; and prokinetic agents , to move material from the stomach to the small bowel more rapidly and prevent reflux .
Biliary reflux may also be treated surgically , if medications are ineffective or if precancerous tissue is present in the esophagus .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The damage of reflux * Bile Reflux page at CNN Health : symptoms , causes , diagnosis , treatment , prevention