YOU DON'T WANT TO KNOW
" You Do n't Want To Know " is the eighth episode of the fourth season of the American TV drama House and the seventy - eighth episode overall .
It aired on 20 November 2007 .
Notably , in this episode the differential diagnosis is confirmed as lupus despite the fact that ' It 's not lupus - it 's never lupus ' is a phrase often used to the point of catchphrase by the eponymous Dr. Gregory House .
PLOT MEDICINE Section::::Plot .
Section::::Medicine .
Kutner and Cole are in the audience of a magic show in a night club in Atlantic City .
Flynn , the magician on stage ( played by Steve Valentine ) , is replicating Harry Houdini 's famous Chinese Water Torture Cell act , calling Cole up to the stage .
Wrapped in chains , Flynn is dropped in the tank and loses consciousness as soon as he enters the water .
Kutner suggests taking the case of the magician .
He wants to run tests to find out why Flynn 's heart stopped in the water , though House is sure the magician has lost consciousness because he screwed up the trick and drowned .
He permits Kutner to test the patient , but he says that he will fire Kutner if the patient 's problems were a result of screwing up the trick .
Flynn says that he is a great magician , and did not fail to carry out the trick .
To demonstrate , Flynn asks Thirteen to pick a card from a deck , and then asks Kutner for his wallet .
The wallet bursts into flames , and when it is extinguished , the card she picked is in it .
Kutner tells Foreman that the tests show there was no cause for the heart failure .
Foreman suggests running a lung MRI , but Flynn starts bleeding internally as soon as they start the MRI .
He has had three units of AB positive blood transfusions ,
so Thirteen wonders if he has had an intestinal infarct .
House realizes what caused the problems with the MRI .
While Flynn is being operated on , House steps in , sticks his hand in Flynn 's gut , and pulls out a key .
Flynn had swallowed the key for the magic trick , then the MRI 's magnet had ripped it through his intestines .
House confronts Flynn , but Flynn still insists that he is a great magician .
To demonstrate , Flynn has House pick a card .
Then he throws the deck of cards at the wall .
A card sticks to the window , but is not the card House picked .
House removes the card and is about to scold the magician when he sees his card stuck on the other side of the glass wall .
House can not figure out how he did the trick .
Suddenly , the magician starts to bleed profusely out of his nose .
House realizes something is still wrong , and Flynn 's cardiac arrest is actually a symptom of something more serious .
House gathers the Fellows in his office .
Amber suggests that Flynn has Polyarteritis nodosa .
Taub throws out the possibility that the nose bleed was caused by cocaine .
House tells Taub and Kutner to go to the patient 's home .
He orders Amber and Cole to do a biopsy of Flynn 's heart .
Kutner and Taub find an old fortune - telling machine , rabbits and marijuana in Flynn 's home .
Taub theorizes that the rabbits could have given Flynn pericarditis from a tick .
House demands to know how Flynn did the card trick earlier .
Flynn says it is more interesting not to know how it is done , but House says it is better to know .
House diagnoses Flynn with tularemia from his rabbits .
Flynn now has bleeding around his heart , which could be a sign of cancer .
House tells his fellows to find where the cancer is located .
Flynn predicts that he will be dead by the next day .
The doctors notice that Flynn has a lot of internal bleeding , and that at this rate he might be dead by the next day .
Kutner considers a tainted blood transfusion .
Foreman says that the low immunoglobulin levels and the other symptoms indicate amyloidosis .
Flynn has had a grand mal seizure , then kidney failure .
House believes that this proves the diagnosis of amyloidosis , and not a bad blood transfusion as Kutner suggested , and that the patient needs a bone marrow transplant .
Since the procedure requires irradiation , House orders a subcutaneous fat biopsy to confirm his diagnosis .
House says that while they are waiting for the results of the biopsy , the fellows can check their blood theory .
The biopsy ends up being inconclusive , and by the time it is done , the fellows still have not confirmed their blood theory .
They ask for more time , but House says the patient can not wait for their tests to finish .
So instead House suggests that they test the blood by giving it to him , and seeing if he gets sick , since he has the universal recipient blood type .
House does get sick , but his symptoms are different from the patients , so he says it is irrelevant , and insists that the patient has amyloidosis .
He refuses to let the fellows examine him , but he passes out , and Thirteen tests his organs .
When House wakes up , he realizes that Thirteen drugged his tea in order to test him .
Wilson stops by House 's office to see how he is .
They discuss their blood types , which prompts House to realize that the patient 's symptoms might be because they gave him the wrong type of blood .
Flynn tells House he is type - A blood , but they had given him type AB , based on what antibodies he produced , so House deduces that his body is making an extra antibody of type B. Based on the antibody production , House diagnoses lupus , quipping , " I finally have a case of lupus . "
CONTEST Section::::Contest .
A bored House announces a contest for the Fellows , to test their ability to do sneaky things and not get caught .
The winner will be spared from getting fired and will get to nominate two competitors , then House will fire one of those two .
In a reference to the Peckinpah film Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia , House issues the contest objective : to " bring me the thong of Lisa Cuddy .
" The winner is to bring the thong to the group .
While House announces the contest , Kutner interrupts and tries to argue that the magician is actually ill , and is asked by House to leave and find some evidence or else get fired .
The Fellows , excluding Kutner , debate taking the challenge , but most of them decide to attempt it .
Taub tries to spill coffee on Cuddy , but that does not work .
Amber pages Cuddy to the clinic then sets off the clinic 's fire alarm .
But Taub keeps Cuddy in her office , away from the clinic 's sprinklers .
Later , Taub gives House a pair of black panties , claiming them to be Cuddy 's .
But House says that Cuddy is wearing a red bra , and he deduces that Cuddy would be wearing red panties to match .
House suspects that they are Amber 's panties , and asks her to lift her skirt to prove that they are not .
She refuses , but they admit that they were hers when House points out that she 's wearing a black bra .
Later , Cole produces Cuddy 's panties .
Amber demonstrates that this time they are not her own .
House later drops his vicodin bottle so that Cuddy , in a tight skirt , will bend over to pick it up .
He is amazed when he sees no panty line .
Amber tells Cole that he should make his nominations based on who is the best doctor , rather than his personal feelings towards her .
Kutner reminds Cole that he is his friend and should not be nominated for elimination .
Taub offers Cole $ 5,000 to keep him off the chopping block .
Thirteen does not try to persuade Cole not to nominate her because she knows it would not make a difference in his decision .
At the end of the episode House enters the lecture room with Cuddy 's underwear on a pillow .
He asks Cole to nominate two candidates .
Cole chooses Amber and Kutner .
House wonders why Cole would nominate Kutner , even though Kutner was the one who spotted that the magician was actually sick , and was also Cole 's friend .
House realizes that Kutner is a liability to the hospital due to his reckless behavior , and Cuddy is the one who would want him eliminated , and thus , that Cole made a deal with Cuddy where she gave him her panties in exchange for being able to choose who she wanted out .
But the fellows were supposed to accomplish their goal without getting caught .
House unexpectedly fires Cole for breaking the rules by letting Cuddy know about the contest .
House 's motive for setting the contest was to identify who could conspire with him to trick Cuddy ; Cole has done the exact opposite by conspiring with Cuddy to fool House .
THIRTEEN
Section::::Thirteen .
Thirteen drops her files , and seems very upset about it .
House privately asks her why it bothered her so .
He suspects she is hiding a medical condition from him , but she denies it .
House later notices that Thirteen 's hand is shaking , and she seems concerned about that as well .
Later , House tells Thirteen that he saw a picture of her mother in her wallet .
In the picture , her mother looked young , and House deduces that Thirteen did n't update the picture because her mother is dead .
House Googled the obituary and learned that her mother died " after a long illness , " and asks Thirteen if it was Parkinson 's disease .
Thirteen says that it was Huntington 's chorea , meaning that she has a 50 % chance of also carrying the mutation that leads to the disease , which is what caused her to become upset when she dropped her files and when her hand shook .
If she has inherited Huntington 's chorea , then she has about twelve years to live .
House says that the reason her hand shook is that he switched her decaf coffee with caffeinated to see her reactions .
That 's part of why Thirteen later drugged House , as mentioned above .
Thirteen refuses to be tested for Huntington 's , because she says that not knowing her fate with regards to the Huntington 's encourages her to live life to its fullest .
This makes little sense to House , and when Thirteen leaves a bottle of water behind , House has her saliva from the bottle tested for the mutation .
House later gives Thirteen an envelope with the results , but she refuses to open it and leaves the room after she lectured him about the importance of being ignorant to her possible illness .
House appears to be persuaded by her , something the magician failed to do when he argued that not knowing the magic is part of the wonder .
In the end , House tosses the unopened envelope into the trash .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" You Do n't Want to Know " at Fox.com