HISTORY OF HAITIAN
NATIONALITY AND CITIZENSHIP
The Republic of Haiti is located on western portion of the island Hispaniola in the Caribbean .
Haiti declared its independence from France in the aftermath of the first successful slave revolution in the Americas in 1804 , and their identification as conquerors of a racially repressed society is a theme echoed throughout Haiti 's history .
NATIONALITY PRIOR TO 1803 Section::::Nationality prior to 1803 .
Haiti has a unique history of racial ideology .
During its colonial period , class structure shifted from one based on wealth , to divisions distinguished by race .
Once accepted as elite , families of African descent were rejected because of racist stereotypes .
This regression shaped the evolution of the Haitian Revolution as peoples of African descent rose up against the white colonial planters .
Haitians are primarily of African descent but a lot of Haitians are also of the indigenous Taino descent ( Arawak native Indians ) which inhabited the island prior to Christopher Columbus 's arrival .
The Taino were nearly wiped out due to diseases the Europeans brought with them and because of cruel practices including slavery .
The Tainos fled to the mountains just before the Africans arrived on the island .
Mixing between the remaining Tainos and some of the Africans occurred and it is believed a lot of Haitians in present - day have some ancestral links to the indigenous Tainos .
NATIONALITY IN SAINT - DOMINGUE
BEFORE 1763 Section::::Nationality in Saint - Domingue before 1763 .
As part of the French Empire , nationality in Saint - Domingue , now the Republic of Haiti , was based on a mixture of economics and race , combining white planter elite , black slaves , and free black planters .
Haiti was unusual , as it was the only slave society in the Americas with a significant population of free black planters .
Unlike most colonial slave societies , status was based on economics rather than race , creating a unified master class of both races .
" Whereas the freedmen in all other slave societies entered at the lowest ranks of free society , in the French West Indies they were often permitted to enter the class of plantation owners from the beginning . "
Officially , imperial policy and the inequality of slavery 's distribution of freedom and wealth excluded all blacks from the civil , public sphere of society .
However , those with little or no official power were able to use public law to fight for their security in liberty and justice .
For example , many slaves were able to use the French Code Noir marriage provision and claim independence .
There was no fine line between the races as interracial relationships were not uncommon ; colonists often had sexual relations with their slaves , generally recognizing the paternity of their children and freeing them from slavery .
Men and women who escaped slavery were able to assert themselves in civil society ; the opportunity to advance economically was not reserved for white Europeans .
CODE NOIR Section::::Code Noir .
Also known as " The Black Code " , this set of laws was written in 1685 concerning the governance of the French American Islands .
It determined and regulated the status of different social classes .
King Louis XIV composed these laws to assert French presence in his Caribbean territories , and to assert Christianity and control over the free black population .
Its purpose was to regulate hours of work and food distribution , limitations of punishments , and formally limit slave - owners ' otherwise arbitrary power .
The Code expelled all Jews , forced all slaves to be baptized , and made provisions concerning the citizenship status of freed blacks .
According to Article 59 , emancipated blacks were to be granted the same privileges as native - born French subjects .
Yet freed blacks generally suffered worse conditions than those enslaved .
All blacks were considered public property , so although they were not tied to a single master , all blacks suffered under racial laws .
* for three years all had to serve in the " maréchaussee " militia to catch fugitive slaves
* had to serve in the general militia
* obliged to a corvée to maintain the roadways * could not be employed publicly or in a liberal profession ( for example , schoolteachers ) *
those of mixed races could not use the name of their white parent NATIONALITY AFTER THE SEVEN YEAR WAR Section::::Nationality after the Seven Year War .
When the Seven Years ' War ended in 1763 , a shift in French colonists ' self - identity due to the ensuing political conflicts redefined a line between the races .
In an effort to reaffirm their French identity politically and culturally , white colonists defined their bond with the metropole through race .
Colonists and imperial administrators created a new public sphere in by which people were unfit for civil life based on their constructed racial sexual stereotypes ; those that were unfit were not allowed to practice their citizenship rights .
Resentful of black success , the colonial elite segregated themselves from their counterparts , the wealthy Creole and ex - slave families , by using race instead of wealth to classify their high level of society .
For example , everyone , regardless of wealth , who had one African grandparent had to identify themselves as " quarteron , " a person of color .
Colonial administration used racism as a tool in developing a Saint - Domingue identity .
The French law of colonial citizenship being fully " white " was influenced by the enlightenment 's emphasis on the purity of ' whiteness . "
The French Constitution of 1791 specifically left out French territories : By excluding Haiti in this Constitution , which contained the Declaration of the Rights of Man , Haiti was denied the same rights as other French subjects .
As a new definition French Citizenship was developing with the progression of the French Revolution , elite men of color began to fight for their rights as citizens .
HAITIAN REVOLUTION Section::::Haitian Revolution .
The development of Haitian nationality is marked by its declaration of independence on January 1 , 1804 .
The Caribbean island won its independence from France after a period of harsh colonial rule in the first successful slave rebellion , making Haiti the second independent country in North America after the United States .
As ideas of the French Revolution spread , a movement against the oppressive Black Code developed .
THE FREE COLORED NARRATIVE Section::::The
Free Colored Narrative .
In the first century after independence , descendants of the wealthy black planter elite ruled Haiti .
These " mulatrist " historians supported a narrative of the Haitian Revolution that focused on the free colored revolutionaries .
As their ancestors had been leaders of the revolution , it followed naturally that the superior elite planters of mixed race should lead the new Haiti .
" Mulatrists " went so far as to claim they could not be guilty of racism towards the darker skinned constituency because they had suffered under French racism .
In 1788 , the Society of the Friends of the Blacks , an abolitionist group , formed in Paris to reform the harsh racial laws in Saint - Domingue .
With support from wealthy free black planters such as Julien Raimond , the Society of the Friends of the Blacks took the issue to trial .
Instead of outright arguing against the slave trade , Raimond and the Society campaigned for the recognition of citizenship for mixed - race colonists .
In 1791 , the very same Paris legislation who voted on the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen ruled in favor of the society , granting voting rights to free blacks , albeit limited voting rights .
Unable to tolerate this decision as it would destabilize the slave regime , white colonialists reacted in violence , only to start a civil war with the free and enslaved black people of Haiti .
It was this " mulatto " oligarchy that led Haitians through their Revolution from France .
THE " BLACK " REVOLUTIONARY NARRATIVE Section::::The " Black " Revolutionary Narrative .
By the twentieth century , this view had shifted to focus on the slave rebellion and its ex - slave leaders like Louverture and Dessalines .
This " black " Revolutionary narrative served to promote Haitian national identity , focusing on the strength of a colonial repressed society rather than its leaders .
Haiti even adopted a new national anthem " La Dessalinienne " , promoting the culture of the rural majority .
When England and Spain invaded in 1793 , they were defeated by ex - slave Toussaint Louverture , leader of the French and native army .
As the white and black populations mobilized against one another , Louverture led the oppressed slaves in the Haitian Revolution , naming himself Governor - General for Life in the 1801 Constitution .
Fighting between blacks and whites would continue , as Napoleon sent General Charles Lecerc to arrest Louverture and re - instate slavery .
In 1803 , another rebellion against the French colonists was led by Jean - Jacques Dessalines .
The successful rebellion ended the civil war in 1804 with the Declaration of Haitian Independence and Dessalines was proclaimed Emperor of Haiti in 1804 .
FOREIGN RECOGNITION OF HAITI
AS
A NATION Section::::Foreign recognition of Haiti as a nation .
Recognizing Haiti as a nation was difficult for those countries that did not want to be associated with a free slave society .
In dealing with foreign policy , Haiti wanted to be seen as an equal nation .
Haiti granted automatic citizenship to anyone of African or Amerindian origin , and even went so far as to invite these oppressed peoples to settle in Haiti .
Their fight to be recognized reflects the Haitian desire to be equal , and thus free .
FRANCE Section::::France .
France recognized Haitian independence in 1825 .
This recognition was indirect , " masked by a degree of doublespeak that would have made Talleyrand proud " , and only transpired after a Haiti paid huge reparations .
However , Haiti was able to open normal relations with their former colonizers .
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA Section::::United States of America .
Prior to the Haitian Revolution , Haiti had been the United States ' second largest trading partner , second only to Great Britain .
However , in the early nineteenth century America was very much a slave society , and balked at the idea of supporting a slave revolt that took over a nation .
The United States was divided ; merchants wanted to continue trade while southern slave owners wanted to isolate or even repress the new Haitians .
Until Jean - Pierre Boyer unified Haiti in 1820 , commercial relations were limited .
As the American Civil War progressed and the United States ' stance on black liberation began to shift , so did their views of Haiti and Liberia ( another free black country ) .
As an imperialistic nation , the US had trouble with a nation that granted civil status to whom they deemed unworthy ; while they had slavery , the US could not recognize Haiti .
In 1863 , Abraham Lincoln officially recognized Haiti and Liberia as independent and sovereign , and signed a treaty of amity and commerce in 1865 .
The subsequent black Haitian ambassador in Washington , D.C. was recognized as an equal in American politics .
ENFRANCHISEMENT OF HAITIAN PEOPLES THROUGH LAW HISTORY OF THE LEGAL SYSTEM Section::::Enfranchisement of Haitian peoples through law .
Section::::History of the legal system .
Prior to Haitian independence , Saint - Domingue was a colony under French rule , but laws were made specifically for Saint - Domingue as a colony .
For example : * The Constitution of 1765 separated the military from the civil government * The Edict of August , 1765 established a judicial system However , after the 1789 Revolution , all developments in French law also pertained to Saint - Domingue as a colony came under a more direct empirical ruling .
The important developments of this time period are : * The decree of April 4 , 1792 , which granted political equality to emancipated slaves * The decree of February 4 , 1794 , which abolished slavery CONSTITUTIONS OF 1801 AND 1805 Section::::Constitutions of 1801 and 1805 .
Louverture 's 1801 Constitution freed all slaves , but required their presence on the island as workers .
Similarly , Dessaline 's 1805 constitution held racial laws : Haitians ( all considered black ) could not marry white foreigners .
CONSTITUTION OF 1806 Section::::Constitution of 1806 .
This ended the authoritative regime of Dessalines , creating three separate branches of government .
This changed the relationship between the citizen and the state , empowering the citizen .
However , the legislative branch represented by the Senate remained the most powerful .
CONSTITUTION OF 1816 Section::::Constitution of 1816 .
Lasting until 1843 , this constitution leveled the power of the three branches and brought in civil ideas from the French declaration in 1789 of fundamental rights .
HAITIAN CIVIL CODE OF 1825 Section::::Haitian Civil Code of 1825 .
In 1825 , Haiti established the first Haitian Civil Code , adopted mainly in part from the Napoleonic Code .
Two years later the Code of Civil Procedure , the Rural Code , and the Commercial Code were established ; these are the foundations of Haiti 's legal system today .
When Riviere Harard unified Haiti , he abolished the law criminalizing Haitian and white foreign marriage .
CONSTITUTION OF 1918 Section::::Constitution of 1918 .
Adopted during US occupation , this Constitution focused on property rights of foreigners .
Previously , to ensure against foreign white domination , no white foreigner was permitted to own real estate .
Contrastingly , all black foreigners could easily acquire Haitian nationality .
In 1918 , foreigners , regardless of race , could own land for business or residency purposes , losing those rights five years after that purpose ended .
CONSTITUTION OF 1950 Section::::Constitution of 1950 .
Article 88 gave power directly to the citizen constituency , as the President of the Republic would now be directly voted upon by citizens .
DUVALIERIST CONSTITUTION OF 1983 CITIZENSHIP MEDIA Section::::Duvalierist constitution of 1983 .
Section::::Citizenship media .
The follow is found in Article 21 : Citizenship . DUVALIERIST DESCENT
* born in Haiti to a Haitian mother or father * born in a foreign country to Haitian parents * born in Haiti to a foreign father ; if not recognized by father , it is acceptable to be recognized by a foreign mother only if the subject is of black descent
DUVALIERIST NATURALIZATION
* after five years of residency , one may apply for naturalization , yet may not practice political rights until ten years after the date of naturalization .
these political rights include : * right to participate in the election of the President of the Republic
* right to defend and serve the country
* right to be elected or appointed to public office Section::::Duvalierist naturalization .
Note :
citizens over the age of 18 are entitled to civil and political rights ; not all Haitians are citizens .
ARTICLE 22 :
DEMOCRATIC PRINCIPLES
Section::::Article 22 : Democratic Principles .
This article is concerned with the principle of equality for all Haitians , including but not limited to freedom of speech ( except during wartime ) , worship and peaceful assembly ( excluding public assembly which must be authorized ) ; with an overall umbrella of individual freedoms guaranteed by the state ( for example , extradition for political reasons is prohibited ) .
HAITIAN SOCIETY Section::::Haitian society .
Haitian society has been sharply divided since its independence in 1804 .
The rural agricultural sector , composing as much as 95 % of the population , makes up the base of this society .
The elite are then left to dominate national institutions and the governmental apparatus .
These two sections are kept separate by income , source of income , language , education , religion , etc .
Militarism and republican nationalism formed the basis by which Haitian society was aligned , granting the elite class legitimate power .
YEOMANRY Section::::Yeomanry .
They live in rural areas , are poor , and work the land for a living .
They believe in Vodou so practice common law marriage , sometimes even polygamy , and generally speak only Creole .
Isolated from the outside world , these poor farmers are illiterate and uneducated .
Most noticeably , they are ( for the most part ) darker in skin tone than the elite .
MIDDLE CLASS
Section::::Middle class .
The Haitian middle class is better off financially than the yeomanry and own their own businesses and attend private educational institutions and are more literate then the yeomanry .
ELITE
Section::::Elite .
This merchant and professional class dominates urban society .
They speak French as well as Creole ( the national language ) and are sent to institutions of higher learning abroad .
Catholicism is the principal religion , so most marriages are religiously affiliated , thus " western " and " modern . "
This elite , some dark skinned but most being lighter - skinned , view themselves as aristocracy .
UNITED STATES
OCCUPATION Section::::United States occupation .
Until 1915 , Haiti followed an isolationist policy .
However , in 1915 the United States invaded Haiti and kept occupation until 1934 .
During this time , interest in Haitian nationality broadened to embrace the rural majority 's " black " culture .
A Haitian historical society was founded in 1924 , with a focus on their history through the " Black Slave Rebellion " narrative of the Haitian Revolution .
Louverture and Dessalines became " great slave revolutionaries " , showing the world the power of colonized peoples .
" By the 1970s … had begun to think of their homeland in terms that transcended mere nostalgic attachment to a particular outpost of empire .
The new … nationalism precipitates strong tensions between conservative and radical elements within local intelligentsias .
Here too , the Haitian experience of the early 1900s , with its armed conflict … Finally , the accelerated urbanization and migration experienced in Haiti , which resulted from the centralizing tendencies of the state , import - dependency , and the extreme exploitation of labor , … trends in the global economy created the impetus for a massive population exodus after World War II . " Since the US occupation , Haiti has been unable to establish an independent civilian police force as an entity separate from the army .
Every attempt to do so has resulted in a military overthrow of the presidency .
Haitian Civil - Military Relations : * Military control for the protection of the state against foreign invaders * Military control for the management of a crisis * Civilian control through the demilitarization of the nation * Civilian control through the professionalization of the army * Civilian control through the co - optation of the arm * Civilian control through the democratization of the army PRESENT - DAY CITIZENSHIP Section::::Present - day citizenship .
All citizenship laws in effect today are from the Constitution of Haiti ratified in 1987 .
HAITIAN CITIZENSHIP MEDIA
STANDING DESCENT Section::::Haitian citizenship media .
Section::::Standing descent .
A person born in Haiti does not automatically receive citizenship .
A child , regardless of where they are born , is considered Haitian if either their mother or father is a native - born citizen of Haiti .
STANDING NATURALIZATION
Section::::Standing naturalization .
Naturalization is possible , yet can only be obtained after a continuous period of Haitian residence for five years .
A naturalized citizen has the right to vote , but is not eligible to hold public office until five years after their date of naturalization , excluding those offices reserved for native - born Haitians by Constitutional law .
DUAL CITIZENSHIP Section::::Dual citizenship .
In recent years , there has been discussion about a constitutional amendment to change Haiti 's stance against dual nationality ; yet while feelings have begun to lean towards acceptance of dual citizenship , policy has yet to change .
Legally , the 1987 constitution still stands , which states , " Dual Haitian and foreign nationality is in no case permitted .
" The constitution also automatically negates Haitian citizenship with the acquisition of foreign citizenship , which strongly affects today 's Haitian diaspora .
However , there is an exception .
A child with Haitian parents born outside of Haiti may dually acquire the citizenship of their birth country .
At the age of eighteen , the child must renounce one of their nationalities .
GROUNDS FOR WITHDRAWING HAITIAN CITIZENSHIP Section::::Grounds for withdrawing Haitian citizenship .
Article 13 of the 1987 constitution explains how Haitian citizenship can be lost .
* Acquiring citizenship of a foreign country through naturalization
* Serving a foreign government in office
* If not a native Haitian but naturalized , residing abroad for three years without authorization .
This loss is permanent Voluntarily withdrawing citizenship must take place before the Justice Department , Port - au - Prince , in Haiti .
It is not possible to reclaim citizenship lost involuntarily .
HAITIAN DIASPORA Section::::Haitian diaspora .
Transnationalism defies the common view of a state 's populations remaining within its territorial boundaries .
Similarly , cultural nationality is determined by a shared language , culture , believed ethnicity , etc . , transcending mere residence of a geographic locality .
The growth of transnationalism with the development of globalization has re - framed , not destroyed , the state ; institutional practices and national identities are changing to adapt to the globalization of their people .
Since the 1950s , there has been an increase in Haitian migration to places such as the United States to escape the political and economic repression of the Duvalier presidencies under François Duvalier , " Papa Doc , " ( 1957–71 ) and Jean - Claude Duvalier , " Baby Doc , " ( 1971–86 ) .
This migration phenomenon known as " the Haitian Diaspora " has developed to describe the thousands of Haitian nationals living outside of their territory .
Generally losing their Haitian citizenship , these long distance nationals have come to act like " transborder citizens , " members to some degree of both states .
There are legal , political , and social repercussions to this " transnationalism .
" Dual citizenship is out of the question ; Haitians living in a foreign country can not get involved lest their " Haitianism " is questioned , yet by remaining faithful to their homeland , they can not fully enjoy the citizenry benefits of the country of their sojourn .
Haitian Americans have different status positions in American society based on their citizenship status : refugee , student ( student visa ) , citizen , immigrant , visitor , and the undocumented person .
These legal statuses have their own boundaries , but are not subject to influence by income or race status .
DIASPORA CITIZENSHIP Section::::Diaspora citizenship .
Citizenship practices by Haitian immigrants in the Diaspora : * those processes linking the Diaspora to the homeland are transnational in that they move beyond the boundaries of the nation - state * individual migrants hold membership in more than one country and continue to be active in homeland affairs * the ' politics of simultaneity , ' in which citizens participate in the affairs of two or more countries at the same time , replaces the ' politics of secession ' prevalent in the dual citizenship context * these individuals claim or appropriate civil , political , social , and cultural rights in both countries
* they develop bi - polar or multiple identities that reflect the border - crossing process they experience in their everyday life . "
IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP INSTITUTIONS
Section::::Immigration and citizenship institutions .
Although these institutions may have good intentions , the political and financial instability of Haiti have restricted the potential effectiveness these programs are designed to have abroad .
* The Office of Diasporic Affairs : created in 1980 under Henry Namphy ; moved to Office of President in 1991 under Jean - Bertrand Aristide * 10th Department Organization : elected a central committee to oversee regional Committees in cities with large Haitian immigration populations ; independent yet strongly tied to Aristide 's government * Ministry for Haitians Living Abroad :
established in 1994 with Aristides return to regulate the relationship between Haitians living abroad and the state
The Ministry for Haitian Communities Abroad created a database in 2000 recording the technical skills of those Haitians residing abroad .
The idea is that Haitians ' loyalty and sense of belonging to the state — even as emigrants — will impel them to contribute to Haiti 's national development .
The emigration of these potentially productive citizens emphasized Haiti 's ambivalent attitude toward the diaspora .
However , money from Haitians living abroad can be hugely beneficial ; in the 1990s , Haitian remittances were equal to 39 percent of Haiti 's national budget .
NOTEWORTHY CASES
Section::::Noteworthy cases .
Lionel Jean - Baptiste , a Haitian immigrant , was stripped of his U.S. citizenship and then denied entrance to Haiti , his homeland .
After being held in a detention center for a drug - related crime in 2006 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that foreigners who could not be deported could not be held indefinitely , forcing the release of Baptiste .
Baptiste was not issued a Haitian passport because by becoming a naturalized American , he had renounced his Haitian citizenship and thus was no longer considered Haitian .
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS * 1987 Constitution of Haïti * Embassy of the Republic of Haiti in Washington ,
D.C. * CIA World Factbook on Haiti SEE
ALSO
* History of Haiti * Timeline of Haitian history FURTHER READING
* Blaustein , Albert P. , and Jay A. Sigler .
Constitutions That Made History .
New York :
Paragon House , 1988 .
* Brown , Gordon S. Toussaint 's Clause : the Founding Fathers and the Haitian Revolution .
Jackson : University Press of Mississippi , 1936
* Fouron , Georges E. , and Schiller , Nina G. , Georges Woke Up Laughing : Long - Distance Nationalism and the Search for Home .
London :
Duke University Press , 2001 .
* Fouron , Georges E. , and Schiller , Nina G. ( 1999 ) ' Terrains of Blood and Nation : Haitian Transnational Social Fields ' , Ethnic and Racial Studies , 22:2 , 340 - 366 * Garrigus , John D. Before Haiti : Race and Citizenship in French Saint - Domingue .
New York :
Palgrave Macmillan , 2006 .
* Laguerre , Michel S. Diasporic Citizenship : Haitian Americans in Transnational America .
New York :
St. Martin 's Press , 1998 .
* Laguerre , Michel S.
The Military and Society in Haiti .
Knoxville :
The University of Tennessee Press , 1993 .
* Levitt , Peggy and Rafael de la Dehesa .
2003 .
Transnational migration and the redefinition of the state : Variations and explanations .
Ethnic and Racial Studies .
26(4):587 - 611 .
* Mackenzie , Charles .
Notes on Haiti : Made During a Residence in That Republic .
Vol .
II .
London :
Frank Cass and Co. Ltd. , 1830 .
* McLeod , Marc C. " Undesirable Aliens : Race , Ethnicity , and Nationalism in the Comparison of Haitian and British West Indian Workers in Cuba , 1912 - 1939 . " Journal of Social History ( 1998 ) : 599 - 614 .
* Mintz , Sidney W. " Introduction .
" Introduction .
The Haitian People .
By James G. Leyburn .
New Haven :
Yale UP , 1966 .
v - xlviii .
* Plummer , Brenda G. Haiti and the Great Powers , 1902 - 1915 .
Baton Rouge :
Louisiana State UP , 1988 .
*
Redden , Kenneth R. , ed . "
The Legal System of Haiti . "
Modern Legal Systems Cyclopedia .
Buffalo , New York : William S. Hein & Co. , Law Publisher , 1989 .