ADVISORY SPEED LIMIT
An advisory speed limit is a speed recommendation by a governing body , used when it may be non - obvious to the driver that the safe speed is below the legal speed .
It is a posting which approximates the Basic Speed Law or rule , and is subject to enforcement as such .
Advisory speed limits are often set in areas with many pedestrians , such as in city centers and outside schools , and on difficult stretches of roads , such as on tight corners or through roadworks .
While travelling above the advisory speed limit is not illegal per se , it may be negligence per se and liability for any collisions that occur as a result of traveling above the limit can be placed partially or entirely on the person exceeding the advisory speed limit .
Signposting of advisory speed limits varies from country to country ; Australia makes extensive use of advisory speed limits across its highway networks while the Richtgeschwindigkeit ( " reference speed " ) in Germany is valid for the whole autobahn network ( but can be overruled by speed limits in particular sections or for special reasons like weather conditions or roadworks ) , while the United States and the United Kingdom only give advisory speed limits for hazards such as bends .
USE Section::::Use .
Use of advisory speed limits varies from country to country , but they are generally used to reduce speed along short stretches of dangerous road , such as on the tight curves of an off - ramp or on a busy shopping street .
The advisory speed limit when not posted is generally the same as the mandatory speed limit in ideal conditions .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , most speed limits imposed by variable - message signs are advisory , and there are no sanctions for drivers who exceed them ; a notable exception being the Gatsometer - camera enforced , MIDAS and ATM variable limits on the M25 , M42 and M6 motorways .
Crucially , the signs imposing these limits are distinct from regular , advisory VMS displays by the inclusion of a red ring surround , effectively changing them from advance hazard warnings into standard , mandatory speed - limit signs .
As local councils require consent from the Department for Transport before changing speed limits , some use advisory speed limits on roads that the DfT refuses to officially downgrade .
The usefulness of advisory speed limits has been questioned by a number of studies : one group from the Transportation Research Board found advisory speed limits through roadworks being consistently flouted by motorists , while an investigation by Manchester Evening News found that almost all buses in Manchester city centre exceeded the local advisory speed limit ;
some by as much as .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In Australia , if a person is involved in a single vehicle accident and the resulting investigation reveals that the driver was exceeding the Advisory Speed Limit displayed it can be a breach of the Insurance Cover Contract , resulting in no pay - out .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
The Richtgeschwindigkeit ( German Advisory or Suggested Speed of Travel ) is a legal term in Germany describing the advisory speed limit for roads without a mandatory speed limit .
Autobahns have an advisory speed limit of on non - signposted sections .
Exceeding the advised speed is not a criminal offense , but may result in greater liability in the case of an accident due to an increased danger of operating the vehicle .
In Germany , the Autobahn - Richtgeschwindigkeits - Verordnung ( Directive on Reference Speed on Motorways ) , introduced in 1974 , recommends a speed of no more than for autobahns and similar roads , whose lanes are separated by a median or which have at least two lanes per direction , provided there are no traffic signs posting a lower speed limit .
Until 31 August 2009 , a different reference speed could be posted by the traffic signs number 380 and 381 , according to § 42 of the German traffic code ( Straßenverkehrsordnung , StVO ) , as seen above .
As these traffic signs were only rarely used , they meanwhile have been abolished .
SIGNAGE Section::::Signage .
The signage for advisory speed limits is not defined by the Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals , and is therefore not standardised internationally .
The United States uses a small yellow sign under the main warning sign , as well as a standalone variation on the standard speed limit sign , with a yellow background instead of a white one , the words " speed limit " omitted and an additional panel stating the type of hazard ahead .
Though they list speeds , the U.S. advisory speed signs are classified as warning signs , not regulatory signs , as primary speed signs are .
Australia uses a similar design as the U.S. in spite of regulatory speed limit signs being quite different .
Germany used a square sign with a blue background and white lettering , similar to the minimum speed limit sign , and New Zealand uses a yellow background with black lettering ( similar to the Australian design without the " km / h " lettering ) .
The United Kingdom currently uses an oblong white rectangle with black lettering stating " Max Speed " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS