POSTHUMOUS MARRIAGE Posthumous marriage ( or necrogamy ) is a marriage in which one of the participating members is deceased .
It is legal in France and similar forms are practiced in Sudan and China .
Since World War
I , France has had hundreds of requests each year , of which many have been accepted .
FRANCE ORIGINS Section::::France .
Section::::Origins .
A few women were married by use of proxy to soldiers that had died weeks earlier .
This practice came to be called posthumous marriage .
Posthumous marriage for civilians originated in the 1950s , when a dam broke and killed 400 people in Fréjus , France , including a man named André Capra , who was engaged to Iréne Jodart .
Jodart pleaded with French President Charles de Gaulle to let her go along with her marriage plans even though her fiancé had died .
She had support from the media and within months was allowed to marry her fiancé .
It is likely that posthumous marriage ( un mariage posthume ) was made as an extension to France 's proxy marriage .
LEGISLATION Section::::Legislation .
Within months after the Fréjus dam tragedy , France 's parliament drafted a law permitting posthumous marriage .
Since then , hundreds of women have formally filed for what is known as postmortem matrimony .
Posthumous marriage became legal in France by Article 172 of the civil code which states : " The President of the Republic may , for serious reasons , authorize the solemnization of marriage if one of the spouses died after completion of official formalities marking it unequivocal consent .
In this case , the effects of marriage dated back to the day preceding the death of the husband .
However , this marriage does not entail any right of intestate succession for the benefit of the surviving spouse and no matrimonial property is deemed to have existed between the spouses . "
RULES Section::::Rules .
Anyone in France who wants to file for posthumous marriage sends a request to the President of France , who forwards it to the Justice Minister , who forwards it to the prosecutor for the surviving member 's district .
If the couple had originally planned on getting married and the family of the deceased approves , the prosecutor sends the application back to the President .
One out of every four applicants for posthumous marriage is rejected .
Examples of ways to legally show intent are for the man to have posted banns ( official wedding announcements ) at the local courthouse or written permission from a soldier 's commanding officer .
Requests also include records that show a serious cause such as the birth of a child or the death of the fiancé .
Pregnancy alone or a letter to that promises marriage does not suffice , partly because such letters have a reputation for being illegitimate .
The marriage applies retroactively to the day before the deceased spouse died .
Even if they were engaged and had published banns , a posthumous marriage will not necessarily happen , partly because living engaged couples can change their minds at the last minute .
A posthumous marriage can also be thwarted by the testimony of a trustworthy individual .
The judge 's role is to make sure that the paperwork has been properly filled out .
The judge can not question the authority of the documents .
REVIEW OF APPLICATION Section::::Review of application .
Article 171 of the Civil Code requires that application refers to serious reasons for posthumous marriage .
The President of the Republic carefully considers the seriousness of the circumstances of the death .
CEREMONY Section::::Ceremony .
In France , a woman will often stand next to a picture of her deceased fiancé while the ceremony is taking place .
The woman being married uses the phrase
" I did " , rather than "
I do " , to consent to the marriage , and the phrase " until death do us part " is not used as part of the vows .
The mayor conducting the ceremony will read the Presidential decree instead of the deceased man 's marriage vows .
REASONS Section::::Reasons .
The primary reason for the posthumous marriage in France is to legitimize children that a woman might have .
It is also done for emotional reasons .
Posthumous spouses usually prefer to keep quiet about posthumously marrying .
However , a recent spouse , named Christelle Demichel , wrote a letter to The New York Times to let people know that they have the option of marrying their lost loved ones .
Dimichel described the marriage as perfect and stated that " it remained in the spirit of a wedding " .
INHERITANCE Section::::Inheritance .
The law does not permit the living spouse to receive any of the deceased spouse 's property or money .
No matrimonial property is considered to have existed between the two living spouses .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
After a posthumous marriage the living spouse inherently becomes a widow or widower .
Posthumous marriage will also bring the surviving spouse into the family of the deceased spouse , which can create an alliance or moral satisfaction .
The surviving spouse is also subject to impediments of marriage that result .
Posthumous marriage also shows the strength of an individual to overcome a fiancé 's death .
Article 171 specifically states that the usual financial aspects of a marriage , such as liquidation of matrimonial regime or the granting of intestate inheritance ( meaning the laws governing inheritances of people whose spouses die without a will ) do not apply .
The widow can , however , receive a pension and can be entitled to insurance benefits .
NOTABLE POSTHUMOUS
MARRIAGES
* Étienne Cardiles married his civil partner , French National Police Captain Xavier Jugelé , on 30 May 2017 , more than five weeks after the latter died in a terrorist attack on the Champs Élysées .
OTHER COUNTRIES
UNITED STATES Section::::Other countries .
Section::::United States .
In 2009 a posthumous wedding ceremony was held in Batavia , Illinois , for Annie Hopkins , who had died of spinal muscular atrophy .
Annie Hopkins had said that she wanted a wedding celebration instead of a funeral .
The wedding celebration was open to the public and was a fundraiser for the Annie Hopkins Foundation Scholarship Fund , named after her .
Since there was no apparent groom in this marriage , it is better classified as a wedding - themed funeral than a posthumous marriage .
On March 10 , 1987 , a man from Miami named Isaac Woginiak died of a heart attack , without marrying his alleged fiancée .
Two weeks later , Circuit Judge George Orr ordered the court clerk to sign a marriage license on behalf of Woginiak .
SOUTH KOREA Section::::South Korea .
In December 1983 , Heung Jin Moon , the second son of Sun Myung Moon and Hak Ja Han ( who were leaders of the Unification Church ) , was in an automobile accident in New York and died on January 2 .
Moon 's death came before his planned arranged marriage to ballerina Julia Pak , daughter of Moon 's interpreter , Bo Hi Pak .
According to Unificationism , only married couples are allowed to enter the highest level of heaven .
Moon 's parents conducted a posthumous marriage ceremony on February 20 , 1984 .
In 1982 the fiancée of Duk Koo Kim , a Korean boxer who died of injuries , held a posthumous wedding when a funeral for Kim was conducted in Kim 's gym .
Kim 's fiancée , Lee Yon - mi was three months pregnant with Kim 's first child at the time wanted to marry Kim to console the boxer .
Lee Yong - mi told Korean media that she would remain celibate for the rest of her life and commit to raising their child .
In Korea , it used to be customary for people to marry the soul of a fiancé that died before a planned wedding .
The living spouse would then stay celibate for the rest of his or her life , but the tradition is not currently legally binding .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank , one of the characters is a man named Fritz Pfeffer , under the pseudonym Albert Dussel .
In the 1930s Pfeffer met Charlotte Kaletta .
Pfeffer and Kaletta moved in together but were forbidden from marrying because of the 1935 Nazi Nuremberg Laws that outlawed marriages between Jews and non - Jews .
Charlotta married Pfeffer posthumously in 1950 , with retrospective effect to 31 May 1937 .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In 2004 a man in South Africa shot his fiancée and then himself during an argument .
The two were later married because the families and friends wished to remember them as a happy couple , to marry the families together , and because in African culture death is instead thought of as a separation of body and soul .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In Okinawa , which has been under the influences of China for centuries , there has been a custom of posthumous marriage .
The reason is to correct the rules of the placing of spirit tablets .
There are strict rules of placing spirit tablets , and if the rules are broken , the spirit tablet under question is moved to a proper place with ceremonies at the order of a spiritualist .
GHOST MARRIAGE
Section::::Ghost marriage .
In China there is a rare tradition called ghost marriage , also known as a minghun or a spirit marriage .
REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements .
When a woman 's fiancé died , in order for her to participate in the ghost marriage , she would have to participate in the man 's funeral service , which included uncomfortable mourning standards , taking a vow of celibacy , and to immediately take up residence with the man 's family .
There are no requirements for a man doing this but this has not been recorded .
REASONS Section::::Reasons .
In Chinese culture it is very shameful to be the parents of an unwed daughter , and unmarried girls are often shunned from society .
For men , ghost marriages were often performed for the sake of progeny .
In addition , ghost marriage for men let the family 's lineage carry on .
The spouse of a deceased male could adopt a child who would carry on the lineage of the man 's family .
Other reasons for performing ghost marriages for deceased males are dreams and séances from the spirits of the males who want to be married .
Chinese tradition also says that younger brothers do not marry before their older brothers , so sometimes a Chinese ghost marriage will be performed to stay in line with this tradition .
ARRANGEMENT Section::::Arrangement .
Sometimes the family of a deceased person will use a priest as a matchmaker .
Other times they will leave out a red envelope with gifts and believe that the deceased person 's spouse will reveal himself .
PERFORMANCE Section::::Performance .
These ghost marriages were similar to both a wedding and a funeral .
The families of the participants will exchange gifts of various sizes which can include cakes , dresses , and money .
To represent the deceased person(s ) effigies made of bamboo will be used .
These are clothed in what people would wear to weddings and are usually burned afterwards .
Most of the rites of the marriage are actually performed in the same way regular Chinese marriages are usually performed .
OUTSIDE CHINA Section::::Outside China .
In Sudan there is a tradition that when an engaged man dies his brother replaces him at his wedding and any of his children are considered children of the deceased brother .
Women will marry men to continue their blood line .
Women will also marry deceased men so that they can retain their wealth instead of losing it after getting married .
MORMONISM Section::::Mormonism .
Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter - day Saints ( LDS Church ) believe that , with the appropriate authority , marriages can be performed for " time and all eternity , " rather than just " until death do us part .
" They believe that Jesus gave this authority to the Apostle Peter ; in Mathew 16:19 , Jesus tells Peter , " And I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven : and whatsoever thou shalt lose on earth shall be loosed in heaven . "
Consequently , the practice of marriage for eternity is referred to as a sealing or an eternal marriage .
Sealings can be performed posthumously , as well as for the living .
Posthumous sealings can be performed to eternally we d a living person and a deceased spouse ( with a live church member standing as a proxy for the deceased ) , or , more commonly , between two deceased persons ( with a living man and woman standing in as proxies ) .
In either case , the couple must have been married while alive .
Thus , this practice is perhaps better described as a posthumous sealing rather than a posthumous marriage .
In current practice , men who are dead may be sealed by proxy to all of the women to whom they were legally married while alive .
Recent changes in church policy also allow women to be sealed to multiple men , but only after both she and her husbands are dead .
Sealings are also performed posthumously for deceased couples , even for couples that divorced in life .
This ordinance is similar to the church 's practice of baptism for the dead , although it has not been as controversial with non - Mormons .
The church 's doctrine is not entirely specific concerning who should be sealed to whom when there are multiple spouses , and the church permits a sealing to take place any time there was a valid marriage between an opposite - sex couple .
One possibility is that regardless of how many times a man or woman is sealed , only one marriage will remain in the afterlife .
Another possibility is that multiple sealings will be valid in the next life .
The church does not clearly teach whether or not polygamous marriages exist in the afterlife .
It is believed that the proxy sealings , like the church 's proxy baptisms , are only offered to the deceased souls , and that deceased persons must accept the ordinance for it to take effect .
The LDS Church opposes same - sex marriages and does not perform them for either living or deceased couples .
LEVIRATE MARRIAGE Section::::Levirate marriage .
Levirate marriage is a tradition related to posthumous marriages or ghost marriages .
In a Levirate marriage , the brother of a deceased man is obligated to marry his late brother 's widow .
REASONS Section::::Reasons .
Levirate marriages will sometimes be performed to give support to the widows and their children .
Sometimes they are considered a restraint on the woman 's liberty .
In some cases Levirate marriages are only performed for when a man died childless in order to continue his family line .
In Deuteronomy 25 : 5 - 6 , The Hebrew Bible mandates Levirate marriages , known as a yibbum , for a man whose married brother died , unless the brother has a child .
When a levirate marriage is not required ( such as when the deceased brother had a child )
it is forbidden by Leviticus 16:18 .
A halitzah , which releases the widow to remarry a man of her choosing , is now typically performed instead of a Levirate marriage .
POSTHUMOUS MARRIAGE IN FICTION Section::::Posthumous marriage in fiction .
In Lisa See 's novel Peony in Love ( New York : Random House , 2007 ) , set in 17th century China , the main character , Peony , dies as a teenager and is later married in a ghost marriage to a poet that she fell in love with during her lifetime .
In Season 2 , episode 16 of the television series Bones , a woman was murdered and her bones were sold for a Minhun ghost marriage .
During the final season of the television series Without a Trace , an episode titled " Devotion " featured a young woman who was kidnapped and set to be killed and ghost married by the Chinese parents of her deceased ex - fiancé .
In season 5 , episodes 13 of the television series Numb3rs , Chinese women are being murdered and then their bodies are buried atop the coffins of unmarried Chinese males .
The brides were picked by the parents of the deceased males .
Before the murders , a short traditional wedding ceremony was held so that the deceased sons would have marriage in the afterlife .
While it appears that the murders are part of a long - standing tradition , the writers acknowledge that the tradition did not involve murder .
In Elizabeth McCracken 's romance The Giant 's House , a librarian named Peggy Cort meets an eleven - year - old boy named James Sweatt , who suffers from a rare disease called Gigantism .
Cort develops an obsession for Sweatt , and after his death she conceives a child with his father and claims that it is James 's and declares herself as the first posthumous bride in history .
In Corpse Bride , a living man accidentally marries a dead woman after she died .
When he agrees to remain married to the dead woman , he is told he has to take poison and die , ( because the marriage vows state ; " Until death do us part " , and death has already parted the living man and the dead woman ) .
Although he agrees to drink the poison and die , they decide it is better for him to marry a living woman ( he was previously engaged to ) and remain alive until his natural death .
The deceased woman then transforms into a group of white butterflies and flies away into the night .
SEE ALSO
* Ghost marriage ( disambiguation ) * Levirate marriage
* Minghun
*
The Maid ( 2005 film ) REFERENCES