GREEN LANTERN ( FILM )
Green Lantern is a 2011 American superhero film based on the DC Comics character of the same name .
The film stars Ryan Reynolds , Blake Lively , Peter Sarsgaard , Mark Strong , Angela Bassett and Tim Robbins , with Martin Campbell directing a script by Greg Berlanti and comic book writers Michael Green and Marc Guggenheim , which was subsequently rewritten by Michael Goldenberg .
The film tells the story of Hal Jordan , a test pilot who is selected to become the first human member of the Green Lantern Corps .
Hal is given a ring that grants him superpowers , and must confront Parallax , who threatens to upset the balance of power in the universe .
The film first entered development in 1997 ; progress remained stalled until Greg Berlanti was hired to write and direct in October 2007 .
Martin Campbell was brought on board in February 2009 after Berlanti was forced to vacate the director 's position .
Most of the live - action actors were cast between July 2009 and February 2010 , and filming took place from March to August 2010 in Louisiana .
The film was converted to 3D during its post - production stage .
Green Lantern was released on June 17 , 2011 , and received generally negative reviews ; most criticized the film for its screenplay , inconsistent tone , choice and portrayal of villains , and its use of CGI , while some praised Reynolds ' performance .
Reynolds would later voice his dissatisfaction with the film .
The film underperformed at the box office , grossing $ 219 million against a production budget of $ 200 million .
Due to the film 's negative reception and disappointing box office performance , Warner Bros. canceled any plans for a sequel , instead opting to reboot the character in the DC Extended Universe line with the film Green Lantern Corps , set for release in 2020 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Billions of years ago , beings called the Guardians of the Universe used the green essence of willpower to create an intergalactic police force called the Green Lantern Corps .
They divided the universe into 3600 sectors , with one Green Lantern per sector .
One such Green Lantern , Abin Sur of Sector 2814 , defeated the malevolent being Parallax and imprisoned him in the Lost Sector on the desolate planet Ryut .
In the present day , Parallax escapes from his prison after becoming strengthened by an encounter with crash survivors who had accidentally fallen into the dugout where Parallax was imprisoned on the abandoned planet .
Parallax feeds on their fear to gain strength before pursuing and nearly killing Abin Sur , who escapes and crash - lands on Earth where he commands his power ring to find a worthy successor .
Hal Jordan , a cocky test pilot working at Ferris Aircraft , is chosen by the ring and transported to the crash site , where the dying Abin Sur appoints him a Green Lantern , telling him to take the lantern and speak the oath .
Jordan says the oath and is whisked away to the Green Lantern Corps home planet of Oa , where he meets and trains with veteran Corps members Tomar - Re , Kilowog , and Corps leader Sinestro , who believes he is unfit and fearful .
Jordan , disheartened by his extreme training sessions and Sinestro 's doubts , quits and returns to Earth , keeping the power ring and lantern .
Scientist Hector Hammond is summoned by his father , Senator Robert Hammond , to a secret government facility to perform an autopsy on Abin Sur 's body under the watchful eye of Amanda Waller .
A piece of Parallax inside the corpse enters Hammond , giving him telepathic and telekinetic powers at the cost of his sanity .
After discovering that he was chosen for the secret work only due to his father 's influence and not for his own abilities , Hammond attempts to kill his father by telekinetically sabotaging his helicopter at a massive party .
Jordan saves the senator and the party guests , including his childhood sweetheart Carol Ferris .
Later , at the government facility , Hammond uses telekenisis to successfully kill his father by burning him alive .
Hammond also elevates Waller high above the floor .
As she 's falling , Jordan arrives and saves the injured Waller by creating a pool of water which whisks her away out of further danger .
During the encounter Jordan learns of Parallax coming to Earth .
On Oa , the Guardians tell Sinestro that Parallax was one of their own until he desired to control the yellow essence of fear , only to become corrupted .
Arguing that the way to fight fear is with fear itself , Sinestro requests that the Guardians forge a ring of the same yellow power , preparing to concede Earth 's destruction to Parallax in order to protect Oa .
Jordan appears and tries to convince the Guardians that fear will turn the users evil if its power is used , but they reject his pleas , and he returns to Earth to try to defeat Parallax on his own .
Jordan saves Ferris from Hammond after a brief showdown .
Parallax arrives , consumes Hammond 's entire life force , and then wreaks havoc on Coast City .
After a fierce battle , Jordan lures Parallax away from Earth and toward the sun .
Parallax is inadvertently caught in the sun 's gravitational pull and is destroyed , while Jordan escapes .
Jordan loses consciousness after the battle and falls toward the sun , but is saved by Sinestro , Kilowog , and Tomar - Re .
The entire Green Lantern Corps congratulates Jordan for his bravery .
Sinestro tells Jordan he now bears the responsibility of protecting his sector as a Green Lantern .
In a mid - credits scene , Sinestro takes the yellow ring and places it on his finger , causing his green suit and eyes to turn yellow .
CAST * Ryan Reynolds as Hal Jordan / Green Lantern :
* Blake Lively as Carol Ferris :
* Peter Sarsgaard as Hector Hammond :
* Mark Strong as Thaal Sinestro : * Angela Bassett as Amanda Waller :
* Tim Robbins as Robert Hammond :
* Temuera Morrison as Abin Sur : * Geoffrey Rush as the voice of Tomar - Re :
* Michael Clarke Duncan as the voice of Kilowog :
* Taika Waititi as Thomas Kalmaku : * Clancy Brown as the voice of Parallax : Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Jon Tenney plays Martin Jordan , Hal Jordan 's father ; Jay O. Sanders portrays Carl Ferris , an aircraft designer , and father of Carol Ferris ; Mike Doyle is cast as Jack Jordan , Hal Jordan 's older brother ; and Nick Jandl is cast as Jim Jordan , Hal Jordan 's younger brother .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In early 1997 , Warner Bros. approached cult filmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith , who had then just finished writing Superman Lives , to script a Green Lantern film .
Smith turned down the offer , believing there were more suitable candidates to make a Green Lantern film .
At one point Quentin Tarantino was offered the chance to write and direct .
Warner also considered the property as an action comedy ; by 2004 , Robert Smigel had completed a script which was set to star Jack Black in the lead role .
However , the studio dropped the comedy idea following poor fan reaction from the Internet .
David S. Goyer was offered the chance to write and direct either a Green Lantern or Flash film after Warner Bros. was impressed with his screenplay for Batman Begins , but he opted to direct the latter .
Actor - writer Corey Reynolds , a comic book fan of the John Stewart character , pitched Warner an idea for a trilogy , with him starring as John Stewart and performing screenwriting duties .
Reynolds intended to introduce Hal Jordan , the Green Lantern Corps and Justice League in possible sequels .
He finished the script for Green Lantern : Birth of a Hero in June 2007 , receiving positive feedback from Warner Bros. with a potential 2010 release date .
However , the studio abandoned Reynolds ' concept , and in October 2007 , Greg Berlanti signed to direct the film and co - write it with comic - book writers Michael Green and Marc Guggenheim .
A draft of the trio 's 2008 script , leaked on the Internet , revealed a story that included the hero 's origin and included the characters Carol Ferris , Kilowog , Sinestro , and Guy Gardner in a cameo appearance , and appeared " to set up Hector Hammond as Hal Jordan 's ...
first major nemesis ...
" Shortly afterward , Guggenheim said that the script would contain characterizations inspired by the Denny O'Neil - Neal Adams run on the comic in the 1970s , and Dave Gibbons ' work in the early 1980s .
He added that he and his co - writers also looked to the 2000s Geoff Johns stories , saying , " It 's been interesting because we finished a draft just before [ Johns ' ] ''
[ story arc ] started up . "
So I 've been reading ' Secret Origin ' with a real interest in seeing '
OK , how did Geoff solve this problem ? '
There are certain elements just for anyone trying to retell Hal 's origin for a modern day audience has to address and grapple with .
For example , why the hell was Abin [ Sur ] flying in a space ship when he 's a Green Lantern ?
You do n't ask that question back in the Silver Age , but when you 're writing in the Modern Age , you have to answer these things . "
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
By December 2008 , the writers had written three drafts of the screenplay and Warner was preparing for pre - production .
However , Berlanti was forced to vacate the director 's position when Warner Bros. attached him to This
Is Where I Leave You , and in February 2009 , Martin Campbell entered negotiations to direct .
The release date was set as December 2010 , before being moved to June 17 , 2011 .
Bradley Cooper , Ryan Reynolds , Justin Timberlake , and Jared Leto were the producers ' top choices for the starring role in July 2009 .
On July 10 , Warner announced that Reynolds had been cast as Hal Jordan / Green Lantern .
A website reported on January 7 , 2010 , that a crew - member had written on her blog that the film was greenlit the day before and that filming would begin in 10 weeks .
Also in January , Blake Lively was cast as Carol Ferris , Peter Sarsgaard was in negotiations to portray Hector Hammond , and Mark Strong was in negotiations to play Sinestro .
In February , Tim Robbins joined the cast as Senator Hammond .
The following month , New Zealanders Temuera Morrison and Taika Waititi had joined the cast as Abin Sur and Tom Kalmaku , respectively .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
With a production budget of $ 200 million , Green Lantern was initially scheduled to begin filming in November 2009 at Fox Studios Australia .
The start date was pushed back to January 2010 , but the production moved to Louisiana , where , on March 3 , 2010 , test footage was filmed in Madisonville involving stunt cars .
Principal photography began on March 15 , 2010 in New Orleans .
Nine days after filming began , Angela Bassett joined the cast as Dr. Amanda Waller , a government agent who is a staple of the DC Comics universe .
In April 2010 , Jon Tenney revealed that he would play Hal Jordan 's father , test pilot Martin H. Jordan .
By June 2010 filming had begun at New Orleans Lakefront Airport .
In the same month it was reported that Mike Doyle has been cast for the role of Jack Jordan , the older brother of Hal Jordan .
In July 2010 it was reported that Ryan Reynolds was injured while shooting scenes for the film , separating his shoulder and was in " lots of pain " .
While promoting Deadpool ( in which Reynolds portrays another famous comic book superhero ) , Reynolds said that filming Green Lantern itself had been frustrating , " You really need a visionary behind a movie like that , but it was the classic studio story : "
We have a poster , but we do n't have a script or know what we want ; let 's start shooting ! "
The Deadpool film refers to Reynolds ' time as Green Lantern in two scenes , the opening scene which features a drawing of Green Lantern , and a later scene where his character ( who has the ability to Break the fourth wall ) insists that his suit not be " green , or animated ! "
In the film 's sequel , there is a post - credits scene in which Deadpool travels back in time to shoot Reynolds before he can make the film .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Geoff Johns confirmed that the film had ended principal photography on August 6 , 2010 and entered post - production .
In an interview with MTV News , director Martin Campbell was asked about the film 's effects - heavy epic scale and commented "
It 's daunting , just the process , ( there are ) something like 1,300 visual shots , it 's mind - blowing , quite honestly " .
When asked about the constructs created from the power rings , Campbell stated " One of the nice things is , we 'll all sit down and say , ' Well , what are we going to do here ? '
Really , it 's as much as your imagination can go to make the constructs " .
The studio also confirmed that the film would have a 3-D release .
In January 2011 , it was reported that Green Lantern had begun re - shoots for key scenes at Warner Bros. Studios in Los Angeles , California .
In March 2011 it was reported that Geoffrey Rush had joined the cast as the voice of the CGI - created character , Tomar - Re .
In April 2011 , Michael Clarke Duncan entered negotiations to voice Kilowog .
Also in April it was reported that Warner Bros. raised the visual effects budget by $ 9 million and hired additional visual effects studios to bolster the ranks of the team that had been working overtime to meet the film 's June 17 launch .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was released in stores on June 14 , 2011 .
The soundtrack was composed by James Newton Howard , who also worked on the other Warner Bros / DC Comics based films Batman Begins and The Dark Knight with Hans Zimmer .
The soundtrack was published by WaterTower Music .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The world premiere of Green Lantern took place on June 15 , 2011 at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood , California , and was released in North America and the UK two days later on June 17 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Green Lantern was released on DVD and Blu - ray on October 14 , 2011 .
The Blu - ray release includes an extended cut , which adds an extra nine minutes of footage to the running time , totaling 123 minutes .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing . Marketing and promotion of the film cost $ 100 million .
The first footage of the film was shown at the 2010 San Diego Comic - Con .
The footage was widely released online in November 2010 with thirty seconds of footage airing the following day on Entertainment Tonight .
The first full theatrical trailer for the film was shown before screenings of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1 and became available online in November 2010 .
This initial trailer was met with a poor reception from fans and , as a result , the film 's marketing campaign was delayed .
Sue Kroll , the studio 's worldwide marketing president stated , " Part of the reason the response to the first trailer was lukewarm was that the big - scale sequences were n't ready to show , and we suffered for it .
We ca n't afford to do that again . "
In April Warner Bros. debuted nine minutes of footage at the 2011 WonderCon in San Francisco .
The Hollywood Reporter reported that the footage wowed the audience .
A four - minute cut of the WonderCon footage was later released online .
ANIMATION Section::::Animation .
In March 2010 , Comics Continuum reported that an animated Green Lantern film was in the works at Warner Bros. Animation and would be part of a direct - to - video project that was timed for release of the live - action Green Lantern movie in the summer of 2011 .
The Green Lantern animated project would likely take a look at the origins of the Green Lantern Corps , including the first ring wielders .
In an interview with Bruce Timm , the producer revealed that a sequel to the had been discussed but cancelled because of the picture not achieving the immediate success that they had hoped for .
However , Timm did hope the live - action film would renew interest in a sequel .
The animated movie entitled was officially announced in June 2010 instead .
COMICS Section::::Comics .
DC Entertainment began releasing a series of Green Lantern Movie Prequel comics the week before the film was released , covering the lives of the characters before the events of the film , written by members of the film 's production team .
Five comics were made , covering Tomar - Re by Marc Guggenheim , Kilowog by Peter J. Tomasi , Abin Sur by Michael Green , Hal Jordan by Greg Berlanti and Sinestro by Michael Goldenberg and Geoff Johns .
A free excerpt of the Sinestro prequel comic was released online as " Secret Origin of the Green Lantern Corps # 1 " two days before the release of the film .
ROLLER COASTER Section::::Roller coaster .
Six Flags debuted two roller coasters named Green Lantern at Great Adventure and in 2011 to coincide with the film 's release .
A third ride , Green Lantern Coaster , also opened in November of the same year at Warner Bros. Movie World in Australia .
Although this ride was more based on the original comic .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
Warner Bros. Interactive produced a tie - in video game , , for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 by Double Helix Games , with versions for the Nintendo Wii , the Nintendo DS and the Nintendo 3DS by Griptonite Games .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Green Lantern opened on Friday , June 17 , 2011 in North America , earning $ 3.4 million in 1,180 midnight runs .
The film went on to gross $ 21,386,523 its opening day , but fell 22 % on Saturday for a weekend total of $ 53,174,303 , earning it the No . 1 spot .
In its second weekend Green Lantern experienced a 66.1 % decline , which was the largest second weekend decline for a superhero film in 2011 .
Green Lantern grossed $ 116,601,172 in the U.S. and Canada as well as $ 103,250,000 internationally bringing its worldwide total to $ 219,851,172 .
Many industry analysts felt that Green Lantern " failed to perform to expectations " .
The Hollywood Reporter speculated that Green Lantern needed to make approximately $ 500 million to be considered financially solid .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Green Lantern received mixed reviews from critics .
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 26 % based on 226 reviews with an average rating of 4.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Noisy , overproduced , and thinly written , Green Lantern squanders an impressive budget and decades of comics mythology .
" On Metacritic , the film has a score of 39 out of 100 based on reviews from 39 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
Justin Chang of Variety gave Green Lantern a mixed review , stating , " Martin Campbell 's visually lavish sci - fi adventure is a highly unstable alloy of the serious , the goofy and the downright derivative . "
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said , " Green Lantern is bad .
This despite Ryan Reynolds 's dazzling dentistry , hard - body physique and earnest efforts , and the support of fine performers like Peter Sarsgaard ...
Mark Strong ... and Angela Bassett " .
Christy Lemire of the Associated Press called it a " joyless amalgamation of expository dialogue and special effects that are n't especially special .
"
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times had mixed feelings , stating , " Green Lantern does not intend to be plausible .
It intends to be a sound - and - light show , assaulting the audience with sensational special effects .
If that 's what you want , that 's what you get .
" British newspaper The Daily Telegraph named The Green Lantern one of the ten worst films of 2011 .
Conversely , Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter gave it a positive review , saying the film " serves up all the requisite elements with enough self - deprecating humor to suggest it does n't take itself too seriously " .
Reviewer Leonard Maltin felt that " the film offers a dazzling array of visual effects , a likable hero , a beautiful leading lady , a colorful villain , and a good backstory .
It also does n't take itself too seriously . "
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said , " More science - fiction space opera than superhero epic , it works in fits and starts as its disparate parts go in and out of effectiveness , but the professionalism of the production make it watchable in a comic book kind of way " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Recipients ! !
Result 2010
Scream Awards
Most Anticipated Movie
rowspan="2 "
2011 Teen Choice Awards
Choice Movie
Actor -
Sci - Fi /
Fantasy
Ryan Reynolds Choice Movie Actress - Sci - Fi
/ Fantasy Blake Lively 2011
Scream Awards
Best Superhero Ryan Reynolds as the Green Lantern rowspan="3
" 38th People 's Choice Awards Ryan Reynolds ( along with The Change - Up )
Favorite Superhero
Ryan Reynolds
Ryan Reynolds CANCELED SEQUEL AND FRANCHISE Section::::Canceled sequel and franchise .
In 2010 , director Martin Campbell confirmed the possibility of a Green Lantern trilogy .
Warner Bros. originally planned on Green Lantern being the first entry of a new DC film franchise , and commissioned a script for a sequel from Greg Berlanti , Michael Green , and Marc Guggenheim while filming for the first film was underway .
In August 2010 , Michael Goldenberg was still attached to write the screenplay , based on the sequel treatment .
The scene in the film 's end credits showing a resurgence of the yellow power ring of fear , with Sinestro becoming corrupted by its dark power , teased the planned sequel .
In September 2011 Warner Bros. , dismayed by the film 's negative reviews and disappointing box office run , abandoned plans for sequels .
REBOOT Section::::Reboot .
In June 2013 , David S. Goyer confirmed that Man of Steel is the first film in the DC Extended Universe .
This confirmed that should the Green Lantern property be featured in an upcoming DC film , it will be a rebooted version .
Later that year Goyer stated that he had interest in making a new feature film based on the titular character .
In July 2015 , Warner Bros announced plans to release a solo Green Lantern film titled Green Lantern Corps , with a release date scheduled for June 19 , 2020 .
The film will be the eleventh installment of the DC Extended Universe .
Hal Jordan and John Stewart will reportedly be the Green Lanterns focused on in the movie .
In January 2016 , it was reported that Goyer and Justin Rhodes will be writing the film 's script and will also produce the film , with Geoff Johns and Jon Berg as executive producers .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The disappointing performance of the movie is occasionally a target of mockery from superhero - related comedies .
Deadpool 2s post - credits scene features Deadpool , who is also portrayed by Ryan Reynolds , time - traveling to kill his own actor as he was reading the script for the Green Lantern .
DC animated movie
Teen Titans Go !
to the Movies also makes a reference to Green Lantern 's disappointing movie .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS