ADVANTAGE GAMBLING Advantage gambling , or advantage play , refers to legal methods , in contrast to cheating in casinos , used to gain an advantage while gambling .
The term usually refers to house - banked games , but can also refer to games played against other players , such as poker .
Someone who practises advantage gambling is often referred to as an advantage player , or AP .
Unlike cheating , which is by definition illegal , advantage play exploits innate characteristics of a particular game to give the player an advantage relative to the house or other players .
While not illegal , advantage play is often discouraged and some advantage players may be banned by certain casinos .
A skillful or knowledgeable player can gain an advantage at a number of games .
Card games have been beaten by card sharps for centuries .
Blackjack and other table games can usually be beaten with card counting , hole carding , shuffle tracking , edge sorting , or several other methods .
The players most skilled in these techniques have been nominated to the Blackjack Hall of Fame .
Some video poker games , such as full pay Deuces Wild , can be beaten by the use of a strategy card devised by computer analysis of the game and often for sale in casino gift shops .
And similar to the Blackjack Hall of Fame , there is an internet " Video Poker Hall of Fame " .
Some slot machines and lotteries with progressive jackpots can eventually have such a high jackpot that they offer a positive return or overlay when played long term , according to the gambling mathematics .
Some online games can be beaten with bonus hunting .
SPORTS AND HORSE BETTING
Section::::Sports and horse betting .
Sports and horse betting can be beaten by placing arbitrage bets , which involve placing bets at different bookmakers who are offering different lines .
Many online sports books now offer bonuses like free bets or free money .
These bonuses usually come with a stipulation that the bettor place a certain number of bets .
For example , a site may offer a bettor $ 50 free if they deposit $ 100 and place a total of $ 1000 in bets .
These can reduce the vig taken by the house or even offer the bettor a small advantage .
Another form of advantage can be found by betting the " middle " on a sports event .
This situation occurs when two bookmakers are offering different lines on the same event , or if a bettor has placed a bet and the bookmaker changes the line .
The bettor simply takes the most favorable lines at each bookmaker , and if the result of the contest is between the numbers , or in the " middle " , then the bettor wins both bets .
For example , Bookmaker A lists the Jets to be a 4-point favorite over the Bills .
Bookmaker B has the Jets as just a 2-point favorite .
The advantage player may bet the Bills +4 with Book A and then the Jets -2 with Book B.
If the Jets win by 3 , the advantage player collects on both bets .
If the Jets win by either 2 or 4 , the advantage player collects on one winning bet and the other " push . "
And if the Jets win or lose by any other total , the two bets cancel out , leaving the advantage player to pay only the vigorish on the bets .
Given typical 10-cent lines , a middle need only win 1 time in 21 to break even , which is a realistic goal – the middle is always a plausible result since it is based on the actual strength of the teams .
Middling is an example of line arbitrage .
SPECIAL OFFERS
Section::::Special offers .
Using special offers provided by bookmakers it is possible for a skilled bettor to put the odds in their favour .
Special offers may include ; cashback on specific events , enhanced odds and comp points .
To profit from these specials , a skilled bettor will use betting , laying and dutching to create their own book on an event that may not guarantee profit but will still put the odds in their favour instead of the bookmaker(s ) involved .
Sign up bonuses are also classed as special offers and can be used in a similar way to lock in a profit regardless of the result using the principles of matched betting .
BETTING EXCHANGES
Section::::Betting exchanges .
Betting exchanges offer advantage players a chance to make a larger profit than possible with bookmakers because exchanges charge commission only on the net winnings in a particular betting market .
One way to make money on the exchanges is " trading " -
in the above example , the Jets might be a favorite decimal odds of 1.90 to defeat the Bills .
If a " trader " thinks these odds too long he may bet $ 1000 on the Jets , and should he prove correct and the odds on the Jets get shorter , " lay off " by laying , say , a $ 1016 bet against the Jets at 1.87 .
If the Jets win , he collects $ 900 on his bet on the Jets and pays out approximately $ 884 on the bet he laid against the Jets .
If the Jets lose , he loses his $ 1000 stake on the Jets but keeps the $ 1016 stake on the bet he laid against the Jets .
Either way , the " trader " makes a $ 16 profit and he will pay a commission only on that profit ( usually not more than 5 % or 80 cents in this example ) for a net profit of $ 15.20 regardless of the result .
Of course , if the odds go the wrong way the " trader " may lose money but most exchanges do not charge a commission in the event of a net loss .
POKER Section::::Poker . Poker can offer a long - term advantage to a skilled player because it is played against other players and not against the house .
The casino usually takes a rake ( commission ) or a time charge .
Whether a poker player can win enough from the game to cover the rake and make a profit depends not only on the player 's skill , but also on the opposition 's lack thereof - the degree of difficulty can vary widely from casino to casino .
Tables with relatively easy opposition are referred to as " soft . "
There is another advantage to playing poker as opposed to games where play is against the house : since the house has no direct interest in the outcome of a poker game , successful poker players can operate openly without risk of being banned by casinos .
There are many ways of making advantage during the game .
One advantage is to watch opponents and their reactions , especially their facial expressions ; example is that a person can make a certain face expression or a gesture if the person is bluffing , therefore making it easy to detect a bluff and call the bet or even raise it .
If the player is making nervous reactions after calling or raising a bluff ( e.g. squeezing fists , sweating , nervous face expression ) , no matter how small they are , if detectable , the bluff can be confirmed .
For this reason , many professional poker players wear sunglasses and caps to prevent other players from reading their gestures and expressions , therefore giving them an advantage .
Other ways of noticing a bluff is the amount of money in the certain bet , especially during flops and turns , while bluffing during the river is a rare occasion .
Some players usually notice the bluff in the amount ; if the amount of money is too large for a safe bet , especially if the raised pot is very close to all in or the pot is all in , the bluff will be called .
When a raised pot is also suspicious but it is not big enough to be a certain bluff , advantage players usually visualize every possible card pair that the suspected bluff player could have ( e.g. pair , two pairs , three of a kind ) .
Another way to notice a bluff is the round in which the bluff is made ; inexperienced bluff players usually bluff during flops , while the advanced ones bluff during turns , and some even during rivers , although bluffing during the river is a very risky move .
OTHER WAYS
TO GAIN AN ADVANTAGE
DICE CONTROL
Section::::Other ways to gain an advantage .
Section::::Dice control .
Experts disagree about whether or not an advantage can be gained at some other games .
One example is dice control .
Authors Stanford Wong and Frank Scoblete have stated that by setting and throwing the dice in a certain way players can alter the odds at the game of craps enough to gain an advantage .
PACHINKO Section::::Pachinko .
In the Japanese game of pachinko , there are numerous purported strategies for winning , the most reliable of which is to use inside information to learn which machines have the highest payout settings .
Because of the " Stock " , " Renchan " , and tenjō systems , it is possible to make money by simply playing machines on which someone has just lost a huge amount of money .
This is called being a " hyena " .
They are easy to recognize , roaming the aisles for a " Kamo " ( " sucker " in English ) to leave their machine in a favorable mode .
ANGLE SHOOTING
Section::::Angle shooting .
" Angle shooting " is another type of advantage play .
Despite " angle shooting " being legal , it is possibly an unethical way to beat casino games .
One way to get an advantage at a casino is " hole carding " where a player tries to look at the dealer 's hole card in blackjack and then uses that information to play his hand differently .
This clearly gives an advantage to the player since knowing your opponent 's cards reduces the risks involved in the game .
Taking advantage of incorrect payouts is another example of angle shooting .
For example , if an inexperienced dealer pays 2 to 1 on a blackjack instead of 3 to 2 , not correcting him is also taking advantage of an incorrect payout .
COMP HUSTLING Section::::Comp hustling .
Comp hustling can be another form of advantage gambling .
Players , known as comp hustlers or comp wizards , who play games with a low house advantage or low bet size such as penny slots , can get more than their expected loss in free items from the casino .
Many advantage players also take steps to maximize the comps they receive from their play .
HAZARDS Section::::Hazards .
Casinos sometimes take measures to thwart players who they believe pose a threat to them , especially card - counters or hole - card players .
However , some casinos tolerate card - counters who do not bet large amounts , who are not good at counting , or who do not use a large betting spread .
Some countermeasures include shuffling when the deck is favorable to the player , imposing betting limits , " backing off " players by asking them not to play blackjack any more , or asking a player to leave the casino .
In New Jersey , a player may not be asked to leave a table for counting cards , although the house may still impose betting limits or shuffle sooner .
Players caught counting cards or hole - carding ultimately may find themselves listed in the Griffin Book and become unwelcome in most casinos .
The Griffin Book was sued , but there are other substitutes today .
In the past , video poker and skillful progressive slot machine players were rarely ejected for winning , but the practice is common today .
They may have their comps reduced or eliminated .
Skillful sports bettors , known as " sharps " , may have their betting limits reduced and may not be allowed to take advantage of bonuses at online sports books .
Instead , skillful sports bettors may rely on " runners " to place and collect their bets .
Craps players are often stopped from playing if the dice fail to bounce off the back wall of the table .
Advantage players abide by the established rules of the game and thus , in most jurisdictions , are not regarded as committing fraud against the casino .
So , while they may face the above casino - imposed sanctions , they are able to operate without the threat of criminal prosecution for their behavior .
This is not the case in all jurisdictions , however , and some advantage players have reported more aggressive countermeasures being taken even in well known gambling locations like Monte Carlo .
SEE ALSO
* Arbitrage betting * Matched betting NOTES