ROBERT LEE WILLIE
Robert Lee Willie ( January 2 , 1958 - December 28 , 1984 ) was a Louisiana man who was convicted for the May 28 , 1980 kidnap , rape , and murder of 18-year - old Faith Hathaway .
He was sentenced to death and held on Death Row at Louisiana State Penitentiary prior to his execution in an electric chair .
Sister Helen Prejean , a teacher and one of the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Medaille from New Orleans , began to write to him and later served as his spiritual adviser .
In her book Dead Man Walking ( 1993 ) , she explored her experiences with men on Death Row and the basis for her growing opposition to the death penalty .
The book was adapted as a 1995 film of the same name , starring Susan Sarandon and Sean Penn .
The book was also adapted as an opera , first produced by the San Francisco Opera in 2000 .
CRIMES
Section::::Crimes .
Willie and Joseph Vaccaro picked up Faith Hathaway , who was walking home after celebrating with friends the night before she was to enter the U.S. Army .
They drove her to a remote area , raped her , and stabbed her to death .
They left her body at Frickes Cave , a borrow pit , south of the parish seat Franklinton , Louisiana , along Highway 25 and near the Bogue Chitto River .
Eight days later , on May 31 , 1980 , the pair attacked a 20-year - old male , Mark Brewster , and 16-year - old female , Debbie Cuevas , both from Madisonville .
The men raped the girl and stabbed and shot the man .
They dropped her off after they visited another person 's trailer home .
Brewster survived his attack , but suffered paralysis from the waist down from his injuries .
After being convicted , Willie also pleaded guilty to stealing $ 10,000 worth of marijuana from and murdering Dennis Hemby in 1978 .
He committed this crime with his cousin , Perry Wayne Taylor .
Willie and Vaccaro were arrested in Arkansas .
TRIAL Section::::Trial .
In court Willie presented a hard case , saying that he had enjoyed raping Hathaway .
Cuevas testified in court against him .
At the trials , Willie and Vaccaro presented disputing accounts as to which man had what role in the crimes .
Willie was convicted of the kidnapping , rape and murder of Hathaway and sentenced to death .
After being convicted , he pleaded guilty to the robbery and murder of Dennis Hembly in 1978 , committed with his cousin Perry Wayne Taylor .
They stole $ 10,000 worth of marijuana .
Taylor pleaded guilty to manslaughter and was sentenced to 21 years .
Willie was sentenced to six life sentences in total .
Vaccaro received two life sentences for his part in the Hathaway and Cuevas / Brewster crimes .
he was serving time in a federal prison in Kansas .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Willie was the son of Elizabeth Oalman of Covington , and had four brothers .
In interviews , he recounted a life filled with drugs , alcohol and violence .
His father John Willie , 53 , served 27 years at Angola for cattle theft , aggravated battery , and manslaughter .
DEATH ROW Section::::Death Row .
In 1982 Sister Helen Prejean began to write to Willie , at the request of the prison chaplain .
A teacher in New Orleans , she was one of the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Medaille and had acted as spiritual adviser to another inmate on Death Row .
Willie was held on Death Row pending his execution , as appeals made their way through the courts .
As was customary for such inmates , he was isolated socially and unable to work or participate in prison programs .
After some time , Sister Prejean began to visit him and became his spiritual adviser .
As she recounted in a book ( see below ) , she worked to acknowledge him as a human being , help him acknowledge his crimes and reconcile with God .
EXECUTION Section::::Execution .
Willie was the 32nd person executed in the United States since 1977 .
That year judicial executions resumed after the US Supreme Court had ruled that states needed to revise their death penalty statutes to meet constitutional concerns .
As of February 2018 , Willie 's execution is the only one successfully carried out in the post - Furman era between Christmas and New Year .
Willie was the sixth man in Louisiana to be executed in a 13 month - period .
He asked Sister Prejean to be with him the day of the execution ; he was also visited by his mother and brothers .
Sister Prejean attended the execution at his request ; he winked at her before the end .
Prior to his execution , he said to Hathaway 's mother and stepfather , Elizabeth and Vern Harvey , who were there as witnesses , " I hope you get some relief from my death . "
He also said , " Killing people is wrong .
That 's why you 've put me to death .
It makes no difference whether it 's citizens , countries , or governments .
Killing is wrong . "
Afterward Sister Prejean said that Willie had expressed remorse before his death .
He had also " told her he would wink at her as a sign ' that I 'm free inside and God 's taking care of me ' . "
Yet , Debbie Cuevas , recounts in her book that Willie never felt remorse:'"Did he show any real remorse before he died ?
" I asked ... [ Helen Prejean ] shook her head sadly . "
No .
and you know , Debbie , I 'm not sure he was capable of that .
" ' ( page 231 ) AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Feeling that victim 's families were overlooked in the criminal justice system , the Harveys founded a group , Parents of Murdered Children , to help others .
They have worked to ensure that families are given more information about court proceedings as well .
They have continued to support the death penalty .
Sister Prejean wrote a non - fiction book Dead Man Walking ( 1993 ) about her encounters with Willie and Elmo Patrick Sonnier , the first convicted murderer for whom she had served as spiritual adviser , and with personnel in the prison system .
She explored the effects of holding people on Death Row and being involved in executions for guards , chaplains and other officials .
She has become an advocate to abolish the death penalty .
Her book was adapted for a 1995 film of the same name , starring Susan Sarandon and Sean Penn .
The character Matthew Poncelet , played by Penn in the film , and his crime , were drawn from Willie and Sonnier .
The book was also adapted as an opera by the same name , first produced in 2000 by the San Francisco Opera .
Debbie Cuevas later married and had a son and a daughter .
Known then as Debbie Morris , she still struggled to come to terms with her experience .
She eventually forgave both Willie and Vaccaro for their crimes against her .
In a memoir , Forgiving the Dead Man Walking :
Only One Woman Can Tell the Entire Story ( 1998 ) , she tells of her spiritual journey .
She writes that she had decided to forgive Willie for the crimes he committed .
After her book was published , Morris began writing to Vaccaro in prison .
Through this period , Morris also established a friendship with Sister Prejean .
Morris opposes capital punishment .
She has said in her book that she believed her testimony contributed to Willie 's being sentenced to death and executed ( page 244 ) .
SEE ALSO
* Capital punishment in Louisiana
* Capital punishment in the United States
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Buchanan , Christopher .
" Louisiana : A Murder , a Movie and a Wink " , PBS(2003 - 12 - 08 ) .
Retrieved on 2007 - 11 - 22 .
* " U.S. Executions Since 1976 " .
Clark County Prosecuting Attorney .
Retrieved on 2007 - 11 - 22 .
*
" South of forgiveness " .
Thordis Elva and Tom Stranger .