SOLAR CAR
A solar car is a solar vehicle used for land transport .
Solar cars usually run on only power from the sun , although some models will supplement that power using a battery , or use solar panels to recharge batteries or run auxiliary systems for a car that mainly uses battery power .
Solar cars combine technology typically used in the aerospace , bicycle , alternative energy and automotive industries .
The design of a solar vehicle is severely limited by the amount of energy input into the car .
Most solar cars have been built for the purpose of solar car races .
Some prototypes have been designed for public use , although no cars primarily powered by the sun are available commercially .
Solar cars depend on a solar array that uses photovoltaic cells ( PV cells ) to convert sunlight into electricity .
Unlike solar thermal energy which converts solar energy to heat , PV cells directly convert sunlight into electricity .
When sunlight ( photons ) strike PV cells , they excite electrons and allow them to flow , creating an electric current .
PV cells are made of semiconductor materials such as silicon and alloys of indium , gallium and nitrogen .
Crystalline silicon is the most common material used and has an efficiency rate of 15 - 20 % .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first model solar car invented was a tiny 15-inch vehicle created by General Motors employee , William G. Cobb .
Called it the Sunmobile , he displayed it in 1955 at the Chicago , Powerama convention .
It was made up of 12 selenium photovoltaic cells and a small electric motor .
SOLAR ARRAY Section::::Solar array .
The solar array consists of hundreds of solar cells converting sunlight into electricity .
In order to construct an array , PV cells are placed together to form modules which are placed together to form an array .
The larger arrays in use can produce over 2 kilowatts ( 2.6 hp ) .
The solar array can be mounted in six ways :
* horizontal .
This most common arrangement gives most overall power during most of the day in low latitudes or higher latitude summers and offers little interaction with the wind .
Horizontal arrays can be integrated or be in the form of a free canopy .
* vertical .
This arrangement is sometimes found in free standing or integrated sails to harness wind energy .
Useful solar power is limited to mornings , evenings , or winters and when the vehicle is pointing in the right direction .
* adjustable .
Free solar arrays can often be tilted around the axis of travel in order to increase power when the sun is low and well to the side .
An alternative is to tilt the whole vehicle when parked .
Two - axis adjustment is only found on marine vehicles , where the aerodynamic resistance is of less importance than with road vehicles .
* integrated .
Some vehicles cover every available surface with solar cells .
Some of the cells will be at an optimal angle whereas others will be shaded .
* trailer .
Solar trailers are especially useful for retrofitting existing vehicles with little stability , e.g. bicycles .
Some trailers also include the batteries and others also the drive motor .
* remote .
By mounting the solar array at a stationary location instead of the vehicle , power can be maximised and resistance minimized .
The virtual grid - connection however involves more electrical losses than with true solar vehicles and the battery must be larger .
The choice of solar array geometry involves an optimization between power output , aerodynamic resistance and vehicle mass , as well as practical considerations .
For example , a free horizontal canopy gives 2 - 3 times the surface area of a vehicle with integrated cells but offers better cooling of the cells and shading of the riders .
There are also thin flexible solar arrays in development .
Solar arrays on solar cars are mounted and encapsulated very differently from stationary solar arrays .
Solar arrays on solar cars are usually mounted using industrial grade double - sided adhesive tape right onto the car 's body .
The arrays are encapsulated using thin layers of Tedlar .
Some solar cars use gallium arsenide solar cells , with efficiencies around thirty percent .
Other solar cars use silicon solar cells , with efficiencies around twenty percent .
BATTERIES Section::::Batteries .
The battery pack in a typical solar car is sufficient to allow the car to go 250 miles ( 400 km ) without sun , and allow the car to continuously travel at speeds of .
MOTORS Section::::Motors .
The motors used in solar cars typically about 2 or 3 horsepower , yet experimental light solar cars may attain the same speed as a typical family car ( ) .
TELEMETRY Section::::Telemetry .
To keep the car running smoothly , the driver must monitor multiple gauges to spot possible problems .
Cars without gauges almost always feature wireless telemetry , which allows the driver 's team to monitor the car 's energy consumption , solar energy capture and other parameters and thereby freeing the driver to concentrate on driving .
RACES Section::::Races .
Two solar car races are the World Solar Challenge and the American Solar Challenge , overland road rally - style competitions contested by a variety of university and corporate teams .
The World Solar Challenge features a field of competitors from around the world who race to cross the Australian continent , over a distance of .
Speeds of the vehicles have steadily increased .
So , for example , the high speeds of 2005 race participants led to the rules being changed for solar cars starting in the 2007 race and 2014 also .
The American Solar Challenge , previously known as the ' North American Solar Challenge ' and ' Sunrayce USA ' , features mostly collegiate teams racing in timed intervals in the United States and Canada .
This race also changed rules for the most recent race due to teams reaching the regulated speed limits .
The most recent American Solar Challenge took place on July 21–28 , 2014 from Austin , Texas to Minneapolis , Minnesota .
The Dell - Winston School Solar Car Challenge is an annual solar - powered car race for high school students .
The event attracts teams from around the world , but mostly from American high schools .
The race was first held in 1995 .
Each event is the end product of a two - year education cycle launched by the Winston Solar Car Team .
In odd - numbered years , the race is a road course that starts at the Dell Diamond in Round Rock , Texas ; the end of the course varies from year to year .
In even - numbered years , the race is a track race around the Texas Motor Speedway .
Dell has sponsored the event since 2002 .
The South African Solar Challenge is an epic , bi - annual , two - week race of solar - powered cars through the length and breadth of South Africa .
Teams will have to build their own cars , design their own engineering systems and race those same machines through the most demanding terrain that solar cars have ever seen .
The 2008 race proved that this event can attract the interest of the public , and that it has the necessary international backing from the FIA .
Late in September , all entrants will take off from Pretoria and make their way to Cape Town via the N1 , then drive along the coast to Durban , before climbing the escarpment on their way back to the finish line in Pretoria 10 days later .
In 2008 the event was endorsed by International Solarcar Federation ( ISF ) , Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile ( FIA ) , World Wildlife Fund ( WWF ) making it the first Solar Race to receive endorsement from these 3 organizations .
There are other distance races , such as Suzuka , Phaethon , WGC ( WSR / JISFC / WSBR ) and the World Solar Rally in Taiwan .
Suzuka and WGC is a yearly track race in Japan and Phaethon was part of the Cultural Olympiad in Greece right before the 2004 Olympics .
SPEED RECORD
Section::::Speed record .
Guinness World Records recognize a land speed record for vehicles powered only by solar panels .
This record is currently held by the Sky Ace TIGA from the Ashiya University .
The record of 91.332 km / h ( 56.75 mph ) was set on 20 August 2014 at the Shimojishima Airport , in Miyakojima , Okinawa , Japan .
The previous record was held by the University of New South Wales with the car Sunswift IV .
Its battery was removed so the vehicle was powered only by its solar panels .
The record of was set on 7 January 2011 at the naval air base in Nowra , breaking the record previously held by the General Motors car Sunraycer of .
The record takes place over a flying stretch , and is the average of two runs in opposite directions .
CARS FOR PUBLIC USE Section::::Cars for public use .
The first solar family car was built in 2013 .
Researchers at Case Western Reserve University , have also developed a better solar car which can recharge more quickly , due to better materials used in the solar panels .
Chinese solar panel manufacturer Hanergy plans to build and sell solar cars equipped with lithium - ion batteries to consumers in China .
Hanergy says that five to six hours of sunlight should allow the cars ' thin - film solar cells to generate between 8 - 10 kWh of power a day , allowing the car to travel about 80 km ( 50 mi ) on solar power alone .
Maximum range is about 350 km ( 217 mi ) .
SEE ALSO
* List of solar car teams * List of prototype solar - powered cars * Electric boat * Kit car
*
The Quiet Achiever * List of motorized trikes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS