FOOL 'S GOLD ( 2008 FILM )
Fool 's Gold is a 2008 American adventure - romance film from Warner Bros. Pictures about a recently divorced couple who rekindle their romantic life while searching for a lost treasure .
The film was directed by Andy Tennant and reunites the How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days stars Matthew McConaughey and Kate Hudson .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
" Finn " Finnegan is a treasure hunter searching for a sunken Spanish galleon , the Aurelia , that was lost at sea with the 1715 Treasure Fleet .
During his search to find the galleon and its treasure , his wife Tess divorces him .
Tess has been working as a steward on a yacht owned by multi - millionaire Nigel Honeycutt .
Finn finds a clue to the location of the treasure and manages to get on Nigel Honeycutt 's yacht
The Precious Gem and convince him and his daughter Gemma to join ( and fund )
the search for the treasure .
Bigg Bunny , a gangster / rapper , and Finn 's mentor , Moe Fitch , are intent on finding the treasure first .
The Precious Gem and Moe 's vessel compete to find the treasure in The Bahamas .
As Finn attempts to secretly take down Moe 's search grid , Finn discovers a sword which holds a clue to finding the treasure .
Tess and Finn follow the clues to an ancient church and discover a diary describing the location of the treasure .
Bigg Bunny and his associates , who have been following Tess and Finn , take Tess hostage and assume incorrectly that Finn is dead .
Bigg Bunny forces Tess to aid him in the search for the treasure in a blowhole .
Tess finds the treasure in a cave beneath the blowhole .
Finn and the Honeycutts enlist Moe to help steal the treasure from Bigg Bunny .
They arrive as Bigg Bunny sends one of his associates back into the water to find out who was killed in the blowhole .
The blowhole kills Bigg Bunny 's employee and traps Finn and Tess .
Tess saves Finn , but Bigg Bunny kidnaps Tess again .
Gemma transports Finn to Bigg Bunny 's plane on her jet ski , and Finn leaps onto the plane 's pontoon as it takes flight .
Bigg Bunny attempts to shoot Finn , but Tess kicks Bigg Bunny out of the plane , sending him into the ocean .
Moe takes Bigg Bunny 's henchman as a prisoner .
Tess and Finn are reunited and find the treasure together .
Tess is shown to be pregnant .
In the end , the treasure is displayed in Moe 's museum , now renamed the Fitch Finnegan Maritime Museum .
CAST
* Matthew McConaughey as Ben ' Finn '
Finnegan
* Kate Hudson as Tess Finnegan * Donald Sutherland as Nigel Honeycutt * Alexis Dziena as Gemma Honeycutt
* Ray Winstone as Moe Fitch
* Kevin Hart as Bigg Bunny Deenz * Ewen Bremner as Alfonz
* Brian Hooks as Curtis * Malcolm - Jamal Warner as Cordell
* Michael Mulheren as Eddie
* Adam LeFevre as Gary * Rohan Nichol as Stefan * David Roberts as Cyrus * Roger Sciberras as Andras
* Dan Mewing as Pilot PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Warner Bros. and director Andy Tennant planned to shoot the film in the Caribbean , but decided on Queensland , Australia because the hurricane season in the Caribbean was likely to stall production of the film .
The Key West scenes were filmed in Port Douglas .
Filming also took place in Brisbane , the Gold Coast , Hamilton Island , Lizard Island , Airlie Beach , and Hervey Bay .
Scenes were also filmed at Batt Reef , where Steve Irwin died from a stingray barb in 2006 .
Inside scenes were shot on a sound stage at the Warner Bros studio facility and the actors and crew stayed in luxury homes and apartments on the Gold Coast .
McConaughey mentioned having a python in the backyard of his house in Port Douglas .
McConaughey said , " There were other days like the day we went out diving and swam with a dugong , which was very cool . "
Two crew members were stung by Irukandji jellyfish during filming , so some of the water scenes were shot in the Caribbean because the actors were so frightened .
At the time of filming , The Precious Gem luxury motor yacht in the film was called the Keri Lee and has subsequently been renamed " Penny Mae " .
It was designed by yacht architect Ward Setzer of Setzer Design Group and originally named Status Quo .
It is privately owned and operated by Lee Group Charters .
The yacht 's tender was a 2007 Chris - Craft Launch 25 .
2011
LAWSUIT Section::::2011 lawsuit .
Warner Brothers Entertainment , Inc. , was sued in 2011 by Canadian novelist Lou Boudreau , in Canadian court , alleging copyright infringement by Tennant and two other men over the authorship of the script .
Warner Brothers did not comment on the matter .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
Fool 's Gold was released on February 8 , 2008 , in the North America and grossed $ 21.5 million in 3,125 theaters its opening weekend , ranking # 1 at the box office .
, the film grossed over $ 110.5 million worldwide — $ 70.2 million in the North America and $ 40.3 million in other territories .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 11 % of 144 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating is 3.6/10 .
The consensus reads : " With little chemistry among the performers , humorless gags , and a predictable storyline , Fool 's Gold fails on every level . "
Metacritic rated the film 29 out of 100 based on 28 reviews .
Several critics compared the film unfavorably to National Treasure and Romancing the Stone .
Some critics referred to the film as " tedious " and " listless . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film zero stars out of four and said " Paris Hilton 's appalling The Hottie and the Nottie is " marginally better . "
Travers wrote " I defy any 2008 comedy to be as stupid , slack and sexless " as Fool 's Gold .
Lou Lumenick of the New York Post gave the film one star out of four and called it " excruciatingly lame " .
Lumenick said , " It 's all basically an excuse to show off the scenery " , including McConaughey 's abs .
Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave the film one and a half stars out of four and said it " plays like a Three Stooges movie with scuba gear " , but that " a Three Stooges movie is enlightened next to this one . "
Rickey described McConaughey as " perennially shirtless " and Hudson as " peculiarly mirthless " .
Pete Vonder Haar of Film Threat gave the film one and a half stars and said " the resolution is never in doubt , the villains are comedic rather than menacing , and no one involved seems to care one way or the other that their names are attached to this indifferent mess . "
Vonder Haar said McConaughey plays Finn " as Saharas Dirk Pitt minus the SEAL training and a few million brain cells . " and asked " Does McConaughey have some codicil in his contract stipulating he must spend at least 51 % of a movie shirtless ? "
Sid Smith of the Chicago Tribune gave it two stars out of four and said the characters " are comic book clichés " .
Smith said " the outcome is predictable " and " The wasted talents include Sutherland , affecting a hokey British accent , and hatchet - faced Ewen Bremner . "
Brian Lowry of Variety said , " The lure of Matthew McConaughey shirtless for extended stretches doubtless has some marketing value , but after that , Fool 's Gold offers small compensation . "
Lowry wrote " At times the pic feels like a comedic version of The Deep , only without the comedy . "
Lowry said the tropic scenery was well - shot but said " there 's not much chemistry " between McConaughey and Hudson .
Carina Chocano of the Los Angeles Times called it a " cheesy , familiar bore " and said it " feels at times like a third - rate Bond movie set to a Jimmy Buffett album . "
Chocano said " Hudson is the best thing about the movie .
She has a likable , grounded presence and sharp comic timing . "
Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club gave the film a " C+ " and called it " the kind of thing people watch because it 's the in - flight movie " .
Rabin called the repeated mentions of Finn 's sexual prowess " a delightfully unnecessary move " .
Rabin said the film " outstays its welcome by a good 20 minutes " and called it " extravagantly stupid " , but that the film 's strengths were the " photogenic locales , obscenely beautiful stars , a laid - back soundtrack " and an unwillingness to take itself seriously .
Lou Lumenick said the ending was " surprisingly bloody " and Brian Lowry said the ending is " a little more violent than necessary " and " a bit grittier than it should be tonally , as if we 've detoured into a different movie . "
Simon Braund of Empire magazine gave the film one star out of five and called it " Absolute tosh .
A ridiculous , unerringly tedious plot is weighed down by listless performances from a cast who clearly wished they were somewhere else , despite the sumptuous location . "
The film earned a Razzie Award nomination for Kate Hudson as Worst Actress ( also for My Best Friend 's Girl ) .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Fool 's Gold was released on DVD and Blu - ray discs on June 17 , 2008 .
About 1,225,904 DVD units have been sold , acquiring revenue of $ 20,502,574 .
This does not include Blu - ray sales .
It was presented in anamorphic widescreen with an English - language 5.1 digital surround soundtrack .
The extras for the DVD include Flirting with Adventure McConaughey - Hudson chemistry featurette , and a gag reel .
Fool 's Gold was released on R4 Australian DVD on June 5 , 2008 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS