HYUNDAI GENESIS COUPE
The Hyundai Genesis Coupé was a rear - wheel drive sports coupe from Hyundai Motor Company , released on October 13 , 2008 for the Korean market .
It is Hyundai 's first rear - wheel drive sports coupe , and shares its basic platform with the Hyundai Genesis luxury sedan .
The Genesis Coupe arrived in United States dealerships on February 26 , 2009 as a 2010 model .
Hyundai USA acting president and CEO
John Krafcik described the Genesis Coupe as being designed " ... to deliver a driving experience that challenges cars like the Infiniti G37 . " With the launch of Genesis Motors as a standalone luxury brand , the Hyundai Genesis Coupe remained branded as a Hyundai and eventually was discontinued .
However , it is expected to receive a new name for the next generation to avoid confusion with the luxury brand .
2009–2012 MODEL PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::2009–2012 model .
Section::::Pre - production .
Photos of a heavily camouflaged Genesis Coupe prototype appeared on the internet as early as May 2007 , fueling anticipation and speculation .
The spy photos suggested that Hyundai 's new coupe would be rear - wheel drive , as pictures of the engine bay showed a longitudinal engine orientation typical of front - engine , rear - drive vehicles .
The pictures also showed a four - cylinder engine with a heat - wrapped turbocharger .
Speculation on potential engines for the new coupe ranged from the turbocharged four - cylinder pictured to the Tau V8 that Hyundai had developed for the luxury - oriented Genesis .
Shortly before the 2007 Los Angeles International Auto show , more photos were leaked of an uncovered silver Genesis Coupe next to a silver Ford Mustang , presumed to be the Genesis Coupe 's target competitor .
INITIAL RELEASE Section::::Initial release .
The production Genesis Coupe was unveiled in 2008 New York International Auto Show , showcasing a red and a silver model .
The unveiling was accompanied by a demonstration of the coupe 's abilities with powerslides and burnouts .
North American models went on sale in spring of 2009 as a 2010 model .
TRIM LEVELS Section::::Trim levels .
Genesis Coupe trims are based around two engine choices .
Trim levels include : 2.0 T Base , 2.0 T R - Spec , 2.0 T Premium , 2.0 T Track ( 2010 only ) ( GT in Canada ) , 3.8 Base ( 2010 ) , 3.8 R - Spec ( 2011 + ) , 3.8 Grand Touring , and 3.8 Track ( GT in Canada ) .
Base models start with keyless entry , steering wheel audio controls , Bluetooth hands - free , tire pressure monitoring system , cruise control , USB / iPod + Aux input , electronic stability control , ABS , electronic brake force distribution , 18-inch wheels , and strut bar .
The 2.0 T Base used a 6 speed manual transmission or 5 speed automatic while the 3.8 Base used a 6 speed manual or automatic transmission .
The 3.8 Base ( only for 2010 ) adds black leather interior and light - up " Genesis " door sill plates .
The 2.0 T Premium and 3.8 Grand Touring add a touch screen infotainment system with navigation , keyless entry with push - button start , power adjustable driver seat , heated front seats , leather interior , 360 watt 10 speaker system , automatic headlights , sunroof / moonroof , and electrochromic dimming mirror with compass .
The 3.8 Grand Touring is the only model with brown leather instead of black and ultrasonic rear parking sensors .
The 3.8 Grand Touring also receives fog lights .
For enthusiasts , the R - spec models come with 19-inch wheels , Brembo brakes , a Torsen Limited slip differential , a stiffer suspension , summer - only Bridgestone Potenza RE050A tires , and factory supplied front camber bolts ( need to be installed ) .
However the R - spec models lose the Premium / Grand Touring features for weight reduction : Bluetooth hands - free , automatic headlights , cruise control , trip computer , chrome interior accents , steering wheel audio controls , and only come with the 6 speed manual transmission .
The Genesis Coupe R - Spec trims are available with a base price $ 3,000 less than the Track models .
The Track trims combine the enthusiast R - spec features with the Premium / Grand Touring features .
In addition , the trims further add HID headlights , fog lights with DRLs , and rear spoiler .
REGIONAL DIFFERENCES Section::::Regional differences .
While the Genesis Coupe that is released in North America will look the same as the Korean version , the suspension setup is stiffer according to American demographic .
Hyundai Canada offers a proximity key for all V6 models , push button start or side - mirror marker lights on the 3.8L models and no spoiler on either the 2.0 T or 3.8L V6 .
( US track models are the only trims equipped with spoilers ) .
In fall of 2009 , Hyundai began Genesis production with Navigation systems .
In some countries Hyundai Genesis Coupe will also be sold as Hyundai Genesis R - Spec , which comes with both the 3.8-liter and 2.0 T engine and features some sport - oriented options .
CUSTOMIZED VERSIONS HYUNDAI RMR " ART OF SPEED " GENESIS COUPE
2.0 T ( 2008 ) Section::::Customized versions .
Section::::Hyundai RMR " Art of Speed " Genesis Coupe 2.0 t ( 2008 ) .
The RMR Genesis is a version of the Genesis Coupe 2.0 T with an RMR turbo kit , HKS sequential transmission , K&W coil over suspension , silver and black body colour scheme , RMR wide body kit , functional hood scoop , carbon fiber wing , Enkei racing wheels with Bridgestone Protenza RE-01 tires , Brembo brake calipers , Sparco steering wheel and seats , eight - point roll cage , and an RMR carbon fiber dashboard .
The vehicle was unveiled at SEMA 2008 .
GENESIS COUPE 2.0 T R - SPEC ( 2009 – )
Section::::Genesis Coupe 2.0 T R - Spec ( 2009 – ) .
The R - spec 2.0 T is a version of the Genesis Coupe 2.0 T Track with fewer factory options , resulting in it being 68 pounds lighter than the 2.0 T Base / Premium models .
The vehicle was unveiled at SEMA 2009 .
RM460 GENESIS COUPE ( 2009 )
Section::::RM460 Genesis Coupe ( 2009 ) .
The RM460 is a Genesis Coupe with a 4.6-liter Hyundai Tau engine V8 , built by Rhys Millen Racing .
The engine is mounted behind the passenger compartment to become a mid - engine rear wheel drive ( MR ) platform .
The numerous modifications are : an increased compression ratio to 11.0:1 , engine management system by AEM , Mendeola five - speed sequential transmission , original MacPherson strut dual - link front suspension and a five - link rear suspension , with a KW coilover component ; HRE 560 Series 20-inch wheels with Toyo T1R tires , StopTech brakes , RMR Signature Edition kit , a carbon fiber spoiler and custom carbon fiber rear hatch , custom RM ONYX HD paint from BASF , Sparco Chrono sports seats , Sparco Alcantara and carbon fiber interior panels , Infinity Kappa Perfect Speakers and power amplifier .
The vehicle was unveiled at SEMA 2009 .
RM500 GENESIS COUPE ( 2011 )
Section::::RM500 Genesis Coupe ( 2011 ) .
The RM500 is a Genesis Coupe with 5.0-liter Tau V8 engine rated 450 hp , built by Rhys Millen Racing .
It included : custom RMR custom stainless exhaust with Greddy rear section muffler and titanium tips , oil cooler , rear differential cooler , RMR Custom Adapter Plate , RMR Custom Light Weight Clutch & Flywheel , K&N Panel Filter , AEM Engine Management System , Brembo Carbon Ceramic Rotors ( Front – 15.5-inch ,
Rear – 15-inch ) , Brembo Six Piston Front Calipers Four Piston Rear , HRE 793-RS II - Spoke Rims ( Front – 19x8.5 , Rear – 19x9.5 ) , Hankook Ventus V12 Tires ( Front – 245/40ZR19 , Rear – 275/35ZR19 ) , RMR Interior Suede Trip Package , Sparco Chrono Sport Seats with RMR Accents , Sparco Track Sliders , RMR Seat Brackets , Sparco Tecno Leather Shift Knob , RMR 1-inch Steering Column Extension , RMR Carbon Front Lip , RMR Carbon Side Skirts , RMR Carbon Rear Diffuser ,
RMR Carbon Three Piece Spoiler , RMR Carbon Grill , RMR Carbon Overlay Roof , RMR Carbon Fog Light Vents with Brake Ducts , RMR Yellow Fog Light Covers .
The vehicle was unveiled in 2011 SEMA Show .
MOTORSPORT Section::::Motorsport .
The Hyundai Genesis Coupe competed at the Formula Drift Professional Drifting Championship , the Pikes Peak International Hill Climb and select Redline Time Attack Series events in 2009 – thanks to a joint venture between Hyundai and racing champion Rhys Millen , who will drive the Red Bull - sponsored race car on those events .
Millen 's V8 engine is running with mostly stock internals and its original Hyundai 's 5.0-liter displacement .
GoGoGear.com
Racing started racing a Genesis Coupe in 2012 in the United States Touring Car Championship and won the championship in 2014 in a 3.8 liter V6 Genesis Coupe .
They became the first team to win a road racing championship ever in a Hyundai in the USA .
In 2015 , the team finished second in the championship .
In July 2009 , Millen and the Genesis Coupe set a new record for two - wheel drive production - based cars at Pikes Peak .
In June 2011 , Rhys Millen set a new record for 2WD Time Attack using the same Genesis Coupe with a time of 11:04.912 .
2013–2016 Section::::2013–2016 .
Korean model was unveiled in Korea Speed Festival 2011 in Yeongam , Korea .
North American model was unveiled in 2012 Detroit North American International Auto Show as 2013 model year vehicle .
The Lambda MPi engine was replaced by Lambda GDi engine .
The front bumper and hood received a styling revision that incorporates Hyundai 's fluidic corporate design language a la Veloster .
Transmission choices include an 8-speed automatic transmission with paddle - shifters or a 6-speed manual transmission .
In response to criticisms about materials quality from reviewers and owners , Hyundai significantly improved materials quality for the new model .
New features include a leather handbrake handle , plasmacluster air filtering , red leather interior option , LED accents above the foglights , and LED taillights .
EXTERIOR Section::::Exterior .
The Genesis Coupe was initially available in one of 9 different colors : Karussell White , Bathurst Black , Aqua Mineral Blue , Interlagos Yellow , Tsukuba red , Mirabeau Blue , Silverstone , and Nordschleife Gray .
There was also a limited edition
Lime Rock Green color available from 2010 - 2011 .
TRIM LEVELS Section::::Trim levels .
Genesis Coupe trims have minor changes from the first generation .
Trim levels include : 2.0 T Base , 2.0 T R - Spec , 2.0 T Premium , 2.0 T Track ( 2010 only ) , 3.8 R - Spec ( 2011 + ) , 3.8 Grand Touring , and 3.8 Track ( renamed Ultimate 2014 + ) .
Carbon coated synchronizers were added to the manual transmission starting in 2014 .
MOTORSPORT Section::::Motorsport .
RMR Genesis Coupe entered 2012 Formula Drift series .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A 30-second Genesis Coupe R - Spec ad titled " Think Fast " , was premiered during fourth quarter of Super Bowl XLVI .
Hyundai had a 3-year partnership with the TV show Burn Notice and the Genesis Coupe was featured prominently in many episodes .
As part of the Canadian market launch , a Sasquatch commercial titled ' Country Drive ' was produced .
In addition , there were 9 " Sasquatch on Set " clips to show what it 's like working with yeti .
On the 20th of September 2012 , the game developer Gameloft released a racing simulator for the Android phone platform , under their established GT Racing title series , featuring the 2011 Genesis Coupe as well as their concept I - oniq hybrid car .
The Genesis Coupe appeared in the video game .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reception to the revised Genesis Coupe has been mixed .
Edmunds praised the 3.8 R - Spec as " the most interesting car that Hyundai makes " .
They also praised the improved transmission , uprated engine and more balanced suspension , but lamented " we could get into a V6-equipped Mustang or Camaro for less money " .
They also criticized the slow - moving tachometer and the brief loss of power after high - rpm upshifts .
Motor Trend was critical of the revised 2.0 T R - Spec , placing it last in a comparison test between it , a Ford Mustang V6 , a Volkswagen Golf GTI , a Scion FR - S , a Subaru BRZ , and a Mazda MX-5 Miata .
They praised its smooth ride and extra power , but criticized its " peaky power delivery " , vague shifter and interior ambience .
When Car and Driver took a 2013 Genesis Coupe 3.8 R - Spec to Virginia International Raceway for its yearly Lightning Lap time trial , they posted a time of 3:13.9 around VIR 's Grand West configuration , 0.1 second slower than the 306-hp 2011 Genesis Coupe 3.8 R - Spec and slower than the Mitsubishi Lancer Evolution , Ford Mustang V6 , Chevrolet Cobalt SS and Nissan
NISMO 370Z.
They were unsettled by its tendency to power oversteer , and its brake fade .
CUSTOMIZED VERSIONS COSWORTH GENESIS RACING SERIES ( 2012 )
Section::::Customized versions .
Section::::Cosworth Genesis Racing Series ( 2012 ) .
It is a version of Genesis Coupe Lambda 3.8 V6 GDi developed in association with Cosworth , with Improved thermal management , Optimization of induction and exhaust systems , Enhanced engine control parameters , Cosworth Intake and High - flow Exhaust , Cosworth CGRS Steering Wheel , Cosworth CGRS Shift knob , Cosworth CGRS Pedals , Cosworth CGRS Shift Boot , Cosworth Two - Tone Sport Seats , Cosworth Two - Tone Interior Treatment , Cosworth CGRS Satin /
Gloss Blue body colour , Cosworth CGRS Full front replacement
bumper w/ integrated Carbon Fiber Brake Ducts , Cosworth CGRS Carbon fiber front splitter , Cosworth CGRS Carbon fiber side skirt lip , Cosworth CGRS Carbon fiber Diffuser , Cosworth CGRS Integrated Trunk Spoiler , Cosworth CGRS Edition Wheels , Cosworth CGRS logo and hood graphics .
The vehicle was unveiled in 2012 SEMA show .
GENESIS COUPE R - SPEC ( 2012 ) Section::::Genesis Coupe R - Spec ( 2012 ) .
It is a version of Genesis Coupe Lambda 3.8 V6 GDi developed in association with ARK Performance , with increased engine power to 395 horsepower@6800rpm and 340 lb.-ft.@5400rpm , ARK performance intake system , ARK performance oil cooler , ARK performance lightweight pulley kit , BTRcc Blueprinting , Brian Crower 4.2 Stroker Kit , JE Pistons , BC 4340 Crankshaft , BC 4340 Connecting Rods , ARK performance R - Spec ceramic - coated headers , JPM Coachworks custom interior , Sparco steering wheel L575 , Sparco Pro ADV racing seats – red , Cusco 8-point chromoly roll cage , ARK - ADRO FL carbon hood , ARK - ADRO rear diffuser , ARK performance SFX rear overfenders , ARK performance CFX carbon deck lid , APR GT300 carbon wing with mount , ARK carbon plate clutch kit , ARK dual mass flywheel , Cusco type RS 1.5/2-way limited - slip differential , Yokohama ADVAN RS2 tires , Nitto NT05 wheels , Six - piston Big Brake kit F / R , ARK carbon brake pads , ARK stainless steel brake lines , ARK performance DTP coilover system , Cusco suspension bars , arms and control rods .
The vehicle was unveiled in 2012 SEMA show .
BISIMOTO ENGINEERING GENESIS COUPE ( 2013 )
Section::::Bisimoto Engineering Genesis Coupe ( 2013 ) .
It is a version of Genesis Coupe Lambda 3.8 V6 GDi developed in association with Bisimoto Engineering , with increased engine power to 1022 horsepower , steel connecting rods , intake gasket , injectors , level 2.4 camshafts , twin Bisimoto / Turbonetics BTX6162 turbochargers , Godzilla blow - off valve , dual RG45 wastegate , Arias forged pistons , Golden Eagle sleeves , WPC metal surface treatment , Supertech valvetrain , Vibrant VanJen clamps and stainless hardware , Magnafuel 750 fuel pump , ARP head , main , and wheel studs ; Portflow custom headwork , AEM Infinity EMS , custom smart ignition coils , NGK Iridium spark plugs , Puröl Elite synthetic oil , Spearco intercooler , Griffin radiator , Kinsler fuel filters , Bisimoto - spec Action Ironman clutch , Bisimoto roll cage , ST coilover suspension and anti - roll bars , Drive Shaft Shop 5.9 Axles and driveshaft , Incurve 20x9.5 and 20x11 aluminum wheels , Toyo Tires R888 R - Compound tires , Buddy Club racing seats and Takata harness , Bisimoto reservoir socks , Racepack IQ3 dash , Bisimoto oil cap , Odyssey dry cell battery , Rywire mil - spec harness , G&J braided lines .
The vehicle was unveiled in 2013 SEMA show .
ENGINE , TRANSMISSION , AND COMMON SPECS Section::::Engine , Transmission , and Common Specs .
The 2009–12 Genesis Coupe is available with two engines .
The standard engine is a 2.0 T Theta turbocharged 4-cylinder producing and torque , with an optional 3.8 L Lambda V6 engine producing and torque .
The 4-cylinder turbocharged engine shares many components with the Mitsubishi Evo X.
Both engines are the result of the Global Engine Manufacturing Alliance , a joint venture among Hyundai , Mitsubishi , and Chrysler , with Hyundai 's engine using a different computer from Siemens .
Interesting features of the engine include oil injectors under the pistons to keep them cooler .
A 6-speed manual transmission is standard equipment , with
an optional 5- or ZF 6-speed automatic ( depending on engine choice ) .
Starting with the 2013 model , both engines got upgraded , the new 2.0 T now produces and torque due to a bigger turbo , while the now produces and torque thanks to the Gasoline direct injection ( GDI ) .
As of 2015 , the 2.0 T engine option is no longer available ( North America ) with the becoming the standard option . !
Model !
Year !
Power !
Torque ! 0
- 100 km / h(Official ) !
Top speed
In some regions such as the Middle East and the Philippines the 3.8 L engine still comes with the old MPi version making , starting with 2016 model the 3.8 L offered in these regions are now the GDI version making . !
Model !
Years !
Types CHASSIS Section::::Chassis .
Optional equipment includes a Torsen Limited slip differential and four - piston Brembo brakes with rotors in the front and in the rear .
wheels are standard , while optional wheels using 225/40 tires in the front and 245/40 in the rear are packaged together with the Brembo brake upgrade .
According to Hyundai , the Genesis Coupe has a 24 % stiffer bending rigidity than the BMW E46 M3 ( 2001–2006 ) .
DIMENSIONS
Section::::Dimensions .
The car 's wheelbase is , with an overall length of , width of , and height of .
The curb weight of the coupe is for the V6 and for the 4-cylinder .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Hyundai took an aggressive stance on their marketing for the new release of this car with Rhys Millen drifting the car to music by Billy Corgan during a Super Bowl advertisement .
They also launched the website edityourown.com that allowed users to create a video that allowed the promotion of the car .
This was done previously by other car manufacturers , although none promised the final edit to be seen on TV as well as winning a cash prize along with the new car as Hyundai has .
Hyundai Genesis ( coupe and the four - door saloon version ) have appeared in the TV series Leverage , driven by the main characters .
The coupe has also appeared in the TV series Burn Notice as Fiona 's new car .
It also made an appearance in the eighth season of the TV series 24 as one of the pursuit vehicles driven by Jack Bauer .
The song FOL from The Smashing Pumpkins , used in Genesis Coupe Super Bowl ad , was freely available by supplying e - mail address to Hyundai .
FUEL ECONOMY Section::::Fuel economy .
+ EPA MPG Estimates !
Model !
Year !
Transmission !
City !
Highway Tank size is .
SEE ALSO
* Hyundai Genesis REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS