THE MOMENT OF TRUTH ( U.S. GAME SHOW )
The Moment of Truth is an American game show based on the Colombian Nada más que la verdad format ( " Nothing but the Truth " ) .
Contestants , answer a series of 21 increasingly personal and embarrassing questions to receive cash prizes .
The show is hosted by Mark L. Walberg and ran on the Fox network from January 23 , 2008 to August 8 , 2009 .
On February 1 , 2008 , Fox ordered an additional 13 episodes of the show , bringing its episode order to 23 .
It was supposed to be on Fox 's fall lineup , but was pushed back to make room for FOX 's new game show Hole in the Wall , as well as the season finale of
So You Think You Can Dance . " FORMAT Section::::Format . !
Tier ! !
Questions ! !
Prize Amount
Prior to the show , a contestant is administered a polygraph exam and asked 100 questions ( 50 questions in season one)—many of which are asked again in front of the studio audience during the actual taping of the program .
Without knowing the results of the polygraph , he or she is asked 21 of those same questions again on the program , each becoming progressively more personal in nature .
If the contestant answers according to the polygraph results , he or she moves on to the next question ; however , should a contestant lie in his or her answer ( as determined by the polygraph ) or simply refuse to answer a question after it has been asked , the game ends .
If he / she gives a false answer before the $ 25,000 level of questions , he / she leaves with nothing ; after the $ 25,000 level , if a false answer is given , the contestant leaves with $ 25,000 ( during the first season , a false answer on any level caused the player to leave with nothing ) .
For each tier of questions answered correctly , the contestant wins the corresponding amount of money .
A contestant may stop at any time before any question is asked and collect their earnings , but once they hear a question , they must answer it or lose the game .
Answering all 21 questions truthfully , as determined by the polygraph results , wins the jackpot of $ 500,000 .
The questions vary , increasing in difficulty and degree of personal nature of the questions .
Sometimes , a " surprise guest"—such as an ex - partner or a good friend — will come on the stage and ask a particularly difficult question .
Friends , colleagues , and family of the contestant who are gathered near the player have access to a button which can be used to switch out a question once per game if they feel that the nature of the question is too personal , an option which is introduced to them after the third question .
Though no contestant on the shows aired by FOX has answered all 21 questions in concert with the polygraph results , according to Mike Darnell , president of alternative entertainment at Fox , " In the vast majority of contestants , 99 % , you get , ' Hmm , I was a little worried when I answered that question . '
" The series requires contestants to sign an agreement that they will accept the conclusions drawn by the polygraph examiner .
However , one contestant in the unaired second season ( S02E09 ) did answer all 21 questions truthfully to win top prize .
The contestant was Melanie Williams , a member of a secretive polygamist group .
Most of the questions centered around the secrets of polygamy and what took place in the group in which Williams was a member .
For $ 500,000 , Williams ' final question was whether she believed her father had sexual relations as an adult with a minor .
She said she felt he did , and the lie detector determined her truthful for the grand prize .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first episode was the lead out after the highly rated American Idol , and managed to rate very well itself with 23 million viewers , the highest rating for a premiere to that point in 2008 .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
In one episode , over the course of play , a female contestant admitted that she felt that her ex - boyfriend is the man she should be married to and to having cheated on her husband .
The intro of the show featured a disclaimer by Mark L. Walberg in which he claimed it was highly debated whether or not the episode should even be aired and
he was against it being aired , calling it the most uncomfortable situation he has ever been in on television .
SEE ALSO
* Nada más que la verdad
*
Sacch Ka Saamna
* Trenutak istine REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS