BREAKING BAD
Breaking Bad is an American neo - western crime drama television series created and produced by Vince Gilligan .
The show originally aired on AMC for five seasons , from January 20 , 2008 to September 29 , 2013 .
Set and filmed in Albuquerque , New Mexico , the series tells the story of Walter White ( Bryan Cranston ) , a struggling and depressed high school chemistry teacher who is diagnosed with lung cancer .
Together with his former student Jesse Pinkman ( Aaron Paul ) , White turns to a life of crime by producing and selling crystallized methamphetamine to secure his family 's financial future before he dies , while navigating the dangers of the criminal world .
The title comes from the Southern colloquialism " breaking bad " , meaning to " raise hell " or turn to a life of crime .
Walter 's family consists of his wife Skyler ( Anna Gunn ) , son Walter ,
Jr. ( RJ Mitte ) , and daughter Holly
( Elanor Anne Wenrich ) .
The show also features Skyler 's sister Marie Schrader ( Betsy Brandt ) and her husband Hank ( Dean Norris ) , a DEA agent .
Walter hires lawyer Saul Goodman ( Bob Odenkirk ) , who connects him with private investigator and fixer Mike Ehrmantraut ( Jonathan Banks ) and in turn Mike 's employer , drug kingpin Gus Fring ( Giancarlo Esposito ) .
The final season introduces the characters Todd Alquist ( Jesse Plemons ) and Lydia Rodarte - Quayle ( Laura Fraser ) .
Breaking Bad is widely regarded as one of the greatest television series of all time .
By the time the series finale aired , it was among the most - watched cable shows on American television .
The show received numerous awards , including 16 Primetime Emmy Awards , eight Satellite Awards , two Golden Globe Awards , two Peabody Awards , two Critics ' Choice Awards and four Television Critics Association Awards .
For his leading performance , Cranston won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series four times , while Aaron Paul won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series three times ; Anna Gunn won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series twice .
In 2013 , Breaking Bad entered the Guinness World Records as the most critically acclaimed show of all time .
A spin - off prequel series , Better Call Saul , starring Bob Odenkirk and Jonathan Banks , debuted on February 8 , 2015 , on AMC . , a feature film spin - off is also in development .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Set in Albuquerque , New Mexico between 2008 and 2010 , Breaking Bad follows Walter White as he is transformed from a meek high school science teacher who wants to provide for his family after learning he has terminal cancer into a ruthless player in the local methamphetamine drug trade .
Initially making only small batches of meth with his former student Jesse Pinkman , Walter and Jesse eventually expand to make larger batches of a special blue meth that is incredibly pure and creates high demand .
Walter takes on the name " Heisenberg " to mask his identity .
Because of his drug - related activities , Walt eventually finds himself at odds with his family , the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) through his brother - in - law Hank Schrader , the local gangs , and the Mexican drug cartels and their regional distributors , putting his life at risk .
PRODUCTION CONCEPTION Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception .
Breaking Bad was created by Vince Gilligan , who spent several years writing the Fox series The X - Files .
Gilligan wanted to create a series in which the protagonist became the antagonist .
" Television is historically good at keeping its characters in a self - imposed stasis so that shows can go on for years or even decades , " he said .
" When I realized this , the logical next step was to think , how can I do a show in which the fundamental drive is toward change ? "
He added that his goal with Walter White was to turn him from Mr. Chips into Scarface .
The show title is based on a Southern colloquialism meaning , among other things , " raising hell " , and was chosen by Gilligan to describe Walter 's transformation .
According to Time entertainment editor Lily Rothman , the term has a broader meaning and is an old phrase which " connotes more violence than ' raising hell ' does ...
[ T]he words possess a wide variety of nuances : to ' break bad '
can mean to ' go wild ' , to ' defy authority ' , and break the law , to be verbally ' combative , belligerent , or threatening ' or , followed by the preposition ' on ' , ' to dominate or humiliate ' . "
The concept emerged as Gilligan talked with his fellow writer Thomas Schnauz regarding their current unemployment and joked that the solution was for them to put a " meth lab in the back of an RV and [ drive ] around the country cooking meth and making money " .
Before the series finale , Gilligan said that it was difficult to write for Walter White because the character was so dark and morally questionable : " I 'm going to miss the show when it 's over , but on some level , it 'll be a relief to not have Walt in my head anymore . "
Gilligan later said the idea for Walter 's character intrigued him so much that he " did n't really give much thought on how well it would sell " , stating that he would have given up on the premise since it was " such an odd , dark story " that could have difficulties being pitched to studios .
As the series progressed , Gilligan and the writing staff of Breaking Bad made Walter increasingly unsympathetic .
Gilligan said during the run of the series , " He 's going from being a protagonist to an antagonist .
We want to make people question who they 're pulling for , and why . "
Cranston said by the fourth season , " I think Walt 's figured out
it 's better to be a pursuer than the pursued .
He 's well on his way to badass . "
While still pitching the show to studios , Gilligan was initially discouraged when he learned of the existing series Weeds and its similarities to the premise of Breaking Bad .
While his producers convinced him that the show was different enough to still be successful , he later stated that he would not have gone forward with the idea had he known about Weeds earlier .
DEVELOPMENT HISTORY Section::::Development history .
The network ordered nine episodes for the first season ( including the pilot ) , but the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike limited the production to seven episodes .
The initial versions of the script were set in Riverside , California , but at the suggestion of Sony , Albuquerque was chosen for the production 's location due to the favorable financial conditions offered by the state of New Mexico .
Once Gilligan recognized that this would mean " we 'd always have to be avoiding the Sandia Mountains " in shots directed toward the east , the story setting was changed to the actual production location .
It was shot primarily on 35 mm film , with digital cameras employed as needed for additional angles , point of view shots and time - lapse photography .
Breaking Bad reportedly cost $ 3 million per episode to produce , higher than the average cost for a basic cable program .
In July 2011 , Vince Gilligan indicated that he intended to conclude Breaking Bad at the end of its fifth season .
In early August 2011 , negotiations began over a deal regarding the fifth and possible final season between the network AMC and Sony Pictures Television , the production company of the series .
AMC proposed a shortened fifth season ( six to eight episodes , instead of 13 ) to cut costs , but the producers declined .
Sony then approached other cable networks about possibly picking up the show if a deal could not be made .
On August 14 , 2011 , AMC renewed the series for a fifth and final season consisting of 16 episodes .
In terms of Breaking Bads immense global popularity , Gilligan thanked the on - demand video service Netflix at the Emmy Awards in September 2013 .
He even went as far as to say that Netflix " kept us on the air " .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Breaking Bad creator Vince Gilligan cast Bryan Cranston for the role of Walter White based on having worked with him in an episode of the science fiction television series The X - Files , on which Gilligan worked as a writer .
Cranston played an anti - Semite with a terminal illness who took series co - protagonist Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) hostage .
Gilligan said the character had to be simultaneously loathsome and sympathetic , and that " Bryan alone was the only actor who could do that , who could pull off that trick .
And it is a trick .
I have no idea how he does it . "
AMC officials , who were initially reluctant with the casting choice , having known Cranston only as the over - the - top character Hal on the comedy series Malcolm in the Middle approached actors John Cusack and Matthew Broderick about the role .
When both actors declined , the executives were persuaded to cast Cranston after seeing his X - Files episode .
Cranston contributed significantly to the formation and development of the Walter White persona .
When Gilligan left much of Walter 's past unexplained during the development of the series , the actor wrote his own backstory for the character .
At the start of the show , Cranston gained 10 pounds to reflect the character 's personal decline and had the natural red highlights of his hair dyed a regular brown .
He collaborated with costume designer Kathleen Detoro on a wardrobe of mostly neutral green and brown colors to make the character bland and unremarkable , and worked with makeup artist Frieda Valenzuela to create a mustache he described as " impotent " and like a " dead caterpillar " .
Cranston repeatedly identified elements in certain scripts where he disagreed with how the character was handled , and went so far as to call Gilligan directly when he could not work out disagreements with the episode 's screenwriters .
Cranston has said he was inspired partially by his elderly father for how Walter carries himself physically , which he described as " a little hunched over , never erect , [ as if ] the weight of the world is on this man 's shoulders . "
In contrast to his character , Cranston has been described as extremely playful on set , with Aaron Paul describing him as " a kid trapped in a man 's body " .
Gilligan originally intended for Aaron Paul 's character , Jesse Pinkman , to be killed at the end of Breaking Bads first season in a botched drug deal as a plot device to plague Walter White with guilt .
However , Gilligan said by the second episode of the season , he was so impressed with Paul 's performance that " it became pretty clear early on that would be a huge , colossal mistake , to kill off Jesse " .
SCIENTIFIC ACCURACY Section::::Scientific accuracy .
Donna Nelson , a professor of organic chemistry at the University of Oklahoma , checked scripts and provided dialogue .
She also drew chemical structures and wrote chemical equations which were used as props .
According to creator Vince Gilligan , Dr. Donna Nelson from the University of Oklahoma approached us several seasons back and said , " I really like this show , and if you ever need help with the chemistry , I 'd love to lend a hand .
" She 's been a wonderful advisor .
We get help wherever we need it , whether it 's chemistry , electrical engineering , or physics .
We try to get everything correct .
There 's no full - time [ advisor ] on set , but we run certain scenes by these experts first .
" Because Walter White was talking to his students , I was able to dumb down certain moments of description and dialogue in the early episodes which held me until we had some help from some honest - to - God chemists , " says Gilligan .
According to Gilligan , Nelson " vets our scripts to make sure our chemistry dialogue is accurate and up to date .
We also have a chemist with the Drug Enforcement Administration based out of Dallas who has just been hugely helpful to us . "
Nelson spoke of Gilligan 's interest in having the science right : "
[ He ] said it made a difference to him . "
In 2013 , two scenes from the first season of Breaking Bad were put under scrutiny in a Mythbusters Breaking Bad Special .
Despite several modifications to what was seen in the show , both the scenes depicted in the show were shown to be physically impossible .
In the " Crazy Handful of Nothin' " episode , Walt produces a batch of fulminated mercury , in crystalline form , and threatens to raze Tuco Salamanca 's office to the ground .
Although the compound is unstable , MythBusters has shown that Walt would have needed a much greater quantity of the compound along with a much faster throwing velocity , and that he and everyone else would have died from the concussive blast .
Jason Wallach of Vice magazine commended the accuracy of the cooking methods presented in the series .
In early episodes , a once common clandestine route , the Nagai red phosphorus / iodine method , is depicted , which uses pseudoephedrine as a precursor to d-(+)-methamphetamine .
By the season 1 finale , Walt chooses to use a different synthetic route based on the difficulty of acquiring enough pseudoephedrine to produce on the larger scale required .
The new method Walt chooses is a reductive amination reaction , relying on phenyl-2-propanone and methylamine .
On the show , the phenyl-2-propanone ( otherwise known as phenylacetone or P2P ) is produced from phenylacetic acid and acetic acid using a tube furnace and thorium dioxide ( ThO ) as a catalyst , as mentioned in episodes " A No Rough - Stuff - Type Deal " and " Más " .
P2P and methylamine form an imine intermediate ; reduction of this P2P - methylamine imine intermediate is performed using mercury aluminium amalgam , as shown in several episodes including " Hazard Pay " .
One of the important plot points in the series is that the crystal meth Walter " cooks " has very long crystals , is very pure , and ( despite its purity ) has a strong cyan blue color .
Truly ultra - pure crystal meth would tend to be clear or white .
In their article " Die Chemie bei Breaking Bad " on Chemie in unserer Zeit ( translated into English on ChemistryViews as " The Chemistry of ' Breaking Bad ' " ) , Tunga Salthammer and Falk Harnish discuss the plausibility of the chemistry portrayed in certain scenes .
According to the two , chemistry is clearly depicted as a manufacturing science without much explanation of analytical methods being provided .
On the other hand , serious scientific subjects are mixed into the dialog in order to show a world where chemistry plays a key role .
TECHNICAL ASPECTS
Section::::Technical aspects .
Michael Slovis was the cinematographer of Breaking Bad beginning with the second season and he received critical acclaim for his work throughout the series .
Critics appreciated the bold visual style adopted by the TV series .
Although series creator Vince Gilligan and Slovis wanted to shoot Breaking Bad in cinemascope , Sony and AMC did not grant them permission .
Gilligan cited Sergio Leone 's Westerns as a reference for how he wanted the series to look .
For his work , he received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Cinematography for a One Hour Series and Outstanding Cinematography for a Single - Camera Series .
Kelley Dixon was one of the editors of Breaking Bad and edited many of the series ' " meth montages " .
For the montages , she would use techniques such as jump cuts and alternating the speed of the film , either faster or slower .
For her work , she received six Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series and won the award in 2013 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS
* Bryan Cranston as Walter White – a chemistry teacher diagnosed with Stage IIIA lung cancer who turns to making meth to secure his family 's finances .
As his shady business progresses , Walter gains a notorious reputation under the name of " Heisenberg " .
Cranston stated that , though he enjoyed doing comedy , he decided he ... should really focus on doing something else .
But I think any good drama worth its weight always has a sprinkling of comedy in it , because you can ease the tension to an audience when it 's necessary , and then build it back up again .
Walt White has no clue he 's occasionally funny , but as an actor , I recognize when there are comedic moments and opportunities .
* Anna Gunn as Skyler White – Walter 's wife who was pregnant with their second child before his diagnosis and who becomes increasingly suspicious of her husband after he begins behaving in unfamiliar ways .
Gunn sees Skyler as " grounded , tough , smart and driven " .
Gunn sees Skyler 's stalled writing career as her biggest dream , saying , " I think she really deep down yearns to be an artist and to be creative and productive . "
* Aaron Paul as Jesse Pinkman – Walter 's cooking partner and former student .
Paul sees Jesse as a funny kid . "
He 's just this lost soul – I do n't think he 's a bad kid , he just got mixed in the wrong crowd .
" Paul elaborated on the character 's background , saying , " He does n't come from an abusive , alcoholic background .
But maybe he just did n't relate to his father , maybe his father was too strict and too proper for Jesse . "
Paul compared the character 's relationship with Walt to The Odd Couple .
* Dean Norris as Hank Schrader – Marie 's husband , Walter and Skyler 's brother - in - law and a DEA agent .
At the beginning of the series , Hank was intended to be the " comic relief " .
Norris , who has played several policemen before in film and television , stated : Having played so many cops , I 've talked with a lot of technical advisers , so I 've been able to pick up a lot .
Coincidentally , one of my best friends growing up is a cop in Chicago , and one of my other best friends out in LA is a sheriff .
So I get to see all the components of that culture .
* Betsy Brandt as Marie Schrader – Skyler 's sister and Hank 's kleptomaniac wife .
Brandt described Marie as " an unpleasant bitch " , but also stated there was more to her than that .
" I think we 're seeing more of it now that she would be there for her family .
But it 's all about her . "
* RJ Mitte as Walter White , Jr. – Walter and Skyler 's son , who has cerebral palsy .
He begins lashing out after Walter 's cancer announcement .
Like Walter Jr. , Mitte has cerebral palsy , although his is a milder form .
Mitte stated he had to regress from his therapy to portray the character , staying up late into the night to slur his speech and learning to walk on crutches so his walking would not look fake .
* Bob Odenkirk as Saul Goodman ( recurring season 2 , main cast season 3–5 ) – a crooked strip mall lawyer who represents Walt and Jesse .
Odenkirk drew inspiration for Goodman from film producer Robert Evans .
I thought about Robert Evans because I 've listened to The Kid Stays in the Picture on CD .
He 's constantly switching up his cadence and his delivery .
He emphasizes interesting words .
He has loads of attitude in almost every line that he says .
So when I rehearse the scenes alone I do my impersonation of Robert Evans to find those moments and turns .
Then I go out and I do Saul .
* Giancarlo Esposito as Gustavo " Gus " Fring ( recurring season 2 , main cast season 3–4 ) – a Chilean high - level drug distributor who has a cover as an owner of the fast food chain Los Pollos Hermanos .
Esposito stated that for the third season , he incorporated his yoga training in his performance .
Gus is the coolest cucumber that ever walked the Earth .
I think about Eddie Olmos way back in Miami Vice .
He was like dead – he was hardly breathing .
I thought , how is this guy just standing in this fire and doing nothing ?
Gus has totally allowed me that level of flexibility and relaxation – not because he has ultimate power
and he knows he can take someone 's life .
He 's just confident .
* Jonathan Banks as Mike Ehrmantraut ( guest star season 2 , main cast season 3–5 :
part 1 ) – works for Gus as an all - purpose cleaner and hitman , and also works for Saul as a private investigator .
The character of Mike has been compared to Harvey Keitel 's Winston Wolf character in Pulp Fiction , which Banks says he is not trying to emulate : " I immediately tried to put it out of my mind , quite honestly .
His cleaner ai n't my cleaner .
But throughout this world , you would suspect there had been a great many cleaners , whether government - run or individual contractors . "
* Laura Fraser as Lydia Rodarte - Quayle ( recurring season 5 : part 1 , main cast season 5 : part 2 ) – a high - ranking employee of Madrigal Electromotive and a former associate of Gus Fring .
She reluctantly begins supplying Walt and Jesse with methylamine and helps Walt expand his operation overseas .
* Jesse Plemons as Todd Alquist ( recurring season 5 : part 1 , main cast season 5 : part 2 ) – an employee of Vamonos Pest Control who becomes an associate of Walt and Jesse .
RECURRING CHARACTERS * Steven Michael Quezada as Steven " Gomey " Gomez – Hank 's DEA partner and best friend who assists in tracking down and learning the identity of Heisenberg .
In comical situations between him and Hank , Gomez serves as the " straight man " .
* Matt L. Jones as Brandon " Badger " Mayhew – Jesse 's dimwitted friend and junkie , who often serves as the series ' comic relief .
* Charles Baker as Skinny Pete – A friend of Jesse and a fellow pusher .
* Rodney Rush as Christian " Combo " Ortega – Also a friend of Jesse and a fellow pusher .
* Jessica Hecht and Adam Godley as Gretchen and Elliott Schwartz – Co - owners of Gray Matter , a company that they co - founded alongside Walter , who left the business prior to its major success .
Gretchen was a former flame of Walt 's and partially the reason he left .
* Raymond Cruz as Tuco Salamanca –
A psychopathic Mexican drug kingpin who becomes Walt and Jesse 's meth distributor .
* Mark Margolis as Hector Salamanca – A former high - ranking member of the Juarez Cartel who is now unable to walk or speak because of a stroke , communicating with the help of a bell .
He is the uncle of Tuco , Marco , and Leonel Salamanca .
* Christopher Cousins as Ted Beneke – Skyler 's boss and president of Beneke Fabricators who begins developing financial issues , resulting in an intervention from Skyler .
* Krysten Ritter as Jane Margolis – Jesse 's apartment manager and girlfriend , who is a recovering addict .
* John de Lancie as Donald Margolis – Jane Margolis ' father , an air traffic controller who causes an airplane collision while being distraught over his daughter 's death .
* David Costabile as Gale Boetticher – A chemist hired by Gus Fring to work alongside Walter .
* Daniel Moncada and Luis Moncada as Leonel and Marco Salamanca – Two ruthless and taciturn hit - men for the Juarez Cartel who are the cousins of Tuco Salamanca and the nephews of Hector Salamanca .
* Emily Rios as Andrea Cantillo – Jesse 's second girlfriend , who is also a recovering addict .
She has a young son named Brock .
* Jeremiah Bitsui as Victor – A loyal henchman to Gus who serves as his enforcer along with Mike .
* Ray Campbell as Tyrus Kitt – Gus 's enforcer along with Mike during season 4 .
* Lavell Crawford as Huell Babineaux – Saul 's bodyguard who also handles problems Walter needs fixing .
* Tina Parker as Francesca Liddy – Saul Goodman 's receptionist .
* Bill Burr as Patrick Kuby – A hired con man of Saul 's who handles various sensitive tasks involving verbal intimidation , coercion , and misdirection .
* Michael Bowen as Jack Welker –
Todd 's uncle and the leader of a white supremacist gang .
* Kevin Rankin as Kenny – Jack 's second in command .
SPECIAL GUEST APPEARANCES * Danny Trejo as Tortuga – A Mexican cartel member and DEA informant .
* DJ Qualls as Getz – An Albuquerque police officer who brings Badger into police custody , prompting Walt to turn to Saul Goodman .
* Jim Beaver as Lawson – An Albuquerque arms dealer who obtains several guns for Walt .
* Steven Bauer as Don Eladio Vuente – The leader of the Juarez Cartel who has a history with Gus .
* Robert Forster as Ed – A vacuum cleaner repairman whose undercover business is a new identity specialist .
* Charlie Rose as himself .
THEMES AND SYMBOLS MORAL CONSEQUENCES Section::::Themes and symbols .
Section::::Moral consequences .
In an interview with The New York Times , creator Vince Gilligan said the larger lesson of the series is that " actions have consequences " .
He elaborated on the show 's philosophy : In a piece comparing the show to The Sopranos , Mad Men and The Wire , Chuck Klosterman said that Breaking Bad is " built on the uncomfortable premise that there 's an irrefutable difference between what 's right and what 's wrong , and it 's the only one where the characters have real control over how they choose to live " .
Klosterman added that the central question of Breaking Bad is : " What makes a man ' bad ' – his actions , his motives , or his conscious decision to be a bad person ? "
Klosterman concluded that , in the world of Breaking Bad , " goodness and badness are simply complicated choices , no different than anything else " .
Ross Douthat of The New York Times , in a response to Klosterman 's piece , compared Breaking Bad and The Sopranos , stating that both series are " morality plays " that are " both interested in moral agency " .
Douthat went on to say that Walter White and Tony Soprano " represent mirror - image takes on the problem of evil , damnation , and free will " .
Walter is a man who " deliberately abandons the light for the darkness " while Tony is " someone born and raised in darkness " who turns down " opportunity after opportunity to claw his way upward to the light " .
DEVOTION TO FAMILY Section::::Devotion to family .
The show explores most of the main characters ' connections to their families in great detail .
Walt justifies his decision to cook crystal meth and become a criminal because of his desire to provide for his family .
In the third season he tries to exit the business because it has driven Skyler to leave him .
Gus convinces him to stay , telling him it is a man 's job to provide for his family , even if he is unloved .
In the final episode of the series , however , Walt finally admits to Skyler that the main motivation for his endeavors in the meth business was his own interest , in spite of secretly securing the $ 9.72 million he had managed to salvage for her and the children .
Jesse 's loneliness in the early seasons of the show can be partly explained by his parents ' decision to kick him out of their home due to his drug - related activities .
This parental disconnect brings him closer to Jane , whose father berates her for her drug use .
When Walt crosses paths with Jane 's father , Walt refers to Jesse as his nephew and laments the fact that he can not get through to him .
Jane 's father responds by telling him to keep trying , saying " Family .
You ca n't give up on them , ever .
What else is there ? "
Jane 's subsequent death , which Walt purposefully did not prevent , is a major factor in her father causing the airline crash at the end of the second season .
Even the show 's more hardened characters maintain ties to family .
In the second season , Tuco Salamanca spends time caring for his physically disabled uncle , Hector .
When Tuco is killed by Hank , his cousins vow revenge .
Their actions are further explained in a flashback , where Hector explains to the brothers that " La familia es todo " ( " Family is everything " ) .
Gustavo Fring 's franchise Los Pollos Hermanos translates to " The Chicken Brothers " .
This refers to the fact that the company was co - founded by Gus and a man named Max , with whom he shared a close personal connection .
When Max is killed by Hector Salamanca , Gus vows to destroy the Salamanca family .
In the first part of the fifth season , it is explained that Mike Ehrmantraut 's intentions for being in this business were to provide for his granddaughter 's future , and by his final episode he is conflicted when having to leave her in a park by herself once he has been warned that the police are onto him .
During the second part of the fifth season , white supremacist Jack Welker says " do n't skimp on family " , and he lets Walt live after capturing him in the desert because of love for his nephew Todd Alquist , who has great respect for Walt .
Lydia Rodarte - Quayle repeatedly demands that if Mike insists on killing her , that he leave her in her apartment so her daughter can find her , fearful she will think Lydia abandoned her .
Much like Walt and Mike , Lydia seems to engage in the meth business in order to provide for her daughter , with actress Laura Fraser stating in an interview that Lydia 's daughter is important to how " Lydia justified what she did to herself " .
PINK TEDDY
BEAR Section::::Pink teddy bear .
A motif within the second season is the image of a damaged teddy bear and its missing eye .
The teddy bear first appears at the end of the music video " Fallacies " for Jesse 's band " TwaüghtHammër " , which was released as a webisode in February 2009 leading to the second season .
The teddy bear can also be spotted on the mural on Jane 's bedroom wall during the final episode of the second season , further connecting the crash to Jane .
It is seen in flashforwards during four episodes , the titles of which , when put together in order , form the sentence " Seven Thirty - Seven down over ABQ " .
The flashforwards are shot in black and white , with the sole exception of the pink teddy bear , which is an homage to the film Schindler 's List , in which the color red is used to distinguish a little girl in a coat .
At the end of the season , Walter indirectly helps cause the midair collision of two airplanes ; the pink teddy bear is then revealed to have fallen out of one of the planes and into the Whites ' swimming pool .
Vince Gilligan called the plane accident an attempt to visualize " all the terrible grief that Walt has wrought upon his loved ones " and " the judgment of God " .
In the first episode of the third season , Walt finds the teddy bear 's missing eye in the pool filter .
Television critic Myles McNutt has called it " a symbol of the damage [ Walter ] feels responsible for " , and The A.V. Club commented that " the pink teddy bear continues to accuse " .
Fans and critics have compared the appearance of the teddy bear 's face to an image of Gus Fring 's face in the fourth - season finale .
The teddy bear was auctioned off , among other memorabilia , on September 29 , 2013 , the air date of the show finale .
WALT WHITMAN Section::::Walt Whitman .
Walter White 's name is reminiscent of the poet Walt Whitman .
During the series , Gale Boetticher gives Walt a copy of Whitman 's Leaves of Grass .
Prior to giving this gift , Boetticher recites " When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer " .
In the episode " Bullet Points " , Hank finds the initials W.W. written in Boetticher 's notes , and jokes with Walt that they are his initials , although Walt indicates that they must refer to Whitman .
In the episode " Hazard Pay " , Walt finds the copy of Leaves of Grass as he is packing up his bedroom , briefly smiles and leaves it out to read .
This occurs at an especially high point in his life , where he feels that things are coming together
and he is succeeding in all his ventures .
A poem in the book , " Song of Myself " , is based on many of these same feelings , furthering the connection between Walt 's life and Whitman 's poetry .
The mid - season finale of season five , " Gliding Over All " , is titled after poem 271 of Leaves of Grass .
In the episode , Hank finds Leaves of Grass in Walt 's bathroom and opens it to the cover page , where he reads the hand - written inscription : " To my other favorite W.W.
It 's an honour working with you .
Fondly G.B. " Upon reading this , Hank becomes visibly shocked , realizing the truth about Walter for the first time , which provides the opening premise for the second half of the final season .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The complete series was released on DVD and Blu - ray on November 26 , 2013 , in a collectible box shaped like one of the barrels used by Walt to bury his money .
The set contains various features , including a two - hour documentary and a humorous alternative ending that features Cranston and his Malcolm in the Middle co - star Jane Kaczmarek playing their characters Hal and Lois , in a nod to the final scene from Newhart .
SEASON 1
( 2008 )
Section::::Season 1 ( 2008 ) .
The first season was originally intended to be nine episodes , but due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike only seven episodes were filmed .
It ran from January 20 to March 9 , 2008 .
A struggling high school chemistry teacher , Walter White ( Bryan Cranston ) , is diagnosed with inoperable , advanced lung cancer .
On a ride - along with his DEA agent brother - in - law Hank Schrader ( Dean Norris ) , Walter sees a former student of his , Jesse Pinkman ( Aaron Paul ) , fleeing the scene of a meth lab .
He later contacts Jesse and devises a scheme to become partners in an attempt to combine their skills to manufacture and distribute methamphetamine , with Walter cooking the product and Jesse using his street connections to distribute it .
Walter says he wants to provide financial stability for his pregnant wife , Skyler ( Anna Gunn ) and disabled son , and to pay for his expensive cancer treatment .
During Walter and Jesse 's first days of selling Albuquerque 's finest meth , they encounter a series of problems with local drug dealers .
He continues to produce meth despite these setbacks using the alias " Heisenberg " .
SEASON 2 ( 2009 )
Section::::Season 2 ( 2009 ) .
Walter continues to find himself facing insurmountable medical bills from his cancer treatment .
Despite having had several bad experiences while producing meth with Jesse , Walter agrees to rejoin his partner .
The two begin producing meth but run into problems .
Jesse 's friend Badger ( Matt L. Jones ) is arrested while selling meth in a sting operation .
Walter hires a lawyer , Saul Goodman ( Bob Odenkirk ) , to help Badger .
Walter and Jesse drive a recreational vehicle into the desert and produce meth for four days .
Later , Combo , another of Jesse 's friends and distributors , is killed by a rival gang for selling meth in their territory .
Saul suggests the two find a new distribution model .
Throughout this , Jesse has been building a relationship with his neighbor and landlady , Jane Margolis ( Krysten Ritter ) .
Jane , who is a recovering addict , relapses and the two begin doing heroin .
Saul finds them a new business partner , Gus Fring ( Giancarlo Esposito ) , who is willing to pay $ 1.2 million for the 38 pounds of meth they produced .
Walter hastily delivers the product to Gus , but misses his daughter 's birth .
Walt withholds Jesse 's half of the money because of his drug use , but Jane finds out about it and blackmails Walt .
Walt visits Jesse 's house and witnesses Jane overdosing and choking on her own vomit , but chooses to stand by and let her die .
Skyler confronts Walter about his frequent absences and excuses .
She begins to piece together his secret life and demands that they separate .
SEASON 3
( 2010 )
Section::::Season 3 ( 2010 ) .
On April 2 , 2009 , AMC announced that Breaking Bad was renewed for a third , 13-episode season .
It premiered on March 21 , 2010 , and concluded on June 13 , 2010 .
The complete third season was released on Region 1 DVD and Region A Blu - ray on June 7 , 2011 .
Walter wishes to reunite his family , but Skyler is still suspicious of Walter 's second life .
Walter believes he can mend the tension between them by confessing to her that he has been producing meth .
Skyler is appalled by the confession and demands a formal divorce .
Meanwhile , Gus offers to pay Walter $ 3 million for three months of his service .
He even offers to provide Walter with a state - of - the - art production facility and a brilliant lab assistant , Gale ( David Costabile ) .
Jesse is continuing to produce and sell meth by himself .
Hank is working with the DEA to investigate Jesse and is slowly gathering evidence to make an arrest .
He survives an assassination attempt made by Tuco 's twin cousins and manages to kill one of his assailants and critically injure the other , who later is assassinated by Mike in the hospital .
Hank suffers critical wounds but survives .
Jesse threatens to report Walter to the police if he is arrested , but Walter offers him Gale 's position at the lab .
After obtaining the position , Jesse begins stealing meth from the lab and selling it in secret on the side .
He gets romantically involved with a woman he meets in his rehab group and learns that her eleven year old brother killed Combo on the orders of two street dealers who work for Gus .
Jesse decides to avenge Combo by killing the dealers , but Walt does it himself to save Jesse from retaliation by Gus .
Gus begins to lose trust in Walter and asks Gale to take over the lab .
He orders his henchmen to kill Walter and Jesse , and Walt convinces them to let him call Jesse .
Instead of luring Jesse to the lab to be killed as he had promised , Walt instructs Jesse to kill Gale so that Walt and Jesse will be Gus 's only trained meth cooks , and Gus will have to keep them alive .
SEASON 4 ( 2011 )
Section::::Season 4 ( 2011 ) .
On June 14 , 2010 , AMC announced Breaking Bad was renewed for a fourth , 13-episode season .
Production began in January 2011 , the season premiered on July 17 , 2011 , and concluded on October 9 , 2011 .
Originally , mini episodes of four minutes in length were to be produced before the premiere of the fourth season , but these did not come to fruition .
Jesse follows Walter 's instructions and murders Gale .
Gus decides to discipline the two by enforcing stricter policies at the lab .
He also tries to break Walter and Jesse 's friendship by assigning them to separate work details .
While Walter works in the meth lab , Jesse escorts Mike ( Jonathan Banks ) , one of Gus 's enforcers , to retrieve payments and provide back - up .
Walter and Jesse become increasingly distant from , and hostile to , each other .
Meanwhile , Hank , who has been recovering from his last engagement with the cartel , finds evidence linking Gale to Gus .
He believes Gus is a major drug distributor and starts looking for tangible evidence to file charges .
Gus realizes Walter 's close ties with Hank could jeopardize his entire operation .
Gus fires Walter and informs him Hank will be killed .
He also warns Walter that if he intervenes his entire family will be murdered .
Jesse and Walter put their differences aside and agree to murder Gus , convincing former cartel enforcer Hector Salamanca to detonate a suicide bomb ; Hector succeeds in this endeavor , killing himself , Gus , and Tyrus , Gus 's henchman .
Walter and Jesse then destroy the meth lab and Walter declares to his wife , " I won . "
SEASON 5
( 2012–13 ) Section::::Season 5
( 2012–13 ) .
On August 14 , 2011 , AMC announced that Breaking Bad was renewed for a fifth and final season consisting of 16 episodes .
Season five is split into two parts , each consisting of 8 episodes .
The first half premiered on July 15 , 2012 , while the second half premiered on August 11 , 2013 .
In August 2013 , AMC released a trailer promoting the premiere of final season with Bryan Cranston reading the poem " Ozymandias " by Percy Bysshe Shelley , over timelapse shots of Breaking Bad locations .
Following Gus Fring 's death , Walter partners with Jesse and Mike to create a new meth production and distribution operation .
Mike handles all business aspects of the partnership , while Walter and Jesse work with a team of house fumigators to produce meth in tented houses .
Hank and the DEA are able to identify nine prison inmates and one lawyer with criminal ties to Mike .
Walter kills Mike , and is fearful that the informants will flip on Walter 's operation since Mike is no longer able to pay them to keep quiet .
He hires Jack Welker , the leader of an Aryan Brotherhood gang , to kill the ten informants from within prison .
Walter 's business continues unimpeded until he decides to retire after accruing $ 80 million , which Skyler had been keeping at a storage unit .
Later , Hank is invited to the Whites ' home , where he unintentionally stumbles upon Walter 's copy of Walt Whitman 's " Leaves of Grass " with a signed message from Gale Boetticher .
He realizes that Walter is the infamous Heisenberg and secretly restarts the investigation .
Hank forms an alliance with Jesse , who now despises Walter for all his wrongdoings .
Left with no options , Walter buries the money in the To'hajilee desert and hires Jack again to murder Jesse .
Walter attempts to confront Jesse in the desert , but instead Hank traps and arrests him .
Welker 's gang arrives and engages Hank in a fierce firefight .
Jack executes Hank despite Walter 's pleas .
Jesse is captured and forced into slavery , producing meth for the gang .
Before leaving , Jack and his gang take a majority of Walter 's money , leaving him with $ 11 million in a gesture of good will .
Skyler and Walter Jr. are distraught over Hank 's death and hold Walter accountable .
They refuse to leave Albuquerque with Walter and instead contact the police .
Walter spends the next several months hiding in a cabin in New Hampshire while struggling with cancer .
He returns to New Mexico in order to visit his family one final time and seek revenge against Jack .
Walt makes arrangements with reluctant former partners Elliot and Gretchen to funnel his remaining $ 9 million in cash to his children .
Later that night , Walter executes all of Jack 's gang at their compound with a machine gun he has rigged in the trunk of his car and frees Jesse , who escapes from the compound before the police arrive .
Walter realizes he is mortally wounded from a gunshot and slowly succumbs to his injury as the police search the compound .
RECEPTION AND LEGACY CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception and legacy .
Section::::Critical reception .
+ Rotten Tomatoes ratings per season !
scope = col ! scope = col ! scope = col ! scope = col
! scope = col ! scope
= row Rating + Metacritic ratings per season !
scope = col ! scope = col ! scope = col ! scope = col
! scope = col ! scope
= row Rating
Breaking Bad received widespread critical acclaim and has been praised by many critics as one of the greatest television shows of all time .
On the review aggregator website Metacritic , the first season scored 73 out of 100 , the second 84 out of 100 , the third 89 out of 100 , the fourth 96 out of 100 , and the fifth 99 out of 100 .
The American Film Institute listed Breaking Bad as one of the top ten television series of 2008 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 and 2013 .
In 2013 , TV Guide ranked it as the ninth greatest TV series of all time .
By its end , the series was among the most - watched cable shows on American television , with audience numbers doubling from the fourth season to the fifth .
In 2016 , Rolling Stone ranked it third on its list of 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time .
For the first season , the series saw a generally positive reception .
New York Post critic Linda Stasi praised the series , particularly the acting of Cranston and Paul , stating " Cranston and Paul are so good , it 's astounding .
I 'd say the two have created great chemistry , but I 'm ashamed to say such a cheap thing . "
Robert Bianco of USA Today also praised Cranston and Paul , exclaiming " There is humor in the show , mostly in Walt 's efforts to impose scholarly logic on the business and on his idiot apprentice , a role Paul plays very well .
But even their scenes lean toward the suspenseful , as the duo learns that killing someone , even in self - defense , is ugly , messy work . "
The second season saw critical acclaim .
Entertainment Weekly critic Ken Tucker stated " Bad is a superlatively fresh metaphor for a middle - age crisis : It took cancer and lawbreaking to jolt Walt out of his suburban stupor , to experience life again — to take chances , risk danger , do things he did n't think himself capable of doing .
None of this would work , of course , without Emmy winner Cranston 's ferocious , funny selflessness as an actor .
For all its bleakness and darkness , there 's a glowing exhilaration about this series : It 's a feel - good show about feeling really bad . "
San Francisco Chronicle 's Tim Goodman claimed " The first three episodes of Season 2 that AMC sent out continue that level of achievement with no evident missteps .
In fact , it looks as if Gilligan 's bold vision for Breaking Bad , now duly rewarded against all odds , has invigorated everyone involved in the project .
You can sense its maturity and rising ambition in each episode . "
Horror novelist Stephen King lauded the series , comparing it to the likes of Twin Peaks and Blue Velvet .
The third season also saw critical acclaim .
Time proclaimed , " It 's a drama that has chosen the slow burn over the flashy explosion , and it 's all the hotter for that choice . "
Newsday stated Breaking Bad was still TV 's best series and it stayed true to itself .
Tim Goodman praised the writing , acting , and cinematography , pointing out the " visual adventurousness " of the series .
Goodman went on to call the show 's visuals " a combination of staggering beauty – the directors make use of numerous wide - angle landscape portraits – and transfixing weirdness . "
After the finale aired , The A.V. Club said that season three was " one of television 's finest dramatic accomplishments .
And what makes it so exciting – what makes the recognition of the current golden age so pressing – is that the season has not been , as [ another reviewer ] put it in another context , ' television good . '
The heart - in - the - throat quality of this season comes as much from the writers ' exhilarating disregard for television conventions as from the events portrayed . "
Season four won near - universal critical acclaim .
The Boston Globe referred to the show as a " taut exercise in withheld disaster " and declared the show " riveting " .
The Pittsburgh Post - Gazette labelled the series " smart and thought provoking that elevates the artistic achievements of the medium " .
Season four was listed by many critics as one of the best seasons of television in 2011 .
Time listed Walter White 's "
I am the one who knocks " line as one of the best television lines of 2011 .
The Pittsburgh Post - Gazette listed it as the best series of 2011 while noting that " Breaking Bad is that rare TV series that has never made a seriously damaging storytelling misstep .
"
The A.V. Club review of the finale summed it up as a " fantastically fitting end for a season that ran in slow motion , starting and continuing with so many crises begging for resolution week after week .
Now the decks are cleared , but that does n't mean anybody is home free .
Nothing 's ever easy on Breaking Bad .
"
The reviewer continued to exalt the season , and proclaimed , " What a season of television – truly something none of us could ever have expected , or claimed we deserved . "
Both halves of the fifth season received overwhelming critical acclaim .
Following the end of the series , critic Nick Harley summarized his commendation of the show : " Expertly written , virtuosic with its direction , and flawlessly performed , Breaking Bad is everything you could want in a drama .
Critics will spend the next decade dissecting and arguing about what made it great , but the reasons are endless and already well documented . "
During the final season , the show also received praise from George R. R. Martin , author of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels , particularly the episode " Ozymandias " ; Martin commented that " Walter White is a bigger monster than anyone in Westeros .
" In his review of the second half of season 5 , Seth Amitin of IGN stated , " This final batch of Breaking Bad is one of the best run of episodes TV has ever offered , " and praised " Ozymandias " in particular , referring to it as " maybe the best episode of TV [ he 's ] ever seen " .
Jonah Goldberg of National Review called it " the best show currently on television , and perhaps even the best ever " .
The veteran actor Sir Anthony Hopkins wrote a letter of praise to Bryan Cranston , telling him that his " performance as Walter White was the best acting I have seen – ever " .
He lauded the rest of the cast and crew as well .
The letter first appeared on Steven Michael Quezada 's ( who portrayed DEA Agent Steven Gomez )
Facebook page , and in spite of it being taken down , the letter soon went viral .
In 2013 , Guinness World Records named Breaking Bad the highest - rated TV series of all time , citing its season 5 Metacritic score of 99 out of 100 . VIEWERSHIP Section::::Viewership . ! rowspan="2 "
Season ! rowspan="2 "
Timeslot ( ET ) ! rowspan="2 "
Episodes ! colspan="2
" Premiered ! colspan="2 "
Ended !
rowspan="2 " Average viewersSeason 1 !
Season 2 !
Season 3 !
Season 4 !
Season 5A !
Season 5B AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
The series received numerous awards and nominations , including 16 Primetime Emmy Awards and 58 nominations , including winning for Outstanding Drama Series in 2013 and 2014 .
It also won two Peabody Awards , one in 2008 and one in 2013 .
For his portrayal of Walter White , Bryan Cranston won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series four times , in 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , and 2014 .
Cranston also won the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama in 2009 and the Satellite Award for Best Actor – Television Series : Drama in 2008 , 2009 , and 2010 , as well as the Critics ' Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series and the Saturn Award for Best Actor on Television in 2012 .
Aaron Paul won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series in 2010 , 2012 , and 2014 .
Paul also won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television in 2010 and 2012 .
Anna Gunn won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2013 and 2014 .
For his work on season four , Giancarlo Esposito won the Critics ' Choice Television Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series .
In 2010 and 2012 , Breaking Bad won the TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Drama , as well as the TCA Award for Program of the Year in 2013 .
In 2009 and 2010 , the series won the Satellite Award for Best Television Series – Drama , along with the Saturn Award for Best Syndicated / Cable Television Series in 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 .
The series won the in both 2012 and 2013 .
In 2013 , it was named No . 13 in a list of the 101 Best - Written TV Series of All Time by the Writers Guild of America and won , for the first time , the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series .
Overall , the show has won 110 industry awards and been nominated for 262 .
RETROSPECTIVE CONVERSATIONS
WRITERS REUNION Section::::Retrospective conversations .
Section::::Writers reunion .
Variety held a Q&A with most of the original writing staff to reflect on the show 's run , the final season , the writing process and alternative endings .
Along with creator Vince Gilligan , fellow writers and producers Peter Gould , Thomas Schnauz , Gennifer Hutchison , Moira Walley - Beckett , Sam Catlin and George Mastras joined to discuss memories from the show 's humble beginnings , character transformations that concluded in the final season as well surprising developments along the way .
For instance , the character of Jesse Pinkman was originally supposed to die halfway through season one in a tragic drug deal gone horribly wrong .
The reasoning behind this decision was that Jesse served his purpose " in a meat - and - potatoes , logistical sense .
The character would give Walt his entrée into the business " before meeting his demise .
However , this was eventually done away with as the story progressed beyond Gilligan 's early scripts .
The writers also opened up on their collaborative process and how their form of storytelling evolved with the show .
According to writer George Mastras , " Screen time was precious , and infusing every moment with the emotion [ was the point ] , not just forming the pieces of the puzzle to tell the story , which is hard enough .
If you 're going to take five seconds of screen time , you 'd better damn well be sure that there 's an emotion there .
It may be very , very subtle , but trust the audiences to pick up on that , because audiences do . "
The development of certain characters posed challenges .
Skyler White became unsympathetic to most viewers in earlier seasons as she was often presented as an obstacle to Walt 's ultimate agenda .
The writers struggled to change the dynamic and realized that " the only way people were going to like Skyler was if she started going along with what Walt was doing .
" It was a tricky shift to alter on screen because they did n't want to betray her character so they justified the change by using her past job as a bookkeeper to segue into her helping Walt money launder his cash under the guise of a car wash .
Breaking the individual episodes was another form of problem solving for the writers .
They stressed the importance of not letting the " master plan " stop them from staying true to the world they created .
There came a point where tracking the characters on a moment - by - moment basis proved to be more useful rather than general direction of the story .
Peter Gould said they would always start with the last thought in a character 's head . "
Where 's Jesse 's head at ?
That was always the prelude to the breakthrough moment , because when you said that , it 's usually because we had gotten attached to some big plan or some big set - piece that we thought had to be there , but the characters did n't want to do what we wanted them to do . "
RIAN JOHNSON 'S EXPERIENCE ON THE SHOW
Section::::Rian Johnson 's experience on the show .
Director Rian Johnson worked on three episodes ( " Fly " , " Fifty - One " and " Ozymandias " ) and in an interview with IGN shared his memories from behind the camera .
He shed some light on the process including the fact that he sat through " tone meetings " with Vince Gilligan .
The two of them talked about every dramatic beat in a script , the distinct visual look of the show and how the tonal shift of each scene had to feel natural while serving the main storyline of the particular episode .
Johnson also revealed that he learned so much about working with actors because of his directing of Bryan Cranston and Aaron Paul , describing the experience as a " free masterclass . "
When asked about the show 's lasting legacy , Johnson offered up his thoughts ,
" I think the seriousness and depth with which it took its characters is the thing that really makes it stand apart for me .
And that 's where the power of it comes from .
Obviously , starting with Walter White , there 's just very few stories that are told on that scale , that have a character who is that deeply considered at the center of it .
And I 've heard people describe it as Shakespearean , and I know that word gets tossed around a lot , but I think in this case it really does apply .
And that speaks , not so much to the fact that he goes to a dark place , but the fact that his entire journey is so deeply resonant , because it 's so deeply considered . " SPIN - OFFS AND ADAPTATIONS METÁSTASIS Section::::Spin - offs and adaptations .
Section::::Metástasis .
On March 13 , 2013 , after several days of speculation fueled by Univision , Sony confirmed that it would be making a Spanish - language remake of Breaking Bad titled Metástasis starring Diego Trujillo as Walter Blanco ( Walter White ) and Roberto Urbina as José Miguel Rosas ( Jesse Pinkman ) , alongside Sandra Reyes and Julián Arango in unnamed roles .
On October 2 , 2013 , the cast list was revealed to include Reyes as Cielo Blanco ( Skyler White ) and Arango as Henry Navarro ( Hank Schrader ) , and that the show would be set in Colombia .
The equivalent of Saul Goodman is named Saúl Bueno .
BETTER CALL
SAUL
Section::::Better Call Saul .
In April 2013 , it was revealed that AMC and Sony were interested in a spin - off series that would focus on Saul Goodman ( Bob Odenkirk ) , with Gilligan and series writer Peter Gould developing the project .
In September 2013 , AMC and Sony Pictures Television officially ordered Better Call Saul , set as a prequel to Breaking Bad .
The series focuses on Saul 's life 6 years before he became Walter 's lawyer , and premiered on February 8 , 2015 .
TALKING BAD
Section::::Talking Bad .
From August 11 , 2013 , to September 29 , 2013 , eight episodes of the live talk show , Talking Bad , aired on AMC , following Breaking Bad .
The host , Chris Hardwick , and guests – who included celebrity fans , cast members , and Breaking Bad crew members , discussed episodes that aired immediately preceding the talk show .
Talking Bad was inspired by the success of Talking Dead ( also hosted by Hardwick ) , which airs immediately following new episodes of The Walking Dead , and the talk shows share a similar logo and theme music .
OTHER Section::::Other .
In July and August 2013 , amidst the host of games , merchandise , podcasts , and various media AMC had released on the " Exclusives " section of the show 's official website , over the course of the series , the digital comic book Breaking Bad : All Bad Things was released in August 2013 .
The comic " recaps the first four - and - a - half seasons of Walter White 's descent from mild - mannered chemistry teacher to drug kingpin " .
In October 2013 , New York composer Sung Jin Hong announced his intentions to create an opera inspired by the Breaking Bad episode " Ozymandias " .
FILM Section::::Film .
Rumors of a possible Breaking Bad film , under the working title Greenbrier , had arisen in 2018 .
A stand - alone film project was officially announced in November 2018 ; the film , written by Gilligan and produced through Sony Television , would be set in the Breaking Bad universe .
According to the New Mexico Film Office , they had approved production for Greenbrier in and around Albuquerque , with production to start in November 2018 in New Mexico .
The film reportedly will " follow the escape of a kidnapped man and his quest for freedom " .
According to /Film , it will be a sequel and feature Paul reprising his role as Jesse after the events of the series .
Cranston stated that he had been contacted by Gilligan regarding the film , but was not sure if Walter would be part of its story .
REAL - LIFE
INFLUENCE
CULT
FOLLOWING Section::::Real - life influence .
Section::::Cult following .
In 2015 , series creator Vince Gilligan publicly requested fans of the series to stop reenacting a scene in which Walter angrily throws a pizza on his roof after his wife refuses to let him inside ; this came after complaints from the home 's real - life owner .
Cranston reprised his role of the character in a commercial for Esurance which aired during Super Bowl XLIX , one week before the premiere of Breaking Bad spin - off Better Call Saul .
WALTER WHITE OBITUARY AND FUNERAL Section::::Walter White
obituary and funeral .
A Breaking Bad fan group placed a paid obituary for Walter White in the Albuquerque Journal , October 4 , 2013 .
On October 19 , 2013 , a mock funeral procession ( including a hearse and a replica of White 's meth lab RV ) and service for the character was held at Albuquerque 's Sunset Memorial Park cemetery .
A headstone was placed with a photo of Cranston as White .
While some residents were unhappy with the makeshift gravesite for closure with the show , tickets for the event raised nearly $ 17,000 for a local charity called Healthcare for the Homeless .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* – official AMC site
* – official Sony Pictures site * Breaking Bad at Emmys.com