UNREPORTED EMPLOYMENT Unreported employment ; working under the table , off the books , cash - in - hand , illicit work or ( in UK English )
moonlighting , is illegal employment that is not reported to the government .
The employer or the employee often does so for tax evasion or avoiding or violating other laws .
The working contract is made without social security costs , and does typically not provide health insurance , paid parental leave , paid vacation or pension funds .
It is a part of what has been called the underground economy , shadow economy , black market or the non - observed economy .
Payments are generally in cash , and the employer often does not check the employee 's background or credentials , as is sometimes required by law or otherwise expected by the industry 's client base , such as a license or professional certification .
While the hiring of the employee may or may not be legal in itself , it is often done when the employer or the employee intentionally fails to obey one or more laws .
In developed nations , unreported employment evades withholding tax and is part of the informal sector .
It is hidden from the state for tax , social security , or labor law purposes but is legal in all other aspects .
COMMON JOBS Section::::Common jobs .
Common types of employment sectors of unreported jobs include the following : * Domestic work , such as housekeeping , babysitting , or foodservice * Construction work , landscaping , farm work
* Taxicab service ( sometimes known as hacking ) * Various types of self - employment , such as plumbing , electrician , window cleaning , painting and decorating , street market trading , and gardening * Short - term work and day laborers
* Short - term youth employment
* Barbacking and restaurant work .
* Human trafficking
* Prostitution
* Fixing cars , motorcycles , and mopeds REASONS Section::::Reasons .
Reasons one may work or pay a worker cash - in - hand include : * Avoidance of wage garnishment or payment of child support or alimony * Cheaper workforce and avoidance of minimum wage laws
* Convenience for both parties * Elimination of paperwork , bookkeeping , and regulation compliance *
Reduced / eliminated expenses or need for bookkeepers , human resource specialists , lawyers , accountants , payroll services , insurance agents and other employment specialists
* Not checking or showing a criminal record
* Protesting actions or policies of the governing authorities ( see agorism )
* Evasion of insurance requirements * Flexibility in hiring short - term employees without excessive overhead or paperwork
* Avoid allowable income limits by a person receiving certain benefits , such as unemployment , disability , or public assistance
* Fugitive , illegal immigration , or organized crime *
Tax noncompliance , tax resistance , or social security evasion
* Ability to hire employees according to personal traits not related to suitability for employment ( eg gender , sexuality , ethnic / religious affiliations etc )
* Ability to hire those who were formerly qualified , and still potentially able to do the job -- eg blacklisted , disbarred , forced retirement , struck off , etc DISADVANTAGES Section::::Disadvantages .
Unreported employment can have harmful effects on government , employers , and employees .
Unreported employment directly affects the government 's ability to fund resources ( government spending ) .
It causes a tax gap by the reducing tax revenue of a government .
A 2005 University of California , Los Angeles study showed that the economy in California was particularly weak by more than two million workers being paid without paying taxes .
Indeed , it 's estimated that over US $ 214.6 billion went unreported to the IRS last year alone from this .
Those who are employed under the table , including illegal immigrants , may be denied rights that legally employed workers have , such as minimum wage , various benefits ( particularly unemployment benefits ) , and fair treatment .
Under - the - table employees who lose their jobs may not be entitled to collect unemployment benefits .
They have limited causes of action against their employers for mistreatment , on - the - job work accidents or lack of payment .
Employers have limited cause of actions against employees who commit crimes such as embezzlement , theft , or abuse of employer .
If practices are widespread , legitimate businesses may be undercut by and have difficultly competing with those who employ staff illegally .
Government revenue agencies look for lifestyles out of line with the income reported .
They have tools that aid in assessing unreported taxes , which can result in large fines or jail time for the employer .
ADVANTAGES
Section::::Advantages .
Many new entrepreneurs fail to report their first part - time hired employees .
The complexity of employment regulations and large amount of paperwork can be daunting to a new entrepreneur , especially when someone is needed for only a few hours a week .
That early underground early employment may be a vital step in the growth of a healthy open economy .
Day laborers fill immediate gaps during labor shortages in some segments of the construction and landscape industries .
Background checks , identification , required paperwork , and government filings for only a day 's work can be prohibitive .
That encourages unreported employment of short - term laborers .
A large amount of work for only a day or two is unreported .
Although nanny laws make allowances for the homeowner , businesses are typically required to fill out and file several hours worth of paperwork even for an hour 's worth of work .
The amounts are too small for tax collecting agencies to pursue and the paper work too arduous to file and
so legitimate micro - employment among businesses is rare .
However , it is an important resource for many small businesses .
In professional fields like architecture , or marketing , unreported work is typically the first step to starting a legitimate business .
Again , paperwork , compliance , and knowledge of labor laws are prohibitive for the small amount of work that is performed .
Although illegal , side business generate relatively little revenue and so are rarely the target of tax enforcers .
Eventually , professional employees have enough work to be able to leave their employer and become independent .
Then , paperwork is usually filed and self - employment taxes are reported .
The business then becomes a legitimate and beneficial part of the economy .
Those who are unlikely to find employment through the reported economy , including those with past criminal records or current warrants as well as illegal immigrants can be reasonably productive and self - sufficient .
That keeps them from engaging in less - desirable activities like theft and drug use . Self - employment in cottage industries is often unreported at first .
A home cook for example , may sell a few pies to friends and co - workers without filing necessary sales taxes or self - employment taxes .
Although that is usually illegal , it may lead to a legitimate and beneficial business and is often how small businesses are started .
In some countries , the tax system attempts to set minimum thresholds on the amounts liable .
However , there is still the burden of compliance with the bookkeeping requirements to prove that one is exempt .
Short - term youth employment is often unreported but can be very beneficial .
A teenager hired to aid in constructing a shed or barn , for example , learns valuable skills and responsibility .
Most youth would not be employed for short - term projects if employment had to be reported .
Government revenue collectors typically ignore enforcement of such of beneficial , unreported employment .
Youth - run lemonade stands that have been shut down by police for example have received an enormous amount of bad press and public outcry .
It has been argued that because illegal immigrants are unable or unlikely to take advantage of unemployment , welfare , and retirement benefits , they are less likely to be unemployed and are more likely to contribute to a productive society .
That view also argues that in states that rely primarily on sales tax as revenue instead of income tax , illegal immigrants may contribute more in government revenues than the government benefits they receive thereby creating a net positive revenue stream for the governing body .
ENFORCEMENT Section::::Enforcement .
Often , both the employer and employee agree on paying in cash .
Frequently , the employer is running an unreported cash - based business .
These methods make detection by authorities to be time - consuming and difficult .
Most small - scale operations take place without any real enforcement effort .
Lawn - mowing is a good example of a cash - based business that is frequently unreported .
In the United States , authorities have focused enforcement resources on large - scale operations like illegal immigrants who are employed by large companies .
Discovery and enforcement of small - scaled unreported employment is typically through a secondary indiscretion like fraud , tax irregularities , and unrelated or partially - related civil / criminal violations of the employer or employee .
Although the federal government may arrest , prosecute , and imprison an individual for engaging in commerce without the state 's approval , the high cost of such enforcement is usually prohibitive except for the most egregious cases .
EXAMPLES UNITED STATES Section::::Examples .
Section::::United States .
According to a The New York Times report in February 2013 , the Obama administration had demonstrated a new strategy to curb the employment of illegal immigrants by focusing on companies that hire them in the first place .
By concentrating on the businesses employing the large numbers of illegal workers , the number of illegal immigrants working in the US would drop dramatically .
The U.S. government would be doing so in a less confrontational manner than they had in recent years .
AMERICAN APPAREL
INCIDENT Section::::American Apparel incident .
In 2009 , American Apparel was convicted of having workers that partook in illicit work .
About 1,800 of American Apparel 's employees were illegal immigrants who were not authorized to work in the United States .
No federal agents stormed into the company 's factory demanding the employees to be deported , but rather sent a written notice that stated that American Apparel faced civil fines and would have to fire all workers who were unauthorized to be in the United States .
REFERENCES
* Reflections on the Meaning and Measurement of Unobserved Economies : What do we really know about the " Shadow Economy " ?
by Edgar L.Feige Journal of Tax Administration 2016 Vol.2
No . 1 * US Immigration and working under the table * European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions SEE
ALSO
* Illicit work * Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE )
*
Informal sector * Underground economy