MADE OF HONOR Made of Honor ( Made of Honour in the United Kingdom , Ireland , Canada , and Australia ) is a 2008 American romantic comedy film directed by Paul Weiland and written by Adam Sztykiel , Deborah Kaplan , and Harry Elfont .
The film stars Patrick Dempsey , Michelle Monaghan , and Sydney Pollack , in his final screen appearance prior to his death
less than a month after the film 's release .
The plot follows a lifelong playboy who falls in love with his best friend , only to have her get engaged and ask him to be her maid of honor .
It was released by Columbia Pictures in United States on May 2 , 2008 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On Halloween night , 1998 , at Cornell University , Tom Bailey ,
Jr. ( Patrick Dempsey ) , in costume as Bill Clinton , slips into bed with his pre - arranged date , Monica .
It turns out to be the wrong woman , Monica 's roommate Hannah ( Michelle Monaghan ) , and Tom likes her because she is so honest and does not fling herself at him .
Ten years later , Hannah and Tom are best friends .
Tom is very wealthy because of his creation of the " coffee collar " and gets a dime every time it is used .
Tom is with a different girl every week , while Hannah focuses on her career at the Metropolitan Museum of Art .
He is very content with his life , suspecting that Hannah is too .
After Tom takes Hannah to his father 's ( Sydney Pollack ) sixth wedding , Hannah tells Tom she must go to Scotland for work .
While she 's gone , Tom discovers that without her , being with another woman week after week is not very fulfilling .
He realizes that he loves Hannah and decides to tell her his feelings when she gets back .
Upon returning , Hannah surprisingly announces she is engaged to a wealthy Scot named Colin ( Kevin McKidd ) .
Hannah asks Tom to be her maid of honor for her wedding .
After discussing it with his friends , Tom decides to be her maid of honor , only to spend time with her and try to convince her she does not even know Colin , as well as making her realize that he loves her and she should be marrying him .
After arriving in Scotland at Eilean Donan Castle for the wedding , Tom realizes he is running out of time to stop Hannah .
He meets all of Colin 's family and must perform in a variant of the Highland Games , in which the groom must compete to prove himself worthy of his bride .
Tom is also in the competition with Colin but loses in the last round .
Tom takes Hannah out for a walk , hoping to tell her how he feels .
The other bridesmaids interrupt for Hannah 's bachelorette party .
On her Hen Night , Hannah parades around a pub and sells her kisses for change .
As she goes around , Hannah then kisses Tom .
Though it just started as a peck on the cheek , it turns into a passionate kiss .
That night , Hannah confronts Tom to ask about the kiss .
When she gets to his room , her drunk cousin is there , trying to have sex with him .
Hannah leaves and Tom runs after her .
He knocks on her door , pleading for her to let him in .
She refuses and asks about the kiss .
He tells her he knew he , not Colin , was the one for her .
She refuses to say that she thinks so too and instead tells Tom that she still expects to marry Colin the next day .
Tom can not go through with watching Hannah and Colin get married
so he decides to go home .
When questioned about his sudden departure shortly before the wedding is to take place , Hannah informs Colin that Tom is just afraid of losing her .
On the way home , Tom realizes that he must stop the wedding and goes back on horseback .
Just when the priest asks for objections , Tom is sent flying off his horse and through the chapel doors .
Seeing her best friend on the floor , Hannah rushes to him .
As he struggles to stand up , he tells her that he loves her more than anything and that she should marry him .
They then share a kiss .
Hannah tells Colin that she is very sorry and that he is the perfect guy , just not the perfect guy for her .
Colin 's grandmother then tells Colin , in Scots , to " deck " Tom , which he does without hesitation .
Hannah and Tom eventually get married .
Melissa catches the bouquet and then links arms with Tom 's dad , to which he says " Number 6 ?
" and his lawyer says " 7 " .
Hannah and Tom go on their honeymoon .
Tom turns on the light just to see if he has got the right girl and Hannah replies " You do " .
The two kiss and as Hannah turns off the light , Tom says " Oh , Monica " and Hannah replies " Oh , Bill . "
CAST * Patrick Dempsey as Thomas " Tom " Bailey ,
Jr. * Michelle Monaghan as Hannah
* Kevin McKidd as Colin McMurray * Kathleen Quinlan as Joan
* Sydney Pollack as Thomas Bailey , Sr .
* Chris Messina as Dennis * Kadeem Hardison as Felix
* Richmond Arquette as Gary * Busy Philipps as Melissa * Whitney Cummings as Stephanie * Emily Nelson as Hilary *
James Sikking as Reverend Foote * Kevin Sussman as Tiny Shorts Guy * Beau Garrett as Gloria * Kelly Carlson as Christie Bailey * Valerie Edmond as Kelly * Hannah Gordon as Deirdre McMurray * Eoin McCarthy as Ewan * Clive Russell as Finlay
* Mary Birdsong as Sharon
* Murray McArthur as Driver in Scotland
* Grant Thomson as Huge Scottish Football Player RATING Section::::Rating .
Made of Honor was originally rated R for " some sex - related material " , but was later rated PG-13 for " sexual content and language " .
In Australia , it is rated M.
In Sweden , the Swedish National Board of Film Censors rated the uncut version as suitable for all ages .
In the UK the British Board of Film Certification ( BBFC ) rated it a 12 for " Moderate Language and Sex References " .
When released on DVD , it was rated 12 for " Strong Sex References " .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 15.5 million in 2,729 theaters in the United States and Canada , averaging $ 5,679 per theater , and ranking # 2 at the box office behind Iron Man .
It grossed a total of $ 46 million in North American and $ 60 million internationally , for a total worldwide gross of $ 106 million , against its $ 40 million budget .
Made of Honor was released on September 16 , 2008 on DVD .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Made of Honor received negative reviews from critics .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 14 % , based on 119 reviews , with an average rating of 4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Sharp performances by Patrick Dempsey and Michelle Monaghan ca n't save this forgettable , formulaic chick flick from its comic failings . "
On Metacritic , the film has an average score of 37 out of 100 , based on 20 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the film a C grade , giving credit to the performances of Pollack and Monaghan for being surprisingly good in a by - the - numbers romantic story alongside Dempsey displaying " plastic sincerity " in his role , saying that " It 's telling that he 's followed by a string of sidekicks apparently created to make him less bland by comparison . "
The New York Times Stephen Holden commended the punch - up of the script for adding " tart satirical flavors to a cotton - candy formula " and the screen presence of both Dempsey and Monaghan , saying that the latter gives off " enough sweetness to satisfy the cotton - candy addicts .
"
Elizabeth Weitzman from the New York Daily News gave credit to Dempsey for his comedic timing over the material containing " snickering emasculation " and director Paul Weiland for his " brisk pace " direction over " a lazy script from three screenwriters who take the low road every time . "
She concluded that , " [ T]he cinematic equivalent of a cookie - cutter wedding , Made of Honor ultimately feels a little depressing . "
Philip Marchand of the Toronto Star noted how the film 's content contains " numerous references to insecure masculinity " , saying that " It 's often a problem to determine when a movie is satirizing characters from a superior height and when it 's sharing the mental level of those characters . "
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said about the film beyond its " gibberish " title , " Everything else about it is plasticky and nonsensical with no one behaving like a real carbon - based life - form .
Monaghan 's charm is stifled , and a classy cameo from Sydney Pollack as Dempsey 's scapegrace dad goes for nothing .
A film to leave at the altar . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS