INFRARED
LAMP Infrared lamps are electrical devices which emit infrared radiation .
Infrared lamps are commonly used in radiant heating for industrial processes and building heating .
Infrared LEDs are used for communication over optical fibers and in remote control devices .
Infrared lamps are also used for some night vision devices where visible light would be objectionable .
Infrared lamp sources are used in certain scientific and industrial instrument for chemical analysis of liquids and gases ; for example , the pollutant sulfur dioxide in air can be measured using its infrared absorption characteristics .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Incandescent light bulbs use a tungsten filament heated to high temperature to produce visible light and , necessarily , even more infrared radiation .
Round bulbs , often tinted red to reduce visible light , provide infrared radiant heat suitable for warming of people or animals , but the power density available is low .
The development of quartz halogen linear lamps allowed much higher power density up to 200 watts / inch of lamp ( 8 w / mm ) , useful for industrial heating , drying and processing applications .
By adjusting the voltage applied to incandescent lamps , the spectrum of the radiated energy can be made to reduce visible light and emphasize infrared energy production .
Different wavelengths of infrared radiation are differently absorbed by different materials .
Solid - state light emitting diodes can be produced to be efficient sources of near - monochromatic infrared energy .
Such sources can be rapidly modulated for communication systems and control signals .
A light emitting diode can be closely coupled to an optical fiber , allowing infrared signals to be sent up to scores of kilometres without amplification .
HEATING
Section::::Heating .
Infrared heating uses infrared lamps , commonly called heat lamps to transmit infrared radiation to the body that is being heated .
When bodies with a large surface area need to be heated , infrared lamps are often used in banks .
Infrared heat lamps are commonly incandescent bulbs which are able to produce infrared radiation .
Infrared lamps have many industrial applications including curing coatings and preparing plastic for forming , commercial applications such as cooking and browning food , and personal applications such as providing heat ( especially in bathrooms and for pets ) .
COMMUNICATION Section::::Communication .
IR data transmission is also employed in short - range communication among computer peripherals and personal digital assistants .
These devices usually conform to standards published by IrDA , the Infrared Data Association .
Remote controls and IrDA devices use infrared light - emitting diodes ( LEDs ) to emit infrared radiation which is focused by a plastic lens into a narrow beam .
The beam is modulated , i.e. switched on and off , to encode the data .
The receiver uses a silicon photodiode to convert the infrared radiation to an electric current .
It responds only to the rapidly pulsing signal created by the transmitter , and filters out slowly changing infrared radiation from ambient light .
Infrared communications are useful for indoor use in areas of high population density .
IR does not penetrate walls and so does not interfere with other devices in adjoining rooms .
Infrared is the most common way for remote controls to command appliances .
SEE ALSO
* Infrared communications applications
*
TDP lamp REFERENCES