THE BORDER ( TV SERIES )
The Border is a Canadian drama that aired on CBC Television and 20 other TV networks worldwide .
It was created by Peter Raymont , Lindalee Tracey , Janet MacLean and Jeremy Hole of White Pine Pictures .
The executive in charge of production is Janice Dawe .
Episodes in the first season were directed by John Fawcett , Michael DeCarlo , Ken Girotti , Kelly Makin , Brett Sullivan and Philip Earnshaw .
The first season had a total budget of 20 million dollars , with about 1.5 million dollars per episode .
The series is set in Toronto and follows agents of Immigration and Customs Security ( ICS ) , a fictitious agency described as being created by the Government of Canada to deal with trans - border matters including terrorism and smuggling .
The cancellation of The Border was announced by the CBC after three seasons were aired .
LIST OF BORDER EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters .
The show stars many Canadian television actors such as James McGowan , Graham Abbey and Catherine Disher .
Sofia Milos and Daisy Beaumont are the only non - Canadian actresses to star , as United States Department of Homeland Security special agent Bianca LaGarda and British intelligence agent Charlotte Bates respectively .
Grace Park joined the cast in Season 2 .
She appeared in six episodes of thirteen as American Homeland Security agent Liz Carver , and continued the role into Season 3 .
ELEMENTS IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS SECURITY
Section::::Elements .
Section::::Immigration and Customs Security .
Immigration and Customs Security ( ) is a fictional federal agency based in Toronto , with its headquarters in a formerly used ferry terminal used for the former Rochester fast ferry ( 43 ° 38′18″N ; 79 ° 21′06″W ) .
The agency is led by Major Mike Kessler , an ex - Special forces operator from Joint Task Force 2 , and is said to be under the supervision of Public Safety Canada .
FIGHTING TERRORISM AND CRIME Section::::Fighting Terrorism and Crime .
Sofia Milos , who plays Bianca LaGarda , had said that The Border demonstrates how people should be fighting against crime and terrorism of all types .
She said that the show hopefully would make a dialogue with viewers and ask themselves if they " believe in your government ?
Whose point of view is right ?
There is a border between justice and crime .
" , hence the show 's title .
Another viewpoint in the show is the reference between the American and Canadian ways of handling situation involving criminal and terrorist suspects .
The show contrasts American - style , results - oriented anti - terrorism efforts in handling a situation with Canadians taking a more relaxed approach to ensure an innocent person is not caught up while conducting anti - terrorist duties .
PRODUCTION INFLUENCES
Section::::Production influences .
Lindalee Tracey had been following immigration issues before she had started to work with her husband , Peter Raymont , starting with the National Magazine Award - winning article The Uncounted Canadians written for Toronto Life in 1991 with the 1997 documentary Invisible Nation on the underground illegal immigrant community in Toronto .
She then collaborated with Raymont to create the 2002 documentary The Undefended Border .
Raymont says that scripts for The Border are often informed or inspired by real news stories dealing with terrorism , border security , illegal immigration and other contemporary issues .
Raymont said that the series and the issues in the show are drawn from issues that currently face Canada and the rest of the world such as 9/11 , the Darfur Crisis , human rights violations in China and trans - national crimes such as pedophiles and international crime rings .
He also said that he wanted to show the Canadian perspective in facing national security issues that would affect the country .
Raymont wanted to show viewers that Canadians are more understanding and open - minded than the Americans are .
To honour Lindalee 's work on creating the series , Raymont had given cards out to the cast and crew of the show to remind them that they should give credit to his wife , whose photo was on it , for being the driving force of the show as a means of honouring Lindalee for her work , after she died in October 2006 from breast cancer .
PRODUCTION
ORIGIN Section::::Production .
Section::::Origin .
Conception of the series started in 2001 , before the 9/11 attacks , when Peter Raymont and his late wife , Lindalee Tracey , pitched the CBC on a fictitious series featuring immigration / border security agents .
That fall , shortly after 9/11 , Raymont and Tracey began shooting a three - hour documentary mini series , commissioned by TVOntario and other broadcasters entitled " The Undefended Border " following Canadian immigration / border security agents .
The CBC put " The Border " drama series into active development at the same time .
Raymont had said that The Border is similar , but a bit different from " 24 with a conscience . "
Production of The Border had hit some problems in Oshawa , Ontario where residents expressed concern when a Piaggio P.180
Avanti twin - engine plane was seen on Stevenson Road , which was located near Oshawa Airport .
The plane 's presence , as well the filming of gunfire scenes , had prompted residents to make calls regarding its unusual appearance in the area .
Oshawa Airport manager Stephen Wilcox , in a press statement , assured the public on the events in Oshawa that " Today is the one day
it 's OK if you see a plane on the road . "
According to Kristine Layfield , the CBC executive director of network programming , it was fortunate that the show had aired on January 7 , 2008 , whilst the Writers Guild of America - led strikes continued in the United States , as it would give the audience something different from watch , especially if CBC Television benefited from the strikes to gain more viewers .
James McGowan had said that he eagerly agreed to be cast as the show 's protagonist after meeting with Raymont and Tracey because " Their humanity really influences this show ... it 's their convictions that are at the heart of the whole show " .
SET Section::::Set .
For the set of the fictional headquarters of the Immigration and Customs Service , The Border production crew had used the abandoned Rochester fast ferry building that fell to disuse in January , 2006 .
Brian Dennis , one of the producers on The Border commented that the use of the abandoned ferry building was " great , it was a production designer 's dream " since the interior of the building had " customs hall and the interrogation rooms that are brand , spanking new and the jail cells . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In its series premiere , the drama had an audience of 710,000 .
In a press release , Kirstine Layfield said she was optimistic " with the numbers , given the difficulty Canadian dramas have in trying to tear viewers ' attention away from U.S. fare " .
In the second week , ratings fell to 600,000 , improved to around 760,000 by the fourth episode , then dipped to a low of 548,000 viewers during the seventh episode , but improved once again the following week to 716,000 .
When The Border returned for its second season , viewership was around 704,000 .
In addition , Grace Park 's presence in the show had given the show an audience of 765,000 .
On iTunes Canada , The Border was among the Top 30 downloads with numbers around 800,000 .
The series was nominated for Best TV Drama at the 2008 Monte Carlo Television Festival , including nominations to James McGowan for Best Actor and Sofia Milos for Best Actress .
In addition , it was also nominated for 9 Gemini Awards and 1 Young Artist Award at the 30th Young Artist Awards .
The Border was the recipient of an award at the 2008 Banff International Television Festival for Best Mobile Enhancement .
The show was nominated for five awards at the 2009 Monte Carlo Television Festival .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
In a February 4 , 2008 article of the National Post , the show was faulted on the basis that it had some similar elements to the American show 24 .
There have also been some claims of anti - Americanism , shown in the character of LaGarda and the portrayal of the American government .
The show has also been criticized for an unrealistic portrayal of cooperation between Canadian law enforcement and intelligence agencies , but it is acknowledged this was done in order to avoid making it too complicated for viewers .
Formerly secret diplomatic cables published by the whistleblower organization WikiLeaks revealed that US diplomats in Canada warned their superiors that The Border and several other popular Canadian dramas had an " insidious " anti - American bias .
DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases .
Video Service Corp released all three seasons of The Border on DVD in Region 1 in Canada between 2008 and 2010 .
On July 16 , 2013 , Mill Creek Entertainment released the complete first season on DVD in the USA . !
rowspan=2Season !
rowspan=2Episodes !
colspan=2Release Date !
Region 1 ( Canada ) !
Region 1 ( USA )
SYNDICATION
LOCAL Section::::Syndication .
Section::::Local .
In Quebec , the show 's first season has been aired in French on the cable channel
Séries+
since September 4 , 2008 .
INTERNATIONAL Section::::International .
Rights to air The Border have recently been bought by French media company Midnight Media to air the show in France .
Several United States - based television networks have expressed interest in purchasing the rights to air the series on American television networks , including ABC , USA , TNT and CBS .
CBC Television had also given a portfolio of its programmes to British media company ContentFilm , as they are interested in broadcasting CBC programmes in other countries .
The Border has been sold to some undisclosed broadcasters by Fireworks International in Europe .
They include Belgium ( on Flemish public broadcaster VRT ) , Denmark , the Netherlands ( on Veronica ) , Norway , Sweden and the UK ( on FX ) .
Australia started airing the series from 14 September 2009 on W Channel .
Since November 2009 , it is airing in the Republic of Macedonia on Telma TV .
It is also airing in Greece on ET3 starting from the 2010 - 11 season . !
Country !
TV Network
Tubi TV
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* CBC 's Official Site