DRIVING IN THE UNITED STATES Driving in the United States is a frequent occurrence , with the majority of Americans using private automobiles as their primary form of transportation to their workplace .
Each state has the authority to set its own traffic laws and issue driving licenses , although these laws are largely the same and licenses from other states are respected throughout the country .
Americans drive on the right side of the road .
There are numerous regulations on driving behavior , including speed limits , passing regulations , and seat belt requirements .
Driving while intoxicated with alcohol is illegal in all jurisdictions within the U.S. CULTURAL CONTEXT Section::::Cultural context .
It is not uncommon for Americans to drive more than an hour each way to work , and 77 % of Americans drive alone to their workplace , while an additional 11 % carpool .
THE RULES OF THE ROAD Section::::The rules of the road .
Although each state sets its own traffic laws , most laws are the same or similar throughout the country .
Traffic is required to keep to the right , known as a right - hand traffic pattern .
The exception is the US Virgin Islands , where people drive on the left .
SPEED LIMITS
Section::::Speed limits .
Speed limits are set by each state or territory , as well as counties or municipalities , on the roads within their jurisdiction .
The maximum speed limit on rural two - lane roads ranges from 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) in parts of the northeast to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) in parts of Texas .
On rural Interstate Highways and other freeways , the speed limit ranges from 60 mph ( 96 km / h ) in Hawaii to 85 mph ( 136 km / h ) in parts of Texas .
All roads in the United States have a speed limit , but it is not always posted frequently ( especially in rural areas ) .
LANE DISCIPLINE AND OVERTAKING Section::::Lane discipline and overtaking .
Overtaking , usually called " passing " , is legal on all four or more lane roads and on most two - lane roads with sufficient sight distance .
On two - lane roads , one must pass to the left of the overtaken vehicle unless that vehicle is preparing to make a left turn , in which case the vehicle must be passed on the right .
Passing on the left means that the overtaking vehicle must enter the oncoming lane .
This should only be done in a legal passing zone , designated by either a dashed yellow center - line ( indicating that passing is legal in both directions ) or a solid line paired with a dashed line ( indicating that passing is only legal for traffic adjacent to the broken line ) .
A solid double yellow line indicated that passing is illegal in both directions .
In some states , it is not against the law to overtake vehicles in the presence of solid yellow lines if it is safe to do so .
For example , Vermont state law also allows passing across the double yellow line when no traffic is on the opposing side ; however , one must pass quickly and return to the proper side .
However , this is unusual as most states have a ban on crossing a double yellow line except when turning , or when pedestrians , bicycles , or other obstructions in the road make it necessary .
Overtaking another vehicle across a solid yellow line is usually considered a serious traffic violation in most states .
On roads with four or more lanes ( including divided highways ) , vehicles may pass to the left or to the right of slower vehicles as long as the maneuver can be completed safely .
However , most states either suggest or require that through traffic stay to the right except to pass .
The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices includes several signage standards to inform drivers of proper lane discipline , including the " STAY RIGHT PASS LEFT " and " SLOWER TRAFFIC KEEP RIGHT " signs .
SEAT BELT
USE Section::::Seat belt use .
49 states and the District of Columbia have passed laws requiring seat belt use by at least all occupants of the front seat .
New Hampshire is the only state with no such requirement for adults ( anyone under eighteen must use a seat belt ) .
Some states also require rear seat occupants to wear seat belts .
In 24 states , the seat belt law is considered to be only a secondary offense , meaning that a police officer can only ticket a person for violating the seat belt law if the driver has already been stopped for another reason .
The effectiveness of seat belt laws varies considerably throughout the country , with some areas observing over 95 % usage and others with less than 40 % usage .
DRUNK DRIVING
Section::::Drunk driving .
Drunk driving is the act of operating and/or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs to the degree that mental and motor skills are impaired .
It is illegal in all jurisdictions within the U.S.
The specific criminal offense is usually called driving under the influence [ of alcohol and/or other drugs ]
( DUI ) , and in some states driving while intoxicated ( DWI ) , operating while impaired ( OWI ) , or operating a vehicle under the influence ( OVI ) .
Such laws may also apply to boating or piloting aircraft .
Vehicles can include farm machinery and horse - drawn carriages .
In the United States , the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) estimates that 17,941 people died in 2006 in alcohol - related collisions , representing 40 % of total traffic deaths in the United States .
NHTSA states 275,000 were injured in alcohol - related accidents in 2003 .
The Bureau of Justice Statistics estimated that in 1996 , local law enforcement agencies made 1,467,300 arrests nationwide for driving under the influence of alcohol , compared to 1,900,000 such arrests during the peak year in 1983 .
The arrest rate for alcohol - related offenses among American Indians was more than double that for the total population during 1996 , and almost 4 in 10 American Indians held in local jails had been charged with a public order offense , most commonly driving while intoxicated .
In 1997 , an estimated 513,200 DWI offenders were under correctional supervision , down from 593,000 in 1990 and up from 270,100 in 1986 .
The most at risk are the younger people .
In 2015 , drivers with a BAC of 0.08 % or higher are involved in a fatal crash ; three in 10 were between 21 and 24 years old ( 28 % ) .
NHTSA defines fatal collisions as " alcohol - related " if they believe the driver , a passenger , or non - motorist ( such as a pedestrian or pedal cyclist ) had a blood alcohol content ( BAC ) of 0.01 or greater .
NHTSA defines nonfatal collisions as alcohol - related if the accident report indicates evidence of alcohol present .
NHTSA specifically notes that alcohol - related does not necessarily mean a driver or non occupant was tested for alcohol and that the term does not indicate a collision or fatality was caused by the presence of alcohol .
On average , about 60 % of the BAC values are missing or unknown .
To analyze what they believe is the complete data , statisticians simulate BAC information .
Drivers with a BAC of 0.10 are 6 to 12 times more likely to get into a fatal crash or injury than drivers with no alcohol .
DRIVER 'S LICENSE Section::::Driver 's license .
A driving license , typically called a " driver 's license " , is required to operate a motor vehicle on any public road in the United States .
This license is issued by the authority of individual states ( including Washington , D.C. and all territories ) .
Drivers are normally required to obtain a license from their state of residence , and all states recognize each other 's licenses for temporary visitors subject to normal age requirements .
Most states allow people to drive unaccompanied once they have reached the age of sixteen .
A state may suspend an individual 's driving privilege within its borders for traffic violations .
Many states share a common system of license classes , with some exceptions , and commercial license classes are standardized by the federal law of 49 CFR part 383 .
THE EFFECTS OF FUEL
SUBSIDY REFORMS Section::::The effects of fuel subsidy reforms .
The United States has critical issues of traffic congestion and greenhouse gas emission due to driving cars .
As one of the ways to solve this issue , the fuel subsidy reforms can be effective .
For example , Indonesia has proved serious traffic jams based on traffic data from 19 Indonesian toll roads from 2008–2015 .
In order to ease the heavy traffic , the effects of fuel subsidy reforms on a motor vehicle on toll roads were investigated .
Utilizing the monthly data of reforms , the estimate suggested an immediate fuel price elasticity of vehicle flows on the toll roads .
The fuel subsidy reforms between 2013 and 2014 had reduced Indonesian traffic pressure on the toll roads and another 10 % of traffic pressure had been cut in 2015 .
Reformed cost of gasoline and diesel and toll road system would contribute to smooth flow of traffic and generate for the infrastructure .
Therefore , the fuel subsidy reforms should be also conducted in the United States in order to reduce traffic congestion on free - way and greenhouse gas emission .
TRAFFIC SIGNS
Section::::Traffic signs .
To convey the message immediately , the roadway signs in the US use symbols rather than words .
The use of symbols is not bothered by any language barriers , and can be instant communication for drivers and pedestrians in order to manage the transportation and the traffic safety .
According to Federal Highway Administration , it states " the color of roadway signs is an important indicator of the information they contain .
The use of red on signs is limited to stop , yield , and prohibition signs .
A white background indicates a regulatory sign ; yellow conveys a general warning message ; green shows permitted traffic movements or directional guidance ; fluorescent yellow / green indicates pedestrian crossings and school zones ; orange is used for warning and guidance in roadway work zones ; coral is used for incident management signs ; blue indicates road user services , tourist information , and evacuation routes ; and brown is for guidance to sites of public recreation or cultural interest .
Sign shape can also alert roadway users to the type of information displayed on a sign .
Traffic regulations are conveyed in signs that are rectangular with the longer direction vertical or square .
Additional regulatory signs are octagons for stop and inverted triangles for yield .
Diamond - shaped signs signify warnings .
Rectangular signs with the longer direction horizontal provide guidance information .
Pentagons indicate school zones .
A circular sign warns of a railroad crossing . "
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF DRIVING VEHICLES
Section::::Environmental impact of Driving vehicles .
Eco - driving has featured reduction of CO2 emission reduction and revealed to lead one of best climate change strategies .
The investigation of Eco - driving is consistent with the assessment of accelerating and decelerating under varying traffic and environmental volume and composition .
Using micro - simulation , they analyzed the effects of Eco - Driving on network - wide traffic and environmental performance at the speed of 30 km / h .
It shows that increasing uses of Eco - Driving in certain road networks significantly affect a cause of traffic congestion and heavy traffic at the investigated roads .
As a result , it causes an increase in CO2 emissions of up to 18 % .
Using Eco - Driving under limited speed and control of acceleration and deceleration can possibly affect CO2 emissions .
Several pollutants can be made by car - driving such as carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide , sulfur oxides , nitrogen oxides , hydrocarbon , and lead .
They pollute the environment and affect human health .
Carbon dioxide is the dominant greenhouse gas that is one of the causes of global warming .
It includes flooding , droughts , storms , and disruption of the ecosystem .
Carbon monoxide implores the flow of oxygen in the blood to the brain and other body parts .
It affects people with heart disease and the central nervous system .
Sulfur oxides are the cause of acid rain that damages the nature and human health .
It particularly aggravates heart and lung diseases in children and the elderly .
Nitrogen oxides are the main ingredients in the formation of acid rain and ground - level ozone that contributes to the global warming .
Hydrocarbons are pollutants of air toxics and hazardous to the lung and other body parts .
It causes cancer and birth defects .
Finally , high - lead level in the air can damage organs and affect the blood , nerves , brains , and heart .
The urban areas relatively have higher traffic density , so they tend to have a higher lead level and more risk to health .
SEE ALSO * Environmental impact of transportation * Numbered Highways in the United States * Transportation in the United States * Transportation safety in the United States REFERENCES