ROYAL DESCENDANTS OF QUEEN VICTORIA AND KING CHRISTIAN IX
The royal descendants of Victoria ( Queen of the United Kingdom ) and of Christian IX ( King of Denmark )
currently occupy the thrones of Belgium , Denmark , Luxembourg , Norway , Spain , Sweden and the United Kingdom .
At the outbreak of the First World War their grandchildren occupied the thrones of Denmark , Greece , Norway , Germany , Romania , Russia , Spain and the United Kingdom .
For this , Queen Victoria was nicknamed " the grandmother of Europe " while King Christian IX was nicknamed " Father - in - law of Europe " .
Of the remaining kingdoms of Europe today , only Willem - Alexander of the Netherlands descends neither from Queen Victoria nor King Christian IX .
GRANDCHILDREN Section::::Grandchildren .
Queen Victoria arranged the marriage of her eldest son and heir - apparent , the future Edward VII , to Alexandra of Denmark , the eldest daughter of King Christian IX , which took place on 10 March 1863 .
Among their six children were George V ( who was also Emperor of India throughout his reign ) and his sister Maud of Wales ( who would later marry their cousin King Haakon VII of Norway , another grandchild of Christian IX , on 22 July 1896 ) .
However , these two marriages were not the only unions amongst and between descendants of Victoria and Christian IX .
The second son of Christian IX , Prince William , became King of Greece as
George I shortly after his sister Alexandra 's marriage due to this new connection with the British Royal Family .
On 27 October 1889 his son , later Constantine I of Greece , married Sophia of Prussia , a granddaughter of Victoria , forging another union between descendants of the British queen and the Danish king .
In 1865 , Christian IX 's second daughter , Princess Dagmar , became engaged to Tsarevich Nicholas of Russia , son and heir of Tsar Alexander II .
Following the untimely death of her fiancé , Dagmar married Nicholas 's younger brother , the Tsarevich Alexander in 1866 , taking the Russian name Maria Feodorovna .
Between 1881 and 1894 , she was empress - consort of Russia .
Her son , Nicholas II of Russia , married Alix of Hesse and by Rhine , yet another granddaughter of Queen Victoria , on 26 November 1894 , and she became empress - consort as Alexandra Feodorovna .
Other grandchildren became monarchs in their own right or consorts .
Christian X of Denmark was the elder brother of Haakon VII of Norway and thus another grandson of Christian IX of Denmark .
William II , German Emperor and King of Prussia was the elder brother of Sophia of Prussia and thus another reigning grandson of Victoria .
Lastly , Victoria had two more granddaughters who became queens : Marie of Edinburgh , who married Ferdinand I of Romania , and Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg who married Alfonso XIII of Spain .
Christian IX was therefore the grandfather of an emperor and two kings who all married granddaughters of Victoria , one of whom ( Maud of Wales ) was also a granddaughter of Christian IX .
In total , five of his grandsons were reigning sovereigns .
Victoria , meanwhile , was the grandmother of an emperor , a king - emperor , four queens consort and an empress consort .
FIRST WORLD
WAR Section::::First World War .
During the First World War ( 1914–1918 ) , many monarchs of countries from both sides were closely related due to their mutual descent from either Queen Victoria , King Christian IX or both .
The most commonly cited example is the fact that Nicholas , his wife , Alexandra , and Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany were all first cousins of King George V of the United Kingdom .
Other countries who fought against Germany in addition to Russia and the United Kingdom were Romania , whose queen - consort , Marie , wife of King Ferdinand I , was a cousin of the Kaiser , and Greece , whose queen - consort , Sophia , wife of
King Constantine I , was the Kaiser 's own sister .
Additionally , King George V was a first cousin , through King Christian IX , of both Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and King Constantine
I of Greece .
Shortly before the end of the war , Nicholas , his wife and children were executed by the Bolsheviks .
Other first cousins of George V , whose countries were neutral during the war , were King Christian X of Denmark , Queen Victoria Eugenie of Spain ( queen - consort of King Alfonso XIII ) and King Haakon VII of Norway ( who was also George 's brother - in - law via his marriage to George 's sister , Maud ) .
FAMILY TREE OF SOVEREIGN AND CONSORT GRANDCHILDREN
Section::::Family tree of sovereign and consort grandchildren .
The family tree below also attempts to show the relationship between close and extended family members referenced on this page .
PRESENT - DAY REIGNING DESCENDANTS Section::::Present - day reigning descendants .
The unions between descendants of Queen Victoria and of King Christian IX did not end with the First World War , despite the overthrows of both the German and Russian monarchies ( along with House of Habsburg in Austria - Hungary ) .
On the contrary , nearly all European reigning kings and queens today are most closely related through their descent from Victoria , Christian or both .
Currently , there are seven kingdoms remaining in Europe : 1 .
Belgium :
King Philippe & Queen Mathilde 2 .
Denmark :
Queen Margrethe II 3 .
Norway :
King Harald V & Queen Sonja 4 .
Spain : King Felipe VI & Queen Letizia 5 .
Sweden :
King Carl XVI Gustaf & Queen Silvia 6 .
United Kingdom :
Queen Elizabeth II & Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh 7 .
Netherlands :
King Willem - Alexander & Queen Máxima King Harald V of Norway , Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom , her husband , Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , Queen Margrethe II of Denmark and King Felipe VI of Spain are all descended from both Queen Victoria and King Christian IX .
The first two monarchs are great - grandchildren of the aforementioned union between Alexandra of Denmark ( daughter of King Christian IX ) and Edward VII ( son of Queen Victoria ) .
Harald V of Norway is actually descended from Christian IX three ways , twice through his father and once through his mother .
Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh and his wife Elizabeth II are second cousins once removed through Christian IX and also third cousins as they are both great - great - grandchildren of Victoria .
Margrethe II of Denmark is descended once each from Victoria and Christian IX .
She is also a first cousin to Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden through Victoria 's granddaughter Princess Margaret of Connaught .
Felipe VI is descended from Victoria three ways and Christian IX twice .
His father , King Juan Carlos I , is descended from Victoria and not Christian IX , while Juan Carlos ' consort , Queen Sofía , is twice a descendant of Victoria and twice a great - great - granddaughter of Christian IX .
King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden is descended from Victoria , twice , as his parents were second cousins because they were both great - grandchildren of Victoria .
in addition , Carl XVI Gustaf also descends on his maternal side from Victoria 's half - sister Feodora .
Although Carl XVI Gustaf is not a descendant of Christian IX ; however , it should be noted that he descends on his maternal side from the parents of Christian IX through Christian IX 's elder brother , Friedrich .
Conversely , Philippe , King of the Belgians is descended from King Christian IX but not Queen Victoria , although , he is a descendant of Victoria 's maternal uncle ( as well as her husband Prince Albert of Saxe - Coburg and Gotha 's paternal uncle ) ,
Leopold I , King of the Belgians .
Philippe 's father , King Albert II , who abdicated in the summer of 2013 , is a first cousin to Harald V of Norway through their grandfather Prince Carl , Duke of Västergötland , married to Princess Ingeborg of Denmark , a granddaughter of Christian IX .
In summation , the monarchs of Norway , Denmark , Spain and the United Kingdom as well as the consort of the United Kingdom are descended from both Victoria and Christian IX .
The King of Sweden is descended from Victoria and not Christian IX ( although from one of his brothers ) .
The King of the Belgians and the Grand Duke of Luxembourg are descended from Christian IX and not Victoria , though they are descendants of both Victoria 's and her spouse 's uncle
Leopold I of Belgium .
The King of the Netherlands is the only monarch descended from neither Victoria nor Christian IX .
( He is , however , a sixth cousin thrice removed of Elizabeth II , Prince Philip , Harald V , Margrethe II and Carl XVI Gustaf through descent from Frederick , Prince of Wales ; a sixth cousin four times removed of Felipe VI , also via descent from Frederick ; and also a fourth cousin twice removed of Albert II through descent from William I of the Netherlands .
Furthermore , William I of the Netherlands was also second cousin once removed to both Queen Victoria and King Christian IX , since he was the great - grandson of George II of Great Britain .
Hence , all current reigning kings and queens in Europe , including the Netherlands , are related through the line of George II of Great Britain . )
MONARCHS DESCENDED FROM QUEEN VICTORIA MONARCHS DESCENDED FROM KING CHRISTIAN IX
Notes
COMMON ANCESTRY BETWEEN VICTORIA AND CHRISTIAN IX Section::::Common ancestry between Victoria and Christian IX .
Because so many monarchs descend from both Queen Victoria and King Christian IX of Denmark , the relationship between these two monarchs is of some interest .
These monarchs were third cousins through their mutual descent from King George II of Great Britain .
This relationship occurs twice because the maternal grandparents of King Christian IX of Denmark , Prince Charles of Hesse - Kassel ( or Hesse - Cassel ) ( 1744–1836 ) and Princess Louise of Denmark ( 1750–1831 ) , were both children of daughters of King George II of Great Britain ( 1660–1727 ) , and thus first cousins .
Louise of Hesse - Kassel , wife of King Christian IX of Denmark , was a granddaughter of Prince Frederick of Hesse ( 1747–1837 ) , the brother of the aforementioned Prince Charles of Hesse - Kassel .
Thus King Christian IX of Denmark and his wife Louise of Hesse - Kassel were second cousins to each other and third cousins to Queen Victoria .
THE LONGEST LIVING DESCENDANTS OF VICTORIA AND CHRISTIAN IX QUEEN VICTORIA OF THE UNITED KINGDOM
* Princess Alice , Countess of Athlone ( aged )
* Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh ( age )
* Michael I of Romania(aged )
* Carl Johan Bernadotte(aged )
* Sigvard Bernadotte(aged )
KING CHRISTIAN IX OF DENMARK
* Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh(age )
* Princess Margaret of Denmark ( aged ) *
Michael I of Romania(aged )
*
Prince Andrew
Romanov(age )
* Lennart Bernadotte(aged ) NOTES
REFERENCES
* Aronson , Theo .
Crowns in Conflict : The Triumph and the Tragedy of European Monarchy
1910–1918
* Aronson , Theo .
A Family of Kings : The Descendants of Christian IX of Denmark
* Aronson , Theo .
Grandmama of Europe : The Crowned Descendants of Queen Victoria , 1973
* Carter , Miranda .
Three Emperors : Three Cousins , Three Empires and the Road to the First World War .
London , Penguin .
2009 .
* Gelardi , Julia P.
Born to Rule :
Five Reigning Consorts , Granddaughters of Queen Victoria
* Potts , D. M. and W. T. W. Queen Victoria 's Gene : Haemophilia and the Royal Family