REMAND ( DETENTION ) Remand ( also known as pre - trial detention or provisional detention ) is the process of detaining a person who has been arrested and charged with an offense until their trial .
A person who is held on remand may be held as a prisoner in prison .
Varying terminology is used , but " remand " is generally used in common law jurisdictions .
Detention before charge is referred to as custody and continued detention after conviction is referred to as imprisonment .
Because imprisonment without trial is contrary to the presumption of innocence , in liberal democracies pre - trial detention is usually subject to safeguards and restrictions .
Typically , a suspect will only be remanded if it is likely that they could commit a serious crime , interfere with the investigation , or fail to turn up in court .
In the majority of court cases , the suspect will be outside of custody while awaiting trial , often with restrictions such as bail .
Research on pretrial detention in the United States has found that pretrial detention increases the likelihood of convictions , primarily because individuals , who would otherwise be acquitted or have their charges dropped , enter guilty pleas .
DETENTION BEFORE CHARGE Section::::Detention before charge .
The pre - charge detention period is the period of time during which an individual can be held and questioned by police , prior to being charged with an offence .
Not all countries have such a concept , and in those that do , the period for which a person may be detained without charge varies by jurisdiction .
The prohibition of prolonged detention without charge , habeas corpus , was first introduced in England about a century after Magna Carta ; the use of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum in 1305 was cited by William Blackstone .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
Under Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms of the Czech Republic , which has the same legal standing as the Czech Constitution , a suspect must be immediately familiarized with the grounds of detention , must be interviewed and within 48 hours either released or charged and handed over to a court .
The court then has a further 24 hours either to order a custody , or to release the person detained .
Detailed rules of detention are included in the Criminal Procedural Code .
The police may arrest and detain a suspect after obtaining prosecutor 's consent .
In an urgent case the police may detain a suspect without the consent .
In both cases , however , the police detention may take place only when grounds for pre - trial detention exist ( see below ) .
The statutory limits of 48 + 24 hours must be complied with and reaching the time limit should aways trigger immediate release , unless a court has ordered pre - trial custody .
Anybody may detain a person , who was caught while perpetrating a crime ( not a misdemeanor ) or immediately after it , when capturing of the perpetrator is necessary to either ascertain the perpetrator 's identity or to prevent the perpetrator from escaping or to secure evidence .
The perpetrator must immediately be handed over to the police , or when that is not possible , detention of the perpetrator must be immediately reported to the police .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , a person is protected by the federal constitution from being held in prison unlawfully .
The right to have one 's detention reviewed by a judge is called habeas corpus .
The U.S. Constitution states that " The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended , unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion
the public Safety may require it " .
A declaration of a state of emergency can suspend the right to habeas corpus .
The Sixth Amendment requires criminal defendants to be " informed of the nature and cause of the accusation " .
The U.S. Bill of Rights thus grants some protection against being held without criminal charge , subject to the courts ' interpretation of what due process means .
Federal authorities have also exercised the power to arrest people on the basis of being a material witness .
Involuntary commitment of the mentally ill is another category of detention without criminal prosecution , but the right of habeas corpus still applies .
The scope of such detentions is also limited by the Bill of Rights .
The executive 's military powers have been used to justify holding enemy combatants as prisoners of war , unlawful combatants , and civilian internees ; the latter two practices have been controversial , especially with regard to the indefinite detention implied by uncertainty as to when the " War on Terror " might be declared to have ended .
Administrative detention , a term applied to many of these categories , is also used to imprison illegal immigrants .
PRE - TRIAL SUPERVISION HÄKTNING ( SWEDISH LAW ) Section::::Pre - trial supervision .
Section::::Häktning ( Swedish law ) . is a pre - trial supervision measure pursuant to Swedish law , meaning that a suspect can be detained by a court in the case of crimes for which there is a prison term of one year or more .
There are two degrees of suspicion : * reasonable suspicion ( the lower level of suspicion ) , or * probable cause ( the higher level of suspicion ) .
Reason for detention is if the crime is a statutory minimum penalty of at least 1 year , and one of : * risk of recidivism ; * * risk that the suspect will destroy evidence or otherwise affect the investigation of the crime ; *
* risk that the suspect will flee prosecution or punishment , * or , for " probable cause " suspicion and also for lesser crimes : * the suspect is without permanent residence in Sweden , and can be assumed wanting to leave Sweden .
* * the identity of the suspect is not established , if he refuses to say it or has given a false identity .
* A person may be held in custody for a period of normally not more than 14 days ( seven days if only the degree of suspicion " reasonable suspicion " exists ) , then normally new remand hearing should be held .
For suspect who has not yet turned 18 needed " serious reasons " for detention decisions are to be notified of the court .
A person , with less serious crimes , they are given by prosecutors a summary penalty order .
A person who was häktad but was not charged ( or was freed after trial ) is entitled to financial compensation , with an amount determined by the Chancellor of Justice .
It is usually around 500 SEK ( US$ 80 ) per day for the suffering , somewhat more if there was media attention , plus compensation for lost work income .
1200 people were compensated in 2007 .
If the prisoner is sentenced , the time as häktad counts as a part of the prison time , so that less time will remain after the trial .
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture of the Council of Europe has repeatedly criticized pre - trial detention in Sweden for the high percentage of cases where restrictions on communication are applied .
Such communication restrictions means in Sweden no visits , no telephone calls , no newspapers and no TV .
DETENTION AFTER CHARGE Section::::Detention after charge .
The term " remand " may be used to describe the process of keeping a person in detention rather than granting bail .
A prisoner who is denied , refused or unable to meet the conditions of bail , or who is unable to post bail , may be held in a prison on remand .
Although remanded prisoners are usually detained separately from sentenced prisoners , due to prison overcrowding they are sometimes held in a shared accommodation with sentenced prisoners .
Reasons for being held in custody on remand vary depending on the local legal system , but may include : * the suspect has been accused of carrying out a particularly serious offence * the suspect having previous convictions for similar offences * reasons to believe the suspect could leave the court 's jurisdiction to avoid its trial and possible punishment * reasons to believe the suspect may destroy evidence or interfere with witnesses
* the suspect is likely to commit further offences before the trial * the suspect is believed to be in danger from accomplices , victims , or vigilantes
In most countries , remand prisoners are considered innocent until proven guilty by a court and may be granted greater privileges than sentenced prisoners .
For example , most jurisdictions that prohibit convicted criminals from voting in elections will still allow remand prisoners to vote , unless they have been disqualified from voting for some other reason .
Other privileges commonly granted include :
* wearing own clothes rather than prison uniform * being entitled to additional visiting hours per week * not being required to complete prison - related work or education
Not all remand prisons grant these privileges , in particular , remand prisoners are often forced to wear prison uniforms and denied additional visitation rights , supposedly for safety reasons , although some facilities allow remand prisoners to wear a uniform that is a different color or otherwise clearly distinguishable from the uniforms of convicted criminals .
Often they are denied all visits and all newspaper and media access , for risk of interfering with the investigation , such as communicating a story with fellow remand prisoners .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
Under Article 8 ( 5 ) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms , which has the same legal standing as the Constitution , nobody shall be taken into custody except on the basis of a court decision , and for reasons and a detention period stipulated by the law .
Detailed rules of remand custody are contained in the Criminal Procedural Code .
A person may be remanded in custody by the decision of a court only when a number of preconditions is met cumulatively :
* he or she has been charged with committing a crime which is punishable by * more than two years of imprisonment in case of intentionally committed crime , or * more than three years of imprisonment in case of negligently committed crime ,
* there are reasonable grounds indicating that the alleged act was committed and it has all features of the given crime , and *
there are apparent reasons for suspicion , that the act was committed by the charged person , and * because of the personality of the charged person , the nature of the crime and its gravity , the objective of the custody may not be reached by a different measure .
At the same time , there must be reasonable concern , that the charged person may either * ( a ) escape or evade the criminal proceedings , or * ( b ) influence witnesses or otherwise similarly frustrate the proceedings , or * ( c ) continue criminal activity with which he or she was charged , or finish a criminal act he or she had attempted , or commit a criminal act he or she was preparing or threatening to commit .
The charged person may be remanded in custody subject to maximum terms as follows : * one year in cases of crimes which are dealt with by a single judge , * two years in cases of crimes which are dealt with by a panel of three judges , * three years in cases of felony crimes ( i.e. intentional crimes punishable by a sentence with an upper jail term of at least 10 years )
* four years in cases punishable by an exceptional penalty ( i.e. 20 – 30 years or life imprisonment ) one third of the maximum detention periods time may be exhausted in pre - trial proceedings and two thirds may be exhausted during the trial .
Reaching the maximum time is always reason for immediate release .
An exception to the time limits above arises in cases of remand due to concern of ( b ) interfering with witnesses or similar frustration of proceedings , in which case the maximum pre - trial detention period may be only three months , except where the charged person has already been influencing witnesses or otherwise frustrating the proceedings .
The court must review the reasons for the pre - trial custody every three months and decide either to continue it , or to release the charged person .
Both the prosecutor and the person in custody may file a complaint against any decision on custody , which leads to review by an appellate court .
Special rules of remand pertain to persons who are processed for extradition , e.g. illegal foreigners , those detained due to international ( foreign ) warrant or the European Arrest Warrant .
CONDITIONS IN CZECH REMAND PRISONS Section::::Conditions in Czech remand prisons .
In the Czech Republic , remand takes place in remand prisons or in separated sections of standard prisons .
Remand prisons are often in city centres and appertain to court houses .
Most remand prisons are over 80 years old , with some , like Pankrác Prison , being more than 125 years old .
Men , women and juveniles are held separately .
Also persons charged with committing different types of crimes ( e.g. unintentional , intentional , violent , etc . ) are held separately .
Cells have capacity varying between 1—8 beds , with most having between 2—4 beds .
Some remand prisons have rooms intended for watching TV , gyms or chapels , but these are exceptional mainly due to overcrowding and lack of space .
All have special areas for interviews between the inmates and their attorneys , visiting rooms and courtyards for out - walks .
Each cell has a WC divided from the rest of the cell - space and running cold water .
Each cell - mate has own bed , storage locker and chair .
Inmates which are held due to concern of influencing witnesses are held in isolation with very limited possibility of contact with other inmates as well as the outer world ( apart from interviews with own attorneys ) .
At any given time in 2011 , there were around 2.500 inmates in the Czech remand prisons ( including ~170 women and ~45 juveniles ) , compared to some 20.500 convicted inmates ( for 10,6 million population ) .
The average length of remand custody is around 100 days , with few inmates spending in remand more than 2 years .
More than half of foreign inmates of the Czech remand prisons are from Slovakia , Ukraine and Vietnam .
Other numerous foreigners are from Bulgaria , Macedonia , Moldova , Poland , Romania , Russia and Serbia .
When it comes to non - European states , there are numerous detainees from Nigeria , Algeria , Morocco , Uzbekistan , Kazakhstan and Mongolia .
There are mostly only few individuals of other nationalities .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In England and Wales , a suspect may be remanded after charge if : * The suspect has been charged with a serious crime * The suspect has been convicted of a serious crime in the past *
The suspect has breached bail conditions or failed to surrender either now or in the past
* The police believe the suspect may not appear in court *
The police believe the suspect may commit another crime if released on bail Remanding a suspect requires permission from a magistrates ' court .
After charge , the court can choose to remand the suspect until the first hearing of their trial ( if the offence is tried at the Crown Court , there is a preliminary hearing at a magistrates ' court ) .
At the first hearing , the court can then decide whether it necessary to remand the suspect until the end of the trial .
Adults will be held on remand at a regular prison , while those below the age of 18 will be held at a secure centre for young people .
If a remanded suspect is convicted and given a prison sentence , the time they spent on remand is deducted from the length of the sentence .
In some cases , a convicted suspect has been released immediately after being sentenced , if the time they spent on remand was longer than or equal to the sentence they received .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits excessive bail .
Under the US Code , pretrial detention of federal suspects is allowed only under certain circumstances , such as when the defendant is a danger to witnesses or jurors .
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
Two 2018 study in the American Economic Review and the Journal of Law , Economics , and Organization found that pretrial detention significantly increases the probability of conviction , largely because individuals who would otherwise be acquitted in trial enter guilty pleas .
The AER study found that pretrial detention also lowers the defendants ' prospects in the labor market .
The JLEO study found that pretrial detention caused 42 % longer incarceration sentence and 41 % higher nonbail court fees owed .
The JLEO study notes that " the use of money bail contributes to a " poverty - trap " : those who are unable to pay bail wind up accruing more court debt . "
CRITICISMS Section::::Criticisms .
Pre - trial detention has been described as a " necessary evil " .
A 2013 report by the Centre for Crime and Justice Studies concluded that pre - trial detention was being overused worldwide , and that most were being held for minor crimes .
A 2014 report by the Open Society Foundations called it a " massive and widely ignored pattern of human rights abuse " .
A person must be found guilty " beyond reasonable doubt " in order to be convicted at a trial .
However , pre - trial detention requires a lower threshold such as " reasonable suspicion " .
In most countries , the prosecution only need to prove that the charges are well - founded and that there is a sufficient threat that the defendant will commit another crime or undermine the judicial process .
In the United States , the system of money bail means that a defendant can be detained even if neither of these threats can be identified , solely because nobody was willing or able to deposit the bail money for them .
In the Harvard Law Review , Stephanie Bibas also noted its impact on plea bargaining .
Pretrial detention alters a defendant 's incentives by making his or her best - case scenario not zero days in jail , but the length of time served pretrial .
Therefore , a defendant may be more likely to plead guilty if the chance of acquittal is low , or if the expected sentence on a guilty plea is less than the amount of jail time that would be served pretrial .
Pretrial detainees may also find it harder to mount an effective defense .
The Open Society Foundation report also concluded that some detainees face worse conditions than convicted prisoners ; for example the suicide rate is three times higher worldwide .
SEE
ALSO * Detention ( imprisonment ) * Remand ( court procedure )
* Prisoner * Law enforcement agency powers
* Arbitrary arrest and detention * Defence Regulation 18B
* Extrajudicial detention * Immigration detention * Nightwalker Statute * Powers of the police in England and Wales
* Quasi - criminal
* Restorative justice * Security certificate * Summary jurisdiction * Unlawful combatant REFERENCES