SINGLE - SUBJECT DESIGN
In design of experiments , single - subject design or single - case research design is a research design most often used in applied fields of psychology , education , and human behavior in which the subject serves as his / her own control , rather than using another individual / group .
Researchers use single - subject design because these designs are sensitive to individual organism differences vs group designs which are sensitive to averages of groups .
Often there will be large numbers of subjects in a research study using single - subject design , however — because the subject serves as their own control , this is still a single - subject design .
These designs are used primarily to evaluate the effect of a variety of interventions in applied research .
REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements .
The following are requirements of single - subject designs :
* Continuous assessment : The behavior of the individual is observed repeatedly over the course of the intervention .
This ensures that any treatment effects are observed long enough to convince the scientist that the treatment produces a lasting effect .
* Baseline assessment : Before the treatment is implemented , the researcher is to look for behavioral trends .
If a treatment reverses a baseline trend ( e.g. , things were getting worse as time went on in the baseline but the treatment reversed this trend ) then this is powerful evidence suggesting ( though not proving ) a treatment effect .
* Variability in data : Because behavior is assessed repeatedly , the single - subject design allows the researcher to see how consistently the treatment changes behavior over time .
Large - group statistical designs do not typically provide this information because repeated assessments are not usually taken and the behavior of individuals in the groups are not scrutinized ; instead , group means are reported .
PHASES
WITHIN SINGLE - SUBJECT DESIGN
* Baseline : this phase is one in which the researcher collects data on the dependent variable without any intervention in place .
* Intervention : this phase is one in which the researcher introduces an independent variable ( the intervention ) and then collects data on the dependent variable .
* Reversal : this phase is one in which the researcher removes the independent variable ( reversal ) and then collects data on the dependent variable .
Section::::Phases within single - subject design .
It is important that the data are stable ( steady trend and low variability ) before the researcher moves to the next phase .
Single - subject designs produce or approximate three levels of knowledge : ( 1 ) descriptive , ( 2 ) correlational , and ( 3 ) causal .
FLEXIBILITY OF THE DESIGN Section::::Flexibility of the design .
Single - subject designs are preferred because they are highly flexible and highlight individual differences in response to intervention effects .
In general , single - subject designs have been shown to reduce interpretation bias for counselors when doing therapy .
INTERPRETATION OF DATA Section::::Interpretation of data .
In order to determine the effect of the independent variable on the dependent variable , the researcher will graph the data collected and visually inspect the differences between phases .
If there is a clear distinction between baseline and intervention , and then the data returns to the same trends / level during reversal , a functional relation between the variables is inferred .
Sometimes , visual inspection of the data demonstrates results that statistical tests fail to find .
Researchers utilizing single - subject design begin with graphic analysis .
During the baseline , data are repeatedly collected and then graphed on the behavior of interest .
This provides a visual representation of the subject 's behavior before application of the intervention .
It is critical that several ( three to five is often recommended ) data points are collected during baseline to allow the researcher to describe the effects on the target behavior during intervention .
In interpreting , the general strategy of all single - subject research is to use the subject as their own control .
Experimental logic argues that the subject 's baseline behavior would match its behavior in the intervention phase unless the intervention does something to change it .
This logic then holds to rule out confound , one needs to replicate .
It is the within - subject replication and allows for the determination of functional relationships .
Thus the goal is : *
Demonstration
* Verification * Replication LIMITATIONS Section::::Limitations .
Research designs are traditionally preplanned so that most of the details about to whom and when the intervention will be introduced are decided prior to the beginning of the study .
However , in single - subject designs , these decisions are often made as the data are collected .
In addition , there are no widely agreed - upon rules for altering phases , so — this could lead to conflicting ideas as to how a research experiment should be conducted in single - subject design .
The major criticism of single - subject designs are : * Carry - over effects : Results from the previous phase carry - over into the next phase .
* Order effects :
The ordering ( sequence ) of the intervention or treatment affects what results .
* Irreversibility : In some withdrawal designs , once a change in the independent variable occurs , the dependent variable is affected .
This can not be undone by simply removing the independent variable .
* Ethical problems :
Withdrawal of treatment in the withdrawal design can at times present ethical and feasibility problems .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Historically , single - subject designs have been closely tied to the experimental analysis of behavior and applied behavior analysis .
SEE ALSO
* N of 1 trial * Single - subject research REFERENCES FURTHER READING