ELEMENT ( CRIMINAL LAW )
Under United States law , an element of a crime ( or element of an offense ) is one of a set of facts that must all be proven to convict a defendant of a crime .
Before a court finds a defendant guilty of a criminal offense , the prosecution must present evidence that , even when opposed by any evidence the defense may choose , is credible and sufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed each element of the particular crime charged .
The component parts that make up any particular crime vary depending on the crime .
The basic components of an offense are listed below ; generally , each element of an offense falls into one or another of these categories .
At common law , conduct could not be considered criminal unless a defendant possessed some level of intentioneither purpose , knowledge , or recklessnesswith regard to both the nature of his alleged conduct and the existence of the factual circumstances under which the law considered that conduct criminal .
However , for some legislatively enacted crimes , the most notable example being statutory rape , a defendant need not have had any degree of belief or willful disregard as to the existence of certain factual circumstances ( such as the age of the accuser ) that rendered his conduct criminal ; such crimes are known as strict liability offenses .
MENTAL STATE ( MENS REA )
Section::::Mental state ( Mens rea ) .
Mens rea refers to the crime 's mental elements of the defendant 's intent .
This is a necessary element — that is , the criminal act must be voluntary or purposeful .
Mens rea is the mental intention ( mental fault ) , or the defendant 's state of mind at the time of the offense , sometimes called the guilty mind .
It stems from the ancient maxim of obscure origin , " actus reus non facit reum nisi mens sit reas " that is translated as " the act is not guilty unless the mind is guilty .
"
For example , the mens rea of aggravated battery is the intention to do serious bodily harm .
Mens rea is almost always a necessary component in order to prove that a criminal act has been committed .
Mens rea varies depending on the offense .
For murder , the mental element requires the defendant acted with " malice aforethought " .
Others may require proof the act was committed with such mental elements such as " knowingly " or " willfulness " or " recklessness " .
Arson requires an intent to commit a forbidden act , while others such as murder require an intent to produce a forbidden result .
Motive , the reason the act was committed , is not the same as mens rea and the law is not concerned with motive .
Although most legal systems recognize the importance of the guilty mind , or mens rea , exactly what is meant by this concept varies .
The American Law Institute 's Model Penal Code has reduced the mental states to four .
In general , guilt can be attributed to an individual who acts " purposely , " " knowingly , " " recklessly , " or " negligently . "
Together or in combination , these four attributes seem basically effective in dealing with most of the common mens rea issues .
CONDUCT ( ACTUS REUS )
Section::::Conduct ( Actus reus ) .
All crimes require actus reus .
That is , a criminal act or an unlawful omission of an act , must have occurred .
A person can not be punished for thinking criminal thoughts .
This element is based on the problem of standards of proof .
How can another person 's thoughts be determined and how can criminal thoughts be differentiated from idle thoughts ?
Further , the law 's purview is not to punish criminal ideas but to punish those who act upon those ideas voluntarily .
Unlike thoughts , words can be considered acts in criminal law .
For example , threats , perjury , conspiracy , and solicitation are offenses in which words can constitute the element of actus reus .
The omission of an act can also constitute the basis for criminal liability .
CONCURRENCE Section::::Concurrence .
In general , men 's rea and actus reus must occur at the same time — that is , the criminal intent must precede or coexist with the criminal act , or in some way activate the act .
The necessary mens rea may not continually be present until the forbidden act is committed , as long as it activated the conduct that produced the criminal act .
However , for criminal liability to occur , there must be either overt and voluntary action CAUSATION Section::::Causation .
Many crimes include an element that actual harm must occur — in other words , causation must be proved .
For example , homicide requires a killing , aggravated battery requires serious bodily injury and without those respective outcomes , those respective crimes would not be committed .
A causal relationship between conduct and result is demonstrated if the act would not have happened without direct participation of the offender .
Causation is complex to prove .
The act may be a " necessary but not sufficient " cause of the criminal harm .
Intervening events may have occurred in between the act and the result .
Therefore , the cause of the act and the forbidden result must be " proximate " , or near in time .
SEE ALSO * Criminal law
* Impossibility defense
*
Corpus delicti REFERENCES CITATIONS
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Laws on Crime
* Thomas , J. , concurring Charles C. Apprendi , Jr. , Petitionier v. New Jersey -
On Writ of Certiorari to the Supreme Court of New Jersey