AQUAGENIC URTICARIA Aquagenic urticaria , also known as water allergy and water urticaria , is a rarely diagnosed form of physical urticaria .
The defining symptom is an itchy skin reaction resulting from contact with water , regardless of its temperature .
It is sometimes described as an allergy , although it is not a true histamine - releasing allergic reaction like other forms of urticaria .
This seems to not be affected by different temperatures of water , such as cold or hot , or chemicals such as fluorine and chlorine , since it is reproduced with distilled water and medical saline .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
The symptoms of aquagenic urticaria ( inaccurately called water allergy ) are similar to all the other types of physical hives .
This may include wheals or small raised hives , intense itching , skin flushing in the areas that are prone to water contact .
The symptoms may appear within minutes after the body comes in contact with the water .
Aquagenic urticaria is a rare condition in which itchy urticaria ( hives ) develop rapidly after the skin comes in contact with water , regardless of its temperature .
The hives associated with aquagenic urticaria are typically small ( approximately 1–3 mm ) , red- or
skin - colored welts ( called wheals ) with clearly defined edges .
It most commonly develops on the neck , upper trunk and arms , although it can occur anywhere on the body .
Some people have itching too .
Once the water source is removed , the rash generally fades within 30 to 60 minutes .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
The exact underlying cause of aquagenic urticaria is poorly understood .
, the main scientific ideas about the cause are that the person is reacting to tiny amounts of an unknown substance dissolved in the water , or that the water interacts with or combines with an unknown substance present in or on the skin , and that the person 's immune system is reacting to this compound .
Despite the common name water allergy , this condition can not be a true allergy to water , especially given that the body is largely composed of water .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Diagnosis of aquagenic urticaria will begin with an evaluation of the patient 's clinical history looking for any signs of what might be causing this severe reaction .
The patient will then be put to a water treatment test where water will be applied to the upper body for 30 minutes .
Water may be placed directly on the skin or a soaked paper towel may be applied .
In many cases distilled water , tap water and saline will be used to check for a difference in reaction .
After this is removed the skin will be checked for a reaction for the next 10–15 minutes .
Because aqugenic urticaria frequently accompanies other types of physical urticaria , the doctor may perform tests to check for these other conditions .
An ice cube may be placed on the forearm for a few minutes to check for cold urticaria , exposure to a hot bath will be used to check for Cholinergis uticaria and the lesions will be inspected to determine the root cause of their appearance .
Evaluations for aquagenic urticaria consist of a clinical history and water challenge test .
The standard test for aquagenic urticaria is application of a 35 ° C water compress to the upper body for 30 minutes .
Water of any temperature can provoke aquagenic urticaria ; however , keeping the compress at a similar temperature to that of the human body ( 37 ° C )
avoids confusion with cold - induced or local heat urticaria .
In addition , a forearm or hand can be immersed in water of varying temperatures .
A diagnosis of aquagenic urticaria requires exclusion of other types of physical urticaria , so an exercise test and ice cube test should be performed to rule out other types of physical urticarial .
aquagenic urticaria should be distinguished from aquagenic pruritus , in which brief contact with water evokes intense itching without wheals or erythema .
The pathogenesis of aquagenic urticaria is not fully known ; however , several mechanisms have been proposed .
Interaction with water with a component in or on the stratum corneum or sebum , generating a toxic compound , has been suggested .
Absorption of this substance would exert an effect of perifollicular mast cell degranulation with release of histamine .
Aquagenic urticaria , once known as a rare physical urticaria , is reclassified as separate subtype of urticaria .
It was first reported by Walter B Shelley et al .
in 1964 .
Itchy hives on contact with water mostly presenting for the first time during puberty in females .
Males are less often affected .
Even if majority cases are sporadic in nature , familial cases are also recorded .
Water in all forms such as tap or sea water , swimming pool , sweat , tears , saliva can induce the lesions .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
The more poignant part of this disorder is the lack of desensitization for water and aqua intile injection as allergen even on repeated exposure .
Avoidance of allergen as a general principle in any allergic disorder necessitates the evasion of water exposure .
Topical application of antihistamines like 1 % diphenhydramine before water exposure is reported to reduce the hives .
Oil in water emulsion creams , petrolatum as barrier agents for water can be used prior to shower or bath with good control of symptoms .
Therapeutic effectiveness of various classes of drugs differs from case to case .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
There is no treatment that will rid the person of symptoms of aquagenic urticaria .
Most treatments are used to lessen the effects of the disease to promote more comfort when the body must come in contact with water .
*
Oral antihistamine
*
Topical corticosteroids : specifically stanozolol .
* Phototherapy * Barrier cream : In some circumstances an oil in water solution or emulsion cream can be applied to the skin to protect it from water exposure while washing or performing aquatic activities .
HISTORY Section::::History .
According to Gerald W. Volcheck , " Urticaria represents transient , localized areas of oedema within skin tissue that appear as pruritic , raised erythematous , skin - colored or white , non - pitting , blanching plaques of variable size " .
The term urticaria was first used by the Scottish physician William Cullen in 1769 .
It originates from the Latin word urtica , meaning stinging hair or nettle , as the classical presentation follows the contact with a perennial flowering plant Urtica dioica .
The history of urticaria dates back to 1000–2000 BC with its reference as a wind - type concealed rash in the book
The Yellow Emperor 's Inner Classic from Huangdi Neijing .
Hippocrates in the 4th century first described urticaria as " knidosis " after the Greek word knido for nettle .
The discovery of mast cells by Paul Ehrlich in 1879 brought urticaria and similar conditions under a comprehensive idea of allergic conditions .
SEE ALSO
* Aquagenic pruritus * Aquadynia * Cholinergic urticaria
* Solar urticaria
* List of cutaneous conditions REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS