STUDIO AUDIENCE
A studio audience is an audience present for the filming of all or part of a television program , or to a smaller extent , radio programs .
The primary purpose of the studio audience is to provide applause and/or laughter to the program 's soundtrack ( as opposed to canned laughter ) .
Additionally , live studio audiences produce an energy off of which the actors can feed , as well as push them to perform to the best of their abilities .
Unlike relying on the ideal chuckles that a laugh track consistently provides , actors have to work for the laughs .
A studio audience can also provide volunteers , a visual backdrop and discussion participants .
On some game shows , contestants are taken from the studio audience , such as with The Price Is Right .
In some cases , a studio audience can be called upon to vote , to help a contestant(s ) ( such as with Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? ) or pass judgment on a politician ( such as with Question Time ) .
In the United States , tickets to be a part of a studio audience are usually given away .
However , as an enticement to attend , one or more members of the audience may be selected to win a prize , which is usually provided by a manufacturer in exchange for an advertisement , usually at the end of the show .
For comedy television shows like All in the Family , Saturday Night Live and Happy Days ( for indoor scenes ) , the use of a live studio audiences essentially turns them into de facto stage productions while shooting individual scenes , with minor problems like the audience applauding or uproariously whooping ( the latter since becoming a satirical cliché in shows which mock the format and tropes of traditional sitcoms ) when their favorite performers enter the stage .
Shows like The Red Green Show , meanwhile , actually make the audience a part of the show , since that show is supposedly a television broadcast made from the ( fictional ) Possum Lodge , cast members react and speak directly to the audience as if they were talking to the viewers at home .
BRIEF HISTORY Section::::Brief history .
In its earliest days , most television broadcasts stemmed from the world of New York theater .
Performing in front of a crowd was something stage veterans knew how to do well .
Starting in the 1940s , these plays were broadcast live .
Thus , these plays were now directed towards both the live audience and those watching from home .
Premiering in 1951 , I Love Lucy was the first television series to be filmed in front of an audience .
This was made possible by the use of multiple cameras .
This implementation allowed the show to benefit from the strengths of both stage plays ( live audience ) and film ( camera angle options , point of view , etc . ) .
This approach produced a marriage between cinema and theater ; television and plays .
Shows that subsequently adopted this concept include All in the Family , Cheers , The Jeffersons , Seinfeld and Friends .
Although radio broadcasts for a studio audience have for the most part ended for commercial radio programs ( outside of special " road show " episodes ) , public radio shows such as A Prairie Home Companion , Wait Wait ...
Do n't Tell Me ! , Says You ! , Tent Show Radio and Whad'Ya Know ? are mainly performed in front of live audiences in theaters or art centers , if not a confined studio setting .
REFERENCES