LARK RISE TO CANDLEFORD ( TV SERIES )
Lark Rise to Candleford is a British television costume drama series , adapted by the BBC from Flora Thompson 's trilogy of semi - autobiographical novels about the English countryside , published between 1939 and 1943 .
The first episode aired on 13 January 2008 on BBC One and BBC HD in the UK .
In the U.S. , the series began airing on select PBS stations in the spring of 2009 .
A third series began airing in the UK on 10 January 2010 .
The fourth and final series began on 9 January 2011 on BBC One and BBC One HD , and was filmed during August 2010 .
It was announced on 22 January 2011 that the show would not be returning for a fifth series .
The final series concluded on 13 February 2011 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series is set in the small Oxfordshire hamlet of Lark Rise and the wealthier neighbouring market town of Candleford towards the end of the 19th century .
The series chronicles the daily lives of farm workers , craftsmen , and gentry , observing the characters in loving , boisterous , and competing communities of families , rivals , friends , and neighbours .
The story is seen through the eyes of a teenage girl , Laura Timmins ( Olivia Hallinan ) , as she leaves Lark Rise to start a new life under the wing of her mother 's cousin , the independent and effervescent Dorcas Lane ( Julia Sawalha ) , who is Post Mistress at the local Post Office in Candleford .
Through these two characters , viewers experience the force of friendship as Laura and Dorcas see each other through the best and worst of times .
CAST MAIN CAST Section::::Cast .
Section::::Main cast . !
rowspan="2 " Character ! !
rowspan="2 " Portrayed by ! !
colspan="4 " Seasons !
width="5 % " Series 1 ! !
width="5 % " Series 2 ! !
width="5 % " Series 3 ! !
width="5 % " Series 4 CASTING NOTES Section::::Casting notes .
From Series 1 to 3 , the cast were credited alphabetically .
Series 4 cast members were billed in the order of prominence within each episode .
Dawn French is credited as a main cast member in every episode in which she appears ; in series 2 and series 4 she appears in one episode .
Although they appear in almost every episode , the actors playing the Timmins ( Edmund , Frank and Ethel ) and Arless ( Lizzie , Archie and Sally ) children as well as Sydney Dowland are not credited as main cast members .
GUEST STARS
* Lorraine Ashbourne as Lil Spicer * Samantha Bond as Celestia Brice - Coulson * Rosie Cavaliero as Mrs Mullins * Camille Coduri as Patty * Tom Conti as Mr. Reppington
* Ben Daniels as Mr. Rushton
* Phil Davis as Arthur Ashlow * Oliver Dimsdale as George Ellison * Michelle Fairley as Elizabeth Patterson
* Burn Gorman as Benedict Marley * Nigel Harman as Samuel Braby
* Matthew McNulty as Fisher Bloom * Stephen Campbell Moore as James Delafield * Hattie Morahan as Miss Enid * Ronald Pickup as Old Peg Leg * Robert Pugh as Walter Arless * Paul Ritter as Mr Steerforth * Claire Skinner as Mrs Macey * Sheridan Smith as Cinderella Doe * Maggie Steed as Mrs Herring
* Peter Vaughan as Reverend Ellison * Danny Webb as Mr Macey FILMING Section::::Filming .
Interior scenes were shot in a warehouse on Beeches Industrial Estate , in Yate , South Gloucestershire .
The villages of Lark Rise and Candleford were both created from scratch on farms in Box and Neston Park , near Corsham in Wiltshire .
According to the BBC planning application , Hatt Farm in Box was used because of its proximity to existing cornfields and farm buildings , and Park Farm in Neston Park was chosen for its unspoilt character and attractive traditional buildings .
The outdoor filming at these locations for the first series took 25 days , spread over a 5-month period .
The country scenes , including all the comings and goings of the lord of the manor , were shot at Chavenage House north of Tetbury , Gloucestershire .
EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2008 )
SERIES 2
( 2008–2009 ) SERIES 3 ( 2010 ) SERIES 4 ( 2011 ) CANCELLATION Section::::Cancellation .
It was announced on 22 January 2011 that the show would not be returning for a fifth series .
The decision caused viewer complaints , prompting BBC One controller Danny Cohen to say , " Lark Rise to Candleford has been a truly wonderful part of the BBC One schedule and we are incredibly grateful to writer Bill Gallagher and the team .
But we feel the time is right to make room for new dramas which we hope will be taken to the nation 's hearts in the same way . "
Following that announcement , many viewers took to setting up and signing online campaigns to see the show recommissioned .
In response , Ben Stephenson of the BBC finally announced the decision was based on the departure of writer and executive producer Bill Gallagher , whose " creative energy " was considered essential to the series .
DVD AND BLU - RAY RELEASES Section::::DVD and Blu - ray releases . !
DVD release !
Release date !
Blu - ray release !
Release date !
No of discs !
No of episodes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS