I COULD FALL IN LOVE
" I Could Fall in Love " is a song recorded by American Tejano singer Selena for her fifth studio album , Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) , released posthumously by EMI Latin on 26 June 1995 .
" I Could Fall in Love " and " Tú Sólo Tú " were the album 's lead promotional recordings , showcasing her musical transition from Spanish- to English - language songs .
The lyrics explore feelings of heartbreak and despair and express the singer 's fear of rejection by a man she finds herself falling in love with .
Composed by Keith Thomas , " I Could Fall in Love " is a pop ballad with R&B , soul and soft rock influences .
Critics praised Selena 's emotive enunciation and compared it to work by Celine Dion , Brandy Norwood and TLC .
It received the Tejano Music Award for the Tejano Crossover Song of the Year , and the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized it at the ASCAP Pop Music Awards as one of the most performed songs of 1995 .
Because of the recording 's composition structure and the singer 's vocalization , OC Weekly , BuzzFeed , Neon Tommy , and Latina magazine , believed " I Could Fall in Love " was one of the best songs recorded by Selena in her musical career .
The track was not released as a commercial single in the United States , where it was feared that it might sell more copies than the album itself .
" I Could Fall in Love " peaked at number eight on the US Billboard Hot 100 Airplay chart , and at number one on the Canadian RPM Adult Contemporary and US Billboard Latin Pop Airplay charts .
It reached the top ten on the singles charts of Canada and New Zealand .
It became the most played song in Kansas City , Miami , and Boston and the second most played in Los Angeles .
The accompanying music video , directed by Hector Galan , featured a montage of pictures and videos of live performances of Selena , which had been collected by her family .
It , too , was released posthumously , and it received a Music Video of the Year nomination at the 1996 Tejano Music Awards .
" I Could Fall in Love " became one of Selena 's most famous and recognizable recordings , and in the 1990s it became a popular wedding song .
Cover versions include recordings by Adrienne Bailon , Jennifer Lopez , Gloria Estefan , Lisa Leuschner , Solange Knowles and Ali - Ollie Woodson .
BACKGROUND AND RELEASE Section::::Background and release .
Before Selena signed a recording contract in 1989 with EMI Latin , she had hinted that she wanted to start recording in English .
She was asked to make three demonstration recordings for Charles Koppelman , chairman of EMI Records .
After reviewing them , Koppelman declined a crossover attempt , believing that Selena should first strengthen her fan base .
Later , after releasing five Spanish - language albums that all achieved unprecedented milestones in the Latin music industry , Koppelman considered that Selena had reached her peak in the Spanish market , and he began preparations for a crossover album .
Selena and her record - producer brother A.B. Quintanilla III arrived in Nashville , Tennessee , intending to collaborate with producer - songwriter Keith Thomas .
Thomas had prepared the instrumental parts for " I Could Fall in Love " but had not had time to complete the vocal parts , so he sang it for them .
Selena and A.B. immediately liked it , and A.B. said that he wanted Selena to include it in her album .
She recorded it in December 1994 at The Bennett House in Franklin , Tennessee , and Bill Whittington mixed it with assistance from Mike Corbett and Todd Moore .
Although Selena had to return later when Thomas was able to provide additional vocals , Selena 's husband Chris Perez , who had overseen the recording sessions , said that the recording was completed on 25 March 1995 .
On 31 March 1995 , Selena was murdered in Corpus Christi , Texas , by her friend and former employee Yolanda Saldívar .
Thomas later announced that he had been working on another track for Selena to record , telling Biography that the track remained unfinished .
" I Could Fall in Love " was released as the lead promotional recording for the 1995 album Dreaming of You on 26 June 1995 , at the same time as " Tú Sólo Tú " , to demonstrate Selena 's transition from Spanish- to English - language recordings .
" I Could Fall in Love " debuted on US radios on 15 June 1995 to contemporary hit radios , Top 40 , urban AC and rhythmic contemporary airplay , while " Tú Sólo Tú " targeted Latin music radios such as Tejano , Latin pop , and regional Mexican airplay .
An editor from the Arizona Daily Star believed " I Could Fall in Love " was targeted more towards adult contemporary radios than R&B and top 40 radio formats that were successful for Gloria Estefan .
" I Could Fall in Love " was released as a maxi single on 26 June 1995 in Australia and Mexico and on 10 August 1995 in Germany .
A maxi single featuring "
Dreaming of You " and " Sukiyaki " was released in Japan .
"
Tú Sólo Tú " was released primarily to Spanish - speaking countries .
Fred Bronson of Billboard commented that if EMI Latin had released " I Could Fall in Love " as a single and it had debuted in the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 chart , then it would have been the first posthumous debut single to do so since " Pledging My Love " by Johnny Ace in 1955 .
COMPOSITION AND LYRICS Section::::Composition and lyrics .
" I Could Fall in Love " is a mid - tempo pop ballad and R&B song with soul and soft rock influences .
Mario Tarradell , an editorial writer for The Dallas Morning News , called the song a " mundane ballad " .
It is set in common time and employs an electronic piano , drum machine , a violin , and a flute in the background .
The instrumentation includes bass drum , keyboard , flamenco guitar , Spanish guitar , and synthesizers .
" I Could Fall in Love " is written in the key of E major , to be played in a moderate groove at 78 half notes per minute .
The vocal range of the melody extends from the note F to A. Sandy Masuo of the St. Louis Post - Dispatch wrote , " These songs [ " I Could Fall in Love " , " I 'm Getting Used to You " and " Captive Heart " ] were to be her armaments in the crossover war and , sure enough , they 're catchy , state - of - the - art pop / R&B – but , despite the sublime melody of " I Could Fall in Love " , strikingly anonymous . "
An editor from the Contra Costa Times called the song a " jazzy ballad " .
Donny Brusca 's book BPM List 2006 : Main Edition classified it as " light - adult contemporary " .
Andrew Griffin of The Town Talk called it a " Tex - Mex ( Texas - Mexico ) pop " song .
" I Could Fall in Love " is similar to " Dreaming of You " in its lyrics .
Many media outlets , including the Milwaukee Journal and Billboard magazine , called them " confessional ballads " , with an emotionally vulnerable narrator who wants true love but finds it unattainable .
Tarradell believed " I Could Fall in Love " was an indirect response to Selena 's father and manager Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. , who forced her and Perez to end their relationship just because Perez was a rocker .
Tarradell asserted that the words " I know it 's not right
but I guess I should try to do what I should do " were directed at Abraham and reflected Selena 's realization of her independence .
Ramiro Burr of the San Antonio Express - News believed that Selena 's 1992 song " Missing My Baby " shared similarities with " I Could Fall in Love " in expressing uncontrollable " adrenalin - fueled love " .
Burr later wrote that the difference in " I Could Fall in Love " is that the lyrics are recorded with " powerful agony " which forces the narrator to " fall into a phase of deep loneliness " because her lover may or may not reciprocate her feelings .
The first verse of " I Could Fall in Love " implores the object of the singer 's desire to walk away , because her emotions are too overpowering and she feels love of unprecedented intensity .
She fears that by allowing him to stay attached , she may " lose control " .
Selena believes that her infatuation can lead to romantic love .
She then sings " I could fall in love ( in love ) with you " before wondering how she would feel if she were to touch him for the first time .
The fear of being rejected and unloved leads her to keep her feelings to herself , and she begins to believe that her love is " not right " .
She continues , " and I guess I should try / to do what I should do /
but I could fall in love
/ fall in love with you " .
During the midpoint break , Selena sings in Spanish that she is always dreaming about him , imagining that he loves her .
She sings the chorus twice before the song comes to an end without her ever having come to terms with her loved one .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
" I Could Fall in Love " received a generally positive response from music critics , who commented on its similarities to songs recorded by other artists .
Ed Morales of Vibe magazine felt that , because of its syncopated drums , " I Could Fall in Love " had a " Jon Secada - like feel " , and it reminded Tarradell of songs recorded by American singer Brandy Norwood and by the trio TLC .
An editor from the Star - News thought the song had " a whiff of " Celine Dion .
James Hunter , also from Vibe , praised Selena 's astute interpretation , calling it a " masterpiece " and commenting that Selena 's death made the track more difficult to listen to .
Larry Flick of Billboard described " I Could Fall in Love " as an " optimistic love song " that left " melancholy thoughts of what might have been " in the mind of the listener .
John Lannert , also from Billboard , conceived " I Could Fall in Love " as a " sensuous narrative " recording and a " seductive romantic confessional " .
Tarradell , writing in The Beaver County Times , called it a " crossover staple " .
Mary Talbot of the New York Daily News , praised Selena 's " soft , velvety voice " .
A San Jose Mercury News reporter wrote that " I Could Fall in Love " and " Dreaming of You " helped Selena to become " the new Gloria Estefan " .
Richard Torres of Newsday considered both these songs to be romantic anthems .
Enrique Fernandez of the Sun Sentinel described " I Could Fall in Love " as " beautiful " , while an editor from The Sacramento Bee called the song a " Latin - influenced R&B lite " .
Because of its " overly simplistic and repetitive lyrics " , Ramiro Burr of the San Antonio Express - News assessed " I Could Fall in Love " as the " weakest track " of Dreaming of You .
Elizabeth Rodriguez Kessler and Anne Perrin wrote in their 2007 book Chican@s in the Conversations that " I Could Fall in Love " was a " clean pop offering " .
Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle commented in 2008 that it had " made the Tejano goddess a posthumous crossover star " .
On 31 March 2010 , Teresa Jusino of Popmatters expressed the view that English - speaking music fans no longer remember Selena 's name , saying that on playing " Dreaming of You " or " I Could Fall in Love " , many would say " I remember that song ! "
or " I love that one ! " .
Randi Bergman of Fashion magazine , called the number an " epic ballad " .
RECOGNITION AND ACCOLADES Section::::Recognition and accolades .
" I Could Fall in Love " was nominated for " Song of the Year " at the 1996 Tejano Music Awards , and won the Tejano Crossover Songs of the Year .
The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized it as one of the most performed songs of 1995 at the 4th ASCAP Pop Music Awards .
Marco Torres of OC Weekly , called the song " so sweet , so loving , so absolutely , amazingly , and astonishingly adorable ! " and placed it at number seven on his " Top 10 Selena songs of All time " list .
Brian Galindo of BuzzFeed believed the " melancholy ballad is another great example of Selena 's ability bring an emotional vulnerability to her songs . " and placed " I Could Fall in Love " at number five on his list of " The 15 Greatest Selena Songs of All Time " .
Latina magazine placed " I Could Fall in Love " at number three on their " Remembering Selena :
Her Top Ten Songs " list .
Ashley Velez of Neon Tommy commented that " Selena lends her vulnerability to this slow ballad " and that it " displays Selena 's talented vocals and helped introduce the singer to the American mainstream .
" Velez then ranked the recording number two on her list of the " Top 5 Selena Songs " .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
Davitt Sigerson , the president and CEO of EMI records , feared that " I Could Fall in Love " might sell more copies than the album itself , so he did not issue the single as a commercial release .
Therefore , it was not eligible for the Billboard Hot 100 chart .
" I Could Fall in Love " debuted at number four on the Hot Latin Tracks chart on 1 July 1995 and peaked at number two the following week , becoming the highest - ever English - language song on that chart . "
Tú Sólo Tú " and " I Could Fall in Love " occupied the first and second positions respectively on Hot Latin Tracks for five consecutive weeks .
Selena thus became the first artist to place both a Spanish- and an English - language song in the top ten of the Hot Latin Tracks chart .
" I Could Fall in Love " became the fifth best - charting song from that chart in 1995 and remained the highest - charting English - language song for two years , until Celine Dion 's 1998 single " My Heart Will Go On " surpassed it when it peaked at number one .
On the Regional Mexican Songs chart , the track reached number five for two consecutive weeks from 1 July 1995 , and it peaked at number one on the Latin Pop Airplay chart of 19 August 1995 for one week .
Entering at number 13 on the Latin Tropical / Salsa Airplay chart of 15 July 1995 , the song peaked at number four there five weeks later , on 26 August 1995 .
" I Could Fall in Love " debuted at number 46 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart issue dated 8 July 1995 and peaked eight weeks later at number 8 on 2 September 1995 .
By entering the Adult Contemporary Tracks chart at number 37 on 29 July 1995 , the recording received a " Hot Shot Debut " as the highest debut of the week .
It ran at number 14 for three consecutive weeks starting on 21 October 1995 .
" I Could Fall in Love " peaked at number 17 on the Adult Top 40 chart and number three on the Hot 100 Recurrent Airplay chart on 23 December 1995 .
The performance entered the Hot Adult Contemporary Recurrent chart on 27 January 1996 at number six and achieved the same on the Rhythmic Top 40 .
Number 15 was its highest position on the Mainstream Top 40 chart .
In New Zealand , " I Could Fall in Love " debuted at number 36 on the New Zealand Top 40 chart on 10 October 1995 and peaked at number ten in the week ending 19 November 1995 , its fifth week on the chart .
In Canada , " I Could Fall in Love " debuted at number 55 on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart of 24 July 1995 .
By 6 November 1995 it was number one .
On 21 August 1995 it entered at number 94 on the RPM Top Singles chart , and in October , after eleven weeks , it reached number ten for two consecutive weeks .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
Directed by Hector Galan , the song 's accompanying music video featured a montage of pictures and videos of live performances by Selena that had been collected by her family .
It was released posthumously and received a Music Video of the Year nomination at the 1995 Tejano Music Awards .
This promotional video reached number 11 on the Billboard Video Monitor VH1 Top Music Videos list , number 6 on The BOX Video List , number 10 on the MOR Music list , and number 3 on the California Music Channel ( CMC ) list of most popular music videos .
CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
" I Could Fall in Love " dominated the Top 40 radio stations , a fact that was well received by critics .
The song was given heavy rotation in the southern United States , becoming the most played song in Kansas City , Miami , and Boston and the second most played in Los Angeles .
In Tucson , Arizona , it was played every 2½ hours , and in San Antonio every hour .
The song was played 25 times its first day of availability on US radios on the Harlingen , Texas radio station KBTQ .
It helped increase Selena 's catalogue sales and simultaneously boosted media attention .
The song 's release sparked a two - day " on - air blitz " on radios in South Texas .
In Riverside , California , program directors reported that " I Could Fall in Love " was one of the three hits they were playing most often on their radio stations .
A San Antonio disc jockey told The Victoria Advocate about the overwhelming response received from the English - speaking audience , who were constantly calling her radio station asking for " I Could Fall in Love " .
" Dreaming of You " and " I Could Fall in Love " were EMI Records ' top selling digital downloads from 1 April 2004 to 31 March 2005 .
" I Could Fall in Love " became one of Selena 's most widely recognized recordings .
It rapidly became popular as a wedding song , causing it to become one of Selena 's most famous songs .
Her English - speaking audience increased substantially as a result of its widespread popularity .
Amanda Edwards of Voxxi.com called it " one of the most popular Latin love songs of all time " , adding that , " from her sweet voice to the genuine sentiment of the song ( with a hint of sexiness if you 're listening carefully ) , we 're sold on this track being a solid standby any time of year but especially for someone hoping for romance on Valentine 's Day " .
A ten - second instrumental of the recording was featured on 4 February 1998 episode of Dexter 's Laboratory .
COVERS Section::::Covers .
A number of singers have adapted the song in a variety of genres .
Puerto Rican - American singer and actress Jennifer Lopez lip - synced the track for her portrayal of the title role in the 1997 biographical film Selena , which was praised by critics .
Reviewing the film 's opening , a Wichita Eagle writer described the song as " hauntingly lovely " and said that it expressed the feelings of Selena 's fans .
Lopez included " I Could Fall in Love " in the set list for her Lets Get Loud Tour in 2001 at the Roberto Clemente Coliseum in San Juan , Puerto Rico , and on 11 February 2003
she included the song in her live video album .
Cuban singer Gloria Estefan performed a cover version during the Selena ¡ VIVE !
concert in 2005 ; Tarradell commented in The Dallas Morning News that it had been a " lovely rendition " .
Puerto Rican singer Ana recorded the song for her album Amor Latino .
The Korean singer I m Tae Kyung performed a slower pop ballad version that incorporates a guitar as its musical foundation .
A reggae - inspired version of the song appeared on Fiona 's Best of Sweet Love .
Season three American Idol contestant Lisa Leuschner included the song in her album Reality .
In Kumbia Kings ' third compilation album Duetos ( 2005 ) , Selena 's brother A.B. Quintanilla III recorded " I Could Fall in Love " as a Spanglish duet with Selena .
For the album Familia RMM Recordando a Selena , recorded by various artists in 1996 , Los Jovenes Del Barrio performed a cover of the song .
Season 10 American Idol contestant Karen Rodriguez performed " I Could Fall in Love " during the " top 13 " episode , receiving unfavorable reviews from critics who considered the song too powerful for her .
However , The Washington Post contributor Derrik Lang called Rodriguez ' cover a " breathy redemption " .
American Idol alumna Katie Stevens wrote to The Hollywood Reporter , claiming that the judges on the show had judged Rodriguez too harshly and calling Rodriguez the " new Selena " .
Rodriguez recorded a studio version of " I Could Fall in Love " in 2011 for her debut album , which was produced by Jim Jonsin .
Solange Knowles included the song in the set list for her 2013 world tour , which has received praise from music critics .
Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle wrote that Knowles had " put a lovely , downtempo twist on ' I Could Fall in Love " .
Michael O'Connell of The Hollywood Reporter called Knowles ' rendition a " fangirl cover " .
Writing in the San Francisco Weekly , Erin Browner considered Knowles ' cover the " highlight of the night " when she performed it at the start of her US tour .
Browner commented that the " combination of sexy Solange and Selena 's epic love song was almost too much for the audience to handle " and that " people immediately whipped out their phones to record ( yep , it 's already on YouTube ) and/or just plain cried the lyrics along with her " .
On 29 March 2015 , Filipino singers Angeline Quinto , Yeng Constantino , and Juris Fernandez performed " I Could Fall in Love " for the variety show
ASAP .
American singer Adrienne Bailon performed " I Could Fall in Love " after a six - year departure from the music business , during the 31 March 2015 episode of The Real ; a talk show she currently hosts .
FORMATS AND TRACK
LISTINGS
* Worldwide Promotional Recording *
" I Could Fall in Love ( Album version ) " – 4:40
* * " I Could Fall in Love ( Softer version ) " –
4:41 * * Japan maxi single *
" I Could Fall in Love " –
4:41 * * " Dreaming of You " – 5:15 * * " Sukiyaki " – 3:01 * * Mexican CD single * " I Could Fall in Love ( Album version ) " – 4:40
* * " I Could Fall in Love ( Softer version ) " – 4:41
* * " Tú Sólo Tú " – 3:12 * * Australian maxi single * " I Could Fall in Love ( Album version ) " – 4:40
* * " I Could Fall in Love ( Softer version ) " – 4:41
* * " Tú Sólo Tú " – 3:45 * * " Amor Prohibido " – 2:50 * CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Section::::Credits and personnel .
Credits adapted from Dreaming of You album liner notes .
* Keith Thomas — producer , arranger , synthesizer , bass programming * Selena —
vocals
* Bill Whittington — vocals recorder , mixer * Mike Corbett — assistant engineer * Todd Moore — production coordinator * Mark Hammond — drums * Tommy Sims — bass guitar
* Dan Huff — backing guitarist * Trey Lorenz — backing
vocalist CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col
" Chart ( 1995 ) ! scope="col " Peakposition !
scope =
rowAustralia ( ARIA ) !
scope =
rowCanadian RPM
Top Singles Chart !
scope =
rowCanadian RMP Adult Contemporary !
scope="row
" ! scope="row " !
scope="row " !
scope="row
" ! scope="row " ! scope = rowUS Tropical Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope = rowUS
Top
40 Mainstream ( Billboard ) !
scope =
rowUS
Rhythmic Top 40
( Billboard YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
Chart ( 1995 ) !
Rank !
scope =
rowCanadian RPM Adult Contemporary !
scope =
rowCanadian RPM Top 100
Singles !
scope = rowUS
Hot Latin Tracks CERTIFICATIONS RELEASE AND RADIO HISTORY Section::::Release and radio history . !
scope="col " Country ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Label ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " United States !
scope="row"Mexico !
scope="row"Australia !
scope="row"Japan !
scope="row"Germany !
scope="row"France !
scope="row"Japan !
scope="row"United Kingdom SEE ALSO
* List of number - one Billboard Hot Latin Pop Airplay of 1995
* Billboard Top Latin Songs
Year - End Chart REFERENCES BOOKS EXTERNAL LINKS