DRIVER 'S LICENSES IN THE UNITED STATES
In the United States , driver 's licenses are issued by each individual state , territory , and the District of Columbia rather than by the federal government because of the concept of federalism .
Drivers are normally required to obtain a license from their state of residence and all states recognize each other 's licenses for non - residents subject to normal age requirements .
A state may also suspend an individual 's driving privilege within its borders for traffic violations .
Many states share a common system of license classes , with some exceptions , e.g. commercial license classes are standardized by federal regulation at .
HISTORY Section::::History .
As the number of motor vehicles reached tens of thousands , state and local governments assumed a new power : authorizing vehicles and drivers .
In 1901 , New York became the first state to register automobiles ; by 1918 all states required license plates .
States were slower to require licenses for drivers .
Only 39 states issued them by 1935 and few required a test , despite widespread concern about incompetent drivers .
Early motorists were taught to drive by automobile salesmen , family and friends , or organizations like the YMCA .
By the 1930s , many high schools offered driver education .
STANDARD AND SPECIAL LICENSES
* Unrestricted Licenses are driver 's licenses that most American drivers have in order to drive .
Various states differ on what class they utilize to distinguish between a typical driver 's license and special licenses , such as restricted , chauffeur , or motorcycle licenses .
For instance , Tennessee designates Class D as a regular driver 's license , while Class M is a motorcycle license and Class H is a hardship license ( see below ) .
* Hardship licenses for minors are driver 's licenses that are restricted to drivers between 14 and 15 ( sometimes up to 18 ) years old who need to drive to and from home and school due to serious hardships , e.g. the driver 's family has financial or medical problems ; the driver needs to get to work or school and has no other practical way of getting to work or school .
A hardship license for minors is distinct from hardship licenses granted for drivers with revoked or suspended licenses .
The table below includes states that provide hardship licenses for minors .
* Provisional Licenses are functionally the same as a driver 's license , but are typically issued to new drivers under the age of 18 , i.e. 14–17 years old .
Almost all states , with the exception of South Dakota , have some form of a graduated licensing provision ; however , the actual restrictions and the length of time a new driver must adhere to them vary widely by state .
Restrictions frequently include : * A curfew , after which night driving is not permitted ( unless 18 years of age , or if the individual has completed an online course ) without an adult present ( typically 11 p.m. , like Pennsylvania , or 1 a.m. , like Wisconsin ) .
However , some states ( e.g. North Carolina ) have curfews as early as 9 p.m.
Some states such as New York provide exceptions for special situations , such as driving home from work or school functions , picking up family members , or for medical appointments , while others such as Massachusetts do not .
* Restrictions on the number of passengers under a specific age present in the vehicle .
For example , in California , minors may not transport people under age 20 for the first 365 days of licensure unless said passengers are family members ( brother , sister , cousin , niece , nephew , or anyone who is 21 or had their license for 1 year or longer etc . ) .
* Chauffeur Licenses are functionally the same as a passenger car license , but also allow the holder to drive a taxi , limo , or other livery vehicle for hire .
Livery licensing in the United States is somewhat complicated .
In the United States , chauffeur licenses are not considered commercial or professional driver 's licenses , and ( assuming the driver already holds a regular passenger license ) a road test is usually not required to convert it to a chauffeur license ; however , some states do require a short written exam on taxi - specific driving laws or a background check , and require the driver to be at least 18 years of age ( although many taxi companies will not hire drivers under 25 for insurance reasons ) .
This type of license is typically , though not universally , called " Class E " .
Some states simply add an endorsement to a regular license , while others require no special permission at the state level to drive a taxi or limo .
Florida once issued chauffeur licenses through its Class D licenses , a designation that was eliminated in 2006 .
Regardless of whether and how the state handles chauffeur licensing , a permit or license must always be obtained from the city , town , or county the driver will be operating in .
* Motorcycle Licenses covers motorcycles only ; frequently combined with a regular driver 's license .
In some states this does not include some types of mopeds , scooters , or motorized bicycles , but with a wide variety of different state - by - state definitions for these vehicles .
A common but not universal criterion is an engine displacement of or less , but also wheel size , type of transmission , and more are sometimes used in the legal codes to distinguish mopeds and scooters from motorcycles .
These vehicles sometimes do not require a motorcycle license , or in some states any license at all , as well as in some states avoiding insurance and registration requirements .
Unlike EU states , no US state differentiates between low and full powered motorcycles for the purposes of licensing .
Some states require an additional motorcycle license to operate a sidecar rig .
* Enhanced Licenses are issued to U.S. citizens in Washington , Vermont , Michigan , California , Minnesota , and New York , and establish nationality in addition to driving privileges .
An EDL is a WHTI compliant document , acceptable for re - entering the United States via land and sea crossings from Canada , Mexico , or the Caribbean .
A U.S. Passport , birth certificate , or another document proving citizenship is required to apply for this type of license .
Motorcycle and commercial driver 's licenses ( see above and below ) usually can also be issued as enhanced .
*
Handicap Permits are issued to persons who meet the proper guidelines for requiring handicap driving and parking access .
They are granted special access to improve their quality of life as a driver .
In certain states , namely Texas , a handicapped person 's drivers license can be revoked based on their disability .
Some states also have additional classifications .
Hawaii , for example , has a separate license category for drivers who only operate mopeds , while some more northerly states have separate categories for snowmobiles and ATVs .
South Carolina and Georgia have non - commercial versions of every commercial class license for agricultural purposes .
COMMERCIAL DRIVER 'S LICENSES ( CDL )
Section::::Commercial Driver 's Licenses ( CDL ) .
Class C licenses are issued in all states , except Massachusetts , in both commercial and non - commercial status .
A non - commercial Class C license may not be used for hire .
Most recreational vehicles that do not fall into the class D / E category , such as converted buses , tractor , lawn mowers , or full size ( greater than )
campers require a non - commercial Class C license and the corresponding permit from the state with which you reside .
CDL ENDORSEMENTS * Class A : Combination ( tractor plus trailer ) vehicle of or more .
Includes split ( coupled ) buses .
* Class B :
Single ( straight ) vehicle of or more ( includes most buses including articulated buses ) .
Also includes combination vehicles for commercial use weighing no less than 26,001 lb .
* Class C : Commercial vehicle that does n't fit classes A or B , but is placarded for hazardous materials or is intended to carry 16 or more persons ( excluding Georgia . )
May include heavy - duty non - commercial vehicles with or without trailers , trailer must have a gross vehicle weight rating of less than .
Vehicles must have a gross vehicle weight rating of less than .
Section::::CDL endorsements .
Professional drivers are usually required to add endorsements to their CDL in order to drive certain types of vehicles that require additional training .
CDL endorsements requirements are mostly similar , but some vary slightly from state to state .
The training and testing requirements are regulated by the US Department of Transportation .
Endorsements are as follows :
* P : Passenger Transport ( buses carrying 16 or more persons .
Vans for hire carrying 11 or more persons in California )
* H : Hazardous Materials ( requires a TSA background check as well as an extensive written exam .
The driver must be a US Citizen or permanent lawful resident to obtain an H or X endorsement . )
* M :
Metal coil
* N :
Tank Vehicles ( Required for carrying liquids in bulk . )
* T : Double / Triple Trailers ( Road trains )
( Class A licenses only . )
* X : Hazardous Materials and Tank Combination
* L : Air Brakes
* S : School Bus ( In addition to a standard bus endorsement , more stringent TSA and CORI background checks are required . )
CDL RESTRICTIONS Section::::CDL restrictions .
Licenses can be restricted through any of the following ways :
* B : Corrective Lenses are required while operating a motor vehicle .
* C : A mechanical aid is required to operate a commercial vehicle .
* D : A prosthetic aid is required to operate a commercial vehicle .
*
E : The driver may only operate a commercial vehicle with an automatic transmission .
* F : An outside mirror is required on the commercial vehicle .
* G : The driver of a commercial vehicle is only allowed to operate during daylight hours .
*
K :
Drivers are authorized to drive a commercial vehicle within the state of issue ( intrastate ) only .
This restriction applies to any holder of a CDL license who is under 21 years old .
*
L : Drivers are restricted from operating a commercial vehicle with air brakes .
This restriction is issued when a driver either fails the air brake component of the general knowledge test or performs the CDL road skills test in a vehicle not equipped with air brakes .
* M : CDL - A holders may operate CDL - B school buses only .
* N :
CDL - A and CDL - B holders may operate CDL - C school buses only .
*
O :
Driver limited to pintail hook trailers only .
* Z :
Alcohol Interlock Device required in the commercial vehicle .
* T : 60-day temporary license .
FOREIGN OFFICIALS AND DIPLOMATS Section::::Foreign officials and diplomats .
In a rare exception to states and territories issuing driver 's licenses , the State Department 's Office of Foreign Missions ( OFM ) issues driver 's licenses to foreign officials and diplomats , bypassing the states and territories in which they live .
OFM - issued driver licenses are equivalent to a regular state - issued license .
DRIVERS LICENSING LAWS
Section::::Drivers licensing laws .
The minimum age to obtain a restricted driver 's license in the United States varies from 14 years , three months in South Dakota to as high as 17 in New Jersey .
In most states , with the exception of South Dakota , a graduated licensing law applies to newly licensed teenage drivers , going by names such as Provisional Driver , Junior Operator , Probationary Driver , or Intermediate License .
These licenses restrict certain driving privileges , such as whether the new driver may carry passengers and if so how many , as well as setting a curfew for young drivers to be off the roads .
For example , Utah drivers who are under 18 may not drive other people outside the family in their first six months with a license .
Unlike in some states of Australia and some provinces of Canada , however , graduated licensing laws do not require lowered speed limits , displaying of L and P plates , restrictions on towing a trailer or boat , or prohibitions on highway driving or operating high performance cars .
Drivers under 18 are usually required to attend a comprehensive driver 's education program either at their high school or a professional driving school and take a certain number of behind the wheel lessons with a certified driving instructor before applying for a license .
Some states like New York also require new adult drivers to attend some form of driver 's education before applying for a license .
However , in some states all newly licensed adult drivers may be on probation for a set amount of time ( usually between six months and two years ) , during which traffic violations carry harsher penalties or mandatory suspensions that would not normally apply to experienced drivers .
According to federal law , the minimum age to operate a commercial vehicle in interstate transit is 21 ; as a result the minimum age to apply for an unrestricted commercial driver 's license is 21 .
Driving a school bus also requires a CDL , however the minimum age to drive a school bus is typically higher , usually 25 .
Some states issue restricted intrastate commercial driver 's licenses , valid for operating commercial vehicles in that state only , to drivers aged 18 and older .
Professional drivers who are aged 18–20 typically can not be licensed to drive tractor trailers , hazardous materials , or school buses .
LICENSES FOR ADULTS AND MINORS ; GDL LAWS Section::::Licenses for adults and minors ; GDL laws .
Below is a list of Graduated Driver 's Licenses ( GDL ) and hardship licenses for minors laws for each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia .
The list includes the state agency responsible for issuing driver 's licenses and the length of time that a full ( unrestricted ) driver 's license is valid for . !
State !
Hardship License for Minors !
Minimum Age for Learner 's Permit !
Minimum Age for Restricted License !
Minimum Age for Full ( Unrestricted ) License !
Validity of Full ( Unrestricted ) License !
class="wikitable
unsortable"Notes Alabama Department of Public Safety , Driver License Division Alaska Department of Administration , Division of Motor Vehicles Arizona Department of Transportation , Motor Vehicle Division Arkansas Department of Finance and Administration , Office of Driver Services California Department of Motor Vehicles
Note : In California , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , the minor must be at least 14 but under the age of 18 .
The pertinent form is DL120 and is entitled " Junior Permit Statement of Facts " .
Colorado Department of Revenue , Division of Motor Vehicles Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles Delaware Department of Transportation , Division of Motor Vehicles District of Columbia Department of Motor Vehicles Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles Georgia Department of Driver Services
Note : In Georgia , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , the minor must have a suspended license due to school conduct or attendance problems and needs an exemption in order to get to and from school or for family medical reasons .
The minor must be old enough to already have a license .
The pertinent form is DDS 7012 .
Hawaii ( Each island has its own requirements regarding driver 's licenses .
For Hawaii , Maui , and Kaua'i , as well as the City and County of Honolulu , see ) Idaho Transportation Department , Division of Motor Vehicles Illinois Secretary of State , Driver Services Department
Driver must have not been convicted of a moving violation in the six months prior to turning 18 to receive full license privileges .
If a driver is convicted of a moving violation in the first full year of licensing , this will result in extension of the passenger restriction for an additional six months .
If a driver is convicted of a moving violation before turning 18 , the Secretary of State will mail a warning letter to the driver and parents .
If an under 18 driver is convicted of two moving violations in 24 months , this will result in a minimum 1-month license suspension .
Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles
The driver may not use any telecommunication device while operating the vehicle .
For the first 180 days of holding their license , the driver may not have any passengers , unless the passengers are over the age of 25 and hold a valid driver 's license .
Holders of a probationary driver 's license must comply with state and local curfew laws .
Iowa Department of Transportation , Motor Vehicle Division , Office of Driver Services
Note : In Iowa , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , called a Minor School License ( MSL ) , the minor must be at minimum 14 and a half years old , the minor must have completed an Iowa - approved drivers education class unless exempted due to hardship , the minor must have a valid instruction permit for the previous six months , the minor 's driving history must be free of convictions for moving traffic violations , contributive accidents and license withdrawals during the six - month period immediately preceding application , and the minor must live at least one mile or more from the school he or she is enrolled in .
The pertinent form is Form 430021 , entitled " Affidavit for School License " , but the form must be completed by the school and signed by the minor 's parent(s ) or legal guardian(s ) .
Kansas Department of Revenue , Division of Motor Vehicles Permit must be held for six months .
After logging 20 daytime and five nighttime hours of driving , if the learner is between age 15 and 16 the learner has the option of getting a restricted license .
The learner must then log an additional 20 daytime and five nighttime practice hours and reach age 16 before getting a less restricted license .
Applicant must provide affidavit showing at least 50 hours of adult supervised driving , with ten of those hours being at night , by a licensed driver at least 21 years old .
At age 17 , a full - privileges license may be obtained with the same requirements as the semi - restricted license .
Nonresident : At least 16 years of age and has in immediate possession a valid license issued by home state or country .
Kentucky Transportation Cabinet , Division of Driver Licensing Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections , Office of Motor Vehicles
Intermediate License ( Age 16 )
: Must have completed the Learners 's Permit requirements , pass the on - road drivers test , and have the Learner 's Permit for at least 90 days .
May not drive between the hours of 11 p.m. to 5 a.m.
Full License ( Age 17 ) : Must successfully complete Learner 's Permit and Intermediate License stages or be a minimum of 17 years of age prior to application for the first time .
Maine Secretary of State , Bureau of Motor Vehicles Maryland Department of Transportation , Motor Vehicle Administration Massachusetts Department of Transportation , Registry of Motor Vehicles
Michigan Secretary of State Note : In Michigan , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , the minor , who is at least 14 years old , must be living on a family - owned farm , the minor 's family income must meet specific levels depending on the number of family members , there must be a significant change in the farming operation , i.e. the loss of a previous driver , to warrant requesting a minor restricted license , and the minor has no alternative transportation available .
The pertinent form is entitled " Application for Minor Restricted License Special Farming Need Only " .
Due to the expense of the graduated licensing system ( including driver education , it can reach upwards of $ 500 for the entire process ) , most poorer Michigan residents wait until they are 18 , spend $ 11 to get the Temporary Instruction Permit , and then take a road test , which is no higher than $ 50 .
Minnesota Department of Public Safety , Division of Driver and Vehicle Services
Note : In Minnesota , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , called a Restricted Farm Work License , the minor must be at least 15 years old and need the license to help a parent or legal guardian on a farm .
The pertinent form is the Farm Work License Affidavit .
Mississippi Department of Public Safety Missouri Department of Revenue Montana Department of Justice , Motor Vehicle Division
Note :
The validity periods to the left are for Class D licenses .
Nebraska Department of Motor Vehicles Note :
In Nebraska , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , both a School Learners Permit and a School Permit will be issued .
A minor , who is at a minimum 14 years old , must have a School Learners Permit for at least 2 months before getting a School Permit .
A School Permit will be issued for a minor , who is at a minimum age of 14 years , 2 months , who lives at least a mile and a half or more from school , who resides outside of a city with 5,000 people or more , or who attends a school outside a city of 5,000 people or more .
The School Permit is to be used for the purpose of transporting the minor or any family member who resides with the minor to attend school , extracurricular , or school - related activities at the school , and the minor may drive under the personal supervision of a licensed driver who is at least 21 years old .
If a minor has not completed a DMV - approved Driver Safety Course , then the minor is required to compile 50 hours of driving time with a parent , guardian or licensed driver 21 years or older .
Information about the School Learners Permit and School Permit can be found here at and the certification of 50 hours of driving time is located at .
Nevada Department of Motor Vehicles
Note : In Nevada , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , a minor restricted license can not be approved for commercial driving purposes , to seek employment , or for public school students in Carson City , Clark , Douglas , or Washoe counties ; workdays and hours are limited to a maximum of six ( 6 ) days per week , ten ( 10 ) hours per day ; a physician 's statement is required if a minor is driving for medical purposes ; a " Verification of Need " affidavit must be completed by an unbiased individual ( a member of the clergy or a social worker , etc . ) and signed in front of a DMV authorized representative or notary public official if a minor is driving for medical appointments or to go to a grocery store ; school authorities and parents / guardians must complete certain sections if a minor is driving to school .
The form is entitled " Restricted License Information " .
New Hampshire Department of Safety , Division of Motor Vehicles , Driver Licensing Office align="left
" Learner 's Permit - No formal learner 's permit is required in NH , -year - olds may drive so long as they are accompanied by a licensed driver aged 25 or older .
Restricted License - " Youth Operator Licenses " are issued to those between 16 and 21 years of age and expire when the person turns 21 years old ( although drivers may operate unrestricted after they reach their 18th birthday ) .
16 and 17 years old applicants must obtain written consent from a parent or legal guardian , and
a certificate of successful completion of a driver education course as provided in RSA 263:19 .
Youth Operators under 18 years are restricted from operating a motor vehicle in the following manner : between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. ; the number of occupants exceeds the number of safety restraints in the vehicle ; during the first six months after issuance of the license with more than one passenger less than 25 years of age who is not a member of the holder 's family unless accompanied by a licensed responsible adult who is at least 25 years of age .
The director of motor vehicles can issue a hardship license for a person between 16 and 18 who has n't completed a driver 's education course , if there is no readily available means of transportation exist to and from a school and the license requirements of RSA 263:14 would cause an undue hardship .
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission New Mexico Motor Vehicle Division New York State Department of Motor Vehicles
Learner Permits :
NYC has the toughest regulations of the regions , requiring an instructor 's brake to be installed , and the accompanying driver must be a parent or professional instructor ( driving school / driver 's ed teacher ) , and prohibits driving between 9 p.m. and 5 a.m.
On Long Island , one must be accompanied by a guardian or professional instructor , and may not drive between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.
In the rest of the state , one may drive while accompanied by a licensed driver over 21 from 5 a.m. to 9 p.m. ; other hours require parent or professional accompaniment .
If you have a Class DJ or MJ junior license , you can not drive within the five boroughs of New York City under any circumstances .
Junior operator licenses ( Class DJ or MJ ) allows unaccompanied driving only in the 3rd
" All Other Regions " area from 5 a.m. to 9 p.m. Between the hours of 9 PM and 5 AM
, you may drive without a supervising driver only directly between your home and your employment ( you must carry appropriate proof of employment ) or to a school course , unless the driver is accompanied by their parent , legal guardian , or a certified driving instructor .
In the Long Island Region , if you have a junior license ( Class DJ , MJ or DJ / MJ ) , you may drive in Nassau and Suffolk counties between the hours of 5 AM and 9 PM without a supervising driver only directly between your home and your employment ( you must carry appropriate proof of employment ) .
A state - approved cooperative work - study educational program an approved program for credit in a post - secondary institution a state - approved registered evening high school while engaged in farm employment an approved driver education course .
Adolescent drivers must have their permit accident and ticket free for six full months before taking their road test , along with the completion at least 50 hours of supervised driving , 15 of which must be in moderate to heavy traffic .
A full driver 's education course is not required in New York State , although license applicants who do not have a driver 's ed certificate must complete a five - hour pre - licensing course .
For 17-year - olds , a junior license will be converted to a full standard license if the driver submits a Driver 's Ed Certificate and a certified completion of 50 hours of driving plus 15 in moderate to heavy traffic .
Otherwise , it will be converted on the driver 's 18th birthday .
A 12 a.m. curfew exists for drivers who have not completed the driver 's ed program .
North Carolina Department of Transportation , Division of Motor Vehicles North Dakota Department of Transportation , Driver License Division Ohio Department of Public Safety , Bureau of Motor Vehicles
Under 17 either with a learner 's permit or a driver license can not drive between midnight and 6 a.m. , under 18 either with a learner 's permit or a driver license can not drive between 1 a.m. and 5 a.m. , unless accompanied by a parent or guardian .
Drivers under 17 may only have one non - family member under the age of 21 in the vehicle ; no restrictions on family members or those over 21 .
18 and over have full license privileges and have no time or passenger restrictions .
Special restricted license can drive after hours for purposes of employment , education , travel between home and school , vocational training , employment opportunities , and attending church services .
Note :
In Ohio , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , the minor , aged 14 or 15 years old , must be the only licensed driver in the household ; any other licensed driver will be required to surrender his or her driver license ; a hardship license may not be used for the child to drive themselves or siblings to and from school , work or social and school events ; the license is valid only within a 10-mile radius of the home for obtaining groceries and other household necessities , to drive the disabled parent or guardian to medical appointments and medical emergencies ; the parent or guardian must accompany the child at all times while driving ; the family must live in an area where there is no public transportation or community services available to assist them ; the parent or guardian must show proof that they can maintain financial responsibility insurance on the driver ; the child must complete a driver education course and the graduated licensing requirements .
To apply for a hardship license for a minor in Ohio , a minor and his or her family can send a letter to the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles , P.O. Box 16784 , Attention Driver License Special Case Division / Medical Unit , Columbus , Ohio , 43216 - 6784 ; the letter must explain the hardship and provide the BMV with the minor 's full name , date of birth , social security number and the names , dates of birth and social security numbers of any licensed drivers in the household ; the BMV must also receive a notarized statement advising that any other driver(s ) in the home would be willing to surrender their driver licenses if a hardship license were to be issued ; before a hardship license is authorized , an investigation is conducted to assist the BMV in determining whether the household qualifies .
Oklahoma Department of Public Safety Oregon Department of Transportation , Driver and Motor Vehicle Services Division Pennsylvania Department of Transportation , Driver and Vehicle Services Rhode Island Department of Revenue , Division of Motor Vehicles
Special restricted license can drive after hours for purposes of employment , education , travel between home and school , vocational training , employment opportunities , and attending church services .
South Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles Applicants for the Special Restricted License must be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the application process to sign the Special Restricted License application .
Applicants must bring their Beginner Permit and submit a PDLA form certifying the following :
* Certification of School Attendance * Certification of Driver Education Course * Certification of Driver Practice * All three of these certifications can be submitted on one form offered at the South Carolina DMV website at this website .
Teen drivers applying for the Special Restricted License must pass a vision screening and the DMV road test .
Special Restricted License holders may drive unaccompanied from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. or until 8:00 p.m. during daylight saving time .
Outside of those hours the teen driver may drive until midnight if accompanied by a licensed driver that is a minimum of 21 years of age .
Between midnight and 4:00 a.m. a Special Restricted License holder must be accompanied by a licensed parent or legal guardian .
Special Restricted License holders may receive an exception for these time restrictions if they can prove that the restrictions interfere with employment , education , travel between home and school , vocational training , employment opportunities , or attending church services .
Teen drivers must submit two statements to qualify the exception .
One of the statements must be from a parent or legal guardian and the other must be a statement on letterhead from a school official or your employer .
The statements must describe the reason the waiver is needed .
Passengers under the age of 21 are limited to two unless they are immediate family members or students be transported to or from school or the license holder is accompanied by a licensed driver that is a minimum of 21 years of age .
Teen drivers that hold the Special Restricted License for 16-year - olds for one year without a conviction for a traffic violation and have not been at - fault in an accident may obtain full driving privileges when they reach the age of 17 .
South Dakota Department of Public Safety Tennessee Department of Safety and Homeland Security , Driver License Services
Note : In Tennessee , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , called a Class H license , if the minor is aged 14 or 15 , the minor can operate a Class D passenger vehicle or Class M motorcycle ( limited to 125 cc ) or both ; the minor must pass a vision screening , knowledge test , and road test to operate a Class D passenger vehicle ; take the Class M knowledge and driving test in addition to the Class D knowledge test to drive a Class M vehicle ; be limited to daylight hours only ( 5 am to 7 pm , no exceptions ) and authorized locations only within a 25-mile radius from the minor 's residence , as specified in the Department of Safety ( DOS ) letter .
If the minor who has a Class H license is aged 15 , the minor is treated the same as a Class PD ( learners permit ) license who drives with a licensed driver 21 years or older who sits in the front passenger seat .
A Class H license will expire on the minor 's 16th birthday .
More information can be found at and the form for application for a hardship license is located at .
Texas Department of Public Safety
Note :
In Texas , for a minor to obtain a hardship license , the minor must be aged 14 to 18 years old ; must have an unusual economic hardship on the minor 's family , the sickness or illness of a member of the minor 's family , or he or she is regularly enrolled in a vocational education program and requires a driver license to pursue the program and has completed an approved course in driver education .
To obtain the pertinent form , called the DL 77 form , go to .
Utah Department of Public Safety , Driver License Division Vermont Agency of Transportation , Department of Motor Vehicles Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles Washington Department of Licensing West Virginia Department of Transportation , Division of Motor Vehicles Wisconsin Department of Transportation , Division of Motor Vehicles
Note :
In Wisconsin , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , the minor must be at least 14 years of age , but under the age of 18 ; must appear in person , accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian , before an examining officer with a birth certificate showing the minor is at least 14 years old ; must have the usage of an automobile , farm truck , dual purpose farm truck , motorcycle with an engine of no more than 125 cc , moped , or motor bicycle owned and registered by the applicant 's parent or guardian , or a farm truck leased to the applicant 's parent or guardian ; must pass an examination , including a test of the applicant 's ability to safely operate the type of vehicle for which the minor is requesting the ability to use .
The hardship license is valid only until the minor secures a full ( unrestricted ) driver 's license or reaches the age of 18 , whichever comes first .
The minor is not permitted to drive in hours of darkness or in a city of more than 500,000 people ; operate either a commercial vehicle or vehicle for hire ( e.g. a taxicab ) .
These restrictions are provided in Section 343.08 of the Wisconsin Statutes & Annotations .
Wyoming Department of Transportation , Driver Services Program
Note :
In Wyoming , to obtain a hardship license for a minor , the minor must be aged 14 or 15 years , the minor 's residence is more than 5 miles from the school they attend ; the minor has a regular job ( a minimum of 10 hours per week ) more than 5 miles from the minor 's residence ; the minor must have a license to work in his / her parents ' business ; any other circumstances which the Wyoming Highway Patrol ( WHP ) finds to be an extreme inconvenience , i.e. the need to provide transportation for long - term medical treatment or conditions ( not to include routine medical office visits ) .
Instructions accompanying the Restricted License Affidavit must be read , the Restricted License Affidavit itself must be filled out , a school attendance verification form must be attached , if the license is to be used for transportation to or from school , or in conjunction with extracurricular school activities , a work verification form must be attached , if the license is to be used for transportation to and from work ; a verification of parental ownership of business form must be attached , if the license is to be used in conjunction with a parental business ; an insurance verification form must be completed and attached ; the Restrictions form must be completed by the WHP .
More information can be found at .
The instructions accompanying the Restricted License Affidavit can be found at .
The Restricted License Affidavit itself can be found at , the School Attendance Verification form at , the Work Verification form at , the Verification of Parental Ownership of Business form at , the Insurance Verification form at , and the Restrictions form ( only to be filled out by the WHP ) at .
DECLINE IN LICENSING AMONG JUVENILES IN THE U.S. Section::::Decline in licensing among juveniles in the U.S ..
According to a December 2 , 2004 Los Angeles Times article , only 43 % of American 15 - 17-year - olds had drivers licenses in 2002 .
By comparison , the percentage of drivers licenses in this age group in 1982 was 52 % .
USE AS IDENTIFICATION AND PROOF OF AGE Section::::Use as identification and proof of age .
Driver 's licenses issued in the United States have a number or alphanumeric code issued by the issuing state 's department of motor vehicles ( or equivalent ) , usually show a photograph of the bearer , as well as a copy of the bearer 's signature , the address of the bearer 's primary residence , the type or class of license , restrictions , endorsements ( if any ) , the physical characteristics of the bearer ( such as height , weight , hair color and eye color ) and birth date .
No two driver 's license numbers issued by a state are alike .
Social Security numbers are now prohibited by federal law from appearing on new driver 's licenses due to identity theft concerns .
In most states , to be compliant with AAMVA standards , the orientation of a driver 's license for persons under the age of 21 is vertical while a driver 's license for those over the age of 21 is horizontal .
Since the driver 's license is often used as proof of a person 's age , the difference in orientation makes it easy to determine that a person is legally allowed to purchase or consume alcohol ( the drinking age in all U.S. states is 21 ) .
Some states , however , do not require that a driver 's license is changed to horizontal , such as Arizona , where it is optional to change to a horizontal license .
Furthermore , the vertical license does not expire until age 65 in the state of Arizona .
Most states require that when a driver establishes residence in a state , he or she must obtain a license issued by that state within a certain time frame .
Because there is no national identity card in the United States , the driver 's license is often used as the de facto equivalent for completion of many common business and governmental transactions .
As a result , driver 's licenses are the focus of many kinds of identity theft .
Driver 's licenses were not always identification cards .
In many states , driver 's licenses did not even have a photograph well into the 1980s .
Activism by the Mothers Against Drunk Driving organization for the use of photo ID age verification in conjunction with increasing the drinking age to 21 in order to reduce underage drinking led to photographs being added to all state licenses .
New York and Tennessee were the last states to add photos in 1986 .
However , New Jersey later allowed drivers to get non - photo licenses ; this was later revoked .
Vermont license holders have the option of receiving a non - photo license .
All Tennessee drivers aged 60 years of age or older had the option of a non - photo driver 's license prior to January 2013 , when photo licenses were required for voting identification .
All people with valid non - photo licenses will be allowed to get a photo license when their current license expires .
Thirteen states allow the option of a non - photo driver 's license for reasons of religious belief : Arkansas , Indiana , Kansas , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , New Jersey , North Dakota , Oregon , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , Washington , and Wisconsin .
Later additions varied from state to state , and have included fingerprints , bar codes , magnetic strips , social security numbers , and tamper - proof features , most of which were added to prevent identity theft and to curb the use of fake IDs .
States have now slowly been converting to digitized driver 's licenses , which incorporate holograms and bar codes to prevent forgery .
NON - DRIVER IDENTIFICATION CARDS Section::::Non - driver identification cards .
Many states , usually through the same agency that issues driver 's licenses , provide identification cards for people who do not drive .
REAL ID Section::::Real ID .
The Department of Homeland Security has the power through the Real ID Act of 2005 to set standards relating to identification of applicants and license design for state - issued driver licenses and identification cards .
States are not required to comply with Real ID , but if a state does not comply , any driver licenses or ID cards issued by that state will not be valid for any official purpose with the federal government , meaning they will not be accepted for entering federal buildings or boarding airplanes .
For a state to meet Real ID compliance , licenses and ID cards issued from that state must be approved by DHS in meeting Real ID requirements .
States can choose to issue both regular licenses and ID cards as well as Real IDs , but any non - Real ID must be marked " Not for Federal Identification " .
Real IDs are valid for 8 years .
Real IDs are allowed to be issued only to legal immigrants and citizens of the United States .
When a person applies for a Real ID , either as a new driver license or ID card applicant or renewing a current license or ID card , they must present a citizenship document ( US passport , certified birth certificate or citizenship certificate ) or proof of legal immigrant status , proof of a Social Security number if they have been issued one , proof of any name changes if using birth certificate , and two proofs of residency in the state .
The state then must verify the documents and store them either electronically or on paper .
No one may have more than one Real ID at one time .
A RealID can be identified several different ways depending on the state .
It is a gold or black star design located on the top right third of the ID .
As of October 2011 , Connecticut also issues them .
Starting in January 2013 , Ohio is issuing RealIDs under the name " Safe ID " .
California started issuing RealIDs on January 22 , 2018 .
ENHANCED DRIVER 'S LICENSES Section::::Enhanced driver 's licenses .
Additionally , some states , mostly those with an international border , issue enhanced driver 's licenses and enhanced ID cards .
Enhanced licenses combine a regular driver 's license with the specifications of the new federal passport card .
Thus , in addition to providing driving privileges , the enhanced license also is proof of U.S. citizenship , and can therefore be used to cross the Canadian and Mexican borders by road , rail , or sea , although air travel still requires a traditional passport book .
The enhanced licenses are also fully Real ID compliant . , Vermont , New York , Michigan , and Washington were issuing enhanced driver 's licenses and ID cards .
In January 2014 , Minnesota became the fifth state to issue enhanced driver 's licenses , while Ohio is set to become the sixth state once it has been approved by its legislature .
On March 27 , 2008 , the Secretary of Homeland Security announced that Washington 's enhanced driver 's license was the first such license approved under the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative ; according to a Homeland Security press release , the department is also working with Arizonan authorities to develop enhanced driver 's licenses .
On September 16 , 2008 , New York began issuing enhanced driver 's licenses that meet WHTI requirements .
Texas was expected to also implement an enhanced driver 's license program , but the program has been blocked by Texas Governor Rick Perry , despite a state law authorizing the Texas Department of Public Safety to issue EDLs and a ruling by the state attorney general , Greg Abbott , that Texas 's production of EDLs would comply with federal requirements .
DIGITAL DRIVER 'S LICENSES Section::::Digital driver 's licenses .
California , Iowa , and Delaware have proposed digital drivers licenses as a means of identification .
The license would be available as an app by MorphoTrust USA and installed on a user 's personal cellphone .
Several questions have been raised about user privacy , since a police officer may ask for one 's license and gain access to one 's cellphone .
Louisiana passed House Bill 481 in 2016 which became Act 625 , making Louisiana the first state with a legally accepted digital driver 's license via LA Wallet , an app created by Envoc that launched in July 2018 .
The law allows Louisiana residents to present driver identification using LA Wallet " ... upon demand of any officer or agent of the department or any police officer of the state , parish , or municipality ... " .
The Louisiana digital driver 's license requires no additional hardware to accept and includes a " no - touch " policy whereby the citizen remains in possession of the mobile device at all times .
In October 2018 , the Louisiana Secretary of State Kyle Ardoin approved usage of LA Wallet for voter identification at the polling stations .
SEE ALSO * Department of Motor Vehicles
* Commercial driver 's license
* Vehicle registration plates of the United States
* Joshua 's Law * Transportation safety in the United States NOTES REFERENCES