THE GOOD WITCH
The Good Witch is a television film that aired on the Hallmark Channel on January 19 , 2008 .
It stars Catherine Bell as Cassandra Nightingale and Chris Potter as Chief of Police Jake Russell .
The film has spawned ten sequels and a television series .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Grey House — an old , abandoned building in the town of Middleton — is infamous for being haunted by its former owner , known as " The Grey Lady " .
Police Chief Inspector Jake Russell decides to investigate when rumors start to spread of someone occupying the house .
He enters the building , accompanied by the town mayor 's wife Martha Tisdale , and is welcomed by a mysterious , beautiful woman who introduces herself as Cassandra Nightingale .
She tells them she had just moved in , and plans to open a shop on Main Street .
Later , Jake Russell 's children Brandon and Lori are chased by a dog on their way home from school .
They end up in the front yard of Grey House and Lori falls and bruises her knee .
Cassie appears and makes the dog stop just by looking at it .
She talks to the dog , and tells it to behave better and go home .
The dog does as told .
She invites the children into her house to take care of Lori 's knee .
The kitchen is full of vials and bottles containing various herbs , which leads Brandon to believe that Cassie is a witch .
The new shop on Main Street is also filled with elixirs and herbs from around the world .
This leads many townspeople , especially Martha Tisdale , to believe Cassie practices Black Magic .
As Jake Russell investigates mysterious occurrences , he and Cassie frequently interact .
A mutual attraction evolves , leading him to ask her out on a date .
As time passes , some people in Middleton continue to be hostile toward Cassie and she considers leaving town .
However , she postpones the date when Jake convinces her to stay .
The couple spend a romantic evening at Grey House where they kiss .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Catherine Bell as Cassandra Nightingale .
A mysterious woman who moves into Grey House .
She seems to have multiple strange abilities , the extent and origin of which are mostly unknown .
These include communicating with animals , and suddenly appearing out of nowhere .
Born Sue - Ellen Brook , Cassie 's parents died in a car crash when she was a child , and she was raised in foster care .
Cassie has a shop in Middleton called Bell , Book & Candle , where she sells various curious objects .
Towards the end of the film she begins a relationship with Police Chief Jake Russell .
* Chris Potter as Chief of Police Jake Russell .
Jake is the father of Brandon and Lori .
Since the death of his wife Jennifer three years ago , he gets help raising them by his father - in - law George .
Since his wife 's death he has become overly protective of his children .
Jake is fascinated by Cassandra , but as opposed to her intuitive decision - making , he relies mainly on facts .
Toward the end of the film , the two begin a relationship .
* Matthew Knight as Brandon Russell .
The son of Jennifer and Jake Russell .
Brandon spends his free time playing video games .
He cares for his younger sister , despite often being annoyed by her .
He gets bullied by another boy in school , but after learning the boy comes from an abusive home , the two boys become friends .
Brandon tells his father about the abuse , and helps get his friend away from the situation .
*
Hannah Endicott - Douglas as Lori Russell , Jake 's youngest child .
Since her mother 's death , she has been haunted by nightmares about monsters .
She receives a dreamcatcher from Cassie and is told not to dream of bunnies , which makes her nightmares disappear .
* Catherine Disher as Martha Tinsdale , a strong willed member of city council .
Martha is afraid of Cassandra ruining the good image of Middleton , as the town is looking for new investors .
Convinced that Cassie practises Black Magic , she petitions for the shop to be closed .
* Paula Boudrea as Nancy , also a member of city council .
Nancy buys a parfum in Bell , Book & Candle that increases her husband 's attraction to her .
At the end of the film , she is revealed to be pregnant , after having tried for a long time .
She befriends Cassie and makes some effort to defend her .
* Noah Cappe as Deputy Derek Sanders , a laid back and easygoing police officer .
In addition to Jake being his boss , the two men are also friends .
Derek is surprised when he first sees Cassie , as she does not look like the witch townspeople have called her .
* Peter MacNeill as George O'Hanrahan .
* Nathan McLeod as Michael , son of Martha Tinsdale .
* Jesse Bostick as Kyle .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
On January 15 , 2008 , Hallmark Channel and Limbo , the mobile entertainment community , teamed up to create and launch the cable network 's first - ever mobile interactive initiative .
The campaign " enhanced viewers ' experience of the premiere of the network 's original movie ... through ' Limbo Unique ' – a game played via cell phone or online " .
The grand prize was $ 2,000 and a portrait of the " Grey Lady " that was featured in the movie .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Although set in Middleton , USA , it was filmed in Hamilton and Niagara on the Lake , Ontario in Canada .
In the sequel , The Good Witch 's Charm , the map on the wall in the police station shows Middleton located northwest of Chicago , in the vicinity of DuPage County .
The names of the suburbs and interstates that are west of Chicago can be clearly seen .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The movie had great success on Hallmark Channel on the night of its premiere , making it the second - highest - rated original movie to that date .
It premiered with a 3.8 HH ( household ) rating and was in nearly 3.2 million homes .
It also was # 1 in its time period , propelling the channel to the # 4 spot in weekly ranking .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Good Witch ( Region 1 ) DVD was released on January 5 , 2010 .
The Good Witch Collection ( Region 1 ) DVD was released October 14 , 2014 .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
In addition to the original TV movie the Hallmark Channel has aired ten sequels .
*
The Good Witch - January 19 , 2008
*
* The Good Witch 's Garden - February 7 , 2009
*
* The Good Witch 's Gift - November 13 , 2010
*
* The Good Witch 's Family - October 29 , 2011
*
* The Good Witch 's Charm - October 27 , 2012
*
* The Good Witch 's Destiny - October 26 , 2013
*
* The Good Witch 's Wonder - October 25 , 2014
*
* Good Witch :
Something Wicked - October 24 , 2015 * * Good Witch : Secrets of Grey House - October 22 , 2016
* * Good Witch : Spellbound - October 22 , 2017
* * Good Witch : Tale Of Two Hearts - October 21 , 2018
* TELEVISION SERIES Section::::Television series .
In February 2014 , the Hallmark Channel announced that Good Witch had been green - lighted for a ten - episode series , starring Catherine Bell , to premiere on February 28 , 2015 .
Production for the first season began on October 29 , 2014 , in Toronto , with Sue Tenney as showrunner .
Bailee Madison and James Denton also star .
CHARACTERS
* A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film or the series season / special .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Good Witch at Hallmark Channel * The Good Witch Movies on Hallmark Channel