ARIZONA COURT OF APPEALS
The Arizona Court of Appeals is the intermediate appellate court for the state of Arizona .
It is divided into two divisions , with a total of twenty - two judges on the court : sixteen in Division One , based in Phoenix , and six in Division Two , based in Tucson .
JURISDICTION Section::::Jurisdiction .
The Court of Appeals has jurisdiction to consider appeals in civil cases from the Arizona Superior Court .
The court also reviews juvenile and domestic relations matters from the superior court , workers ' compensation and unemployment benefits decisions , tax court decisions , and certain corporation commission decisions .
The court also has jurisdiction over appeals in criminal matters from superior court , except for cases in which a death sentence has been imposed .
Death penalty cases go directly to the Supreme Court of Arizona .
The court may also decide " petitions for special action , " which is Arizona 's term for petitions for special writs , such as certiorari , mandamus and prohibition .
PROCEDURES
SELECTION OF JUDGES Section::::Procedures .
Section::::Selection of judges .
Judges are selected by a modified form of the Missouri Plan .
A bipartisan commission considers applicants and sends a list of nominees to the governor .
The governor is required by law to appoint from this list based on merit , without regard to party affiliation .
Judges are then retained for an initial period , after which they are subject to a retention election .
If the judge wins the election , his / her term is six years .
DECIDING CASES
Section::::Deciding cases .
The Court of Appeals decides cases in panels of three judges , called " departments .
" Each department chooses a presiding judge from among the three .
Division One also has a Chief Judge and Vice Chief Judge , elected by all judges in the division .
The process for pro se criminal defendants begins with the dismissal of a Petition for Post Conviction Relief by the superior court .
A review of the superior court 's decision by the court of appeals begins with a Petition for Review .
DIVISIONS Section::::Divisions .
While the Court of Appeals is divided into two geographic divisions in Phoenix and Tucson , the superior courts are bound by all of the Court of Appeals decisions , regardless of the division they are issued in .
An Arizona trial court is not required to give greater precedent to a Court of Appeals decision from the division it is located in then a decision from the other division .
FORMER JUDGES
*
Sarah D. Grant *
Sandra Day O'Connor
* G. Murray Snow
SEE ALSO * Courts of Arizona REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Arizona Court of Appeals , Division One website * Arizona Court of Appeals ,
Division Two website