AUSTRO - HUNGARIAN RULE IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA Bosnia and Herzegovina fell under Austro - Hungarian rule in 1878 when the Congress of Berlin approved the occupation of the Bosnia Vilayet , which officially remained part of the Ottoman Empire .
Three decades later , in 1908 , Austria - Hungary provoked the Bosnian crisis by formally annexing the occupied zone , establishing the Condominium of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the joint control of Austria and Hungary .
HISTORY OCCUPATION Section::::History .
Section::::Occupation .
Following the Russo - Turkish War ( 1877–1878 ) , in June and July 1878 the Congress of Berlin was organized by the Great Powers .
The resulting Treaty of Berlin caused Bosnia and Herzegovina to nominally remain under sovereignty of the Ottoman Empire , but was de facto ceded to Austria - Hungary , which also obtained the right to garrison the Sanjak of Novi Pazar .
According to article 25 : The provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina shall be occupied and administered by Austria - Hungary .
The government of Austria - Hungary , not desiring to undertake the administration of the Sanjak of Novi - Pazar , which extends between Serbia and Montenegro in a South - Easterly direction to the other side of Mitrovitza , the Ottoman administration will continue to exercise its functions there .
Nevertheless , in order to assure the maintenance of the new political state of affairs , as well as freedom and security of communications , Austria - Hungary reserves the right of keeping garrisons and having military and commercial roads in the whole of this part of the ancient vilayet of Bosnia .
To this end the governments of Austria - Hungary and Turkey reserve to themselves to come to an understanding on the details .
The
Austro - Hungarian Army engaged in a major mobilization effort to prepare for the assault on Bosnia and Herzegovina , commanding by the end of June 1878 a force of 82,113 troops , 13,313 horses and 112 cannons in the VI , VII , XX , and XVIII infantry divisions as well as a rear army in the Kingdom of Dalmatia .
The primary commander was Josip Filipović ; the forward XVIII infantry division was under the command Stjepan Jovanović , while the rear army commander in Dalmatia was Gavrilo Rodić .
The occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina started on 29 July 1878 and was over on 20 October .
The Ottoman army in Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time consisted of roughly 40,000 troops with 77 cannons , that combined with local militias to around 93,000 men .
The Austro - Hungarian troops were occasionally met with ferocious opposition from elements of both Muslim and Orthodox populations there , and significant battles occurred near Čitluk , Stolac , Livno and Klobuk .
Despite setbacks at Maglaj and Tuzla , Sarajevo was occupied in October 1878 .
Austro - Hungarian casualties amounted to over 5,000 and the unexpected violence of the campaign led to recriminations between commanders and political leaders .
Fierce resistance from Muslims was expected as Austro - Hungarians realized their occupation meant that Bosnian Muslims would lose their privileged status based on their religion .
Tensions remained in certain parts of the country ( particularly Herzegovina ) and a mass emigration of predominantly Muslim dissidents occurred .
However , a state of relative stability was reached soon enough and Austro - Hungarian authorities were able to embark on a number of social and administrative reforms which intended to make Bosnia and Herzegovina into a " model colony " .
With the aim of establishing the province as a stable political model that would help dissipate rising South Slav nationalism , Habsburg rule did much to codify laws , to introduce new political practices , and generally to provide for modernization .
ETHNIC RELATIONS Section::::Ethnic relations .
The Austro - Hungarian administration advocated the ideal of a pluralist and multi - confessional Bosnian nation .
Joint Imperial Minister of Finance and Vienna - based administrator of Bosnia Béni Kállay thus endorsed Bosnian nationalism in the form of Bošnjaštvo ( " Bosniakhood " ) with the aim to inspire in Bosnia 's people ' a feeling that they belong to a great and powerful nation ' and viewed Bosnians as " speaking the Bosnian language and divided into three religions with equal rights . " .
Between 1861 and 1869 , Topal Osman Pasha , an Ottoman Grand vizier had striven to do the same .
On the one hand , these policies attempted to insulate Bosnia and Herzegovina from its irredentist neighbors ( Orthodox Serbia , Catholic Croatia , and the Muslim Ottoman Empire ) and to marginalize the already circulating ideas of Serbian and Croatian nationhood among Bosnia 's Orthodox and Catholic communities , respectively .
On the other hand , the Habsburg administrators precisely used the existing ideas of nationhood ( especially Bosnian folklore and symbolism ) in order to promote their own version of Bošnjak patriotism that aligned with loyalty to the Habsburg state .
Habsburg policies are thus best described not as anti - national , but as cultivating their own style of pro - imperial nationalisms .
This policy had mixed results .
Overall , most Serb and Croat politicians ultimately ignored or opposed the policy , but Serb and Croat politicians also tried and failed to secure the allegiance of Bosnian Muslim constituencies .
At the same time , Austro - Hungarian officials actively promoted Bosnia and Herzegovina as new and flourishing crownlands .
Habsburg officials publicized numerous exhibits on Bosnian history , folklore , and archaeology , with artists like Alphonse Mucha presenting the Bosnian pavilion at the Paris Exposition of 1900 .
The idea of a unified South Slavic state ( typically expected to be spearheaded by independent Kingdom of Serbia ) became a popular political ideology in the region at this time , including Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Certain Muslim circles in Bosnia and Herzegovina published the newspaper Bošnjak ( " Bosniak " ) .
This newspaper caused fierce discussions in Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , and Serbia .
The newspaper supported Kállay 's policy , whose goal was to strengthen Austro - Hungarian rule in occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Although Kállay 's policy was not widely accepted even amongst Muslims , Bošnjak nevertheless represented the national aspirations of some Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Kállay 's policy was finally defeated in 1896 and 1899 , when Bosnian Serbs and Muslims called for religious and educational autonomy .
Kállay 's policy had some potential to resist Croatian and Serbian national aspirations , but after 1899 and 1900 his policy of promoting Bosnian identity had no significant effect .
After the death of Kallay , the policy was abandoned .
By 1905 , nationalism was an integral factor of Bosnian politics , with national political parties corresponding to the three groups dominating elections .
Soon after Austria - Hungary occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878 , the government took the area 's religious activities and institutions under its sovereignty .
Austro - Hungarian authorities issued regulations which made Muslim clergy Austro - Hungarian state officials , answering exclusively to them .
This was to isolate Bosnian Muslims from the Ottoman Empire , and its clergy who were subordinate to the Sultan .
The Muslims were largely unhappy with their new status , and formed Muslim political opposition .
This Muslim opposition demanded , at first , Muslim religious autonomy from Austria - Hungary , but later , as it grew stronger , they demanded autonomy from the Ottoman Empire .
The Muslim opposition tried to align itself with the Serbs , who were also demanding religious and educational autonomy .
But unsolved agrarian relations between the Muslim leadership and the Serbs was an obstacle to any far - reaching alliance .
The alliance that did form was only tactical .
Later , the Muslim leadership emphasized Ottoman sovereignty over Bosnia and Herzegovina , and demanded the right to organize their religious activity under the aegis of the Shaykh al - Islām of the Ottoman Empire .
With Kállay 's death in 1903 , the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina was liberalized .
The national movements in Bosnia and Herzegovina were transformed into political parties .
Muslims founded the Muslim National Organization ( MNO ) in 1906 , Serbs formed the Serbian National Organization ( SNO ) in 1907 , and Croats formed the Croat National Union ( HNZ ) in 1908 .
Another significant Croatian party , though less represented then the HNZ , was the Croatian Catholic Association ( HKU ) .
The MNO considered Bosnia and Herzegovina to be part of the Ottoman Empire until the collapse of Austria - Hungary in 1918 .
They considered Austria - Hungary a European country assigned to control Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Their main goal was to achieve Muslim religious autonomy and to maintain the agrarian relations that were in force at the time .
In 1909 they achieved their religious autonomy .
Austro - Hungarian authorities signed a treaty with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople by which the Emperor gained control over the Serbian Orthodox Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina in exchange for annual reimbursement .
Serbs largely disapproved of Austro - Hungarian control over their religious institutions , and organised a struggle to gain their religious autonomy .
The struggle was ended in their favour in 1905 .
After gaining religious autonomy , the Serbs gathered around four political groups , out of which three become notable .
The notable groups became known by the names of their official newspapers , the Srpska riječ ( Serbian Word ) , the Petar Kočić 's Narod i Otadžbina ( the People and Fatherland ) and the Lazar Dimitrijević 's Dan ( the Day ) .
Later they demanded unity under one party , which was approved to them , so they founded the Serbian People 's Organisation .
As a relative majority , the Serbs were a dominant political factor , and as such they demanded Bosnia and Herzegovina 's autonomy from the Ottoman Empire and Austria - Hungary .
Serbian politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina was dominated by the three factions gathered around the three newspapers .
The main problem of Serbian civic politics was the agrarian reaction .
Serb peasants demanded to be liberated from feudal relations , while on the other hand they wanted to maintain cooperation with the Muslim People 's Organisation in achieving national aspirations .
The group gathered around Kočić 's Narod i Otadžbina newspaper completely stood for Serbian peasantry against the Muslims in order to change the agrarian position of the peasantry .
Kočić 's group also banned any cooperation with the Austrian - Hungarian authorities .
The group gathered around Dimitrijević also advocated a radical change of the agrarian relations and criticised the Serbian civic leadership for neglecting the peasantry , but they advocated cooperation with the Austro - Hungarian authorities in changing agrarian relations .
The main goal of Serbian politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina was the removal of Austro - Hungarian authority in Bosnia and Herzegovina and annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Kingdom of Serbia .
Their goals , however , were no obstacle to economic cooperation with the Austrian - Hungarian authorities .
In order to suppress national aspirations , the Austrian - Hungarian authorities tried to limit the activity of the Franciscans in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Emperor and the Holy See discussed the reestablishment of the Catholic Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Emperor 's goal was to have the Church in Bosnia subordinated to his secular power within the Church .
In the end , in 1881 , the Holy See yielded , on condition that the Emperor did not explicitly mention his authority in a bulla which he , however , did .
After establishing secular power over the Catholic Church in Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Emperor established the cathedral in Sarajevo and named Archbishop Dr. Josip Štadler as its head .
Just before the occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Croatian Sabor asked the Emperor to alter the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina so it could be unified with the Kingdom of Croatia - Slavonia and the Kingdom of Dalmatia .
The Emperor refused to accept this demand and dismissed the Sabor .
This was done as the Austrian - Hungarian authorities had a plan to isolate Bosnia and Herzegovina from its neighbouring Slavic countries , Croatia and Serbia , and to halt the national aspirations of the peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The authorities did not only suppress the Croatian and Serbian names , but also any flags , coats of arms and folk songs .
Any activity that would emphasise a common interest of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina and those in the Triune Kingdom was suppressed from the start .
As they were unable to form a political party , especially under Kállay 's administration , Croats formed various musical societies , reading rooms , schools , economic institutions and newspapers .
The authorities forbade these societies from using the word " Croatian " , even though they allowed use of the word " Serbian " for Serbian societies .
Only later was the use of the word " Croatian " allowed .
This official policy was pushed by Hungarian circles , especially under Kállay and his successor Stephan Burián von Rajecz .
The goal of their policy was to weaken the Croatian position in Bosnia and Herzegovina by strengthening the Serbian position , in order to make unification of Bosnia and Herzegovina with Croatia less likely .
Even though the authorities tried to isolate Bosnia and Herzegovina from the influence of neighbouring Slavic countries , Croatian people in Bosnia were nevertheless influenced by all three major political movements from Croatia , first the Illyrian movement , later Yugoslavism and Croatian nationalism .
In Croatian politics there were two factions and their formal political organising ran slowly .
The fundamental reason for this Croatian political division was disagreement between the Franciscan Bosnian Province and the Archbishop 's Chancery on the organisation of parishes within the archdiocese .
The first initiative for creation of a Croatian political party came from the Croatian intelligentsia which gained support from the Franciscans .
In 1908 , after some preparations , it founded the Croatian People 's Union with Ivo Pilar as its main ideologist .
In its program , the HNZ advocated the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina by Austria - Hungary and its unification with the rest of the Croatian lands .
In relations with the Serbs , the HNZ stood for a strict reciprocity , rejecting the idea of Bosnia and Herzegovina 's unification with any other country or its autonomy .
The HNZ did not demand any changes in social relations or changes in the agrarian relations .
They tried to maintain good relations with the Muslim population , which was the only way to gain political strength .
Because of this , they were harshly criticized by the Štadler 's Croatian Catholic Association ( HKU )
that advocated an end to the serf system .
Pilar believed that the HNZ 's goals could only be achieved if Croats gained support from the Muslim population , and at the same time , he criticised Štadler for his Catholic propaganda .
Štadler , who was Pilar 's main opponent , believed that Catholic Croats should not be educated in any way other than as Catholics , thus advocating segregation between Catholics and Muslims .
The HKU , like the HNZ , advocated unification of Bosnia and Herzegovina with other Croatian lands .
It also promoted Christian morals , and unlike the HNZ , the HKU advocated the abolition of the serf system as they had no relations with the Muslims .
ANNEXATION Section::::Annexation .
Even though Bosnia and Herzegovina was still part of the Ottoman Empire , at least formally , the Austrian - Hungarian authorities had factual control over the country .
Austria - Hungary waited for a chance to incorporate Bosnia and Herzegovina formally as well .
Any action concerning Bosnia and Herzegovina depended on international opinion , which Austrian - Hungarian authorities were aware of .
They used the Young Turk Revolution in the Ottoman Empire to finally annex Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The Young Turk movement had gained support in mass protests throughout the Ottoman Empire during 1908 , with their intention to restore the suspended Ottoman constitution .
The Austrian - Hungarian authorities were afraid that the revolution could spread to Bosnia and Herzegovina , as it had support from the Bosnian Muslims and the Serbs , who supported the autonomy of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the Ottoman Empire .
On 7 September 1908 , the SNO and the MNO demanded that Bosnia and Herzegovina accept the constitution as part of the Ottoman Empire .
On 5 October the Emperor Franz Joseph announced the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and ordered the Minister of Finance to compose a constitution for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The annexation was announced in Sarajevo two days later , on 7 October .
This annexation led to an international crisis , which was solved on 26 February 1909 when the Ottoman Empire recognised the annexation having received material compensation and on the Austrian - Hungarian garrisons leaving the Sanjak of Novi Pazar .
By this , Bosnia and Herzegovina was formally under the Austrian - Hungarian sovereignty .
On 21 March 1909 , the German Empire sent an ultimatum to the Russian Empire to recognise the annexation , which Russia did immediately .
Soon , the Kingdom of Serbia recognised the annexation on 31 March , the Kingdom of Montenegro doing so on 5 April .
The annexation caused unrest amongst the Muslim and Serb population .
The Streifkorps ( special counterinsurgency units ) were reestablished in context of demonstrations in Serbia and in Montenegro against the annexation .
The Muslims could not believe the sovereignty of the Sultan could be overturned with a proclamation , and that they were now ruled by a Christian emperor .
The MNO and the SNO refused to give any official statement about the annexation .
In Budapest they held a meeting on 11 October 1908 they issued the Message to the People of Bosnia and Herzegovina , where they stated that the people could n't reconcile with the Austrian - Hungarian occupation in 30 years and asked for the people to remain calm and wait for the decision of the superpowers .
Both parties announced that they would continue the struggle for the autonomy of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
However , since all European countries had already recognised the annexation , the SNO and the MNO , who wanted to continue their activity as legitimate organisations , thus recognised the annexation ; the SNO doing so in May 1909 and the MNO in February 1910 .
Unlike the Serbs and the Muslims , the Croats enthusiastically accepted the Austrian - Hungarian annexation .
In an audience to the Emperor Franz Joseph , the representatives of the HNZ , Pilar , Nikola Mandić and Antonije Sunarić expressed the gratitude of the Croat people to the Emperor for the annexation at the end of October 1908 .
However , Croat enthusiasm did not endure , as Bosnia and Herzegovina failed to be joined with Croatia as expected .
POLITICS Section::::Politics .
In Bosnia and Herzegovina , every major ethnic group was represented by its political party .
The Muslims were represented by the Muslim People 's Organisation , the Serbs were represented by the Serbian People 's Organisation , while the Croats were represented by the two political parties , the Croatian People 's Union and the Croatian Catholic Association .
The Diet of Bosnia was established in 1910 .
PARLIAMENTARY PARTIES
* Croatian People 's Union ( Hrvatska narodna zajednica )
* Croatian Catholic Association ( Hrvatska katolička udruga )
* Muslim People 's Organisation ( Muslimanska narodna organizacija )
* Serbian People 's Organisation ( Srpska narodna organizacija ; Српска народна организација ) NON - PARLIAMENTARY PARTIES
* Muslim Progressive Party ( Muslimanska napredna stranka )
* Muslim Democracy ( Muslimanska demokracija )
* Serbian People 's Independent Party ( Srpska narodna nezavisna stranka )
* Socialdemocratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina
( Socijaldemokratska stranka Bosne i Hercegvoine )
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
+ Population of Bosnia and Herzegovina by Religion 1879–1910 !
rowspan=2Census !
colspan=2Muslim !
colspan=2 Orthodox !
colspan=2 Catholic !
colspan=2 Jewish !
rowspan=2Total !
Number !
Share !
Number !
Share !
Number !
Share !
Number !
Share align =
center1879
align =
right448,613 align
= right38.7 % align
= right496,485 align = right42.9
% align
= right209,391 align =
right18.1
% align =
right3,675
align =
right0.3 % align
=
right1,158,440 align =
center1885
align
= right492,710 align =
right36.9 % align =
right571,250 align =
right42.8 % align =
right265,788 align =
right19.9 % align = right5,805
align
= right0.4 % align
=
right1,336,091
align =
center1895
align =
right548,632 align =
right35.0 % align =
right673,246 align =
right42.9
% align =
right334,142 align =
right21.3 % align =
right8,213
align =
right0.5 % align =
right1,568,092 align = center1910
align =
right612,137 align
= right32.2 % align =
right825,418 align =
right43.5 % align
=
right434,061 align = right22.9
% align
=
right11,868
align = right0.6 % align
=
right1,898,044 ADMINISTRATION Section::::Administration .
Bosnia and Herzegovina was governed jointly by Cisleithania ( Austria ) and the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen ( Hungary ) through the joint Ministry of Finance .
In the Ministry of Finance , there was the Bosnian Office which controlled Bosnia and Herzegovina over the Government based in Sarajevo .
The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina was headed by a governor , who was also a commander of military forces based in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The government was also composed of the governor 's deputy and chiefs of departments .
At first , the government had only three departments , administrative , financial and legislative .
Later , other departments , including construction , economic , education , religion , and technical , were founded as well .
In the 1910 Constitution , the Emperor proclaimed Bosnia and Herzegovina to be unique administrative territory under responsible leadership of the joint finance minister .
With the implementation of the constitution , the position of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not change .
It remained a corpus separatum administrated by Austria and Hungary .
The constitution implemented three new constitutions , the Diet of Bosnia , the National Council and the municipal councils .
The Diet of Bosnia had very limited legislative powers .
The main legislative power was in hands of the emperor , parliaments in Vienna and Budapest and the joint minister of finance .
The Diet of Bosnia only proposed decisions which needed to be approved by the both parliaments in Vienna and Budapest .
The Diet also had no impact on the administrative - political institutions , the National Council and the municipal councils and also it did n't have right to participate in every decision making ; the Diet could participate only in decisions that mattered Bosnia and Herzegovina exclusively , while decisions on armed forces , commercial and traffic connections , customs and similar matters , were made by the parliaments in Vienna and Budapest .
The Austrian - Hungarian authorities left the Ottoman division of Bosnia and Herzegovina untouched , they only changed the names of divisional units .
Thus the Bosnia Vilayet was renamed to Reichsland , sanjaks were renamed to Kreise , kazas were renamed to Bezirke , while nahiyahs were renamed to Exposituren .
There were six Kreise and 54 Bezirke .
Head of the Reichsland was a Landsschef , heads of the Kreises were Kreiseleiters and heads of the Bezirke were Bezirkesleiters .
GOVERNORS Section::::Governors . !
№ !
Portrait !
width=180Name !
colspan=2Term of Office !
Ethnicity ! 1 ! 2 ! 3 ! 4 ! 5 ! 6 ! 7 ! 8 !
9 RELIGION Section::::Religion . The emperor of Austria - Hungary had the ability to appoint and dismiss religious leaders and to control religious establishments financially through agreements created with the Pope , the Ecumenical Patriarchate , and the Sheikh - ul - Islam .
The occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina led to great reforms of the Catholic Church in that country , after centuries in the Ottoman Empire .
In 1881 , Vrhbosna was elevated to an archdiocese , and the dioceses of Banja Luka and Mostar - Duvno were formed .
Work began on the Sacred Heart Cathedral in Sarajevo in 1884 and was completed by 1889 .
SEE ALSO
* Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria
* Bosnian - Herzegovinian Infantry
* Ludwig Thallóczy
REFERENCES
Citations Bibliography