LUCAS MCCAIN
Lucas McCain is a fictional character in the Western television series , The Rifleman , which ran on ABC from 1958 to 1963 .
A rancher and widowed father with a penchant for using his Winchester firearm as a last resort , the part was portrayed by former athlete - turned - actor Chuck Connors .
CHARACTER SYNOPSIS
Section::::Character synopsis .
In the story , Lucas earns enough money from a turkey shoot contest to purchase a ranch near the fictitious town of North Fork in the New Mexico Territory , where , presumably in the 1880s , he dedicates himself to rearing his son , Mark McCain , played by singer / actor and former Mousketeer Johnny Crawford .
The McCains had previously lived in Enid , Oklahoma where Lucas ' wife , Margaret ( daughter of Samuel E. Gibbs ) died in a smallpox outbreak ( Season 5 , Episode 23 , " The Guest " ; Season 5 , Episode 24 , " Old Man Running " ) .
Despite Lucas ' frequent and rapid use of his rifle to settle disputes , the program is family - oriented .
Lucas struggles to instill proper values in his young son , and most episodes end on an uplifting note .
Mark has a special bond and affection for his father .
In promoting tolerance , Lucas in the third - season episode " The Queue " , defends a Chinese immigrant trying to make his way in North Fork .
Sammy Davis Jr. appears in another episode as a black allowed without resistance to check into the hotel in North Fork .
Similarly , in " The Gaucho " during the first season , Lucas befriends an Argentine family against the prejudice of townspeople .
In " The Sheridan Story " also during the first season , Lucas , a veteran of the Union Army during the American Civil War ( he was a lieutenant in the 10th Indiana Volunteer Infantry Regiment ) , hires a former Confederate to work on his ranch , but the former soldier causes trouble , being unable to accept defeat .
The even - tempered Lucas serves as the peacemaker .
Also , in " The Sister " , Mark asked Lucas if he would remarry .
Lucas replied that it was " only natural " for him to consider a second marriage .
Mark asked when Lucas might marry again .
He reassured Mark : " When I find the right woman . "
Mark asked what the qualifications would entail .
Lucas told Mark that he would know the right woman " when I meet her son . "
With a big grin on his face , Mark asked , " What will she be like ? "
Lucas replied , " Well , she 'll have to cook and sew and scrub .
Her hands got ta be soft , she 's got ta have hair like the crimson as the setting sun .
Eyes as brown as chestnuts .
She 's got ta wear a flower because that 's womanly .
Ride a horse like a man . "
Mark suggested such a woman would be " kinda hard to find . "
Lucas agreed : " Very hard to find , son . "
As it turns out , Lucas did not remarry during the run of the program .
However , in the last season , he was for a time smitten by a beautiful hotel owner named " Lou Mallory " .
REFERENCES