AUDI S5
The Audi S5 is the high - performance variant of Audi 's A5 .
It is also the coupé , cabriolet , and five - door fastback versions of the fourth - generation ( B8 )
Audi S4 saloon and estate models .
Like all Audi " S " cars , they are only available as standard with Audi 's quattro four - wheel drive ( 4WD ) system , here in S5 using a Torsen - based centre diff system .
Most versions of the S5 are manufactured at Audi 's plant in Ingolstadt , Germany ; they are available as a coupé , cabriolet , and five - door sportback , which was previously not available in North America until the 2018 model year , which was released in the United States in mid 2017 .
The cabriolets are built at Audi 's factory in Neckarsulm , Germany .
The Chassis in an S5 and A5 are different .
S5 B8/8 T ( 2007–2012 ) Section::::S5 B8/8 T ( 2007–2012 ) .
The Audi S5 was released in coupé form to the public at the same time as the A5 .
The Audi S5 Sportback was unveiled at the 2009 Frankfurt Motor Show , and went on sale in the spring of 2010 with a MSRP of € 57,900 .
The Audi S5 , in comparison to the A5 , features a more aggressive body style ( typical design for Audi S and RS models ) which consists of side skirts , bigger air inlets on front bumper and dual - quad tip exhaust .
The S5 includes a string of LED daytime running lights around the bi - Xenon headlamps and a vertically striped chrome grille as well .
In many markets , the S5 includes as standard , 19 " alloy wheels with a five - parallel spoke design , bigger brakes , heated leather sport bucket seats , and other convenience features , some of which are available only as an option on the A5 .
Changes for 2010 model year include LED tail lamps , the introduction of Premium Plus and Prestige trim levels and new optional equipment such as leather / Alcantara seats .
Despite sharing the same nameplate , the powertrains were different between the coupé and the Cabriolet / Sportback for the 2010–2012 model years .
The 2007–2012 Audi S5 coupé had a 4.2-litre Fuel Stratified Injection ( FSI ) V8 engine that produces , while the S5 Cabriolet and Sportback have a supercharged 3.0-litre TFSI V6 engine producing which is shared with the 2010 Audi S4 3.0 TFSI quattro sedan and avant .
The coupé had a choice of either a 6-speed manual or 6-speed Tiptronic , while the Cabriolet / Sportback have the 7-speed S tronic dual - clutch transmission .
Despite minor differences in peak power output , both the V8 and the supercharged V6 provide very much similar performance .
While the V8 benefits from the smooth power delivery the V6 is more frugal .
The only Audi S5 with the V8 engine is the pre - facelift coupé version .
S5 B8.5/8.5 T ( 2013–2017 ) Section::::S5 B8.5/8.5 T ( 2013–2017 ) .
The ( B8.5/8.5 T or Facelift )
Audi S5 Coupé uses the 3.0-litre supercharged V6 TFSI engine producing , previously used in the S5 Cabriolet and S4 Sedan / Avant since the 2010 model year .
The other major change under the hood is the introduction of stop - start technology for better fuel efficiency .
Audi claims an average fuel economy of ( compared to the current in the V8 coupe and in the Cabriolet ) .
In 2017 , Audi replaced the supercharged engine with a single turbocharged 2995 cc , engine , an increase of from the supercharged model .
Although more powerful at low RPM , Audi made a decision to replace the supercharger with a turbocharger based on European driver 's preference for smaller , more efficient , yet powerful engines , a market which Mercedes and BMW have always led .
As part of the mid - generational refresh , the S5 undergoes some major front - end changes , including a complete redesign of the headlights – this means new LED DRL 's , a brand - new grille loosely based on the 2012 Audi A6 grille and new fog lamps .
Audi has also introduced a new rear diffuser that appears to be more cosmetic than the one found on previous models and updated LED tail light design .
Inside , the S5 receives some new features .
Dials in the center console get the chrome treatment along with the edges of the buttons for the windows , 4 Audi MMI control buttons and Audi 's 3G+ MMI which has a slightly refreshed interface and now features Google Earth maps .
Audi has brought the shift knob from the RS5 to the S5 .
There is a shift from having four buttons down each side of the console , to just two with the addition of a Menu and Car buttons below the MMI control dial ( Audi has removed the skip forward / backward buttons that previously occupied the space on either side of the back button ) .
Lastly , a flat - bottom steering wheel style will have a new circular airbag cover as well as piano black trim .
S5 B9 ( 2017–PRESENT ) Section::::S5 B9 ( 2017–present ) .
The Audi S5 ( B9 ) is an all - wheel drive coupé , sportback , & cabriolet built by Audi from late 2016 , after its unveiling in June 2016 .
Its sportback trim adds rear doors and a hatchback rear .
It is part of the second generation model line following on from the Audi S5 ( B8 ) that had been in production since 2007 .
As part of the refresh , the new S5 has undergone some major front and rear end changes , including a drop in weight to ( Coupé ) and a complete redesign of the headlights and bonnet , LED front and rear lighting , sharper body lines , and a new larger one piece grille .
There are also a number of optional safety options available such as drive assist and head up display .
Inside , the S5 also receives some new features .
A redesigned dashboard and centre console , updated tablet style 8 " Audi MMI , Virtual Cockpit ( optional ) , and features Google Earth maps and Apple CarPlay .
The new Audi S5 also has new electrically adjustable front heated seats with cross stitching , and has an optional flat - bottom steering wheel style with circular airbag cover as well as a variety of trim options .
Fitted with a completely new and more powerful 3-litre V6 petrol engine , the S5 has direct injection as well as a twin - scroll turbocharger to reduce both weight , and cost .
The turbocharger is mounted within the engine V and as a result has reduced turbo lag response times .
The quattro all - wheel drive system receives power through a locking centre differential that splits torque sent to the wheels at 40 % to the front and 60 % to the rear .
The system can also divert up to 70 % to the front or up to 85 % to the rear .
time is around 4.0 seconds ( coupé & sportback ) , with a limited top speed of .
ENGINES Section::::Engines . !
Model !
Years !
Body style !
Type / code !
Power !
Torque SEE ALSO
* Audi Ur - S4 / Ur - S6
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Audi.com -
international corporate portal *
Audi UK - S and RS models
* Audi USA - S5