RJ MITTE
Roy Frank " RJ " Mitte III ( born August 21 , 1992 ) is an American actor , producer , and model .
He is best known for his role as Walter " Flynn " White Jr. on the AMC series
Breaking Bad ( 2008–13 ) .
Like his character on the show , he has cerebral palsy .
After moving to Hollywood in 2006 , he began training with personal talent manager Addison Witt .
They sought acting opportunities where his disability would serve to educate viewers , which led him to audition for the role in Breaking Bad .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Mitte was born in Jackson , Mississippi .
He was delivered by emergency caesarian and was not breathing at the time of his birth , which resulted in permanent brain damage .
He was adopted a few weeks later by Roy Frank Mitte Jr. and Dyna Mitte , who later separated .
He was diagnosed with cerebral palsy at the age of three , and doctors put his legs in casts for six months in an attempt to straighten his feet .
Mitte was fitted with leg braces and used crutches throughout most of his childhood ; however , over time , his body became stronger through sports and exercise ; he no longer needed any walking devices by his teenage years .
In 2006 , he moved with his family to Los Angeles , where his younger sister Lacianne Carriere had received an offer for a role in a film project .
Mitte was raised by his mother following the separation of his parents , and from the age of 13 was financially responsible for the family , which by then also included his sister who was born when Mitte was 11 years old .
He remains responsible and takes on multiple jobs to bring in an income .
CAREER Section::::Career .
After receiving several roles as an extra , including in the Disney series Hannah Montana , Mitte became interested in films and decided to take acting lessons .
Shortly after , he was offered the role of Walter White Jr. , who also has cerebral palsy , in the AMC series Breaking Bad .
At the 2013 Media Access Awards , Mitte received the SAG - AFTRA Harold Russell Award for his portrayal of Walter White , Jr. on the series , and also presented the eponymous RJ Mitte Diversity Award to deaf actor Ryan Lane .
The Screen Actors Guild named Mitte as the spokesman for actors with disabilities and he is the representative of " Inclusion in the Arts and Media of Performers with Disabilities " , which employs artists with disabilities .
In 2011 he starred in the short horror film Stump .
That same year , he worked as executive producer of the documentary Vanished : The Tara Calico Story , that deals with the disappearance of Tara Calico .
In 2012 Mitte was cast in the thriller film House of Last Things .
In 2013 , Mitte appeared in the music video for " Dead Bite " by rapcore band Hollywood Undead .
In January 2014 , he began a recurring role on the ABC Family drama series Switched at Birth portraying Campbell , a premed student paralyzed from a snowboarding accident who uses a wheelchair .
On July 14 , 2016 , Mitte was announced as part of British Channel 4 's coverage of the 2016 Rio Paralympic Games .
Mitte is producing and will star in the film Wildflowers , along with his teenage sister , Lacianne Carriere .
He is also working as a producer on a documentary called The Kids of Widney High .
He hopes to branch out into directing .
ACTIVISM Section::::Activism .
Mitte appeared on the cover of the February / March 2015 issue of Neurology Now ( published by the American Academy of Neurology ) .
The issue included a short biography and his views on cerebral palsy , bullying , and his acting career .
He is also a celebrity ambassador for United Cerebral Palsy .
MODEL Section::::Model .
In Spring 2014 , Mitte modeled for a Gap campaign .
In June 2015 , Mitte walked for Vivienne Westwood on a catwalk .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Notes TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title !
Role !
Notes Switched at Birth 2017
Chance Patient at convention Episode : "
The Collected Works of William Shakespeare "
MUSIC VIDEOS Section::::Music videos . !
Year !
Artist !
Title !
Role AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year!!Award!!Category!!Project!!Result
2011Screen Actors Guild AwardOutstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama SeriesBreaking Bad 2012Screen Actors
Guild AwardOutstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama SeriesBreaking Bad 2012Young Artist AwardBest Performance in a TV Series - Recurring Young Actor 17 - 21Breaking
Bad 2013Media Access AwardSAG - AFTRA Harold Russell
AwardBreaking
Bad 2013Screen Actors Guild AwardOutstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama SeriesBreaking Bad REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* RJ Mitte discusses Breaking Bad at AMCtv.com * RJ Mitte —
Breaking Bad Is Good Interview with ABILITY Magazine