MY SISTER 'S KEEPER ( FILM )
My Sister 's Keeper is a 2009 American drama film directed by Nick Cassavetes and starring Cameron Diaz , Abigail Breslin , Sofia Vassilieva , Jason Patric , and Alec Baldwin .
Based on Jodi Picoult 's 2004 novel of the same name , on June 26 , 2009 the film was released to cinemas in the United States , Canada , Ireland , Mexico , and the United Kingdom .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Kate Fitzgerald
( Sofia Vassilieva ) has acute promyelocytic leukemia .
Conceived by in vitro fertilization , her younger sister Anna ( Abigail Breslin ) was brought into the world as a savior sister .
She is a genetic match to her older sister and can donate compatible organs , blood , and tissue to help her .
When Kate turns 15 , she goes into renal failure and
11-year old Anna knows that she will be forced by her parents to donate one of her kidneys .
She also realizes that she may not be able to live the life she wants to lead – she will not be able to play sports , drink alcohol , or be a mother in the future .
Anna tells her parents that she does not want to be a donor and sues them for medical emancipation and the rights to her own body .
Her father Brian ( Jason Patric ) understands her , though her domineering mother , Sara ( Cameron Diaz ) , who leads an obsessive campaign to keep Kate alive , is indignant at her decision .
Attorney Campbell Alexander ( Alec Baldwin ) agrees to work for Anna as her guardian ad litem , suing for partial termination of parental rights .
He has agreed to take the case because he has epilepsy , and is sympathetic to her predicament .
The film is interlaced with flashbacks that detail Kate and Anna 's close relationship , as well as how Kate 's illness has affected her siblings , including their brother , Jesse ( Evan Ellingson ) .
In a flashback , Kate meets a fellow cancer patient , Taylor Ambrose ( Thomas Dekker ) , whom she begins dating .
He asks her to the hospital 's prom for teen patients ; there , they slow - dance , then have sex .
A few days later , Kate begins to worry as she has not seen Taylor since the dance .
She learns that Taylor has died and attempts suicide by overdosing on painkillers , but Anna stops her .
Kate expresses hope that after she dies , she will see Taylor .
Kate makes a request to go to the beach one last time .
Brian obtains permission and discharges her from the hospital for the day .
Sara overreacts and demands that Kate be returned to the hospital immediately .
Brian angrily refuses and threatens Sara with a divorce if she does not join them .
Sara shows up at the beach , where they enjoy one final family outing .
During the hearing , Jesse reveals that Anna is actually acting under Kate 's instruction ; Kate , not wanting to live any longer , had persuaded Anna to refuse to donate her kidney .
Anna had wanted to give Kate her kidney and had been upset at Kate 's decision .
Sara is finally forced to acknowledge what Kate has been trying to tell her all this time : she is ready to die .
Later that day , Kate dies sleeping , with her mother by her side .
After her death , Campbell states that Anna has won the case .
The family moves on with their lives .
Sara , who gave up practicing law to look after Kate , returns to work , Brian retires from firefighting and counsels troubled youths , and Jesse receives an arts scholarship in New York .
Anna reveals that every year on Kate 's birthday they go to Montana , which was her " most favorite place in the world " .
She concludes that she was not born merely to save her sister , she was born because she had a sister , and that their relationship continues even in death .
PRODUCTION AND CAST CHANGES Section::::Production and cast changes .
Upon the original creation of the film adaptation , sisters Dakota Fanning and Elle Fanning were cast to play Kate and Anna respectively .
However , when Dakota heard that she would be required to shave her head for the role , she dropped out of the film as then did Elle .
The two sisters were replaced , with Abigail Breslin taking on the lead role as Anna Fitzgerald and Sofia Vassilieva on the role of Kate Fitzgerald .
CAST
* Abigail Breslin as Anna Fitzgerald
* Alexandra Casteele as Young Anna Fitzgerald
* Cameron Diaz as Sara Fitzgerald
* Sofia Vassilieva as Kate Fitzgerald
* Olivia Hancock as young Kate Fitzgerald
* Jason Patric as Brian Fitzgerald
* Chris Kinkade as Dr. Nguyen * David Thornton as Dr. Chance
* Evan Ellingson as Jesse Fitzgerald
* Brennan Bailey as young Jesse Fitzgerald
* Paul Christopher Butler as three - year - old Jesse * Alec Baldwin as Campbell Alexander * E.G. Daily as Nurse Susan * Lin Shaye as Nurse Adele * Joan Cusack as Judge De Salvo
* Heather Wahlquist as Kelly * Thomas Dekker as Taylor Ambrose * Emily Deschanel as Dr. Farquad RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film received mixed reviews from critics .
Rotten Tomatoes reports that 47 % of reviews for the film were positive , based on 126 reviews .
Another aggregate review site Metacritic reported 51 % positive reviews based on 28 reviews .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
In its opening weekend it placed 5th with a total of $ 12,442,212 , behind , The Proposal ( second weekend ) , The Hangover ( fourth weekend ) , and Up ( fifth weekend ) .
The film left theatres on October 8 , 2009 with a domestic total of $ 49,200,230 with a further $ 46,459,927 from foreign markets .
It has grossed $ 95,660,157 worldwide .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipient !
Result SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Trailer :
* Vega4 – "
Life Is Beautiful " TV spot : * James Blunt – " Carry You Home "
* Plain White T 's – " 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 " * Tyrone Wells – " More " Movie : * Don Ho – " Tiny Bubbles " * E.G. Daily – "
Life Is Just a Bowl of Cherries " * Priscilla Ahn –
" Find My Way Back Home " * Jimmy Scott – " Heaven " * Regina Spektor – " Better " * Jonah Johnson – "
With You " * Greg Laswell – " Girls
Just Want to Have Fun " * Pete Yorn – " Do n't Wanna Cry " *
Phil Xenidis – " Kill Me " * Jeff Buckley – " We All Fall in Love Sometimes " * Edwina Hayes – " Feels Like Home " * Hana Pestle – " These Two Hands " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
My Sister 's Keeper Soundtrack