STAR WARS :
THE CLONE WARS ( FILM ) Star Wars :
The Clone Wars is a 2008 American 3D animated science fiction action - adventure film set within the Star Wars universe , leading into a produced by Lucasfilm Animation .
The film is set during the three - year time period between the films ( 2002 ) and ( 2005 ) , and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures , who also holds the home media distribution rights to this film , even after Disney 's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012 .
The film premiered on August 10 , 2008 at the Grauman 's Egyptian Theatre , while screening in wide - release on August 14 , 2008 across Australia , and August 15 in the United States , Canada and the United Kingdom .
The Clone Wars served as an introduction to the television series of the same name , which debuted on October 3 , 2008 .
Though critical reception was negative , the film was a box office success , and grossed $ 68.3 million worldwide against an $ 8.5 million budget .
It is the only theatrical Star Wars film not to be distributed by either 20th Century Fox ( soon to be owned by Disney ) or Walt Disney Studios .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
During the Clone Wars , Jedi Knights Anakin Skywalker and Obi - Wan Kenobi lead a small Republic clone army against the Separatist droid army on the planet .
Awaiting reinforcements , the two Jedi greet a shuttle carrying the young Jedi Ahsoka Tano , who insists that she has been assigned by Jedi Master Yoda to serve as Anakin 's Padawan .
Anakin begrudgingly accepts Ahsoka 's apprenticeship , and the two succeed in deactivating the Separatists ' energy field while Obi - Wan stalls the droid army commander , allowing a Republic victory .
Ahsoka earns Anakin 's respect .
Following the battle , Yoda arrives and informs the Jedi that crime lord Jabba
the Hutt 's son Rotta has been kidnapped .
Anakin and Ahsoka are tasked with retrieving the Huttlet , while Obi - Wan is sent to Tatooine to negotiate with Jabba over a potential treaty between the Hutts and the Republic .
Anakin and Ahsoka find Rotta on the planet Teth , where they are ambushed by Separatist forces led by Count Dooku 's apprentice Asajj Ventress , discovering that Dooku hopes to frame the Jedi for Rotta 's kidnapping .
The Jedi manage to escape the trap along with R2-D2 and hijack a derelict transport with which they travel to Tatooine .
Obi - Wan , alerted by Anakin , arrives on Teth and defeats Ventress in a lightsaber duel , though she manages to escape .
Meanwhile , Senator Padmé Amidala , Anakin 's secret wife , learns of Anakin 's mission and fears for his safety .
She decides to contact Jabba 's uncle Ziro in Coruscant .
The Hutt refuses to cooperate , apparently believing that it is the Jedi who are responsible for the situation .
However , Padmé soon discovers that Ziro has actually conspired with Dooku to have Rotta killed in order for Jabba to have Anakin and Ahsoka executed in return , which will force the Jedi Council , led by Yoda , to take Jabba into custody and allow Ziro to seize power over the Hutt clans .
Padmé is discovered and detained , but a chance call by C-3PO enables her to summon a squadron of clone troopers , and Ziro is arrested .
Upon their arrival on Tatooine , Anakin and Ahsoka are shot down by MagnaGuards .
Anakin devises a ruse to confront Dooku while carrying a decoy Rotta , leaving Ahsoka to take the real Rotta to Jabba 's palace .
While Anakin fights off Dooku , Ahsoka is ambushed by the MagnaGuards , whom she defeats .
The two deliver Rotta safely to Jabba , who nonetheless orders the Jedi 's execution for their supposed attempt to kidnap him .
However , Padmé contacts Jabba in time and reveals Ziro and the Separatists ' responsibility for the kidnapping .
Acknowledging the Jedi 's heroism and allowing the Republic to have Ziro punished for his betrayal , Jabba agrees to the Republic treaty while Anakin and Ahsoka are retrieved by Obi - Wan and Yoda .
In the meantime during his escape , Dooku reports to his master Darth Sidious about the failure of their plot against the Jedi and Jabba , but the Sith Lord assures him that the tide of war is still in their favor .
CAST
* Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker * Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano * James Arnold Taylor as Obi - Wan Kenobi , 4A-7
* Tom Kane as Yoda , Narrator , Admiral Yularen
* Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex , Commander Cody , Clone troopers
* Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus
* Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu
* Anthony Daniels as C-3PO * Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress , TC-70
* Ian Abercrombie as Palpatine / Darth Sidious * Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala * Corey Burton as Whorm Loathsom , Ziro the Hutt
* David Acord as Rotta the Huttlet * Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba
the Hutt
* Matthew Wood as Battle droids PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Star Wars : The Clone Wars was made to serve as both a stand - alone story and a lead - in to the weekly .
George Lucas had the idea for a film after viewing some of the completed footage of the early episodes on the big screen .
Those first few episodes , originally planned for release on television , were then woven together to form the theatrical release .
The story of the kidnapped Hutt was inspired by the Sonny Chiba samurai film titled Shogun 's Shadow .
Warner Bros. had tracked the series ' development from the beginning , and Lucas decided on a theatrical launch after viewing early footage declaring " This is so beautiful , why do n't we just go and use the crew and make a feature ? "
Lucas described the film was " almost an afterthought . "
Howard Roffman , president of Lucas Licensing , said of the decision , " Sometimes George works in strange ways . "
Producer Catherine Winder said the sudden decision added to an already large challenge of establishing a show " of this sophistication and complexity , " but she felt it was a good way to start the series , and thought budgetary constraints forced the production team to think outside the box in a positive way .
ANIMATION Section::::Animation .
Lucasfilm and Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series using the Maya 3D modeling program to create highly detailed worlds , characters and creatures .
The film 's animation style was designed to pay homage to the stylized looks of both Japanese anime and manga , and the supermarionation of the British 1960s series Thunderbirds .
At a Cartoon Network - hosted discussion , Lucas said he did not want the Clones Wars film or television series to look like such movies as Beowulf , because he wanted a stylized look rather than a realistic one .
He also felt it should not look like the popular Pixar movies such as The Incredibles , because he wanted the film and characters to have its own unique style .
Lucas also decided to create the animated film and series from a live - action perspective , which Winder said set it apart from other CGI films .
Essentially , it " meant using long camera shots , aggressive lighting techniques , and relying on editing instead of storyboards .
"
Animators also reviewed designs from the when creating the animation style for the film and the new series .
In charge was Steward Lee , working as the storyboard artist during filming .
Some actors from the live - action films , including Anthony Daniels , Matthew Wood , Christopher Lee and Samuel L. Jackson , returned to vocally reprise their roles of their respective characters , although Lee and Jackson did n't reprise their roles in the subsequent Clone Wars series .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score for Star Wars : The Clone Wars was composed by Kevin Kiner .
The original motion picture soundtrack was released by Sony Classical on August 12 , 2008 .
The disc begins with the main theme by John Williams , followed by more than 30 separate music cues composed by Kiner .
Kiner is known for his work on such television series as Stargate SG-1 , , Superboy and .
The soundtrack uses some instruments never heard before in a Star Wars score , including erhus , duduks and ouds .
MARKETING
TOYS
Section::::Marketing . Section::::Toys .
Star Wars : The Clone Wars merchandise was first released on July 26 , 2008 .
Hasbro released several 3-inch Clone Wars action figures , an electronic clone trooper helmet , a customizable lightsaber , and an electronic All Terrain Tactical Enforcer ( AT - TE ) .
Target and KB Toys also devoted shelf space for Clone Wars toys , but did not hold midnight releases or pursue the branding opportunities
Toys " R " Us did .
Toys " R "
Us mounted digital clocks in all 585 of its stores that counted down to the release of the Clone Wars toys , and more than 225 of the stores opened at midnight for the debut of the Star Wars products .
Two of the Toys " R " Us flagship outlets in Mission Bay , San Diego and Times Square in Manhattan , New York City held costume and trivia contests on July 26 , and gave away limited - edition Star Wars toys with every purchase .
A section of the Toys " R " Us website was also dedicated to The Clone Wars .
The toy line continues with The Clone Wars figures being well received by collectors for their detail to the characters and vehicles .
FOOD Section::::Food .
Due to Lucas ' sudden decision to produce the film , Lucas Licensing did not have time to enter into agreements with previous Star Wars marketing partners like Pepsi , Burger King and Kellogg 's , with which the Lucasfilm licensing company had a ten - year marketing plan for the other films .
When questioned by The New York Times about Star Wars merchandising in July 2008 , a Pepsi spokesperson was unaware a new Star Wars film was being released .
On August 15 , McDonald 's held its first ever Happy Meal promotion for a Star Wars film and for four weeks , 18 exclusive toys came in specially designed Happy Meal boxes .
COMICS AND BOOKS Section::::Comics and books .
Dark Horse Comics published a six - issue digest - sized comic book miniseries .
Randy Stradley , vice president of publishing for Dark Horse , said the sudden decision to release the Clone Wars film required the company to temporarily delay plans for two other Star Wars comic book series , and Rebellion .
The Clone Wars comics did not receive the promotional campaign it otherwise would have due to the abruptness of the theatrical and comic book releases .
Topps , the trading cards company , released a series of 90 Clone Wars cards on July 26 , which also included foil cards , motion cards , animation cel cards and rare sketch cards by top Star Wars artists and Lucasfilm animators .
DK Publishing and the Penguin Group released books , activities and other merchandise that tied in with the film .
Also released was the Clone Wars : The Visual Guide , published by DK , and Star Wars : The Clone Wars in the UK , published by Puffin and in the U.S. by Grosset & Dunlap .
The publishers also released a storybook , picture books and an activity book .
At the American International Toy Fair , Lego announced a product line for the film and the TV series , to be released in July 2008 in the United States and on August 2008 in the United Kingdom .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
The LucasArts video game developer adapted the film into for the Nintendo DS and for Wii .
A reviewer from PocketGamer.co.uk said his expectations for Jedi Alliance were low due to poor Clone Wars movie reviews , but he found the game " a varied and well - paced experience . "
PORTABLE MEDIA PLAYERS Section::::Portable media players .
A Star Wars : The Clone Wars MP3 player was released in August 2008 .
The player includes one gigabyte of memory , which holds 200 songs or 20 hours of music and comes with three interchangeable faceplates : a green one with Yoda and a lightsaber on it , a silver one with Captain Rex and a Galactic Empire logo on it , and one with two Clone troopers on Coruscant .
One review claimed it improved upon a Darth Vader MP3 player released in July 2008 , which featured only 512 megabytes of memory and a dated visual display .
A Star Wars iPod iSpeaker ( a speaker / dock for iPods , iPhones and MP3 players ) was also released .
The speaker includes an image of Captain Rex and three other Clone Troopers .
RACING SPONSORSHIP Section::::Racing sponsorship .
A Star Wars :
The Clone Wars open wheel car for the IndyCar Series was unveiled at the 2008 San Diego Comic - Con International .
The # 26 car , which also included Blockbuster Inc. decals and was driven by Andretti Green Racing driver Marco Andretti , ran August 24 on the Infineon Raceway in the Sonoma Mountains in California .
Andretti said , " I 'm hoping that my upcoming battle at Infineon will be as exciting as anything in a Star Wars movie so I can win it for both Blockbuster and Lucasfilm . "
The car finished 14th at Infineon , which Andretti attributed to a slow pit stop early in the race ; he added , " I just do n't think it was a very good performance for us today . "
The Clone Wars car was the second collaboration between Lucasfilm , Blockbuster and Andretti Green Racing .
It premiered as an Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull car at the Indianapolis 500 in May 2008 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film 's two - disc DVD and Blu - ray Disc was released on November 11 , 2008 in the United States and on December 8 , 2008 in the United Kingdom .
The film was released as a single - disc DVD , two - disc Special Edition DVD , and Blu - ray Disc .
The standard - definition versions include the film in widescreen format with Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround EX sound , and with feature - length audio commentary .
NOVELIZATION RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , Star Wars : The Clone Wars received an approval rating of 18 % based on 169 reviews , with an average rating of 4.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
Mechanical animation and a less - than stellar script make The Clone Wars a pale shadow of George Lucas ' once great franchise .
"
This constituted the lowest Rotten Tomatoes rating of any Star Wars film ; the previous six theatrical films ranged from 55 % to 95 % , and the made - for - television Ewok films and the Star Wars Holiday Special garnered higher ratings , although their averages encompassed far fewer reviews .
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 35 out of 100 based on 30 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Entertainment Weekly listed Star Wars :
The Clone Wars as one of the five worst films of 2008 with critic Owen Gleiberman saying , It 's hard to tell the droids from the Jedi drones in this robotic animated dud , in which the George Lucas Empire Strikes Back — at the audience .
What wears you out is Lucas ' immersion in a Star Wars cosmology that has grown so obsessive - compulsively cluttered yet trivial that it 's no longer escapism ; Because this movie has bad lightsaber duels and the lack of the original cast , it 's something you want to escape from .
Ai n't It Cool News posted two reviews of the film during the week before its release , but pulled them down due to an embargo placed on those attending the screening its writers attended .
The same reviews were re - posted on the site , on the day of the film 's release .
The retraction prompted some readers to allege a conspiracy by Lucasfilm to keep negative press out of circulation until the release of the film , but although the review by site creator Harry Knowles was negative , Drew McWeeny said that his review was positive and that no such conspiracy existed .
Several critics compared The Clone Wars to a Saturday morning cartoon and described it as little more than a plug for the upcoming animated series .
Linda Barnard , of the Toronto Star , said the movie " pretty much drives a stake into the heart of every loyal fan of the movies .
And now [ George Lucas is ] out to stick it to those too young to know about Jar Jar Binks . "
Variety magazine reviewer
Todd McCarthy said , " This is n't the Star Wars we 've always known and at least sometimes loved . "
Joe Neumiar , of the New York Daily News , wrote , " If this were a true Star Wars film , right about now somebody would say , ' ... I 've got a bad feeling about this . '
"
In his review for Entertainment Weekly , critic Owen Gleiberman gave the film an F grade and wrote , " George Lucas is turning into the enemy of fun . "
Carrie Rickey , of The Philadelphia Inquirer , said , " The best that can be said about the movie is that it 's harmless and mostly charmless .
The Clone Wars is to Star Wars what karaokemarionette - based shows Thunderbirds and Fireball XL5 , although George Lucas previously said the animation style was a deliberate homage to such shows .
Tom Long of The Detroit News said the animation " is downright weak compared to what 's generally seen on screens these days " and said the characters are so stiff they look like they were " carved by Pinocchio 's father . "
Roger Ebert said " the characters have hair that looks molded from Play - Doh , bodies that seem arthritic , and moving lips on half - frozen faces —
all signs that shortcuts were taken in the animation work .
"
McCarthy said " the movements , both of the characters and the compositions , look mechanical , and the mostly familiar characters have all the facial expressiveness of Easter Island statues . "
But some of the same reviewers who criticized the animation acknowledged some positive elements about it ; McCarthy said it allowed for " somewhat more dramatic compositions and color schemes , " and Carrie Rickey , of The Philadelphia Inquirer , said the scenery and backgrounds were " vivid and alive " , although she said the characters " move as you would imagine the statues at a waxworks might . "
Reviewers also criticized the dialogue , which Ebert said was limited to " simplistic declamations " and Claudia Puig of USA Today described as " stilted and overblown , a problem also in some of the live - action incarnations .
"
Many critics also said that the battle scenes were repetitive and lacked tension ; McCarthy described the action sequences as " a little exposition , an invasion ; some more exposition , a lightsaber fight ; a bit more blah - blah , a spaceship dogfight , and on and on . "
Linda Stasi , of the New York Post , also described the lack of character development in the film , writing that whereas the original Star Wars films dedicated time to allowing viewers to get to know the characters , " Director Dave Filoni is so concentrated on the action that we 're never given the chance to care who lives and who is blown into spare parts . "
Jason Anderson , of the Globe and Mail , wrote that although The Clone Wars is intended for younger audiences , " parents may be perturbed by the film 's relentless violence .
" Ebert also found protagonist Ahsoka Tano " annoying , " and Michael Rechtshaffen , of The Hollywood Reporter , said the attempts of humor amid the bickering between Ahsoka Tano and Anakin Skywalker are " strained " .
Puig said she enjoyed the character , and that " her repartee with Anakin enlivens things . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Clone Wars earned $ 68,282,844 worldwide , including $ 35,161,554 in North American domestic box office grosses and $ 33,121,290 in international grosses .
The film earned $ 14,611,273 on 3,452 screens in its opening weekend , including $ 6,228,973 on its opening day , August 15 .
It was the third - highest earning film of the weekend , behind Tropic Thunder and The Dark Knight , which earned $ 25.8 million and $ 16.3 million , respectively .
Dan Fellman , head of distribution for Warner Bros. , said the box office performance met expectations because two - thirds of the audience were families and the budget for the film was $ 8.5 million , frugal considering it was a CGI film , and because the film was meant to introduce the animated series .
Fellman said , " It was targeted to a specific audience for specific reasons .
We accomplished that mission , and it will continue in another medium . "
When The Clone Wars dropped to $ 5.6 million in its second week of release , ContactMusic.com described it as " the first bona fide Star Wars flop .
"
The film also earned $ 23,428,376 from DVD sales in the US .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award in the category " Worst Prequel , Remake , Rip - Off or Sequel " .
SEE ALSO
* List of Star Wars films and television series REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* at