RON JON
SURF
SHOP
Ron Jon Surf Shop is a surfer style retail store chain founded in 1959 in Ship Bottom , NJ by Ron DiMenna .
The store specializes in surfing and bodyboarding equipment , and their Cocoa Beach , Florida , store is currently the largest surfing shop in the world .
Debra Harvey is the current President .
Ron Jon surf shop has 14 stores nationwide .
In addition to the Ship Bottom and Cocoa Beach stores , Ron Jon also operates stores in Orange Beach , Alabama ; Fort Lauderdale , Orlando ; Key West , Fort Myers , Panama City Beach and Clearwater Beach , Florida ; Myrtle Beach , South Carolina ; and Ocean City , Maryland .
A former store in Orange , California closed in early 2009 .
The corporation also includes one Ron Jon Surf School separately owned and run by Craig Carroll , located in Cocoa Beach , Florida .
The company made plans to construct a Surf Park at the location of the Orlando Ron Jon store , but it has since been canceled , due in part that the schematics for the pool were installed backwards .
The flagship store in Cocoa Beach operates 365 days a year , 24 hours a day .
It has over 52,000 square feet of retail space .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Ruon - Jian is the name of a fictional character in the animated television series which aired on Nickelodeon between 2005 and 2008 .
His name ( pronounced Ron - Jon ) is humorously derived from the name of the surfing company " Ron Jon " , as Ruon - Jian acts and looks like a stereotypical surfer .
COCOA
BEACH SURF
MUSEUM Section::::Cocoa Beach Surf Museum .
Ron Jon Surf Shop also houses the Cocoa Beach Surf Museum at the Cocoa Beach location .
This museum contains exhibits highlighting surfing in the East Coast of the United States .
It preserves and documents the unique history and culture of East Coast surfing through exhibits and educational events , community outreach programs for all ages , digital archiving activities , and its new oral history project .
It highlights surfing history and culture from Cocoa Beach , nationally and internationally , and from differing perspectives , including exhibits that feature the history and lore that defines Cocoa Beach as one of the premier surf towns in the world .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS