SUPERHEATED WATER Superheated water is liquid water under pressure at temperatures between the usual boiling point , and the critical temperature , .
It is also known as " subcritical water " or " pressurized hot water . "
Superheated water is stable because of overpressure that raises the boiling point , or by heating it in a sealed vessel with a headspace , where the liquid water is in equilibrium with vapour at the saturated vapor pressure .
This is distinct from the use of the term superheating to refer to water at atmospheric pressure above its normal boiling point , which has not boiled due to a lack of nucleation sites ( sometimes experienced by heating liquids in a microwave ) .
Many of water 's anomalous properties are due to very strong hydrogen bonding .
Over the superheated temperature range the hydrogen bonds break , changing the properties more than usually expected by increasing temperature alone .
Water becomes less polar and behaves more like an organic solvent such as methanol or ethanol .
Solubility of organic materials and gases increases by several orders of magnitude and the water itself can act as a solvent , reagent and catalyst in industrial and analytical applications , including extraction , chemical reactions and cleaning .
CHANGE OF PROPERTIES WITH TEMPERATURE Section::::Change of properties with temperature .
All materials change with temperature , but superheated water exhibits greater changes than would be expected from temperature considerations alone .
Viscosity and surface tension of water drop and diffusivity increases with increasing temperature .
Self - ionization of water increases with temperature , and the pKw of water at 250 ° C is closer to 11 than the more familiar 14 at 25 ° C .
This means the concentration of hydronium ion ( ) and the concentration of hydroxide ( ) are increased while the pH remains neutral .
Specific heat capacity at constant pressure also increases with temperature , from 4.187 kJ / kg at 25 ° C to 8.138 kJ / kg at 350 ° C .
A significant effect on the behaviour of water at high temperatures is decreased dielectric constant ( relative permittivity ) .
EXPLANATION OF ANOMALOUS BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Explanation of anomalous behaviour .
Water is a polar molecule , where the centers of positive and negative charge are separated ; so molecules will align with an electric field .
The extensive hydrogen bonded network in water tends to oppose this alignment , and the degree of alignment is measured by the relative permittivity .
Water has a high relative permittivity of about 80 at room temperature ; because polarity shifts are rapidly transmitted through shifts in orientation of the linked hydrogen bonds .
This allows water to dissolve salts , as the attractive electric field between ions is reduced by about 80–fold .
Thermal motion of the molecules disrupts the hydrogen bonding network as temperature increases ; so relative permittivity decreases with temperature to about 7 at the critical temperature .
At 205 ° C the relative permittivity falls to 33 , the same as methanol at room temperature .
Thus water behaves like a water / methanol mixture between 100 ° C and 200 ° C .
Disruption of extended hydrogen bonding allows molecules to move more freely ( viscosity , diffusion and surface tension effects ) , and extra energy must be supplied to break the bonds ( increased heat capacity ) .
SOLUBILITY
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS Section::::Solubility .
Section::::Organic compounds .
Organic molecules often show a dramatic increase in solubility with temperature , partly because of the polarity changes described above , and also because the solubility of sparingly soluble materials tends to increase with temperature as they have a high enthalpy of solution .
Thus materials generally considered " insoluble " can become soluble in superheated water .
E.g. , the solubility of PAHs is increased by 5 orders of magnitude from 25 ° C to 225 ° C and naphthalene , for example , forms a 10 % wt solution in water at 270 ° C , and the solubility of the pesticide chloranthonil with temperature is shown in the table below .
+ Solubility of Chloranthonil in Water !
width =
" 70 " T ( ° C ) !
Mole Fraction
50 5.41 x 10 100 1.8
x 10 150 6.43 x 10 200 1.58 x 10
Thus superheated water can be used to process many organic compounds with significant environmental benefits compared to the use of conventional organic solvents .
SALTS Section::::Salts .
Despite the reduction in relative permittivity , many salts remain soluble in superheated water until the critical point is approached .
Sodium chloride , for example , dissolves at 37 wt% at 300 ° C As the critical point is approached , solubility drops markedly to a few ppm , and salts are hardly soluble in supercritical water .
Some salts show a reduction in solubility with temperature , but this behaviour is less common .
GASES Section::::Gases .
The solubility of gases in water is usually thought to decrease with temperature , but this only occurs to a certain temperature , before increasing again .
For nitrogen , this minimum is 74 ° C and for oxygen it is 94 ° C Gases are soluble in superheated water at elevated pressures .
Above the critical temperature , water is completely miscible with all gasses .
The increasing solubility of oxygen in particular allows superheated water to be used for wet oxidation processes .
CORROSION Section::::Corrosion .
Superheated water can be more corrosive than water at ordinary temperatures , and at temperatures above 300 ° C special corrosion resistant alloys may be required , depending on other dissolved components .
Continuous use of carbon steel pipes for 20 years at 282 ° C has been reported without significant corrosion , and stainless steel cells showed only slight deterioration after 40–50 uses at temperatures up to 350 ° C .
The degree of corrosion that can be tolerated depends on the use , and even corrosion resistant alloys can fail eventually .
Corrosion of an Inconel U - tube in a heat exchanger was blamed for an accident at a nuclear power station .
Therefore , for occasional or experimental use , ordinary grades of stainless steel are probably adequate with continuous monitoring , but for critical applications and difficult to service parts , extra care needs to be taken in materials selection .
EFFECT OF PRESSURE Section::::Effect of pressure .
At temperatures below 300 ° C water is fairly incompressible , which means that pressure has little effect on the physical properties of water , provided it is sufficient to maintain a liquid state .
This pressure is given by the saturated vapour pressure , and can be looked up in steam tables , or calculated .
As a guide , the saturated vapour pressure at 121 ° C is 200 kPa , 150 ° C is 470 kPa , and
200 ° C is 1,550 kPa .
The critical point is 21.7 MPa at a temperature of 374 ° C , above which water is supercritical rather than superheated .
Above about 300 ° C , water starts to behave as a near - critical liquid , and physical properties such as density start to change more significantly with pressure .
However , higher pressures increase the rate of extractions using superheated water below 300 ° C .
This could be due to effects on the substrate , particularly plant materials , rather than changing water properties .
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS Section::::Energy requirements .
The energy required to heat water is significantly lower than that needed to vaporize it , for example for steam distillation and the energy is easier to recycle using heat exchangers .
The energy requirements can be calculated from steam tables .
For example , to heat water from 25 ° C to steam at 250 ° C at 1 atm requires 2869 kJ / kg .
To heat water at 25 ° C to liquid water at 250 ° C at 5 MPa requires only 976 kJ / kg .
It is also possible to recover much of the heat ( say 75 % ) from superheated water , and therefore energy use for superheated water extraction is less than one sixth that needed for steam distillation .
This also means that the energy contained in superheated water is insufficient to vaporise the water on decompression .
In the above example , only 30 % of the water would be converted to vapour on decompression from 5 MPa to atmospheric pressure .
EXTRACTION Section::::Extraction .
Extraction using superheated water tends to be fast because diffusion rates increase with temperature .
Organic materials tend to increase in solubility with temperature , but not all at the same rate .
For example , in extraction of essential oils from rosemary and coriander , the more valuable oxygenated terpenes were extracted much faster than the hydrocarbons .
Therefore , extraction with superheated water can be both selective and rapid , and has been used to fractionate diesel and woodsmoke particulates .
Superheated water is being used commercially to extract starch material from marsh mallow root for skincare applications and to remove low levels of metals from a high - temperature resistant polymer .
For analytical purposes , superheated water can replace organic solvents in many applications , for example extraction of PAH 's from soils and can also be used on a large scale to remediate contaminated soils , by either extraction alone or extraction linked to supercritical or wet oxidation .
REACTIONS Section::::Reactions .
Superheated water , along with supercritical water , has been used to oxidise hazardous material in the wet oxidation process .
Organic compounds are rapidly oxidised without the production of toxic materials sometimes produced by combustion .
However , when the oxygen levels are lower , organic compounds can be quite stable in superheated water .
As the concentration of hydronium ( ) and hydroxide ( ) ions are 100 times larger than in water at 25 ° C , superheated water can act as a stronger acid and a stronger base , and many different types of reaction can be carried out .
An example of a selective reaction is oxidation of ethylbenzene to acetophenone , with no evidence of formation of phenylethanoic acid , or of pyrolysis products .
Several different types of reaction in which water was behaving as reactant , catalyst and solvent were described by Katritzky et al .
Triglycerides can be hydrolysed to free fatty acids and glycerol by superheated water at 275 ° C , which can be the first in a two - stage process to make biodiesel .
Superheated water can be used to chemically convert organic material into fuel products .
This is known by several terms , including direct hydrothermal liquefaction , and hydrous pyrolysis .
A few commercial scale applications exist .
Thermal depolymerization or thermal conversion
( TCC ) uses superheated water at about 250 ° C to convert turkey waste into a light fuel oil and is said to process 200 tons of low grade waste into fuel oil a day .
The initial product from the hydrolysis reaction is de - watered and further processed by dry cracking at 500 ° C .
The " SlurryCarb " process operated by EnerTech uses similar technology to decarboxylate wet solid biowaste , which can then be physically dewatered and used as a solid fuel called E - Fuel .
The plant at Rialto is said to be able to process 683 tons of waste per day .
The HTU or Hydro Thermal Upgrading process appears similar to the first stage of the TCC process .
A demonstration plant is due to start up in The Netherlands said to be capable of processing 64 tons of biomass ( dry basis ) per day into oil .
CHROMATOGRAPHY
Section::::Chromatography .
Reverse phased HPLC often uses methanol / water mixtures as the mobile phase .
Since the polarity of water spans the same range from 25 to 205 ° C , a temperature gradient can be used to effect similar separations , for example of phenols .
The use of water allows the use of the flame ionisation detector ( FID ) , which gives mass sensitive output for nearly all organic compounds .
The maximum temperature is limited to that at which the stationary phase is stable .
C18 bonded phases which are common in HPLC seem to be stable at temperatures up to 200 ° C , far above that of pure silica , and polymeric styrene / divinylbenzene phases offer similar temperature stability .
Water is also compatible with use of an ultraviolet detector down to a wavelength of 190 nm .
SEE ALSO
* Pressurized water reactor *
Supercritical carbon dioxide
* Superheated steam *
Water heating
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam * Calculator for vapour pressure and enthalpy of superheated water .