HIGH - DEFINITION
OPTICAL DISC FORMAT WAR
The high - definition optical disc format war was between the Blu - ray and HD DVD optical disc standards for storing high - definition video and audio ; it took place between 2006 and 2008 and was won by Blu - ray Disc .
The two formats emerged between 2000 and 2003 and attracted both the mutual and exclusive support of major consumer electronics manufacturers , personal computer manufacturers , television and movie producers and distributors , and software developers .
Blu - ray and HD DVD players became commercially available starting in 2006 .
In early 2008 , the war ended when several studios and distributors shifted to Blu - ray disc .
On February 19 , 2008 , Toshiba officially announced that it would stop the development of the HD DVD players , conceding the format war to the Blu - ray Disc format .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The Blu - ray / HD DVD conflict resembled the earlier videotape format war between VHS and Betamax , partly because of Sony 's strong involvement in both episodes .
These format wars have often proved destructive to both camps because consumers , afraid of committing to a losing standard , would refrain from purchasing either .
Format wars have been avoided in notable cases such as the DVD Forum for the unified DVD standard ( except for a minor war from 1998 to 1999 with the DIVX format ) , the Grand Alliance for the HDTV standard , and the Wi - Fi Alliance for wireless networking standards .
The emergence of high definition players followed the entry of HDTV televisions into the mainstream market in the mid-2000s .
Consumer - grade high definition players required an inexpensive storage medium capable of holding the larger amount of data needed for HD video .
The breakthrough came with Shuji Nakamura 's invention of the blue laser diode , whose shorter wavelength opened the door to higher density optical media following a six - year patent dispute .
Sony started two projects applying the new diodes : Ultra Density Optical and , with Pioneer , DVR Blue .
The first DVR Blue prototypes were unveiled at the CEATEC exhibition in October 2000 .
On February 19 , 2002 , the project was officially announced as Blu - ray , and the Blu - ray Disc Association was founded by a consortium of nine electronics companies .
The DVD Forum , chaired by Toshiba , was deeply split over whether to go with the more expensive blue lasers , whose discs initially required a protective caddy to avoid mishandling , making the medium more expensive and physically different from DVDs .
In March 2002 , the forum voted to approve a proposal endorsed by Warner Bros. and other motion picture studios that involved compressing HD content onto dual - layer DVD-9 discs .
In spite of this decision , the DVD Forum 's Steering Committee announced in April 2002 that it was pursuing its own blue - laser high - definition solution .
In August , Toshiba and NEC announced their competing standard Advanced Optical Disc , which was finally adopted by the DVD Forum and renamed " HD DVD " the following year after being voted down twice by Blu - ray Disc Association members , prompting the U.S. Department of Justice to make preliminary investigations .
Three new members had to be invited and the voting rules changed before the initiative finally passed .
The competing standards had significant differences that made each incompatible with the other .
ATTEMPTS TO AVOID A FORMAT WAR Section::::Attempts to avoid a format war .
In an attempt to avoid a costly format war , the Blu - ray Disc Association and DVD Forum started to negotiate a compromise in early 2005 .
One of the issues was that Blu - ray 's supporters wanted to use a Java - based platform for interactivity ( BD - J ) , while the DVD Forum was promoting Microsoft 's " iHD " ( which became HDi ) .
A much larger issue , though , was the physical formats of the discs themselves ; the Blu - ray Disc Association 's member companies did not want to risk losing billions of dollars in royalties as they had done with standard DVD .
An agreement seemed close , but negotiations proceeded slowly .
At the end of June 2005 , Sun Microsystems , the developer of Java , announced that the Blu - ray Association had chosen the Java - based BD - J interactivity layer instead of Microsoft 's HDi .
At the same time , Microsoft and Toshiba jointly announced that they would cooperate in developing high - definition DVD players .
In a top - level meeting in July , Microsoft 's Bill Gates argued that the Blu - ray standard had to change to " work more smoothly with personal computers " .
The Blu - ray Disc 's representatives defended the technology .
On August 22 , 2005 , the Blu - ray Disc Association and DVD Forum announced that the negotiations to unify their standards had failed .
Rumors surfaced that talks had stalled ; publicly , the same reasons of physical format incompatibility were cited .
At the end of September , Microsoft and Intel jointly announced their support for HD DVD .
Hewlett Packard ( HP ) proposed an ultimatum for the Blu - ray Disc Association :
adopt Microsoft 's proprietary HDi ( instead of the Java - based system ) and a mandatory managed copy feature , or
HP would support HD DVD instead .
In a research report , Gartner analysts Van Baker , Laura Behrens and Mike McGuire wrote that if HP 's proposal were accepted , Blu - ray would become the winner of the format war .
Though the Blu - ray Disc group did add mandatory managed copy to Blu - ray , they did not add HDi .
HD DVD players and movies were released in the United States on April 18 , 2006 .
The first Blu - ray Disc titles were released on June 20 , 2006 and the first movies using dual layer Blu - ray discs ( 50 GB ) were introduced in October 2006 .
ALLIANCES Section::::Alliances .
The Blu - ray Disc Foundation was formed by Hitachi , LG , Panasonic , Pioneer , Philips , Samsung , Sharp , Sony , and Thomson on May 20 , 2002 .
Other early supporters included Dell , HP , Mitsubishi and TDK .
The Blu - ray Disc Association was inaugurated on October 4 , 2004 by 14 companies of Board of Directors which added 20th Century Fox to the 13 above - mentioned companies , Contributors of 22 companies , General members of 37 companies , and a total of 73 companies .
Acer , Alpine , Asus , HP , Hitachi Maxell , Kenwood , Lanix , LG , Lite - On , Meridian , Onkyo and Samsung , provided non - exclusive support .
Toshiba , NEC , Sanyo , Memory - Tech Corporation started HD DVD Promotion Group on September 27 , 2004 .
It also included Microsoft , RCA , Intel , Venturer Electronics .
In Europe , HD DVD was supported either exclusively or non - exclusively by Medusa Home Entertainment , Studio Canal , Universum Films , Kinowelt Home Entertainment , DVD International , Opus Arte , MK2 , Momentum Pictures , Twister Home Video , among others .
During the height of the format war , some studios supported both formats , including Paramount Pictures , BBC , First Look Studios , Image Entertainment ( including the Discovery Channel ) , Magnolia Pictures , Brentwood Home Video , Ryko and Koch / Goldhil Entertainment .
DECIDING FACTORS
Section::::Deciding factors .
The format war 's resolution in favour of Blu - ray was primarily decided by two factors : shifting business alliances , including decisions by major film studios and retail distributors , and Sony 's decision to include a Blu - ray player in the PlayStation 3 video game console .
STUDIO , DISTRIBUTOR ALLIANCES Section::::Studio , distributor alliances .
Studio alliances shifted over time .
Before October 2005 and the release of either format , each had the exclusive support of three of the Big Six .
HD DVD had Universal Studios , Paramount Pictures , and Warner Bros Pictures , while Blu - ray Disc started out with Columbia Pictures , Walt Disney Pictures , and 20th Century Fox .
Disney and Fox were both impressed by the extra DRM ( BD+ and region coding ) that the Blu - ray Disc format provided on paper .
Then HD DVD supporters Warner Bros. and Paramount added support for Blu - ray .
But in August 2007 , after supporting Blu - ray for over a year , Paramount announced it would release all high - definition content ( except titles directed by Steven Spielberg ) exclusively on HD DVD .
At the same time , DreamWorks Animation SKG , which had not released any high - definition discs , announced it would release exclusively on HD DVD .
Explaining their decisions , the companies cited perceived advantages to HD DVD 's technology and lower manufacturing costs .
The companies together received about $ 150 million in cash and promotional guarantees , including a Toshiba HD DVD marketing campaign with a tie - in to Shrek the Third .
But retail support for HD DVD was eroding .
In June 2007 , Blockbuster , at the time the largest U.S. movie rental company , moved to Blu - ray exclusively in 1450 stores after test - marketing both formats at 250 stores and finding that more than 70 % of high definition rentals were Blu - ray discs .
In July 2007 , Target Corporation , began carrying only Blu - ray standalone players in its stores , promoting them with end cap displays featuring Blu - ray Disc movies from Sony and Disney .
On January 4 , 2008 , Warner Bros. , which has the largest market share of DVDs , announced plans to drop HD DVD support completely as of the beginning of June 2008 .
At the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas , some HD DVD - related events and private meetings with analysts and retailers were canceled , including an event scheduled for the eve of the show sponsored by the North American HD DVD Promotional Group .
Toshiba management expressed disappointment over Warner 's decision but said that Toshiba would continue promoting the competing format .
The following Monday , Toshiba reduced the price of its HD DVD players by 40 to 50 percent , calling the price a " deal breaker for the mainstream consumer " .
At the time , analyst Roger Kay of Endpoint Technologies Associates likened the price cut to the high - stakes Blackjack bet of " doubling down " in an effort to increase market share and " win back the studios " .
Richard Greenfield of Pali Capital called the move a gimmick and predicted that HD DVD would not become widely adopted .
Gartner analyst Hiroyuki Shimizu predicted that while the price cut might extend HD DVD 's life somewhat , the limited title library would ultimately " inflict fatal damage on the format " , leaving Blu - ray the victor by the end of 2008 .
Warner Bros. ' sister studio New Line Cinema followed suit , canceling tentative plans to release titles on HD DVD .
Other small studios and producers moving exclusively to Blu - ray included National Geographic Society , Constantin Film , and Digital Playground .
Warner 's move was echoed by Walmart 's February 15 , 2008 decision to phase HD DVD out completely by June 2008 .
Walmart is the largest DVD retailer in the United States , and its decision prompted the New York Times to run a mock obituary for the HD DVD format .
The newspaper quoted technology analyst Rob Enderle 's contention that if Walmart " says HD DVD is done , you can take that as a fact .
" Four days earlier , Best Buy began recommending Blu - ray Disc as the customer 's digital format choice , and Netflix , the largest online video rental service , began phasing out its HD DVD inventory after stocking both formats since early 2006 .
In January 2008 , UK retailer Woolworths Group plc said it would stock only Blu - ray discs in its 820 stores beginning in March 2008 .
PLAYSTATION 3 Section::::PlayStation 3 .
Sony 's decision to incorporate a Blu - ray Disc player as a standard feature of the PlayStation 3 video game console also helped ensure the format 's eventual triumph .
By the time Toshiba ceded the market , about 10.5 million of the Sony consoles had been sold worldwide versus an estimated 1 million HD DVD players — including both standalone units and the add - on player for Microsoft 's Xbox 360 console , which did not use the HD DVD add - on for gaming unlike the PS3 which had games that used the added storage capacity of Blu - ray discs .
This equipment gap was a factor in Blu - ray titles ( including the ones bundled with the PS3 ) outselling their HD DVD counterparts two to one in the United States and three or four to one in Europe .
Sony 's strategy came at a cost .
The company initially priced the PlayStation 3 at $ 599 for the 60 GB model and $ 499 for a 20 GB ( released outside the PAL region ) , roughly double the price of the PlayStation 2 and substantially higher than competing consoles .
But the PS3 console sold at an estimated loss of more than US$ 200 per unit , resulting in losses estimated at about $ 3 billion .
But analysts , such as Richard Cooper with Screen Digest , expected Sony to recoup far more than that through the sale of games on the system .
AVS FORUM SHUTDOWN Section::::AVS Forum shutdown .
In November 2007 , the popular audio - visual discussion site AVS Forum temporarily closed its HD - DVD and Blu - ray discussion forums because of , as the site reported , " physical threats that have involved police and possible legal action " between advocates of the rival formats .
TOSHIBA ANNOUNCEMENT AND AFTERMATH Section::::Toshiba announcement and aftermath .
On February 19 , 2008 , Toshiba announced it would cease developing , manufacturing and marketing HD DVD players and recorders .
On that same day , Universal Studios announced it would release its titles in the Blu - ray Disc format , following two years of exclusive HD DVD support .
The studio subsequently released its final two HD DVD titles : Fletch on March 11 , 2008 and Atonement on March 18 .
On February 20 , 2008 , Paramount Pictures announced it would back Blu - ray , becoming the last of the major studios to do so .
Paramount ceased HD DVD production on February 28 , 2008 , with Things We Lost in the Fire and Into the Wild becoming the studio 's last HD DVD releases , both released on March 4 , 2008 .
The studio scrapped the HD DVD version of Bee Movie , which , on May 20 , 2008 , joined Face / Off and Next in becoming the studio 's first Blu - ray releases since becoming HD DVD exclusive .
In April 2009 , Warner Home Video announced it would trade up to 25 HD DVDs for the Blu - ray equivalents , charging only for shipping and handling .
Microsoft ceased production of Xbox 360 HD DVD players while considering how its HDi and VC-1 technologies could be applied to other platforms .
Microsoft 's VC-1 codec is already in use in Blu - ray titles ; Warner Bros. encodes the main features of all titles in the format but encodes supplements and bonus content in MPEG-2 .
Microsoft has since entered into talks with Sony regarding Blu - ray ; although , Windows Vista has supported basic filesystem and shell functionality for both Blu - ray Disc and HD DVD since launch , relying on third parties to implement movie playback .
A Blu - ray drive was not released for the Xbox 360 , but its successor , the Xbox One , features a built - in Blu - ray drive for movies and gaming , and the Xbox One S supports Ultra HD Blu - ray for 4 K playback .
Toshiba 's pull - out did not have an immediate significant effect on stand - alone Blu - ray player sales , which rose 2 percent from February to March 2008 , after falling 40 percent between January and February , according to NPD Group .
NPD noted that upconverting DVD player sales rose 5 percent in the first quarter of 2008 over the same quarter of 2007 but did not release a comparison of first quarter Blu - ray sales compared to the same quarter of 2007 .
At the time of the report , upconverting DVD players cost around $ 70 versus $ 300 for Blu - ray players .
But in spring 2009 , the number of Blu - ray players nearly doubled its year to date 2009 sales over the same period 2008 : about 9 million high - definition units sold in the U.S. from January through March , up from the 4.8 million that sold during first - quarter 2008 , according to Adams Media Research .
In April 2008 , the firm estimated a total of 10.5 million Blu - ray households , including Blu - ray consoles and Blu - ray - enabled PlayStation 3s .
SEE ALSO
* Comparison of high definition optical disc formats *
De facto standard * Dominant design * Videotape format war REFERENCES