INTERNATIONAL RECOGNITION OF KOSOVO
Since its declaration of independence from Serbia ( enacted on 17 February 2008 ) , international recognition of Kosovo has been mixed , and the international community continues to be divided on the issue . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
A number of states expressed concern over the unilateral character of Kosovo 's declaration , or explicitly announced that they would not recognise an independent Kosovo .
The United Nations Security Council ( UNSC ) remains divided on this issue : of its five members with veto power , three ( the United States , the United Kingdom , and France ) have recognised the declaration of independence , while the People 's Republic of China has expressed concern , urging the continuation of the previous negotiation framework .
The Russian Federation has rejected the declaration and considers it illegal .
On 15 May 2008 , Russia , China , and India released a joint statement calling for new negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina .
Although EU member states individually decide whether to recognise Kosovo , by consensus the EU has commissioned the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo ( EULEX ) to ensure peace and continued external oversight .
Due to the dispute in the United Nations Security Council ( UNSC ) , the reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo ( UNMIK ) and partial handover to the EULEX mission met with difficulties .
In spite of Russian and Serbian protests , the UN Secretary - General Ban Ki - moon proceeded with the reconfiguration plan .
On 15 July 2008 , he stated : " In the light of the fact that the Security Council is unable to provide guidance , I have instructed my Special Representative to move forward with the reconfiguration of UNMIK ... in order to adapt UNMIK to a changed reality . "
According to the Secretary - General , the " United Nations has maintained a position of strict neutrality on the question of Kosovo 's status " .
On 26 November 2008 , the UNSC gave the green light to the deployment of the EULEX mission in Kosovo .
The EU mission is to assume police , justice , and customs duties from the UN , while operating under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 ( UNSCR 1244 ) that first placed Kosovo under UN administration in 1999 .
As of late July 2008 , UNMIK no longer provides the citizens of Kosovo with travel documents , while their ability to travel using the new Kosovan passport does not coincide with diplomatic recognition : for example Greece , Romania , and Slovakia accept Kosovo - issued documents for identity purposes , despite not officially recognising its independence .
The three neighbouring states that recognise Kosovo — Albania , Montenegro , and Macedonia — all accept the Kosovan passportUnited Nations General Assembly ( UNGA ) resolution adopted on 8 October 2008 backed the request of Serbia to seek an International Court of Justice advisory opinion on Kosovo 's declaration of independence .
On 22 July 2010 , the ICJ ruled that the declaration of independence of Kosovo " did not violate any applicable rule of international law " , because its authors , who were " representatives of the people of Kosovo " , were not bound by the Constitutional Framework ( promulgated by UNMIK ) or by UNSCR 1244 that is addressed only to United Nations Member States and organs of the United Nations .
SERBIA 'S REACTION
Section::::Serbia 's reaction .
Due to Serbian claims that Kosovo is part of its sovereign territory , its initial reactions included recalling ambassadors from countries that recognised Kosovo for several months , indicting Kosovar leaders on charges of high treason , and litigating the case at the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) .
Serbia also expelled ambassadors from countries that recognised Kosovo after the UNGA vote adopting Serbia 's initiative to seek an ICJ advisory opinion .
In December 2012 , as a result of European Union mediated negotiations on Kosovo 's status , Serbian Prime Minister Ivica Dačić agreed to appoint a liaison officer to Kosovo .
In March 2013 , Dačić said that while his government would never recognise Kosovo 's independence , " lies were told that Kosovo is ours " and that Serbia needed to define its " real borders " .
In April 2013 , Kosovo and Serbia reached an agreement to normalise relations , and thereby allow both nations to eventually join the European Union .
Under the terms of the agreement , " Belgrade acknowledged that the government in Pristina exercises administrative authority over the territory of Kosovo – and that it is prepared to deal with Pristina as a legitimate governing authority . "
On 17 June 2013 Kosovo and Serbia exchanged liaison officers .
POSITIONS
TAKEN
BY
SOVEREIGN ENTITIES ENTITIES THAT RECOGNISE KOSOVO AS AN INDEPENDENT STATE MEMBER STATES OF THE UNITED NATIONS Section::::Positions taken by sovereign entities .
Section::::Entities that recognise Kosovo as an independent state .
Section::::Member states of the United Nations . !
# ! !
Country ! !
Date of recognition ! !
Reference 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 Notes OTHER STATES AND ENTITIES
Section::::Other states and entities . !
State or entity ! !
Date of recognition ! !
Reference WITHDRAWN RECOGNITION Section::::Withdrawn recognition .
The Serbian Foreign Ministry claims that there are twelve nations that have withdrawn the recognition ( Suriname , Liberia , São Tomé and Príncipe , Guinea - Bissau , Burundi , Papua New Guinea , Lesotho , Dominica , Grenada , Comoros , Solomon Islands and Madagascar ) .
The Kosovan Foreign Ministry has called this " fake news " and " Serbian propaganda " .
Guinea - Bissau withdrew recognition in November 2017 , but then sent a note verbale to the Government of Kosovo stating that the previous note revoking recognition had no effect .
Just a few days after allegedly revoking the recognition in June 2018 , the Government of Liberia issued a statement " reaffirming bilateral relations with Kosovo " .
In July 2018 , Serbia 's Foreign Minister published a note from Papua New Guinea withdrawing its recognition of Kosovo , but according to Kosovo 's Minister of Foreign Affairs it did not have an official seal affixed .
Nonetheless , the Serbian FM still counts all those countries as having revoked their recognitions .
On November 2 , the Commonwealth of Dominica agreed to suspend its recognition of Kosovo .
São Tomé and Príncipe 's decision to recognize Kosovo in 2012 was declared invalid by the President of São Tomé and Príncipe because it was not confirmed by the Parliament .
Thus , São Tomé and Príncipe never recognized Kosovo as independent and is not counted here as " withdrawn " . !
State or Entity ! !
Period of recognition ! !
Reference ENTITIES
THAT DO NOT RECOGNISE KOSOVO AS AN INDEPENDENT STATE Section::::Entities that do not recognise Kosovo as an independent state .
Diplomatic recognition is an explicit , official , unilateral act in the foreign policy of states in regards to another party .
Not having issued such a statement does not necessarily mean the state has objections to the existence , independence , sovereignty or government of the other party .
Some states , by custom or policy , do not extend formal recognitions , on the grounds that a vote for membership in the UN or another organisation whose membership is limited to states is itself an act of recognition .
MEMBER STATES OF THE UNITED NATIONS
A Section::::Member states of the United Nations .
Section::::A. ! Country ! !
Position
In May 2009 , the Ambassador of Algeria to Serbia , Abdelkader Mesdoua stated that Algeria would reconsider the issue of Kosovo if Serbia changed its own position .
In a 2 December 2009 hearing at the ICJ , the Argentine delegation said that Kosovo 's declaration of independence " breaches an obligation to respect the territorial integrity of Serbia , the obligation of peaceful settlement of disputes and principle of non - intervention .
The resolution has no legal basis in the principle of self - determination , " and that it " did not , and could not , abolish Serbia 's sovereignty over Kosovo " .
At a meeting in May 2009 with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , the representative of Armenia to the UN , Armen Martirosyan reportedly promised that the request for recognition would be forwarded to his government .
On a July 2009 state visit to Armenia , Serbian president Boris Tadić discussed the issues of Kosovo and Nagorno - Karabakh with Sargsyan .
The two leaders agreed that regional conflicts must be resolved without the use of force and only by peaceful means in keeping with international law .
Tadić also met with Armenian prime minister Tigran Sargsyan where the same issues were discussed .
The Kosovo and Nagorno - Karabakh issues can only be solved through negotiations and " any imposed solutions are absolutely unacceptable and we fully agree on that , " Tadić said afterwards .
On 4 April 2011 Sargsyan said that Armenia would not recognise the independence of Kosovo against Serbia 's interests .
In a 3 December 2009 hearing at the ICJ , the Azerbaijani delegation said that entities that declare secession while violating the internal laws of the state can not be considered to be states , and that a fait accompli may not be accepted – power is not the right , and the force is not the law .
At a meeting with Serbian president Boris Tadić in Baku in May 2010 , President of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev said that Serbia and Azerbaijan mutually help each other in the international arena and that his country provides strong support for the territorial integrity of Serbia .
He stated that the unilaterally proclaimed independence of Kosovo is an illegal move and called on all UN member states to respect international law .
B Section::::B. ! Country ! !
Position
In April 2010 , Bahamian Foreign Minister Brent Symonette said , " We have considered and continue to consider the situation on the ground on both sides and maintain a status of awaiting the outcome of negotiations between Kosovo and its neighbouring countries before committing support to either of the two countries " .
On 26 September 2012 , the Bahamian Foreign Minister , Frederick A. Mitchell , said that his state has sympathy for the independence of Kosovo , and that the Bahamas will support the state of Kosovo .
The Foreign Ministry of Belarus published a statement saying " that the settlement of the Kosovo and Metochia status should progress under international law , based on UN Security Council resolution 1244 ( of 1999 ) which is a fundamental document for the Kosovo settlement certifying the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia , and based on the key provisions of the UN Charter and Helsinki Final Act , with the essential role of the UN Security Council bearing a predominant responsibility for safeguarding international peace and security " .
In a 3 December 2009 hearing at the ICJ , the Belarusian delegation said that secession by international law was allowed only in former colonies , or in cases where the minority population was oppressed for a long period of time and was denied the participation in government , however the situation in Kosovo has not met these criteria traditionally interpreted as the right for " external " self - determination .
The internal law of Serbia as well as UNSC resolutions are satisfactory for the " internal " self - determination of the Albanian population .
In May 2012 the Belarusian ambassador to Serbia , Uladzimir Chushaw , said that Belarus will never recognise the independence of Kosovo .
He was quoted as saying , " The Kosovo wounds are hurting us very much . "
On 19 September 2012 , Wangchuk said that his country is deliberating the issue of Kosovo .
In a 4 December 2009 hearing at the ICJ , the Bolivian delegation said that Kosovo is an integral part of Serbia and that the Republic of Kosovo does not exist .
A unilateral declaration of independence can not change the international regime established by the UNSC resolution , or decide the outcome of negotiations .
In March 2011 , Skelemani said that Botswana still has to advise itself properly in order to come up with an informed decision on the issue .
He said that the matter of Kosovo has been before the ICJ and therefore it requires a close look as it involves law .
In September 2013 , Botswana Foreign Minister Phandu TC Skelemani , promised the recognition of Kosovo stating that it was now only a matter of procedure before it happens .
In September 2014 , Skelemani said that his country values as positive the developments in Kosovo , which pave the way to the possibility for reviewing of recognition by his country .
C Section::::C. !
Country ! !
Position
In February 2009 , Secretary of State at Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Cambodia , Ouch Borith , reiterated an earlier Cambodian Ministry of Foreign Affairs statement that Kosovo is a sensitive issue which they are studying carefully .
Borith questioned , " if Kosovo is recognized , what about South Ossetia ? "
On 2 April 2009 , the Director of the Department of International Organizations at Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Cambodia , Tuy Ri , stated that Cambodia had no plans to file a brief ( either supportive of Serbia or Kosovo ) in the ICJ case .
In November 2011 , in a meeting with First Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo , Behgjet Pacolli , Cameroon 's prime minister , Philémon Yang , reportedly said that the recognition of Kosovo was underway .
In a 15 November 2012 meeting with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Enver Hoxhaj , the Minister Delegate of Cameroon 's Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Adoum Gargoum , said that his country has no political or legal reasons not to recognise Kosovo 's independence , expressing the sympathy of his people for the people of Kosovo .
In December 2010 , Cape Verde 's National Director of Political Affairs and Cooperation , José Luis Rocha , said that his country will wait until there is consensus at the UNSC before considering its position .
In February 2013 , the Prime Minister of Cape Verde , José Maria Neves promised that his country would soon recognise the state of Kosovo .
On 6 April 2012 , the Congolese National Assembly Speaker , Evariste Boshab Mabudj - ma - Bilenge , said that " Serbia 's position on Kosovo and Metohija is the Democratic Republic of Congo 's position " .
In September 2013 the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the DR Congo , Raymond Tshibanda , stated that he would suggest to the Congolese President that they recognise Kosovo .
In December 2009 , Ambassador of Cuba to Serbia , Mercedes Martínez Valdés , said that Cuba supports the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Serbia regarding the issue of Kosovo and advocates for the respect of international law .
In a September 2010 meeting between the Foreign Ministers of Albania and Cuba , Edmond Haxhinasto and Bruno Rodriguez Parrilla , Mr. Rodriguez said that Cuba was reconsidering recognition of Kosovo in light of the decision made by the ICJ .
In February 2015 , it was reported that Cuba continued to support Serbia over Kosovo .
On 23 February 2009 , in a meeting with Serbian president Boris Tadić , Christofias said that " Cyprus has not recognized the unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo and we will not recognize it in the future .
We are on your side , not only because your case is similar to ours , but because it is a matter of principles " .
On 16 June 2009 , Minister of Defence of Cyprus Costas Papacostas said that Cyprus will never recognise the independence of Kosovo .
In October 2009
this stance was reiterated by Christofias who said Cyprus would not recognise Kosovo , even if all other EU members did so .
On 28 June 2012 , the Cypriot Foreign Ministry stated that while they have not recognised the independence of Kosovo , they were fully committed to further advancing the European perspective of the region .
They pledged that during their EU Council Presidency , Cyprus will exercise its duties in a neutral and credible manner , taking into consideration the positions of all EU member states , but that any actions undertaken during the Presidency should not in any way be interpreted as suggesting any change in their position in relation to non - recognition and to the status of Kosovo under international law .
E Section::::E. !
Country ! !
Position
At a meeting in January 2009 with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , Ecuador 's Ambassador to Austria , Maria Elena Moreira , said that the government of her country has carefully followed developments in Kosovo , and taking into account the recognition of Kosovo by European and Latin American countries , Ecuador will seriously consider the request for recognition of Kosovo as an independent and sovereign country .
At a meeting on 25 March 2009 with Hyseni , the Ambassador of Ecuador to the UN , Diego Morejón - Pazmino , said that Ecuador has been carefully following developments in Kosovo , and he stressed the importance of building democratic institutions and a society with rights guaranteed to all communities .
Mr. Morejón - Pazmino also said that Ecuador would carefully examine developments before making a decision on whether to recognise Kosovo .
In September 2011 , the President of Equatorial Guinea , Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo , is reported to have responded positively to a request for recognition by Kosovo .
On 21 November 2011 , in a meeting with First Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo , Behgjet Pacolli , President Obiang reportedly promised to immediately begin formalising the recognition of Kosovo .
In January 2012 , Pacolli 's advisor Jetlir Zyberaj stated that Kosovo had received confirmation of recognition from Equatorial Guinea but was awaiting receipt of the note verbale .
In September 2011 , the President of Eritrea , Isaias Afewerki , is reported to have responded positively to a request for recognition of Kosovo .
In April 2014 , the Eritrean Foreign Minister , Osman Saleh Mohammed , said Eritrea supports the right to self - determination and that his country would work to improve its relations with Kosovo .
According to Serbia , Hyseni and other members of his delegation were denied entry into Ethiopia in January 2010 .
They allegedly wanted to attend an African Union summit in order to lobby African nations to recognise Kosovo .
Their visas were denied after pressure by the Serbian government , the Serbian Foreign Minister , Vuk Jeremić , said .
Jeremić , who attended the summit , thanked his Ethiopian counterpart for denying the visas and supporting Serbia 's cause .
However , Kosovo 's Foreign Ministry denies that they submitted any requests for visas .
On 5 August 2012 it was reported that the Ethiopian government had formally recognised Kosovo , with Kosovo 's Foreign Ministry awaiting the arrival of the note verbale .
In December 2014 , amid a diplomatic dispute with Serbia , Ethiopia threatened to recognise Kosovo .
G Section::::G. !
Country ! !
Position
At a meeting on 26 March 2009 with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , the Ambassador of Guatemala to the UN , Gert Rosenthal , said that his country 's government is carefully studying the developments in Kosovo , and the ongoing preparations to present a case to the ICJ .
He also said that Guatemala is working with others in Latin America to reach a decision .
In April 2014 , Guatemalan President Otto Pérez Molina said that his country would consider recognising Kosovo .
I Section::::I. !
Country ! !
Position
In April 2012 during a visit in Belgrade Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Ramin Mehmanparast said that Iran will adhere to its decision not to recognise independence of Kosovo .
Tehran on this issue is very clear and Iran is thereby giving its support to stability and safety in the region , Mehmanparast said .
Mehmanparast added that Iran supported the Belgrade - Pristina dialogue as it believes that the international law can channel the burning issues in the best manner possible .
In a 5 August 2012 interview , the Ambassador of Iran to Albania , Ali Amouei , said that he believes the sustainable way out of the Kosovo issue is talks with Serbia , and that Iran will not hesitate to officially recognise Kosovo once it has concluded that it would serve to establish peace and stability in the Balkans and the realisation of the legitimate rights of Muslims in Kosovo .
In February 2013 , Amouei said that if the OIC concludes unanimously that recognising Kosovo helps peace and stability in the region , Iran will not avoid the recognition .
He said that Iran 's good relations with Serbia and Russia do not affect their position on Kosovo .
On 18 February 2010 , following a meeting with Iraqi prime minister Nouri al - Maliki , Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić said that Serbia strongly supports Iraq 's territorial integrity just as Iraq supports Serbia .
In May 2010 , Ali al - Baldawi , a representative of the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq , reportedly said that relations would be established with Kosovo once his party , which won the latest elections , forms a new government .
On 6 August 2010 , following a meeting with prime minister al - Maliki , the Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Šutanovac said that Iraq did not recognise the independence of Kosovo and added that Iraq had supported the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia .
In March 2011 , Kosovo 's prime minister Hashim Thaçi met with the Iraqi vice - president Tariq al - Hashimi , who promised that Iraq would consider the recognition of Kosovo in the immediate future to open the way for the promotion of good relations between the two countries .
In October 2011 Iraq 's ambassador to Belgrade , Falah Abdulsada , said that Iraq supports international law and international mechanisms , and has not changed its position of non - recognition of Kosovo .
In September 2012 , Iraqi president , Jalal Talabani , said that he appreciated the interest of the Republic of Kosovo in creating friendship with his country , and he invited Kosovo 's deputy prime minister , Behgjet Pacolli , to make an official visit to Iraq in order to discuss in more depth further steps to create inter - state relations .
In November 2012 , Zebari expressed his country 's support for an independent Kosovo , and appreciated the progress achieved in Kosovo after the declaration of independence .
He also said that Iraqi authorities follow the developments in Kosovo with great care .
On 28 April 2009 , Arthur Koll , the Israeli ambassador to Serbia , said it had been more than a year since Kosovo unilaterally declared independence , and that Israel had no intention of recognising that independence and that " Israel is asked from time to time how solid this decision is , but the fact is that Israel 's position has not changed throughout this time .
The Serbian people and government should appreciate Israel 's position , which also demonstrates the friendship between the two states " .
On 16 September 2009 , Israeli foreign minister Avigdor Lieberman said that Israel is " monitoring the situation between Serbia and Kosovo " and that Israel hopes for " a really comprehensive and peaceful solution " which would be established through negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina .
Lieberman said that his country would be able to withstand the pressure made on it to recognise Kosovo because Israel has " been under pressure since 1948 on many issues and we know how to deal with any pressure " .
" Israeli officials have confirmed that Israel will remain firm in its stand [ on Kosovo ] , " Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dačić said during a visit to Israel in late October 2009 .
In June 2011 , Lieberman said that Kosovo 's independence is a " sensitive issue " and that Israel may recognise Kosovo after other countries like Greece and Spain accept it .
On 3 August 2012 , during the opening of Israeli Embassy in Tirana , Lieberman , when asked about Kosovo , said that his country is in a delicate situation .
In August 2012 , Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister , Danny Ayalon , stated that Israel was considering recognising Kosovo , with a decision expected as soon as the following year .
In December 2012 , the Israeli Ambassador to Albania , David Cohen , said that Israel has not recognised Kosovo yet , but it is working on this issue and that although it does not have known trade relations with Kosovo , it does give visa facilitation for Kosovars .
J Section::::J. !
Country ! !
Position
Following April 2010
meetings with Jamaican officials , Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić stated that Serbia can count on Jamaica 's continued support in the preservation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity .
K Section::::K. !
Country ! !
Position
At a meeting on 27 May 2009 with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , the representative of Kenya to the UN , Zachary Muburi - Muita , said that " Kosovo deserves a place in the family of nations " and that he will pass the request for recognition to his government .
He also said that a right for self - determination is an undeniable right .
Following a September 2010 meeting with Kenyan politicians , Albanian prime minister Sali Berisha said that Kenya had promised to decide positively regarding recognition of Kosovo .
In October 2012 , Prime Minister of Kenya , Raila Odinga , stated that Kenya was seriously considering recognising Kosovo , and that a decision would be announced shortly .
L Section::::L. !
Country ! !
Position
In a February 2012 meeting with the speaker of Albanian Parliament , Jozefina Topalli , the Lebanese prime minister , Najib Mikati , said that the issue of Kosovo 's recognition is being considered very seriously .
In December 2013 , Lebanese Foreign Minister Adnan Mansour promised to consider Kosovo 's request for recognition .
M Section::::M. !
Country ! !
Position
In a 21 May 2010 meeting with Serbian prime minister , Mirko Cvetković , Mali 's Foreign Minister , Moctar Ouane , said that Serbia can count on Mali 's support in its efforts to preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity .
In August 2011 meeting with Kosovo 's First deputy prime minister Behgjet Pacolli , Touré is reported to have said that recognition of Kosovo will be seriously considered by Mali .
Following the August 2012 publication of a note verbale recognising Kosovo 's independence , purportedly signed by acting President of Mali , Dioncounda Traoré , state run media in Mali issued a statement in which the Presidency of Mali denied recognising Kosovo and claimed that the document was a fabrication .
Pacolli claimed that the Malian Army , who had recently seized control of the state in a coup d'état due to dissatisfaction over the governments handling of their own separatist uprising in Azawad , had intervened to reverse the recognition granted by the civilian president .
On Pacolli 's return to Mali to seek clarification on the issue , state leaders promised to reconfirm their recognition .
In June 2009 , the Mauritian prime minister , Navin Ramgoolam , had called the US Embassy in Port Louis to say that he had decided that Mauritius would recognise Kosovo , despite opposition from his foreign ministry .
In a 17 July 2012 meeting with Kosovo 's deputy prime minister , Edita Tahiri , both the Mongolian president and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade , Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj and Gombojav Zandanshatar , said that Mongolia would consider recognising the independence of Kosovo .
Elbegdorj promised that Mongolia would seriously consider recognising the independence of Kosovo in the very near future , and has a very high appreciation for the movement of the people of Kosovo for freedom and independence .
Zandanshatar promised that his country would deliberate the issue of recognising Kosovo 's independence .
In June 2011 , Moroccan government representatives explained that they had difficulty in recognising Kosovo due to the political context of Western Sahara .
On 6 July 2012 , Morocco 's Foreign Minister , Saad - Eddine El Othmani pledged that the highest state institutions would review a request for recognition by Kosovo , and a decision on recognition would be made within an appropriate period .
In an 8 October 2012 meeting between the Prime Ministers of Albania and Morocco , Sali Berisha and Abdelilah Benkirane , Mr. Benkirane promised to consider a request from the Albanian authorities to recognise Kosovo as it is a very important subject for the region .
At a meeting on 18 June 2009 with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , Ambassador Chidumo reportedly said that the issue of Kosovo continues to remain on Mozambique 's agenda and that he would resubmit the request for recognition to his government .
In September 2012 , Mozambique 's Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co - Operation , Oldemiro Julio Marques Baloi , said that his government would reconsider recognising Kosovo .
N
Section::::N. !
Country ! !
Position
In November 2009 , Ojo Maduekwe , Foreign Minister of Nigeria ( and former advocate of Biafran independence ) , emphasised that Nigeria will never recognise the independence of Kosovo .
In August 2011 , Kosovo 's First Deputy Prime Minister Behgjet Pacolli said that he had received from senior Nigerian state leaders support and guarantee that Kosovo recognition would be seriously dealt with in a short period of time .
Reports of Nigeria recognising Kosovo appeared in 2011 .
In a 22 September 2011 statement , a spokesman for the Nigerian Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Damian Agwu , said that the Nigerian Federal Government had decided to " open a trade office in Pristina " .
However , the following day the Ministry reversed course and said no trade office would be opened .
It was reported in September 2012 that Olugbenga Ashiru , Nigerian Foreign Minister , had denied that the recognition took place .
Behgjet Pacolli , the First Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo , reiterated that the recognition occurred and claimed that Ashiru never spoke with the Gazeta Express .
In January 2013 , former Foreign Minister of Kosovo Skënder Hyseni said that the recognitions by Nigeria and Uganda were " contested , not only by the respective states , but also by the US State Department " .
Current Foreign Minister , Enver Hoxhaj , stated that he is certain that the number of recognitions is valid .
The lack of recognition was confirmed by the Nigerian Foreign Minister in March 2014 .
P Section::::P. !
Country ! !
Position
In April 2010 , it was reported that the Paraguayan president had told Kosovan pilot James Berisha , who was on an awareness - raising journey around Central and South America , that Paraguay had already recognised Kosovo 's independence but had not made this known so as not to jeopardise their relationship with Russia .
In a November 2012 meeting with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Enver Hoxhaj , Foreign Affairs Undersecretary , Rafael E. Seguis , pledged support for Kosovo , saying that his country has full understanding for the independence of Kosovo and that he would consider the request for recognition .
R Section::::R. !
Country ! !
Position
In February 2009 , Romanian Foreign Minister Cristian Diaconescu said that " Romania does not change its position and will not recognize Kosovo 's independence , which contradicts to the norms and principles of the international law " and that the EP resolution on Kosovo is not binding .
In September 2009 , President Traian Băsescu announced that Romania will partner Serbia in its action at the ICJ and said that " Territorial partitions are unacceptable , regardless of what explanations [ are ] put forward to support them . "
On 24 September 2010 , Romanian prime minister Emil Boc said in an address to the UNGA that while Romania respected the ICJ 's opinion on the legality of Kosovo 's independence , it did not examine the key issue which was the legality of the creation of a new state .
Romania will continue not to recognise Kosovo 's independence .
In March 2012 a majority of Romanian MEPs , including Elena Băsescu ( the president 's daughter ) , voted in favour of a resolution calling on the EU countries which had not recognised Kosovo to do so .
In April 2012 , Diaconescu said " As far as we are concerned , we clearly stated our approach , which has not changed : Romania will not recognize this province because it does not meet all requirements of the international laws to function as a state .
But , certainly , the situation must be analyzed especially through the perspective of the relation Belgrade will establish with this province " .
In April 2013 , following a resolution by the European Parliament which urged all EU members states which had not recognised Kosovo to do so , Romania 's Prime Minister Victor Ponta stated that his country must follow the EU 's lead .
In May 2015 , Prime Minister Victor Ponta stated that " In 2008 Romania decided not to recognize Kosovo .
However , things have changed since then .
Governments have changed and some new decision on the recognition of Kosovo could be made ... because many things have changed in Kosovo since 2008 . "
S
Section::::S. !
Country ! !
Position
At a meeting in August 2011 with U.S. Representative , Eliot Engel , both St. Vincent & the Grenadines ' Prime Minister and Foreign Minister , Ralph Gonsalves and Louis Straker , took on board the case for recognition of Kosovo and promised to review the issue .
In March 2012 , São Tomé and Príncipe 's Council of Ministers under then Prime Minister Patrice Trovoada adopted a resolution recognising Kosovo 's independence .
In January 2013 , President Manuel Pinto da Costa issued a communication stating that the recognition was invalid as he had not been consulted on the decision , as required by the country 's Constitution .
New Prime Minister Gabriel Costa said that the process of recognition was an anomalous situation .
Kosovo Foreign Minister , Enver Hoxhaj , insisted that the recognition remains valid .
First Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo Behgjet Pacolli said that he received a note verbale recognising Kosovo from Trovoada and that it was a closed issue .
In September 2014 , Adam said that Seychelles will consider the recognition of Kosovo with utmost seriousness .
In September 2012 , South Sudan 's vice - president , Riek Machar Teny , invited Kosovo 's prime minister , Hashim Thaçi , to South Sudan to discuss building bilateral relations between the two countries .
During an October 2012 meeting with Pacolli , South Sudan 's president Salva Kiir Mayardit stated his country 's desire to maintain friendly relations with Kosovo .
He reiterated the position that South Sudan supports the right of the citizens of Kosovo to build and consolidate their state .
In September 2013 the Foreign Minister of South Sudan , Barnaba Marial Benjamin , confirmed that the recognition of Kosovo is a matter of time .
In April 2014 , Benjamin said that positive news in regards to improving relations with Kosovo should be expected .
In September 2014 , Benjamin said that South Sudan is considering with seriousness the recognition of the independence and will follow all the procedures in order to do so .
In a June 2009 meeting with Serbian president Boris Tadić , Sri Lankan president Mahinda Rajapaksa re - affirmed his country 's solidarity with Serbia and stated that Sri Lanka remained firmly opposed to Kosovo 's independence as it threatened the international order .
Rajapaksa said that there could be no right for countries to be formed by secession , which was in violation of the UN Charter and the principles of national sovereignty .
In a September 2011 meeting with Kosovo 's First deputy prime minister Behgjet Pacolli , Rajapaksa promised that Sri Lanka will continue to cooperate and expressed his willingness to continue contacts which would lead to the construction of interstate relations in the future .
In February 2013 , the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka , D. M. Jayaratne , stated that the recognition of Kosovo by Sri Lanka will be reviewed .
In a September 2010 meeting between the Foreign Ministers of Kosovo and Sudan , Skënder Hyseni and Ali Karti , Mr. Karti said that Sudan has closely followed the decision of the ICJ , and will , sooner or later , support Kosovo .
In April 2012
a Syrian opposition delegation ( Syrian National Council ) led by Ammar Abdulhamid visited Pristina and promised to recognise Kosovo immediately if they triumph in Syria .
T
Section::::T. !
Country ! !
Position
In February 2009 , Jamaluddin Ubaidulloev , Second Secretary of the Department of European and North American Affairs at the Foreign Ministry of Tajikistan , said that the Foreign Ministry could not offer an official position on the recognition of Kosovo because it had received no decision on the matter from the government .
However in past conversations , the Head of the European and North American Affairs at the Ministry , Khusrav Nosiri , had commented that Tajikistan wished to avoid the question of Kosovo recognition because of perceived parallels with the question of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
At a meeting on 25 March 2009 with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , the Ambassador of Trinidad and Tobago to the UN , Maria Annette Valere , said that her country knows how important the process of international recognition is for Kosovo , and that the government of Trinidad and Tobago would address the request for recognition in the near future .
In a September 2010 meeting between the Foreign Ministers of Kosovo and Tunisia , Skënder Hyseni and Kamel Morjane , Mr. Morjane said that Tunisia will take the opinion of the ICJ very seriously , and will review Kosovo 's request for recognition in government .
In an August 2011 meeting with Kosovo 's First deputy prime minister , Behgjet Pacolli , the leader of the Ennahda Movement , Rashid al - Ghannushi , " guaranteed Tunisia would recognize Kosovo if his party won the elections " .
On 29 October 2011 , following a meeting with representatives of Ennahda Movement , Pacolli reported that Tunisia was expected to recognise Kosovo following the forthcoming elections .
At a meeting in October 2012 with Albanian Foreign Minister and Chairman of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe , Edmond Panariti , the Tunisian Foreign Minister , Rafik Abdessalem , said that his government is seriously considering the issue of the recognition of Kosovo .
In January 2013 , Abdessalem stressed that the decision to recognise Kosovo was in the final stages and that it was only a matter of time before this occurs , while prime minister Hamadi Jebali stated that there were no obstacles to recognition .
However , in late February the Tunisian ambassador to Serbia , Majid Hamlaoui , said that Tunisia would not recognise Kosovo , despite outside pressure for recognition .
U Section::::U. !
Country ! !
Position
In August 2011 , Ugandan Foreign Minister Sam Kutesa wrote to Kosovo 's Deputy Prime Minister Behgjet Pacolli promising to review the request for recognition in line with the ICJ decision .
In February 2012 Kosovo 's MFA announced that Uganda had recognised their independence , citing a note verbale dated 5 December 2011 from Uganda 's President Yoweri Museveni which expressed congratulations " on the advancement towards your country 's independence " and that " we are behind other nations that have recognized the Republic of Kosovo " .
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić responded that Ugandan State Foreign Minister Henry Oryem Okello had informed him that the recognition never took place .
In January 2013 , former Foreign Minister of Kosovo Skënder Hyseni said that the recognitions by Nigeria and Uganda were " contested , not only by the respective states , but also by the US State Department " .
Current Foreign Minister , Enver Hoxhaj , stated that he is certain that the number of recognitions is valid .
In an article posted in June 2014 , Kosovo 's MFA listed Uganda as a state that had not recognised Kosovo .
On 27 September 2010 , Uruguayan Deputy Foreign Minister Roberto Conde , stated that Uruguay would never recognise the independence of Kosovo .
V
Section::::V. !
Country ! !
Position
In a 23 February 2011 meeting with Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić , Vietnamese deputy prime minister , Pham Gia Khiem , reaffirmed Vietnam 's position of supporting " Kosovo - related issues under the United Nations Security Council 's decree to gain comprehensive measures in terms of respecting national sovereignty and territorial integrity , and assuring the benefits of involved nations " .
In a 24 November 2011 meeting with Albanian deputy prime minister and Foreign Minister , Edmond Haxhinasto , Vietnam 's Foreign Minister , Pham Binh Minh , said that Vietnam is following the developments in Kosovo , and that Serbia and Kosovo should continue the dialogue to find common ground that will be acceptable to both parties .
Z Section::::Z. !
Country ! !
Position On 12 February 2009 , the Zambian Foreign Ministry Permanent Secretary , Tens Kapoma , and Zambia 's Permanent Representative to the UN , Lazarous Kapambwe , did not rule out the possibility of Kosovo recognition , they indicated by their response that Zambia would be unlikely to do so in the immediate future .
Zambian Government Representatives expressed reservations about the legal precedence that Kosovo recognition would establish .
In particular , they conveyed some concern about the domestic legal ramifications vis - a - vis the Lozi tribe , an ethnic group in western Zambia within which remains some support for greater autonomy or full independence .
Kapambwe implied that the US recognition of Kosovo is inconsistent with its refusal to recognise South Ossetian and Abkhazian secession from Georgia .
Kapambwe suggested that Zambia could be persuaded to recognise Kosovo if Kosovo or the international community could establish that Kosovo meets four conditions for national sovereignty , according to the criteria for statehood laid down in the Montevideo Convention .
In a September 2010 meeting with Kosovo 's Foreign Minister , Skënder Hyseni , Mr. Pande said that Zambia is carefully studying the opinion of the ICJ and that the request for recognition will be processed soon .
In a subsequent meeting with the Albanian Foreign Minister , Edmond Haxhinasto , Mr. Pande said that Kosovo 's independence is an irreversible reality and that the decision of the ICJ 's opinion eased the decision on recognition of Kosovo for many African countries .
On 27 February 2011 , regarding a request to recognise Kosovo , Pande stated that " We will evaluate that request .
It will have to undergo scrutiny like we always do " .
In September 2012 , Zambian Foreign Minister , Given Lubinda , said that his country has no reason not to recognise Kosovo .
Zambia 's Minister of Home Affairs , Edgar Lungu , stated in December 2013 that his government will thoroughly discuss and clear all the grey areas before any decision can be made over Kosovo , and that recognition of Kosovo was Zambia 's priority .
In February 2013 , the then Prime Minister of Zimbabwe , Morgan Tsvangirai , said that he would consider recognising Kosovo .
OTHER STATES AND ENTITIES
Section::::Other states and entities . !
Country ! !
Position POSITIONS
TAKEN
BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS Section::::Positions taken by intergovernmental organisations .
Intergovernmental organisations do not themselves diplomatically recognise any state ; their member states do so individually .
However , depending on the intergovernmental organisation 's rules of internal governance and the positions of their member states , they may express positive or negative opinions as to declarations of independence , or choose to offer or withhold membership to a partially recognised state . !
International organisation ! !
Position
The Council of Europe Development Bank 's board of directors voted in favour of Kosovo 's membership on 14 June 2013 during their meeting in Malta .
In June 2014 , Kosovo became a member state of the Venice Commission , an advisory body of the Council of Europe .
POSITIONS
TAKEN
BY OTHER ACTORS AUTONOMOUS REGIONS AND SECESSIONIST MOVEMENTS Section::::Positions taken by other actors .
Section::::Autonomous regions and secessionist movements . !
Entity ! !
Position Usman Ferzauli , the Foreign Minister of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria , said that his country " welcome the declaration of state independence by Kosovo and do not question the right of the people of Kosovo to distance themselves from the state that terrorized it" .
The Prime Minister of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria , Akhmed Zakayev , stated in an April 2010 interview that to him and his nation , Kosovo represented a hope , and also made reference to a letter he had apparently sent to Kosovo 's prime minister Hashim Thaçi congratulating the latter .
INTERNATIONAL NON - GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS Section::::International non - governmental organisations . !
International organisation ! !
Position Kosovo is not a member of the governing structures for the ISO.Independently of its ISO membership status , ISO will also potentially issue a standardised country code for Kosovo .
According to rules of procedure followed by the ISO 3166 Maintenance Agency based in Geneva , a new ISO 3166 - 1 code for Kosovo will only be issued once it appears in the UN Terminology Bulletin Country Names or in the UN Statistics Division 's list of Country and Region Codes for Statistical Use .
To appear in the terminology bulletin , it must either ( a ) be admitted into the UN , ( b ) join a UN Specialised Agency or ( c ) become a state party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice .
Criterion ( b ) was met when Kosovo joined the International Monetary Fund and World Bank ; a terminology bulletin has yet to be circulated .
SEE ALSO * Foreign relations of Kosovo * List of diplomatic missions in Kosovo * List of diplomatic missions of Kosovo * Membership of Kosovo in international organizations * Membership of Kosovo in international sports federations * International Court of Justice advisory opinion on Kosovo 's declaration of independence * Reactions to the International Court of Justice advisory opinion on Kosovo 's declaration of independence * Kosovo – Serbia relations
* Belgrade – Pristina negotiations
* List of states with limited recognition REFERENCES