DOMINICAN REPUBLIC –
UNITED STATES RELATIONS Dominican Republic –
United States relations are bilateral relations between the Dominican Republic and the United States of America .
According to the 2012 U.S. Global Leadership Report , 57 % of Dominicans approved of U.S. leadership , with 8 % disapproving and 35 % uncertain , the third highest rating for any surveyed country in the Americas .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The country 's standing as the largest Caribbean economy , second - largest country in terms of population and land mass , with large bilateral trade with the United States , and its proximity to the United States and other smaller Caribbean nations make the Dominican Republic an important partner in hemispheric affairs .
The Embassy estimates that 100,000 U.S. citizens live in the Dominican Republic ; many of whom are dual nationals .
An important element of the relationship between the two countries is the fact that more than 1 million individuals of Dominican origin reside in the United States , most of them in the metropolitan Northeast and some in Florida .
The U.S. occupied the Dominican Republic from 1916 until 1924 and intervened on behalf of the Dominican government during the Dominican Civil War .
The Dominican government has been supportive of many U.S. initiatives in the United Nations and related agencies .
The two governments cooperate in the fight against the traffic in illegal substances .
The Dominican Republic has worked closely with U.S. law enforcement officials on issues such as the extradition of fugitives and measures to hinder illegal migration .
The United States supports the Leonel Fernández administration 's efforts to improve Dominican competitiveness , to attract foreign private investment , to fight corruption , and to modernize the tax system .
Bilateral trade is important to both countries .
U.S. firms , mostly manufacturers of apparel , footwear , and light electronics , as well as U.S. energy companies , account for much of the foreign private investment in the Dominican Republic .
Exports from the United States , including those from Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands , to the Dominican Republic in 2005 totaled US$ 5.3 billion , up 11 % from the previous year .
The Dominican Republic exported $ 4.5 billion to the United States in 2006 , equaling some 75 % of its export revenues .
The Dominican Republic is the 47th - largest commercial partner of the United States .
The U.S. Embassy works closely with U.S. business firms and Dominican trade groups , both of which can take advantage of the new opportunities in this growing market .
At the same time , the Embassy is working with the Dominican government to resolve ongoing commercial and investment disputes .
The Embassy counsels U.S. firms through its Country Commercial Guide and informally via meetings with business persons planning to invest or already investing in the Dominican Republic .
This is a challenging business environment for U.S. firms , especially for medium to smaller sized businesses .
The U.S. Agency for International Development ( USAID ) mission is focused on improving access of underserved populations to quality health care and combating HIV / AIDS and tuberculosis ( TB ) , promoting economic growth through policy reform , support for CAFTA - DR implementation , and technical assistance to small producers and tourism groups ; environmental protection and policy reform initiatives ; improved access to quality primary , public education and assistance to at - risk youth ; a model rural electrification program ; and improving participation in democratic processes , while strengthening the judiciary and combating corruption across all sectors .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Dominicans constituted one of the many diverse units which fought alongside Spanish forces under Bernardo de Gálvez during the Gulf Coast campaign of the American Revolution .
In 1869 , President Ulysses S. Grant ordered U.S. Marines to the island for the first time .
Pirates operating from Haiti had been raiding U.S. commercial shipping in the Caribbean , and Grant directed the Marines to stop them at their source .
Following the virtual takeover of the island , the Dominican president offered to sell the country to the United States for $ 100,000 in cash and $ 50,000 in armament credits ) .
Although President Grant supported the arrangement , the Senate , under the leadership of abolitionist Charles Sumner , failed to pass the annexation legislation .
On 5 May 1916 , President Woodrow Wilson ordered the Marines back to Santo Domingo following twenty - eight revolutions in fifty years .
They stayed for eight years to manage the country 's finances and preserve the peace , and the U.S. Navy Department virtually ran the entire country .
American troops left in 1924 after the election of General Horacio Vasquez .
In 1927 , Rafael Trujillo became the chief of the national police and principal adviser to President Horacio Vasquez .
The following year Trujillo formed the Dominican Secret Police , which he headed , and converted the national police into an autonomous paramilitary force under his direct command .
In 1930 , he marshaled his supporters and his forces and successfully ran for office in a typical Dominican election where power and coercion replaced free choice and accurate ballot counting .
Trujillo ruled the Dominican Republic for thirty years as a ruthless dictator and became one of the most graphic examples of a Latin American caudillo ever to hold office .
During his long regime the country had no independent legislature , judiciary , or political opposition .
He used the secret police extensively to eliminate political opposition and to prevent several coup attempts during and after World War II .
The secret police allegedly murdered more than 500,000 people during the Trujillo era , including some 37,000 Haitians .
During this long period of oppression and death , the Trujillo government extended its policy of state terrorism beyond national borders .
Notorious examples of Trujillo 's reach abroad are the unsuccessful assassination attempt in Caracas against Venezuelan President Rómulo Betancourt ( 1960 ) , the abduction and subsequent disappearance in New York City of the Spaniard Jesús Galíndez ( 1956 ) , the murder of writer in Mexico , also a Spaniard , and crimes committed against Cubans , Costa Ricans , Nicaraguans , Puerto Ricans , as well as United States citizens .
In June 1960 the Organization of American States ' Human Rights Commission issued a scathing report on violations in the Dominican Republic .
Supported by the U.S. State Department , the commission accused Trujillo of flagrant and numerous violations of human rights against the citizens of the Dominican Republic .
Trujillo retaliated against the chief proponent of the report , Venezuelan President Romulo Betancourt , by actively supporting an assassination attempt .
The plot failed and Trujillo 's involvement in the conspiracy became public in a report by the OAS Council 's ( the organization 's general assembly ) investigating committee .
Composed of representatives from the United States , Argentina , Mexico , Panama , and Uruguay , the committee verified Dominican complicity and placed responsibility on " high officials " within the government .
Responding to a Venezuelan call for collective action , on 20 August 1960
the OAS Council passed a resolution invoking diplomatic and economic sanctions against the Trujillo government .
The resolution , passed fourteen to one ( the Dominican Republic dissented while Brazil , Argentina , Guatemala , Haiti , Paraguay , and Uruguay abstained ) , marked the first time that the organization had taken such actions against a member nation .
As a show of support , President Dwight D. Eisenhower suspended all economic and diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic .
Trujillo was assassinated on 31 May 1961 by a small band of conspirators led by Antonio de la Maza and Antonio Imbert Barrera .
The coup attempt that followed failed to seize power and all of the conspirators except Imbert were found and executed by Ramfis Trujillo , the dictator 's son , who remained in de facto control of the government for the next six months through his position as commander of the armed forces .
Trujillo 's brothers , Hector Bienvenido and Jose Arismendi Trujillo , returned to the country and began immediately to plot against President Balaguer .
On 18 November 1961 , as a planned coup became more evident , U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk issued a warning that the United States would not " remain idle " if the Trujillos attempted to " reassert dictatorial domination " over the Dominican Republic .
Following this warning , and the arrival of a fourteen - vessel U.S. naval task force within sight of Santo Domingo , Ramfis and his uncles fled the country on 19 November with $ 200 million from the Dominican treasury .
In 1963 Juan Bosch and his moderately reformist Dominican Revolutionary Party took power ; he was the first directly elected democratic and progressive president in the country 's history .
However , Bosch earned the enmity of the country 's oligarchy and key U.S. officials , and after seven hectic months he was overthrown .
In 1965 a democratic revolution was sparked to oppose the country 's return to oligarchical rule , but the United States , fearing the installation of a communist regime ( as had happened in Cuba the previous decade ) , again occupied the country in 1965–66 and snuffed out the revolt .
UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC MISSION
* Ambassador — James " Wally " Brewster , Jr. * Deputy Chief of Mission — Christopher Lambert * USAID Mission Director — James Watson , Acting * Consul General — William Weissman * Economic and Political Counselor — Alexander Marguiles * Public Affairs Adviser —
Todd Philip Haskell * Commercial Counselor ( DOC / FCS)—Robert O. Jones * Defense Attaché — Lt . Col . David M. O'Connell ( U.S. Marine Corps ) Section::::United States diplomatic mission .
The U.S. Embassy is located in Santo Domingo .
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC DIPLOMATIC MISSION
* Ambassador — José Tomás Pérez SEE
ALSO
* Dominican Americans
* Foreign relations of the United States * Foreign relations of the Dominican Republic EXTERNAL LINKS * History of Dominican Republic - U.S. relations * REFERENCES Section::::References .