MEMBER STATES OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS
The Commonwealth of Nations is a voluntary association of 53 sovereign states .
Nearly all of them are former British colonies or dependencies of those colonies .
No one government in the Commonwealth exercises power over the others , as is the case in a political union .
Rather , the Commonwealth is an international organisation in which countries with diverse social , political , and economic backgrounds are regarded as equal in status , and cooperate within a framework of common values and goals , as outlined in the Singapore Declaration issued in 1971 .
Such common values and goals include the promotion of democracy , human rights , good governance , the rule of law , individual liberty , egalitarianism , free trade , multilateralism , and world peace , which are promoted through multilateral projects and meetings , such as the Commonwealth Games , held once every four years .
The symbol of this free association is Queen Elizabeth II , who serves as the Head of the Commonwealth .
This position , however , does not imbue her with any political or executive power over any Commonwealth member states ; the position is purely symbolic , and it is the Commonwealth Secretary - General who is the chief executive of the Commonwealth .
The Commonwealth was first officially formed in 1931 when the Statute of Westminster gave legal recognition to the sovereignty of dominions .
Known as the " British Commonwealth " , the original members were the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , Irish Free State , and Newfoundland , although Australia and New Zealand did not adopt the statute until 1942 and 1947 respectively .
In 1949 , the London Declaration was signed and marked the birth of the modern Commonwealth and the adoption of its present name .
The newest member is Rwanda , which joined on 29 November 2009 .
The most recent departure was the Maldives , which severed its connection with the Commonwealth on 13 October 2016 .
As of April 2017 , of the states that are members of the Commonwealth of Nations , three are in Europe , twelve in North America and the Caribbean , one in South America , nineteen in Africa , seven in Asia , and eleven in Oceania .
There are seven former members , four of which no longer exist as independent entities ( but form part of current member states ) .
The members have a combined population of 2.4 billion , almost a third of the world population , of whom 1.21 billion live in India , and 95 % live in Asia and Africa combined .
Currently sixteen of the member states are Commonwealth realms , with the Head of the Commonwealth as their head of state .
Five others are monarchies with their own individual monarchs ( Brunei , Eswatini , Lesotho , Malaysia , Tonga ) and the rest are republics .
Republic of Ireland ( from 1949 according to the Commonwealth ; 1936 according to Irish government ) , Zimbabwe ( 2003 ) , and Maldives ( 2016 ) are former members of the Commonwealth .
South Africa , Pakistan and The Gambia left and later rejoined the Commonwealth .
CURRENT MEMBERS Section::::Current members .
All dates below are provided by the Commonwealth of Nations Secretariat members list , and population figures are as of 1 January 2018 . !
width =
150pxCountry !
width =
125pxJoined !
width = 90pxContinent !
width = 80pxPopulation !
width =
450pxNotes
A.
Unless otherwise noted , independence was gained from the United Kingdom on the date ( shown in column 2 ) of joining the Commonwealth .
B. Not a member of the Commonwealth Foundation .
C.
Though Pakistan celebrates 14 August 1947 as its independence day , independence was officially granted at midnight , 15 August 1947 .
Therefore , its date of joining the Commonwealth would be 15 August 1947 .
D. Commonwealth realms , recognising Queen Elizabeth II as their head of state since the day of their independence , distinctly from her being the sovereign of the United Kingdom .
E. Geopolitically part of Europe , but geographically part of Asia .
FORMER MEMBERS Section::::Former members . !
Country !
Joined !
Continent !
Left !
width=
400pxNotes
The cabinet of Ibrahim Mohamed Solih has announced that the Maldives is to return to its status as a Commonwealth republic DISSOLVED MEMBERS Section::::Dissolved members . !
Former country !
Joined !
Continent !
Dissolved !
Rejoined as part of !
width=400pxNotes PROSPECTIVE MEMBERS Section::::Prospective members . !
Country !
Applied !
Continent !
Population !
width=400pxNotes
Africa align
=
right
42,425,989 Sudan was a condominium of the United Kingdom and Egypt known as Anglo - Egyptian Sudan , but in practice the structure of the Condominium ensured full British control over the Sudan until its independence in 1956 .
Sudan has expressed an interest in joining the Commonwealth .
Gained independence from Britain as part of Sudan in 1956 .
Gained independence from Sudan in 2011 .
English colony of Willoughbyland from 1650 to 1667 and controlled by the British from 1799 to 1816 .
Subsequently , a Dutch colony .
In 2012 , Suriname announced plans to join the Commonwealth and the British government has made it a priority to provide guidance to Suriname in applying for Commonwealth membership .
Africa align =
right 16,150,362
In recent years , under the presidency of Robert Mugabe , Zimbabwe has dominated Commonwealth affairs , creating acrimonious splits in the organisation .
Zimbabwe was suspended in 2002 for breaching the Harare Declaration .
In 2003 , when the Commonwealth refused to lift the suspension , Zimbabwe withdrew from the Commonwealth .
Since then , the Commonwealth has played a major part in trying to end the political impasse and return Zimbabwe to a state of normality .
On May 15 , 2018 , President Mnangagwa submitted an application to rejoin
the Commonwealth F. The population figure is based on 2014 estimates .
Other states which have expressed an interest in joining the Commonwealth over the years or states which may be eligible to join the Commonwealth include Algeria , Bahrain , Cambodia , Egypt , Eritrea , Israel , Libya , Madagascar , Palestine , United States and Yemen .
SEE ALSO * Commonwealth of Nations membership criteria * List of countries by English - speaking population
* List of countries where English is an official language
* Prospective members of the Commonwealth of Nations * Representatives of the Commonwealth of Nations REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Commonwealth timeline