PREAMBLE TO THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
The preamble to the Constitution of India is a brief introductory statement that sets out guiding people and principles of the document , and it indicates the source from which the ordinary document derives its authority , meaning , the people .
The hopes and aspirations of the people as well as the ideals before our nation are described in the preamble in clear words .
It may be considered the heart and soul of the Constitution .
The preamble can be referred to as the preface which highlights the entire Constitution .
It was adopted on 26 November 1949 by the Constituent Assembly and came into effect on 26th January 1950 .
HISTORIC BACKGROUND Section::::Historic background .
The preamble is based on the Objectives which was drafted and moved in the Constituent Assembly by Jawaharlal Nehru on 13 December 1946 .
B. R. Ambedkar said about the preamble : It was , indeed , a way of life , which recognizes liberty , equality , and fraternity as the principles of life and which can not be divorced from each other : Liberty can not be divorced from equality ; equality can not be divorced from liberty .
Nor can liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity .
Without equality , liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many .
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative .
Without fraternity , liberty and equality could not become a natural course of things .
The Supreme Court of India originally stated in the BeruBari case presidential reference that the preamble is not an integral part of the Indian constitution , and therefore it is not enforceable in a court of law .
However , the same court , in the 1973 Kesavananda case , overruled earlier decisions and recognised that the preamble may be used to interpret ambiguous areas of the constitution where differing interpretations present themselves .
In the 1995 case of Union Government Vs LIC of India , the Supreme Court once again held that the Preamble is an integral part of the Constitution .
As originally enacted the preamble described the state as a " sovereign democratic republic " , to which the terms " Secular " and " Socialist " were later added by the 42nd Amendment .
The preamble - page , along with other pages of the original Constitution of India , was designed and decorated by the renowned painter Beohar Rammanohar Sinha of Jabalpur who was at Shantiniketan with acharya Nandalal Bose at that time .
Nandalal Bose endorsed Beohar Rammanohar Sinha 's artwork without any alteration whatsoever .
As such , the page bears Beohar Rammanohar Sinha 's short signature Ram in Devanagari lower - right corner .
The calligraphy was done by Prem Behari Narain Raizada .
SOVEREIGNTY Section::::Sovereignty .
Sovereignty means the independent authority of a State .
It means that it has the power to legislate on any subject ; and that it is not subject to the control of any other State or external power .
According to the preamble , the constitution of India has been pursuance of the solemn resolution of the people of India to constitute India into a ' Sovereign Democratic Republic ' , and to secure well - defined objects set forth in the preamble .
Sovereignty denotes supreme and ultimate power .
It may be real or normal , legal or political , individual or pluralistic .
In monarchies , sovereignty was vested in the person of monarchs .
But in republican form of governments , which mostly prevail in the contemporary world , sovereignty is shifted to the elected representatives of the people .
According to D.D Basu , the word ' sovereign ' is taken from article 5 of the constitution of Ireland . '
Sovereign or supreme power is that which is absolute and uncontrolled within its own sphere ' .
In the words of Cooley , " A state is sovereign when there resides within itself supreme and absolute power , acknowledging no superior " .
Sovereignty , in short , means the independent authority of a state .
It has two aspects- external and internal .
External sovereignty or sovereignty in international law means the independence of a state of the will of other states , in her conduct with other states in the committee of nations .
Sovereign in its relation between states and among states signifies independence .
The external sovereignty of India means that it can acquire foreign territory and also cede any part of the Indian territory , subject to limitations ( if any ) imposed by the constitution .
On the other hand , internal sovereignty refers to the relationship between the states and the individuals within its territory .
Internal sovereignty relates to internal and domestic affairs , and is divided into four organs , namely , the executive , the legislature , the judiciary and the administrative .
Though India became a sovereign country on 26 January 1950 , having equal status with the other members of the international community , she decided to remain in the Commonwealth of Nations .
Pandit Nehru declared that India will continue – " her full membership of the Commonwealth games of Nations and her acceptance of the King as the symbol of the free association of the independent nations and as such the Head of the Commonwealth " .
Her membership of the Commonwealth of Nations and that of the United Nations Organization do not affect her sovereignty to any extent .
It is merely a voluntary association of India and it is open to India to cut off this association at her will , and that it has no constitutional significance .
SOCIALIST Section::::Socialist .
Before the term was added by the 42nd Amendment in 1976 , the Constitution had socialist content in the form of certain Directive Principles of State Policy .
The term socialist as used here refers to democratic socialism , i.e. achievement of socialist goals through democratic , evolutionary and non - violent means .
Essentially , it means that ( since wealth is generated socially ) wealth should be shared equally by society through distributive justice , not concentrated in the hands of few , and that the government should regulate the ownership of land and industry to reduce socio - economic inequalities .
SECULAR
Section::::Secular .
Secular means that the relationship between the government and religious groups are determined according to constitution and law .
It separates the power of the state and religion .
By the 42nd Amendment in 1976 , the term " Secular " was also incorporated in the Preamble .
There is no difference of religion i.e. all religion are equally respected and moreover , there is no state religion .
All the citizens of India are allowed to profess , practice and propagate any religion .
Explaining the meaning of secularism as adopted by India , Alexander Owics has written , " " Secularism is a part of the basic structure of the Indian Constitution and it means equal freedom and respect for all religions . '
DEMOCRATIC Section::::Democratic .
The people of India elect their governments by a system of universal adult franchise , popularly known as " one man one vote " .
Every citizen of India 18 years of age and above and not otherwise debarred by law is entitled to vote .
The word ' democratic ' not only refers to political but also to social & economic democracy .
REPUBLIC Section::::Republic .
In a republican form of government , the head of state is elected and not a hereditary monarch .
Thus , this word denotes a government where no one holds public power as proprietary right .
As opposed to a monarchy , in which the head of state is appointed on a hereditary basis for life or at least until abdication , a democratic republic is an entity in which the head of state is elected , directly or indirectly , for a fixed tenure .
Thus , India has a President who is elected and has a fixed term of office .
JUSTICE Section::::Justice .
India seeks to secure social , economic and political justice for its people .
( i )
Social Justice : Social Justice means the absence of socially privileged classes in the society and no discrimination against any citizen on grounds of caste , creed , color , religion , gender or place of birth .
India stands for eliminating all forms of exploitations from the society .
( ii )
Economic Justice : Economic Justice means no discrimination between man and woman on the basis of income , wealth and economic status .
It stands for equitable distribution of wealth , economic equality , the end of monopolistic control over means of production and distribution , decentralisation of economic resources , and the securing of adequate opportunities to all for earning their living .
( iii )
Political Justice : Political Justice means equal , free and fair opportunities to the people for participation in the political process .
It stands for the grant of equal political rights to all the people without discrimination .
The Constitution of India provides for a liberal democracy in which all the people have the right and freedom to participate .
LIBERTY Section::::Liberty .
The idea of Liberty refers to the freedom on the activities of Indian nationals .
This establishes that there are no unreasonable restrictions on Indian citizens in term of what they think , their manner of expressions and the way they wish to follow up their thoughts in action .
However , liberty does not mean freedom to do anything , and it must be exercised within the constitutional limits .
EQUALITY Section::::Equality .
This envisages that no section of the society enjoys special privileges and individuals are provided with adequate opportunities without any discrimination : all are equal before the law .
FRATERNITY Section::::Fraternity .
This refers to a feeling of brotherhood and a sense of belonging with the country among its people .
It embraces psychological as well as territorial dimensions of National Integration .
It leaves no room for regionalism , communalism , casteism etc . , which hinders the Unity of the State .
AMENDABILITY Section::::Amendability .
In Berubari Case ( 1960 ) , The amendability & the Significance of the same came to the force .
An important & very interesting question was raised relating to the powers of the Parliament to cede Indian territory to a foreign country , as an interpretation of the Article 3 .
Supreme Court had held that the power of Parliament to diminish the area of a state as guaranteed in article 3 of the Constitution does not cover cession of the Indian territory to a foreign country .
Hence , Indian territory can be ceded to a foreign country only by means of amendment of the Constitution under the Article 368 .
Consequently , the 9th Constitutional Amendment Act , 1960 was enacted to transfer the Berubari Union to Bangladesh ( erstwhile East Pakistan ) .
Supreme Court also held the view that Preamble can not be a part of the constitution but later in Kesavananda Bharati Case ( 1973 ) , the Supreme Court gave a comprehensive verdict .
It said that Preamble is part of the Constitution and is subject to the amending power of the parliament as are any other provisions of the Constitution , provided the basic structure of the Constitution is not destroyed .
It has been clarified by the Supreme Court of India that , being a part of the Constitution , the Preamble can be subjected to Constitutional Amendments exercised under article 368 , however , the basic structure can not be altered .
FORTY - SECOND
AMENDMENT Section::::Forty - second Amendment .
The preamble has been amended only once so far .
On 18 December 1976 , during the Emergency in India , the Indira Gandhi government pushed through several changes in the Forty - second Amendment of the constitution .
A committee under the chairmanship of Sardar Swaran Singh recommended that this amendment be enacted after being consulted to study the question of amending the constitution in the light of past experience .
Through this amendment , the words " socialist " and " secular " were added between the words " Sovereign " and " democratic " and the words " unity of the Nation " were changed to " unity and integrity of the Nation " .
REFERENCES