ADVANCED EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN Advanced emergency medical technician ( AEMT ) is provider of prehospital emergency medical services in the United States .
A transition to this level of training from the Emergency Medical Technician - Intermediate ( EMT - I ) , which had somewhat less training , began in 2013 and has been implemented by most states at this point .
The AEMT is not intended to deliver definitive medical care in most cases , but rather to augment prehospital critical care and provide rapid on - scene treatment .
AEMTs are most usually employed in ambulance services , working in conjunction with EMTs and paramedics , however are also commonly found in fire departments and law enforcement agencies as non - transporting first responders .
Ambulances operating at the AEMT level of care are commonplace in rural areas , and occasionally found in larger cities as part of a tiered - response system , but are overall much less common than EMT and Paramedic level Ambulances .
The AEMT provides a low - cost , high - benefit option to provide advanced - level care when the paramedic level of care is not feasible .
The AEMT is authorized to provide limited advanced life support , which is beyond the scope of an EMT .
EDUCATION AND TRAINING Section::::Education and training .
Advanced EMTs must be certified as EMTs prior to seeking certification as an AEMT in most states .
However , in some states AEMT is the introductory level and may not require prerequisites .
Certification as an AEMT involves a class lasting from three to six months citation needed , the curriculum for which is largely outlined by the NAEMT but can vary slightly from state to state .
AEMT training is regulated at both the state and federal level .
At the federal level , the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) has developed a minimum content and hour curriculum , known as the National Standard Curriculum , but this is not binding on the states .
Along with classroom time , the AEMT student is required to complete several hours of clinical experience in an advanced life support ambulance or other ALS environment such as an emergency department .
During these clinical hours , the AEMT student must successfully demonstrate full practical knowledge of skills learned .
Upon completion of all classroom and practical skills hours , AEMT students must successfully pass a standardized psychomotor and cognitive assessment before they can be certified .
AEMTs are trained to provide many aspects of Advanced Life Support care .
In many states , AEMTs are considered Advanced Life Support providers .
Some states use terms such as Limited Advanced Life Support ( LALS )
Intermediate Life Support ( ILS ) to differnatate between the Paramedic and AEMT scope of practices .
HISTORICAL Section::::Historical .
In the 1970 's as EMS levels were being designated , the NREMT issued certifications at only two levels ; EMT - Ambulance and EMT - Paramedic .
During the late 1970 's and early 1980 's some states started their own designations at levels in - between EMT - A and EMT - P.
In the early 80 's , the NREMT Board of Directors adopted a new national certification ; EMT - Intermediate , based on several state 's recommendations .
In 1985 the Department of Transportation developed the first national standard curriculum for this new level of EMT / Intermediate .
The 1985 course provided advanced knowledge and mainly three " advanced interventions " ( at that time ) ; IV 's , MAST trouser application and use of the Esophageal Obturator Airway .
Simply stated , EMT - I care centered on trauma patients .
Soon after 1985 some states started adding " enhancements " ( skills ) to the Intermediate and others adopted a more expansive level called Cardiac Care which included some ACLS drugs .
In 1994 a blue ribbon panel of EMS stakeholders gathered and endorsed the EMS Education and Practice Blueprint .
That blueprint was to resolve the fragmented levels of Intermediates used across the nation .
In 1999 the Department of Transportation , based upon the blueprint , developed a national standard curriculum for the EMT - Intermediate .
Immediately it ran into political opposition and the National Association of State EMS Directors ( now the National Association of State EMS Officials ) asked the NREMT Board to continue to offer Intermediate certifications at both the former ( I-85 ) and the new ( I-99 ) designated levels .
EMT - I/85
Section::::EMT - I/85 .
EMT - I/85 is a level of EMT - I training formulated by the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians in 1985 .
This training level includes more invasive procedures than are covered at the EMT - Basic level , including IV therapy , the use of advanced airway devices , and provides for advanced assessment skills .
The EMT - I/85 typically administered the same medications as an EMT - B ( oxygen , oral glucose , activated charcoal , epinephrine auto - injectors ( EpiPens ) , nitroglycerin , and metered - dose inhalers such as albuterol ) .
However , in some states they were also allowed to administer naloxone , D50 , and glucagon .
Like all other EMT levels , their scope of practice was governed by the state and/or their Medical Director .
EMT - I/99 Section::::EMT - I/99 .
The EMT - I/99 level was the closest level of certification to paramedic , and allowed many techniques not available to the EMT - I/85 or EMT - Basic .
These techniques included needle decompression of a tension pneumothorax , endotracheal intubation , nasogastric tube placement , use of cardiac event monitors / ECGs , and administering medication to control certain cardiac arrhythmias .
ADVANCED
EMT Section::::Advanced EMT .
The advanced EMT or AEMT is the new mid - level EMS provider that has been introduced at the national level according to the new national EMS scope of practice model .
The AEMT replaced the EMT - I/85 and EMT - I/99 , however some states have continued to teach similar levels , but they are not nationally recognized .
The new scope consists of all EMT level skills , basic airway management and the insertion of supraglottic airways , suctioning of an already intubated patient , usage of a CPAP device , initiation of peripheral intravenous therapy , pediatric and adult intraosseous placement and several pharmacological interventions beyond the EMT level .
These pharmacological interventions include administering * Non - medicated intravenous fluids ( e.g. 0.9 % normal saline )
* Sublingual nitroglycerin * Epinephrine 1:1,000 for anaphylaxis and Epinephrine 1:10,000 for cardiac arrest
* Dextrose 50 % , dextrose 25 % , and glucagon for hypoglycemia * Naloxone for opioid overdoses * Nitrous oxide for pain management * Inhaled beta agonist medications ( e.g. albuterol and ipratropium ) for respiratory emergencies caused by asthma , COPD , etc .
Other states may use different names for the above and often have a scope of practice beyond the minimal national standards .
The EMT - I/99 had a total of three recertification cycles to meet the requirements to transition to the paramedic level , while the EMT - I/85 had two recertification cycles to transition to the AEMT .
SCOPE OF PRACTICE Section::::Scope of practice .
In addition to the standards established by the United States Department of Transportation ( DOT ) , some states issue licenses for more specialized levels of training .
The minimal psychomotor scope of practice at the national level for an AEMT includes Alaska has an EMT - II , which is very similar to the I/85 standard , and the EMT - III , which is closer to the I/99 standard .
A sponsoring physician can broaden the scope of an EMT - III beyond state - defined protocols by providing additional training and quality control measures .
This means that additional drugs and procedures ( including wound suturing ) can be accomplished by an appropriately trained EMT - III .
The EMT - III program is a short upgrade program , and does not generally receive reciprocity with other states .
Arkansas licenses EMS providers at the levels of EMT , AEMT , and Paramedic , following the NREMT guidelines for these levels .
In addition to the National Scope of Practice , AEMT 's in Arkansas can start Intraosseous infusions in Adults and provide CPAP to patients with pulmonary edema .
AEMT 's in Arkansas are becoming more commonplace , especially in areas where 911 service has been traditionally provided by BLS - level services .
AEMT 's and Paramedics in Arkansas are allowed to provide Advanced Interventions when off - duty , if in their normal coverage area .
California uses an EMT designation which is equivalent to the national EMT - Basic , and advanced EMT , which is the intermediate level or limited advanced life support , followed by paramedic , ALS level .
Iowa EMT - Basics can administer EpiPen per protocol , insert a Combitube , and set up and maintain ( but not start )
an IV that is non - medicated as well as all other basic skills .
EMT - Intermediates can establish an IV in addition to the EMT - Basic skills .
An Iowa Paramedic is a NREMT - Intermediate/99 and is not the highest level of care in Iowa .
This allows them to insert ET tubes and perform needle decompression , manual defibrillation and medication administration .
The Iowa Paramedic Specialist is the NREMT - Paramedic .
Iowa also has a Critical Care endorsement for Paramedic Specialists .
Massachusetts recognizes the DOT levels of EMT - B , AEMT , and EMT - P. EMT - Intermediates in Massachusetts followed the same protocols as the EMT - Basic , but were allowed to start IVs , perform fluid resuscitation , perform an ALS assessment , and insert advanced airways such as endotracheal tubes , Combitubes , and laryngeal mask airways .
The Intermediate level in Massachusetts has been phased out and replaced by the EMT - Advanced ; however most of the scope of practice remained the same .
Maine recognizes three levels , EMT Basic , EMT - Advanced , and EMT - Paramedic .
EMT - Advanced in the state of Maine can provide many different treatments including IV therapy , EKG monitoring , 12 lead EKG placement , dextrose ( D50 ) , glucagon , and other medications .
Advanced EMTs can also place laryngeal mask airway devices and use CPAP when needed .
Some treatments and medications require consultation with online medical direction .
Michigan uses the National Registry AEMT examination , but does not require continued national registration when an AEMT renews .
New York State has an AEMT - CC ( Advanced EMT - Critical Care ) certification , which is unique to New York , and is more advanced than a nationally recognized AEMT .
In addition to the national scope of practice , New York also authorizes its AEMT - CCs to intubate patients and do three lead ecg monitoring as well as twelve lead in certain counties , in addition to providing certain cardiac medications and cardiac care , including cardioversion .
In more recent years , New York has expanded its AEMT - CC level to include the administration of certain narcotics and some additional skills .
In order to transition to the national standard , NYS has introduced an additional AEMT certification that meets national standard as of 2013 .
It still must be recognized by its regional EMS councils in order for those regions to begin implementing its use .
However , progress has been steady , with the most recent county to accept the new level of certification being Nassau County ( located on Long Island ) .
Nassau recognized this level in mid 2017 .
In 2018 , NYS will begin a 10-year phase - out of its unique AEMT - CC level of certification .
However , one should note that no advanced EMT certifications are recognized in New York City except at volunteer agencies such as Hatzalah EMS and Central Park Ambulance .
One either functions as an EMT - B or a Paramedic within FDNY and affiliated services .
Oklahoma recognized an EMT - Cardiac level until recently .
However , that level has been phased out and providers in Oklahoma at the EMT - Cardiac level have since been trained and certified to the paramedic level or downgraded to EMT - I. Pennsylvania uses the National Registry AEMT examination , but does not require continued national registration when an AEMT renews .
The Pennsylvania scope for AEMTs is similar to the national scope except Pennsylvania does not allow AEMTs to administer nalaxone intravenously in Pennsylvania , AEMTs can not function independently and a Paramedic should be called to every call where Care is needed above the BLS level ( even if the IALS provider is capable of performing the interventions )
Rhode Island 's first - level ALS provider is EMT - Cardiac , which is unique to Rhode Island and Virginia .
( Virginia has recently phased out the Cardiac Tech program . )
The EMT - C is a certification between the EMT - I and EMT - P , allowing the use of more cardiac drugs than the EMT - I , but fewer than the EMT - P.
The time and cost of an EMT - C program is generally less than one third that of an EMT - P program .
EMT - C or higher licensure may be required by Rhode Island fire departments , who provide emergency medical services in the majority of the state .
Tennessee EMTs are licensed at either the EMT - IV ( Intravenous Therapy ) Level or the EMT - Paramedic Level .
EMT - IVs are trained to the NREMT - B standard in accordance with DOT regulations , as well as receive additional training in advanced airway management , administration of epinephrine 1:1000 in anaphylaxis , administration of nebulized and aerosolized beta-2 agonists such as Xopenex and albuterol , administration of D50W and D25W , IV therapy and access , and trauma life support including the use of MAST trousers .
EMT - IVs can also administer nitroglycerin and aspirin in the event of cardiac emergencies , and can give glucagon .
EMT - IVs can also administer the Mark 1 auto injector kit for organophosphate poisoning and suspected nerve gas exposure .
The State of Tennessee Board of EMS is currently evaluating allowing EMT - IVs to administer naloxone and nitrous oxide as well .
The board has accepted the new levels of EMR , EMT , EMT - Advanced , and Paramedic .
Gap analysis has been completed by the state and the board has moved to allow up to 4 years for the EMT - IV to transition to EMT - Advanced by way of an eight - hour course , choosing to let all EMT - IV 's and Paramedics under the current standard be renewed as usual for this cycle .
In Virginia , the first level of ALS is EMT - Enhanced ( previously Shock Trauma ) , which is unique to Virginia .
It is essentially equivalent to the EMT - I/85 .
The EMT - Enhanced can start IV lines , perform dual - lumen airway insertion , and administer some medications such as D50W , glucagon , albuterol , epinephrine , and sometimes narcotics .
They can not , however , administer any cardiac medications .
The next level of ALS is EMT - Intermediate , which is equivalent to the I/99 level of certification .
In most counties , the EMT - I operates under the same protocols as the EMT - Paramedic .
There are a few procedures that only paramedics can perform , including rapid sequence intubation , surgical cricothyrotomy , and needle cricothyrotomy .
Virginia phased out its Cardiac Tech level and replaced it with its Intermediate level .
In the state of Washington , EMT - Basic protocols are similar to those in Iowa .
Certified EMT - B personnel can administer EpiPen per state protocols and can insert a Combitube .
The Washington EMT - B can set up and maintain an IV that is non - medicated , but EMT - I certification is required to start the IV.WA Office of Emergency Medical and Trauma System ( May 2009 )
Some county protocols ( such as Jefferson ) accept an EMT / ILS Tech which , in addition to all EMT - I and EMT - B skills , can administer D50W , naloxone , albuterol , and can now draw up epinephrine in addition to using the EpiPen .
Wisconsin offers an EMT - IV - Technician certification for the EMT - Basic , allowing them to start basic IV lines , treat for hypovolemic shock , and administer naloxone , D50W , and a limited number of other medications .
This level of training is often used in non - urban areas where hospitals may be sparse and advanced life support intercepts or aeromedical transports can take a great deal of time .
Additionally , some private ambulance companies employ EMT - IV Technicians for interfacility transports which only require IV therapy and do not necessitate the specialized advanced care of a paramedic .
SEE ALSO
* Emergency medical responder levels by state * National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians
* National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians
* Emergency Medical Services in the United States * Wilderness emergency medical technician
*
Medic
*
Combat
medic * Corpsman * 68W * Rescue squad
* Pararescue REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians
* National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians
* National EMS Memorial Service * National Highway Traffic Safety Agency , Office of Emergency Medical Services
* The Difference Between an EMT and a Paramedic * EMT City , large community for EMTs and Paramedics