TSUNAMIS AFFECTING
THE BRITISH ISLES Tsunamis affecting the British Isles are extremely uncommon , and there have only been two confirmed cases in recorded history .
Meteotsunamis are somewhat more common , especially on the southern coasts of England around the English and Bristol Channels .
CONFIRMED TSUNAMIS SCOTLAND ( 6100 BC )
Section::::Confirmed tsunamis .
Section::::Scotland ( 6100 BC ) .
The east coast of Scotland was struck by a high tsunami around 6100 BC , during the Mesolithic period .
The wave was caused by the massive underwater Storegga slide off Norway .
The tsunami even washed over some of the Shetland Islands .
Tsunamite ( the deposits left by a tsunami ) dating from this event can be found at various locations around the coastal areas of Scotland , and are also a tourist feature in the Montrose Basin , where there is a layer of deposited sand about thick .
At the time , what became the east coast of England was connected to the areas of Denmark and the Netherlands by a low - lying land bridge , now known to archaeologists as Doggerland .
The area is believed to have had a coastline of lagoons , marshes , mudflats , and beaches , and may have been the richest hunting , fowling and fishing ground in Europe at the time .
Much of this land would have been inundated by the tsunami , with a catastrophic impact on the local human population .
LISBON EARTHQUAKE ( 1755 )
Section::::Lisbon earthquake ( 1755 ) .
The coast of Cornwall was hit by a three - metre high tsunami on 1 November 1755 , at around 14:00 .
The waves were caused by the 1755 Lisbon earthquake .
The tsunami took almost four hours to reach the UK .
The tsunami was also observed along the south coast of England and on the River Thames in London .
Contemporary reports say that there were three of these tsunami waves , and that the sea receded very quickly , then rose up .
At St Michael 's Mount , the sea rose suddenly and then retired ; ten minutes later , it rose very rapidly , then ebbed equally rapidly .
The sea rose in Penzance and at Newlyn ; the same effect was reported at St Ives and Hayle .
Although there is no record of the overall death toll , the 19th - century French writer Arnold Boscowitz claimed that " great loss of life and property occurred upon the coasts of Cornwall " .
The tsunami also reached Galway in Ireland , at a height of two metres , and caused some serious damage to the " Spanish Arch " section of the city wall .
METEOTSUNAMI ( 1929 )
Section::::Meteotsunami ( 1929 ) .
On 20 July 1929 a wave reported as being between 3.5 and 6 metres high struck the south coast including busy tourist beaches at Worthing , Brighton , Hastings and Folkestone .
Two people drowned and the wave was attributed to a squall line travelling along the English Channel .
SOUTH COAST ( 2011 )
Section::::South coast ( 2011 ) .
A small tsunami with a peak wave height anomaly of 40 cm occurred on 29 June 2011 along the south coast of England .
The tsunami was described as mild and there were no records of injuries or damage .
Video footage clearly showed the tsunami and there were reports of fish leaping out the water and hair lifting up because of a static charge .
Initial media speculation attributed the event to an underwater landslide , as no earthquakes were recorded at the time .
However the British Geological Survey concluded that it was unlikely to have been caused by a submarine landslide and was probably a meteotsunami .
POSSIBLE TSUNAMIS ENGLAND AND WALES ( 1014 )
Section::::Possible tsunamis .
Section::::England and Wales ( 1014 ) .
A widespread flood was reported in the Anglo - Saxon Chronicle to have occurred in western Britain , from the coast of Cumbria to Kent , on 28 September 1014 .
William of Malmesbury stated that " A tidal wave ... grew to an astonishing size such as the memory of man can not parallel , so as to submerge villages many miles inland and overwhelm and drown their inhabitants .
" The event was also mentioned in Welsh bardic chronicles .
On 28 September 1014 ◦ Accounts suggest that a flood affected Kent , Sussex , Hampshire , Cumbria , and Mount 's Bay in Cornwall , where the Bay was " inundated by a ' mickle seaflood ' when many towns and people were drowned " .
DOVER STRAITS EARTHQUAKE ( 1580 ) Section::::Dover Straits earthquake ( 1580 ) .
On 6 April 1580 a 5.8 magnitude earthquake occurred with its epicentre on the sea bed close to Calais .
Giant waves were reported at the time and hundreds of people were killed when ships were sunk by the waves and the low - lying coastal land around Calais was inundated by the sea .
In Dover , part of the chalk cliff collapsed , taking with it part of Dover Castle .
A contemporary French account states " in the city of Calais such a horrible and terrible earthquake came to pass that a great part of the houses fell , and even the sea overflowed into the city and did ruin and drown a great number of houses , and numerous persons perished , and a great multitude of beasts lost which were at pasture outside this city . "
In recent years , it has been suggested that these waves were a tsunami and not seiches .
It is unlikely that the earthquake alone was strong enough to rupture the sea bed to trigger a tsunami , but it appears to have been sufficiently powerful to have caused an undersea landslide that was capable of generating a tsunami , as happened in Papua New Guinea in 1998 , killing around 2500 people .
BRISTOL CHANNEL ( 1607 ) Section::::Bristol Channel ( 1607 ) .
The Bristol Channel floods , on the morning of 30 January 1607 , are suggested to be a tsunami caused by an earthquake , a landslide from the Irish coast or a freak combination of high tides and a storm surge .
There is historical evidence suggesting a tsunami , including eyewitness accounts describing a wave as " mighty hilles of water " – with sparks – and a wave that travelled so fast that not even a greyhound could escape it .
There is an ancient , large fault off the south - western tip of Ireland , which scientists say could possibly have triggered a tsunami in the Irish Sea .
The continental shelf of Ireland is also very steep , with a drop of about 100 metres , and scientists believe the 1607 tsunami might have been triggered by an undersea landslide here , if not an earthquake .
Geologists say that after studying the disaster they are more convinced that it was a tsunami , rather than a simple storm surge .
NORTH SEA ( 1858 )
Section::::North Sea ( 1858 ) .
A tsunami was reported by witnesses in England , Germany , the Netherlands and Denmark on 5 June 1858 .
A witness stated that at 09:15 , the sea in Pegwell Bay , North Kent , " suddenly receded about 200 yards and returned to its former position within the space of about 20 minutes " .
The Times reported severe thunderstorms and flooding in the west of England on the same day .
Due to the weather conditions , it may have been a meteotsunami .
FUTURE TSUNAMIS Section::::Future tsunamis .
In the 1990s , geologists realised that the Cumbre Vieja volcano in La Palma , in the Canary Islands off North Africa , could pose a tsunami risk to Britain and Ireland , as it is seemingly unstable .
They concluded that a future volcanic eruption will result in the mass of rock alongside the volcanoes breaking off and falling into the sea as a massive landslide .
This in turn will generate a huge tsunami , which will surge into the Atlantic Ocean and hit Spain , Portugal , the east coast of the United States , France , the southern and western parts of Ireland and the south coast of England .
It is estimated that the waves will take around 6 hours to reach the British Isles , and that when they do they will be around 10 metres ( 30 ft ) high .
Britain would be badly hit , and it is believed by some that if nothing is done , thousands of lives will be lost .
There is considerable controversy about the accuracy of these predictions .
Researchers at Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands found the island to be much more stable than was widely believed , estimating that it would take at least another 10,000 years for the island to grow enough for there to be a danger .
SEE ALSO
* List of earthquakes in the British Isles
* List of natural disasters in the British Isles NOTES CITATIONS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS