HELLO , LITTLE GIRL
" Hello , Little Girl " is the 83rd episode of the ABC television series , Desperate Housewives .
It is the thirteenth episode of the show 's fourth season and aired on April 27 , 2008 , in the United States .
The episode title references the Stephen Sondheim song of the same name from the musical Into the Woods .
The song " Wow " by Kylie Minogue was released as promotion for this episode .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The next morning , after the ball , Lynette asks Tom where he had been when the fire took place at Rick 's restaurant .
Tom denies that he did it
and he says he was listening to the car radio about the Cavaliers ' basketball game and assures her that he did not start the fire .
Rick comes by to the pizzeria and confronts Tom about the fire and that he found a matchbook from Scavo 's pizzeria at the back of his restaurant .
Tom again denies that he committed the arson and the men start to fight .
Lynette tries to break the fight but fails and Andrew has to call the police .
The incident leads to the police for an investigation about the fire .
While waiting for Tom being questioned by the police , Rick expresses to Lynette that he missed her so much , and that makes Lynette uncomfortable
so she barges into the investigation room .
Lynette lies to the police that she saw Tom leave the ball momentarily , providing him with an alibi .
After the police 's investigation , Lynette and Tom argue when she still does not believe Tom .
Tom reveals that he did not trust her with Rick , even though Lynette assured him that nothing happened between them .
Later that night , Lynette finds out that Porter and Preston are the ones who set Rick 's restaurant on fire , as the twins worried that Rick may try to take Lynette away from her family .
Katherine decides to start a business as a caterer to earn some money and she asks Bree to join .
At first Bree refuses due to previous conflicts , but later agrees after some convincing .
When Dylan is driving back home one day , she is stopped by a police officer for speeding , and the police officer lets her go with a warning .
She meets the police officer again the next day , and he reveals that he is her father , Wayne Davis .
He tells her that he tried to track her down and stopped her even though she was not speeding as he just wanted to see Dylan .
He admits that he has been abusive to Katherine in the past , but he tells Dylan that her mother is not just a victim in this incident , and also beat him more severely than he would beat her .
However , Dylan wants to talk to Wayne and she swears that she will not tell her mother about meeting him .
When Dylan tries to help out Katherine to print out invitation cards for the anniversary Katherine is hired to plan , Dylan takes the opportunity to have dinner with her father with the excuse that she is going to the print shop .
Carlos gets a dog named Roxy to aid his mobility but Gabrielle wants the dog to help around the house .
However , Roxy turns out to be more than a mere guide dog to Carlos .
Whenever Gabrielle argues with Carlos , Roxy growls and barks at her .
Gaby then reaches to her boiling point when Carlos allows Roxy to sleep on their bed .
She then drives Roxy back to the dog training center the next morning
when Carlos is asleep , however Roxy manages to chase Gaby 's car back to their house .
She lies to Carlos that Roxy had run away , but soon he discovers the truth when Steve , the coach from the dog training center calls him .
Edie drops by their house to bring them dog food , that Carlos had asked her to get , one day and tells Gabrielle to be more kind to Carlos since he has changed .
She even warns Gaby that if she does not treat Carlos right , other women will be willing to do so .
In the end Gabrielle allows the dog to sleep with Carlos and her in their bed .
Susan is becoming very emotional when Bree and Orson are moving back to their house and Mike returns home from the rehabilitation center .
Julie tells Mike about Orson 's admitting that he ran over Mike during his sleepwalking .
Mike learns the truth about his nearly fatal accident when he confronts Orson the next day , when Orson breaks into tears and asks him for his forgiveness .
When Mike tells Susan about the incident , she storms into Orson 's house and scolds Orson , and that news shocks Bree as well .
Mike asks Susan to forgive Orson for his wrongdoings as he has done a lot of regrettable things himself and she had forgiven him , too .
He also tells her that Orson has already suffered hell and that his actions are understandable , and that reporting him to the police would leave Bree without a husband and Benjamin without a father .
Susan reconciles with Bree the next day and sees Orson packing his bags and leaving the house , indicating that Bree is not forgiving Orson for his past actions .
TITLE Section::::Title .
The title is a reference to the Stephen Sondheim musical Into the Woods .
RECEPTION
*
This episode attracted 16.35 million viewers in its original US airing .
* 11.60 Million viewers watched this episode in the UL coming 17th in weekly ratings .
GOOFS
*
In the previous episode , Wayne had double circled Dylan 's face in the newspaper .
In this episode , her has single circled Katherine 's face and Dylan 's face .
This is seen when he pulls Dylan over .
AWARDS
* Teri Hatcher submitted this episode for consideration of her work for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards .
* Brent Kinsman and Shane Kinsman submitted this episode for consideration of their work for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards .
* Jason Gedrick also submitted this episode for consideration of his work for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards .
INTERNATIONAL TITLES
* Czech : Ahoj , holčičko
( Hello , Little Girl )
* French : Partir en fumée ( To go up in smoke ) *
French Canadian :
La transgression des règles ( Breaking the rules ) * German : Hallo , kleines Mädchen ( Hello , Little Girl )
* Hebrew : לעבור על החוק ( LaAvor Al HaHok ;
To Break the Law )
* Hungarian : Helló , kislány !
( Hello , Little Girl )
* Spanish : ¡ Hola ! nena
( Hello ! Baby )
* Greek : Γειά σου , Μικρό κορίτσι ( Hello , Little Girl ) REFERENCES