JOHANNA ( CHARACTER )
Johanna is a fictional character appearing in the story of Sweeney Todd .
In the original version of the tale , the penny dreadful The String of Pearls ( 1846–7 ) , her name is Johanna Oakley and she is no relation of Todd .
In the popular by Stephen Sondheim , inspired by Christopher Bond 's play Sweeney Todd , the Demon Barber of Fleet Street ( 1973 ) , she is referred to simply as Johanna and is portrayed as the daughter of Benjamin Barker and his wife , Lucy .
In this version she is the ward of Judge Turpin , the man who falsely convicted her father and raped her mother .
IN THE STRING OF PEARLS Section::::In
The String of Pearls .
In The String of Pearls Johanna Oakley is the lover of a sailor named Mark Ingestrie , who seems to have gone missing at sea .
One of his shipmates , Lieutenant Thornhill , comes to London with this sad news and also brings a gift of a string of pearls for Johanna from Mark .
Thornhill , himself , however , also goes missing - last seen entering Sweeney Todd 's establishment .
One of Thornhill 's seafaring friends , Colonel Jeffery , is alerted to the disappearance of Thornhill by the latter 's faithful dog , Hector , and investigates his whereabouts .
He is joined by Johanna who wants to know what happened to her lover , Mark Ingestrie .
Johanna 's suspicions of Sweeney Todd 's involvement lead her to the desperate and dangerous expedient of dressing up as a boy and entering Todd 's employment , after his last assistant , Tobias Ragg , has been incarcerated in a madhouse .
Soon the full grisly horror of Todd 's activities are discovered and the dismembered remains of hundreds of his victims found in the crypt underneath St Dunstan 's church .
Meanwhile it is discovered that Johanna 's lover , Mark Ingestrie , is not dead , but has come to London in reduced circumstances and has been imprisoned in the cellars beneath Mrs. Lovett 's pie shop and put to work as the cook .
Threatened with being killed and made into a meat - pie himself , he eventually escapes and makes the startling announcement to customers that " Mrs Lovett 's pies are made of human flesh ! " .
Mark then marries Johanna and they live happily ever after .
IN SONDHEIM 'S SWEENEY TODD
Section::::In Sondheim 's Sweeney Todd .
In Stephen Sondheim 's musical , , after Benjamin Barker is sent away to Australia , and Lucy raped and driven insane , Judge Turpin takes their daughter Johanna as his ward , raising her as his own .
He keeps her in her chamber at his estate like a prisoner , with her only connection to the outside world being her window .
Judge Turpin plans to make Johanna his wife ; the idea repulses her , and she rejects him .
Anthony Hope falls in love with her at first sight and vows to rescue her from her containment .
Judge Turpin discovers her plot to escape and sends her to Fogg 's Asylum for the mentally deranged .
She is rescued by Anthony , posing as a wig maker 's apprentice .
During the escape , she is forced to kill Fogg , the Asylum owner , when Anthony can not bring himself to do so .
Disguised as a sailor , she is taken to Sweeney Todd 's barber shop , where he has been longing to see her .
When an insane beggar woman ( later revealed to be her mother ) pursues her in the upper room , Johanna hides herself in a large trunk .
From there she presumably witnesses Todd 's murders of the Beggar Woman and the Judge .
She is nearly murdered by her father when he discovers her , as he does not recognize her as his daughter ( seeing as he had never met her since infancy and because she is disguised as a young man ) .
She survives when Mrs. Lovett screams in the basement bakehouse , distracting Todd and allowing her to escape .
In the final scene , Johanna , Anthony and two policemen encounter Toby in the bakehouse , mindlessly turning the meat grinder , surrounded by the corpses of Todd , Lucy , Mrs. Lovett , and Turpin .
Presumably she elopes with Anthony after the events of the show .
Much of Johanna 's dialogue and lyrics subtly reflect that she may be suffering from living under lock and key , confined by the surveillance of an oppressive and more powerful party .
During the song Kiss Me , for example , she repeatedly interrupts Anthony 's plans for elopement , believing that she has heard the Judge returning home , before calming and embracing him .
This more confined portrayal of her character differs from the earlier The String Of Pearls version , in which she is offered more autonomy and a perhaps more assertive or adventurous control over her destiny by dressing as a boy .
In Tim Burton 's , much of Johanna 's music is cut out including the Kiss Me sequence and her part in the second act Quartet .
She has little dialogue , reducing her part to a nearly silent role .
After being rescued from the asylum by Anthony , she does not kill Fogg , but instead leaves him to be savagely torn apart by the screeching horde of deranged female inmates with Anthony 's consent .
Considering that cannibalism is a central theme in the film , the emaciated , unkempt and agitated appearance of the female inmates in Fogg 's presence foreshadows the manner of his grisly death at their hands .
The ending is changed slightly : instead of her running out of the Barber Shop , Todd , hearing Mrs. Lovett scream , deliberately lets her go ( still without recognizing her ) asking her to forget his face .
He leaves her sitting in the barber chair , after which she is not seen again , leaving it unclear if she reunites with Anthony , as the film also suggests that Johanna finds the idea of eloping with Anthony to be a naive solution to her traumatic upbringing .
In this version Johanna is sixteen years old .
In " Poor Thing " , Mrs Lovett describes Johanna as the " year - old kid " , which , added to the fifteen years Sweeney has spent in Australia , makes her sixteen .
PERFORMERS
*
Eve Lister played the role in the 1936 film adaptation .
Billed as " Johanna Oakley " .
MUSICAL PERFORMERS
*
Sarah Rice played Johanna in the original Broadway production .
* Mandy Moore played Johanna in the 1980 London Production .
* Betsy Joslyn portrayed her in the filmed version of the 1982 tour .
* Jayne Wisener played Johanna in the 2007 film adaptation directed by Tim Burton .
* Celia Keenan - Bolger played Johanna in the 2004 Production at the Kennedy Center .
* Lauren Molina in the 2005 John Doyle revival , and in the 2007 - 2008 John Doyle revival international tour .
* Cassie Skinner in the 2009 Production at the Roleystone Theatre , Perth , Western Australia .
* Lucy May Barker in the 2012 revival at the Adelphi Theatre , London
* Erin Mackey in the 2014 New York Philharmonic production .
SONGS Section::::Performers .
Section::::Songs .
In the musical Johanna sings only one song by herself .
The tracks were all composed by Stephen Sondheim .
These include : * " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Prologue ) " ( with Company )
*
* * " Green Finch & Linnet Bird " * * " Kiss Me ( Part I ) " ( with Anthony )
*
* * " Kiss Me ( Part II / Quartet ) " ( with Anthony , Beadle Bamford , Judge Turpin )
*
* * " Johanna ( Quartet ) " ( with Anthony , Todd and Beggar Woman )
*
* * " City on Fire / Searching " ( with Company , Anthony / Todd , Mrs. Lovett and Beggar Woman )
*
* * " Ah , Miss ( Reprise ) " ( with Anthony )
*
* * " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd ( Epilogue ) " ( with Company )
*
* REFERENCES