ENERGY SUBSIDIES Energy subsidies are measures that keep prices for consumers below market levels or for producers above market levels , or reduce costs for consumers and producers .
Energy subsidies may be direct cash transfers to producers , consumers , or related bodies , as well as indirect support mechanisms , such as tax exemptions and rebates , price controls , trade restrictions , and limits on market access .
They may also include energy conservation subsidies .
The development of today 's major modern energy industries have all relied on substantial subsidy support .
The elimination of energy subsidies is widely seen as one of the most effective ways of reducing global carbon emissions .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Main arguments for energy subsidies are : * Security of supply – subsidies are used to ensure adequate domestic supply by supporting indigenous fuel production in order to reduce import dependency , or supporting overseas activities of national energy companies .
* Environmental improvement – subsidies are used to reduce pollution , including different emissions , and to fulfill international obligations ( e.g. Kyoto Protocol ) .
* Economic benefits – subsidies in the form of reduced prices are used to stimulate particular economic sectors or segments of the population , e.g. alleviating poverty and increasing access to energy in developing countries .
* Employment and social benefits – subsidies are used to maintain employment , especially in periods of economic transition .
Main arguments against energy subsidies are : *
Some energy subsidies counter the goal of sustainable development , as they may lead to higher consumption and waste , exacerbating the harmful effects of energy use on the environment , create a heavy burden on government finances and weaken the potential for economies to grow , undermine private and public investment in the energy sector .
Also , most benefits from fossil fuel subsidies in developing countries go to the richest 20 % of households .
* Impede the expansion of distribution networks and the development of more environmentally benign energy technologies , and do not always help the people that need them most .
*
The study conducted by the World Bank finds that subsidies to the large commercial businesses that dominate the energy sector are not justified .
However , under some circumstances it is reasonable to use subsidies to promote access to energy for the poorest households in developing countries .
Energy subsidies should encourage access to the modern energy sources , not to cover operating costs of companies .
The study conducted by the World Resources Institute finds that energy subsidies often go to capital intensive projects at the expense of smaller or distributed alternatives .
Types of energy subsidies are : * Direct financial transfers – grants to producers ; grants to consumers ; low - interest or preferential loans to producers .
* Preferential tax treatments – rebates or exemption on royalties , duties , producer levies and tariffs ; tax credit ; accelerated depreciation allowances on energy supply equipment .
* Trade restrictions – quota , technical restrictions and trade embargoes .
* Energy - related services provided by government at less than full cost – direct investment in energy infrastructure ; public research and development .
* Regulation of the energy sector – demand guarantees and mandated deployment rates ; price controls ; market - access restrictions ; preferential planning consent and controls over access to resources .
* Failure to impose external costs – environmental externality costs ; energy security risks and price volatility costs .
* Depletion Allowance – allows a deduction from gross income of up to ~27 % for the depletion of exhaustible resources ( oil , gas , minerals ) .
Overall , energy subsidies require coordination and integrated implementation , especially in light of globalization and increased interconnectedness of energy policies , thus their regulation at the World Trade Organization is often seen as necessary .
IMPACT OF FOSSIL FUEL SUBSIDIES
Section::::Impact of fossil fuel subsidies .
The degree and impact of fossil fuel studies is extensively studied .
Because fossil fuels are a leading contributor to climate change through greenhouse gases , fossil fuel subsidies increase emissions and exacerbate climate change .
The OECD 's inventory in 2015 determined an overall value of $ 160bn-$200bn per year between 2010 and 2014 relying on the WTO 's 1994 definition of fossil fuel subsidies as " financial contribution by a government " which " confers a benefit " on its recipient .
This is the only internationally agreed definition of the term .
A 2016 IMF study estimated that global fossil fuel subsidies were $ 5.3 trillion in 2015 , which represents 6.5 % of global GDP .
The study found that " China was the biggest subsidizer in 2013 ( $ 1.8 trillion ) , followed by the United States ( $ 0.6 trillion ) , and Russia , the European Union , and India ( each with about $ 0.3 trillion ) .
" The authors estimated that the elimination of " subsidies would have reduced global carbon emissions in 2013 by 21 % and fossil fuel air pollution deaths 55 % , while raising revenue of 4 % , and social welfare by 2.2 % , of global GDP .
" This study is controversial for its radical break with previous definitions of subsidies by redefining externalities as a subsidy , as well as an excessively broad application of social costs as oil externalities .
The externalities accounted for are broad enough that oil companies not paying for automobile accidents is considered a subsidy .
According to the International Energy Agency , the elimination of fossil fuel subsidies worldwide would be the one of the most effective ways of reducing greenhouse gases and battling global warming .
In May 2016 , the G7 nations set for the first time a deadline for ending most fossil fuel subsidies ; saying government support for coal , oil and gas should end by 2025 .
According to the OECD , subsidies supporting fossil fuels , particularly coal and oil , represent greater threats to the environment than subsidies to renewable energy .
Subsidies to nuclear power contribute to unique environmental and safety issues , related mostly to the risk of high - level environmental damage , although nuclear power contributes positively to the environment in the areas of air pollution and climate change .
According to Fatih Birol , Chief Economist at the International Energy Agency without a phasing out of fossil fuel subsidies , countries will not reach their climate targets .
A 2010 study by Global Subsidies Initiative compared global relative subsidies of different energy sources .
Results show that fossil fuels receive 0.8 US cents per kWh of energy they produce ( although it should be noted that the estimate of fossil fuel subsidies applies only to consumer subsidies and only within non - OECD countries ) , nuclear energy receives 1.7 cents / kWh , renewable energy ( excluding hydroelectricity ) receives 5.0 cents / kWh and bio - fuels receive 5.1 cents / kWh in subsidies .
In 2011 , IEA chief economist Faith Birol said the current $ 409 billion equivalent of fossil fuel subsidies are encouraging a wasteful use of energy , and that the cuts in subsidies is the biggest policy item that would help renewable energies get more market share and reduce CO emissions .
IMPACT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SUBSIDIES
Section::::Impact of renewable energy subsidies .
Global renewable energy subsidies reached $ 88 billion in 2011 .
According to the OECD , subsidies to renewable energy are generally considered more environmentally beneficial than fossil fuel subsidies , although the full range of environmental effects should be taken into account .
IEA POSITION ON SUBSIDIES Section::::IEA position on subsidies .
According to International Energy Agency ( IEA ) ( 2011 ) energy subsidies artificially lower the price of energy paid by consumers , raise the price received by producers or lower the cost of production .
"
Fossil fuels subsidies costs generally outweigh the benefits .
Subsidies to renewables and low - carbon energy technologies can bring long - term economic and environmental benefits " .
In November 2011 , an IEA report entitled Deploying Renewables 2011 said " subsidies in green energy technologies that were not yet competitive are justified in order to give an incentive to investing into technologies with clear environmental and energy security benefits " .
The IEA 's report disagreed with claims that renewable energy technologies are only viable through costly subsidies and not able to produce energy reliably to meet demand . "
A portfolio of renewable energy technologies is becoming cost - competitive in an increasingly broad range of circumstances , in some cases providing investment opportunities without the need for specific economic support , " the IEA said , and added that " cost reductions in critical technologies , such as wind and solar , are set to continue . "
Fossil - fuel consumption subsidies were $ 409 billion in 2010 , oil products being half of it .
Renewable - energy subsidies were $ 66 billion in 2010 and will reach $ 250 billion by 2035 , according to IEA .
Renewable energy is subsidized in order to compete in the market , increase their volume and develop the technology so that the subsidies become unnecessary with the development .
Eliminating fossil - fuel subsidies could bring economic and environmental benefits .
Phasing out fossil - fuel subsidies by 2020 would cut primary energy demand 5 % .
Since the start of 2010 , at least 15 countries have taken steps to phase out fossil - fuel subsidies .
According to IEA onshore wind may become competitive around 2020 in the European Union .
According to the IEA the phase - out of fossil fuel subsidies , over $ 500 billion annually , will reduce 10 % greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 .
SUBSIDIES BY COUNTRY
Section::::Subsidies by country .
The International Energy Agency estimates that governments subsidised fossil fuels by US $ 548 billion in 2013 .
Ten countries accounted for almost three - quarters of this figure .
At their meeting in September 2009 the G-20 countries committed to " rationalize and phase out over the medium term inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption " .
The 2010s have seen many countries reducing energy subsidies , for instance in July 2014
Ghana abolished all diesel and gasoline subsidies , whilst in the same month Egypt raised diesel prices 63 % as part of a raft of reforms intended to remove subsidies within 5 years .
The public energy subsidies for energy in Finland in 2013 were € 700 million for fossil energy and € 60 million for renewable energy ( mainly wood and wind ) .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
The energy policy of Turkey includes heavily subsidizing coal .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
According to a Congressional Budget Office testimony , roughly three - fourths of the projected cost of tax preferences for energy in 2016 was for renewable energy and energy efficiency .
An estimated $ 10.9 billion was directed toward renewable energy ; $ 2.7 billion , went to energy efficiency or electricity transmission .
Fossil fuels accounted for most of the remaining cost of energy - related tax preferences — an estimated $ 4.6 billion .
According to a 2015 estimate by the Obama administration , the US oil industry benefited from subsidies of about $ 4.6 billion per year .
A 2017 study by researchers at Stockholm Environment Institute published in the journal Nature Energy estimated that nearly half of U.S. oil production would be unprofitable without subsidies .
ALLOCATION OF SUBSIDIES IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Allocation of subsidies in the United States .
On March 13 , 2013 , Terry M. Dinan , senior advisor at the Congressional Budget Office , testified before the Subcommittee on Energy of the Committee on Science , Space , and Technology in the U.S. House of Representatives that federal energy tax subsidies would cost $ 16.4 billion that fiscal year , broken down as follows : * Renewable energy : $ 7.3 billion ( 45 percent ) * * Energy efficiency : $ 4.8 billion ( 29 percent )
* * Fossil fuels : $ 3.2 billion ( 20 percent )
* * Nuclear energy : $ 1.1 billion ( 7 percent ) *
In addition , Dinan testified that the U.S. Department of Energy would spend an additional $ 3.4 billion on financial Support for energy technologies and energy efficiency , broken down as follows : * Energy efficiency and renewable energy : $ 1.7 billion ( 51 percent )
* * Nuclear energy : $ 0.7 billion ( 22 percent )
* * Fossil energy research & development : $ 0.5 billion ( 15 percent )
* * Advanced Research Projects Agency — Energy : $ 0.3 billion ( 8 percent )
* * Electricity delivery and energy reliability : $ 0.1 billion ( 4 percent )
* A 2011 study by the consulting firm Management Information Services , Inc. ( MISI ) estimated the total historical federal subsidies for various energy sources over the years 1950–2010 .
The study found that oil , natural gas , and coal received $ 369 billion , $ 121 billion , and $ 104 billion ( 2010 dollars ) , respectively , or 70 % of total energy subsidies over that period .
Oil , natural gas , and coal benefited most from percentage depletion allowances and other tax - based subsidies , but oil also benefited heavily from regulatory subsidies such as exemptions from price controls and higher - than - average rates of return allowed on oil pipelines .
The MISI report found that non - hydro renewable energy ( primarily wind and solar ) benefited from $ 74 billion in federal subsidies , or 9 % of the total , largely in the form of tax policy and direct federal expenditures on research and development ( R&D ) .
Nuclear power benefited from $ 73 billion in federal subsidies , 9 % of the total , largely in the form of R&D , while hydro power received $ 90 billion in federal subsidies , 12 % of the total .
A 2009 study by the Environmental Law Institute assessed the size and structure of U.S. energy subsidies in 2002–08 .
The study estimated that subsidies to fossil fuel - based sources totaled about $ 72 billion over this period and subsidies to renewable fuel sources totaled $ 29 billion .
The study did not assess subsidies supporting nuclear energy .
The three largest fossil fuel subsidies were : * Foreign tax credit ( $ 15.3 billion ) * * Credit for production of non - conventional fuels ( $ 14.1 billion ) * * Oil and Gas exploration and development expense ( $ 7.1 billion ) * The three largest renewable fuel subsidies were : * Alcohol Credit for Fuel Excise Tax ( $ 11.6 billion ) * * Renewable Electricity Production Credit ( $ 5.2 billion ) * * Corn - Based Ethanol ( $ 5.0 billion ) * In the United States , the federal government has paid US$ 74 billion for energy subsidies to support R&D for nuclear power ( $ 50 billion ) and fossil fuels ( $ 24 billion ) from 1973 to 2003 .
During this same timeframe , renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency received a total of US $ 26 billion .
It has been suggested that a subsidy shift would help to level the playing field and support growing energy sectors , namely solar power , wind power , and bio - fuels .
However , many of the " subsidies " available to the oil and gas industries are general business opportunity credits , available to all US businesses ( particularly , the foreign tax credit mentioned above ) .
The value of industry - specific ( oil , gas , and coal ) subsidies in 2006 was estimated by the Texas State Comptroller to be $ 6.25 billion - about 60 % of the amount calculated by the Environmental Law Institute .
The balance of federal subsidies , which the comptroller valued at $ 7.4 billion , came from shared credits and deductions , and oil defense ( spending on the Strategic Petroleum Reserve , energy infrastructure security , etc . ) .
Critics allege that the most important subsidies to the nuclear industry have not involved cash payments , but rather the shifting of construction costs and operating risks from investors to taxpayers and ratepayers , burdening them with an array of risks including cost overruns , defaults to accidents , and nuclear waste management .
Critics claim that this approach distorts market choices , which they believe would otherwise favor less risky energy investments .
Many energy analysts , such as Clint Wilder , Ron Pernick and Lester Brown , have suggested that energy subsidies need to be shifted away from mature and established industries and towards high growth clean energy .
They also suggest that such subsidies need to be reliable , long - term and consistent , to avoid the periodic difficulties that the wind industry has had in the United States .
A 2012 study authored by researchers at the Breakthrough Institute , Brookings Institution , and World Resources Institute estimated that between 2009 and 2014 the federal government will spend $ 150 billion on clean energy through a combination of direct spending and tax expenditures .
Renewable electricity ( mainly wind , solar , geothermal , hydro , and tidal energy ) will account for the largest share of this expenditure , 32.1 % , while spending on liquid biofuels will account for the next largest share , 16.1 % .
Spending on multiple and other forms of clean energy , including energy efficiency , electric vehicles and advanced batteries , high - speed rail , grid and transportation electrification , nuclear , and advanced fossil fuel technologies , will account for the remaining share , 51.8 % .
Moreover , the report finds that absent federal action , spending on clean energy will decline by 75 % , from $ 44.3 billion in 2009 to $ 11.0 billion in 2014 .
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT ROLE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEW ENERGY INDUSTRIES Section::::United States government role in the development of new energy industries .
From civilian nuclear power to hydro , wind , solar , and shale gas , the United States federal government has played a central role in the development of new energy industries .
America 's nuclear power industry , which currently supplies about 20 % of the country 's electricity , has its origins in the Manhattan Project to develop atomic weapons during World War II .
From 1942 to 1945 , the United States invested $ 20 billion ( 2003 dollars ) into a massive nuclear research and deployment initiative .
But the achievement of the first nuclear weapon test in 1945 marked the beginning , not the end , of federal involvement in nuclear technologies .
President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's " Atoms for Peace " address in 1953 and the 1954 Atomic Energy Act committed the United States to develop peaceful uses for nuclear technology , including commercial energy generation .
The new National Laboratory system , established by the Manhattan Project , was maintained and expanded , and the government poured money into nuclear energy research and development .
Recognizing that research was not sufficient to spur the development of a nascent , capital - intensive industry , the federal government created financial incentives to spur the deployment of nuclear energy .
For example , the 1957 Price Anderson Act limited the liability of nuclear energy firms in case of serious accident and helped firms secure capital with federal loan guarantees .
In the favorable environment created by such incentives , more than 100 nuclear plants were built in the United States by 1973 .
Commercial wind power , today one of the fastest growing energy sectors , was also enabled through government support .
In the 1980s , the federal government pursued two different R&D efforts for wind turbine development .
The first was a " big science " effort by NASA and the Department of Energy ( DOE ) to use U.S. expertise in high - technology research and products to develop new large - scale wind turbines for electricity generation , largely from scratch .
A second , more successful R&D effort , sponsored by the DOE , focused on component innovations for smaller turbines that used the operational experience of existing turbines to inform future research agendas .
Joint research projects between the government and private firms produced a number of innovations that helped increase the efficiency of wind turbines , including twisted blades and special - purpose airfoils .
Publicly funded R&D was coupled with efforts to build a domestic market for new turbines .
At the federal level , this included tax credits and the passage of the Public Utilities Regulatory Policy Act ( PURPA ) , which required that utilities purchase power from some small renewable energy generators at avoided cost .
Both federal and state support for wind turbine development helped drive costs down considerably , but policy incentives at both the federal and state level were discontinued at the end of the decade .
However , after a nearly five - year federal policy hiatus in the late 1980s , the U.S. government enacted new policies to support the industry in the early 1990s .
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( NREL ) continued its support for wind turbine R&D , and also launched the Advanced Wind Turbine Program ( AWTP ) .
The goal of the AWTP was to reduce the cost of wind power to rates that would be competitive in the U.S. market .
Policymakers also introduced new mechanisms to spur the demand of new wind turbines and boost the domestic market , including a 1.5 cents per kilowatt - hour tax credit ( adjusted over time for inflation ) included in the 1992 Energy Policy Act .
Today the wind industry 's main subsidy support comes from the federal production tax credit .
The development of commercial solar power was also dependent on government support .
Solar PV technology was born in the United States , when Daryl Chapin , Calvin Fuller , and Gerald Pearson at Bell Labs first demonstrated the silicon solar photovoltaic cell in 1954 .
The first cells recorded efficiencies of four percent , far lower than the 25 percent efficiencies typical of some silicon crystalline cells today .
With the cost out of reach for most applications , developers of the new technology had to look elsewhere for an early market .
As it turned out , solar PV did make economic sense in one market segment : aerospace .
The United States Army and Air Force viewed the technology as an ideal power source for a top - secret project on earth - orbiting satellites .
The government contracted with Hoffman Electronics to provide solar cells for its new space exploration program .
The first commercial satellite , the Vanguard I , launched in 1958 , was equipped with both silicon solar cells and chemical batteries .
By 1965 , NASA was using almost a million solar PV cells .
Strong government demand and early research support for solar cells paid off in the form of dramatic declines in the cost of the technology and improvements in its performance .
From 1956 to 1973 , the price of PV cells declined from $ 300 to $ 20 per watt .
Beginning in the 1970s , as costs were declining , manufacturers began producing solar PV cells for terrestrial applications .
Solar PV found a new niche in areas distant from power lines where electricity was needed , such as oil rigs and Coast Guard lighthouses .
The government continued to support the industry through the 1970s and early 1980s with new R&D efforts under Presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford , both Republicans , and President Jimmy Carter , a Democrat .
As a direct result of government involvement in solar PV development , 13 of the 14 top innovations in PV over the past three decades were developed with the help of federal dollars , nine of which were fully funded by the public sector .
More recently than nuclear , wind , or solar , the development of the shale gas industry and subsequent boom in shale gas development in the United States was enabled through government support .
The history of shale gas fracking in the United States was punctuated by the successive developments of massive hydraulic fracturing ( MHF ) , microseismic imaging , horizontal drilling , and other key innovations that when combined made the once unreachable energy resource technically recoverable .
Along each stage of the innovation pipeline – from basic research to applied R&D to cost - sharing on demonstration projects to tax policy support for deployment – public - private partnerships and federal investments helped push hydraulic fracturing in shale into full commercial competitiveness .
Through a combination of federally funded geologic research beginning in the 1970s , public - private collaboration on demonstration project and R&D priorities , and tax policy support for unconventional technologies , the federal government played a key role in the development of shale gas in the United States .
Investigations have uncovered the crucial role of the government in the development of other energy technologies and industries , including aviation and jet engines , synthetic fuels , advanced natural gas turbines , and advanced diesel internal combustion engines .
VENEZUELA Section::::Venezuela .
In Venezuela , energy subsidies were equivalent to about 8.9 percent of the country 's GDP in 2012 .
Fuel subsidies were 7.1 percent while electricity subsidies were 1.8 percent .
In order to fund this the government used about 85 percent of its tax revenue on these subsidies .
It is estimated the subsidies have caused Venezuela to consume 20 percent more energy than without them .
The fuel subsidies are given more heavily to the richest part of the population who are consuming the most energy .
The fuel subsidies maintained a cost of about $ 0.01 US for a liter of gasoline at the pump since 1996 until president Nicolas Maduro reduced the national subsidy in 2016 to make it roughly $ 0.60 US per liter ( The local currency is Bolivar and the price per liter of gas is 6 Bolivars ) .
Fuel consumption has increased overall since the 1996 policy began even though the production of oil has fallen more than 350,000 barrels a day since 2008 under that policy .
PDVSA , the Venezuelan state oil company , has been losing money on these domestic transactions since the enactment of these policies .
These losses can also be attributed to the 2005 Petrocaribe agreement , under which Venezuela sells many surrounding countries petroleum at a reduced or preferable price ; essentially a subsidy by Venezuela for countries that are a part of the agreement .
The subsidizing of fossil fuels and consequent low cost of fuel at the pump has caused the creation of a large black market .
Criminal groups smuggle fuel out of Venezuela to adjacent nations ( mainly Colombia ) .
This is due to the large profits that can be gained by this act , as fuel is much more expensive in Colombia than in Venezuela .
Despite the fact that this issue is already well known in Venezuela , and insecurity in the region continues to rise , the state has not yet lowered or eliminated these fossil fuel subsidies .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
Russia is one of the world 's energy powerhouses .
It holds the world 's largest natural gas reserves ( 27 % of total ) , the second - largest coal reserves , and the eighth - largest oil reserves .
Russia is the world 's third - largest energy subsidizer as of 2015 .
The country subsidizes electricity and natural gas as well as oil extraction .
Approximately 60 % of the subsidies go to natural gas , with the remainder spent on electricity ( including under - pricing of gas delivered to power stations ) .
For oil extraction the government gives tax exemptions and duty reductions amounting to about 22 billion dollars a year .
Some of the tax exemptions and duty reductions also apply to natural gas extraction , though the majority is allocated for oil .
In 2013 Russia offered the first subsidies to renewable power generators .
The large subsidies of Russia are costly and it is recommended in order to help the economy that Russia lowers its domestic subsidies .
However , the potential elimination of energy subsidies in Russia carries the risk of social unrest that makes Russian authorities reluctant to remove them .
EUROPEAN UNION Section::::European Union .
In February 2011 and January 2012 the UK Energy Fair group , supported by other organisations and environmentalists , lodged formal complaints with the European Union 's Directorate General for Competition , alleging that the Government was providing unlawful state aid in the form of subsidies for nuclear power industry , in breach of European Union competition law .
One of the largest subsidies is the cap on liabilities for nuclear accidents which the nuclear power industry has negotiated with governments . "
Like car drivers , the operators of nuclear plants should be properly insured , " said Gerry Wolff , coordinator of the Energy Fair group .
The group calculates that , " if nuclear operators were fully insured against the cost of nuclear disasters like those at Chernobyl and Fukushima , the price of nuclear electricity would rise by at least € 0.14 per kWh and perhaps as much as € 2.36 , depending on assumptions made " .
According to the most recent statistics , subsidies for fossil fuels in Europe are exclusively allocated to coal ( € 10 billion ) and natural gas ( € 6 billion ) .
Oil products do not receive any subsidies .
SEE ALSO
* Corporate welfare * Building - integrated photovoltaics#Government subsidies
* Feed - in tariff * Gasoline subsidies
* Renewable Energy Certificates * Renewable energy commercialization#Non - technical barriers to acceptance * Renewable energy payments
* Stranded assets * Financial incentives for photovoltaics REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Reforming Energy Subsidies - UNEP ( 2008 )
* European countries spend billions a year on fossil fuel subsidies , survey shows ( 2017 )