FORMER PRESIDENTS ACT
The Former Presidents Act ( known also as FPA ; 3 U.S.C. ยง 102 ) is a 1958 U.S. federal law that provides several lifetime benefits to former presidents of the United States who have not been .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before 1958 , the U.S. federal government provided no pension or other retirement benefits to former United States presidents .
Andrew Carnegie offered to endow a US$ 25,000 annual pension for former Chief Executives in 1912 , but congressmen questioned the propriety of such a private pension .
That prompted legislation to provide benefits to former presidents .
When the Former Presidents Act took effect , there were two living former presidents : Herbert Hoover and Harry S. Truman .
Dwight D. Eisenhower was the first president to fall under the act upon leaving office .
The original act provided for lifetime Secret Service protection for former presidents .
In 1997 , it was reduced to 10 years for presidents taking office after 1997 .
The 1997 amendment was reverted by the Former Presidents Protection Act of 2012 ( ) .
All living former presidents and their spouses after Dwight D. Eisenhower are now entitled to receive lifetime Secret Service protection .
CURRENT STATUS
Section::::Current status .
By law , former presidents are entitled to a pension , staff and office expenses , medical care or health insurance , and Secret Service protection .
PENSION Section::::Pension .
The Secretary of the Treasury pays a taxable pension to the president .
Former presidents receive a pension equal to the pay that the head of an executive department ( Executive Level I ) would be paid ; , it is $ 207,800 per year .
The pension begins immediately after a president 's departure from office .
A former president 's spouse may also be paid a lifetime annual pension of $ 20,000 if they relinquish any other statutory pension .
TRANSITION Section::::Transition .
Transition funding for the expenses of leaving office is available for seven months .
It covers office space , staff compensation , communications services , and printing and postage associated with the transition .
STAFF AND OFFICE Section::::Staff and office .
Private office staff and related funding is provided by the Administrator of the General Services Administration .
People employed under this subsection are selected by and responsible only to the former president for the performance of their duties .
Each former president fixes basic rates of compensation for persons employed for him , not exceeding an annualized total of $ 150,000 for the first 30 months and $ 96,000 thereafter .
MEDICAL INSURANCE Section::::Medical insurance .
Former presidents are entitled to medical treatment in military hospitals ; they pay for this at interagency rates set by the Office of Management and Budget .
Two - term presidents may buy health insurance under the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program ; a GSA legal opinion ruled Jimmy Carter ineligible .
SECRET SERVICE PROTECTION Section::::Secret Service protection .
Former presidents were entitled from 1965 to 1996 to lifetime Secret Service protection , for themselves , spouses , and children under 16 .
A 1994 statute , ( ) , limited post - presidential protection to ten years for presidents inaugurated after January 1 , 1997 .
Under this statute , Bill Clinton would still be entitled to lifetime protection , and all subsequent presidents would have been entitled to ten years ' protection .
On January 10 , 2013 , President Barack Obama signed the Former Presidents Protection Act of 2012 , reinstating lifetime Secret Service protection for his predecessor George W. Bush , himself , and all subsequent presidents .
Richard Nixon relinquished his Secret Service protection in 1985 , the only president to do so .
DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY Section::::Diplomatic Immunity .
Former presidents are entitled to a Diplomatic Passport .
This includes personal travel with this passport .
SEE ALSO
* Presidential Townhouse
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* National Archives : Former Presidents Act