TREATY CLAUSE
The Treaty Clause is part of Article II , Section 2 , Clause 2 , of the United States Constitution , that empowers the President of the United States to propose and chiefly negotiate agreements between the United States and other countries , which , upon receiving the advice and consent of a two - thirds supermajority vote of the United States Senate , become binding with the force of federal law .
TEXT ONE OF THREE TYPES OF INTERNATIONAL ACCORD Section::::One of three types of international accord .
The body of law governing U.S. foreign policy recognizes three mechanisms by which the United States enters into binding international obligations .
The term " treaty " is used in a more restricted legal sense than in international law .
U.S. law distinguishes what it calls treaties from congressional - executive agreements and executive agreements .
All three classes are considered treaties under international law ; they are distinct only from the perspective of internal United States law .
Distinctions among the three concern their method of ratification : by two - thirds of the Senate , by normal legislative process , or by the President alone , respectively .
The Treaty Clause empowers the President to make or enter into treaties with the " advice and consent " of two - thirds of the Senate .
In contrast , normal legislation becomes law after approval by simple majorities in both the Senate and the House of Representatives and the signature of the President .
Throughout American history , presidents have also made international agreements through congressional - executive agreements , that are ratified with only a majority from both houses of Congress , or executive agreements , made by the President — in the exercise of his Constitutional executive powers — alone .
Though the Constitution does not expressly provide for any alternative to the Article II treaty procedure , of the Constitution does distinguish between treaties ( which states are forbidden to make ) and agreements ( which states may make with the consent of Congress ) .
The Supreme Court has considered congressional - executive and executive agreements to be valid , and they have been common throughout American history .
Thomas Jefferson explained that the Article II treaty procedure is not necessary when there is no long - term commitment :
A further distinction embodied in U.S. law is between self - executing treaties , which do not require additional legislative action , and non - self - executing treaties which do require the enactment of new laws .
These various distinctions of procedure and terminology do not affect the binding status of accords under international law .
Nevertheless , they do have major implications under U.S. domestic law .
In Missouri v. Holland , the Supreme Court ruled that the power to make treaties under the U.S. Constitution is a power separate from the other enumerated powers of the federal government , and hence the federal government can use treaties to legislate in areas which would otherwise fall within the exclusive authority of the states .
By contrast , a congressional - executive agreement can only cover matters which the Constitution explicitly places within the powers of Congress and the President .
Likewise , a sole - executive agreement can only cover matters within the President 's authority or matters in which Congress has delegated authority to the President .
For example , a treaty may prohibit states from imposing capital punishment on foreign nationals , but a congressional - executive agreement or sole - executive agreement can not .
In general , arms control agreements are often ratified by the treaty mechanism .
At the same time , trade agreements ( such as the North American Free Trade Agreement and United States accession to the World Trade Organization ) are generally voted on as a CEA , and such agreements typically include an explicit right to withdraw after giving sufficient written notice to the other parties .
If an international commercial accord contains binding " treaty " commitments , then a two - thirds vote of the Senate may be required .
Between 1946 and 1999 , the United States completed nearly 16,000 international agreements .
Only 912 of those agreements were treaties , submitted to the Senate for approval as outlined in Article II of the Constitution .
Since the Franklin Roosevelt presidency , only 6 % of international accords have been completed as Article II treaties .
Most of these executive agreements consist of congressional - executive agreements .
REPEAL Section::::Repeal .
American law is that international accords become part of the body of U.S. federal law .
Consequently , Congress can modify or repeal treaties by subsequent legislative action , even if this amounts to a violation of the treaty under international law .
This was held , for instance , in the Head Money Cases .
The most recent changes will be enforced by U.S. courts entirely independent of whether the international community still considers the old treaty obligations binding upon the U.S. Additionally , an international accord that is inconsistent with the U.S. Constitution is void under domestic U.S. law , the same as any other federal law in conflict with the Constitution .
This principle was most clearly established in the case of Reid v. Covert .
The Supreme Court could rule an Article II treaty provision to be unconstitutional and void under domestic law , although it has not yet done so .
In Goldwater v. Carter , Congress challenged the constitutionality of then - president Jimmy Carter 's unilateral termination of a defense treaty .
The case went before the Supreme Court and was never heard ; a majority of six Justices ruled that the case should be dismissed without hearing an oral argument , holding that " The issue at hand ... was essentially a political question and could not be reviewed by the court , as Congress had not issued a formal opposition .
" In his opinion , Justice Brennan dissented , " The issue of decision making authority must be resolved as a matter of constitutional law , not political discretion ; accordingly , it falls within the competence of the courts " .
Presently , there is no official Supreme Court ruling on whether the President has the power to break a treaty without the approval of Congress , and the courts also declined to interfere when President George W. Bush unilaterally withdrew the United States from the ABM Treaty in 2002 , six months after giving the required notice of intent .
SCOPE OF PRESIDENTIAL POWERS Section::::Scope of presidential powers .
Presidents have regarded the Article II treaty process as necessary where an international accord would bind a future president .
For example , Theodore Roosevelt explained : A sole - executive agreement can only be negotiated and entered into through the president 's authority ( 1 ) in foreign policy , ( 2 ) as commander - in - chief of the armed forces , ( 3 ) from a prior act of Congress , or ( 4 ) from a prior treaty .
Agreements beyond these competencies must have the approval of Congress ( for congressional - executive agreements ) or the Senate ( for treaties ) .
In 1972 , Congress passed legislation requiring the president to notify Congress of any executive agreements that are formed .
Although the nondelegation doctrine prevents Congress from delegating its legislative authority to the executive branch , Congress has allowed the executive to act as Congress 's " agent " in trade negotiations , such as by setting tariffs , and , in the case of Trade Promotion Authority , by solely authoring the implementing legislation for trade agreements .
The constitutionality of this delegation was upheld by the Supreme Court in Field v. Clark ( 1892 ) .
SEE ALSO
* Appointments Clause * Foreign policy of the United States * Jus tractatuum
* List of United States treaties * Supremacy Clause FURTHER READING Section::::Further reading .
Warren F. Kimball , Alliances , Coalitions , and Ententes -
The American alliance system : an unamerican tradition
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Treaties Pending in the Senate * List of rejected treaties and other info