THE BOAT
THAT ROCKED
The Boat That Rocked ( retitled Pirate Radio in North America , Good Morning England in France , Radio Rock Revolution in Germany
and I Love Radio Rock in Italy ) is a 2009 British comedy film written and directed by Richard Curtis with pirate radio in the United Kingdom during the 1960s as its setting .
The film has an ensemble cast consisting of Philip Seymour Hoffman , Bill Nighy , Rhys Ifans , Nick Frost and Kenneth Branagh .
Set in 1966 , it tells the story of the fictional pirate radio station " Radio Rock " and its crew of eclectic disc jockeys , who broadcast rock and pop music to the United Kingdom from a ship anchored in the North Sea while the British government endeavors to shut them down .
It was produced by Working Title Films for Universal Pictures and was filmed on the Isle of Portland and at Shepperton Studios .
After the world premiere in London 's Leicester Square on March 29 , 2009 , the film was released theatrically in the United Kingdom and Ireland on April 1 , 2009 .
It was a commercial failure at the British box office making only US$ 10.1 million in its first three months , just a fifth of its US$ 50 million production cost .
It received mixed reviews concerning its muddled storyline and 2¼-hour length .
For its North American release , the film had its running time cut by 20 minutes and was retitled Pirate Radio .
Opening on November 13 , 2009 , it was still commercially unsuccessful in the US earning only US$ 8 million .
When the worldwide theatrical run was finished in January 2010 , the film had grossed US$ 36.3 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1966 , numerous pirate radio stations broadcast to the United Kingdom from ships anchored in international waters , specialising in rock and pop music that is not played on BBC Radio .
Seventeen - year - old Carl , recently expelled from school , is sent to stay with his godfather Quentin , who runs the station " Radio Rock " anchored in the North Sea .
The eclectic crew of disc jockeys and staffers , led by the brash American DJ " The Count " , quickly accept Carl as one of their own .
At the start of the film Doctor Dave and Carl conspire to have Carl lose his virginity .
Dave has his girlfriend get naked and lie in bed for him while he turns off the lights and goes into the bathroom , where Carl has hidden .
Carl then gets naked and walks into the dark room in an attempt to deceive Dave 's girlfriend .
However she turns the lights on and sees who was really about to have sex with her , and Carl gets embarrassed and leaves .
In London , government minister Sir Alistair Dormandy resolves to shut down pirate radio stations due to their commercialism and low morals , instructing his subordinate Twatt to find legal loopholes that will serve this end .
( Threatening termination and blacklisting if he does n't . )
They attempt to cut off the stations ' revenue by prohibiting British businesses from advertising on unlicensed radio stations .
Quentin counters this by bringing massively popular DJ Gavin Kavanagh out of retirement and onto Radio Rock , enticing his advertisers to work around the law by paying their bills from abroad .
Gavin 's popularity creates a rivalry between himself and The Count , who was initially brought to Radio Rock as Gavin 's replacement .
On his eighteenth birthday Carl is introduced to Quentin 's niece Marianne and falls instantly in love with her , but is heartbroken when she is seduced by Doctor Dave .
Carl 's roommate " Thick " Kevin observes that the sex , drug , and alcohol - filled atmosphere of Radio Rock is clearly no place for Carl to get on the straight - and - narrow .
He theorises that the real reason Carl 's mother sent him there is that his father — whom Carl has never met — is someone on the ship , with Quentin being the likeliest suspect .
DJ " Simple " Simon Swafford marries Elenore in an onboard ceremony , but soon learns that she only married him as a means to live on the ship and be with Gavin , with whom she is infatuated but refuses to marry her ( or anyone ) .
The Count challenges Gavin to a game of chicken in defence of Simon 's honour : The two climb one of the ship 's radio masts in a clash of egos , reconciling after they are both injured by jumping into the ocean below .
Soon afterwards , Carl 's mother Charlotte visits for Christmas , she denies his suspicion that Quentin is his father .
As she departs , Carl passes on a cryptic message from reclusive late - night
DJ " Smooth " Bob Silver , leading to the unexpected revelation that Bob is actually his father .
When Marianne returns to the ship and apologises to Carl for sleeping with Doctor Dave .
She and Carl have sex that night .
The following morning , The Count and the rest of the DJ 's announce the news of the event to millions of cheering fans all over Britain .
Meanwhile , Dormandy 's mission to ban pirate radio advances when Twatt comes across news of a fishing boat whose distress call was blocked by Radio Rock 's powerful signal .
Twatt proposes the creation of the Marine Offences Act , which will make pirate radio stations illegal on the grounds that they endanger other vessels .
Despite public opinion being heavily in support of the pirate stations , the Act passes unanimously through Parliament and takes effect at midnight on 1 January 1967 .
The Radio Rock crew choose to defy the law and continue to broadcast , firing up the ship 's engine so that they may avoid arrest by relocating .
The aging vessel can not take the strain , causing the engine to explode and the ship to start sinking .
The DJs broadcast their position in hope of aid , and Twatt appeals to Dormandy to send rescue boats , but Dormandy refuses .
Carl rescues the oblivious Bob from his cabin , while The Count vows to continue broadcasting as long as possible .
With the lifeboats inoperable , all gather on the prow as the ship begins to go down .
They are rescued by dozens of fans , who heard about their broadcast predicament , and have motored out in a fleet of small boats to save them ; Carl himself is rescued by Marianne , Simon is rescued by a female fan who genuinely loves him ,
Dave being rescued by a throng of female fans , and Elenore rescuing Gavin .
The Radio Rock ship disappears beneath the sea , with The Count emerging from the sinking vessel at the last moment .
Though pirate radio in Britain comes to an end , the music lives on , with rock and pop becoming increasingly popular in subsequent decades , broadcast over hundreds of ' legal ' stations around the world .
CAST * Philip Seymour Hoffman as " The Count " , the brash American DJ on Radio Rock , loosely based on Emperor Rosko , DJ on pirate Radio Caroline in 1966 .
* Tom Sturridge as " Young " Carl , who is sent to stay with his godfather Quentin on the Radio Rock ship .
* Bill Nighy as Quentin , Carl 's godfather , who runs Radio Rock .
* Will Adamsdale as " News " John Mayford , the station 's news and weather reporter .
* Rhys Ifans as Gavin Kavanagh , a massively popular DJ brought out of retirement by Quentin , leading to a professional rivalry with The Count .
* Nick Frost as DJ " Doctor " Dave , who unsuccessfully attempts to help Carl lose his virginity , and later has sex with Carl 's crush , Marianne .
* Tom Brooke as " Thick " Kevin , Carl 's intellectually dense cabin - mate and member of the Radio Rock staff .
* Rhys Darby as Angus " The Nut " Nutsford , DJ and lone New Zealander on the ship .
* Katherine Parkinson as Felicity , the lesbian cook and the only single woman permitted to live on the ship .
* Chris O'Dowd as " Simple " Simon Swafford , Radio Rock 's breakfast DJ who marries Elenore and learns on their wedding night that she married him to be near Gavin .
O'Dowd drew inspiration from Tony Blackburn , the morning DJ on pirate station Radio Caroline in the 1960s , and his Irish contemporary Larry Gogan .
* Tom Wisdom as " Midnight " Mark , Radio Rock 's suave night time DJ who rarely speaks but has female listeners swooning over him ; he is known as " The Sexiest Man on the Planet " .
In one scene , he " entertains " about 30 naked women who are part of a large group of fans that visit the ship .
* Ralph Brown as hippy " Smooth " Bob Silver , " The Dawn Treader " ( 36am shift ) , Radio Rock 's reclusive early - morn DJ .
* Ike Hamilton as Harold , the station 's radio assistant .
* Kenneth Branagh as Sir Alistair Dormandy , a strict government minister who endeavors to shut down pirate radio stations .
Portrayed as a Conservative , but based on Labour Postmaster General Tony Benn .
* Sinead Matthews as Miss C ( aka Miss Clitt , as revealed in the DVD deleted scenes ) , Dormandy 's assistant who secretly listens to Radio Rock .
* Jack Davenport as Domenic Twatt , Dormandy 's subordinate who is assigned the task of finding legal loopholes that can be used to shut down pirate radio stations .
* Talulah Riley as Marianne , Quentin 's niece , ( and a fan of Dave ) with whom Carl falls instantly in love .
* Emma Thompson as Charlotte , Carl 's mother .
* January Jones as Elenore ( ' the goddess '
according to Quentin ) , who marries Simon so that she can live on the ship and carry on a sexual relationship with Gavin ; Simon ends the marriage after 17 hours .
* Gemma Arterton as Desiree , a female fan ; Dave tries to coerce her into having sex with Carl .
Section::::Cast .
Additional minor roles were played by Ian Mercer as the transfer boatman , Stephen Moore as the Prime Minister , Michael Thomas and Bohdan Poraj as Dormandy 's subordinates Sandford and Fredericks , Olegar Fedoro as the Radio Rock ship 's captain , Francesca Longrigg and Amanda Fairbank - Hynes as Dormandy 's wife and daughter , and Olivia Llewellyn as Marianne 's friend Margaret and Felicity 's love interest .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film was written and directed by Richard Curtis and made by Working Title Films for Universal Studios .
The producers for Working Title were Tim Bevan , Eric Fellner and Hilary Bevan Jones , with Curtis , Debra Hayward and Liza Chasin acting as executive producers .
Principal photography started on 3 March and continued until June 2008 .
Filming took place on the former Dutch hospital ship Timor Challenger , previously De Hoop , moored in Portland Harbour , Dorset ; the " North Sea " scenes were shot off the coast of Dunbar , East Lothian .
Boat interior shots were filmed inside a warehouse in Osprey Quay on the Isle of Portland and at Shepperton Studios .
They also visited Squerryes Court in Kent to shoot the scenes of the home of government minister Alistair Dormandy ( Kenneth Brannagh ) .
The film 's production cost exceeded £ 30 million .
HISTORICAL SETTING
Section::::Historical setting .
The official synopsis of The Boat That Rocked before release stated that it tells the fictional story about a group of DJs in 1966 who are at odds with a traditionalist British government that prefers to broadcast jazz .
According to director Richard Curtis , the film , though inspired by real British pirate radio of the 1960s , is a work of historical fiction and does not depict a specific radio station of the period .
RELEASE
NORTH AMERICAN RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Section::::North American release .
Following the film 's commercial failure at the British box office , Focus Features commissioned a re - edited version for release in North American release 13 November 2009 .
Retitled Pirate Radio , this version of the film deleted approximately twenty minutes of footage from the original version to address complaints from several critics that the film 's running time was excessive .
Upon the release of Pirate Radio in the United States , Manohla Dargis wrote : Stuffed with playful character actors and carpeted with wall - to - wall tunes , the film makes for easy viewing and easier listening , even if Mr. Curtis , who wrote and directed , has nothing really to say about these rebels for whom rock ' n ' roll was both life 's rhyme and its reason .
Robert Wilonsky , reviewing Pirate Radio after having seen The Boat That Rocked and its UK home video release , said the U.S. theatrical release had had " most of its better bits excised " ; according to Wilonsky , " after watching the DVD , Pirate Radio feels so slight in its current incarnation .
Shorn of the scenes that actually put meat on its characters ' frail bones , the resulting product is vaguely cute and wholly insubstantial , little more than a randomly assembled hodge - podge of scenes crammed in and yanked out that amount to yet another movie about rebellious young men sticking it to The Grumpy Old Man — this time , with a tacked - on Titanic climax . "
The marketing campaign for the film 's North American release was notable for embellishing the nature of the movie , as well as the historical setting .
Trailers had a prominent voice - over announcement stating that " in 1966 the British government banned rock ' n ' roll on the radio .
Until one American DJ and a band of renegades launched a radio station on the high seas and raided the air waves .
" In the film , pirate radio transmissions were widespread before Parliament passed the Marine Offences Act , including the station portrayed on the film .
The trailer in North America also featured dialog from a scene not in the release ; chief among which were a British government minister was being told in a voiceover that the American deejay " The Count " is " possibly the most famous broadcaster ever , " which was n't borne by the actual plot .
The trailer and commercials also displayed prominent text that stated " inspired by a true story , " which was not claimed by either the production or writing staff .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received mixed reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes gave it a score of 61 % based on 158 reviews .
The Daily Telegraph credited the film with " some magical moments , " but called it " muddled " and criticised its length .
Time Out was also critical of the length and said the film was " disappointing . "
The Hollywood Reporter ran the headline " Rock ' n ' roll movie Boat just barely stays afloat , " declaring the film too long to sustain interest .
Total Film also criticised the film 's length and comedic style .
Andrew Neil , writing in The Observer , remarked that he was disappointed in the " contrived " storyline and the " unnecessarily perverted " history .
Channel 4 said the film was " touching , " " heartfelt " and an " enjoyable journey " but questioned its coherence .
The film 's British box office revenues in its first 12 weeks of release were £ 6.1 million , less than a quarter of its production cost .
In USA , the film earned less than US$ 3 million in its first weekend ( in a mid - scale release of 882 screens as opposed to 3,404 screens for 2012 and 3,683 screens for A Christmas Carol ) and suffered a 49.7 % drop - off on its second weekend — earning only US$ 1.46 million .
Pirate Radio took in only about ( approximately £ 5 million ) in North America .
SOUNDTRACK
*
The soundtrack features songs from The Kinks , The Rolling Stones , The Turtles , Jimi Hendrix , Duffy , Procol Harum , Box Tops , The Beach Boys , Dusty Springfield , The Seekers and The Who .
*
The soundtrack features 32 songs on two discs .
The film itself has a 60-song playlist .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Scenes cut from the film but available in
at least some of the film 's home media releases include : * a long scene of late - night sabotage aboard a competitor 's vessel ; *
The Count 's homage to the Beatles , delivered in front of Abbey Road studios ; * Gavin Kavanagh in a flashback , dancing in a Latin American bar to " Get Off of My Cloud " ; * a heartbroken " Simple " Simon lip syncs Lorraine Ellison 's " Stay with Me " in its entirety . !
Format !
Release date !
Additional content DVDRegion 1 : 13
April 2010Region 2 : 7 September 2009Region 4 : 12 August 2009 * Deleted scenes ,
director 's commentary Blu - rayRegion 1 : 13 April 2010Region 2 : 7 September 2009Region 4 : 12 August 2009 * Deleted scenes , director 's commentary REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS