STAGECOACH FESTIVAL
The Stagecoach Festival is an outdoor country music festival presented by Goldenvoice , The Messina Group , and Moore Entertainment and founded by Paul Tollett .
The festival is held at the Empire Polo Club in Indio , California .
Various artists attend , whether they be mainstream or relatively unknown , ranging from folk , mainstream country , bluegrass , roots rock , and alternative country .
It is the highest - grossing festival centered on country music in the world .
The festival acts as a sister event to Goldenvoice 's Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , taking place the following weekend at the same site .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Stagecoach took place for the first time in 2007 .
Put on at the same venue , also by Goldenvoice , Stagecoach is seen as a " cousin " of Coachella .
In 2012 , the festival 's 55,000 attendees marked its first sell - out crowd .
In 2018 , Stagecoach set a new attendance record with 75,000 attendees .
Notable performers have included Brad Paisley , Jason Aldean , Kenny Chesney , Brooks and Dunn , Toby Keith , Miranda Lambert , Blake Shelton , Sugarland , The Charlie Daniels Band , Alabama .
George Strait , Alan Jackson , Willie Nelson , Eagles , Roger McGuinn , Rascal Flatts , Taylor Swift , Tim McGraw , Carrie Underwood , Keith Urban , Martina McBride , Don Williams , Jerry Lee Lewis , Shania Twain and Luke Bryan .
CAMPING Section::::Camping .
The facilities provide on - site camping for some festival - goers .
The Desert Sun published an article on the camping , reporting that some attendees think that it , as a standalone event , is almost on par with the concerts .
The 2013 festival 's tent / car camping policy was eliminated and the RV camping rules altered due to the overwhelming 55,000 person sellout crowd at the 2012 festival .
The new rules stand until Goldenvoice decides on a different approach .
FESTIVAL CUISINE Section::::Festival Cuisine .
The festival showcases a variety of food and beverages to enjoy over the course of the weekend .
Some of the restaurants expected for the 2013 festival are Jackelope Ranch , Las Casuelas , Ruth 's Chris Steakhouse , Fisherman 's Market & Grill , and vendors like Spicy Pie , Pink 's Hot Dogs , and Waffleman Ice Cream Sandwiches .
There are also full bars , a Cantina Restaurant , BBQ contest , and a pancake breakfast supporting the local Lion 's Club .
Kansas City BBQ Society ( KCBS ) sanctioned the Stagecoach Invitational BBQ Championship encompassing teams from across the nation competing for the KCBS California State championship .
Apart from food , the festival offers alcoholic beverages as well , much like its sister festival , Coachella .
However , the festival does not boast beer gardens and reserved drinking areas like its counterpart , which could be the reason why there are a considerable number of alcohol arrests .
There was a reported 157 arrests made during the weekend - long festival in 2015 .
GRAND CHAMPIONS
* 2008
- Sug 's Shack BBQ & BLQUE Cuttin Edge
Que * 2009 - Rhythm N ' Que & Lotta Bull * 2010
- Lotta Bull West * 2011
- All Sauced Up * 2012
- El Fuego Fiasco LINEUPS BY YEAR SEE ALSO * Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival
* Country Thunder
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Stagecoach Festival