LAWS REGARDING INCEST Laws regarding incest ( i.e. sexual activity between family members or close relatives ) vary considerably between jurisdictions , and depend on the type of sexual activity and the nature of the family relationship of the parties involved , as well as the age and sex of the parties .
Besides legal prohibitions , at least some forms of incest are also socially taboo or frowned upon in most cultures around the world .
Incest laws may involve restrictions on marriage rights , which also vary between jurisdictions .
When incest involves an adult and a child , it is usually considered to be a form of child sexual abuse .
DEGREES OF RELATIONSHIP Section::::Degrees of relationship .
Laws regarding incest are sometimes expressed in terms of degrees of relationship .
The consanguinity ( but not affinity ) relationships may be summarized as follows : !
Degree of relationship!!Relationship!!Coefficient of relationship ( r ) oii 0identical twins ; clones 100 % 1parent - offspring 50 % ( 2 )
2full siblings 50 % ( 2 + 2 )
23/4 siblings or sibling - cousins 37.5 % ( 2 + 2⋅2 ) 2grandparent - grandchild 25 % ( 2 ) 2half siblings 25 % ( 2 ) 3aunt
/ uncle - nephew / niece 25 % ( 2⋅2 ) 4double first cousins 25 % ( 2 + 2 ) 3great grandparent - great grandchild 12.5 % ( 2 )
4first cousins 12.5 % ( 2⋅2 )
6quadruple second cousins 12.5 % ( 8⋅2 )
6triple second cousins 9.38 % ( 6⋅2 )
4half - first cousins 6.25 % ( 2 )
5first cousins once removed 6.25 % ( 2⋅2 ) 6double second cousins 6.25 % ( 4⋅2 )
6second cousins 3.13 % ( 2 + 2 ) 8third cousins 0.78 % ( 2⋅2 ) 10fourth cousins 0.20 % ( 2⋅2 )
The degree of relationships is calculated by counting the number of generations back to a common ancestor .
Most laws regarding prohibited degree of kinship concern relations of r = 25 % or higher , while most permit unions of individuals with r = 12.5 % or lower .
In some US states , cousin marriages are prohibited .
Also , most laws make no provision for the rare case of marriage between double first cousins .
Incest laws may also include prohibitions of unions between biologically unrelated individuals if there is a close legal relationship , such as adoption .
AFRICA
CÔTE D'IVOIRE ( IVORY COAST ) Section::::Africa .
Section::::Côte d'Ivoire
( Ivory Coast ) .
Consensual incest between adults is legal in Côte d'Ivoire ( Ivory Coast ) .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In South Africa , since 2007 , incest is the sexual penetration between persons who are related as follows : *
lineally , that is , if one person is a direct descendant of the other .
* within the first degree of consanguinuity , that is , where one person is a direct descendant of a parent of the other ; this category includes siblings as well as an uncle or aunt with a niece or nephew .
* within the first degree of affinity , that is , where one person is the direct ancestor or descendant of the spouse of the other person .
* as adoptive parent and adopted child .
Before 2007 , incest was a common law offence which extended to the same degrees of relationship but which applied only to vaginal intercourse .
ZIMBABWE Section::::Zimbabwe .
In Zimbabwe , most forms of incest are illegal and an offender is currently liable to a fine up to or exceeding level fourteen ( about US$ 5000 ) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or both .
Incest is classified as " sexual intercourse within a prohibited degree of relationship " .
A prohibited degree of relationship would be that of a parent and his or her natural or adoptive child , a step - parent and his or her step - child , whether the step - child 's parent and step - parent are married under the Marriage Act [ Chapter 5:11 ] or the Customary Marriages Act
[ Chapter 5:07 ] , or are parties to an unregistered customary law marriage , and whether or not the child was over the age of eighteen years at the time of the marriage ; a brother and sister , whether of whole or half blood ; or an uncle and his niece ; or a grand - uncle and his grand - niece ; or an aunt and her nephew ; or a grand - aunt and her grand - nephew ; or a grandparent and his or her grandchild and any person and his or her first or second cousin .
In cases of first and second cousins an individual charged with such a crime can raise a defense that the cultural or religious customs or traditions of the community to which he or she belongs do not prohibit marriage between first or second cousins ; or in the case of a person who is a member of a community governed by customary law , that the cultural or religious customs or traditions of the particular community to which he or she belongs do not prohibit marriage between first or second cousins .
AMERICAS ARGENTINA Section::::Americas .
Section::::Argentina .
In Argentina , incest is legal if both individuals are over the minimum age of consent .
Marriage between third - degree relatives and beyond is allowed , with the exception of marriage involving lineal ancestors and descendants , which is considered null and void disregarding the degree of separation ( parent / offspring , grandparent - grandchild ) .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
Brazil has no criminal punishment if the involved are over the age of 14 ( the clear age of consent in force ; before 2011 , though , sex with people as young as 12 and as elder as 17 was in a legal grey area , with legal guardian - reported sex with those aged 12 and 13 being prosecuted as statutory rape , but unlike as with those aged 11 and younger not directly prosecuted by the State without a report by either the legal guardians or the adolescents themselves –
unlike now , where the police forces prosecute all statutory rape - related cases without distinction – , and legal guardian - reported sex with those aged 14 , 15 , 16 and 17 being prosecuted as corruption of minors , but prosecution as corruption of minors for non - commercial consented sexual activity between people out of a defined hierarchy fell ) , capable of acting upon their legal rights , and that consent means that the relationship is absent of any kind of coercion or fraud .
First cousin marriages , once fairly common in some regions in the 19th century , are allowed on demand as all other marriages , while avunculate ones ( those between uncles or aunts and nephews or nieces ) , the preferred by some Amazonian Amerindian tribes , and those between half - siblings , are allowed provided that those contracting it have a health check .
Marriages between parents and their children ( both consanguineous and adoptive ) or between siblings ( both consanguineous and adoptive ) are invalid , but , as stated above , non - rape sexual relationships between persons older than the age of consent are likely otherwise treated legally as all others , irrespectively of consanguinity ( information over the possibility or validity of in such situations are nevertheless unclear or unexistent , but since those in these relationships are already consanguineous and thus inherently inside a legal family entity , the rights offered by such unions – recognizing a family entity between unrelated single persons – are most likely pointless , with the exceptional cases being only the remote possibility of people who were adopted contracting a relationship with a biological close family member ) .
Brazilian law , by the Article 1521 of the Civil Code , also extends the invalidity of marriage between parents and children to grandparents and grandchildren or any other sort of ascendant - descendant relationship ( both consanguineous and adoptive ) , parents - in - law and children - in - law even after the divorce of the earlier couple ( see affinity ) , as well as to stepparents and stepchildren , and former husbands or wives to an adoptive parent who did this unilaterally ( regarded as an equivalent , in families formed by adoption , to stepparents and stepchildren ) ; and extends the invalidity of marriage between siblings to biological cousin - siblings .
It also formerly prohibited the avunculate marriages and extended the prohibition for marriage between siblings to half - siblings , both cited above , but the Decrete Law 3.200/1941 made marriage possible for those non - ascended / descended in consanguinity of third degree ( 25 % )
provided both have health checks .
Brazilian law never held marriages between double first cousins as a reason for invalidity , even though those have a consanguinity as strong as that of half - siblings , and those , as other first cousins , are not asked health checks to marry , doing so in the same way as non - related people .
Also legally treated much like non - related people are stepsiblings , while those who are stepsiblings and half - siblings ( that is , those who have a half - sibling who is also child of a latter married spouse of one 's parent ) are treated like half - siblings who are not stepsiblings , being demanded health checks before marrying .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Under Canadian federal law , incest is defined as having a sexual relationship with a sibling ( including half - sibling ) , child / parent or grandchild / grandparent , regardless of knowing the existence of the blood relationship .
It is punishable by up to 14 years ' imprisonment .
A person who commits incest with someone under the age of 16 is liable to a minimum imprisonment of five years .
CHILE Section::::Chile .
In Chile , incest between lineal ancestors and descendants and between full siblings is prohibited .
It is punishable by up to 1 year in prison .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Laws regarding incest in the United States vary widely between jurisdictions regarding both the definition of the offense and penalties for its commission .
The Laws regarding incest in the United States article summarizes these laws for individual U.S. States and the District of Columbia .
In the United States , the District of Columbia and every state and inhabited territory have some form of codified incest prohibition .
In most states , sexual activity between a lineal ancestor and a lineal descendant ( parent , grandparent with child or grandchild ) , siblings ( brother - sister ) and aunt - nephew , uncle - niece is penalized as incest .
However , individual statutes vary widely .
Rhode Island has repealed its criminal incest statute , and only criminalizes incestuous marriage .
Ohio " targets only parental figures " , and New Jersey does not apply any penalties when both parties are 18 years of age or older .
The most severe penalties for incest are in Massachusetts , Virginia , Texas and Oregon , which punishes incest with up to 20 years in prison , Georgia where a penalty for incest is up to 30 years in prison , Wisconsin where the penalty for incest is up to 40 years in prison , and in the states of Nevada , Montana , Idaho and Michigan where a penalty of up to life imprisonment for incest may be given .
In some states , sex between first cousins is prohibited ( see cousin marriage law in the United States by state for cousin sex , as well as cousin marriage , being outlawed in some states ) .
Many states also apply incest laws to non - blood relations , including stepparents , stepsiblings , in - laws and people related through adoption .
ASIA CHINA
MAINLAND Section::::Asia .
Section::::China .
Section::::Mainland .
The People 's Republic of China prohibits two kinds of marriages in terms of kinship .
*
One person is the direct descendant of another .
*
* One person is another 's first cousin .
* HONG KONG Section::::Hong Kong .
In Hong Kong , it is illegal to have sexual intercourse with certain close relatives , even if they are consenting adults .
The prohibited relationships are grandfather - granddaughter , father - daughter , brother - sister and mother - son .
Punishment is up to 20 years ' imprisonment for male offenders and up to 14 years ' imprisonment for female offenders .
The law does not cover sexual intercourse with more distant relatives , such as an aunt , uncle , niece , nephew and cousin .
It only addresses male - on - female and female - on - male sexual intercourse , and it appears that consensual same - sex incest is not illegal .
The law makes an assumption that a female below the age of 16 has no ability to consent to sexual intercourse , therefore a female below 16 can not commit incest .
MACAU Section::::Macau .
According to Macau 's civil code , people in direct line kinship or in the second degree of collateral kinship can not marry each other .
INDIA Section::::India .
The Indian Penal Code ( IPC ) does not contain any specific provision against incest , but there are general provisions relating to sexual abuse of children by their custodian , such as a parent or teacher .
More over the rule of kinship or marriage is governed by the different marriage laws .
IRAN Section::::Iran .
According to the Article 82 of Iran 's Penal code , incest is forbidden and the maximum punishment is the death penalty .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Consensual incest between adults is legal in Japan .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
In Malaysia , it is incest to have sexual intercourse with a person who under the law , religion , custom or usage that applies to the person
he or she is not permitted to marry on account of their relationship .
In addition to whipping , persons convicted of incest face a minimum sentence of 6 years ' imprisonment and a maximum sentence of 20 years ' imprisonment .
It is a defense against the charge if the person did not know the relationship was not permitted or if the sexual intercourse was done without his or her consent .
Girls below the age of 16 and boys below the age of 13 are deemed to be incapable of giving consent .
( The age of consent for sex in Malaysia is 16 for both sexes . )
While it is unclear to which family members the incest law applies , a verdict from the High Court in Sabah and Sarawak in 2011 provided some indication about the sentencing guidelines .
It described incest as a " heinous crime " but that the degree of kinship between the parties dictates the " level of repulsion " which the court translates into a sentence imposed .
The verdict said the worst on such a scale is incest committed by a father to his biological daughter or a brother to his biological sister , and that such offenders should receive the harshest sentence .
It said an uncle and his maternal niece committing incest is not on that same level and , if there was no violence involved , the length of the sentence should reflect it .
There are more severe sentences for those who commit incest through rape .
The offence of incestuous rape is punishable with not less than 8 years ' imprisonment and not more than 30 years ' imprisonment .
In addition , those convicted receive not less than 10 strokes .
Malaysian law also considers sexual intercourse with the stepfamily to be incestuous .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
The legal code of Pakistan defines incest as marriage ( consortion ) between a male and either his : * wife or former wife of father , grandfather and further ancestors
* Mother , grandmother and further ancestors * Daughter , granddaughter and further descendants * full or half sister * parents ' sisters , grandparents ' sisters and further ancestors ' sisters * daughter , granddaughter and further descendant of full or half sibling
* suckling ancestor
* suckling sister * Mother , grandmother and further ancestors of wife or former wife * Daughter , granddaughter of wife or former wife
* Wife or former wife of true son or grandson and further descendants
* Sororal polygyny
Both participants are guilty if they commit the above acts and are charged with Zina .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
Article 81 of the Civil Code of the Philippines considers marriages between the following incestuous and void from their performance : * Between brothers and sisters , whether of the full or half blood ; * * Between collateral relatives by blood within the fourth civil degree
* A similar prohibition can be found in Articles 37 and 38 of the Family Code .
In the 1973 visa proceedings case of In re :
Bautista , an Immigration Officer denied entry to a married couple who were second cousins .
In reaching the decision , the immigration officer relied on subsection 1 of Article 81 of the Civil Code .
However , on appeal , it was found that the parties were collateral relatives and therefore fell under subsection 2 of the same Code , which prohibits marriages between relatives by blood within the fourth civil degree .
The fourth civil degree includes first cousins .
Second cousins , who are the children of first cousins , fall under the fifth civil degree and are not covered by the prohibition .
The marriage , being valid under the laws of the place of celebration , was then recognized for immigration purposes only .
In addition , the Code of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines allows this by consanguinity ( tahrimjbin - nasab )
the following marriages : * Ascendants and descendants of any degree ; * * Brothers and sisters , whether germane , consanguine or uterine ; and * * Brothers or sisters and their descendants within the third civil degree .
* SINGAPORE Section::::Singapore .
Section 376 G of the Penal Code specifies that " a male , of or above the age of 16 , having sexual relations with his grand - daughter , daughter , sister , half - sister , mother or grandmother , with or without consent , shall be guilty of an offence .
Any woman of or above the age of 16 years who , with consent , permits her grandfather , father , brother , half - brother , son or grandson ( whether such relationship is or is not traced through lawful wedlock ) to penetrate her in the manner described in subsection ( 1)(a ) or ( b ) , knowing him to be her grandfather , father , brother , half - brother , son or grandson , as the case may be , shall be guilty of an offence . "
TAIWAN Section::::Taiwan .
In Taiwan , officially the Republic of China ( ROC ) , Article 983 of the Civil Code prohibits marrying any lineal relative by blood or by marriage ,
collateral relative by blood
if is within the sixth degree of relationship ( except relative by adoption who is of the same rank ) , or if collateral relative by marriage is within the fifth degree of relationship of a different rank .
Relatives by marriage or adoption are prohibited marriage and can not marry even after the marriage or adoption has ended .
The degree of relationship is calculated vertically , therefore a sibling is within the second degree of relationship .
The Judicial Yuan Interpretation No.32 and No.91 allows marriage between siblings by adoption when the adoption was intended for the marriage .
When the interpretation was made , it was not uncommon for parents to adopt a child so that their own child can marry the adopted child when both children have grown up .
Article 230 of the Penal Code prohibits sexual intercourse between any lineal relatives by blood or collateral relatives within the third degree of relationship by blood .
Violators may be imprisoned for up to 5 years .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
Incestuous relations between adults ( over 18 years old ) are not prohibited by law .
Incestuous marriage is prohibited by law .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
Sibling marriage and avunculate marriage is prohibited , while cousin marriage is legal .
Marriage between parents and offspring is also prohibited , even when there is no blood relationship , i.e. adoptive parent or parent - in - law .
VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
Incest between people of direct blood line is illegal in Vietnam and is punishable by sentencing to between 6 months and 5 years of imprisonment .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Most European countries prohibit incest ; apart from those listed below , these include : ( all articles refer to the Penal Codes )
Albania Article 106 , Ukraine Article 155 Paragraph 2 , Slovenia Article 195 , Slovakia Section 203 , Serbia Article 197 , Poland Article 201 , Norway Article 197 and 198 , Bosnia and Herzegovina Article 201 , Hungary Article 199 , Bulgaria , Croatia Article 198 , and Cyprus Article 147 .
Countries which allow incest between consenting adult siblings include France , Spain , the Benelux and Portugal .
AUSTRIA Section::::Austria .
In Austria , incest between lineal ancestors and descendants and between full siblings is prohibited .
It is punishable by up to 9 years in prison .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
In Denmark , incest is sex between lineal ancestors and descendants and between full siblings .
Sex with a descendant is punishable by up to 6 years ' imprisonment .
Sex between siblings is punishable by up to 2 years ' imprisonment .
ESTONIA Section::::Estonia .
Incest is not criminally prohibited in Estonia except as part of the general protection of adolescents from sexual abuse .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
In Finland , sexual acts between one 's full sibling ( but not half - sibling ) , ancestor or descendant are punishable by a fine or up to two years in prison for " sexual act between close relatives " .
However , there is no penalty if the person in question was under 18 years old when performing a sexual act with a parent or grandparent or if the person was forced or illegally persuaded to perform the sexual act .
The marriage law defines , that marriage between one 's sibling , half - sibling , ancestor or descendant is forbidden .
FRANCE , BELGIUM AND LUXEMBOURG Section::::France , Belgium and Luxembourg .
The 1810 penal code promulgated by Napoleon I and adopted throughout most of Europe abolished incest laws in France , Belgium and Luxembourg .
On 27 January 2010 , France reinstated laws against incest .
The new law , however , defines incest as rape or sexual abuse on a minor " by a relative or any other person having lawful or de facto authority over the victim " .
Incest between consenting adults is not prohibited .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In Germany , incest is legally defined as vaginal intercourse between lineal ancestors and descendants ( parents , grandparents , great - grandparents and their children , grandchildren , great - grandchildren ) and between full and half siblings .
The penalty is a fine or up to 3 years of prison .
Incest between relatives who are minors ( below 18 years old )
at the time of offence is not punishable but remains a crime , therefore aiding and abetting of incest between related minors is punishable .
Regarding marriage , the same rules apply and prohibit marriage between aforementioned relatives .
The criminal liability of incest among consenting adults is disputed in Germany .
In the case of Patrick Stübing , the Federal Constitutional Court ruled in 2008 that the criminalization of incest is constitutional in a 7:1 vote with one judge dissenting .
In September 2014 the German Ethics Council recommended that the government abolish laws criminalizing consensual incest between adult siblings , arguing that such bans impinge upon citizens .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
Article 345 of the Greek Penal Code as modified by Article 2 , Paragraph 8 of Law 3625/2007 and Article 3 Paragraph 10 of Law 3727/2008 prohibits incestuous relations between relatives of both ascending and descending line , and between half or full siblings , and imposes ( 1 ) for the ascending relative ( for example father , uncle , grandfather etc . ) : at least 10 years ' imprisonment if the descending relative is under 15 years old , imprisonment if 15 but not 18 years old , and maximum 2 years ' imprisonment if 18 years and older ; ( 2 ) for the descending relative ( for example child , nephew etc . )
maximum 2 years ' imprisonment ; ( 3 ) for half or full siblings maximum 2 years ' imprisonment .
Paragraph 2 of Article 345 Penal Code also states that if the descending relative and the half or full siblings were under 18 years old , they might be cleared of any charge .
Also , Article 1357 of the Greek Civil Code prohibits the marriage of relatives of direct blood line in totality , and up the four degrees of consanguinity of the secondary blood line ( for example you can marry the first cousin of your mother / father , but not your first cousin ) .
Article 1358 of the Greek Civil Code also prohibits the marriage of relatives in law totally in direct blood line , and up the third degree of the secondary blood line .
ICELAND Section::::Iceland .
Article 200 of the Icelandic Penal Code prohibits incestuous relations between relatives of both ascending and descending line , and between half or full siblings , and ( 1 ) imposes for the ascending relative ( for example father , uncle , grandfather etc . ) :
imprisonment up to a maximum of 12 years if the descending relative is between 15 and 17 years old , imprisonment up to a maximum of 8 years if 18 years and older ; ( 2 ) for siblings a maximum 4 years ' imprisonment – if the half or full siblings were under 18 years old , they might be cleared of any charge .
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND Section::::Republic of Ireland .
Incest is illegal in the Republic of Ireland under the Punishment of Incest Act 1908 , which pre - dates the foundation of the state .
It is illegal for a male to have sexual intercourse with his granddaughter , mother , daughter or sister ( including half - sister ) ; and for a female ( over sixteen years of age ) with her grandfather , father , son or brother ( including half - brother ) .
The act does not refer to other familial relationships ( such as grandson - grandmother ) , or same - sex relations .
It is punishable by up to 7 years ' imprisonment for a female and up to life imprisonment for a male .
The maximum sentence for males was increased from seven years to twenty years by the Criminal Justice Act , 1993 ; and further increased to life imprisonment by the Criminal Law ( Incest Proceedings ) Act , 1995 .
The maximum sentence for females has never been increased from the 7 years specified in the original 1908 act .
A private members ' bill introduced in 2012 by Denis Naughten TD attempted to redress this inequality in sentencing by increasing the maximum sentence for females to life imprisonment .
However , during a speech made during the second stage reading of the bill in March 2014 , Justice Minister Alan Shatter TD stated that while he was not opposed to the bill in principle , a sexual offences bill announced by the government on 17 December 2013 will " include measures to equalise upwards the penalties for incest by male and female offenders " and also " take a more comprehensive approach to reform of the law in this area " .
Occasionally , offenders convicted of incest will be admitted to a psychiatric hospital for psychiatric treatment .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
Incest is illegal in Italy only if it provokes public scandal , according to Article 564 of the Penal code and punishable from 2 to 8 years ' imprisonment , open to more years for the older person if the other was under aged .
LATVIA Section::::Latvia .
Incest is not criminally prohibited in Latvia except as part of the general protection of adolescents from sexual abuse .
LITHUANIA Section::::Lithuania .
Incest is not criminally prohibited in Lithuania except as part of the general protection of adolescents from sexual abuse .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
Consensual incest between adults is legal in the Netherlands .
Marriage is forbidden between ancestors and descendants or between siblings , although the Minister of Justice may grant dispensation in the case of siblings by adoption .
Marriage is also forbidden between blood relations of the third and fourth degree , unless both partners have signed a declaration of consent .
( Dutch civil law book 1 , articles 41 and 42 . ) NORWAY Section::::Norway .
Incest is illegal in Norway and is defined as intercourse between ancestors and descendants , siblings , and even stepfamily .
It is punishable by up to 5 years in prison .
POLAND Section::::Poland .
In Poland , incest is defined in Article 201 of the Penal Code as sexual intercourse with an ancestor , descendant , guardian , ward , brother , or sister , and is punishable by imprisonment for no less than 3 months and no more than 5 years .
PORTUGAL
Section::::Portugal .
Incest is not specifically prohibited under Portuguese law .
ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
Incest is defined in the Penal Code as " consensual sexual relations between lineal relatives or between siblings " and is punished by a year to 5 years in prison .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
In Russia , consensual sex between adults , including incest , is not a crime .
However , under the Family Code of Russia , persons who are related lineally , siblings , half - siblings , and a stepparent and a stepchild may not marry .
SLOVENIA Section::::Slovenia .
Incest in Slovenia is not criminally prohibited unless one person is a minor .
A person who has sexual relations with a blood relation minor is punished to 2 years in prison .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
Consensual incest between adults is legal in Spain .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
Incest with a descendant or a full sibling is prohibited by law in Sweden .
Half - siblings can marry , but require special approval by the government .
SWITZERLAND
Section::::Switzerland .
Article 213 of the Swiss Penal Code prohibits incest .
Intercourse among siblings or other persons related by blood in direct line is punishable by up to 3 years ' imprisonment .
The federal government proposed to abolish this prohibition in 2010 , arguing that in the few cases where persons were convicted of incest ( three since 1984 ) , other sexual crimes such as child sexual abuse were also committed .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Legislation regarding sexual offences in the United Kingdom is devolved .
Sex with an adult who is related as parent ( including adoptive parent ) , grandparent , child ( including adopted child ) , grandchild , brother , sister , half - brother , half - sister , uncle , aunt , nephew or niece , is illegal .
In England and Wales the offence is against the Sexual Offences Act 2003 which effectively replaced the offence of incest with two new wider groups of offences : familial child sex offences ( sections 25–29 ) and sex with an adult relative ( sections 64–65 ) .
These laws are intended to protect the rights of people , so as to avoid potential violation .
However , these laws still outlaw consensual sexual relationships between family members , even if they are fully willing and knowledgeable to the potential consequences .
There has been some debate surrounding the rhetoric used by the Sexual Offences Review Team .
Roffee discusses how the language used manipulates the reader to deem consensual familial sexual acts as illegal to the point of immoral .
In Northern Ireland similar offences are against the Sexual Offences ( Northern Ireland ) Order 2008 .
In Scotland the offence is against the Criminal Law ( Consolidation ) ( Scotland ) Act 1995 , the provisions of which effectively replaced the Incest and Related Offences ( Scotland ) Act 1986 ( although the 1986 Act was not actually repealed until 2010 ) .
Prior to the 1986 Act the law was based on the Incest Act 1567 which incorporated into Scots criminal law Chapter 18 of the Book of Leviticus , using the version of the text of the Geneva Bible of 1562 .
In January 2016 a petition calling for " Adult Consensual Incest " to be decriminalised , was submitted to the Scottish Parliament 's Public Petitions Committee but the petition was not debated and no change was made to the law .
OCEANIA
AUSTRALIA
Section::::Oceania .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , under federal law , sexual conduct between consenting adults ( 18 years of age or older ) is legal , and state incest laws are subject to the overriding federal law .
Federal law prohibits marriage to an ancestor and descendant or sibling ( including a sibling of half - blood ) , including those traced through adoption .
Subject to conflicting Commonwealth laws , incest is a crime in every Australian jurisdiction , but definitions and penalties vary .
In all jurisdictions except New South Wales , incest is sexual intercourse between a lineal ancestor and a lineal descendant .
In New South Wales , incest takes place between " close family members " , which are " parent , son , daughter , sibling ( including a half - brother or half - sister ) , grandparent or grandchild , being such a family member from birth " .
Incest generally only applies in cases where a participant is aged 16 or over ( the age of consent in that state ) ; and where the participant is aged between 10 and 16 years of age an older participant would generally be charged with sexual intercourse with a child under the age of 16 , while cases in which a participant is under 10 an older participant would generally be charged with sexual intercourse with a child under the age of 10 .
In Queensland , unlawful incest includes sexual intercourse between an uncle or aunt with their niece or nephew , although here its application is curtailed by the effect of the federal Marriage Act 1961 , as the Queensland Criminal Code states that the crime of incest does not apply to " persons who are lawfully married or entitled to be lawfully married " .
Thus it is not incest for a niece aged 16 or over to engage in sexual intercourse with their uncles and a nephew aged 16 or over may engage in sexual intercourse with their aunts .
The same principles apply in a same - sex context , as the Marriage Act allows same - sex marriage .
In all other jurisdictions , incest can also arise where one of the parties is below the age of consent , but this does not exclude the possibility of bringing the more general charge of sexual intercourse with a child under the age of 10 ( New South Wales and Northern Territory ) , 12 , 16 or 17 ( South Australia and Tasmania ) as the case may be .
This is particularly relevant where a certain form of sexual conduct between related persons falls outside of the legal definition of incest in a particular jurisdiction .
In no Australian state or territory is consent a defense to incest .
The maximum penalty for incest varies : 8 years ' imprisonment in New South Wales ; 10 years ' imprisonment in South Australia ; 20 years ' imprisonment in Western Australia and the Australian Capital Territory ; 25 years ' imprisonment in the Northern Territory , Victoria and Tasmania ; and life imprisonment in Queensland .
After one conviction for incest , the offender 's name is placed on the sex offender registry for 15 years , while any offender with two or more convictions for incest has their name placed on the Register for the remainder of their life .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
In New Zealand , incest is sexual connection between a parent and child ( both biological and adopted ) , grandparent and grandchild ( both biological and adopted ) , and full and half siblings .
It is a defence if the person was unaware of the relationship at the time of the act ( i.e. accidental incest ) .
A conviction for incest attracts a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment .
Incest is the only sexual crime punishable by 7 years or more imprisonment that is not subject to the country 's " three - strikes " law .
It is also illegal in New Zealand to have a sexual connection with a dependent child under 18 ; this includes step - children , foster children and wards .
A conviction for having a sexual connection , or attempting to have a sexual connection , with a dependent child attracts a maximum penalty of 7 years ' imprisonment .
SEE ALSO
* Jewish views on incest
*
Mahram REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hughes , Graham .
" The Crime of Incest . "
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology , Fall 1964 .
Volume 55 , Issue 3 ( September ) , Article 2 , p. 322 - 331 .