NARUTO :
ULTIMATE NINJA STORM
Naruto :
Ultimate Ninja Storm , known in Japan as is the first installment of the Ultimate Ninja Storm series , it is a fighting game developed by CyberConnect2 and published by Namco Bandai Games .
The game was released for the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) across North America , Europe and Australasia in November 2008 and in Japan on January 15 , 2009 .
It is based on the popular manga and anime series Naruto by Masashi Kishimoto , and the first installment of the on the PS3 .
A sequel titled was released in Japan , North America and Europe in October 2010 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 .
Two more sequels , and were released in 2013 and 2016 respectively .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Naruto :
Ultimate Ninja Storm retains many of the gameplay elements from earlier installments of the Ultimate Ninja series .
However , Ultimate Ninja Storm allows players to fight in three - dimensional environments , as opposed to the two - dimensional planes in previous games .
One of the new features introduced to the series in Ultimate Ninja Storm is " Awakening Mode " , a transformation that can be activated when a player loses a certain amount of health during a match .
The health requirement for each character differs based on how powerful the transformation is .
Once activated , the character gains new abilities , speed , and stronger attacks .
A few of the characters in the game gain entirely new movesets after transforming .
With the d - pad , players can use preset items during a match that either damage the opponent or provide various status effects like increasing attack power , or lowering the opponent 's defense .
Players are also able to customize their character 's jutsu and select two support characters to use in a match .
Returning to the game from previous installments is " jutsu clash " mode , which is initiated if both players activate their special attack at the same time .
During this mode , both players have to press the corresponding button as fast as possible in order to knock away their opponent .
Each character has an " ultimate jutsu " .
If it hits , both players either input button commands , mash a certain button , or spin the analogue stick the fastest during the time limit .
If the attacking player wins , the ultimate will hit , typically taking away around a third to a full bar of the opponent 's health .
If the defending player wins , they will escape without major damage .
Each character also has an " ultimate impact " , where if the player holds down the melee button , the character controlled will charge up a very powerful strike .
If it hits , it zooms in on the opponent 's face taking a heavy blow in a short , cinematic close - up .
The game includes 25 playable characters , each of which can also be used as a support character during battle .
Ten additional support - only characters are available as free downloadable content released over the five - month period that followed the game 's release .
Additional downloadable content include alternative costumes , and new missions .
The story mode loosely covers the events of the anime up to episode 135 .
Players are able to explore the Hidden Leaf Village between missions , which acts as a central hub for the story mode , and access more missions .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The game was first unveiled in September 2007 , under the code name Naruto PS3 Project .
Namco Bandai said the title would start with " Naruto : Ultimate Ninja " and asked fans for suggestions on a suffix consisting of one or two words .
In April 2008 the game was officially named Naruto : Ultimate Ninja Storm , in addition , the developers allowed fans to choose the final front cover for the game out of a possible six .
The game features cel - shaded graphics that " will break the barrier between anime and video game " .
Hiroshi Matsuyama , one of the creators of the game , commented that the staff wanted to try to remove the borderline between the anime and actual gameplay .
They wanted to reach an effect where people actually look at the scenes as anime rather than a game .
The core concept of the game is that of a one on one battle .
Though the storyline from the game is based on the first 135 episodes of the anime series , the producers picked out key areas within the story , effectively forming a line from the first to the 135th episode .
A playable demo of the game was released on Sony 's PlayStation Network on July 17 , 2008 .
Only Naruto Uzumaki and Kakashi Hatake were playable and only one stage was included .
The official North American release date of the game was confirmed in a trailer shown during the 2008 Tokyo Game Show .
RELEASES Section::::Releases .
A limited edition version of Ultimate Ninja Storm was available to those who pre - order the game at select retailers .
It includes a steel book case with an alternate art plastic slip cover , two exclusive cards for the Naruto collectible card game , a CD of the game 's soundtrack , and an individually numbered " Laser Cel " depicting Naruto Uzumaki and Sasuke Uchiha .
In Europe , the game was released on November 7 , 2008 , and in Australia on November 20 , 2008 .
The Japanese version of the game was released on January 15 , 2009 under the name of .
A remastered version of the game was released in Naruto :
Ultimate Ninja Storm Trilogy alongside Ninja Storm
2 and 3 for the PlayStation 4 , Xbox One , and Microsoft Windows on August 25 , 2017 , and was released for Nintendo Switch on April 26 , 2018 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Naruto :
Ultimate Ninja Storm received " generally positive " reception , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
IGN gave the game an 8.4 out of 10 , praising it for its " phenomenal visuals " and the variety of things that can be done between missions .
It noted that the single - button combat might turn away hardcore gamers , but found the fast - paced action and chakra management system to be redeeming factors .
GameSpot gave the game a score of 7.5 out of ten saying it was n't a bad game
but it was n't a great one either .
1UP.com gave it a B− and praised the game 's graphics , but commented that some parts of the game system have issues .
As of July 2009 , 83,868 units have been sold in Japan .
It was the only video game to win the Excellence Prize in the Entertainment Division of the 13th annual Japan Media Arts Festival .
As of 2016 , the game has sold over two million copies .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website
* Game 's Manual