DRIVING ON SHABBAT
According to halakah , the operation of a motor vehicle constitutes multiple violations of the prohibited activities on Shabbat ( Hebrew for Sabbath ) .
Though Jewish law is based on texts that were written long before the existence of the automobile , various writings prohibit during Shabbat
the actions that take place as a result of driving .
The Torah thus prohibits driving on the basis that a labor is being performed by the act of operating a motor vehicle .
The vehicle 's ignition combusts fuel , which is considered to violate one of the 39 prohibited activities on Shabbat , as well as creating a spark , which is likewise in violation of a related rabbinic ( or possibly biblical ) prohibition ( " igniting a fire " ) .
Isaiah 58:13 - 14 speaks out against travel during Shabbat Modern vehicles also have many other electrical components , such as lights , that are continually turned on and off during the course of a vehicle 's operation , often without the driver 's awareness .
Besides , the laws of Shabbat place limits on the distance one may travel beyond the city / town where one is spending Shabbat , regardless of the method of transportation .
However , Jews of varying non - orthodox backgrounds have taken differing views on the matter , either finding various interpretations to permit and justify at least some driving on Shabbat , either solely for synagogue attendance or for other personal reasons as well , disregarding the Jewish biblical and rabbinical laws altogether .
Ignoring Orthodox Jewish law , some feel that driving involves less effort than walking , while others feel that those who live too far from a synagogue would be cut off from religious life altogether if they do not drive to reach the synagogue , and the benefits outweigh full Shabbat observance .
Other sources reject any defense of driving during Shabbat , arguing that to reject the prohibition would be a rejection of a God - given commandment .
In Israel , some ultra - Orthodox neighborhoods are barricaded on Shabbat to prevent driving .
In Mea Shearim , residents have been known to throw stones at those driving through their neighborhoods on Shabbat .
In Jerusalem and some other Israeli cities with large Orthodox populations , public buses do not operate during Shabbat .
Part of the population in Israel view it as " sinful " to drive on Shabbat , and are annoyed by those who drive through their neighborhoods on Shabbat .
VIEWS ORTHODOX Section::::Views .
Section::::Orthodox .
Orthodoxy generally prohibits driving during Shabbat under all circumstances except for a life - threatening emergency .
Orthodox Jews have never challenged prohibitions against driving on Shabbat , but rather have striven to make any accommodations necessary to avoid this activity , including living within walking distance of a synagogue and other places where they wish to visit regularly during Shabbat , walking long distances when the need arises , and staying at home throughout Shabbat when this is not possible .
Those who are travelling away from their hometown will attempt to find a hotel or other accommodations within a practical walk of their Shabbat needs .
While riding an animal , the primary ancient form of transportation , during Shabbat is rabbinically prohibited , the operation of an automobile is considered a direct violation of Torah law due to the burning of fuel , among other issues .
Additionally , those who do drive frequently travel greater distances than those who walk , thereby leaving the boundaries of the local eruv and violating those Shabbat laws pertaining to traveling beyond the " boundary distance " ( tehum ) and transferring between a public and private domain ( hotza'ah ) .
Orthodox Jews do not view the use of the automobile in order to fulfill the mitzvah of attending synagogue as acceptable .
In Orthodox Judaism , committing a sin in order to fulfill a mitzvah other than saving a human life ( Pikuach Nefesh ) is not considered Halachically acceptable , and if one can not reach a synagogue by walking , it is preferable to pray at home .
In particular , Orthodox Judaism frowns upon those who purchase a home too far to walk to a synagogue , then state they can only reach the synagogue by car , or those who live within a practical walk to a synagogue , but prefer attendance at one that can only be reached by car from their home .
Certain professionals who perform life - saving duties , such as physicians , may be permitted to drive during Shabbat to their place of employment in order to perform these duties , and may be permitted to drive home following the completion of their work .
A non - professional who drives to a hospital during an emergency is not permitted to drive home , once the emergency situation has been stabilized .
Parking and turning off the vehicle may not be permitted under these circumstances either , although moving the car out of the emergency lane is viewed with more leniency .
In practice , though truly Orthodox Jews generally do not drive during the Sabbath , some Jews use their vehicles to reach Orthodox synagogues for services .
Some Modern Orthodox synagogues have a large number of non - Orthodox congregants who drive to their services .
While some of these facilities allow congregants to park in their own lots , others will close off their parking and require those who drive to park elsewhere .
In Israel , streets in some Haredi neighborhoods are closed off during Shabbat in order to prevent non - Shabbat - observers from driving .
CONSERVATIVE Section::::Conservative .
The Conservative Movement examined the issue of driving on Shabbat during the 1950s and decided to allow limited use of the automobile strictly for the purpose of attending synagogue services .
The need to reexamine the ruling came in response to demographic shifts , as many Jews were moving into suburban communities and no longer in walking distance of their synagogues .
In accordance with these rulings , driving is not permitted for any other reasons , including attendance at a social function at the synagogue that has no prayer involved ( such as a Bar or Bat Mitzvah reception ) , as doing so is viewed as serving man and not God .
Nevertheless , many Conservative Jews take this leniency further to allow driving for almost any reason they wish .
Some Conservative Jews who follow a more stringent practice will refrain from driving at all during Shabbat , or will reserve driving for rare occasions for which they find it unavoidable .
The Conservative movement made the decision to permit driving to synagogue based on the changes in the way people were living .
Since most people in the modern world live too far from a synagogue to walk , few Jews would possibly be able to attend synagogue without driving , which they believe could lead to the collapse of Jewish observance .
There are some within the Conservative movement , however , who frown upon the Conservative practice of driving during Shabbat on the basis that other Jewish laws are typically broken when driving takes place .
These include the handling of one 's wallet or purse ( a muktzah item ) , since it contains one 's driver 's license ; the purchase of gasoline , a business transaction ; and the distance of travel , which usually extends outside the boundaries of an eruv .
During the 1990s , the Conservative - affiliated Masorti Movement in Israel took the stricter view and banned all driving on Shabbat on the basis that no one in Israel works on Shabbat , and that it is possible to pray at home simply by opening a siddur .
More importantly , aside from all the ' minor ' transgressions above , according to many authorities , one is actually transgressing the biblical decree not to ignite a fire on Shabbat .
REFORM
Section::::Reform .
Reform Judaism , which does not necessarily consider halakha binding , has long permitted driving during Shabbat .
Most members of Reform congregations drive to services , as well as to other Shabbat activities .
One rationale permitting driving on Shabbat is that in society where cars are common , it is more ' restful ' to drive to observe a positive mitzvah ( attending Shabbat services ) .
RIDING IN A VEHICLE
Section::::Riding in a vehicle .
While the operation of a motor vehicle clearly violates Shabbat laws , another question is if it is permissible to ride as a passenger in a vehicle driven by a gentile during Shabbat .
Some Orthodox rabbis have ruled that besides the appearance being given , since a passenger being present in a vehicle may cause the vehicle to require additional fuel versus the absence of that passenger , this practice is generally not permitted .
However , it may be permissible if a Jew has a medical reason to be transported in a vehicle that is short of life - threatening .
SPECIAL SITUATIONS
LIFE - THREATENING EMERGENCIES
Section::::Special situations .
Section::::Life - threatening emergencies .
In the event of a life - threatening emergency , all of the laws of Shabbat , including those regarding the prohibition of driving , are suspended .
MEDICAL EMERGENCIES Section::::Medical emergencies .
When it is necessary to drive someone to the hospital , the driver must put the car in park , leave the engine running , and leave the door open , since closing the door will cause the dome light to turn off .
A gentile should then be asked to park the car .
Rabbi Moshe Feinstein is famous for allowing someone in this position to drive home , even though there is no medical reason to drive home , so that someone who is in need of medical treatment will not forgo that treatment because they would be stuck at the hospital until the end of Shabbat .
Others require that travel home from the hospital be conducted by a non - Jew , for example a taxi driver .
VISITING OTHERS IN HOSPITAL
Section::::Visiting others in hospital .
If a close relative is taken by ambulance to the hospital on Shabbat , it may be permissible to accompany that relative .
If the relative is not coherent , others may be required to provide authorization for life - saving treatment , and the mere presence of visitors can have a salutary effect on patients .
LABOR
Section::::Labor .
Labor is considered a life - threatening emergency , thereby permitted driving during Shabbat .
If a woman is transported to the hospital as a result of false labor , and then sent home , she must be driven home by a gentile .
SECURITY Section::::Security .
When there is a threat on human life from belligerent foes , driving is permitted .
Therefore , police , army , and other security personnel are permitted to drive .
It is common in Israel
that observant Jews that otherwise abide by the prohibition of driving , drive while in the army or when patrolling their town as a volunteer Civil Guard .
NON - LIFE - THREATENING HEALTH PROBLEMS Section::::Non - life - threatening health problems .
When a medical issue occurs that is not considered life - threatening , but is of discomfort to a person , or may endanger one 's limb , it is acceptable to ask a gentile if available to drive the patient to a hospital or physician .
FERTILITY TREATMENT Section::::Fertility treatment .
Some rabbinical authorities have ruled that in the event that a couple is undergoing treatment for infertility and has the need to receive a treatment during Shabbat that can not otherwise be avoided , transportation provided by a gentile can be arranged prior to Shabbat , in which the gentile opens and closes the doors of the car for the Jew .
All arrangements must be made in advance .
SEE ALSO * Electricity on Shabbat
* Shemirat Shabbat Kehilchatah REFERENCES