RACER
X ( CHARACTER ) ROLE IN THE SERIES Section::::Role in the series .
Racer X is a heroic , mysterious , flamboyant , selfless , sympathetic and often brooding soldier of fortune .
His true identity is , the eldest son of Mom and Pops Racer and the older brother of Speed and Spritle .
His ' Racer X ' moniker is actually a play on his own first name Rex .
Years before the start of the series , when Rex was 18 years old ( Speed 's current age ) , he had a falling out with Pops after wrecking the Mach One ( the first car Pops ever built ) at the end of his first race as a professional driver ( seen in flashbacks throughout the series ) .
Racer X drives the number 9 car , the Shooting Star .
Throughout the course of Speed Racer , Racer X 's identity is constantly revealed to the audience in almost every episode in which he appears , while Speed is unaware of it .
Speed starts to suspect that Racer X might , in fact , be his estranged older brother in the " Challenge of the Masked Racer " saga ( episodes 3 and 4 ) .
Speed finds out that Racer X is his long lost brother near the end of the series in " The Trick Race " .
It was acknowledged by both Pops and Speed over the years that Racer X was the superior driver of the two , and the greatest driver that they had ever seen , but Speed always vowed to defeat Racer X as the two vigorously competed .
Speed was often suspicious of Racer X 's identity and motives because Racer X would repeatedly , and inexplicably , sacrifice winning races to protect Speed from drivers and others who tried to harm him .
The assistance from Racer X nearly always led to Speed winning races , while Racer X came in second place .
Racer X always left the scene unnoticed , receding into his secret life .
It was not until the episode " Challenge of the Masked Racer Part 2 " that fans of the show finally got to see the face of Racer X.
His face was shown a second time near the end of the series in " The Trick Race " .
In that episode , Speed finally gets a chance to ask Racer X if he is his older brother — only to be interrupted by a punch in the stomach .
As Speed lies unconscious , Captain Terror , of the Car Acrobatic Team , soon recognizes the resemblance of Rex under the mask of Racer X. Racer X confesses that he is truly Rex .
He then vows to quit automobile racing and becomes a full - time international secret agent instead .
As he walks away , he takes off his mask and he tells the unconscious Speed that he will look after him wherever he might go .
When Speed wakes up , he finds Racer X 's mask on the ground beside him .
He is finally convinced that Racer X is in fact his older brother .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Pops had told Rex prior to the race that Rex was not yet prepared to compete at the professional racing level .
With less than one lap to go in his first major race , Rex was leading and cruising toward victory , but lost control of the car and wrecked it .
Pops exploded with anger and berated Rex .
In an even more enraged response , Rex fled the family and exiled himself while vowing to become the world 's greatest race car driver .
During his exile , Rex assumed the mysterious Racer X ( a.k.a .
Masked Racer ) identity , to pursue his racing career .
In several stories Racer X is seen as an international spy or agent and is often responsible for thwarting evil corporate schemes .
In this persona , he is often portrayed wearing a white linen suit , Panama hat and wrap around sunglasses .
He also seems at times to be working in cooperation with Inspector Detector , though it is not clear if he actually works for the same organization .
Inspector Detector also seems to know about Racer X 's identity though again it is unclear if this knowledge is mutually shared through the relationship or that the Inspector has a dossier on Racer X. MACH GOGOGO MANGA Section::::Mach GoGoGo manga .
In Tatsuo Yoshida 's original manga series that inspired the Speed Racer anime , Racer X is portrayed similarly to his role in the anime .
In the first volume , it is uncertain whether the Racer X character was really Speed 's older brother .
However , in Yoshida 's second volume , it is revealed that Racer X is Speed 's brother , Rex .
In the second volume , the character 's origins are exactly the same in the anime , meaning that Rex also crashed Pops ' Mach 1 and fled the family when Pops berated him .
However , the story of Racer X in the original manga is slightly different .
Racer X does n't disguise himself as the deceased Prince Kabala like he did in the anime — for Kabala was alive to race Speed in the Fire Race in the manga .
In the end , Racer X comes back to Speed in the Mach 5 as Rex in an abrupt way , revealing his secret life as Racer X and a secret agent to him .
The manga ends with Speed and Rex holding hands in a family reunion , promising each other to race together .
The concept of the Mach 5 originally being Rex 's car in the 2008 film was probably inspired by this scene , the closing scene of the manga .
1999/2000 COMIC SERIES Section::::1999/2000 comic series .
In Tommy Yune 's prequel comic to Speed Racer , Rex is portrayed as dying while driving the Falling Star ( no . 9 ) in a race against cousin Hank Racer in the Mach 3 .
Several years later , Racer X appears driving the famed Shooting Star that has a similar appearance to Rex 's car and brings shock and anger from the Racer family for dishonoring Rex by racing a car with his numbers and similar color schemes .
Racer X is instrumental in helping Speed save Trixie from corrupt interests here and is even praised by Speed before he declares that one day he will learn his identity .
A prequel series was published a year later and told Rex 's story between his original crash and " death " in Yune 's first prequel .
The Racer X series depicted Rex racing and crashing the Mach 1 before being banished from Pops team and struggling to find a sponsor and ride .
Eventually he is invited by Prince Kabala of Kapetapek to journey there and meet with the royal leader .
Arriving he finds that Kabala wants to hone Rex 's racing skills and have him serve him as a diplomat for the South Pacific island - nation against the Western nations ( particularly the United States ) .
Rex learns martial arts , shooting , and racing skills from Kabala before committing a crime punishable by death .
Kabala saves him by challenging him to a Fire Race through the volcanoes on the island .
Before the race , Rex is given his famed number 9 car ( later dubbed the Shooting Star ) and successfully beats Kabala as the volcano entrance collapses .
He briefly adopts Kabala 's identity ( by wearing a mask ) in order to save the nation from guerillas .
At the end of the series , Rex is seen wearing his Racer X mask and loading the Falling Star with Kabala 's dead body onto a ship for transport to the race at the beginning of the Speed Racer prequel .
SPEED RACER ( 2008 FILM )
Section::::Speed Racer ( 2008 film ) .
In the 2008 film adaptation of the manga and anime , Rex Racer is portrayed by Scott Porter while Racer X is portrayed by Matthew Fox .
The relationship between Rex and young Speed is built considerably with Speed looking up to Rex as a role model and learning to drive from his older brother .
Rex drives the Mach 5 in the film and gives it to Speed when he leaves Pops ' racing team to drive for corporate interests .
As a result , in this adaptation Rex does not destroy the car he drove for Pops ( the Mach 4 ) and is portrayed as a reckless and cheating corporate driver responsible for numerous crashes before being killed at the entrance of the Ice Caves in the Casa Cristo cross country race .
When Racer X appears in the film , he has been working as a gun for hire and is feared by many drivers , sponsors , and corporate interests .
Racer X works with Inspector Detector tracking the corruption that has taken over racing , and contracts Speed to work with him and Taejo Togokhan ( a key witness in the case against Royalton 's corruption ) in the Casa Cristo that season .
Speed begins to suspect that Racer X is in fact Rex , noting that the masked racer appeared exactly two years after his brother died in " The Crucible " and exhibits the same driving styles .
After Taejo Togokhan reneges on the proposed takedown of Royalton Industries after Casa Cristo , Speed recklessly races the Mach 5 at the track where Rex took him to drive when he was younger .
Racer X appears and Speed confronts him about his suspicions , especially due to the two 's similar driving styles and the fact that Racer X found him at that particular race track .
Removing his mask , Speed is depressed to learn that Racer X is not his brother .
However , as the film closes the truth about Rex and his work before his " death " is revealed and he is shown faking his death in the caves , detonating his car and undergoing cosmetic surgery afterwards to alter his appearance in order to take on the corruption without bringing harm to his family .
In the end , as in all his other versions , Racer X is Rex Racer .
When Inspector Detector asks Rex whether he made a mistake by leaving his family , Rex responds to him saying that " If I did , it 's a mistake I 'll have to live with . "
Meaning Rex has to continue hiding his identity in order to keep his brother safe .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Racer X was the name of an ' 80s heavy metal band founded by future Mr. Big guitarist Paul Gilbert .
Dallas band Slow Roosevelt have a song entitled " Racer X " on their CD Weightless .
The band Big Black 's 1984 EP is Racer - X.
The title track is full of Speed Racer references .
In the Dexter 's Laboratory Speed Racer parody episode , " Mock 5 " , Dexter 's older sister , Dee Dee , portrays both Racer X and Spritle .
In the comic strip Liberty Meadows had a story line around a weiner dog race .
One of the dachshunds that entered was named Wiener X and wore a mask like the Speed Racer character .
In Season 4 Episode 1 of Fetch with Ruff Ruffman , Scruff Ruffman was Racer X in a Luge Race .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS