ALCOHOL LAWS OF PENNSYLVANIA
The alcohol laws of Pennsylvania contain many peculiarities not found in other states , and are considered some of the strictest regulations in the United States .
ALCOHOL SALES
FOR CONSUMPTION OFF - PREMISES Section::::Alcohol sales .
Section::::For consumption off - premises .
Pennsylvania is an alcoholic beverage control state .
Spirits are to be sold only in the state owned Fine Wine and Good Spirits stores , which also sell wine , but not beer .
Prices are generally the same throughout the state , but state stores may offer special discounts and sales , and county sales tax may cause the price to differ slightly .
People under the age of 21 are allowed to enter Fine Wine and Good Spirits stores , contrary to popular belief , but only if accompanied by a parent or guardian .
Monday through Saturday , a store may open as early as 9 am and close as late as 10 pm .
On Sunday , many stores sell liquor from 11 am until 7 pm .
Wineries are common throughout the Commonwealth , and often sell their wines at storefronts in shopping malls ; persons under the age of 21 are permitted to enter these establishments .
Wine was available for a short time in supermarket kiosks , but this practice has ended .
Many supermarkets now operate restaurants at which they are permitted to sell small quantities of wine ( see below ) .
Beer may only be purchased in large quantities from a distributor .
Beer distributors mainly sell kegs of beer and cases .
A beer distributor is also allowed to sell any package intended for resale by a PLCB - approved brewery containing any variety of bottle / can arrangements greater than or equal to 128 ounces .
Beverage distributors ( which also sell soft drinks ) may sell beer and malt liquor , or hard liquor .
People under 21 may enter most beverage distributors without an adult , since most distributors also sell water , soda , ice , tobacco products , and some snack foods .
They are subject to the rules of the individual establishment .
The hours of operation of beer distributors are typically similar to that of Wine and Spirits stores and other retail establishments .
These hours are only restricted by the state on Sundays , where a special license is required to sell beer , and sales before 11 am are not permitted .
Although state law permits late - night beer distributors , local authorities can place additional restrictions , and stores typically close before 10 pm .
Beer and wine in small quantities may be purchased from a restaurant , bar , or licensed retailer .
These establishments may sell six and twelve packs of beer , along with individual bottles such as 40 ounce or 24 ounce beers .
Their licenses permit them to sell up to 192 fluid ounces of beer per purchase .
They may also sell up to 4 bottles of wine per purchase .
Some supermarkets , including Wegmans , Giant Eagle , Giant , and Weis , have begun to sell alcohol within restaurants attached to the main supermarket building , but only under very specific conditions ( the restaurant must have a defined separation from the rest of the supermarket , a separate cashier , and seating for at least 30 patrons ) .
Supermarket chain ShopRite has begun to attach Wine and Spirits stores to its stores .
For a time , Sheetz obtained a liquor license for a restaurant attached to one of its convenience stores in Altoona .
After several debates , the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania ruled that the store must sell beer to in - house customers as well as take - out .
The 17th Street store now again sells beer and allows limited in store consumption .
FOR CONSUMPTION ON - PREMISES Section::::For consumption on - premises .
Closing time for restaurants and bars in Pennsylvania is 2 am and for private clubs is 3 am .
ATTEMPTS TO PRIVATIZE Section::::Attempts to privatize .
Pennsylvania state lawmakers have attempted to privatize the sales of wine and spirits in the commonwealth .
The state has had a monopoly over the sales of wine and spirits since the repeal of Prohibition .
In the 2011 legislative session , the privatization of sales of wine and spirits was the focus of some controversy .
This controversy is due to the budget deficit that the commonwealth faces .
Supporters of the bill argue that sales taxes and license sales could generate nearly $ 1 billion worth of revenue for the state .
In the 2012 session , House Majority Leader Mike Turzai , with the backing of Governor Tom Corbett , announced a plan to issue 1,600 new liquor store licenses and auction the 600-plus liquor stores currently owned by the state .
Stores would be allowed to sell beer in any configuration and without limit .
Supporters say it could raise as much as $ 1.6 billion for the state .
Opponents say that the proposed pricing would make it difficult for mom - and - pop stores to afford such licenses .
Major opponents include the liquor store clerks union and the Pennsylvania Beer Alliance .
DRINKING AGE
Section::::Drinking age .
The minimum drinking age in Pennsylvania is 21 years .
Minors are prohibited from purchasing , possessing , or consuming alcohol , even if it is furnished by the minor 's immediate family .
Persons over the age of 18 are permitted to serve alcohol , so an exception is made in the possession portion of the law in this respect .
Many states have exceptions for consuming alcohol made for religious or medicinal purposes , but Pennsylvania does not have exceptions for either .
A person under the age of 21 may also be arrested , charged , and convicted of underage drinking through constructive possession , even if they had not consumed any alcohol , simply by being in the presence of alcohol .
This is mainly exercised when officials break up large parties or other events where alcohol is being consumed and the issuance of chemical tests to every individual is deemed impractical .
DRUNK DRIVING
Section::::Drunk driving .
Driving , operating , or being in actual physical control of the movement of vehicle under the influence is a crime in Pennsylvania , and is subject to a great number of regulations outside of the state 's alcohol laws .
Pennsylvania 's maximum blood alcohol level for driving is 0.08 % for persons at or over the age of 21 ( with suspension of license on the first offense ) , and 0.04 % for a person operating a commercial vehicle ( 0.02 % for a school bus ) with revoking of the license on the first offense .
For those under 21 , Pennsylvania follows a " zero tolerance " policy , meaning that any BAC over 0.02 % is enough to warrant a DUI ( the small allowance is for certain medicinal purposes such as some cold medicines that contain alcohol ) .
Penalties include fines , license suspension , and possible imprisonment .
SEE ALSO
* Sumptuary law * Allegheny County Alcoholic Beverage Tax * Law of Pennsylvania REFERENCES