EIGHT BELLES Eight Belles ( February 23 , 2005 – May 3 , 2008 ) was a Thoroughbred racehorse owned by Rick Porter 's Fox Hill Farms .
She finished second to winner Big Brown in the 134th running of the Kentucky Derby held at Churchill Downs , a race run by only thirty - nine fillies in the past .
Her collapse just after the Derby 's conclusion resulted in immediate euthanasia .
Earlier in the year , Eight Belles made history at Oaklawn Park in Hot Springs , Arkansas , by being the first filly in the history of the track to win the Martha Washington Stakes ( February 17 , 2008 , by 13½ lengths , setting a stakes record for margin of victory ) , the Honeybee Stakes ( March 16 , 2008 , beating stakes winner Pure Clan ) , and the Fantasy Stakes ( April 12 , 2008 ) .
EVENTS
AFTER THE 2008 KENTUCKY DERBY Section::::Events after the 2008 Kentucky Derby .
Eight Belles broke down approximately a furlong ( 1/8 mile ) after the wire , while being slowed after the race .
She suffered compound fractures of both front ankles and was immediately euthanized because of the nature of her injuries .
Dr. Larry Bramlage , the on - call veterinarian , stated that Eight Belles ' trauma was too severe to even attempt to move her off the track .
According to the Louisville Courier - Journal , Bramlage said the filly had fractures of the cannon and sesamoid bones in both front legs .
That is the same type of break that was suffered , in the 2006 Preakness , by 2006
Kentucky Derby winner Barbaro in one leg .
Eight Belles was buried and memorialized in the garden of Churchill Downs ' Kentucky Derby Museum on September 7 , 2008 .
A race has been renamed in her honor , and was run on the Derby Day 2009 undercard as the Eight Belles Stakes .
REMEMBERING EIGHT
BELLES
Section::::Remembering Eight Belles .
The National Thoroughbred Racing Association ( NTRA ) asked jockeys riding at Pimlico Race Course during all races over the weekend of the 133rd running of the Preakness Stakes ( May 16 and 17 , 2008 ) to wear stickers on their boots or mud pants in honor of Eight Belles .
The red and white stickers , made by the NTRA , had a bell , the number 8 and the word " Belles " on them .
The Jockeys ' Guild wholeheartedly agreed .
Jockey John Velazquez said : " It 's something to remind everybody of a great horse .
What happened was a really sad thing , and we 're sad .
I think it [ wearing the stickers ] is a good thing to bring awareness to our game .
We 'll do whatever is possible to minimize anything that happens like that . " NECROPSY Section::::Necropsy .
Kentucky chief veterinarian Lafe Nichols performed a necropsy and tests at the University of Kentucky 's Livestock Disease Diagnostic Center .
According to a review of the results by the Associated Press , compound fractures of both front legs at the fetlock joints were confirmed .
They described lacerated skin on both legs , an absence of joint fluid in the damaged areas and congested lungs .
The filly also experienced a bruised head and hemorrhaging in the left thyroid gland , which the report blamed on her fall after the initial injuries .
Larry Jones , her trainer , commented that he believes the horse just tripped over her own feet .
" She 's bad about stumbling while pulling up .
She does n't pick her feet up very high .
It 's one reason she could run very fast and far .
She had the perfect motion for being effective and efficient .
However , those horses who do that have a tendency to want to stumble . "
The Jockey Club formed a panel to examine the issues , which include breeding practices , track surfaces and medication .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Veteran Washington Post sportswriter Sally Jenkins wrote that Thoroughbred horses had become too strong with bones too lightweight : " She ran with the heart of a locomotive , on champagne - glass ankles .
" Blaming the breeders and investors , Jenkins claimed , " thoroughbred racing is in a moral crisis , and everyone now knows it . " Controversial campaign group PETA called for the suspension of jockey Gabriel Saez and the prize money to be revoked were he to be found at fault .
Six generations back takes Eight Belles to Native Dancer ( foaled March 1950 ) , along with all 20 of the horses in the Derby , and many horses racing in the United States today .
Much opinion has been published in the press stating that there may be a connection between the fact of inbreeding stemming from Native Dancer , with the weak ankles seen in horses today , leading to Eight Belles ' demise .
The Los Angeles Times went so far as to headline its opinion piece that today 's horses are being " bred for death " .
The owner of Eight Belles made comments and suggested solutions in an article in The Wall Street Journal .
Many news outlets and articles pointed fingers at Eight Belles ' trainer .
In response to a New York Times article suggesting this sport is becoming a form of animal cruelty , the trainer of Eight Belles , Larry Jones , said , " I disagree wholeheartedly , these horses , they run because they like to run .
I mean if you knew how many horses were injured in the field running and just playing with other horses , I 'm gon na be honest with you
, we 've had more horses injured on the farm than we have on the racetrack-
they do more injury to [ themselves ] .
This sport is not that cruel , and everyone does the best they can to make sure it is a safe track and a safe condition . "
PEDIGREE
Section::::Pedigree .
Eight Belles ' dam was Away , a descendant of Northern Dancer , and her sire was Unbridled 's Song .
Unbridled 's Song 's dam is a daughter of Caro .
Caro is the sire of Winning Colors , one of only three fillies to win the Kentucky Derby .
HONORS Section::::Honors .
Eight Belles was a finalist for the Eclipse Award 's American Champion Three - Year - Old Filly for 2008 .
REFERENCES