BUCK TAYLOR Walter Clarence Taylor , III ( born May 13 , 1938 ) , known as Buck Taylor , is an American actor best known for his role as gunsmith - turned - deputy Newly O'Brien in 174 episodes during the last eight seasons of CBS 's Gunsmoke television series ( 1967–1975 ) .
In recent years , he has painted the portrait of his friend and Gunsmoke series ' star James Arness .
Taylor 's painting specialty is the American West , and each year , he creates the posters for several Texas rodeos .
Taylor lives with his second wife on a ranch near Fort Worth , Texas .
EARLY YEARS , EDUCATION ,
MILITARY Section::::Early years , education , military .
Taylor was born in Hollywood , Los Angeles , California , to Mr. and Mrs. Walter Taylor ,
Jr. He has an older sister , Faydean Taylor Tharp ( born circa 1931 ) of the Greater Los Angeles Area .
His father was the character actor Dub Taylor , sometimes known as " Cannonball " Taylor , and a native of Richmond , Virginia .
Buck Taylor was born in the same year his father got his first acting role in the film
You Ca n't Take It with You .
Dub Taylor , one of cinema 's most prolific supporting actors , appeared with dozens of leading actors , including John Wayne and the musicians Tex Ritter and Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys .
Buck grew up on the various Hollywood sets , and was close to his father 's Texas friend , the Western actor Chill Wills .
Taylor graduated from North Hollywood High School and studied theatre arts at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles .
In 1960 , he tried out for the Olympic Games in gymnastics .
He served two years in the United States Navy .
ACTING CAREER
TELEVISION AND FILM ROLES
Section::::Acting career .
Section::::Television and film roles .
Taylor 's first acting role was as Trooper Shattuck in the 1961 episode " Image of a Drawn Sword " on CBS 's Dick Powell 's Zane Grey Theater .
He appeared on the sitcoms The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet and My Favorite Martian .
He was cast twice in the 1963 - 1964 ABC series The Greatest Show on Earth .
He portrayed Mickey Vecchione in the 1963 episode " My Son the Social Worker " on Going My Way .
He appeared in 1960 's series Combat !
episode " The First Day " .
Taylor co - starred in the 1963 Walt Disney production , Johnny Shiloh , the first of more than fifty films .
He was then cast in an uncredited role in Ensign Pulver ( 1964 ) and in The Wild Angels ( 1966 ) , as a motorcycle gang member .
He guest starred on Have Gun - Will Travel , The Rebel , and three times on Stoney Burke .
He was cast on The Fugitive , and The Legend of Jesse James .
He appeared as well on The Virginian and The Big Valley .
He also appeared as frustrated newlywed Gard Hayden in The Outer Limits in the 1964 episode titled " Do n't Open Till Doomsday " .
NEWLY O'BRIEN
ON GUNSMOKE Section::::Newly O'Brien on Gunsmoke .
Taylor 's long - term role on Gunsmoke was not his first role in a weekly series .
In the preceding 1966–1967 season , he starred in 10 episodes as John " Brad " Bradford , along with Michael Anderson , Jr. and Barbara Hershey in ABC 's The Monroes , the story of an orphaned family trying to survive in the Wyoming wilderness .
Gunsmoke introduced Taylor on a weekly basis to millions of viewers .
Dub Taylor also guest - starred numerous times on the series .
Before Taylor was cast as handsome young gunsmith
" Newly " , he had actually appeared in an earlier segment of the series as an outlaw .
As Newly , however , he was clearly one of the " good guys " in the same tradition as James Arness as Matt Dillon .
The Newly character superseded that of Clayton Thaddeus " Thad " Greenwood , played by Roger Ewing ( born 1942 ) .
Taylor got along so well with the Gunsmoke cast that he named his second and third sons Matthew Taylor and Cooper Glenn Taylor for James Arness ' ( 1923–2011 )
Marshal Matt Dillon character and for Glenn Strange ( 1899–1973 ) , the character actor who played the bartender , Sam , and remained on the program until cancer claimed his life .
Strange never knew of the honor , for Cooper Taylor was not born until 1975 .
Taylor was actively involved in the preparation of the script for the 1987 reunion film , by which time Milburn Stone , the cranky Doc Adams character , had died .
Ken Curtis , who had portrayed the deputy Festus Haggen , felt shortchanged by the offer of far less pay than Amanda Blake and passed on the project .
In 1991 , Taylor co - starred with Curtis in what turned out to be Curtis ' last acting role in the film version of Louis L'Amour 's Conagher , which also starred Taylor 's friend Sam Elliott and Elliott 's wife , Katharine Ross .
ACTING AFTER GUNSMOKE Section::::Acting after Gunsmoke .
At the age of 43 , Taylor was cast as the outlaw Dan Clifton , who died at 31 , in the 1981 film Cattle Annie and Little Britches , a fictional portrayal of the teenaged bandits Cattle Annie and Little Britches , played by Amanda Plummer and Diane Lane , respectively .
Taylor is called " Dynamite Dick " in the film , but Clifton 's nickname was " Dynamite Dan . "
In 1983 , Taylor appeared in the film The Triumphs of a Man Called Horse .
In the film Gettysburg ( 1993 ) , he played William Gamble .
In the 2003 production Gods and Generals , Taylor was cast as Maxcy Gregg .
He appeared on CBS 's Dallas starring Larry Hagman and Walker , Texas Ranger starring Chuck Norris .
Taylor had a memorable role as " Turkey Creek " Jack Johnson in Tombstone ( 1993 ) and appeared in 1997 in Rough Riders , both co - starring with Sam Elliott .
He appeared in director John Lee Hancock 's The Alamo ( 2004 ) and in the Wyoming - based Flicka ( 2006 ) , a loose adaptation of the novel My Friend Flicka .
He had a part in the 2007 film The Mist .
He appeared as Ben Lily in January 2008 with his friend Val Kilmer in the CBS miniseries Comanche Moon , another in the Lonesome Dove line of television films based on Larry McMurtry novels .
Taylor in 2008 worked in three films ,
The Hard Ride , The Last Horseman , and Legend of Hell 's Gate .
While he was clean - shaven in Gunsmoke , like other cowboy actors , he later elected to sport a deep mustache .
In 2018 Taylor was cast in ' Yellowstone ' , a modern day western starring Kevin Costner .
Taylor plays a hard nosed wrangler whose duties are not only ranching , but carrying out the orders of ranch owner John Dutton ( Costner ) , including murder .
Yellowstone has proved popular on the newly formed Paramount network , and has already been renewed for a second season .
Taylor 's self - portrait hangs in the Texas Cowboy Hall of Fame in Fort Worth .
Taylor is also an inductee of the Texas Cowboy Hall of Fame in Fort Worth and has received the " Spirit of Texas " Award .
In 1993 , he received the Golden Boot award which honors the " Best of the West " from the Motion Picture and Television Fund .
In 1998 , Taylor , Rex Allen , and Christina Paine won the " Cowboy Spirit Award " .
In 2000 , Taylor was memorialized in " The Trail of Fame " on the streets of Dodge City , the western Kansas town where Gunsmoke is set .
He has also received the " Spirit of the West " award , along with Jack Palance and Roy Rogers .
Additionally , Taylor is recognized on the Hollywood Walk of Fame with his friends Sam Elliott and Katharine Ross .
Taylor 's star also appears on the streets of " Little Hollywood " in Kanab , Utah .
There , his star is between Ronald W. Reagan and Tom Mix .
In 1981 , Taylor was inducted as a trustee in the National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City for his Gunsmoke role .
In 2006 , he was awarded by the same organization with the " Wrangler " ( or Western Heritage Award ) .
Taylor has a plaque on the Walk of Western Stars in Santa Clarita , California , that includes past recipients James Arness and other Gunsmoke alumni Dennis Weaver and the late Amanda Blake .
ARTISTIC PURSUITS Section::::Artistic pursuits .
In 1993 , Taylor began selling his paintings at the National Finals Rodeo in Las Vegas .
These paintings are sold through his website , private art shows and festivals , and at galleries .
His private commissions can be found in the Loomis Fargo headquarters , the Franklin Mint , John Wayne Enterprises , the American Quarter Horse Association Museum in Amarillo , the National Ranching Heritage Center museum in Lubbock , and in the hands of private collectors Roy Clark , Val Kilmer , Roger Staubach , Powers Boothe , Jasey Wrenn , Sam Elliott , and James Arness .
Taylor is the official artist for several rodeos , including the Pendleton Round - Up in Pendleton , Oregon , and state fairs .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
In 1961 , Taylor married the actress Judy Ann Nugent , who was a sister - in - law of actor Nick Adams .
The couple divorced in 1983 .
They had three sons : Adam Carlyle Taylor ( 1966–1994 ) , Matthew Taylor ( born 1970 ) , and Cooper Glenn Taylor ( born 1975 ) .
Adam was an assistant director , and Matthew and Cooper are Hollywood stunt men who were raised in Montana .
Taylor is the father - in - law of actress / producer Anne Lockhart ( born 1953 ) , the widow of Adam Taylor , who died three days before his 28th birthday in a highway accident in Madison County , Montana .
Anne is the daughter of actress June Lockhart .
Taylor has two grandchildren , Carlyle and Zane Taylor , the daughter and son of Adam and Anne .
Taylor and current wife Goldie , a flight attendant , met in 1995 at a quarter horse show , where his paintings were being exhibited .
They we
d after a three - month courtship and run a ranch on the Brazos River in Texas .
Taylor supports the John Wayne Cancer Foundation , the Walt Garrison Multiple Sclerosis Foundation , the Future Farmers of America Scholarship , the Screen Actors Guild Retirement Home , the Ben Johnson Children 's Hospital , and Frontier Texas , a state - of - the - art museum for which Taylor does some of the narration .
The museum opened in 2004 in Abilene in Taylor County ( coincidence of the name ) in West Texas .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS