LEX LUTHOR ( SMALLVILLE )
Lex Luthor is a fictional character from the television series Smallville .
He is featured in the pilot episode until the season seven finale , and has been played continuously by Michael Rosenbaum , with various actors portraying the character as a child throughout the series .
The character of Lex Luthor , first created for comic books by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster in 1940 as nemesis of Superman , was adapted to television in 2001 by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar — this is only the third time the character has been adapted to a live action television series .
The character has also appeared in various literature based on the Smallville television series , none of which directly continues from or into the television episodes .
In this 2001 series , Lex Luthor is sent to Smallville , by his father Lionel Luthor , to run the local LuthorCorp fertilizer plant .
After driving his car off a bridge , he is saved by Clark Kent and quickly develops a new friendship with the farm boy .
As the series unfolds , Lex 's curiosity about Clark and all things connected to Clark ultimately destroys their friendship .
Lex 's relationship with his father is tension - filled from the start of the show , and eventually comes to an end when Lex murders his father in an effort to discover Clark 's secret .
The Smallville incarnation of the character is first introduced as a morally ambiguous character , who walks a fine line between good and evil .
Lex is an inquisitive person , and it is that curiosity that drives him to attain as much power as possible as the series progresses — it will ultimately lead him to being Clark 's greatest enemy .
Michael Rosenbaum has been nominated for and won a Saturn Award and a Teen Choice Award for his portrayal of Lex Luthor on Smallville .
After seven seasons as a series regular , Michael Rosenbaum left the show , but reprised the role for the two - hour series finale .
ROLE IN SMALLVILLE Section::::Role in Smallville .
Lex Luthor , introduced in the pilot as the son of billionaire Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) , is sent to Smallville by his father to run the local fertilizer plant .
As a child , he is caught in the first meteor shower that renders him completely bald .
Years later as a young adult , Lex first meets Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) saving his life from drowning and the two quickly become friends .
Lex tries to be a good guy for most of the early seasons , but his motives are usually driven by curiosity for the unexplained , like the day Clark rescued him from drowning .
Over the course of seven seasons — beginning in the pilot episode on the day Clark rescued him from drowning —
Lex has been trying to uncover the secrets that Clark keeps .
In season one , Lex hires Roger Nixon ( Tom O'Brien ) , a reporter for the tabloid newspaper The Inquisitor , to discover how he survived the automobile accident where Clark saved him from drowning .
All the evidence points to
Clark having been hit by Lex 's car , but Lex refuses to believe that is what happened so Nixon attempts to expose Clark to everyone .
Around the same time , Lex also enlists the help of Dr. Hamilton ( Joe Morton ) ; Hamilton is commissioned to study the effects of the meteor rocks .
Hamilton finds an octagonal disc , with unknown symbols imprinted on the disc 's surface that match those on Clark 's ship , while searching for traces of an alien ship that landed in Smallville in 1989 .
The disc is eventually stolen by Nixon in an attempt to open Clark 's ship .
In season two , Lex 's curiosity with the symbols continues .
Lex first kills Nixon before the reporter can kill Jonathan Kent ( John Schneider ) for protecting Clark from Nixon .
When Clark discovers the Kawatche Caves , under a LuthorCorp construction site , Lex opts to be the curator of the caves to preserve them after he notices symbols on the cave walls that match the symbols on the disc , as well as an octagonal shape in the wall of the cave that would fit the disc perfectly .
His interest grows more and more when he finds Clark constantly in the caves , and later with a piece of paper that appears to indicate that Clark has deciphered the language on the cave walls — although , Clark denies being able to read the language .
Lex 's company eventually loses the Kawatche caves to Lionel as his father has also developed an interest in the caves and the octagonal disc .
During all this , Lex also met and courted Dr. Helen Bryce ( Emmanuelle Vaugier )
but Helen would try to kill him on their honeymoon .
Season three revealed why Lex endured Lionel 's harsh parenting ; his father blames him for his younger brother Julian Luthor 's death , however , Lex took the blame to protect the true killer , his mentally unwell mother Lillian Luthor ( Alisen Down ) , from Lionel 's wrath .
Also , Lex 's curiosity into the symbols ( and Clark ) leads to a blowout between the two .
When Lionel gives Clark a key to a room in the Luthor Mansion where Lex has been collecting information on Clark 's family , Clark informs Lex that their friendship " is over " .
In season four , Lex replaces his father as LuthorCorp 's CEO and turns his attention turns toward finding three ancient stones , which contain the same symbols as those in the cave and on the disc .
He fails to find all three stones but suspects that Clark did , and used the stones to find the treasure of knowledge they were supposed to have led to , often having confrontations with Jason Teague ( Jensen Ackles ) .
Around this time , Lex 's lifestyle of bedding women and then leaving them the next day would catch up to him when one ( Cobie Smulders ) that he had previously slept with attempts to kill him after framing him for the murder of another one of the said women .
In season five , Lex becomes obsessed with uncovering Clark 's secret ; he breaks three metahuman criminals out of Belle Reve and sends them to the Kent Farm , where they hold several people close to Clark hostage .
The scheme amounts to nothing , however , and Clark cuts Lex out of his life completely upon finding out .
His curiosity into the symbols , which he believes to be alien in nature , results in Brainiac ( James Marsters ) arranging him to be possessed by the spirit of the Kryptonian criminal Zod .
In season six , Lex married Lana Lang ( Kristin Kreuk ) after deceiving Lana into being pregnant with his child .
Upon learning the truth , Lana faked her own death and attempted to pin the murder on Lex .
Season seven displayed Lex 's descent into darkness ; he has a brother - like relationship with Grant Gabriel ( Michael Cassidy ) , the new editor of the Daily Planet newest editor , until it 's revealed Grant is actually a clone of Lex 's late brother .
After Lex buys the Daily Planet , Grant attempts to keep Lex from being controlling , thus Lex has his brother 's clone murdered and staged as a failed mugging .
Lex then discovers that the previous symbols are connected to the secret organization Veritas , which his father is a part of .
The Veritas members learned that an alien visitor known as " The Traveler " would arrive in Smallville during the meteor shower of 1989 .
At this time , Lex realizes that Lionel has been covering up the Traveler 's existence and subsequently kills his own father for it .
He eventually discovers that the Veritas members knew of a means to control the Traveler , so Lex sets out to find the device .
The device , an orb he finds in the mantle above a fireplace in the Luthor mansion , leads Lex to the Fortress of Solitude , where he is confronted by Clark .
Having finally discovered Clark 's secret , Lex uses the orb to bring down the Fortress around Clark and himself .
In season eight , Lex is missing and Tess Mercer ( Cassidy Freeman ) is put in charge as Lex 's hand - picked successor .
Tess wants Lex found , until Lex is revealed to have a surgically - implanted nano - transmitter in Tess 's optic nerve .
Wanting revenge , Lex uses a kryptonite bomb to have Lana 's stolen bio - enhanced suit , designed to absorb and emit kryptonite radiation , absorb the radiation to de - activate the bomb and subsequently never be able to go near Clark again without fatal effects .
Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) discovers Lex 's location and uses a bomb to blow up Lex 's travelling medical transport , seemingly killing him .
Season ten revealed that Lex had manufactured a number of clones in an attempt to heal himself .
However , the majority of these clones are flawed and age at an accelerated rate .
One clone of Lex ( Mackenzie Gray ) , aged approximately twenty years older than the original , attempted to get revenge on Clark by trying to kill Lois Lane ( Erica Durance ) but died before he could finish .
The two - hour series finale reveals Lex used the viable parts of his clones , including parts of his original body , to create a composite that only lacked a heart .
After the alternate reality version of his father sacrifices himself to Darkseid , Lex is brought back to life through his clone .
He speaks with Clark , telling his former friend he accepts they have a destiny as enemies , but neither of them can fulfill their roles unless Clark defeats Darkseid by inspiring humanity .
Lex later meets with Tess , and fatally stabs his sister , however , Tess poisons him with a specialized neurotoxin that removes all of Lex 's memories .
The series ends by shifting seven years into the future , where Lex had been elected as the President of the United States .
PORTRAYAL Section::::Portrayal .
When crafting Smallville 's version of Lex Luthor , series developers Al Gough and Miles Millar decided that he would not be a precursor to the more comedic role performed by Gene Hackman in the Superman film series ; the pair wanted him to be likeable and vulnerable .
The role was difficult to cast , as no one involved in the casting could agree on who they liked for the role .
Gough and Millar wanted to cast a comedian for the series , on the belief that comedians always want to " please and be loved at the same time . "
Michael Rosenbaum auditioned for Lex Luthor twice .
Feeling he did not take his first audition seriously , Rosenbaum outlined a two - and - a - half - page scene , indicating all the places to be funny , charismatic , or menacing .
His audition went so well that everyone agreed he was " the guy " .
Before Rosenbaum got the part , Martin Cummins auditioned for the role of Lex Luthor ; Cummins would go on to play Dr. Garner , a neuro - scientist who experiments on Clark , in multiple episodes of Smallville spanning season two and three .
Michael Rosenbaum is not the only actor to portray Lex on the show .
There have been four other actors that have performed the role ; Matthew Munn , Wayne Dalgish , Lucas Grabeel , and Connor Stanhope have all portrayed Lex Luthor as a child in various episodes throughout the series .
Rosenbaum relished the opportunities he gets to show Lex 's evil side , even if it is only for a few seconds in earlier seasons .
Specifically , he delighted in the chance to " go overboard " , like he did in " Hug " where his character pulls out a machine gun and shoots everything in sight ; to the actor , this gave the audience a glimpse into who Lex was becoming .
To portray Lex 's signature bald head , Rosenbaum had to go through more than just a regular head shaving .
Not only was his head shaved every day , but he had to undergo hours of make - up treatments on his head , in various color combinations , so that his natural hairline did not show up on film .
After seven seasons of portraying Lex Luthor on Smallville , Michael Rosenbaum decided to move on with his acting career , so he departed from the show .
On February 11 , 2011 , Michael Ausiello reported that after the back and forth speculation as to whether Rosenbaum would return to the series , the actor finally agreed to appear in the series finale .
Rosenbaum expressed that his return for the final episode was for the fans , stating , " I appreciate all of their passion , their relentlessness , and even their threats . "
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT STORYLINE PROGRESSION Section::::Character development .
Section::::Storyline progression .
Rosenbaum believed that Lex was trying to be a hero in season one , but that his character showed signs of having to fight " ambiguity " and stay on the straight path .
The tension - filled relationship with his father , which is first established in the pilot episode , comes to a crossing in the season one finale , when Lex is left with the decision to either help his father remove the structural beam that has fallen on him , or let him die .
Rosenbaum wanted the audience to see that Lex was really contemplating what his life would be like if Lionel was no longer around .
As Rosenbaum explained the scene : Season two delved deeper into Lex 's darker moments , from the time he wavers to save his father 's life , to his outburst at Jonathan for what he feels is unfair treatment .
These moments play into Lex 's psyche .
Season three 's " Memoria " finally explained the mysterious circumstances surrounding the death of Lex 's infant brother , Julian .
Gough explains that they had known the story of Julian Luthor back in season one , when the character was first mentioned in " Stray " , but they wanted to find the right time to explain the situation .
The creative team wanted the audience to think that Lex was responsible for Julian 's death as an infant , before finally revealing that Lex was merely covering for his mother .
Season four began expanding on the series long story arc of Lex 's feelings for Lana .
Though the seeds were planted in the second episode of the first season , it was not until season four that Lex began to show more of his true feelings .
According to Gough , not only was Lex trying to protect Lana from Jason Teague ( Jensen Ackles ) , Lana 's boyfriend who was also after the stones of knowledge , but he was also trying to get Jason out of the picture completely
so he could have Lana for himself .
Writer Darren Swimmer questioned Lex 's motives from earlier seasons : " You have to ask yourself , in the words of Lex Luthor himself : Why would some billionaire want to be bailing out this girl and buying her a coffee house to begin with ?
What 's that all about ? "
Writer Todd Slavkin described season five as " the darkening of Lex Luthor " .
By the time " Aqua " came around , Lex had removed the gloves , as there is no friendship with Clark that he needed to worry about , and his dark side began to show its face .
Season five also saw Lex 's hunger for power begin to develop , as he campaigned for a Kansas senate seat .
It was the events of " Lexmas " that drove Lex to continue his pursuit of ultimate power .
In " Lexmas " , Lex is shot and he gets a chance to live a life where he is married to Lana and he no longer on a quest for power .
In this alternate reality , without all the power and money that he had originally had , Lex is unable to save Lana , who dies after giving birth to their second child .
It is here that Lex decided that he would always " go for the prize " .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
One of Lex 's key characteristics is his curiosity for the unexplained .
Lex 's primary motive for his " shady " actions derives from his curiosity , specifically beginning from the moment he and Clark meet after Lex hits Clark with his Porsche .
Clark always appearing when something strange happens in Smallville does nothing but fuel Lex 's curiosity .
Rosenbaum believes that Lex 's only sees two options : " For Lex , it 's either take a nice ride to Metropolis and work with his dad , or find out what 's going on with this strong , strange fellow , Clark Kent . "
Another characteristic of Smallville 's Lex Luthor — one that is being developed over the course of the series — is his evilness .
Rosenbaum believes that what the audience sees in Lex 's dark side in the early seasons is merely a taste of what the character is truly capable of .
In the season two premiere " Vortex " , Rosenbaum requested Greg Beeman to shoot a close - up of him after he shoots Nixon , in an effort to open a window into Lex 's darker side .
Rosenbaum intended to leave the interpretation of whether Lex enjoyed killing Nixon open to the audience .
As Beeman explains Rosenbaum 's thoughts , " ... either Lex is horrified and appalled , or he liked it , and it felt good to him " .
According to Rosenbaum , when Lex reaches that point where he uses all of his mind , and " really flips out " , that is the point where the " world needs to hide " .
Television reviewer Brian Byun felt that it was this struggle between good and evil inside Lex that not only made him an anti - hero , but also , given that the audience familiar with Lex 's mythology and the knowledge that he will end up being Superman 's greatest enemy , make Smallville 's Lex Luthor a " tragic figure [ of ] almost Shakespearean grandeur " .
Taking a page out of Chazz Palminteri 's A Bronx Tale , Rosenbaum ignored the script during his final scene with Kristin Kreuk for the season six finale .
Here , as Lana is informing Lex that she is going to leave , Lex walks around her and closes the door to her exit .
Rosenbaum was trying to invoke a moment of fright for the audience .
To the actor , he wanted the audience to wonder what Lex was going to do to Lana ; it was a moment meant to show just how unpredictable Lex can be .
As the seasons progressed , and the character began to grow darker and more sinister , Rosenbaum sought more opportunities to bring humor to the scene , either with physical subtleties like little smiles at key moments , or " self - deprecating humor " .
One such instance , which became popular with audiences , was in the season six episode " Justice " , where Lex made a joke about wanting a ponytail .
The producers were concerned over the piece of dialogue , but Rosenbaum convinced them that he could pull it off .
To Rosenbaum , this quip by Lex makes him more credible as a person , because it is well known that Lex always wanted hair .
This moment reflects an earlier episode , where Lex reveals his feelings of meagerness when comparing himself to Clark .
In season five 's " Lockdown " , Lex provides a window into his thoughts about his place in Smallville .
As writer Steven S. DeKnight describes it , the audience gets to see a moment where Lex shows how he still feels like an outsider , and that he views Clark as this " perfect person " .
DeKnight believes that , from how Clark sees it , Lex is driven by his desire to attain everything that Clark has , like his family and girlfriend .
Lex also develops a craving for power , with that hunger expanding in season five .
Al Gough believes that Lex 's political motivations are based on his lust for power .
Rosenbaum echoes that opinion , believing that Lex can never get enough ; " Lex is an insatiable character " .
Rosenbaum believes that nothing will satisfy Lex 's hunger , and that he will keep going until he is president of the United States .
Even then , he will keep trying to make the majority of people like and believe in him .
Visually , the character of Lex Luthor has his own characteristics .
In Smallville , Lex is usually given a " glass , steel [ colored ] background " , and dressed in a lot of black , grey , and " cool tones " like purples and blues .
RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Relationships .
Rosenbaum realizes that the friendship between Lex and Clark is destined to fail , but that Clark 's friendship truly is important to Lex early in the series .
The actor also believes that if Clark could see the darkness that Lex is constantly fighting then he would understand more of Lex 's actions .
Reviewer Brian Byun expressed that the choice to explore the friendship between Clark and Lex , before they become sworn enemies , which was something that had been used in the past but never to the depth of what Smallville is doing , helped keep the show from becoming " Dawson 's Creek with superpowers " .
Like Lana , who held emptiness inside her after the loss of her parents , which she tried to fill with the men in her life , Lex attempts to fill his own void , over the loss of his mother , with the women in his life .
According to writer Holly Harold , Lex " needs and wants to be loved " .
Rosenbaum agrees , and feels that Lex is searching for that " unconditional love " .
The actor likens this feeling to one that everyone can relate to , but that Lex fails to achieve with not only the women he develops relationships with , but also with his own father .
Rosenbaum and Annette O'Toole ( Martha Kent ) agree that the only person that could give Lex that love is his mother , who died when he was a child .
Whenever they have scenes together , O'Toole and Rosenbaum try and hint around the idea that Martha wants to provide that love for Lex , because she recognizes that he needs it , and that Lex really wants her to provide it as well .
After various failed relationships , Lex finally believes he has what he wants when he begins a romantic relationship with Lana Lang .
In " Hypnotic " , in an effort to stop hurting Lana emotionally , Clark told her that he no longer loved her .
This drives Lana into Lex 's arms .
Writer Darren Swimmer explains that this was not something that just happened in the series , but something that had been hinted at for many seasons .
Rosenbaum admits that Lex had a crush on Lana for many years , but contends that he tried to help Clark win Lana early on — he succeeded .
When Clark and Lana 's relationship crumbled , because of Clark 's deceit , Lex was waiting .
Rosenbaum believes that Lana was " tired of the boy and wanted a man around " .
By contrast , Swimmer believes that Lana started dating Lex as a way of making Clark mad , but the relationship " turned into much more " .
Kreuk contends that Lana went to Lex because " she knows she will never really love him . "
Kreuk believes that Lana 's relationship with the men in her life was originally motivated by a desire to fill a void in her life that was left after her parents were killed .
This need to fill that emptiness was fulfilled in " Void " , when Lana took a drug to induce death so that she could see her parents in the afterlife .
Upon meeting her parents , Kreuk believes that Lana realized that she no longer needed someone else to fill that hole in her .
Kreuk sees this filled void as the reason why Lana would gravitate toward Lex .
Kreuk feels that if Lex had chosen a different path after the events of " Lexmas " , then Lana would have been able to truly love him .
As Rosenbaum describes it , Lex views Lana as this beautiful , charming girl with a little naïveté .
It is this naïveté that allows Lex to believe that he can trust and confide in Lana , and that she is his one true love .
Lex also knows that Lana will always love Clark , but he expects her to love him for who he is just the same .
Rosenbaum does not believe that Lana gives that to Lex .
Writer Holly Harold finds parallels between Lex 's relationship with Lana , and that of Lionel 's relationship with Martha .
Both men believe that these two women will be their saving grace , and pull them back from the dark side .
In Lex 's defense , Rosenbaum contends that Lex is not using Lana in an effort to hurt Clark , but that he really does love her .
The actor believes that Lex 's problem lies in the fact that every time he has loved someone and opened up to them he has been hurt , or betrayed .
Even though Lex loves Lana more than anyone else before her , he just can not bring himself to open up completely for fear of repeating the past .
Rosenbaum believes that the eventual dissolution of the marriage between Lex and Lana was a tragic moment in both characters ' lives .
It is a moment that solidifies Lex 's history of opening up to women and having them hurt him .
It is not just the women in his life that Lex has a difficult time maintaining a healthy relationship with , but his father as well .
Rosenbaum characterizes the relationship between Lex and Lionel as a form of tug - of - war , and disagrees with John Glover 's assessment that Lionel is merely testing Lex for the life he is going to take over .
For Rosenbaum , Lex is being pushed and pushed , and Lex is afraid that he will reach the point that he knows he will no longer be able to come back from .
In " Vortex " , Lex realizes that he forgot who he was in that moment that his father was trapped under the column , and he felt guilty over the situation .
According to Rosenbaum , Lex realized that by letting his father die he would have been traveling down a dark path , and would have become all that his father was — evil .
As Lex continues to live in his father 's shadow , and as time progresses , he learns more about the " monster " that Lionel truly is .
The breaking point comes when Lex learns that his father killed Lex 's grandparents in a tenement fire .
Rosenbaum sees this as the ultimate ethical dilemma — he likens it to parents learning that their child has murdered someone , and then having to decide if they should go to the authorities or not — and Lex , who can no longer take his father 's abuse , decides to turn Lionel over to the FBI .
According to Rosenbaum , the decision is justified to Lex , who sees that monster that Lionel really is from his actions — using electroshock therapy to erase Lex 's memories , drugging Lex , killing his own parents , and the way he treated Lex 's mother .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Michael Rosenbaum was nominated multiple times for the Saturn Award category of Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series for his performance as Lex Luthor .
His first nomination came in 2002 , which is the only year he has won the award .
The same year he was also nominator for Cinescape Genre Face of the Future Award , alongside co - star Kristin Kreuk .
He followed that with consecutive nominations from 2003 to 2006 .
Rosenbaum was nominated for Choice Sidekick in the 2002 and 2003 Teen Choice Awards .
In 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 he was nominated as a Teen Choice Awards Choice Villain .
OTHER MEDIA APPEARANCES YOUNG ADULT NOVELS
Section::::Other media appearances .
Section::::Young adult novels .
Lex makes his first appearance outside of the television series in the novel Smallville : Strange Visitors , published by Aspect .
When a couple of con artists arrive in Smallville promoting miracle cures created by the meteor rocks , Lex becomes interested in what they are really after , as he believes their plans could hinder the research he is doing on the meteor rocks .
After Jacobi and Wolfe 's con is realized , Lex uses a dummy corporation to steal all of the meteor rocks Jacobi 's Ascendence Foundation has collected .
In Smallville : Dragon , Lex throws a party at his mansion for the local teenagers , that is ultimately crashed by a repitilian creature that was created by the meteor rocks .
He is also visited by an old flame , Renata , who shows up looking to rekindle their relationship .
Lex quickly discovers that she has an ulterior motive when she propositions him to fund a drug deal , which prompts Lex to realize that she was really sent by his father as some test for Lex .
COMIC BOOKS Section::::Comic books .
In 2012 , the Smallville series was continued through the comic book medium , with Smallville : Season 11 .
Written by Bryan Q. Miller , who also wrote for the television series , the first issue details Lex changing the LuthorCorp name to LexCorp , due to his memory loss in the series finale .
Tess
Mercer 's death is ruled a suicide , and Lex sells the ownership rights to the Daily Planet .
He also questions why he would befriend the " unsophisticated " farmer - turned - reporter Clark Kent , after reading some newspaper clippings .
He immediately harbors distrust with " Superman " , after the latter reveals himself to the world .
Lex do not know why he despises Superman other than trusting his feelings , suspecting it has something to do with his past .
Thus , this reveals that there are remnants of memories left for Lex to continue his hatred towards the superhero but have no knowledge of Superman 's secret identity .
Lex later discovers that he once knew who Superman is and determined to remember .
This leads to a proposal with General Sam Lane to create a joint venture between LexCorp and the Pentagon for the company 's project , " Guardian Defense Platforms " , which involves monitoring the world 's metahuman and extraterrestrial communities .
In the second issue , Lex takes steps to regain his lost memories , having his assistant Otis Berg research the neurotoxin Tess used on him , eventually he discovers that the toxin has caused Lex 's brain to operate at a higher percentage than normal , increasing his overall intelligence .
In addition , Otis discovers that the toxin not only erased Lex 's memories and enhanced his intelligence , but also caused him to mentally bond with Tess 's consciousness when she poisoned him .
Clark and Oliver eventually discover what happened to Tess , and extracts her consciousness from Lex and uploaded it into the Watchtower 's computer until they can clone her a new body , eventually a robotic one that mirrors her original 's
but it also gives her abilities
include creating cyclone - force wind .
It is also revealed that Lex was friends with Bruce Wayne , the secret identity of Batman , since childhood , but lost touch after the murder of Bruce 's parents .
Years later , Bruce is secretly aware that Lex is now corrupt .
After helps defeating the Monitors , Lex considers running for the Oval Office after the President completed his terms ; Lex knows that this was his goal before his amnesia .
SEE ALSO
* Lex Luthor — The DC Comics version of the character REFERENCES