COLD SHOCK
RESPONSE Cold shock response is the physiological response of organisms to sudden cold , especially cold water .
In humans , cold shock response is perhaps the most common cause of death from immersion in very cold water , such as by falling through thin ice .
The immediate shock of the cold causes involuntary inhalation , which if underwater can result in drowning .
The cold water can also cause heart attack due to vasoconstriction ; the heart has to work harder to pump the same volume of blood throughout the body .
For people with existing cardiovascular disease , the additional workload can result in cardiac arrest .
Inhalation of water ( and thus drowning ) may result from hyperventilation .
Some people are much better able to survive swimming in very cold water due to body or mental conditioning .
Hypothermia from exposure to cold water is not as sudden as is often believed .
A person who survives the initial minute of trauma ( after falling into icy water ) , can survive for at least thirty minutes provided they do n't drown .
However , the ability to perform useful work ( for example to save oneself ) declines substantially after ten minutes ( as the body protectively cuts off blood flow to " non - essential " muscles ) .
PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSE Section::::Physiological response .
The physiological response results in temporary breathlessness .
CONDITIONING AGAINST COLD SHOCK
Section::::Conditioning against cold shock .
It is possible to undergo physiological conditioning to reduce the cold shock response , and some people are naturally better suited to swimming in very cold water .
Adaptations include the following : * having an insulating layer of body fat covering the limbs and torso without being overweight ; * * ability to experience immersion without involuntary physical shock or mental panic ; * * ability to resist shivering ; * * ability to raise metabolism ( and , in some cases , increase blood temperature slightly above the normal level ) ; *
* a generalized delaying of metabolic shutdown ( including slipping into unconsciousness ) as central and peripheral body temperatures fall .
*
In these ways , winter swimmers can survive both the initial shock and prolonged exposure .
Nevertheless , the human organism is not suited to freezing water : the struggle to maintain blood temperature ( by swimming or conditioned metabolic response ) produces great fatigue after thirty minutes or less .
COLD SHOCK RESPONSE IN BACTERIA Section::::Cold shock response in bacteria .
Bacteria express a well - defined set of proteins after a rapid decrease in temperature , which differ from those expressed under heat shock conditions .
Cold shock proteins may include helicases , nucleases , and ribosome - associated components that interact with DNA and RNA .
Processes such as cold signal perception , membrane adaptation , and the modification of the translation apparatus are involved .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Introduction to Frozen Mythbusters and Myth # 1 .
Wilderness Medicine Newsletter .
Sourced 2008 - 05 - 17 .