HOLLY FLAX
Hollis ' Holly ' Partridge Scott ( née Flax ) is a fictional character from the US television series
The Office played by Amy Ryan .
She was an original character , and not based on a character from the British version of the show .
Initially , she served as a replacement HR Representative for the Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin when Toby Flenderson left for Costa Rica .
Later , her character was developed into a friend and romantic interest for Steve Carell 's character Michael Scott .
She and Michael have a shared sense of humor and similar personality traits , though Holly does prove to be more rational than Mike .
In the office , she is noticeably more acquiescent to Michael 's antics and ideas than was her predecessor , Toby .
At the office , Michael proposes to her with the help of their co - workers .
She and Michael eventually get back together , move to Colorado , marry and start a family together .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Holly Flax is the human resources representative for the Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin .
She and Michael Scott become good friends in the office , though Michael desires to turn their friendship into a romance , which eventually takes place .
Executive producer Greg Daniels has repeatedly stated that the inspiration for Flax 's character stems from a shopgirl who served him on a vacation in Newfoundland , Canada , whom he described as " a female Michael Scott . "
She is originally from Des Moines , Iowa , and her parents and adopted brother[Michael W. Goin ]
now live in Boulder , Colorado and her father suffers from dementia .
In her early life , she held the position of hall monitor in middle school due to her geeky demeanor , and because of this , was a target of harassment by other students .
When she was in high school , she was diagnosed with mono .
CHARACTER HISTORY
SEASON 4 Section::::Character history .
Section::::Season 4 .
Holly arrives at Dunder Mifflin to serve as Toby 's replacement .
Michael initially dislikes her because she is part of Human Resources , but quickly falls in love with her .
She is subjected to hazing by Dwight Schrute , who convinces her that Kevin Malone is mentally challenged , a belief she continued to harbor until Season Five when it was embarrassingly pointed out to her that he was n't .
During an attempt to put a raccoon in Holly 's car , a Toyota Camry Solara convertible , Dwight is berated by Michael , who takes Holly 's side and loudly proclaims that she is the " best thing that has happened to him and the company since World War II .
"
Holly invites Michael to go out for dessert after Toby 's going away party , but Michael turns her down , opting instead to go with Jan Levinson , who is pregnant and had asked Michael to be there as if he were the child 's father .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
Michael had been courting Holly in the first episode of the season .
Holly practices yoga , so Oscar refers Holly to a yoga class with an attractive teacher .
Holly agrees to a date with him , much to Michael 's dismay .
Holly buys tickets for Counting Crows , but the yoga instructor does n't call her .
Michael , who does not pick up on several hints that Holly has given him ( about attending the concert with her ) , purchases the tickets from her and rips them to pieces .
She ultimately considers him to be her best friend in the office .
It is also revealed that she was picked on as a child just like Michael .
Michael is pleased when Corporate HR blasts Holly for seeking disciplinary action against Meredith over the sex - for - supplies ( and Outback Steakhouse coupons ) deal instead of conducting a stupid seminar and getting signatures , but he also yells at the staff to complete the seminar .
This also restores good feelings between Holly and Michael .
Michael tells Holly he will treat her poorly in front of Jan during her baby shower because he has a vested interest in Jan 's baby , which is not his .
Despite being told of this , she is shown to be uncomfortable with Michael 's attitude toward her .
However , despite witnessing Michael 's treatment of Holly throughout the day , Jan notices the two of them have a lot in common after Holly makes jokes in front of her .
Jan then orders Michael not to date Holly before driving away .
This , in addition to feeling no connection with Jan 's baby , prompts Michael to apologetically hug Holly and ask her out on a date , which she accepts , visibly moved .
Holly and Michael date , and on their third date have sex in the office ( inadvertently leading to the break - in at the office ) .
She helps Michael organize a fundraiser ( offering yoga lessons ) and displeases CFO David Wallace , who sees them kissing , thus noticing a relationship .
In response , she is transferred back to Nashua .
She and Michael plan to continue dating , but realize on the trip that the distance is insurmountable .
Thus , they are forced to end their relationship , sharing one last embrace before saying goodbye .
Michael tells everyone that they are engaged upon his return , but later admits this is not true .
Later , David is called out on the transfer by Michael , who chastises him on the phone before hanging up .
When Michael comes to Nashua with Pam Beesly to give his lecture and find closure with Holly , she is not there because she is on an HR retreat .
It is also revealed that she is dating one of the salesmen there , A.J. , which deeply upsets Michael and makes him unable to do his presentation ; he ultimately breaks down and asks her boyfriend about Holly in front of everyone before leaving .
He goes to her desk and smells her sweater , cutting a sleeve off to take with him .
Michael finds a file on her computer titled " Dear Michael " and copies it to his flash drive .
He tells Pam about it , and Pam volunteers to read it herself and deletes it afterward , telling Michael it said she still has feelings for him and that it is n't over .
It is unclear whether Pam was telling the truth .
Holly and Michael reunite at the Dunder Mifflin company picnic for the first time since she was transferred .
She is still seeing A.J. , who arrives with her .
Holly and A.J. have apparently started living together .
David Wallace lets Holly and Michael do a skit about the history of Dunder Mifflin ; the two decide to do a skit that spoofs Slumdog Millionaire .
The presentation goes horribly and gets worse when they reveal that the Buffalo branch is closing down , much to everyone 's surprise .
Michael and Holly reminisce about the presentation and talk about one in the future .
Holly leaves with A.J. , with Michael noting that it was n't the right time to talk to her and that they will eventually find each other .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Holly does not appear in Season 6 , but is mentioned many times by Michael , who still has feelings for her .
Her return is hinted at in the season finale , " Whistleblower , " after Michael takes the fall for Sabre 's defective printers .
In return for his loyalty , Michael requests that Holly be returned to Scranton .
Jo says she will see what she can do .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
Holly first appears over speakerphone in " Sex Ed " , when Michael calls her in fear that he may have contracted herpes and infected Holly with it .
The lighthearted conversation turns serious when Holly suggests that Michael over - romanticized their relationship , which she characterizes as " just a fling " .
In " Classy Christmas " , Holly returns to Scranton to fill in while Toby is away at jury duty .
The initial excitement about seeing her old friend again turns to anger when a jealous Michael vandalizes her Woody doll ( a gift from her boyfriend AJ ) .
Holly divulges to the women of the office that AJ wo n't commit , and she 's going to give him an ultimatum to propose to her by New Year 's .
When Pam tells Michael , he is cheered up by the news , as well as Holly lying to AJ about how Woody got damaged .
Holly returns from the holiday break in " Ultimatum " without an engagement ring .
Michael is briefly enthusiastic until he learns that Holly gave up on her ultimatum , considering it unreasonable .
However , at the end of the episode , Holly tells A.J. that she wants to take a " break " from their relationship .
Her and Michael 's friendship seems to rebuild itself with " The Seminar " .
In " The Search " , Holly rejects Michael 's advances , saying she does n't want to be involved with a coworker again .
When he goes missing , Holly is able to track Michael 's footsteps due to their similar thought patterns .
When she finds him on a building rooftop , they admit that they miss each other and share a kiss .
In the episode " PDA " , it is revealed that Michael and Holly are officially dating .
They make the rest of the office uncomfortable with their excessive public displays of affection , and agree to stop only at the insistence of their coworkers .
Later that day , when Michael declares that he loves Holly and she says that she returns his feelings , they must settle for a handshake .
In order to avoid the kind of breakup they have previously experienced , they decide to move in together .
As the season progresses , Holly 's presence leads Michael to become a more mature adult .
In " Threat Level Midnight " , Michael screens the film that he had been working on for the past 11 years .
Michael is hurt when Holly is n't impressed , but her honesty helps him realize that the film is laughably awful .
In " Todd Packer " , Todd Packer returns to the sales bullpen .
She initially trusts Michael 's assessment of Packer , but confronts Michael about his friend after Packer shows his true colors .
When Michael tries to smooth things over , Packer speaks disrespectfully about Holly .
Michael decides not to disclose that Packer 's " promotion " in Florida is a prank by Jim and Dwight , and as Michael and Holly watch him drive away
it 's obvious that she is helping Michael to grow .
A deleted scene from this episode reveals that Holly has a blind friend named Lois , who does n't get along with Michael .
In " Garage Sale " , she realizes her aging parents need assistance and decides to move home to Colorado .
She briefly changes her mind when Michael seems reluctant , saying that he is her life now .
At the end of the episode , Michael leads her through various spots in the building that are meaningful to them ( the stairwell where they first kissed , the water cooler he visited just to watch her work ) .
He finally leads her to the annex which is filled with lighted candles .
He begins to propose to her when the sprinkler system goes off .
Through her laughter , she accepts his proposal .
Afterwards , he announces to the office he 's quitting his job to move to Colorado with his fiancée .
Holly does not appear in the subsequent episodes " Training Day " and " Michael 's Last Dundies " , but did have a voice - only segment ( in a telephone conversation ) in " Goodbye , Michael " , confirming with Michael that she 'll pick him up at the airport when his plane lands .
In the process , she unintentionally cheers a distraught Michael up when he initially gets cold feet about moving to Colorado .
The episode marked Steve Carell 's final episode as a series regular .
SEASON 9
Section::::Season 9 .
Holly does not appear in any episodes , but Michael makes a surprise appearance at Dwight and Angela 's wedding in the series finale .
During the wedding reception , Michael shows Pam pictures of Holly and Michael 's kids on his cell phone .
Pam reveals that Michael and Holly are living very happily together .
Michael now has two cell phones to store all the pictures that he takes of their kids , and is very happy to finally have a family plan .
NBC.com later revealed that Michael and Holly had four children together .
REFERENCES