AS WE KNOW IT
" As We Know It " is the seventeenth episode of the second season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy .
The episode was written by Shonda Rhimes and was directed by Peter Horton .
It originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , on February 12 , 2006 , running for 43:06 min .
This episode is the second of a two - part story .
The episode ( along with its first part , " It 's the end of the world " ) secured writer Shonda Rhimes
a 2006 Emmy Award nomination in the " Writing for a drama series " category .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dr. Bailey is in labor , and without her husband Tucker Jones by her side , she refuses to push so she can give birth .
George works with Addison to convince Bailey to have the baby .
He finally gets through to Bailey by giving her the motivation that she needs , and ultimately he holds her while she delivers the baby .
Izzie and Alex have sex again .
Chief Richard Webber is under a lot of stress from everything that 's been going on , and it is believed that he is having a heart attack , which lures his wife Adele to the hospita[anxiety attack ] ] .
Dr. Bailey 's husband goes into cardiac arrest .
Meredith finally removes the explosive from the patient , and Dylan , the leader of the bomb squad , carries it away .
Meredith steps out of the operating room into the hallway , curiously watching Dylan walk away with the explosive , and at that moment , the bomb explodes , killing Dylan and a second bomb squad member .
Meredith is knocked unconscious by the explosion .
There is a revival of the " shower scene " from the first part , but with a more serious tone : the fully clothed Izzie and Cristina wash blood off of a stunned Meredith as George looks on .
Dr. Bailey 's husband and the man who had the explosive embedded in his body both survive .
At the end of the episode , Preston and Derek become friends , overcoming their initial rivalry in the series beginning , and call each other by their first names .
Cristina says " I love you , too " to a sleeping Preston .
Derek comes to visit Meredith and says , " You almost died today , " and Meredith tells him that she ca n't remember their last kiss .
Derek recalls the kiss for her , telling her that she " smelled like some kind of flower , " which Meredith says was lavender , and then he leaves .
TITLE REFERENCE Section::::Title reference .
The episode 's title refers to " It 's the End of the World as We Know It
( And I Feel Fine ) " by R.E.M .. MUSIC
* " I Tell Myself " - Correatown *
" Stay Where You Are " - Ambulance Ltd
* " World Spins Madly On " - The Weepies *
" Back in the Wild " - Los Chicros remixed by Greenskeepers
* " Breathe ( 2 AM ) " - Anna Nalick *
" Unlike Me ( A cappella version ) " - Kate Havnevik
* " Homebird " - Foy Vance RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Dave Anderson of TV Guide liked the use of Anna Nalick 's song in three key scenes .
He called the scene where O'Malley convinces Bailey to go through with the birth " Knight 's turn for Emmy consideration . "
Wetpaint named it in December 2011 one of the 5 best episodes of Grey 's Anatomy along with the first part
" It 's the End of the World " .
Variety listed the episode in its top 10 most bizarre medical maladies encountered in the series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS