AIRPLANE MODE Airplane mode , aeroplane mode , flight mode , offline mode , or standalone mode is a setting available on smartphones and other portable computers that , when activated , suspends radio - frequency signal transmission by the device , thereby disabling Bluetooth , telephony , and Wi - Fi .
GPS may or may not be disabled , because it does not involve transmitting radio waves .
The name comes from the prohibition by most of the airlines of using equipment transmitting radio - frequency signal while in flight ; using airplane mode prevents devices from transmitting .
When the " aeroplane mode " is activated , it disables all voice , text , telephone , and other signal - transmitting technologies such as Wi - Fi and Bluetooth .
Wi - Fi
and Bluetooth can be enabled separately even while the device is in airplane mode ; this is acceptable on some aircraft .
Receiving radio - frequency signals , as by radio receivers and satellite navigation services , is not inhibited .
However , even receiving telephone calls and messages without responding would require the phone to transmit .
In a revised review in October 2013 , the United States Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) made a recommendation on the use of electronic devices in " airplane mode"—cellular telephony is disabled , while Wi - Fi may be used if the carrier offers it .
Short - range transmission such as Bluetooth is always permissible .
The statement cites the common practice of aircraft operators whose aircraft can tolerate use of these personal electronic devices , but use may still be prohibited on some models of aircraft .
While in airplane mode , most devices allow the user to continue to use their email client or other program to write text or E - mail messages which are saved in memory to send when airplane mode is disabled .
Although it is not possible to make normal calls or send text in airplane mode , devices such as some Nokia smartphones allow the user to make calls to emergency services even in airplane mode , while others do not .
As a side - effect , airplane mode reduces power consumption and increases battery endurance by shutting down the device 's transmitters and receivers .
LEGAL STATUS
IN VARIOUS NATIONS
* China : Prior to September 2017 , all cell phones , even with Airplane mode , were never allowed to be used during the flight although other devices can be used while in cruising altitude .
On September 18 , 2017 , the Civil Aviation Authority of China relaxed these rules and allowed all Chinese air carriers to allow the use of Portable Electronic Devices ( PEDs ) for the entire flight as long as they 're in Aeroplane Mode .
* Europe : On December 9 , 2013 , the European Aviation Safety Agency updated its guidelines on portable electronic devices ( PEDs ) , allowing them to be used throughout the whole flight as long as they 're set in Airplane mode .
* India : On 23 April 2014 , the Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( DGCA ) amended the rule which bans use of portable electronic devices and allowing their usage in all phases of flight .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Copa Airlines ' cell phone policy
* QANTAS policy on usage of flight mode