AMERICAN COLLEGE OF EDUCATION American College of Education is a regionally accredited , online college based in Indianapolis , Indiana , delivering online master 's , doctorate and specialist degree programs , a bachelor 's degree completion program , and graduate - level certificates in Education , Healthcare , and Nursing .
American College of Education confers degrees in a variety of programs , including a Master of Education in Educational Leadership , Master of Education in Curriculum and Instruction , Master of Education in Early Childhood Education , and a Master of Education in Educational Technology .
Academic Programs Ed . D. and Ed .
S. in Leadership degrees were launched in 2013 .
All courses are taught online .
HISTORY Section::::History .
American College of Education was formally incorporated in Illinois on February 25 , 2005 .
Following incorporation , it purchased the intellectual property ( the academic programming ) of Barat College .
American College of Education immediately applied to The Higher Learning Commission to continue the accreditation of Barat College under its new name and ownership .
The Higher Learning Commission approved this request in March 2006 .
In August 2015 , The Higher Learning Commission awarded American College of Education its 10-year re - accreditation , securing the college 's accreditation through 2025 .
In March 2016 , American College of Education announced a partnership with the National Institute for STEM Education ( NISE ) and Accelerate Learning , inventors of STEMScopes , to provide a pathway to STEM certification and degree programs .
Educators who earn the National Certificate for STEM Teaching from NISE are able to transfer their certificate coursework to American College of Education to complete an M.Ed .
in STEM Leadership .
In support of its expanding healthcare offerings , American College of Education announced a transfer agreement with Ivy Tech Community College in April 2018 , allowing Ivy Tech students who earn associate of science or associate of applied science degrees in the School of Health Sciences to transfer to American College of Education to complete a Bachelor of Science in Healthcare Administration .
In June , the college formally announced its intention to expand into the nursing field with the RN to MSN program , a pathway program that allows registered nurses to complete both a Bachelor of Science in Nursing and a Master of Science in Nursing degree in a three - year span .
The first cohort of the nursing program will sit during the August 2018 term .
FACULTY Section::::Faculty .
ACE has more than 100 faculty members across the globe .
DEGREE PROGRAMS Section::::Degree programs .
American College of Education offers master 's degrees , doctoral and specialist degree programs , and a bachelor 's degree completion program in Healthcare Administration .
A new Master of Science in Nursing degree was added in June 2018 .
The college also offers several graduate - level certificates , including programs in English as a Second Language and Bilingual Education , Content Area Instruction , and Virtual Instruction .
ACCREDITATION Section::::Accreditation .
American College of Education is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission ( HLC).American College of Education Accreditation
The Professional Education Programs ( M.Ed .
in Educational Leadership , M.Ed .
in Curriculum and Instruction , M.Ed .
in English as a Second Language and Bilingual Education , M.Ed .
in Educational Technology ) are also accredited by the Teacher Education Accreditation Council ( TEAC ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * American College of Education