TURTLE SHELL
The turtle shell is a highly complicated shield for the ventral and dorsal parts of turtles , tortoises and terrapins ( all classified as " turtles " by zoologists ) , completely enclosing all the vital organs of the turtle and in some cases even the head .
It is constructed of modified bony elements such as the ribs , parts of the pelvis and other bones found in most reptiles .
The bone of the shell consists of both skeletal and dermal bone , showing that the complete enclosure of the shell probably evolved by including dermal armor into the rib cage .
The shell of the turtle is an important study , not just because of the obvious protection it provides for the animal , but also as an identification tool , in particular with fossils as the shell is one of the likely parts of a turtle to survive fossilization .
Hence understanding the structure of the shell in living species gives us comparable material with fossils .
The shell of the hawksbill turtle , among other species , has been used as a material for a wide range of small decorative and practical items since antiquity , but is normally referred to as tortoiseshell .
SHELL NOMENCLATURE
Section::::Shell nomenclature .
The turtle shell is made up of numerous bony elements , generally named after similar bones in other vertebrates , and a series of keratinous scutes which are also uniquely named .
Some of those bones that make the top of the shell , carapace , evolved from the scapula rami of the clavicles along with the dorsal and superficial migration of the clecthra .
The ventral surface is called the plastron .
These are joined by an area called the bridge .
The actual suture between the bridge and the plastron is called the anterior bridge strut .
In Pleurodires the posterior pelvis is also part of the carapace , fully fused with it .
This is not the case in Cryptodires which have a floating pelvis .
The anterior bridge strut and posterior bridge strut are part of the plastron , on the carapace are the sutures into which they insert , known as the Bridge carapace suture .
The bones of the shell are named for standard vertebrate elements .
As such the carapace is made up of 8 pleurals on each side , these are a combination of the ribs and fused dermal bone .
Outside of this at the anterior of the shell is the single nuchal bone , a series of 12 paired periphals then extend along each side .
At the posterior of the shell is the pygal bone and in front of this nested behind the eighth pleurals is the suprapygal .
Between each of the pleurals are a series of neural bones , which although always present are not always visible , in many species of Pleurodire they are submerged below the pleurals .
Beneath the neural bone is the Neural arch which forms the upper half of the encasement for the spinal chord .
Below this the rest of the vertebral column .
Some species of turtles have some extra bones called mesoplastra , which are located between the carapace and plastron in the bridge area .
They are present in most Pelomedusid turtles .
The skeletal elements of the plastron are also largely in pairs .
Anteriorly there are two epiplastra , with the hyoplastra behind them .
These enclose the singuar entoplastron .
These make up the front half of the plastron and the hyoplastron contains the anterior bridge strut .
The posterior half is made up of two hypoplastra ( containing the posterior bridge strut ) and the rear is a pair of xiphiplastra .
Overlying the boney elements are a series of scutes , which are made of keratin and are a lot like horn or nail tissue .
In the center of the carapace are 5 vertebral scutes and out from these are 4 pairs of costal scutes .
Around the edge of the shell are 12 pairs of marginal scutes .
All these scutes are aligned so that for the most part the sutures between the bones are in the middle of the scutes above .
At the anterior of the shell there may be a cervical scute ( sometimes incorrectly called a nuchal scute ) however the presence or absence of this scute is highly variable , even within species .
On the plastron there are two gular scutes at the front , followed by a pair of pectorals , then abdominals , femorals and lastly anals .
A particular variation is the Pleurodiran turtles have an intergular scute between the gulars at the front , giving them a total of 13 plastral scutes .
Compared to the 12 in all Cryptodiran turtles .
CARAPACE Section::::Carapace .
The carapace is the dorsal ( back ) , convex part of the shell structure of a turtle , consisting of the animal 's ossified ribs fused with the dermal bone .
The spine and expanded ribs are fused through ossification to dermal plates beneath the skin to form a hard shell .
Exterior to the skin the shell is covered by scutes , which are horny plates made of keratin that protect the shell from scrapes and bruises .
A keel , a ridge that runs from front to the back of the animal is present in some species , these may be single , paired or even three rows of them .
In most turtles the shell is relatively uniform in structure , species variation in general shape and color being the main differences .
However the soft shell turtles , pig - nose turtles and the leatherback sea turtle have lost the scutes and reduced the ossification of the shell .
This leaves the shell covered only by skin .
These are all highly aquatic forms .
The evolution of the turtle 's shell is unique because of how the carapace represents transformed vertebrae and ribs .
While other tetrapods have their scapula , or shoulder blades , found outside of the ribcage , the scapula for turtles is found inside the ribcage .
The shells of other tetrapods , such as armadillos , are not linked directly to the vertebral column or rib cage allowing the ribs to move freely with the surrounding intercostal muscle .
However , analysis of the transitional fossil , Eunotosaurus africanus shows that early ancestors of turtles lost that intercostal muscle usually found between the ribs .
Recent breakthroughs in stem - turtle fossil records contribute to the study of the evolution of the turtle 's shell .
The first piece of fossil record discovered , essential for building the evolution and development model , was Germany and Thailand 's
214-million - year - old
Late Triassic reptile Proganochelys , which marked as the first point of full shell development and carapace ossification in Testudines .
The following phenomenal discovery of China 's 220-million - year - old stem turtle , predating the Proganonchelys by 6 million years , the Odontochelys semitestacea fossil in China shed light on the intermediate stages of turtle carapace evolution by exhibiting a partially formed dorsal carapace .
One major discovery was that O. semitestacea provided documentation that the plastron evolved before the carapace structure .
Close examination of the partially formed carapace revealed similarity to the fully formed carapace in crown turtles such as the lack of intercostal muscles and limited rib mobility .
Furthermore , it is made up of modified forms of laterally expanded and broadened ribs without ossification , similar in structure to the modern turtle embryo .
The addition of South Africa 's 260-million - year - old Permian stem reptile E. africanus , the hypothesized earliest stem turtle predating the O. semitestacea by 40 million years , revealed the early stages of carapace evolution .
Histological data characterized E. africanus and Proganochelys ribs as homologous structures , both broadened and T - shaped in cross - section .
Lyson hypothesizes that this morphology in E. africanus suggests that turtles may have fossorial origin .
The wide torso gave rise to the turtle shell but during the Permian period , the broadened ribs may have provided great stability in burrowing .
The skeletal structure of E. africanus in comparison to the extant fossorial gopher tortoise share similar features adapted to withstand the impact and force needed in digging .
For example , E. africanus exhibits shoulders and forelimb adapted to burrowing , showing increased muscle indicated in structures such as their tubercle on the posterior coracoid and their large and wide terminal phalanges .
Furthermore , fossoriality may have helped E. africanus survive the global mass extinction which wiped out over ninety percent of species at the end of the Permian period .
The most recent finding of a Middle Triassic stem - turtle offers both a morphological and temporal intermediate to the E. africanus and O. semitestacea , contributing to the construction of carapace evolution timeline .
The 240 million - year - old Pappochelys fossil found in Germany shows similarly broadened and T - shaped ribs that vary in shape with respect to position along the spine .
The carapacial ridge has been found to play an essential role in the development of the turtle shell .
Embryological analyses show that the carapacial ridge initiates the formation of the turtle shell .
It causes axial arrest which causes the ribs to be dorsalized , the shoulder girdle to be rearranged and encapsulated in the rib cage , and the carapace to develop .
O. semitestacea presents evidence of axial arrest that is observed in embryos but lacks fan - shaped ribs and a carapace .
This suggests that the primitive carapacial ridge functioned differently and must have gained the function of mediating the ribs and carapace development later .
PLASTRON
Section::::Plastron .
The plastron is the nearly flat part of the shell structure of a turtle , what one would call the belly or ventral surface of the shell .
It also includes within its structure the anterior and posterior bridge struts and the bridge of the shell .
The plastron is made up of nine bones and the two epiplastra at the anterior border of the plastron are homologous to the clavicles of other tetrapods .
The rest of the plastral bones are homologous to the abdominal ribs of other tetrapods .
The evolution of the plastron has remained more mysterious , though Georges Cuvier , a French naturalist and zoologist in the 19th century , wrote that the plastron developed primarily from the sternum of the turtle .
This fits well with the knowledge obtained through embryological studies , showing that changes in the pathways of rib development often result in malformation or loss of the plastron .
This phenomenon occurs in turtle development , but instead of experiencing complete loss of the sternum the turtle body plan repurposes the bone into the form of the plastron .
The discovery of an ancestral turtle fossil , Pappochelys rosinae , provides additional clues as to how the plastron formed .
Pappochelys serves as an intermediate form between two early stem - turtles , E. africanus and Odontochelys , the latter of which possesses a fully formed plastron .
In place of a modern plastron , Pappochelys has paired gastralia , like those found in E. africanus .
Pappochelys is different from its ancestor because the gastralia show signs of having once been fused , as indicated by the fossil specimens which show forked ends .
This evidence shows a gradual change from paired gastralia , to paired and fused gastralia , and finally to the modern plastron across these three specimens .
In certain families there is a hinge between the pectoral and abdominal scutes allowing the turtle to almost completely enclose itself .
In certain species the sex of a testudine can be told by whether the plastron is concave , male or convex , female .
This is because of the mating position ; the male 's concave plastron allows it to more easily mount the female during copulation .
The plastral scutes join along a central seam down the middle of the plastron .
The relative lengths of the seam segments can be used to help identify a species of turtle .
There are six laterally symmetric pairs of scutes on the plastron : gular , humeral , pectoral , abdominal , femoral , and anal ( going from the head to the tail down the seam ) ; the abdominal and gular scute seams are approximately the same length , and the femoral and pectoral seams are approximately the same length .
The gular scute or gular projection on a turtle is the most anterior part of the plastron , the underside of the shell .
Some tortoises have paired gular scutes , while others have a single undivided gular scute .
The gular scutes may be referred to as a gular projection if they stick out like a trowel .
* Gular ( disambiguation ) , gular anatomical formations in other species PLASTRAL FORMULA Section::::Plastral formula .
The plastral formula is used to compare the sizes of the individual plastral scutes ( measured along the midseam ) .
The following plastral scutes are often distinguished ( with their abbreviation ) :
* intergular = intergul
* gular = gul *
humeral = hum * pectoral = pect *
abdominal =
abd
*
femoral =
fem *
anal =
an Comparison of the plastral formulas provides distinction between the two species .
For example , for the eastern box turtle , the plastral formula is : an > abd > gul > pect > hum > < fem
Turtle plastrons were used by the ancient Chinese in a type of divination called plastromancy .
See also oracle bones .
SCUTES Section::::Scutes .
The turtle 's shell is covered in scutes that are made of keratin .
The individual scutes as shown above have specific names and are generally consistent across the various species of turtles .
Terrestrial tortoises do not shed their scutes .
New scutes grow by the addition of keratin layers to the base of each scute .
Aquatic chelonii shed individual scutes .
The scute effectively forms the skin over the underlying bony structures ; there is a very thin layer of subcutaneous tissue between the scute and the skeleton .
The scutes can be brightly colored in some species , but the basal color is a grey to dark brown color dorsally ; the plastral scutes are often white to yellow in base color .
Moustakas - Verho and Cherepanov 's embryological study reveals that the patterning of the plastral scutes appear independent from the patterning of carapacial scutes , suggesting that the carapace and plastron evolved separately .
DISEASES
SEPTICEMIC CUTANEOUS ULCERATIVE DISEASE ( SCUD ) Section::::Diseases .
Section::::Septicemic cutaneous ulcerative disease ( SCUD ) .
Originally described by Kaplan ( 1957 ) is often known by its acronym SCUD .
This disease is known to be caused by a variety of bacteria entering through some sort of abrasion , combined with poor animal husbandry .
The disease is identified by its progression and what starts as ulcerative lesions of the plastron leads to a septacemic infection causing the degradation of the liver and other organs .
Without treatment , this will lead to death .
SHELL ROT
Section::::Shell rot .
Ulcers of the shell may be superficial or deep , and may be termed " shell rot " .
Ulcers are generally a result of poor husbandry .
Turtles with ulcerative shell lesions should be examined and treated by a veterinarian , as the ulcers may become infected and penetrate through the shell .
The shell will need to be cleaned daily , and dead tissue removed .
Topical and/or injectable antibiotics are required in the case of bacterial infections .
Deep ulcers may need to be repaired through surgery and the application of acrylic or fiberglass material .
In a disease called " septicemic cutaneous ulcerative disease " , or SCUD , ulcers may be seen on both the shell and legs .
This condition is often associated with the bacteria , Citrobacter freundii .
PYRAMIDING Section::::Pyramiding .
Pyramiding is a shell deformity commonly found in captive turtles , in which the shell grows unevenly resulting in a " pyramid " shape underlying each scute .
This deformity can vary in severity from barely noticeable to life - threatening .
Indian star tortoises and some other species display this morphology naturally .
Several causes can lead to pyramiding , including excessive animal or vegetable protein ; inadequate calcium , sunlight , and/or vitamin D3 ; and excessive moisture / poor nutrition foods .
Once pyramiding has occurred , it can not be reversed , though if the underlying problem is corrected , the animal may still lead a long , healthy life .
BROKEN SHELLS Section::::Broken shells .
Turtles ' shells may become broken due to natural causes , accidents , or intention .
When the split is not too wide the shell may be brought together by screwing bolts into the shell then connecting the bolts with a wire ; otherwise , a special device may be required .
SEE ALSO
* Evolutionary developmental biology REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * African Tortoise Website , has more information on pyramiding