LANA LANG ( SMALLVILLE )
Lana Lang is a fictional character on the television series Smallville .
She has been a series regular since the pilot episode , and has been played continuously by Kristin Kreuk , with two other actresses having portrayed Lana Lang as a child and as an elderly woman .
The character of Lana Lang , first created for comic books by Bill Finger and John Sikela in the 1950s as a romantic interest for Superboy , was adapted to television in 2001 by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar .
The character has also appeared in various literature based on the Smallville television series , none of which directly continues from or into the television episodes .
In Smallville , Lana is the love interest for Clark Kent , though , in the first season she is dating Whitney Fordman .
By season two , with Whitney 's departure , Lana and Clark begin to grow closer .
Clark 's dishonesty over the secrets he is hiding causes their relationship to end .
Lana then grows closer to Lex Luthor .
Eventually Lana learns the truth about Clark and they get back together .
After stealing a kryptonite - powered suit from Lex , Lana absorbs an enormous amount of kryptonite radiation , which prohibits her from getting too close to Clark , and she leaves Smallville for good , but vowed to continue to use her powers to preserve life .
Initially , Lana is characterized as the intelligent " girl next door " .
She eventually becomes a tragic figure in Smallville , as the decisions made by Clark and Lex change the character over the course of the show .
As Gough explains , by the end of the sixth season , Lana has shown that she can beat Lex at his own game .
Over the course of the show , Lana transitions from the girl next door to a more " self - reliant young woman " .
Kreuk has been nominated for various awards for her portrayal of Lana Lang .
ROLE IN SMALLVILLE Section::::Role in Smallville .
In the first season , Lana and Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) are just beginning their friendship , as she is a popular cheerleader dating star quarterback Whitney Fordman ( Eric Johnson ) , and Clark can not get near her without getting sick from the kryptonite necklace she wears .
In the pilot episode , when her parents are killed in the first meteor shower , Lana is adopted by her aunt Nell ( Sarah - Jane Redmond ) .
As the first season progresses , Lana grows closer to Clark , while Whitney begins to distance himself because of his father 's medical ailments .
In season two 's episode " Heat " Lana sends Whitney , who left Smallville for the Marines in the season one finale , a video message breaking up with him .
Lana 's aunt Nell moves to Metropolis with her fiancé in the season two episode " Ryan " , but Lana opts to move in with her friend Chloe Sullivan
( Allison Mack ) so that she may finish high school in Smallville .
By the end of season two , Lana and Clark slowly try and start a romantic relationship , but fear backlash from Chloe because of her personal feelings for Clark .
Just as the two give in to their feelings fully , Clark unexpectedly runs away from Smallville in the season two finale .
At the start of season three , it is shown that Lana , alongside the Kents , has been spending her time searching for Clark ; she ultimately finds him in Metropolis thanks to Chloe 's help .
Clark 's actions in Metropolis force the two to rethink their relationship in the season three episode " Phoenix " , and Lana eventually begins a new relationship with Adam Knight ( Ian Somerhalder ) , a guy she met while in physical therapy after being trampled by a horse in season three 's " Asylum " .
By the season three episode " Crisis " , it is discovered that the relationship Adam attempted to form with Lana was just a ploy so that Adam could investigate Clark .
Season three 's " Forsaken " reveals that Lana , in order to move on with her life , applies and is admitted into a program to study in Paris , France .
Season four shows that Lana , while in Paris , began a romantic relationship with Jason Teague ( Jensen Ackles ) .
At the beginning of season four , Lana returns to Smallville after receiving a mysterious tattoo on her lower back , which resembles a symbol on the local Kawatche cave walls , when she touched the tomb of Countess Margaret Isobel Theroux .
In season four 's " Spell " and " Sacred "
, the tattoo acts as a doorway for the spirit of Isobel to inhabit Lana 's body ; each time Isobel takes over Lana 's body she sets out to find the three stones of knowledge , which are also being searched for by Clark and Lex Luthor ( Michael Rosenbaum ) .
In the season four finale " Commencement " , Lana is confronted by Jason 's mother Genevieve ( Jane Seymour ) , who is also after the three stones of knowledge , and during a struggle Isobel comes forward and kills Genevieve .
The resulting death of Genevieve , who was revealed to have been the cause for Isobel 's death centuries
prior in the episode " Bound " , releases Isobel 's control over Lana .
During the second meteor shower , Lana witnesses the landing of an alien spacecraft , and two alien beings emerging and killing everyone in sight in the season five premiere .
The spaceship becomes Lana 's primary focus in season five , officially teaming up with Lex Luthor to discover the mystery behind the ship in the episode " Splinter " .
When her relationship with Clark hits a breaking point in season five 's " Hypnotic " , she begins to grow closer to Lex .
The relationship with Lex eventually leads to marriage in the season six episode " Promise " , but not before Lana discovers Clark 's secret and realizes why he has been lying to her all these years .
When she learns that Lex set up a fake pregnancy in order to get her to marry him in the season six finale " Phantom " , Lana effectively ends the marriage and fakes her own death to escape Lex after he threatens her .
She also frames Lex for her murder , to punish him for his betrayal .
It is revealed at the start of season seven that her effort fails , but as part of the " settlement " of their divorce , Lex makes sure that Lana does not go to jail for her actions .
With Clark 's secret no longer an issue , the two begin a real relationship in the season seven episode " Fierce " .
Lana becomes obsessed with making Lex pay for all his crimes against humanity , which causes her to develop the Isis Foundation , using $ 10 million she stole from Lex .
The Isis Foundation is a counseling center for kryptonite - infected people , but it doubles as a front for Lana 's surveillance on Lex .
Her obsessions also begin to affect her relationship with Clark by the episode " Wrath " .
Eventually , Lana realizes that , even though she loves him , the only way for Clark to help the world to the best of his ability would be if she left Clark and Smallville for good , which she does in the season seven finale .
In the season eight episode " Bride " , Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) , believing he is tracking Lex Luthor who has been missing since the season seven finale , discovers Lana instead .
Oliver convinces her to return to Smallville so that she can attend Chloe 's wedding .
In the season eight episode " Power " , it is revealed that Lana really returned so that she could steal Lex 's " Prometheus " technology , which harnesses alien DNA to give the wearer of a " super - suit " superhuman abilities , for herself .
By the end of the episode , the procedure is complete , and Lana becomes just as strong and invulnerable as Clark .
In the episode " Requiem " , Lana discovers that her suit absorbs kryptonite , but also emits the radiation making her a potential danger to Clark .
When Winslow Schott puts a kryptonite bomb on the roof of the Daily Planet , Lana is forced to absorb all of the kryptonite to deactivate the bomb .
As a result , she leaves Smallville to go on her own quest as Clark can no longer get near her without the kryptonite radiation hurting him .
PORTRAYAL Section::::Portrayal .
Creators Alfred Gough and Miles Millar were initially trying to find someone for the role of Clark Kent , but Kristin Kreuk was the first to be cast , as Lana Lang .
Casting director Coreen Mayrs sent David Nutter , the director of the pilot episode , a tape of 69 people and the second person on the tape was Kreuk .
They loved her audition tape so much they immediately showed her to the network .
For one of her auditions , she read the graveyard scene with Tom Welling ; the network thought they had " great chemistry " .
Jade Unterman and Louise Grant portrayed the character as a child and an elderly woman , respectively .
At the time she was cast as Lana , Kreuk had no idea who the character was in Superman lore .
Her uncle , who owned a comic book shop , filled her in on the details and she learned more from the producers .
Kreuk realized that the character in the comics and her character on the show were two different people .
As a result , Kreuk learns about the development of Lana as Lana is learning in the show , just as Welling does with Clark Kent .
When asked if her being cast as a traditionally red haired character caused outcry from fans , Kreuk believes that whoever did " got over it pretty fast " .
By season three , Kreuk had decided to " invest " herself less in her character , as she felt that her character 's ultimate development was entirely in the hands of the producers .
She no longer became frustrated when the producers had Lana doing things that Kreuk felt were out of character , instead trusting that they would find the right direction for the character .
Kreuk enjoyed the fourth season because it gave her the chance to stretch her acting abilities with Lana 's storyline involving the spirit of Countess Margaret Isobel Thoreaux .
According to the actress , " That was a lot of fun ; I thought it was funny as well [ … ] It really was wonderful to be able to stretch and play this driven woman who has a goal and is going to reach it , and in the meantime she 's going to be sexy doing it .
That was a lot of fun for me because the show [ sometimes ] is n't realistic so , as actors , we get to play with different types of things . "
Kreuk says her strangest moment on the show was playing a vampire in season five 's " Thirst " , an experience she remembers as " uncomfortable " due to the fake blood they covered her in .
Kreuk left the series at the end of the seventh season , but appeared in five episodes in season eight as a guest star .
Coincidentally , Annette O'Toole , who portrayed Martha Kent in the series , played Lana Lang in Superman III , starring Christopher Reeve .
CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT
STORYLINE PROGRESSION Section::::Character development .
Section::::Storyline progression .
One of the early turning points for the character came in season one 's " X - Ray " , when Lana discovers information about her parents that changes her perspective on them .
It began with her mother 's graduation speech , which showed that her mother was not as happy as her aunt had led her to believe .
Lana 's perception of her mother drove the way she led her own life , which was based on the idea of everyone perceiving her in a good light .
In season two , Lana discovers that her mother had had an affair with a man named Henry Small , and that he was her biological father .
This continued the idea established in season one that Lana 's perception that her parents were this perfect couple was wrong .
According to Kreuk , meeting her biological father allowed the character to realize that she had to create her own life , as the one she had envisioned did not actually exist .
Season two also showed Lana 's transition from the " girl next door " to a more " self - reliant young woman " .
At the beginning of the season Lana is forced to come to terms with her diminished feelings for Whitney , as well as her growing feelings for Clark .
It takes time before Lana is strong enough to finally tell Whitney the truth , in a video message , about the way she feels .
The Talon , a local coffee shop co - owned by Lana , becomes her new grounding force as Whitney and her aunt have left Smallville .
Kreuk thinks that it can be hard to believe that a sixteen - year - old girl could become co - owner of a coffee shop , but she believes that it helps to provide more independence for the character and establish her more within the show .
Eventually , in order to really get to know herself , and find her role in life , Lana leaves Smallville for Paris .
In season four , Kristin Kreuk felt like Lana is " going a little crazy and is uncertain about her direction , and feels people are n't validating her beliefs " .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
At the start of the show , Lana Lang is characterized as the girl next door .
As Kreuk describes her , she is the " beautiful , popular girl who is really lonely " .
She has a " hole in her heart " , because of the loss of her parents , and feels empathy for everyone .
Kristin feels that deep down the character is a " tough girl " , and that Lex manages to bring that side of her out more .
For instance , he convinces her to fight back against a rival coffee shop that is spreading rumors about The Talon – the coffee shop that
she joint owns with Lex .
Unfortunately , that tough side is not seen in the first season .
According to Kreuk , the character was never placed in situations where she could show her outgoing side , because she was left to communicate primarily with Whitney and Clark .
Kreuk thinks that Lana " lived in her head a little bit " ; she was intelligent enough to read classical books , but would also read romantic novels " on the sly " .
As Alfred Gough sees it , Lana is a by - product of Clark and Lex 's decisions .
She will always love Clark , and Clark will always love her , but it was Clark 's bad decisions , and Lex 's " basest instincts " that make Lana the " receptacle of all of these bad decisions " , marking her as a tragic figure on the show .
While Lana was with Clark , Kreuk characterizes her as a " wimpy , whiny kind of girl " ; with Lex , Lana is " strong , powerful , and does n't have to question , ' What is going on ?
What does he think ?
Does he love me ?
I do n't know where I stand . '
" To clarify , Lana 's relationship with Lex brings out a darkness that had not been seen in the character .
This is evident in " Nemesis " when Lana manipulates her way into seeing Lionel , only to interrogate him about why he forced her to marry Lex , as well as leaving Lex to die in the underground tunnels .
As Gough explains , by the end of the sixth season , Lana has shown that she can beat Lex at his own games .
Reviewer Jennifer Malkowski feels that Lana is one of the most gullible characters on television .
According to Malkowski , Lana 's strong feminist stance , and her request that people should stop protecting her and start telling her the truth , are diluted by her willingness to believe whatever pieces of information she gets , even if they are lies .
After the series ended , Gough and Millar expressed regret with Lana 's characterization throughout the course of the show , which they felt damaged Lana in the audiences ' mind .
Gough and Millar believed that Lana 's behavior toward Clark ( for refusing to reveal his secret ) made her come across as cold and unsympathetic .
RELATIONSHIPS
Section::::Relationships .
When Smallville first began , Lana was in a romantic relationship with Whitney Fordman , the star quarterback of the football team .
Kreuk believes that Lana truly was in love with Whitney when they first started dating , but by the time the audience first sees her in the pilot she is no longer in that same state of mind .
Kreuk believes that by the time of the pilot Lana had grown " comfortable " with Whitney , and that was where their relationship ended .
Though Lana had growing feelings for Clark , Kreuk feels that the producers rushed the coupling of Clark and Lana at the end of the second season .
She believes that with everything that had happened throughout the season between the two characters , it seemed a bit of a stretch for Lana to just quickly fall into Clark 's arms .
The next season began to develop more of the relationship between Lex and Lana .
Kreuk believes that Lana cares for Lex as a friend , and that she recognizes the " undertones " that Lex may be placing on their relationship , but that Lana tends to ignore them .
Kreuk recognizes that Lex is a big part of Lana 's life , and that Lana tries to pay more attention to the good that Lex does and focus less on the darker aspects of his life .
The friendship that Lana shares with Chloe was deeply damaged at the start of season three , so much so that not even Kreuk realized how badly until the episode " Truth " .
Lana is aware that Chloe still has romantic feelings for Clark , but their friendship suffered the most when Chloe revealed that she had known where Clark had been hiding for months .
The feelings of distrust for Chloe remained hidden until " Truth"—where Chloe gained the ability to have others speak the truth no matter what — when Lana finally revealed how much she can not trust Chloe .
This developing friendship between Lex and Lana puts a strain on Lana 's relationship with Clark .
Just as Clark is beginning to realize the truth about Lex and his lies , Lana is starting to trust Lex more .
Ultimately , it is Clark 's own lack of honesty that forces Lana to leave Smallville and go to Paris at the end of season three .
In the end , Kreuk believes that Clark is Lana 's only true friend , as Lex is more focused on bringing his father to justice
and she and Chloe have a tense relationship based on their mutual feelings for Clark .
While in Paris , Lana begins a new romantic relationship with Jason Teague .
Kreuk believes that Lana did love Jason Teague , but she also still loved Clark at the same time .
With Clark , it was the " first love " that she never had the chance to discover , and that lingered with her while she was in Paris during the space between seasons three and four .
According to Kreuk , before Lana can experience successful relationships with other people she will need to know what it is like to truly be in a relationship with Clark , because of the " intense connection between [ the ] two " .
Allison Mack shares her insight into the relationship between Clark and Lana , believing that the pair should have remained apart until they could finally be honest with each other : " There 's no honesty in their relationship , and there 's no way that they could have a healthy relationship without that honesty [ … ]
You ca n't be with someone if you 're not honest with them . "
Kreuk echoes Mack 's sentiments , acknowledging that Lana is not stupid , and if Clark wants a real relationship then he is going to have to be honest with her .
The beginning of season five saw , for the first time , Clark and Lana in a happy relationship together , one that was void of dishonesty and secrets .
The return of Clark 's powers in " Hidden " , as well as the secrets and lies that accompany them , caused stress on their relationship .
In the series ' 100th episode , Clark finally took a chance and told Lana the truth .
When it resulted , indirectly , in her death and he was allowed to live the day over again Clark chose not to tell her his secret .
In " Hypnotic " , in an effort to stop hurting Lana emotionally , Clark told her that he no longer loved her .
This drove Lana into Lex 's arms .
Writer Darren Swimmer explains that this was not something that just happened in the series , but something that had been hinted at for many seasons .
Swimmer believes that Lana started dating Lex as a way of making Clark mad , but the relationship " turned into much more " .
Kreuk contends that Lana went to Lex because " she knows she will never really love him . "
Kreuk believes that Lana 's relationship with the men in her life has been motivated by a desire to fill a void in her life that was left after her parents were killed .
This need to fill that emptiness was fulfilled in " Void " , when Lana took a drug to induce death so that she could see her parents in the afterlife .
Upon meeting her parents , Kreuk believes that Lana realized that she no longer needed someone else to fill that hole in her .
Kreuk sees this filled void as the reason why Lana would gravitate toward Lex .
Although she did not truly love Lex , Kreuk argues that Lex was not a rebound guy and that Lana did have feelings for him . "
Even though Lana eventually marries Lex in season six , Al Gough argues that Lana still loved Clark and Clark still loved her .
The only reason Lana was with Lex was because Clark forced her in that direction
and she ended up getting in over her head .
By contrast , writer Caroline Dries feels that Lana did love Lex , and that she did not make any hasty decisions when she agreed to marry him .
Dries believes that the progression of the show demonstrates that Lex earned Lana 's love .
To answer viewers that hated to see Lana marry Lex , Dries contends that as viewers we are seeing all of Lex , including how evil he truly is , while Lana only sees the portion of Lex that appears good .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In 2001 , Kristin Kreuk was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Actress , as well as Female Cinescape Genre Face of the Future .
The following year , alongside co - star Tom Welling , Kreuk was nominated for a Best Actress Saturn Award again .
She would receive two more nominations in that category , one in 2004 and one in 2006 , before she departed from the show .
In the 2003 Teen Choice Awards , Kristin Kreuk was nominated for Choice TV Actress :
Drama / Action Adventure .
She was nominated again in 2004 , 2006 , 2008 for the revised category Choice TV Actress : Action Adventure , and finally in 2009 .
Kreuk was also co - nominated with Welling at the 2006 Teen Choice Awards for Most Beautiful Couple ( TV - Choice Chemistry ) .
DVD Verdict 's Brian Byun felt that the casting of the series was " pitch - perfect " ; noting that Kreuk is " painfully luminous " as Lana Lang , which makes it obvious why she is the object of Clark 's obsession .
OTHER MEDIA APPEARANCES YOUNG ADULT NOVELS
Section::::Other media appearances .
Section::::Young adult novels .
Lana makes her first literary appearance in Smallville : Strange Visitors , published by Aspect .
In Strange Visitors , Lana attempts to organize a fund raiser for the family of a school mate , Stewart , who was diagnosed with terminal cancer .
Her effort is rendered moot when Lex Luthor and Dr. Donald Jacobi , a con artist that comes to Smallville , pick up Stewart 's medical bills after a meteor rock removes all of the malignant cancer cells in his brain .
In Smallville : Dragon , Lana visits an antiques dealer , Mrs. Mayfern , looking for a gift for her boyfriend , Whitney .
When she leaves she breaks up with Whitney and starts dating Clark .
It is eventually discovered that she was hypnotized by Mrs. Mayfern , whose homegrown herbal tea is fertilized by meteor rocks .
COMIC BOOKS Section::::Comic books .
Lana made a non - speaking cameo appearance in the ninth issue of the show 's comic book continuation Smallville :
Season Eleven , written by executive story editor Bryan Q. Miller .
Though Clark and Bart Allen do not notice her , she watches them race over the coast of Cameroon .
Lana returns in a parallel storyarc Valkyrie , in which she uses the superhero alias " Angel of the Plateau " and battles terrorists in Africa .
Lana also saves Lois from one of their attacks .
Lana reveals that she has been using her abilities to help and protect children from people who would exploit them after Lana had settled in Africa .
However , Lois tries not to reveal her relationship with Clark to Lana .
Elsewhere , the terrorists seek John Corben 's aid in defeating Angel of the Plateau .
Corben 's new kryptonite heart ( installed by Winslow Schott ) has absorbed the nanites embedded in Lana 's skin , rendering her powerless and no longer emitting the kryptonite radiation once more .
After Lois helps Lana defeat Corben , Lana reveals that she had seen Lois 's engagement ring , thus she already knows about Clark 's relationship with Lois .
Lana gives her blessing to Lois , and decides to remain in Africa as the Angel .
SEE ALSO
* Lana Lang — The DC Comics version of the character REFERENCES