SOVEREIGN DEFAULT
A sovereign default ( ) is the failure or refusal of the government of a sovereign state to pay back its debt in full .
Cessation of due payments ( or receivables ) may either be accompanied by formal declaration ( repudiation ) of a government not to pay ( or only partially pay ) its debts , or it may be unannounced .
A credit rating agency will take into account in its gradings capital , interest , extraneous and procedural defaults , failures to abide by the terms of bonds or other debt instruments .
Countries have at times escaped the real burden of some of their debt through inflation .
This is not " default " in the usual sense because the debt is honored , albeit with currency of lesser real value .
Sometimes governments devalue their currency .
This can be done by printing more money to apply toward their own debts , or by ending or altering the convertibility of their currencies into precious metals or foreign currency at fixed rates .
Harder to quantify than an interest or capital default , this often is defined as an extraneous or procedural default ( breach ) of terms of the contracts or other instruments .
If potential lenders or bond purchasers begin to suspect that a government may fail to pay back its debt , they may demand a high interest rate in compensation for the risk of default .
A dramatic rise in the interest rate faced by a government due to fear that it will fail to honor its debt is sometimes called a sovereign debt crisis .
Governments may be especially vulnerable to a sovereign debt crisis when they rely on financing through short - term bonds , since this creates a situation of maturity mismatch between their short - term bond financing and the long - term asset value of their tax base .
They may also be vulnerable to a sovereign debt crisis due to currency mismatch : if few bonds in their own currency are accepted abroad , and so the country issues mainly foreign - denominated bonds , decrease in the value of their own currency can make it prohibitively expensive to pay back their foreign - denominated bonds ( see original sin ) .
Since a sovereign government , by definition , controls its own affairs , it can not be obliged to pay back its debt .
Nonetheless , governments may face severe pressure from lending countries .
In a few extreme cases , a major creditor nation , before the establishment of the UN Charter Article 2 ( 4 ) prohibiting use of force by states , made threats of war or waged war against a debtor nation for failing to pay back debt to seize assets to enforce its creditor 's rights .
For example , Britain invaded Egypt in 1882 .
Other examples include the United States ' " gunboat diplomacy " in Venezuela in the mid-1890s and the United States occupation of Haiti beginning in 1915 .
Today a government which defaults may be widely excluded from further credit , some of its overseas assets may be seized ; and it may face political pressure from its own domestic bondholders to pay back its debt .
Therefore , governments rarely default on the entire value of their debt .
Instead , they often enter into negotiations with their bondholders to agree on a delay ( debt restructuring ) or partial reduction of their debt ( a ' haircut or write - off ' ) .
Some economists have argued that , in the case of acute insolvency crises , it can be advisable for regulators and supranational lenders to preemptively engineer the orderly restructuring of a nation 's public debt- also called " orderly default " or " controlled default " .
In the case of Greece , these experts generally believe that a delay in organising an orderly default would hurt the rest of Europe even more .
The International Monetary Fund often lends for sovereign debt restructuring .
To ensure that funds will be available to pay the remaining part of the sovereign debt , it has made such loans conditional on acts such as reducing corruption , imposing austerity measures such as reducing non - profitable public sector services , raising the tax take ( revenue ) or more rarely suggesting other forms of revenue raising such as nationalization of inept or corrupt but lucrative economic sectors .
A recent example is the Greek bailout agreement of May 2010 .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
According to financial historian Edward Chancellor , past instances of sovereign default have tended to occur under some or all of the following circumstances : *
A reversal of global capital flows
*
Unwise lending * Fraudulent lending * Excessive foreign debts
* A poor credit history *
Unproductive lending
* Rollover risk *
Weak revenues
* Rising interest rates *
Terminal debt
A significant factor in sovereign default is the presence of significant debts owed to foreign investors such as banks who are unable to obtain timely payment via political support from governments , supranational courts or negotiation ; the enforcement of creditors ' rights against sovereign states is frequently difficult .
Such willful defaults ( the equivalent of strategic bankruptcy by a company or strategic default by a mortgager , except without the possibility of the exercise of normal creditors ' rights such as asset seizure and sale ) can be considered a variety of sovereign theft ; this is similar to expropriation ( including inadequate repayment for the exercise of eminent domain ) .
Some also believe that sovereign default is a dark side of globalization and capitalism .
INSOLVENCY / OVER - INDEBTEDNESS OF THE STATE Section::::Insolvency / over - indebtedness of the state .
If a state , for economic reasons , defaults on its treasury obligations , or is no longer able or willing to handle its debt , liabilities , or to pay the interest on this debt , it faces sovereign default .
To declare insolvency , it is sufficient if the state is only able ( or willing ) to pay part of its due interest or to clear off only part of the debt .
Reasons for this include : * massive increases in public debt * declines in employment and therefore tax revenue * government regulation or perceived threats of regulation of financial markets
* popular unrest at austerity measures to repay debt fully Sovereign default caused by insolvency historically has always appeared at the end of long years or decades of budget emergency ( overspending ) , in which the state has spent more money than it received .
This budget balance / margin was covered through new indebtedness with national and foreign citizens , banks and states .
ILLIQUIDITY Section::::Illiquidity .
The literature proposes an important distinction between illiquidity and insolvency .
If a country is temporarily unable to meet pending interest or principle payments because it can not liquify sufficient assets , it is " in default because of illiquidity " .
In this concept the default can be solved as soon as the assets which are " only temporarily illiquid " become liquid ( again ) , which makes illiquidity a temporary state - in contrast to insolvency .
The weakness of this concept is that is practically impossible to prove that an asset is only temporarily illiquid .
CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT Section::::Change of government .
While normally the change of government does not change the responsibility of the state to handle treasury obligations created by earlier governments , nevertheless it can be observed that in revolutionary situations and after a regime change the new government may question the legitimacy of the earlier one , and thus default on those treasury obligations considered odious debt .
Important examples are : * default of debts of the Bourbon France after the French Revolution .
* default of bonds through Denmark in 1850 , which were issued by the government of Holstein instated by the German Confederation .
* default of debts of the Russian Empire after the Soviet government came to power in 1917 .
* repudiation of debts of the Confederate States of America by the United States after the Civil War through the ratification of Section 4 of the Fourteenth Amendment .
DECLINE OF THE STATE Section::::Decline of the state .
With the decline of a state , its obligations are turned over to one or several successor states .
Lost wars significantly accelerate sovereign default .
Nevertheless , especially after World War II the government debt has increased significantly in many countries even during long lasting times of peace .
While in the beginning debt was quite small , due to compound interest and continued overspending it has increased substantially .
APPROACHES TO DEBT REPAYMENT Section::::Approaches to debt repayment .
There are two different theories as to why sovereign countries repay their debt .
REPUTATION APPROACH
Section::::Reputation approach .
The reputation approach stipulates that countries value the access to international capital markets because it allows them to smooth consumption in the face of volatile output and/or fluctuating investment opportunities .
This approach assumes no outside factors such as legal or military action because the debtor is a sovereign country .
Debtor countries with poor reputations will lack access to these capital markets .
PUNISHMENT APPROACH
Section::::Punishment approach .
The punishment approach stipulates that the debtor will be punished in some form , whether it be by legal action and/or military force .
The creditor will use legal and/or military threats to see their investment returned .
The punishment may prevent debtors from being able to borrow in their own currency .
CONSEQUENCES Section::::Consequences .
Creditors of the state as well the economy and the citizens of the state are affected by the sovereign default .
CONSEQUENCES FOR CREDITORS Section::::Consequences for creditors .
The immediate cost to creditors is the loss of principal and interest owed on their loans to the defaulting country .
In this case very often there are international negotiations which end in a partial debt cancellation ( London Agreement on German External Debts 1953 ) or debt restructuring (
e.g. Brady Bonds in the 1980s ) .
This kind of agreement assures the partial repayment when a renunciation / surrender of a big part of the debt is accepted by the creditor .
In the case of the Argentine economic crisis ( 1999–2002 ) some creditors elected to accept the renunciation ( loss , or " haircut " ) of up to 75 % of the outstanding debts , while others ( " holdouts " ) elected instead to await a change of government ( 2015 ) for offers of better compensation .
For the purpose of debts regulation debts can be distinguished by nationality of creditor ( national or international ) , or by the currency of the debts ( own currency or foreign currency ) as well as whether the foreign creditors are private or state owned .
States are frequently more willing to cancel debts owed to foreign private creditors , unless those creditors have means of retaliation against the state .
CONSEQUENCES FOR STATE Section::::Consequences for state .
When a state defaults on a debt , the state disposes of ( or ignores , depending on the viewpoint ) its financial obligations / debts towards certain creditors .
The immediate effect for the state is a reduction in its total debt and a reduction in payments on the interest of that debt .
On the other hand , a default can damage the reputation of the state among creditors , which can restrict the ability of the state to obtain credit from the capital market .
In some cases foreign lenders may attempt to undermine the monetary sovereignty of the debtor state or even declare war ( see above ) .
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE CITIZEN Section::::Consequences for the citizen .
If the individual citizen or corporate citizen is a creditor of the state ( e.g. government bonds ) , then a default by the state can mean a devaluation of their monetary wealth .
In addition , the following scenarios can occur in a debtor state from a sovereign default :
* a banking crisis , as banks have to make write downs on credits given to the state .
* an economic crisis , as the interior demand will fall and investors withdraw their money * a currency crisis as foreign investors avoid this national economy Citizens of a debtor state might feel the impact indirectly through high unemployment and the decrease of state services and benefits .
However , a monetarily sovereign state can take steps to minimize negative consequences , rebalance the economy and foster social / economic progress , for example
Brazil 's Plano Real .
SOLUTIONS Section::::Solutions .
With the reputation of the Big Three – Standard & Poor 's , Moody 's and Fitch Group – coming under fire since the 2008 financial crisis , many have questioned their ratings methods .
Marc Joffe , a former Senior Director at Moody 's and now Principal Consultant at Public Sector Credit Solutions ( PSCS ) , has recently argued that economists and other academic social scientists , via logit and probit econometric models , are better equipped than ratings agencies to assess the default risk of sovereigns and municipalities .
To support better ratings methods , PSCS ( in partnership with Wikirating ) maintains a comprehensive public database of sovereign defaults , revenues , expenditures , debt levels , and debt service costs .
PSCS has also developed the Public Sector Credit Framework , an open source budget simulation model that helps analysts assess default probabilities .
EXAMPLES OF SOVEREIGN DEFAULT Section::::Examples of sovereign default .
A failure of a nation to meet bond repayments has been seen on many occasions .
Philip II of Spain defaulted on debt four times – in 1557 , 1560 , 1575 and 1596 – becoming the first nation in history to declare sovereign default due to rising military costs and the declining value of gold , as it had become increasingly dependent on the revenues flowing in from its mercantile empire in the Americas .
This sovereign default threw the German banking houses into chaos and ended the reign of the Fuggers as Spanish financiers .
Genoese bankers provided the unwieldy Habsburg system with fluid credit and a dependably regular income .
In return the less dependable shipments of American silver were rapidly transferred from Seville to Genoa , to provide capital for further military ventures .
In the 1820s , several Latin American countries which had recently entered the bond market in London defaulted .
These same countries frequently defaulted during the nineteenth century , but the situation was typically rapidly resolved with a renegotiation of loans , including the writing off of some debts .
A failure to meet payments became common again in the late 1920s and 1930s ; as protectionism by wealthy nations rose and international trade fell especially after the banking crisis of 1929 , countries possessing debts denominated in other currencies found it increasingly difficult to meet terms agreed under more favourable economic conditions .
For example , in 1932 , Chile 's scheduled repayments exceeded the nation 's total exports ( or , at least , its exports under current pricing ; whether reductions in prices – forced sales – would have enabled fulfilling creditors ' rights is unknown ) .
More recently Greece became the first developed country to default to the International Monetary Fund .
In June 2015 Greece defaulted on a $ 1.7 billion payment to the IMF .
SEE ALSO
* Asset liability mismatch
* Sovereign bond * Debt crisis
* External debt * Currency crisis
* Financial crisis
* Balance of payments
* Vulture fund REFERENCES * D. Andrew Austin ( 2016 ) , Has the U.S. Government Ever " Defaulted " ?
* Guillermo Calvo ( 2005 ) , Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil : Bad Luck or Bad Policy ?
* Barry Eichengreen ( 2002 ) , Financial Crises : And What to Do about Them .
* Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann , eds .
, ( 2005 ) , Other People 's Money : Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies .
* Barry Eichengreen and Peter Lindert , eds .
, ( 1992 ) , The International Debt Crisis in Historical Perspective .
* M. Nicolas J. Firzli ( 2010 ) , Greece and the Roots the EU Debt Crisis .
* Charles Calomiris ( 1998 ) , ' Blueprints for a new global financial architecture ' .
* Jean Tirole ( 2002 ) , Financial Crises , Liquidity , and the International Monetary System . CITATIONS AND NOTES Citations
Notes
EXTERNAL LINKS
* List of Credit Default Swap premiums of various countries .