REPUBLIC SERVICES Republic Services , Inc is the second largest provider of non - hazardous solid waste collection , transfer , disposal , recycling , and energy services in the United States , as measured by revenue .
COMPANY HISTORY Section::::Company history .
Republic Industries was created as a waste disposal firm in 1981 .
H. Wayne Huizenga , became chairman of the board in 1995 .
At that time Republic Industries began acquiring auto dealerships and car rental agencies .
In 1998 , Republic Industries spun off Republic Services as an IPO then changed its name to AutoNation .
In June 2008 , Republic became the second largest waste management company in the U.S. following the acquisition of its larger competitor , Allied Waste Industries , for $ 6.1 billion in Republic stock .
The merged company retained the Republic Services name .
The Wall Street Journal reported in June 2010 that Republic Services ' $ 4 billion acquisition of Allied in December 2008 " has been successful from the start " , delivering at the high end of the annual savings projected when they did the deal ( $ 191 million ) , a 27 % increase in share price .
After 12 years as CEO of Republic Services , James O'Connor retired on January 1 , 2011 .
Replacing him was the president and COO of Republic Services , Donald Slager .
James P. Snee and Katharine Weymouth were appointed to the Republic Services Board of Directors in 2018 , resulting in a total of 12 board members , 11 of them independent .
Based on 2017 revenue of over $ 10 billion , the firm retained the number two position in the industry .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
Republic Services ' operations primarily consist of providing collection , transfer and disposal of non - hazardous solid waste , recovering and recycling of certain materials , and energy services .
As of December 31 , 2017 , it operated in 40 states and Puerto Rico through 343 collection operations , 204 transfer stations , 195 active landfills , 90 recycling centers , 7 treatment , recovery and disposal facilities , and 11 salt water disposal wells .
Republic also operated 68 landfill gas and renewable energy projects and had post - closure responsibility for 124 closed landfills .
In January 2016 , Republic realigned its field support functions by combining its three regions into two field groups , consolidating its areas and streamlining select operational support roles at its Phoenix headquarters .
FLEET Section::::Fleet .
According to Fleet Owner 500 , 2017 , Republic Services ranked 7 in the U.S. in total number of trucks in service with 16,000 .
RENEWABLE NATURAL GAS USAGE Section::::Renewable natural gas usage .
Republic Services announced in May 2017 that it will increase its usage of renewable natural gas ( RNG ) by a factor of three above what it used in 2016 .
They will also reduce usage of CO2e ( carbon dioxide equivalent ) by about 110,000 metric tons by their fleet over the coming three years with an expanded agreement with Clean Energy .
FLEET AUTOMATION
Section::::Fleet automation .
Approximately 75 % of its residential routes have been converted to automated single driver trucks .
By converting its residential routes to automated service , they reduce labor costs , improve driver productivity , decrease emissions and create a safer work environment for its employees .
Additionally , communities using automated vehicles have higher participation rates in recycling programs , thereby complementing its initiative to expand its recycling capabilities .
FLEET CONVERSION TO COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS ( CNG ) Section::::Fleet conversion to compressed natural gas ( CNG ) .
As of November 2016 , Republic Services operated a fleet of almost 2,500 CNG - powered vehicles , supported by 38 natural gas fueling stations .
According to the company , their CNG fleet helped to save about 21 million gallons of diesel fuel .
In August 2016 Republic Services opened a new Compressed Natural Gas ( CNG ) fueling station in Long Beach , California .
The station will serve the recent addition of 56 CNG - powered garbage trucks which replaced their old diesel trucks .
With this addition of CNG trucks the total number of alternative fuel vehicles operating in Long Beach is 147 .
In Broward and Dade Counties in South Florida Republic Services added 62 CNG trucks to their collection fleet in April 2016 .
The addition brought the total number of trucks to 127 .
In Central Contra Costa County Republic Services added 40 Compressed Natural Gas solid waste collection trucks to its fleet .
The CNG trucks replaced diesel - powered garbage collection trucks .
As of April 2016 the total number of CNG trucks operated by Republic in Contra Costa County was 123 .
In Portland , Republic Services added 16 CNG solid waste collection trucks to its fleet in April , 2016 .
In St. Louis the company added four CNG solid waste collection trucks to its fleet , bringing the total number of CNG trucks in the region to 107 .
Approximately 19 % of its fleet operates on CNG .
During 2017 about 30 % of the company 's replacement vehicle purchases were CNG vehicles .
As of December 31 , 2017 , they operated 37 CNG fueling stations .
In Raleigh , North Carolina , Republic Services added eight CNG trucks in November , 2015 , bringing the total number of CNG trucks in North Carolina to 25 .
Republic Services brought the number of CNG trucks operating in Colorado up to 82 with an addition of 17 trucks in the greater Denver area .
LANDFILLS Section::::Landfills .
Republic Services owns or operates 193 active landfills .
They also have responsibility for 126 closed landfills , for which they have associated closure and post - closure obligations .
Republic Services owns and operates the largest landfill in the United States at 2,200 acres ( 890 ha ) located in Apex , Nevada .
In 2008 , at the time that Republic Services bought Allied Waste , it acquired two closed St. Louis , Missouri landfills , West Lake and Bridgeton .
An underground event ( more accurately referred to as a " smoldering event " ) was detected in the closed Bridgeton Landfill .
Due to the odors emitted from the landfill and its proximity to the adjacent West Lake — an EPA - managed Super Fund site which contains low - level radioactive waste dumped there illegally over forty years ago — environmental groups got involved .
Republic operates the Bridgeton Landfill near St. Louis , Missouri .
The landfill is the site of an underground event of concern to residents and the EPA .
Since 2013 , when Republic Services installed equipment to flare off gasses and treat contaminated liquid , the levels of contaminants released into the air have mostly fallen below regulatory acceptable levels .
In 2013 the company said it would build a barrier to separate the two landfills , but because the EPA was uncertain where the radioactive contamination was located , progress on the barrier was delayed for more than a year .
In March 2016 the EPA released studies which showed the extent of the radioactive waste on the site , and allowed the company to build a barrier without disturbing the radioactive areas .
During the construction of the barrier Republic also must submit plans for a cooling system , which must be completed within four months of commencement of construction .
The company will also enlarge onto the north quarry of Bridgeton Landfill a plastic liner that it already installed over the south quarry .
Environmental Protection Agency Region 7
Administrator Mark Hague said this should help control the reaction by blocking oxygen " as well as mitigate some of the odors coming off of this site .
" Republic will also install more temperature monitors plus
two sulfur dioxide monitors to track unhealthy emissions .
They will also be required to develop a system which can quickly extinguish any new hot spots that the underground event might create .
RECYCLING CENTERS
Section::::Recycling centers .
Republic owns or operates 90 recycling centers .
These facilities generate revenue through the processing and sale of old corrugated cardboard ( OCC ) , old newspaper ( ONP ) , aluminum , glass and other materials , which accounted for approximately 5 % of their revenue during 2017 .
Approximately 77 % of its recycling center volume relates to OCC , ONP and other mixed paper .
Of the 5.0 million tons they sold during 2017 , 2.5 million moved through its recycling centers and 2.5 million they collected and delivered to third parties .
In June 2016 the company , together with Lab USA , announced the launch of a state - of - the - art ash metal recovery facility at the Roosevelt Regional Landfill in Roosevelt , Washington .
The high - tech process allows metals which would otherwise have been lost into the environment to be reclaimed , recycled , shipped to manufacturers and repurposed as new metal products .
The facility will systematically extract metal from ash that is already found in the landfill in addition to all newly delivered ash .
It is estimated that the facility will be able to recover and recycle more than 46,200 tons of ferrous metals and 42,900 tons of non - ferrous metals .
According to the American Iron and Steel Institute , recycling iron uses 20 percent less energy in production than extracting iron from natural resources .
Recycling copper saves about 60 percent of the energy which would be needed to mine copper .
Use of this facility will help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
On Earth Day , April 22 , 2016 , Republic Services announced enhancements they made to the Anaheim Recycling Center .
The new system can handle over 1000 tons of recyclables each day , or 100 tons per hour .
At the end of 2015 Republic Services opened a $ 35 million , 110,000 square - foot recycling center in North Las Vegas .
The plant 's solar panels generate enough energy to run the plant for two to three months .
The plant is designed to process one million pounds of recycled paper each day , going up to two million pounds as automation is completed .
Eventually the plant will be able to recycle three million pounds of paper per day .
Eventually the plant will be able to recycle three million pounds of paper per day .
Low - flow water fixtures in the building will reduce water consumption by 20 % .
In early 2015 Republic Services invested $ 19 million in a St. Louis recycling center upgrade of the company 's state - of - the - art Northside Recycling Center .
The upgraded center is able to produce 25 tons of baled recycled material an hour .
Ninety - two percent of the material that comes through the center is then sold to be remade into new products .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
Republic Services , along with all other waste and recycling companies , are subject to a variety of federal , state and local requirements that regulate , among other things , the environment , public health , safety , zoning and land use .
Operating and other permits , licenses and other approvals generally are required for landfills and transfer stations , certain solid waste collection vehicles , fuel storage tanks and other facilities that they own or operate .
Federal , state and local laws and regulations vary , but generally govern wastewater or storm water discharges , air emissions , the handling , transportation , treatment , storage and disposal of hazardous and non - hazardous waste , and the remediation of contamination associated with the release or threatened release of hazardous substances .
These laws and regulations provide governmental authorities with strict powers of enforcement .
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) and various other federal , state and local authorities administer these regulations .
CUSTOMER SERVICE Section::::Customer service .
In February 2016 , Republic Services said that it would be opening a customer service center in Fishers , Indiana and creating hundreds of jobs over the next 10 years .
They are investing $ 13.6 million to renovate and equip office space along the I-69 corporate corridor in Fishers .
The customer service office is expected to be operational by September 1 , 2016 , and will create up to 469 new jobs by 2025 .
In February 2016 it was announced by North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory and N.C. Commerce Secretary John E. Skvareta , III , that Republic Services was planning to open a full - service Customer Resource Center in Charlotte .
It is expected that the facility will create over 350 new jobs , while Republic 's investment in the Center is projected to be over $ 6.8 million over the next three years .
In January 2016 , the company said it will invest $ 20 million during 2016 to design and implement its Customer Resource Centers in addition to other customer focused initiatives .
The company expects the changes to result in a yearly savings of about $ 10 million .
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY , SUSTAINABILITY AND INNOVATION
Section::::Corporate responsibility , sustainability and innovation .
Republic Services puts a substantial percentage of its earnings- 45 percent- into developing new technologies and initiating new programs across the US .
The company has also been an industry leader in advancing new technologies , including converting landfill gas to energy , solar energy products , and a natural gas fleet .
The company has developed programs that will enable it to reduce emissions by 2.5 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent over the next four years , including developing at least two landfill gas - to - energy projects each year , adding at least 150,000 tons per year of recycling capacity , and reducing the greenhouse gas emissions from its fleet by 3 % by 2018 .
At the end of 2015 , 40 companies participated in an inaugural business tour in Seattle highlighting the regenerative model of what has become known as the circular economy .
Those in attendance , including Jennifer Gerholdt , the environment and sustainability director at the US Chamber of Commerce Foundation , toured Republic Services as well as General Biodiesel , Phillips , PCC Markets / Wiserg and others .
Republic Services scored in the 90th percentile of the Commercial Services and Supplies sector of the 2016 Dow Jones Sustainability — North America Index ™ ( DJSI ) , and was also named to the 2016 DJSI World and North America indices .
Republic is the only recycling and solid waste collection provider in the Commercial Services and Supplies sector that is included in the 2016 DJSI World Index .
The rankings highlight Republic 's leadership in corporate governance , environmental , social and financial aspects of sustainability .
The Blue Planet sustainability initiative is Republic Services ' approach to corporate social responsibility through their efforts to reduce emissions from operations ; improve materials management ; improve safety standards ; increase community engagement ; and a focus on employee growth opportunities .
At the end of August , 2017 , the company released its most recent Sustainability Report describing how well it was able to advance its sustainability initiatives .
RECYCLING
Section::::Recycling .
In partnership with the Alabama Coastal Foundation ( ACF ) Republic Services is launching an oyster shell collection program in 28 restaurants .
Funded by a two - year grant from the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation , the goal of the collection program is to create sustainable oyster habitats and to teach the public about the importance of oyster shell recycling .
In Missoula , Montana Republic Services launched an expanded recycling program in response to demand made by the citizens of the city .
On April 19 , 2016 Republic Services launched a website to allow easier access to sustainability resources and community tours at the Southern Nevada Recycling Center .
The Nevada Center opened in November 2015 , and is described as a " state - of - the - art " recycling center .
It was developed and built by Cambridge Cos . , of Griffith , Indiana .
The facility is 110,000 square feet , making it the largest residential recycling plant in the country .
In partnership with the city of Chesterfield , and USAgain , Republic Services launched a new program offering curbside textile recycling in Chesterfield , Missouri .
The program began in April 2016 .
In September 2015 the Buffalo Bills partnered with Republic Services for the third year in a row to encourage and support recycling during the football team 's home games .
The goal was to maintain the cleanliness of the parking lot at Ralph Wilson Stadium by handing out recycling bags and garbage bags to fans who participate in tailgating .
The University of Nevada Las Vegas partnered with Republic Services of Southern Nevada in September 2015 to participate in the GameDay Recycling Challenge .
The challenge is a competition between 72 college football teams across the United States .
At the end of August 2017 , Republic Services signed a deal of purchase ReCommunity Holdings , the largest independent recycling - processing company in the United States .
ReCommunity operates 26 recycling centers in 14 states , manufacturing reusable items from waste .
ReCommunity 's plants recover about 1.6 million tons of recyclable commodities annually , which will help Republic Services achieve their " Blue Planet " sustainable initiative of adding at least 150,000 tons of recycling capacity per year by 2018 .
SOLAR ENERGY Section::::Solar energy .
In September 2017 , Republic Services and Soltage activated a 13.5 megawatt solar energy project in Massachusetts .
When finished , the project , constructed on three former landfill sites , will include approximately 41,000 solar panels to power 1,900 local households and reduce carbon emissions by more than 14,000 tons .
COMPOSTING
Section::::Composting .
In April 2016 the city of Boise , Idaho considered the implementation of a composting program , utilizing Republic Services , the company that was already hauling garbage in the city .
The program went into effect in June 2017 .
After a little more than one month the company picked up 1,716 tons of compost from Boise 's single - family homes .
On May 6 , 2010 Allied Waste , a Republic Services company , upgraded its Pacific Region Compost Facility ( PRC ) with the state 's first food composting facility .
The facility accepts all food waste including meat , bread and vegetable products , which per the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality ( DEQ ) is almost 15 percent of the material landfilled in Oregon .
Allied Waste paved 2 acres ( 8,100 m2 ) and purchased and installed a composting system that has been used successfully in Washington and California called " aerated static pile technology .
" It captures and controls emissions from the composting process using a negative air system .
It has a smaller footprint than other methods , and reduces the amount of storm water runoff .
LANDFILL GAS TO ENERGY ( LFGTE )
Section::::Landfill gas to energy ( LFGTE ) .
In July 2016 Republic Services and Mas Energy launched a new renewable energy project to serve the metropolitan Atlanta area .
The project includes three landfill gas - to - energy facilities in Buford , Griffin and Winder .
The facilities will produce 24.1 megawatts of electricity , enough to power 15,665 households .
The three facilities together will be the largest landfill gas - to - energy project in Georgia .
Republic Services converts landfill gas , the natural byproduct of decomposing waste , to energy .
The use of landfill gas is beneficial to the U.S. economy by reducing air pollution through the capture and use of methane .
As of July 2016 , Republic Services operated 69 landfill gas and renewable energy projects .
In April 2015 Republic Services opened a landfill gas - to - energy project near Los Angeles at the Sunshine Canyon Landfill .
The 20-megawatt renewable energy project has the ability to supply enough electricity to power almost 25,000 homes in the area .
In January 2010 , the EPA 's Landfill Methane Outreach Program ( LMOP ) selected three Republic Services landfill gas - to - energy projects ( LFGTE ) as LFGTE Projects of the Year for 2009 .
Ox Mountain Landfill in Half Moon Bay , California ; Jefferson City Landfill in Jefferson City , Missouri and Oak Grove Landfill in Winder , Georgia were honored at the annual LMOP conference in Baltimore in January 2010 .
Republic Services developed LFGTE projects at 73 of its 213 landfills , including 52 electric generating plants , 13 medium Btu plants that provide LFG to industrial users , 6 high Btu plants that produce pipeline quality gas and 3 leachate evaporators ; The 52 electric projects generate 323 MW of electricity , enough to power about 250,000 homes .
The 22 other projects provide or process more than 58,000 scfm of gas , energy needed to heat almost 200,000 homes , the combined benefits equivalent to removing about 4 million cars off the road .
In 2008 , Republic Services agreed to pay a $ 1 million fine and up to $ 36 million in remediation costs for alleged violations of the Clean Water Act at a closed landfill in Clark County , Nevada .
In 2007 , Republic Services was fined $ 725,000 by the State of California related to hazardous waste leaking from a closed landfill into San Francisco Bay .
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION Section::::Awards and recognition .
Republic Services was included as one of " The Best Places to Work for LGBTQ Equality " in the Human Rights Campaign Foundation 's 2018 Corporate Equality Index , receiving a score of 100 % .
In 2016 and 2017 Republic Services was included in the Dow Jones Sustainability World and North America indices in 2017 .
The company was listed on the Forbes list of America 's Best Employers for 2017 .
The Ethisphere Institute named Republic Services to the 2017 list of the World 's Most Ethical Companies in March , 2017 .
The Carbon Disclosure Project ( CDP ) named Republic Services to the Supplier Climate A List .
Of the companies around the world that participated in this CDP supply chain program in 2016 , only 3 percent earned this recognition .
The CDP is an international non - profit organization that drives sustainable economies .
LOBBYING
Section::::Lobbying .
In 2014 , Republic Services gave $ 50,000 to Missouri Republicans to their House and Senate campaign committees and $ 20,000 to House and Senate committees for Missouri Democrats .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Republic Services
* Sustainability