THE NIGHTS
" The Nights " is a song by Swedish DJ and record producer Avicii .
It features uncredited vocals by Nicholas Furlong , who co - wrote the song with Jordan Suecof , Gabriel Benjamin , and John Feldmann .
On 1 December 2014 , it was released as a digital download by PRMD Music and Universal Island on Avicii 's The Days / Nights EP , then on 11 January 2015 in the United Kingdom .
The song peaked at number six on the UK Singles Chart and number one on the UK Dance Chart .
On 23 January 2015 , Avicii released " The Nights ( Avicii by Avicii ) " , his own remix of the song .
The song appears on the UK version of Avicii 's second studio album Stories ( 2015 ) .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Furlong noted that he began writing the song as an ode to his father .
The inspiration for the " pirate - y fight song " sound came to him while at a bar in Ireland .
Furlong recalled : " I had been going back and forth with Jordan and Gabe about this song idea that merged commercially sound rock music with the signature sound of an Irish drinking song .
When I returned to Los Angeles we all went into the studio . "
Furlong sent the original idea , titled " My Father Told Me " , to Arash Pournouri , Avicii 's manager .
Pournouri recognised an immediate draw to the track , saying that the song had that same sense of euphoria which characterises so much of Avicii 's music .
In an interview with Yahoo !
Music , Pournouri said : " It made absolute sense to work on it with Ras ...
[Avicii
and I just needed ] to make it more ' us '
and that 's what [ we ] did . "
Like his previous hits " Wake Me Up " and " Hey Brother " , " The Nights " is a progressive house song containing elements of folk rock .
It is written in the key of F # . MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
On 1 December 2014 , a lyric video to accompany the release of " The Nights " was released on YouTube .
On 15 December 2014 , the official music video for " The Nights " was released on YouTube and premiered on the front page of Yahoo Music .
The video was produced , directed by , and stars " professional life liver " Rory Kramer , who filmed an exuberant action - packed recollection of his own life on roller coasters , surfing , snowboarding , skateboarding , balloon flying , making a four door convertible out of a Toyota , etc .
– living a life to be remembered .
CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Recording
* Recorded at Foxy Studios , Los Angeles , California Personnel * Songwriting – Nicholas Furlong , Gabriel Benjamin , Jordan Suecof , John Feldmann , Tim Bergling * Production – Avicii * Co - production – Ash Pournouri
* Vocals – Nicholas Furlong * Engineering and vocal production – Zakk Cervini * Acoustic guitar – Colin Brittain
* Lap steel guitar –
Will Carter * Live drums –
Jordan Suecof * Additional vocals — The Mighty Riot IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
" The Nights " was featured on the soundtrack of the EA Sports video game FIFA 15 .
The song was also used during Sportscenter 's ' Images of 2014 ' segment on ESPN , recapping the year 's best moments in sports .
" The Nights " will be featured on the soundtrack of the video game WRC 5 .
It was the goal song of the Carolina Hurricanes from the 2015–16 season to the 2017 - 18 season , and the victory song of the New York Rangers since the 2015–16 season .
CHARTS AND CERTIFICATIONS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts and certifications .
Section::::Weekly charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2014–15 ) ! scope="col " Peakposition !
scope="row " Japan ( ZIP Dance Hits 20 ) ! scope="row " Lebanon ( Lebanese Top 20Video Chart ) ! scope="row " Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) ! scope="col " Chart ( 2018 ) ! scope="col " Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2015 ) ! scope="col " Position !
scope="row " Australia ( ARIA ) ! scope="row " Germany ( Official German Charts ) ! scope="row " Italy ( FIMI ) ! scope="row " New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ ) ! scope="row " Poland ( ZPAV ) !
scope="row"Slovenia ( SloTop50 ) !
scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) CERTIFICATIONS REFERENCES