KING SHEPHERD
The King Shepherd is a dog breed developed from crossing German Shepherd Dog with Shiloh Shepherd and long - coated European lines of German Shepherd along with Malamute in the 1990s .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The King Shepherd is a large breed .
According to the American Rare Breeds Association males stand at over tall and should have an ideal weight of pounds while females are tall and ideally .
The build of this dog is muscular , long , and robust ; the structure is solid .
The head is in good proportion with the body and moderately wide between the eyes .
The forehead is slightly rounded .
The cheeks are not too full and moderately curved when viewed from the top .
The thick , firm ears are medium - sized and moderately wide at base .
The eyes are medium - sized and almond shaped .
The shades of the eyes can be varying shades of brown ranging from golden brown to almost black .
The chest is broad and deep .
Thickly feathered , the tail reaches at least to the hocks and is slightly curved .
Docked tails are inadmissible .
Paws are round and short with a well closed arch .
The pads are very hard .
The nails are short , strong , and dark - colored .
Dewclaws are usually removed .
The King Shepherd comes with a wide range of colors : Sable , black saddle with tan , gold , cream , and tan or silver markings .
Pale washed - out colors are serious faults .
The undercoat has little color except in solid black dogs .
White , blue , or liver colored dogs or a dog with a nose that is other than black are not accepted in the show ring .
Puppies change color until their final coat .
There are two coat varieties - plush - haired and long - haired .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
The King Shepherd is self - confident with a well - balanced personality and healthy nervous system .
They should not exhibit any shyness or nervousness .
They are extremely intelligent , easy to train and eager and faithful to please their owners .
This breed makes a fine sheep - herder and working dog .
They are also a naturally courageous guard and watchdog , showing courage , strength , and hardiness in their role of protector .
They make very nice companions and are friendly to other animals and children .
CARE Section::::Care .
King Shepherds are very intelligent and energetic , and needs both challenging mental stimulation and plenty of exercise .
The King Shepherd takes well to strenuous activity .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
Two American dog breeders Shelly Watts - Cross , and David Turkheimer created this large breed from the Shiloh Shepherd ( American and European German Shepherd Dogs and Alaskan Malamutes ) , additional American - bred German Shepherd Dogs and the Great Pyrenees .
An organized dog breed club was started in 1995 .
OTHER INFORMATION
Section::::Other information .
The King Shepherd 's life expectancy is 10–14 years .
King Shepherds are classified in the herding group and have recognition by : ARBA , AKSC , WWKC , ERBDC , SKC , and the APRI .
REFERENCES