WESTERN HONEY BEE
The western honey bee or European honey bee ( Apis mellifera ) is the most common of the 7–12 species of honey bee worldwide .
The genus name Apis is Latin for " bee " , and mellifera is the Latin for " honey - bearing " , referring to the species ' production of honey .
Like all honey bees , the western honey bee is eusocial , creating colonies with a single fertile female ( or " queen " ) , many normally non - reproductive females or " workers , " and small proportion of fertile males or " drones .
" Individual colonies can house tens of thousands of bees .
Colony activities are organized by complex communication between individuals , through both pheromones and the dance language .
The western honey bee was one of the first domesticated insects , and it is the primary species maintained by beekeepers to this day for both its honey production and pollination activities .
With human assistance , the western honey bee now occupies every continent except Antarctica .
Because of its wide cultivation , this species is the single most important pollinator for agriculture globally .
Honey bees are threatened by pests and diseases , especially the varroa mite and colony collapse disorder .
Western honey bees are an important model organism in scientific studies , particularly in the fields of social evolution , learning , and memory ; they are also used in studies of pesticide toxicity , to assess non - target impacts of commercial pesticides .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
The western honey bee can be found on every continent except Antarctica .
The species is believed to have originated in Africa or Asia , and it spread naturally through Africa , the Middle East and Europe .
Humans are responsible for its considerable additional range , introducing European subspecies into North America ( early 1600s ) , South America , Australia , New Zealand , and East Asia .
Western honey bees adapted to the local environments as they spread geographically .
These adaptations include synchronizing colony cycles to the timing of local flower resources , forming a winter cluster in colder climates , migratory swarming in Africa , and enhanced foraging behavior in desert areas .
All together , these variations resulted in 28 recognized subspecies , all of which are cross - fertile .
The subspecies are divided into four major branches , based on work by Ruttner and confirmed by mitochondrial DNA analysis .
African subspecies belong to branch A , northwestern European subspecies branch M , southwestern European subspecies branch C and Middle - Eastern
subspecies branch O. LIFE CYCLE
COLONY
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
Section::::Colony life cycle .
Unlike most other bee species , honey bees have perennial colonies which persist year after year .
Because of this high degree of sociality and permanence , honey bee colonies can be considered superorganisms , meaning that reproduction of the colony , rather than individual bees , is the biologically significant unit .
Honey bee colonies reproduce through a process called " swarming " .
In most climates , western honey bees swarm in the spring and early summer , when there is an abundance of blooming flowers from which to collect nectar and pollen .
In response to these favorable conditions , the hive creates one to two dozen new queens .
Just as the pupal stages of these " daughter queens " are nearly complete , the old queen and approximately two - thirds of the adult workers leave the colony in a swarm , traveling some distance to find a new location suitable for building a hive ( e.g. , a hollow tree trunk ) .
In the old colony , the daughter queens often start " piping " , just prior to emerging as adults , and , when the daughter queens eventually emerge , they fight each other until only one remains ; the survivor then becomes the new queen .
If one of the sisters emerges before the others , she may kill her siblings while they are still pupae , before they have a chance to emerge as adults .
Once she has dispatched her rivals , the new queen , the only fertile female , lays all the eggs for the old colony , which her mother has left .
Virgin females are able to lay eggs , which develop into males ( a trait shared with wasps , bees , and ants because of haplodiploidy ) .
However , she requires a mate to produce female offspring , which comprise 90 % or more of bees in the colony at any given time .
Thus , the new queen goes on one or more nuptial flights , each time mating with 1–17 drones .
Once she has finished mating , usually within two weeks of emerging , she remains in the hive , laying eggs .
Throughout the rest of the growing season , the colony produces many workers , who gather pollen and nectar as cold - season food ; the average population of a healthy hive in midsummer may be as high as 40,000 to 80,000 bees .
Nectar from flowers is processed by worker bees , who evaporate it until the moisture content is low enough to discourage mold , transforming it into honey , which can then be capped over with wax and stored almost indefinitely .
In the temperate climates to which western honey bees are adapted , the bees gather in their hive and wait out the cold season , during which the queen may stop laying .
During this time , activity is slow , and the colony consumes its stores of honey used for metabolic heat production in the cold season .
In mid- through late winter , the queen starts laying again .
This is probably triggered by day length .
Depending on the subspecies , new queens ( and swarms ) may be produced every year , or less frequently , depending on local environmental conditions .
INDIVIDUAL BEE
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Individual bee life cycle .
Like other insects that undergo complete metamorphosis , the western honey bee has four distinct life stages : egg , larva , pupa and adult .
The complex social structure of honey bee hives means that all of these life stages occur simultaneously throughout much of the year .
The queen deposits a single egg into each cell of a honeycomb prepared by worker bees .
The egg hatches into a legless , eyeless larva fed by " nurse " bees ( worker bees who maintain the interior of the colony ) .
After about a week , the larva is sealed in its cell by the nurse bees and begins its pupal stage .
After another week , it emerges as an adult bee .
It is common for defined regions of the comb to be filled with young bees ( also called " brood " ) , while others are filled with pollen and honey stores .
Worker bees secrete the wax used to build the hive , clean , maintain and guard it , raise the young and forage for nectar and pollen ; the nature of the worker 's role varies with age .
For the first ten days of their lives , worker bees clean the hive and feed the larvae .
After this , they begin building comb cells .
On days 16 through 20 , workers receive nectar and pollen from older workers and store it .
After the 20th day , a worker leaves the hive and spends the remainder of its life as a forager .
Although worker bees are usually infertile females , when some subspecies are stressed they may lay fertile eggs .
Since workers are not fully sexually developed , they do not mate with drones and thus can only produce haploid ( male ) offspring .
Queens and workers have a modified ovipositor , a stinger , with which they defend the hive .
Unlike bees of any other genus and the queens of their own species , the stinger of worker honey bees is barbed .
Contrary to popular belief , a bee does not always die soon after stinging ; this misconception is based on the fact that a bee will usually die after stinging a human or other mammal .
The stinger and its venom sac , with musculature and a ganglion allowing them to continue delivering venom after they are detached , are designed to pull free of the body when they lodge .
This apparatus ( including barbs on the stinger ) is thought to have evolved in response to predation by vertebrates , since the barbs do not function ( and the stinger apparatus does not detach ) unless the stinger is embedded in elastic material .
The barbs do not always " catch " , so a bee may occasionally pull its stinger free and fly off unharmed ( or sting again ) .
Although the average lifespan of a queen in most subspecies is three to five years , reports from the German - European black bee subspecies previously used for beekeeping indicate that a queen can live up to eight years .
Because a queen 's store of sperm is depleted near the end of her life , she begins laying more unfertilized eggs ; for this reason , beekeepers often replace queens every year or two .
The lifespan of workers varies considerably over the year in regions with long winters .
Workers born in spring and summer will work hard , living only a few weeks , but those born in autumn will remain inside for several months as the colony clusters .
On average during the year , about one percent of a colony 's worker bees die naturally per day .
Except for the queen , all of a colony 's workers are replaced about every four months .
SOCIAL CASTE Section::::Social caste .
Behavioral and physiological differences between castes and subcastes arise from phenotypic plasticity , which relies on gene expression rather than heritable genotypic differences .
QUEENS Section::::Queens .
The queen bee is a fertile female , who , unlike workers ( which are genetically also female ) , has a fully developed reproductive tract .
She is larger than her workers , and has a characteristic rounder , longer abdomen .
A female egg can become either a queen or a worker bee .
Workers and queens are both fed royal jelly , which is high in protein and low in flavonoid , during the first three days of their larval stage .
Workers are then switched to a diet of mixed pollen and nectar ( often called " bee bread " ) , while queens will continue to receive royal jelly .
In the absence of flavonoid and the presence of a high - protein diet , queen bees develop a healthy reproductive tract — a task necessary for maintaining a colony of tens of thousands of daughter - workers .
Periodically , the colony determines that a new queen is needed .
There are three general causes : *
The hive is filled with honey , leaving little room for new eggs .
This will trigger a swarm , where the old queen will take about half the worker bees to found a new colony and leave the new queen with the other half of the workers to continue the old one .
*
* The old queen begins to fail , which is thought to be demonstrated by a decrease in queen pheromones throughout the hive .
This is known as supersedure , and at the end of the supersedure the old queen is generally killed .
*
* The old queen dies suddenly , a situation known as emergency supersedure .
The worker bees find several eggs ( or larvae ) of the appropriate age range and attempt to develop them into queens .
Emergency supersedure can generally be recognized because new queen cells are built out from comb cells , instead of hanging from the bottom of a frame .
* Regardless of the trigger , workers develop the larvae into queens by continuing to feed them royal jelly .
Queens are not raised in the typical horizontal brood cells of the honeycomb .
A queen cell is larger and oriented vertically .
If workers sense that an old queen is weakening , they produce emergency cells ( known as supersedure cells ) made from cells with eggs or young larvae and which protrude from the comb .
When the queen finishes her larval feeding and pupates , she moves into a head - downward position and later chews her way out of the cell .
At pupation , workers cap ( seal ) the cell .
The queen asserts control over the worker bees by releasing a complex suite of pheromones , known as queen scent .
After several days of orientation in and around the hive , the young queen flies to a drone congregation point – a site near a clearing and generally about above the ground – where drones from different hives congregate .
They detect the presence of a queen in their congregation area by her smell , find her by sight and mate with her in midair ; drones can be induced to mate with " dummy " queens with the queen pheromone .
A queen will mate multiple times , and may leave to mate several days in a row ( weather permitting ) until her spermatheca is full .
The queen lays all the eggs in a healthy colony .
The number and pace of egg - laying is controlled by weather , resource availability and specific racial characteristics .
Queens generally begin to slow egg - laying in the early fall , and may stop during the winter .
Egg - laying generally resumes in late winter when the days lengthen , peaking in the spring .
At the height of the season , the queen may lay over 2,500 eggs per day ( more than her body mass ) .
She fertilizes each egg ( with stored sperm from the spermatheca ) as it is laid in a worker - sized cell .
Eggs laid in drone - sized ( larger ) cells are left unfertilized ; these unfertilized eggs , with half as many genes as queen or worker eggs , develop into drones .
WORKERS
Section::::Workers .
Workers are females produced by the queen that develop from fertilized , diploid eggs .
Workers are essential for social structure and proper colony functioning .
They carry out the main tasks of the colony , because the queen is occupied with only reproducing .
These females will raise their sister workers and future queens that eventually leave the nest to start their own colony .
They also forage and return to the nest with nectar and pollen to feed the young .
DRONES Section::::Drones .
Drones are the colony 's male bees .
Since they do not have ovipositors , they do not have stingers .
Drone honey bees do not forage for nectar or pollen .
The primary purpose of a drone is to fertilize a new queen .
Many drones will mate with a given queen in flight ; each will die immediately after mating , since the process of insemination requires a lethally convulsive effort .
Drone honey bees are haploid ( single , unpaired chromosomes ) in their genetic structure , and are descended only from their mother ( the queen ) .
In temperate regions drones are generally expelled from the hive before winter , dying of cold and starvation since they can not forage , produce honey or care for themselves .
There has been research into the role western honey bee drones play in thermoregulation within the hive .
Given their larger size ( 1.5 times that of worker bees ) , drones may play a significant role .
Drones are typically located near the center of hive clusters for unclear reasons .
It is postulated that it is to maintain sperm viability , which may be compromised at cooler temperatures .
Another possible explanation is that a more central location allows drones to contribute to warmth , since at temperatures below their ability to contribute declines .
QUEEN - WORKER CONFLICT Section::::Queen - worker conflict .
When a fertile female worker produces drones , a conflict arises between her interests and those of the queen .
The worker shares half her genes with the drone and one - quarter with her brothers , favouring her offspring over those of the queen .
The queen shares half her genes with her sons and one - quarter with the sons of fertile female workers .
This pits the worker against the queen and other workers , who try to maximize their reproductive fitness by rearing the offspring most related to them .
This relationship leads to a phenomenon known as " worker policing " .
In these rare situations , other worker bees in the hive who are genetically more related to the queen 's sons than those of the fertile workers will patrol the hive and remove worker - laid eggs .
Another form of worker - based policing is aggression toward fertile females .
Some studies have suggested a queen pheromone which may help workers distinguish worker- and queen - laid eggs , but others indicate egg viability as the key factor in eliciting the behavior .
Worker policing is an example of forced altruism , where the benefits of worker reproduction are minimized and that of rearing the queen 's offspring maximized .
In very rare instances workers subvert the policing mechanisms of the hive , laying eggs which are removed at a lower rate by other workers ; this is known as anarchic syndrome .
Anarchic workers can activate their ovaries at a higher rate and contribute a greater proportion of males to the hive .
Although an increase in the number of drones would decrease the overall productivity of the hive , the reproductive fitness of the drones ' mother would increase .
Anarchic syndrome is an example of selection working in opposite directions at the individual and group levels for the stability of the hive .
Under ordinary circumstances the death ( or removal ) of a queen increases reproduction in workers , and a significant proportion of workers will have active ovaries in the absence of a queen .
The workers of the hive produce a last batch of drones before the hive eventually collapses .
Although during this period worker policing is usually absent , in certain groups of bees it continues .
According to the strategy of kin selection , worker policing is not favored if a queen does not mate multiple times .
Workers would be related by three - quarters of their genes , and the difference in relationship between sons of the queen and those of the other workers would decrease .
The benefit of policing is negated , and policing is less favored .
Experiments confirming this hypothesis have shown a correlation between higher mating rates and increased rates of worker policing in many species of social hymenoptera .
BEHAVIOR THERMOREGULATION Section::::Behavior .
Section::::Thermoregulation .
The honey bee needs an internal body temperature of to fly ; this temperature is maintained in the nest to develop the brood , and is the optimal temperature for the creation of wax .
The temperature on the periphery of the cluster varies with outside air temperature , and the winter cluster 's internal temperature may be as low as .
Honey bees can forage over a air - temperature range because of behavioral and physiological mechanisms for regulating the temperature of their flight muscles .
From low to high air temperatures , the mechanisms are : shivering before flight , and stopping flight for additional shivering ; passive body - temperature regulation based on work , and evaporative cooling from regurgitated honey - sac contents .
Body temperatures differ , depending on caste and expected foraging rewards .
The optimal air temperature for foraging is .
During flight , the bee 's relatively large flight muscles create heat which must be dissipated .
The honey bee uses evaporative cooling to release heat through its mouth .
Under hot conditions , heat from the thorax is dissipated through the head ; the bee regurgitates a droplet of warm internal fluid — a " honeycrop droplet " – which reduces the temperature of its head by .
Below bees are immobile , and above their activity slows .
Honey bees can tolerate temperatures up to for short periods .
COMMUNICATION Section::::Communication .
Honey - bee behavior has been extensively studied , since bees are widespread and familiar .
Karl von Frisch , who received the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his study of honey - bee communication , noticed that bees communicate with dance .
Through these dances , bees communicate information regarding the distance , the situation , and the direction of a food source by the dances of the returning ( honey bee )
worker bee on the vertical comb of the hive .
Honey bees direct other bees to food sources with the round dance and the waggle dance .
Although the round dance tells other foragers that food is within of the hive , it provides insufficient information about direction .
The waggle dance , which may be vertical or horizontal , provides more detail about the distance and direction of a food source .
Foragers are also thought to rely on their olfactory sense to help locate a food source after they are directed by the dances .
Unlike western honey bees , the dwarf honey bee do not change the precision of the waggle dance to indicate the type of site that is set as a new goal .
Therefore , western honey bees are better at conveying information than its closely related species and this further supports the notion that former are more evolved than latter .
Another means of communication is the shaking signal , also known as the jerking dance , vibration dance or vibration signal .
Although the shaking signal is most common in worker communication , it also appears in reproductive swarming .
A worker bee vibrates its body dorsoventrally while holding another bee with its front legs .
Jacobus Biesmeijer , who examined shaking signals in a forager 's life and the conditions leading to its performance , found that experienced foragers executed 92 percent of observed shaking signals and 64 percent of these signals were made after the discovery of a food source .
About 71 percent of shaking signals occurred before the first five successful foraging flights of the day ; other communication signals , such as the waggle dance , were performed more often after the first five successes .
Biesmeijer demonstrated that most shakers are foragers and the shaking signal is most often executed by foraging bees on pre - foraging bees , concluding that it is a transfer message for several activities ( or activity levels ) .
Sometimes the signal increases activity , as when active bees shake inactive ones .
At other times , such as the end of the day , the signal is an inhibitory mechanism .
However , the shaking signal is preferentially directed towards inactive bees .
All three forms of communication among honey bees are effective in foraging and task management .
PHEROMONES Section::::Pheromones .
Pheromones ( substances involved in chemical communication ) are essential to honey - bee survival .
Honey bees rely on pheromones for nearly all behaviors , including mating , alarm , defense , orientation , kin and colony recognition , food production and integrating colony activities .
DOMESTICATION Section::::Domestication .
Humans have been collecting honey from bees for thousands of years , with evidence in the form of rock art found in France and Spain , dating to around 7000 BCE .
The honey bee is one of the few invertebrate animals to have been domesticated .
Bees were likely first domesticated in ancient Egypt , where tomb paintings depict bee - keeping .
Europeans brought bees to North America in 1622 .
Beekeepers have selected bees for several desirable features : * the ability of a colony to survive periods with little food * the ability of a colony to survive cold weather * resistance to disease * increased honey - production
* reduced aggressiveness
* reduced tendency to swarm
* reduced nest - building * easy pacification with smoke These modifications , along with artificial change of location , have improved bees from the point of view of the beekeeper , and simultaneously made them more dependent on beekeepers for their survival .
In Europe , cold - weather survival was likely selected for , consciously or not , while in Africa , selection probably favoured the ability to survive heat , drought , and heavy rain .
Authors do not agree on whether this degree of artificial selection constitutes genuine domestication .
In 1603 , John Guillim wrote " The Bee I may well reckon a domestic insect , being so pliable to the benefit of the keeper . "
More recently , many biologists working on pollination take the domesticated status of honey bees for granted .
For example , Rachael Winfree and colleagues write " We used crop pollination as a model system , and investigated whether the loss of a domesticated pollinator ( the honey bee ) could be compensated for by native , wild bee species . "
Similarly , Brian Dennis and William Kemp write : " Although the domestication of the honey bee is closely connected to the evolution of food - based socio - economic systems in many cultures throughout the world , in current economic terms , and in the U.S. alone , the estimated wholesale value of honey , more than $ 317 million dollars in 2013 , pales in comparison to aggregate estimated annual value of pollination services , variously valued at $ 11–15 billion . "
On the other hand , P. R. Oxley and B. P. Oldroyd ( 2010 ) consider the domestication of bees at best partial .
Oldroyd observes that the lack of full domestication is somewhat surprising , given that people have kept bees for at least 7000 years .
Instead , bee - keepers have found ways to manage bees using hives , while the bees remain " largely unchanged from their wild cousins " .
Leslie Bailey and B. V. Ball , in their book Honey Bee Pathology , call honey bees " feral insects " , in contrast to the silkworm ( Bombyx mori ) which they call " the only insect that has been domesticated " , and refer to the " popular belief among many biologists as well as beekeepers that bees are domesticated " .
They argue that honey bees are able to survive without man 's help , and in fact require to " be left at liberty " to survive .
They argue further that even if bees could be raised away from the wild , they would still have to fly freely to gather nectar and pollinate plants .
Therefore , they argue , bee - keeping is " the exploitation of colonies of a wild insect " , with little more than the provision of a weatherproof cavity for them to nest in .
Pilar de la Rua and colleagues likewise argue that honey bees are not fully domesticated , since " endemic subspecies - specific genetic footprints can still be identified in Europe and Africa " , making conservation of wild - bee diversity important .
They further argue that the difficulty of controlling drones for mating is a serious handicap and a sign that domestication is not complete , in particular as " extensive gene flow usually occurs between wild / feral and managed honeybee populations " .
BEEKEEPING
Section::::Beekeeping .
The honey bee is a colonial insect which is housed , transported by and sometimes fed by beekeepers .
Honey bees do not survive and reproduce individually , but as part of the colony ( a superorganism ) .
Honey bees collect flower nectar and convert it to honey , which is stored in the hive .
The nectar , transported in the bees ' stomachs , is converted with the addition of digestive enzymes and storage in a honey cell for partial dehydration .
Nectar and honey provide the energy for the bees ' flight muscles and for heating the hive during the winter .
Honey bees also collect pollen , which after being processed to bee bread supplies protein and fat for the bee brood to grow .
Centuries of selective breeding by humans have created bees which produce far more honey than the colony needs , and beekeepers ( also known as apiarists ) harvest the surplus honey .
Beekeepers provide a place for the colony to live and store honey .
There are seven basic types of beehive : skeps , Langstroth hives , top - bar hives , box hives , log gums , D. E. hive , and miller hives .
All U.S. states require beekeepers to use movable frames to allow bee inspectors to check the brood for disease .
This allows beekeepers to keep Langstroth , top - bar and D.E. hives without special permission , granted for purposes such as museum use .
Modern hives also enable beekeepers to transport bees , moving from field to field as crops require pollinating ( a source of income for beekeepers ) .
In cold climates , some beekeepers have kept colonies alive ( with varying degrees of success ) by moving them indoors for winter .
While this can protect the colonies from extremes of temperature and make winter care and feeding more convenient for the beekeeper , it increases the risk of dysentery and causes an excessive buildup of carbon dioxide from the bees ' respiration .
Inside wintering has been refined by Canadian beekeepers , who use large barns solely for the wintering of bees ; automated ventilation systems assist in carbon - dioxide dispersal .
PRODUCTS
HONEY BEES Section::::Products .
Section::::Honey bees .
A primary product of honey bees is more honey bees .
Honey bees are bought as mated queens , in spring packages of a queen with of bees , as nucleus colonies ( which include frames of brood ) and as full colonies .
Commerce in bees dates to prehistory , and modern methods of producing queens and dividing colonies for increase date to the late 1800s .
Bees are typically produced in temperate to tropical regions and sold to colder areas ; for example packages of bees produced in the U.S. state of Florida are sold to beekeepers in Michigan .
POLLINATION
Section::::Pollination .
The honey bee is an important pollinator of crops ; this service accounts for much of the species ' commercial value .
A large number of the crop species farmed worldwide depend on it , Although orchards and fields have increased in size , wild pollinators have dwindled .
In a number of regions the pollination shortage is addressed by migratory beekeepers , who supply hives during a crop bloom and move them after the blooming period .
Commercial beekeepers plan their movements and wintering locations according to anticipated pollination services .
At higher latitudes it is difficult ( or impossible ) to winter over sufficient bees , or to have them ready for early blooming plants .
Much migration is seasonal , with hives wintering in warmer climates and moving to follow the bloom at higher latitudes .
In California almond pollination occurs in February , early in the growing season before local hives have built up their populations .
Almond orchards require two hives per acre , or per hive , for maximum yield , and pollination is dependent on the importation of hives from warmer climates .
Almond pollination ( in February and March in the U.S. ) is the largest managed pollination event in the world , requiring more than one - third of all managed honey bees in the country .
Mass movements of bees are also made for apples in New York , Michigan , and Washington .
Despite honey bees ' inefficiency as blueberry pollinators , large numbers are moved to Maine because they are the only pollinators who can be easily moved and concentrated for this and other monoculture crops .
Bees and other insects maintain flower constancy by transferring pollen to other biologically specific plants ; this prevents flower stigmas from being clogged with pollen from other species .
CLAIMS OF HUMAN DEPENDENCY Section::::Claims of human dependency .
European honey bees are often described as being essential to all human food production , leading to claims that without their pollination , all of humanity would starve , or even die out .
Einstein is sometimes misquoted as saying If bees disappeared off the face of the earth , man would only have four years left to live .
But not only did the scientist not say that , there is no science to support the prediction , itself .
In fact , many important crops need no insect pollination at all .
The ten most important crops , comprising 60 % of all human food energy , all fall into this category :
Plantains are sterile and propagated by cuttings , as are cassava .
Potatoes , yams , and sweet potatoes are root vegetables propagated by tubers .
Soybeans are self - pollinated .
Rice , wheat , and corn are all wind - pollinated , because this is true of all grasses .
Similarly , no crops originating in the New World depend on the domesticated honey bee Apis mellifera at all , as the insect is invasive , having been brought over with colonists in the last few centuries .
Thomas Jefferson mentioned this in his Notes on the State of Virginia : Tomatoes , peppers , squash , and all other New World crops evolved with native pollinators like squash bees , bumble bees , other native bees .
The stingless bees mentioned by Jefferson are distant relatives of the honey bees , in the genus Melipona .
HONEY Section::::Honey .
Honey is the complex substance made from nectar and sweet deposits from plants and trees which are gathered , modified and stored in the comb by honey bees .
Honey is a biological mixture of inverted sugars , primarily glucose and fructose .
It has antibacterial and antifungal properties .
Honey from the western honey bee , along with the bee Tetragonisca angustula , has specific antibacterial activity towards an infection causing bacteria , Staphylococcus aureus .
Honey will not rot or ferment when stored under normal conditions , however it will crystallize over time .
Although crystallized honey is acceptable for human use , bees can only use liquid honey and will remove and discard crystallized honey from the hive .
Bees produce honey by collecting nectar , a clear liquid consisting of nearly 80 percent water and complex sugars .
The collecting bees store the nectar in a second stomach and return to the hive , where worker bees remove the nectar .
The worker bees digest the raw nectar for about 30 minutes , using digestive enzymes to break down the complex sugars into simpler ones .
Raw honey is then spread in empty honeycomb cells to dry , reducing its water content to less than 20 percent .
When nectar is being processed , honey bees create a draft through the hive by fanning with their wings .
When the honey has dried , the honeycomb cells are sealed ( capped ) with wax to preserve it .
BEESWAX Section::::Beeswax .
Mature worker bees secrete beeswax from glands on their abdomen , using it to form the walls and caps of the comb .
When honey is harvested , the wax can be collected for use in products like candles and seals .
BEE BREAD Section::::Bee bread .
Bees collect pollen in a pollen basket and carry it back to the hive ,
where after undergoing fermentation and turning into bee bread becomes a protein source for brood - rearing .
Excess pollen can be collected from the hive ; although it is sometimes consumed as a dietary supplement by humans , bee pollen may cause an allergic reaction in susceptible individuals .
BEE BROOD Section::::Bee brood .
Bee brood , the eggs , larvae , or pupae of honey bees , is edible and highly nutritious .
Bee brood contains the same amount of protein that beef or poultry does .
Bee brood is often harvested as a byproduct when the farmer has excess bees and does not wish for more .
PROPOLIS
Section::::Propolis .
Propolis is a resinous mixture collected by honey bees from tree buds , sap flows or other botanical sources , which is used as a sealant for unwanted open spaces in the hive .
Although propolis is alleged to have health benefits ( tincture of Propolis is marketed as a cold and flu remedy ) , it may cause severe allergic reactions in some individuals .
Propolis is also used in wood finishes , and gives a Stradivarius violin its unique red color .
ROYAL JELLY
Section::::Royal jelly .
Royal jelly is a honey - bee secretion used to nourish the larvae and queen .
It is marketed for its alleged but unsupported claims of health benefits .
On the other hand , it may cause severe allergic reactions in some individuals .
GENOME Section::::Genome .
As of October 28 , 2006 , the Honey Bee Genome Sequencing Consortium fully sequenced and analyzed the genome of Apis mellifera , the western honey bee .
Since 2007 , attention has been devoted to colony collapse disorder , a decline in European honey bee colonies in a number of regions .
The European honey bee is the third insect , after the fruit fly and the mosquito , to have its genome mapped .
According to scientists who analyzed its genetic code , the honey bee originated in Africa and spread to Europe in two ancient migrations .
Scientists have found that genes related to smell outnumber those for taste , and the European honey bee has fewer genes regulating immunity than the fruit fly and the mosquito .
The genome sequence also revealed that several groups of genes , particularly those related to circadian rhythm , resembled those of vertebrates more than other insects .
Another significant finding from the honey bee genome study , was that the honey bee was the first insect to be discovered with a functional DNA methylation system since functional key enzymes ( DNA methyltransferase-1 and -3 ) were identified in the genome .
DNA methylation is one of the important mechanisms in epigenetics to study gene expression and regulation without changing the DNA sequence , but modifications on DNA activity .
DNA methylation later was identified to play an important role in gene regulation and gene splicing .
The genome is unusual in having few transposable elements , although they were present in the evolutionary past ( remains and fossils have been found ) and evolved more slowly than those in fly - species .
HAZARDS AND SURVIVAL Section::::Hazards and survival .
European honey - bee populations face threats to their survival increasing interests into other pollinator species , like the common eastern bumblebee .
North American and European populations were severely depleted by varroa - mite infestations during the early 1990s , and U.S. beekeepers were further affected by colony collapse disorder in 2006 and 2007 .
Improved cultural practices and chemical treatments against varroa mites saved most commercial operations ; new bee breeds are beginning to reduce beekeeper dependence on acaricides .
Feral bee populations were greatly reduced during this period ; they are slowly recovering , primarily in mild climates , due to natural selection for varroa resistance and repopulation by resistant breeds .
Insecticides , particularly when used in excess of label directions , have also depleted bee populations as bee pests and diseases ( including American foulbrood and tracheal mites ) are becoming resistant to medications .
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS
Section::::Environmental hazards .
Africanized bees have spread across the southern United States , where they pose a slight danger to humans ( making beekeeping — particularly hobby beekeeping — difficult ) .
As an invasive species , feral honey bees have become a significant environmental problem in non - native areas .
Imported bees may displace native bees and birds , and may also promote the reproduction of invasive plants ignored by native pollinators .
Unlike native bees , they do not properly extract or transfer pollen from plants with pore anthers ( anthers which only release pollen through tiny apical pores ) ; this requires buzz pollination , a behavior rarely exhibited by honey bees .
Honey bees reduce fruiting in Melastoma affine , a plant with pore anthers , by robbing its stigmas of previously deposited pollen .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
Insect predators of honeybees include the Asian giant hornet and other wasps , robber flies , dragonflies such as the green darner , the European beewolf , some praying mantises , and the water strider .
Arachnid predators of honeybees include fishing spiders , lynx spiders , goldenrod spiders and the St Andrew 's Cross spider .
Reptile and amphibian predators of honeybees include the American toad , Anole lizards , the American bullfrog and the wood frog .
Specialist bird predators include the bee - eaters ; other birds that may take bees include grackles , hummingbirds , Summer tanager , and tyrant flycatchers .
Most birds that eat bees do so opportunistically , however , summer tanagers will sit on a limb and catch dozens of bees from the hive entrance .
Mammals that sometimes take bees include bears , least shrews , opossums , raccoons , honey badgers and skunks .
CLOSE RELATIVES Section::::Close relatives .
Apart from Apis mellifera , there are 6 other species in the genus Apis .
These are Apis andreniformis , Apis florea , Apis dorsata , Apis cerana , Apis koschevnikovi , and Apis nigrocincta .
These other species all originated in South and Southeast Asia .
Only Apis mellifera is thought to have originated in Europe , Asia , and Africa .
SEE ALSO * Apitherapy * Beeline * Bee bearding
* Colony collapse disorder *
Worker policing REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY * A. I. Root 's The ABC and XYZ of Beekeeping * Molecular confirmation of a fourth lineage in honeybees from the Near East Apidologie 31
( 2000 ) 167–180 , accessed Oct 2005 * Biesmeijer , Jacobus .
"
The Occurrence and Context of the Shaking Signal in Honey Bees ( Apis mellifera )
Exploiting Natural Food Sources " .
Ethology .
2003 .
* Lindauer , Martin .
" Communication among social bees " .
Harvard University Press 1971 .
*
Schneider , S. S. , P. K. Visscher , Camazine , S. " Vibration Signal Behavior of Waggle - dancers in Swarms of the Honey Bee , Apis mellifera ( Hymenoptera : Apidae ) .
Ethology .
1998 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* FAO :
Beekeeping explained
* FAO : Honeybee anatomy
* IFAS : Apis mellifera * Sound recordings of Apis mellifera at BioAcoustica