TIBBY ROLLINS
Tabitha Anastasia " Tibby " Tomko - Rollins is a fictional character in the 2001 novel
The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants and the 2005 film based upon it .
She is a member of the titular club , along with her friends Lena Kaligaris , Bridget Vreeland and Carmen Lowell .
She was portrayed by Amber Tamblyn in the film .
FAMILY Section::::Family .
Tibby 's parents are described as former hippies .
She was born when they were 19 , and she apparently spent much of her early life swept up in their various adventures ; her father was , at turns , a writer for a socialist newspaper , a public defender , and an organic farmer , while her mother was a sculptor .
Eventually , her mother became a real estate agent and her father became a corporate lawyer .
They settled down in a suburban house with Tibby and her two younger siblings , Nicky and Katherine , who are respectively thirteen and fourteen years younger than her .
Tibby often feels like an outcast in her own family , viewing herself as a leftover of her parents ' former life .
As a result , she resents her younger siblings and tries to distance herself from them during the first two novels .
FRIENDS Section::::Friends .
Tibby 's best friends are Lena Kaligaris , Carmen Lowell , and Bridget Vreeland .
She has known them all since birth .
She also befriends Bailey Graffman and has a guinea pig Mimi who both die at the end of the first novel .
THE SISTERHOOD OF THE TRAVELING PANTS Section::::The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants .
Stuck at home in Bethesda , Maryland while her three friends went to Greece , Mexico and South Carolina , she decides to make a " suckumentary " about people she considers to be " lame , " among them her coworkers at Wallman 's and Brian McBrian , a fellow high schooler who spends most of his time playing Dragon Master at the local 7-Eleven .
At Wallman 's , Tibby meets twelve - year - old Bailey Graffman , who is dying of leukemia and is eager to help Tibby with her movie .
Bailey , afraid of not having enough time to truly understand people and , in turn , be understood , looks beyond appearances and finds the true worth in each of Tibby 's documentary subjects , allowing Tibby to do the same .
Bailey dies at the end of the novel and Tibby decided to make the documentary about the summer she had with Bailey .
THE SECOND SUMMER OF THE SISTERHOOD Section::::The Second Summer of the Sisterhood .
Tibby takes a course in filmmaking at Williamston College .
She tries desperately to impress Alex and Maura , two of her classmates .
In the process , she ends up shunning Brian ( who has become one of her closest friends since the end of the first novel ) when he visits her and makes a video which upsets her mother .
In the end , she realises that Brian is her true friend , and Alex and Maura are phony .
She makes a touching video about Bailey , and Brian and her mother forgive her .
GIRLS IN PANTS :
THE THIRD SUMMER OF THE SISTERHOOD Section::::Girls in Pants : The Third Summer of the Sisterhood .
Brian asks Tibby to the senior dance at their high school , and she says yes .
After the dance , at a picnic table , they exchange their first kiss , and Brian reveals his feelings for her .
The next morning while thinking about Brian , Tibby forgets that her younger sister has been trying to get an apple from a tree outside her window .
She opens the window , and her sister accidentally falls out .
Tibby becomes depressed and blames herself , so she avoids Brian .
Eventually , though , she comes to terms with her problems .
Tibby ends up helping deliver Carmen 's half - brother , Ryan and becomes his godmother .
After that , she finds Brian , and together , they strip off their clothes and jump into the city pool , marking their start as a couple .
FOREVER IN BLUE : THE FOURTH SUMMER OF THE SISTERHOOD Section::::Forever in Blue : The Fourth Summer of the Sisterhood .
Brian , Tibby 's now long - term boyfriend , visits her and announces that he 's been admitted to NYU , where she studies .
Afterwards , they get drunk and have sex for the very first time .
They discover that the condom broke , leading Tibby to suspect that she may be pregnant .
Although she later finds out that she is not , she breaks up with Brian .
Lena 's younger sister , Effie , then seeks her out and asks her permission to go out with Brian .
Tibby begins to doubt her decision to break up with Brian and becomes terribly upset .
Lena then goes to Tibby 's house to comfort her .
They talk about their relationships and both come to a revelation , that they only fall in love once .
Tibby meets Brian at the site of their first kiss , the picnic table , and apologizes for letting her fear ruin their relationship .
They enter a new stage in their romance .
This results in Effie taking the pants out of anger , and accidentally losing them in Greece .
SISTERHOOD EVERLASTING
Section::::Sisterhood Everlasting .
Ten years following the last sisterhood book , Tibby has moved to Australia with Brian and now has almost no contact with the three other girls .
Soon after moving to Australia , Tibby learns that she is not only pregnant
but she is also diagnosed with a terminal disease .
She keeps the pregnancy a secret from the sisterhood and her family , as revealing it will also reveal the disease .
Nearly two years after giving birth to her daughter , Bailey , she calls her " sisters " together for one last trip to Greece .
Disaster strikes when she suddenly dies in a swimming accident on the shores in Greece leaving her sisters , Lena , Bridget , and Carmen , devastated and assuming that she had taken her own life .
It is revealed through the novel that Tibby was suffering from Huntington 's disease and aware that she was going to die , even though her death by drowning was an accident .
When she invited the girls to Greece she was going to reveal this and give them letters to help them move on .
It is later revealed that she discovered she had the disease when she found she was pregnant with her daughter Bailey .
Her final gift to Lena , Carmen , and Bridget is willing them to move on because life is too short .
OTHER REFERENCES
Section::::Other references .
In Tibby is alive , attending NYU and dating Brian .
In , Polly babysits Tibby 's little brother and sister .
Polly sees a picture of Bailey which Tibby keeps in her bedroom .