500 DAYS OF SUMMER 500 Days of Summer ( stylized as ( 500 ) Days of Summer ) is a 2009 American romantic comedy - drama film by first time director Marc Webb from a screenplay written by Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber , and produced by Mark Waters .
The film stars Joseph Gordon - Levitt and Zooey Deschanel , and employs a nonlinear narrative structure , with the story based upon its male protagonist and his memories of a failed relationship .
As an independent production , the film was picked up for distribution by Fox Searchlight Pictures and premiered at the 25th Sundance Film Festival .
It garnered favorable reviews and became a successful " sleeper hit " , earning over $ 60 million in worldwide returns , far exceeding its $ 7.5 million budget .
Many critics lauded the film as one of the best from 2009 and drew comparisons to other acclaimed films such as Annie Hall ( 1977 ) and High Fidelity ( 2000 ) .
The film received Best Original Screenplay and Best Screenplay awards at the 14th Satellite Awards and 25th Independent Spirit Awards , respectively , as well as two nominations at the 67th Golden Globe Awards : Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy and Best Actor – Musical or Comedy ( Gordon - Levitt ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On January 8 , Tom Hansen meets Summer Finn , his boss 's new assistant .
Tom is trained as an architect but works as a writer at a greeting card company in Los Angeles .
After discovering they have a similar taste in music , they have a conversation about love at a karaoke night ; Tom believes in it , but Summer does not .
Tom 's friend and co - worker McKenzie drunkenly reveals that Tom likes Summer , which Tom asserts is only " as friends " , something Summer agrees with .
A few days later , Summer kisses Tom in the copy room at work .
During the next few months Summer and Tom grow closer .
Tom shows Summer his favorite spot in the city , which overlooks a number of buildings he likes , though the view is somewhat spoiled by parking lots .
After several months of dating , both Tom 's friends and his preteen half - sister Rachel push him to question Summer where they are in their relationship , though Summer brushes this off , saying that it should not matter if they are both happy .
One night , Tom gets into a fight with a man who tries to pick up Summer in a bar , which causes their first argument .
They make up and Summer concedes Tom deserves some certainty , but that his demand that she promises to always feel the same way about him would be impossible for anyone to make .
On day 290 , they are hanging out in a cafe .
Tom wants to go back to Summer 's place
but she insists on seeing The Graduate and weeps at the ending , which surprises Tom as he 'd always thought it was a romantic fairy tale .
They visit the record store , but Summer is distracted , appears to have lost interest in Tom , and kisses him good night .
Tom tempts her with an offer of pancakes at a diner , where Summer casually announces that the relationship has n't been working and breaks up with Tom while they are waiting for the food to arrive .
Summer wants them to remain friends , but Tom is devastated .
Summer quits her job at the greeting card company .
Tom 's boss moves him to the consolations department , as his depression is making him unsuitable for happier events .
Tom goes on a blind date with a woman named Alison .
The date does not go well as he spends it complaining about Summer until an exasperated Alison ends up taking Summer 's side .
Months later , Tom attends co - worker Millie 's wedding and tries to avoid Summer on the train , but she spots him and invites him for coffee .
They have a good time at the wedding , dance together , and Summer catches the bouquet .
She invites Tom to a party at her apartment and falls asleep on Tom 's shoulder on the train ride back .
He attends the party hoping to rekindle their relationship but barely gets to talk to Summer and spends most of the night drinking alone , until he spots her engagement ring .
Tom leaves , close to tears .
He enters a deep depression , only leaving his apartment for alcohol and junk food .
After a few days , he returns to work with a hangover and , after an emotional outburst , quits his job .
Rachel tells Tom that she does not believe Summer was " the one " and that his depression is being worsened by the fact that he is only looking back on the positive aspects of their relationship .
One day he suddenly finds the energy to get out of bed and rededicates himself to architecture , something Summer had pressured him to do .
He makes a list of firms he wants to work for , assembles a portfolio , and goes to job interviews .
On day 488 , Summer is waiting for Tom at his favorite spot in the city and they talk .
Summer says she got married because she felt sure about her husband , something she was n't with Tom .
She explains that Tom was right about true love existing ; he was just wrong about it being with her .
Summer puts her hand on Tom 's and says she is glad to see he is doing well .
As she leaves , Tom tells her he really hopes she is happy .
Twelve days later , on Wednesday , May 23 , Tom attends a job interview and meets a girl who is also applying for the same job .
He finds that she shares his favorite spot and dislike for the parking lots .
As he is entering the interview , he invites her for coffee afterwards .
She politely declines , then changes her mind .
Her name is Autumn .
CAST
* Joseph Gordon - Levitt as Tom Hansen , a trained architect who works as a writer at a greeting card company .
* Zooey Deschanel as Summer Finn , assistant to Tom 's boss and Tom 's love interest .
* Geoffrey Arend as McKenzie , Tom 's co - worker at the greeting card company .
*
Chloë Grace Moretz as Rachel Hansen , Tom 's younger half - sister .
* Matthew Gray Gubler as Paul , one of Tom 's friends .
* Clark Gregg as Vance , Tom 's boss .
* Patricia Belcher as Millie * Rachel Boston as Alison , Tom 's blind date .
* Minka Kelly as Autumn * Maile Flanagan as Rhoda * Yvette Nicole Brown as Vance 's New Secretary
*
Olivia Bagg as Young Summer
* Richard McGonagle as Narrator PRODUCTION WRITING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Writing .
The style of film is presented in a nonlinear narrative .
Each scene is introduced using a title card showing which of the 500 days it is .
Co - writer of the film Scott Neustadter admitted the film was based on a real romance .
Neustadter explains that when he met the real girl who inspired the character Summer as a student at the London School of Economics in 2002 , he was rebounding from a bad breakup back home , and promptly fell " crazily , madly , hopelessly in love " with the girl who " returned his kisses but not his ardor . "
The ending of the relationship was " painfully and unforgettably awful , " which prompted him to co - write the film with Michael H. Weber .
When Neustadter later showed the script to Summer 's real life counterpart , she said she related more to the Tom character .
Weber also stated that , " we 've all been in the trenches of love , we 've all gone through the highs and lows , so Scott and I felt that the only way to tell this story was to come at it from a completely real place .
It was pretty interesting for us because Scott was just going through a break - up
and I was in a long - term relationship , so we each brought a totally opposite perspective , living it and not living it , and I think that tension helped to bring out more of the comedy " .
DIRECTION Section::::Direction .
Director Marc Webb has described the film as more of a " coming of age " story as opposed to a " rom - com " .
He stated , " We arrive at a different conclusion , for one thing .
Plus , most romantic comedies are more loyal to a formula than to emotional truth .
It 's about happiness , and learning that you 'll find it within yourself , rather than in the big blue eyes of the girl in the cubicle down the hall .
I wanted to make an unsentimental movie and an uncynical movie .
In my mind , I wanted it to be something you could dance to .
That 's why we put a parenthesis in the title – it 's like a pop song in movie form .
It 's not a big film .
It 's not about war or poverty .
It 's about 500 days in a young guy 's relationship , but it 's no less deserving of scrutiny .
When your heart is first broken , it consumes you .
And it 's an emotion I wanted to make a movie about , before I forgot how it felt " .
Webb also stated that Deschanel 's character , Summer , is based on a stock character type ; " Yes , Summer is an immature view of a woman .
She 's Tom 's view of a woman .
He does n't see her complexity and the consequence for him is heartbreak .
In Tom 's eyes , Summer is perfection , but perfection has no depth .
Summer 's not a girl , she 's a phase .
"
Gordon - Levitt explained that he was drawn to the role of Tom because of his relatability to the character .
" I 've had my heart broken before .
Truly , truly broken .
But when I look back at me in my heartbroken phase , it 's pretty hilarious , because it felt so much more extreme than it really was .
One of the things I love about 500 Days of Summer is that it does n't make light of what we go through in romances , but it is honest about it and shows it for what it is , which is often profoundly funny " .
FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
David Ng of the Los Angeles Times describes architecture as a star of the film .
Tom is seen reading Alain de Botton 's The Architecture of Happiness .
The film was originally set in San Francisco but was later moved to Los Angeles and the script rewritten to make better use of the location .
Buildings used include the Los Angeles Music Center ( which includes the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion ) and the towers of California Plaza .
The older Fine Arts Building is featured in the film , in a scene where Tom shows it to Summer and mentions its designers , Walker and Eisen , two of his favorite architects , although he incorrectly gives the partners ' names as " Walker and Eisner . "
Christopher Hawthorne of the Los Angeles Times describes the film as having " finely honed sense of taste " to include the Bradbury Building where Tom goes for his job interview .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
To help promote the film , Gordon - Levitt and Deschanel starred in the debut episode of Microsoft Zune and Mean Magazines " Cinemash " series .
In the episode , they " mash " the characters from the film Sid and Nancy with story elements from 500 Days of Summer .
Marc Webb created a music video as a companion piece to the film , titled " The Bank Heist " .
It features Deschanel and Gordon - Levitt dancing to " Why Do You Let Me Stay Here ? " , a song by Deschanel 's folk group She & Him .
Webb remarked , " when we did n't include Zooey in the dance sequence [ in 500 Days ] , she was a little heartbroken
and I felt like I needed to remedy that . "
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film made its debut at the 25th Sundance Film Festival .
It proved a huge success and received a standing ovation from festival crowds upon screening .
In Europe , 500 Days of Summer premiered in Switzerland as the opening film of the 62nd Locarno Film Festival .
Filmed independently , it was picked up for distribution by Fox Searchlight Pictures and opened in the United States and Canada on July 17 , 2009 , later expanding to wide release on August 7 , 2009 .
It was later also released on September 2 , 2009 , in Ireland and the United Kingdom , and opened in Australia on September 17 , 2009 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Upon the film 's initial limited release in the U.S , it was expected to become the " breakout indie hit of the summer " .
Later , during its full opening weekend , the film grossed twenty - seven times its original budget cost , making it one of the most successful " sleeper hits " of the year .
By September 8 , the film had taken in $ 1.9 million from 318 screens in the United Kingdom .
This was regarded as a successful five - day opening by Fox Searchlight , earning around half as much as the science - fiction blockbuster District 9 , which took in $ 3.5 million .
As of February 25 , 2010 the film had grossed $ 32,391,374 in the United States and Canada and $ 60,722,734 worldwide .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
500 Days of Summer received positive reviews , with critics particularly praising the screenplay and Gordon - Levitt 's performance .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film is " Certified Fresh " with a rating of 85 % , based on 224 reviews with an average rating of 7.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " A clever , offbeat romantic comedy , 500 Days of Summer is refreshingly honest and utterly charming . "
Later , at the website 's year - end " Golden Tomato Awards " , which honored the best reviewed films of 2009 , the film placed second in the romantic category .
On Metacritic , the film received an average score of 76/100 based on 36 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film four stars out of four .
He described the film as " a delightful comedy , alive with invention " .
He particularly praised the strong performances of Gordon - Levitt and Deschanel and summarized his review by adding , " Here is a rare movie that begins by telling us how it will end and is about how the hero has no idea why " .
Premiere also awarded the film four stars out of four , stating " Much like the actual summer ( the season , not the character ) , we never wanted it to end " .
Michael Ordoña of the Los Angeles Times gave a positive review .
He wrote , " 500 Days of Summer is something seldom seen : an original romantic comedy .
It bristles with energy , emotion and intellect , as it flits about the dizzying highs and weeping - karaoke lows of a passionate entanglement " .
Dana Stevens of Slate also praised the film and described it as " a keeper .
It 's fun both to watch and to talk about afterward , and it possesses the elusive rom - com sine qua
non :
two equally appealing leads who bounce wonderfully off each other " .
Lou Lumenick of the New York Post awarded the film three stars out of four .
He praised the directing of Marc Webb , stating , " it 's the oldest bittersweet story in the book , of course , but music - video director Marc Webb approaches his feature debut with great confidence , flair and a minimum of schmaltz .
That 's the whole guy - centric point of 500 Days of Summer , though .
Sometimes you never , ever truly figure out why these mysterious creatures break your heart " .
Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman gave the film an " A " , and also praised the originality of the story ; " Most romantic comedies have half a dozen situations at best : Meet Cute , Infatuation , Pop Song Montage , Contrived Mix - Up , Angry Breakup , and Final Clinch .
500 Days of Summer is about the many unclassifiable moments in between .
It 's a feat of star acting , and it helps make 500 Days not just bitter or sweet but everything in between " .
Film Threat critic Scott Knopf gave the film a maximum five - star rating and called the script " fantastic " .
He also lauded the film 's innovative nature ; " Of course they meet .
Of course they fall for each other .
Of course there are problems .
It sounds cliché but what 's remarkable about 500 Days is how the film explores new ways to tell the world 's oldest story " .
He concluded that the film was " the best romantic comedy since Love Actually . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of four .
He wrote , " Boy meets girl , boy loses girl .
It 's been done to emo death .
That 's why the sublimely smart - sexy - joyful - sad 500 Days of Summer hits you like a blast of pure romantic oxygen " and concludes : " 500 Days is otherwise a different kind of love story : an honest one that takes a piece out of you " .
IGN critic Eric Goldman scored the film at 9.0/10 upon his review of the Blu - ray release .
He praised the film as " one of the best of 2009 " and particularly complimented the innovative nature of the story in an often clichéd genre ; " 500 Days of Summer proved there is a way to bring something fresh and new to one of the most cliché and often frustrating genres – the romantic comedy " .
The New York Times and Empire gave the film 4/5 .
Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club also gave the film favourable reviews with a B- grade .
NPR was more dismissive : " For all its rhetorical whimsy and hipster dressings , 500 Days of Summer is a thoroughly conservative affair , as culturally and romantically status quo as any Jennifer Aniston vehicle . "
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal was also more critical , calling it , " synthetic and derivative , a movie that 's popping with perceptions while searching for a style . "
British newspaper The Times gave a mixed review .
Despite Toby Young awarding the film three stars out of five , he critiqued , " It is hardly the freshest romantic comedy of past 20 years .
Taking the best bits from other movies and rearranging them in a non - linear sequence does not make for an original film . "
The Guardian film critic Peter Bradshaw said the film was " let down by sitcom cliches , and by being weirdly incurious about the inner life of its female lead . "
Mark Adams of the Daily Mirror , though , gave the film a glowing review , awarding it a full five stars , and writing , " It is a modern romance for grown - ups ... a sweet - natured , funny , deeply - romantic tale that brims with energy and is blessed with top - notch performances by Deschanel and Gordon - Levitt , who are both charming and have real chemistry " .
Chris Tookey of the Daily Mail was also impressed and described the film as " delightful and endearing " , awarding four stars out of five .
He wrote , " For the young , this is a worthwhile cautionary tale .
If you 're of more mature vintage , it will make you remember how it felt to be naive , energised by first love and mortified when that certain someone turned out not to love you nearly as much as you would have liked " .
Jordan Mattos of the World Socialist Web Site gave the film a negative review , stating that its omission of " the material realities and complexities that play a hand in determining the fate of contemporary relationships ... comes at too high a price " .
He praised Deschanel 's performance as " honest , and terrifying in its calculating precision " but condemned the film for not taking " a searching look " at the development of Summer 's personality .
Chelsey Aquino of Racket Magazine gave the film a positive review , granting the film a score of 8.5 out of 10 .
She wrote " 500 Days was a breath of fresh air ; they were n't afraid of showing the pear - shaped , more real and complex side of romance versus all the old clichés . "
Praise was also given , complimenting how 500 Days of Summer was " a rare kind of film that transcends its genre and the stereotypes that it 's often associated with . "
TOP
TEN LISTS Section::::Top Ten lists .
The film was also included in several " Top Ten " year end lists for 2009 by various film critics . !
Publication !
Rank ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades .
Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber received numerous awards for their screenplay ; including the 2009 Hollywood Film Festival 's Hollywood Breakthrough Screenwriter Award on October 26 , 2009 , the Satellite Award for Best Original Screenplay , the Southeastern Film Critics Association Award for Best Original Screenplay ( with the film also being named in the Top Ten Films of the Year ) , as well as the Las Vegas Film Critics Society Award for Best Screenplay .
Alan Edward Bell won the San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Editing , as well as the film being named one of the ten best movies of the year by the National Board of Review Awards 2009 .
The film also received two nominations at the 67th Golden Globe Awards announced on December 15 , 2009 , for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy and for Joseph Gordon - Levitt for Best Actor – Musical or Comedy .
It has been nominated for four Independent Spirit Awards and won the award for Best Screenplay SOUNDTRACK ALBUMS Section::::Soundtrack albums .
Two soundtrack albums were released for 500 Days of Summer .
The first , consisting of various pop songs from the film , was released through Sire Records and reached no . 42 on the Billboard 200 sales chart .
Andrew Leahey of Allmusic rated the album three and a half stars out of five , saying " With music playing such an integral role in the story line , it 's refreshing to see that the accompanying soundtrack does its job well , distilling the characters ' record collections ( not to mention the movie 's quirky , nostalgic ambiance ) into one eclectic track list .
" The second album consists of the film 's musical score , composed by Mychael Danna and Rob Simonsen . MUSIC FROM THE MOTION PICTURE
THE SCORE FROM THE MOTION
PICTURE
SEE
ALSO
* Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Archived of