ALCOHOL LAWS OF WEST VIRGINIA
Alcohol laws of West Virginia are more complex on paper than in actual practice , owing to a provision of the state constitution and " work - arounds " of its terms .
CONSTITUTION
Section::::Constitution .
The state constitution , Article VI , Section 46 , passed to repeal prohibition in 1934 , prohibits the consumption of " intoxicating liquors " in a " saloon or other public place " .
RETAIL SALE OF BEER AND WINE Section::::Retail sale of beer and wine .
Beer has been available in general , privately owned , retail stores since 1934 .
Wine was transferred from the state - owned ABC stores system to private sale in 1981 .
RETAIL SALE OF LIQUOR Section::::Retail sale of liquor .
Prior to 1990 , liquor was sold only in a state owned system of stores , known as ABC Stores .
In that year , the state withdrew from the retail liquor business and auctioned off permits to private businesses , who operate as " agents of the state " .
In smaller counties , a local monopoly was provided for , with only one agent per area , but in larger counties , multiple competing agencies were granted .
Agencies are rebid every 10 years .
In the 2010 rebid , the following agencies were granted : Rite - Aid drug store chain , 42 agencies CVS drug store chain , 9 agencies Seven - Eleven convenience store chain , 20 agencies Sam 's Club warehouse store chain , 2 agencies Kroger grocery store chain , 1 agency privately owned convenience stores , 31 agencies privately owned alcohol and tobacco shops , 14 agencies privately owned grocery stores , 7 agencies privately owned souvenir shop , 1 agency privately owned stand - alone liquor only stores , 40 agencies BY THE DRINK SALE OF BEER Section::::By
the drink sale of beer .
In 1937 , the state " worked around " the constitutional prohibition on public consumption by redefining standard beer as " non - intoxicating beer " and thus permitting the sale of this product in bars and restaurants .
All beer vendors to this day are legally selling " non - intoxicating beer " .
BY THE DRINK SALE OF WINE AND LIQUOR
Section::::By
the drink sale of wine and liquor .
Following World War II , there was a desire to provide for the sale of wine and liquor by the drink , particularly in the northern parts of the state .
In 1948 the state provided for the licensing of private clubs , such as veteran 's organizations , fraternal organizations , and golf and country clubs , on the theory that these were not " public places " .
Throughout the 1950s , however state voters regularly rejected constitutional amendments which provided for public consumption .
Votes were generally along regional lines , with northern areas and larger cities supporting repeal , and southern and rural areas supporting the continued ban .
In 1961 , the state legislature found a " work - around " that short - circuited another vote .
The new law provided for a new type of " private club " .
In actual practice , these " private clubs " are simply public places .
Patrons become " members " for one dollar with the purchase of their first drink , which comes with a one dollar " discount " , with the law requiring that the club may not refuse " membership " to any person over age 21 .
In previous years , patrons were actually issued membership cards , but this practice has fallen into disuse and 99 % of patrons are unaware that they are members of any such " club " .
Technically , public bars and saloons remain illegal in the state to this day .
The 1961 law was a part of a political deal whereby southern legislators agreed to these changes , and northern legislators withdrew their blocking of the renaming of Marshall College , which had been accredited as a " university " since 1937 and which is located in southern West Virginia , to Marshall University .
This system remains in effect to this day .
Such " clubs " are required to post a registry number which begins with the letter " ABCC " followed by a serial number , over their doors .
The Greenbrier Resort in White Sulphur Springs , simply adds a $ 10 " alcohol membership fee " to the bill of all first time patrons .
RAISING THE ABV% CAP
Section::::Raising the ABV% Cap .
Prior to July 2009 , non - intoxicating beer was defined as all malt based beverages that contained at least 0.5 % ABV and not more than 6 % ABV .
Therefore , all beer sold in WV could not contain more than 6 % ABV .
This effectively eliminated nearly 2/3 of all beer being produced throughout the world from being purchased in WV .
Beginning in 2005 there were many attempts to raise that limit so that the WV market would be opened to the many world class beers that were , at the time , illegal to purchase in WV .
The WV Beer Wholesalers Association were initially opposed to the change in the law stating that it would cause higher rates of underage drinking and DUI 's .
The facts however showed that this was not the case and in 2009 , the WV Beer Wholesalers Association changed their stance on the subject and , along with the beer consumer advocacy group West Virginia Craft Beer Society , proceeded to lobby the Legislature to pass HB 2719 , aka " The Craft Beer Bill " and change the definition of " non - intoxicating beer " to all malt based beverages between 0.5 % and 12 % ABV .
The WV Legislature passed the bill in April 2009 and Governor Joe Manchin signed the bill into law in July 2009 .
DAYS AND HOURS Section::::Days and hours .
Retail sale of beer and wine is prohibited on Sundays between 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. and between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays .
Retail sale of liquor is prohibited on Sundays , Christmas Day , and between 12:00 midnight and 8:00
a.m on all other days .
On weekdays and Saturdays , drink establishments of all types must close by 3:30 a.m. and remain closed until 8:00 a.m.
On Sundays , they must be closed between 3:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
In 2016 , the state permitted a local option election whereby counties may change the Sunday 1:00 p.m. time to 10:00 a.m. Several counties immediately scheduled such elections for November 2016 .
DRINKING AGE AND DRY COUNTIES
Section::::Drinking age and dry counties .
The drinking age was 18 for beer / wine and 21 for liquor until 1972 , when it was lowered to 18 for all beverages ( along with the age of majority ) .
It was then raised to 19 in 1983 ( 21 for non - residents ) and 21 for all in 1986 .
Persons under 18 are also not allowed to sell alcohol .
Calhoun County is " dry . "
CROSS - BORDER ISSUES Section::::Cross - border issues .
Because its laws are less restrictive than its neighbor states , West Virginia benefits from sales to border residents , especially from the southern part of its border with Kentucky which has several " dry " counties .
Huntington also benefits from neighboring Lawrence County , Ohio having several dry townships .
REFERENCES