MILES HEIZER Miles Dominic Heizer ( born May 16 , 1994 ) is an American actor and musician .
He stars in the Netflix original series 13 Reasons
Why as Alex Standall .
His most notable film role was in the 2007 movie Rails & Ties , in which he played character Davey Danner .
From 2010 until 2015 , he starred in the NBC drama series Parenthood as Drew Holt , the son of Lauren Graham 's character Sarah Braverman .
Miles appears in the 2016 film Nerve as Tommy , alongside actors Emma Roberts and Dave Franco .
He also played the recurring role of Joshua Lipnicki on four episodes of the NBC medical drama series ER , and co - starred in the 2018 dramedy film Love , Simon as Cal .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Heizer was born on May 16 , 1994 in Greenville , Kentucky .
His mother is a nurse , and he has one older sister named Moriah .
Miles ' family moved to Los Angeles when he was ten years old .
CAREER Section::::Career .
He made his acting debut in an episode of titled " Nothing to Lose " , playing the role of Joey Everton .
He then starred in the short film Paramedic as Young James .
Heizer has since guest - starred in episodes of Ghost Whisperer , Shark , Bones , and Private Practice .
In 2007 , Heizer played the role of Davey Danner at 12 years old in the film Rails & Ties , for which he was nominated for the Young Artist Award for Best Leading Young Actor in a Feature Film .
That same year , he had a recurring role as Joshua Lipnicki on the NBC medical drama television series ER .
In 2010 , he was cast as Drew Holt , the son of Lauren Graham 's character , on the NBC drama series Parenthood .
Heizer portrayed his character Drew Holt alongside his real life best friend Mae Whitman who starred as his character 's sister , Amber Holt , until the series ' ending in 2015 .
In 2013 , Heizer co - starred as Josh in the film Rudderless .
In 2015 , he had a supporting role as Marshall Lovett in the drama - thriller film The Stanford Prison Experiment , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 26 .
In 2016 , Heizer starred as Tommy Mancuso in the film Nerve , and in 2017 , he began playing Alex Standall in the Netflix original series 13 Reasons Why .
He played Cal Price , one of Simon 's classmates , in the 2018 movie Love , Simon .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Miles and his best friend and former Parenthood co - star Mae Whitman are roommates .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominated work !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS