ACCESS TO HIGHER EDUCATION
The Access to
Higher Education ( HE ) Diploma is a U.K. qualification which prepares students — usually mature students — for study as an undergraduate at university .
The diploma is designed for people who would like to study in higher education but who left school without qualifications such as A - Levels .
Once completed , the access diploma is held in the same standing as A - Levels , allowing holders to study for BA degrees , BSc degrees , HNCs , HNDs , LLBs and other undergraduate degrees .
Each year , around 20,000 Access to HE students apply to universities across the UK .
There are over 1,000 different courses leading to the Access to HE Diploma and courses
are available in most further education colleges in England and Wales .
Access courses are generally tailored as pathways ; that is , they prepare students with the necessary skills and imbue the appropriate knowledge required for a specific undergraduate career .
For example , there are ' access to law ' , ' access to medicine ' and ' access to nursing ' pathways that prepare students to study law , medicine and nursing at undergraduate level , respectively .
The first access courses were established in the 1970s .
Many of these courses were set up to encourage entry to teacher training by people with a wider range of backgrounds than the traditional types of students who were attracted to teaching .
Over the years , the success of these early courses led to the development of courses in other areas .
In the 1987 white paper Higher Education : Meeting the Challenge , the government identified Access to HE as ' the third recognised route to higher education ' , and sought to extend Access to HE provision through a national framework for the recognition of Access to HE courses .
A national framework has been in existence since 1989 .
The Quality Assurance Agency ( QAA ) , the Access to HE regulatory body , has been responsible for this framework in England , Wales and Northern Ireland since it was established in 1997 .
SEE ALSO
* Foundation degree
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS