LAKE HILLIER Lake Hillier is a saline lake on the edge of Middle Island , the largest of the islands and islets that make up the Recherche Archipelago in the Goldfields - Esperance region , off the south coast of Western Australia .
It is particularly notable for its pink colour .
A long and thin shore divides the Southern Ocean from the lake .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Lake Hillier is about in length by about in width .
The lake is surrounded by a rim of sand and a dense woodland of paperbark and eucalyptus trees with a narrow strip of sand dunes covered by vegetation separating its northern edge from the northern coast of Middle Island .
The most notable feature of the lake is its pink , vibrant colour .
The vibrant colour is permanent , and does not alter when the water is taken in a container .
The pink colour is considered to be due to the presence of the organism Dunaliella salina .
The Extreme Microbiome Project , part of the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities ( ABRF ) , Metagenomics Research Group ( MGRG ) , has performed a metagenomic analysis on the lake to find Dunaliella as well as Salinibacter ruber , Dechloromonas aromatica , and a few species of the Archaea .
Air is the best mode of transportation for viewing the lake .
At one point in its history the lake was used to collect salt .
HISTORY EUROPEAN DISCOVERY AND USE Section::::History .
Section::::European discovery and use .
Lake Hillier was visited by the Matthew Flinders ' expedition on 15 January 1802 .
Flinders ' journal entries are considered to be the first written records of the lake .
Flinders observed the pink lake after ascending the island 's highest peak ( now called Flinders Peak ) , describing the lake as follows : In the north - eastern part was a small lake of a rose colour , the water of which , as I was informed by Mr. Thistle who visited it , was so saturated with salt that sufficient quantities were crystallised near the shores to load a ship .
The specimen he brought on board was of a good quality , and required no other process than drying to be fit for use .
Flinders visited Middle Island again in May 1803 ; he intended " to stop a day or two in Goose - Island Bay , for the purposes of procuring geese for our sick people , seal oil for our lamps , and a few casks of salt from the lake on Middle Island " .
It is reported that Flinders subsequently named the lake after William Hillier , a crew member of Investigator who died of dysentery on 20 May 1803 prior to the expedition 's departure from Middle Island .
In 1889 , Edward Andrews investigated the commercial possibilities of producing salt from Lake Hillier , and briefly moved onto the island with both of his sons .
They left after working the salt deposits for about one year .
The lake was subject to salt mining during the late 19th century .
The salt mining enterprise is reported as failing for a number of reasons including " the toxicity of the salt collected for consumption " .
FORMS OF LIFE Section::::Forms of life .
The only living organisms in Lake Hillier are microorganisms including Dunaliella salina , which causes the salt content in the lake to create a red dye which helps produce the colour , as well as red halophilic bacteria present in the salt crusts .
Despite the unusual hue , the lake exhibits no known adverse effects upon humans .
From above , the lake appears a solid bubble gum pink , but from the shoreline it appears more of a clear pink hue .
The shoreline is also covered in salt crust deposits .
SAFETY AND ACCESSIBILITY Section::::Safety and accessibility .
Despite the high salt content levels ( comparable to those of the Dead Sea ) , Lake Hillier is safe to swim in .
However , there are very few ways to reach Lake Hillier .
Aeroplane scenic flights are the most common method , with 6 flights a day departing Esperance Airport , flying over Lake Hillier via the nearby Cape Le Grand National Park .
Cruises are also an option for passengers wanting to visit the isolated lake , and surrounding forest area .
PROTECTED AREA STATUS Section::::Protected area status .
As recently as 2012 , Lake Hillier has been located within the boundaries of the Recherche Archipelago Nature Reserve .
Since 2002 , the lake itself has been considered to be a wetland of " subregional significance " .
SEE ALSO
* List of lakes of Western Australia * Lake Retba
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Lake Hillier website