GUERRILLA WARFARE IN THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR Guerrilla warfare in the American Civil War followed the same general patterns of irregular warfare conducted in 19th century Europe .
Structurally , they can be divided into three different types of operations — the so - called ' People 's War ' , ' partisan warfare ' , and ' raiding warfare ' .
Each has distinct characteristics that were common practice during the Civil War years ( 1861–1865 ) .
TYPES OF GUERRILLA WARFARE
Section::::Types of guerrilla warfare .
The concept of a ' People 's war , ' first described by von Clausewitz in his classic treatise On War , was the closest example of a mass guerrilla movement in the era .
In general during the Civil War , this type of irregular warfare was conducted in the hinterland of the Border States ( Missouri , Arkansas , Tennessee , Kentucky , and northwestern Virginia / West Virginia ) .
It was marked by a vicious neighbor - against - neighbor quality as other grudges got settled .
It was frequent for residents of one part of a single county to take up arms against their counterparts in the rest of the vicinity .
Bushwhacking , murder , assault , and terrorism were characteristics of this kind of fighting .
Few participants wore uniforms or were formally mustered into the actual armies .
In many cases , it was civilian against civilian , or civilian against opposing enemy troops .
One such example was the opposing irregular forces operating in Missouri and northern Arkansas from 1862 to 1865 , most of which were pro - Confederate or pro - Union in name only .
They preyed on civilians and isolated military forces of both sides with little regard for politics .
From these semi - organized guerrillas , several groups formed and were given some measure of legitimacy by their governments .
Quantrill 's Raiders , who terrorized pro - Union civilians and fought Federal troops in large areas of Missouri and Kansas , was one such unit .
Another notorious unit , with debatable ties to the Confederate military , was led by Champ Ferguson along the Kentucky - Tennessee border .
Ferguson became one of the few figures of the Confederate cause to be executed after the war .
Dozens of other small , localized bands terrorized the countryside throughout the border region during the war , bringing total war to the area that lasted until the end of the Civil War and , in some areas , beyond .
Partisan warfare , in contrast , more closely resembled commando operations of the 20th century .
Partisans were small units of conventional forces , controlled and organized by a military force for operations behind enemy lines .
The 1862 Partisan Ranger Act passed by the Confederate Congress authorized the formation of these units and gave them legitimacy , which placed them in a different category than the common ' bushwhacker ' or ' guerrilla ' .
John Singleton Mosby formed a partisan unit that was very effective in tying down Federal forces behind Union lines in northern Virginia in the last two years of the war .
Groups such as Blazer 's Scouts , White 's Comanches , the Loudoun Rangers , McNeill 's Rangers , and other similar forces at times served in the formal armies , but often were loosely organized and operated more as partisans than as cavalry , especially early in the war .
Lastly , deep raids by conventional cavalry forces were often considered ' irregular ' in nature .
The " Partisan Brigades " of Nathan Bedford Forrest and John Hunt Morgan operated as part of the cavalry forces of the Confederate Army of Tennessee in 1862 and 1863 .
They were given specific missions to destroy logistical hubs , railroad bridges , and other strategic targets to support the greater mission of the Army of Tennessee .
Morgan led raids into Kentucky as well .
In his last raid , he violated orders by going across the Ohio River and raiding in Ohio and Indiana as well , as he wanted to bring the war to the northern states .
This long raid diverted thousands of Union troops .
He captured and paroled nearly 6,000 troops , destroyed bridges and fortifications , and ran off livestock .
By mid-1863 , Morgan 's Raiders had been mostly destroyed in the late days of the Great Raid of 1863 .
Some of his followers continued under their own direction , such as M. Jerome Clarke , who kept on with raids in Kentucky .
The Confederacy conducted few deep cavalry raids in the latter years of the war , mostly because of the losses in experienced horsemen and the offensive operations of the Union army .
Federal cavalry conducted several successful raids during the war but in general used their cavalry forces in a more conventional role .
A good exception was the 1863 Grierson 's Raid , which did much to set the stage for General Ulysses S. Grant 's victory during the Vicksburg Campaign .
UNION COUNTERMEASURES AGAINST
THE CONFEDERATE GUERRILLAS Section::::Union countermeasures against the Confederate guerrillas .
Federal counter - guerrilla operations were successful in reducing the impact of Confederate guerrilla warfare .
In Arkansas , Federal forces used a wide variety of strategies to defeat irregulars .
These included the use of Arkansas Unionist forces as anti - guerrilla troops , the use of riverine forces such as gunboats to control the waterways , and the provost marshal 's military law enforcement system to spy on suspected guerrillas and to imprison those captured .
Against Confederate raiders , the Federal army developed an effective cavalry themselves and reinforced that system by numerous blockhouses and fortification to defend strategic targets .
However , Federal attempts to defeat Mosby 's Partisan Rangers fell short of success because of Mosby 's use of very small units ( 10–15 men ) operating in areas considered friendly to the Rebel cause .
Another regiment known as the " Thomas Legion " , consisting of white and anti - Union Cherokee Indians , morphed into a guerrilla force and continued fighting in the remote mountain back - country of western North Carolina for a month after Robert E. Lee 's surrender at Appomattox Court House .
That unit was never completely suppressed by Union forces , but voluntarily ceased hostilities after capturing the town of Waynesville , North Carolina , on May 10 , 1865 .
PROLONGING THE WAR THROUGH GUERRILLA ACTION
Section::::Prolonging the war through guerrilla action .
In the late 20th century , several historians focused on the Confederate government 's decision to not use guerrilla warfare to prolong the war .
Near the end of the war , there were those in the administration who advocated continuing the southern fight as a guerrilla conflict .
These efforts were opposed by Confederate generals such as Lee who ultimately believed that surrender and reconciliation were the best options for the war - ravaged South .
NOTABLE CIVIL WAR GUERRILLAS , PARTISANS , JAYHAWKERS , AND RANGERS Section::::Notable Civil War guerrillas , partisans , jayhawkers , and rangers .
Other notable bushwhackers , jahawkers , and guerrillas of the Civil War included Frank James , Jesse James , " Tinker Dave " Beaty , Archie Clement , Silas M. Gordon , Champ Ferguson , Charles R. Jennison , James Montgomery , Joseph C. Porter , and George M. Todd .
SEE ALSO
* Bushwhackers - ( Confederate ) * Jayhawkers - ( Union ) * Partisan rangers - ( Confederate ) REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Beckett , Ian Frederick William .
Encyclopedia of guerrilla warfare ( ABC - Clio , 1999 )
* Beilein Jr. , Joseph M. , and Matthew C. Hulbert , eds .
The Civil War Guerrilla : Unfolding the Black Flag in History , Memory , and Myth ( Lexington : University Press of Kentucky , 2015 ) 243 pp * Browning , Judkin .
Shifting Loyalties :
The Union Occupation of Eastern North Carolina ( Univ of North Carolina Press , 2011 )
* Fellman , Michael .
Inside War : The Guerrilla Conflict in Missouri During the American Civil War ( Oxford University Press , 1989 )
* Gallagher , Gary W. " Disaffection , Persistence , and Nation : Some Directions in Recent Scholarship on the Confederacy . "
Civil War History 55#3 ( 2009 )
pp : 329 - 353 .
* Grant , Meredith Anne . "
Internal Dissent :
East Tennessee 's Civil War , 1849 - 1865 . "
( thesis 2008 ) .
online
* Mackey , Robert R.
The Uncivil War : Irregular Warfare in the Upper South , 1861 - 1865 ( University of Oklahoma Press , 2014 reprint )
* Mountcastle , Clay .
Punitive War :
Confederate Guerrillas and Union Reprisals ( University Press of Kansas , 2009 )
* Nichols , Bruce , Guerrilla Warfare in Civil War Missouri , McFarland & Co. Inc. , 2006 . .
* Sutherland , Daniel E. A Savage Conflict : The Decisive Role of Guerrillas in the American Civil War ( Univ of North Carolina Press , 2009 )
* Williams , David .
Bitterly Divided : The South 's Inner Civil War ( The New Press , 2010 ) PRIMARY SOURCES
* U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies , 70 volumes in 4 series .
Washington , D.C. : United States Government Printing Office , 1880 - 1901 .
* Lowell Hayes Harrison , James c. Klotter , A New History of Kentucky , Lexington , KY : University Press of Kentucky , 1997
EXTERNAL LINKS * " Guerilla Warfare in Kentucky " — Article by Civil War historian
/ author Bryan S. Bush