FOUNDATION PIECING
In patchwork , foundation piecing was originally a method used to stabilize pieces of fabric that were stitched together .
It first became popular in the 18th and 19th centuries in England , although a 15th - century Italian piece , the Impruneta cushion owned by Antonio degli Agli , may have used foundation piecing .
A similar process popular in Britain is English paper piecing .
Originally pieces of scrap fabric or muslin were used as the foundation .
Recently , the use of paper , whether tracing paper , freezer paper or some other heavyweight paper , has become very popular for use as a pattern , in creating quilt blocks that are all the same size , each with precise , sharp points and perfectly matched intersections .
In addition , information such as color and fabric choices can be written on the paper foundation in order to facilitate the construction of the piece and reducing room for error while sewing .
With paper piecing , a shorter stitch length ( e.g. 12 stitches per inch ) is used when sewing the components together .
This perforates the foundation , making it easier to tear away after the block is completed .
Several methods can be used to prepare the design for use on the foundation : tracing , photocopying , computer printing , needle punching , and pre - set designs .
There are three primary techniques used when foundation piecing : top pressed , under pressed and single template piecing .
The technique used is dependent upon your preference and the pattern of the design being sewn .
However , under pressed piecing allows for greater accuracy because the sewing is done right on the foundation with the fabric underneath , which allows the stitcher to view the marked seam line and sew directly on it .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Hall , Jane , The Experts Guide to Foundation Piecing , C & T Publishing , Layfayette , CA , 2006 .
Anderson , Alex , " Paper Piecing With Alex Anderson : 7 Quilt Projects , Tips , Techniques " , C & T Publishing , Layfayette , CA , 2011 .