DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT
A drinking establishment is a business whose primary function is the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises .
Some establishments may also serve food , or have entertainment , but their main purpose is to serve alcoholic beverages .
There are different types of drinking establishment ranging from seedy bars or nightclubs , sometimes termed " dive bars " , to 5,000 seat beer halls and elegant places of entertainment for the elite .
A public house , informally known as a " pub " , is an establishment licensed to serve alcoholic drinks for consumption on the premises in countries and regions of British influence .
Although the terms are increasingly used to refer to the same thing , there is a difference between pubs , bars , inns , taverns and lounges where alcohol is served commercially .
A tavern or pot - house is , loosely , a place of business where people gather to drink alcoholic beverages and , more than likely , also be served food , though not licensed to put up guests .
The word derives from the Latin taberna and the Greek ταβέρνα / taverna .
A brewpub is a pub or restaurant that brews beer on the premises .
A beer hall ( ) is a large pub that specializes in beer .
An Izakaya is a type of Japanese drinking establishment which also serves food to accompany the drinks .
A speakeasy is an establishment that illegally sells alcoholic beverages .
BAR Section::::Bar .
Types of bars range from seedy bars or nightclubs , sometimes termed " dive bars " , to elegant places of entertainment for the elite .
Many bars have a happy hour to encourage off - peak patronage .
Bars that fill to capacity sometimes implement a cover charge during their peak hours .
Such bars often feature entertainment , which may be a live band or a popular disc jockey .
Bars provide stools or chairs that are placed at tables or counters for their patrons .
Some bars have entertainment on a stage , such as a live band , comedians , go - go dancers , or strippers .
The term " bar " is derived from the specialized counter on which drinks are served .
The " back bar " is a set of shelves of glasses and bottles behind that counter .
In some establishments , the back bar is elaborately decorated with woodwork , etched glass , mirrors , and lights .
PUB Section::::Pub .
A public house , informally known as a " pub " , is an establishment licensed to serve alcoholic drinks for consumption on the premises in countries and regions of British influence .
Although the terms are increasingly used to refer to the same thing , there is a definite difference between pubs , bars , inns , taverns and lounges where alcohol is served commercially .
A pub that offers lodging may be called an inn or ( more recently ) hotel in the United Kingdom .
Today , many pubs in the UK , Canada and Australia with the word " inn " or " hotel " in their names no longer offer accommodation , and in some cases have never done so .
Some pubs bear the name of " hotel " because they are in countries where stringent anti - drinking laws were once in force .
In Scotland until 1976 , only hotels could serve alcohol on Sundays .
In Wales , an 1881 Act applied the same law until 1961 when local polls could lift such a ban in a district and in 1996 the last ban was lifted in Dwyfor .
The need for such polls was removed by the Welsh Assembly in 2003 .
There are approximately 53,500 public houses in the United Kingdom .
In many places , especially in villages , a pub can be the focal point of the community , so there is concern that more pubs are closing down than new ones opening .
The history of pubs can be traced back to Roman taverns , through the Anglo - Saxon alehouse , to the development of the modern generally prevailing tied house system .
TAVERN Section::::Tavern .
A tavern or pot - house is , loosely , a place of business where people gather to drink alcoholic beverages and , more than likely , also be served food , though not licensed to put up guests .
The word derives from the Latin taberna and the Greek ταβέρνα / taverna , whose original meaning was a shed or workshop .
The distinction of a tavern from an inn , bar or pub varies by location , in some places being identical and in others being distinguished by traditions or by legal license .
In Renaissance England , a tavern was distinguished from a public ale house by dint of being run as a private enterprise , where drinkers were " guests " rather than members of the public .
BREWPUB
Section::::Brewpub .
A brewpub is a pub or restaurant that brews beer on the premises .
Some brewpubs , such as those in Germany , have been brewing traditionally on the premises for hundreds of years .
Others , such as the Les 3 Brasseurs chain in France and Canada , and the various chains in North America , are modern restaurants .
BEER HALL Section::::Beer hall .
A beer hall ( ) is a large pub that specializes in beer .
Bavaria 's capital Munich is the city most associated with beer halls ; almost every brewery in Munich operates a beer hall .
The largest beer hall was the 5,000-seat Mathäser near the München Hauptbahnhof ( Munich central train station ) which has since been converted into a film theatre .
IZAKAYA Section::::Izakaya .
An is a type of Japanese drinking establishment which also serves food to accompany the drinks .
The food is usually more substantial than that offered in other types of drinking establishments in Japan such as bars or snack bars .
BEER GARDEN Section::::Beer garden .
A beer garden ' ( a loan translation from the German Biergarten ) is an outdoor area in which beer , other drinks , and local food are served ( see German cuisine ) .
Beer gardens originated in Southern Germany ( especially Bavaria ) and are most common there .
They are usually attached to a beer hall , pub , or restaurant .
The term " beer garden " ( Biergarten ) has become a generic term for open - air establishments where beer is served .
Many countries have such establishments .
The characteristics of a traditional beer garden include trees , wooden benches , a gravel bed , and freshly prepared meals .
Some modern beer gardens use plastic chairs , fast food , and other variations of the traditional beer garden .
The largest traditional beer garden in the world is the Hirschgarten in Munich , which seats 8,000 .
SPEAKEASY Section::::Speakeasy .
A speakeasy , also called a blind pig or blind tiger , is an establishment that illegally sells alcoholic beverages .
Such establishments came into prominence in the United States during the Prohibition era ( 1920–1933 , longer in some states ) .
During that time , the sale , manufacture , and transportation ( bootlegging ) of alcoholic beverages was illegal throughout the United States .
Speakeasies largely disappeared after Prohibition was ended in 1933 , and the term is now used to describe some retro style bars .
Different names for speakeasies were created .
The terms " blind pig " and " blind tiger " originated in the United States in the 19th century .
These terms were applied to lower - class establishments that sold alcoholic beverages illegally , and they are still in use today .
The operator of an establishment ( such as a saloon or bar ) would charge customers to see an attraction ( such as an animal ) and then serve a " complimentary " alcoholic beverage , thus circumventing the law .
" Blind tiger " also referred to illegal drinking establishment in which the seller 's identity was concealed .
A drawer would open up in a wall , the patron drops in change , and then a drink is placed in the drawer .
Speakeasies were numerous and popular during the Prohibition years .
Some of them were operated by people who were part of organized crime .
Even though police and agents of the Bureau of Prohibition would often raid them and arrest their owners and patrons , they were so profitable that they continued to flourish .
The poor quality bootleg liquor sold in speakeasies was responsible for a shift away from 19th century ' classic ' cocktails , that celebrated the raw taste of the liquor ( such as the Gin Cocktail , made with Genever ( sweet ) gin ) , to new cocktails aimed at masking the taste of rough moonshine .
SEE ALSO
* Boteco * Botequim * Cider house
*
Coffeehouse * Juice bar
* List of bars
* Tea house * Types of drinking establishments REFERENCES