LIST OF SPECIALIZED AGENCIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS Specialized agencies are autonomous organizations working with the United Nations and each other through the co - ordinating machinery of the United Nations Economic and Social Council at the intergovernmental level , and through the Chief Executives Board for co - ordination ( CEB ) at the inter - secretariat level .
Specialized agencies may or may not have been originally created by the United Nations , but they are incorporated into the United Nations System by the United Nations Economic and Social Council acting under Articles 57 and 63 of the United Nations Charter .
At present the UN has in total 15 specialized agencies that carry out various functions on behalf of the UN .
The specialized agencies are listed below .
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION ( FAO ) Section::::Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) .
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations leads international efforts to defeat hunger .
Serving both developed and developing countries , FAO acts as a neutral forum where all nations meet as equals to negotiate agreements and debate policy .
FAO 's mandate is to raise levels of nutrition , improve agricultural productivity , better the lives of rural populations and contribute to the growth of the world economy .
FAO is the largest of the UN agencies .
It was established in 1945 and its headquarters is in Rome , Italy .
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION ( ICAO ) Section::::International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) .
The International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) was founded in 1947 .
It codifies the principles and techniques of international air navigation and fosters the planning and development of international air transport to ensure safe and orderly growth .
Its headquarters are located in the Quartier international de Montréal of Montreal , Quebec , Canada .
The ICAO Council adopts standards and recommended practices concerning air navigation , prevention of unlawful interference , and facilitation of border - crossing procedures for international civil aviation .
In addition , ICAO defines the protocols for air accident investigation followed by transport safety authorities in countries signatory to the Convention on International Civil Aviation , commonly known as the Chicago Convention .
INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT ( IFAD ) Section::::International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD ) .
The International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD ) was established as an international financial institution in 1977 , as one of the major outcomes of the 1974 World Food Conference and a response to the situation in the Sahel .
It is dedicated to eradicating rural poverty in developing countries .
Its headquarters are in Rome , Italy .
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION ( ILO )
Section::::International Labour Organization ( ILO ) .
The International Labour Organization ( ILO ) deals with labour issues .
Its headquarters are in Geneva , Switzerland .
Founded in 1919 , it was formed through the negotiations of the Treaty of Versailles and was initially an agency of the League of Nations .
It became a member of the UN system after the demise of the League and the formation of the UN at the end of World War II .
Its Constitution , as amended to date , includes the Declaration of Philadelphia on the aims and purposes of the Organization .
Its secretariat is known as the International Labour Office .
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION ( IMO )
Section::::International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) .
The International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) , formerly known as the Inter - Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization ( IMCO ) , was established in 1948 through the United Nations to coordinate international maritime safety and related practices .
However the IMO did not enter into full force until 1958 .
Headquartered in London , United Kingdom , the IMO promotes cooperation among government and the shipping industry to improve maritime safety and to prevent marine pollution .
IMO is governed by an Assembly of members and is financially administered by a Council of members elected from the Assembly .
The work of IMO is conducted through five committees and these are supported by technical sub - committees .
Member organizations of the UN organizational family may observe the proceedings of the IMO .
Observer status may be granted to qualified non - governmental organizations .
The IMO is supported by a permanent secretariat of employees who are representative of its members .
The secretariat is composed of a Secretary - General who is periodically elected by the Assembly , and various divisions including , inter alia , marine safety , environmental protection , and a conference section .
And also promotes international cooperation in education , science and culture INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ( IMF ) Section::::International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) is part of the United Nations system and has a formal relationship agreement with the UN , but retains its independence .
The IMF provides monetary cooperation and financial stability and acts as a forum for advice , negotiation and assistance on financial issues .
It is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States of America .
INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION UNION ( ITU ) Section::::International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) .
The International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) was established to standardize and regulate international radio and telecommunications .
It was founded as the International Telegraph Union in Paris on 17 May 1865 .
Its main tasks include standardization , allocation of the radio spectrum , and organizing interconnection arrangements between different countries to allow international phone calls — in which regard it performs for telecommunications a similar function to what the UPU performs for postal services .
It has its headquarters in Geneva , Switzerland , next to the main United Nations campus .
UNITED NATIONS EDUCATIONAL , SCIENTIFIC AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATION ( UNESCO ) Section::::United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) .
The United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) is a specialized agency of the United Nations established in 1946 with its headquarters in Paris , France .
Its stated purpose is to contribute to peace and security by promoting international collaboration through education , science , and culture in order to further universal respect for justice , the rule of law , and the human rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the UN Charter .
UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION ( UNIDO ) Section::::United Nations Industrial Development Organization ( UNIDO ) .
United Nations Industrial Development Organization ( UNIDO ) is the specialized agency of the United Nations , which promotes inclusive and sustainable industrial development(ISID ) , headquartered in Vienna , Austria .
The Organization addresses some of the most pressing issues of our time , and works to accelerate economic growth in order to bring prosperity to all while at the same time safeguarding the environment .
UNIDO 's mandate is fully aligned with the global development agenda , which underlines the central role of industrialization and its importance as a key enabler for all 17 Global Goals , and especially for SDG9 .
The Director General is Li Yong .
UNIVERSAL POSTAL UNION ( UPU ) Section::::Universal Postal Union ( UPU ) .
The Universal Postal Union ( UPU ) , headquartered in Berne , Switzerland , coordinates postal policies between member nations , and hence the worldwide postal system .
Each member country agrees to the same set of terms for conducting international postal duties .
WORLD BANK GROUP ( WBG ) Section::::World Bank Group ( WBG ) .
The World Bank Group is part of the United Nations system and has a formal relationship agreement with the UN , but retains its independence .
The WBG comprises a group of five legally separate but affiliated institutions : the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) , the International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) , the International Development Association ( IDA ) , the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency ( MIGA ) , and the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ( ICSID ) .
It is a vital source of financial and technical assistance to developing countries around the world .
Its mission is to fight poverty with passion and professionalism for lasting results and to help people help themselves and their environment by providing resources , sharing knowledge , building capacity and forging partnerships in the public and private sectors .
The WBG headquarters are located in Washington , D.C. , United States of America .
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
( IBRD ) Section::::International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) .
The IBRD makes loans to developing countries for development programmes with the stated goal of reducing poverty .
It is part of the World Bank Group ( WBG ) .
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
( IFC ) Section::::International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) .
The IFC is the largest multilateral source of loan and equity financing for private sector projects in the developing world .
It is part of the World Bank Group ( WBG ) .
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION ( IDA ) Section::::International Development Association ( IDA ) .
The IDA 's mandate is close to that of IBRD , with the focus on the poorest countries .
It is part of the World Bank Group ( WBG ) .
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION ( WHO ) Section::::World Health Organization ( WHO ) .
The World Health Organization ( WHO ) acts as a coordinating authority on international public health which deals with health and sanitation and diseases and sends medical teams to help combat epidemics .
Established on 7 April 1948 , the agency inherited the mandate and resources of its predecessor , the Health Organization , which had been an agency of the League of Nations .
It was established in April 7 , 1948 when 26 members of the United Nations ratified its Constitution .
April 7 is celebrated as the World Health Day every year .
The WHO is governed by 194 Member States through the World Health Assembly .
Its headquarters are at Geneva in Switzerland .
WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANIZATION ( WIPO ) Section::::World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) .
The World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) is a specialized agency of the United Nations created in 1967 and headquartered in Geneva , Switzerland .
Its purpose is to encourage creative activity and to promote the protection of intellectual property throughout the world .
The organization administers several treaties concerning the protection of intellectual property rights .
WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION ( WMO ) Section::::World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) .
The World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) originated from the International Meteorological Organization ( IMO ) , which was founded in 1873 .
Established in 1950 , WMO became the specialized agency of the United Nations for modern meteorology ( weather and climate ) , operational hydrology and related geophysical sciences .
It has its headquarters in Geneva , Switzerland .
WORLD TOURISM ORGANIZATION ( UNWTO OR WTO ) Section::::World Tourism Organization ( UNWTO or WTO ) .
The World Tourism Organization ( UNWTO or WTO ) was established in 1974 in Madrid , Spain , to replace the International Union of Official Tourist Publicity Organizations ( IUOTPO ) .
UNWTO has 160 member states and 350 affiliated members representing private organizations , educational institutions and others .
It is headquartered in Madrid , Spain .
The World Tourism Organization serves as a forum for tourism policies and acts as a practical source for tourism know - how .
FORMER SPECIALIZED AGENCIES Section::::Former specialized agencies .
The only UN specialized agency to go out of existence is the International Refugee Organization , which existed from 1946 to 1952 .
In 1952 , it was replaced by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( headquartered in Geneva , Switzerland ) , which is a subsidiary organ of the United Nations General Assembly .
RELATED ORGANIZATIONS Section::::Related organizations .
There are other intergovernmental organizations that have concluded cooperation agreements with the United Nations .
In terms of cooperation structures , some agreements come very close to the relationship agreements concluded under articles 57 and 63 of the UN Charter with the specialized agencies , but due to Charter requirements that the agencies deal with " economic , social , cultural , educational , health , and related fields " , organizations with such agreements are not formally specialized agencies of the United Nations .
These organizations are termed Related Organizations by the UN .
The IAEA established such an agreement with the UN in 1957 , and the OPCW and the CTBTO used this model for agreements of their own with the UN .
COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR - TEST - BAN TREATY ORGANIZATION PREPARATORY COMMISSION Section::::Comprehensive Nuclear - Test - Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission .
The Comprehensive Nuclear - Test - Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission preparatory commission is tasked with preparing the activities of the nuclear non - proliferation organization .
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY ( IAEA ) Section::::International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) .
The International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) is an intergovernmental organization for scientific and technical cooperation in the field of nuclear technology .
It seeks to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to inhibit its use for military purposes .
The IAEA was set up as an autonomous organization on 29 July 1957 .
Prior to this , in 1953 , U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower envisioned the creation of this international body to control and develop the use of atomic energy , in his " Atoms for Peace " speech before the UN General Assembly .
The organization and its former Director General , Mohamed ElBaradei , were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize announced on 7 October 2005 .
As of March 2015 , the IAEA 's membership is 164 countries .
Due to historical reasons and the political nature of its work , the IAEA is not a specialized agency .
Instead , its relationship to the United Nations is governed by a special agreement as well as by its statute that commits the IAEA to report annually to the General Assembly and , when appropriate , to the Security Council .
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR MIGRATION ( IOM ) Section::::International Organization for Migration ( IOM ) .
Since September 2016 , IOM has been a related organization to the United Nations .
Headquarters are in Geneva , Switzerland .
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS Section::::Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons .
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons ( OPCW ) is an intergovernmental organization , located in The Hague , Netherlands .
The organization promotes and verifies the adherence to the Chemical Weapons Convention which prohibits of the use of chemical weapons and requires their destruction .
The verification consists both of evaluation of declarations by members states and on - site inspections .
WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION ( WTO ) Section::::World Trade Organization ( WTO ) .
The WTO was established instead of the failed proposal for a specialized agency dealing with trade issues , the International Trade Organization .
WTO headquarters are in Geneva , Switzerland .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary . !
No . !
Logo !
Official name !
Abbreviation !
Location ( Country ) !
Location ( City ) !
Established !
Precursor established !
Member states !
Other participants !
Map and reference * the UN members * observer states :
Holy See , Palestine * observer entities : Order of Malta * observer regional organizations :
European Union * other observer entities and organizations
colspan="10 " align =
centerSpecialized agencies * the UN members except Liechtenstein * Cook Islands , Niue * associate members :
Faroe Islands , Tokelau * member organization :
European Union * the UN members except Dominica , Liechtenstein , Tuvalu * Cook Islands —
* the UN members except Andorra , Australia , Bahrain , Belarus , Brunei , Bulgaria , Czech Republic , Latvia , Liechtenstein , Lithuania , Federated States of Micronesia , Monaco , Montenegro , Palau , Poland , Russia , San Marino , Serbia , Singapore , Slovenia , Slovakia , Turkmenistan , Ukraine * Cook Islands , Niue * observers : Holy See * the UN members except Andorra , Bhutan , Liechtenstein , Micronesia , Monaco , Nauru , North Korea , Tonga —
* the UN members except Afghanistan , Andorra , Armenia , Belarus , Bhutan , Botswana , Burkina Faso , Burundi , Central African Republic , Chad , Kyrgyzstan , Laos , Lesotho , Liechtenstein , Mali , Micronesia , Nauru , Niger , Rwanda , South Sudan , Swaziland , Tajikistan , Uzbekistan , Zambia
* Cook Islands * associate members : Faroe Islands , Hong Kong , Macao * the UN members except Andorra , Cuba , Liechtenstein , Monaco , and North Korea ; * Kosovo — * the UN members except Palau *
Vatican City
* observers :
Palestine * the UN members except Liechtenstein * Cook Islands , Niue , Palestine * associate members : Aruba , British Virgin Islands , Cayman Islands , Curaçao , Faroe Islands , Macau , Sint Maarten
, Tokelau * observers :
Holy See * NOC only : Liechtenstein , Hong Kong , Bermuda , Guam , American Samoa , Puerto Rico , US Virgin Islands * the UN members except Andorra , Antigua and Barbuda , Australia , Brunei , Canada , Estonia , Iceland , Kiribati , Latvia , Liechtenstein , Lithuania , Marshall Islands , Micronesia , Nauru , New Zealand (
as of 31 December 2013 ) , Palau , San Marino , Singapore , Solomon Islands , South Sudan , United Kingdom , United States *
Palestine * observers :
Holy See , Order of Malta
* the UN members except Andorra , Marshall Islands , the Federated States of Micronesia , Palau * Vatican City * member countries :
Aruba , Curaçao and Sint Maarten , British Overseas Territories
* observers :
Palestine * the UN members except Andorra , Cuba , Liechtenstein , Monaco , North Korea
* Kosovo —
* the UN members except Liechtenstein * Cook Islands , Niue * associate members :
Puerto Rico , Tokelau * observers :
Chinese Taipei , Holy See , Palestine , Order of Malta * the UN members except Marshall Islands , Micronesia , Nauru , Palau , Solomon Islands , Timor - Leste , South Sudan
* Holy See , Niue * observers :
Palestine * the UN members except Andorra , Equatorial Guinea , Grenada , Liechtenstein , Marshall Islands , Nauru , Palau , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , and San Marino
* Cook Islands , Niue * member territories : British Caribbean Territories , Curacao and Sint Maartin , French Polynesia , Hong Kong , Macau , New Caledonia
* the UN members except Antigua and Barbuda , Barbados , Belgium , Belize , Canada , Comoros , Denmark , Dominica , Estonia , Finland , Grenada , Guyana , Iceland , Ireland , Kiribati , Liberia , Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Marshall Islands , Micronesia , Myanmar , Nauru , New Zealand , Palau , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Samoa , Singapore , Solomon Islands , Somalia , Suriname , Sweden , Tonga , Trinidad and Tobago , Tuvalu , United Arab Emirates , United Kingdom , United States
* associate members : Aruba , Flemish Community , Hong Kong , Macau , Madeira , Puerto Rico
* observers :
Holy See , Palestine colspan="10
" align = centerRelated organizations * the UN members except Bhutan , Cuba , Dominica , India , Mauritius , North Korea , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , Somalia , South Sudan , Syria , Tonga , Tuvalu * Cook Islands , Holy See and Niue —
* the UN members except Andorra , Bhutan , Cape Verde , Comoros , Equatorial Guinea , Gambia , Grenada , Guinea , Guinea - Bissau , Kiribati , Maldives , Micronesia , Nauru , North Korea , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Samoa , São Tomé and Príncipe , Solomon Islands , Somalia , South Sudan , Suriname , Timor - Leste , Tonga , Tuvalu * Holy See —
* the UN members except Egypt , Israel , North Korea and South Sudan
* Cook Islands , Holy See and Niue —
* the UN members except Algeria , Andorra , Azerbaijan , Bahamas , Belarus , Bhutan , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Comoros , Equatorial Guinea , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Iran , Iraq , Kiribati , Lebanon , Libya , Marshall Islands , Micronesia , Monaco , Nauru , North Korea , Palau , San Marino , São Tomé and Príncipe , Serbia , Somalia , South Sudan , Sudan , Syria , Timor - Leste , Turkmenistan , Tuvalu , Uzbekistan * customs territory members : European Union , Hong Kong , Macau , Chinese Taipei
* observers : Algeria , Andorra , Azerbaijan , Bahamas , Belarus , Bhutan , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Comoros , Equatorial Guinea , Ethiopia , Iran , Iraq , Lebanon , Libya , São Tomé and Príncipe , Serbia , Sudan , Syria , Uzbekistan , Holy See SEE
ALSO
* United Nations System
* United Nations Charter * League of Nations organizations
* List of supranational environmental agencies NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * UN official site * Flow chart of the UN system