JAGUAR LAND ROVER Jaguar Land Rover Automotive PLC is the holding company of Jaguar Land Rover Limited , a British multinational automotive company with its headquarters in Whitley , Coventry , United Kingdom , and a subsidiary of Indian automotive company Tata Motors .
The principal activity of Jaguar Land Rover Limited is the design , development , manufacture and sale of vehicles bearing the Jaguar and Land Rover marques .
Both marques have long and complex histories prior to their merger – Jaguar going back to the 1930s and Land Rover to the 1940s – first coming together in 1968 as part of the ill - fated British Leyland conglomerate , later again independent of each other , and then as subsidiaries of BMW ( in the case of Land Rover ) , and Ford Motor Company ( Jaguar ) .
Ford acquired Land Rover from BMW in 2000 following the break - up of the former Rover Group , which was effectively the remainder of the British Leyland car producing companies .
Jaguar Land Rover has been a subsidiary of Tata Motors since they founded it for the acquisition of Jaguar Cars Limited and Land Rover from Ford in 2008 .
On 1 January 2013 the operations of Jaguar Cars Limited and Land Rover were merged as Jaguar Land Rover Limited and the parent was renamed to Jaguar Land Rover Automotive PLC .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Both businesses having been part of British Leyland for parts of their histories until 1984 , Jaguar Cars and Land Rover were eventually reunited into the same group again by the Ford Motor Company in 2002 .
Ford had acquired Jaguar Cars in 1989 and Land Rover from BMW in 2000 .
In 2006 , Ford purchased the Rover brand name from BMW for around £ 6 million .
This reunited the Rover and Land Rover brands for the first time since the Rover group was broken up by BMW in 2000 .
On 18 January 2008 , Tata Motors , a part of the Tata Group , established Jaguar Land Rover Limited as a British - registered , wholly owned subsidiary .
The company was to be used as a holding company for the acquisition from Ford of the two businesses – Jaguar Cars Limited and Land Rover .
That acquisition was completed on 2 June 2008 .
On 1 January 2013 , the group , which had been operating as two separate companies ( Jaguar Cars Limited and Land Rover ) , although on an integrated basis , underwent a fundamental restructuring .
The parent company was renamed to Jaguar Land Rover Automotive PLC , Jaguar Cars Limited was renamed to Jaguar Land Rover Limited and the assets ( excluding certain Chinese interests ) of Land Rover were transferred to it .
The consequence was that Jaguar Land Rover Limited became responsible in the UK for the design , manufacture and marketing of both Jaguar and Land Rover products .
In addition to the Jaguar and Land Rover marques , JLR also owns the rights to the dormant Daimler , Lanchester and Rover marques .
The latter was acquired by Land Rover , whilst still under Ford ownership , from BMW in the aftermath of the collapse of MG Rover Group ; BMW had retained ownership of the marque when it broke up Rover Group in 2000 , then licensed it to MG Rover .
INVESTMENT AND EXPANSION Section::::Investment and expansion .
In March 2011 , Jaguar Land Rover announced that it would hire an additional 1,500 staff at its Halewood plant , and signed over £ 2 billion of supply contracts with UK - based companies , to enable production of its new Range Rover Evoque model .
In September 2011 , the company confirmed that it would be investing £ 355 million in the construction of a new engine plant at the i54 business park near Wolverhampton , central England , to manufacture a family of four - cylinder petrol and diesel engines .
In November 2011 Jaguar Land Rover announced that it would be creating 1,000 new jobs at its Solihull plant , a 25 per cent increase in the size of the workforce at the site .
In March 2012 , Jaguar Land Rover announced the creation of 1,000 new jobs at its Halewood plant , and a shift to 24-hour production at the plant .
In the same month , Jaguar Land Rover and the China - based carmaker Chery agreed to invest an initial US$ 2.78 billion in a new joint venture , the activities of which would include the manufacture of Jaguar and Land Rover vehicles and engines , the establishment of a research and development facility , the creation of a new automobile marque , and sales of vehicles produced by the company .
Jaguar Land Rover planned to create 4,500 manufacturing and engineering jobs in the UK over the next five years .
In late 2012 , the company announced a joint venture for Jaguars and Land Rovers to be built in China , now the world 's biggest car - market .
The agreement was with Chery , China 's sixth largest auto manufacturer , and called for a new Chinese factory in Changshu to build vehicles starting in 2014 .
Trial production at the facility began in April 2014 , with a potential capacity of 130,000 vehicles annually .
The first production model by the Chery Jaguar Land Rover venture was the Evoque , with other models planned that also include modifications , such as longer wheelbases , to satisfy Chinese market demand .
In September 2013 , Jaguar Land Rover announced an additional 1,700 jobs and £ 1.5 billion investment at its facility in Solihull .
The money was to be spent on designing systems to allow the chassis of future models to be made out of aluminium ; the first of these would be a new mid - sized sports saloon car to be introduced in 2015 .
The same month , the company announced plans to open a £ 100 million research and development centre called the National Automotive Innovation Campus at the University of Warwick , Coventry to create a new generation of vehicle technologies .
Jaguar Land Rover was to invest £ 50 million in the facility with additional funding from Tata Motors , the University and the UK government .
The carmaker said around 1,000 academics and engineers would work there and that construction would start in 2014 .
Under its chief executive , Dr Ralf Speth , JLR has increased its investment in R&D significantly .
In 2013 , according to Speth , it invested £ 3 billion in " product creation " and claimed to be the " biggest R&D investor in the UK in the automotive business " .
In 2017 a plant for Ingenium engine production was added to the Chery Jaguar Land Rover facility in China .
On 13 April 2018 , Jaguar Land Rover announced that it would be cutting 1,000 temporary contract jobs in the West Midlands , citing a slump in sales due to uncertainty over changes to taxes on diesel cars and Brexit .
CORPORATE AFFAIRS Section::::Corporate affairs .
Jaguar Land Rover Automotive is a public limited company incorporated under the laws of England and Wales ( Company No . 06477691 ) .
The immediate parent of Jaguar Land Rover Automotive PLC is TML Holdings Pte . Ltd. , Singapore and the ultimate parent undertaking and controlling party is Tata Motors Limited of India .
The Chairman of Tata Group , Ratan Tata , was the chairman and a director of Jaguar Land Rover Automotive PLC from 2008 to December 2012 .
Jaguar Land Rover Automotive PLC 's principal active subsidiaries are :
* Jaguar Land Rover Holdings Limited * Jaguar Land Rover Limited ( designs , manufactures and sells Jaguar and Land Rover vehicles ) BOARD OF DIRECTORS Section::::Board of directors . !
Name !
Position !
Year appointed FINANCIAL DATA Section::::Financial data . !
Year ending !
Turnover ( £ m ) !
EBITDA ( £ m ) !
Net income / ( loss ) before tax ( £ m ) !
23 MAY 2017 !
24,300 !
1600 ! ! OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
Jaguar Land Rover has six main facilities for R&D , manufacturing and vehicle assembly , of which five are in the UK and one in India .
Jaguar Land Rover invested a total of £ 1,411 million in research and development in the year ended 31 March 2015 .
Jaguar Land Rover has three research and development facilities in the UK :
* Gaydon , Warwickshire – an engineering and development facility .
Formerly an RAF bomber base before being acquired by British Leyland and redeveloped as a vehicle design , development and testing centre .
Part of this site is also the Aston Martin headquarters , development centre and factory .
*
Whitley , Coventry – an engineering and development site and headquarters of Jaguar Land Rover which was formerly the Jaguar Cars head office .
This site was acquired from Peugeot in the 1980s , and was formerly a First World War airfield , an aircraft factory and then a missile factory before being sold to the Rootes Group ( later Chrysler Europe ) .
*
JLR is a partner in the National Automotive Innovation Centre at the University of Warwick , Coventry .
Vehicle Assembly plants : *
Castle Bromwich Assembly , Birmingham .
Jaguar Land Rover 's main Jaguar assembly plant , producing the XF , XJ and F - Type ranges .
Originally an aircraft factory during World War Two – Spitfires were built here – it was later acquired by Pressed Steel Fisher and became a vehicle body assembly works .
It came under the auspices of Jaguar through the merger with BMC in the 1960s .
* Jaguar XE , Jaguar XF , Jaguar XJ , Jaguar F - Type * Halewood Body & Assembly , Halewood , Merseyside .
Used by Jaguar Land Rover for Land Rover production .
Originally a Ford assembly plant ( the Ford Escort being its most prolific model )
it was given to Jaguar in 2000 for production of the X - Type .
Ford still owns the transmission manufacturing operation at Halewood .
* Land Rover Discovery Sport , Range Rover Evoque * Solihull plant , Solihull , West Midlands .
Jaguar Land Rover 's principal Land Rover assembly plant .
This was originally an aircraft engine plant during World War Two , being used for as a Rover plant after the war .
In 2014 the Jaguar XE became the first Jaguar car to be assembled here , followed by the F - Pace in 2016 .
* Range Rover , Range Rover Sport , Range Rover Velar , Land Rover Discovery , Jaguar F - Pace
* Pune , India * Jaguar XF , Jaguar XJ , Range Rover Evoque – assembly of complete knock - down kits only * Chery Jaguar Land Rover , Changsu , China
* Range Rover Evoque , Land Rover Discovery Sport , Jaguar XE , Jaguar XF
* JLR Brazil , Itatiaia , Brazil
* Range Rover Evoque SVO facility
* Ryton - on - Dunsmore , near Coventry – where the Special Vehicle Operations development centre was created in 2016 .
The site was previously used by Rootes for aircraft production plant for World War Two , and later became the Rootes / Chrysler / Peugeot car plant which was closed in 2006 and has since been demolished .
Engine Assembly plants * Engine Manufacturing Centre , Wolverhampton .
A £ 500 million facility located at the i54 site in Staffordshire close to Wolverhampton where the Ingenium family of modular diesel and petrol engines are built .
The plant was officially opened by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on Thursday 30 October 2014 .
*
Chery Jaguar Land Rover , Changsu , China .
Planned facilities
* JLR Slovakia , Nitra , Slovakia ( production planned to start in 2018 )
* Software engineering facility , Shannon , Ireland * Storage depot , Stone , Staffordshire Co - operations
*
The Magna Steyr company in Graz , Austria builds the E - Pace ( from 2017 ) and the I - Pace ( from 2018 ) .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
Jaguar Land Rover currently sells vehicles under the Jaguar and Land Rover marques .
FUTURE ELECTRIFICATION Section::::Future electrification .
In September 2017 , Jaguar Land Rover announced that all new Jaguar and Land Rover models launched from the 2020 model year will have an all - electric or hybrid powertrain option , In October 2017 , JLR announced that their electrification programme will start with the Range Rover Sport P400e for the 2018 model year , a plug - in hybrid model due in the showrooms in late 2017 .
and be followed by the launch of a plug - in hybrid Range Rover due in 2018 for the 2019 model year , CURRENT JAGUAR PRODUCTS
* Jaguar XE ( compact executive car )
* Jaguar XF ( executive car & estate )
* Jaguar XJ ( full - size luxury car )
* Jaguar F - Type ( sports car )
* Jaguar E - Pace ( subcompact luxury SUV )
* Jaguar F - Pace ( compact luxury SUV )
* Jaguar I - Pace ( compact luxury electric SUV ) { class="wikitable " Section::::Current Jaguar products . !
Jaguar XE !
Jaguar XF !
Jaguar XJ !
Jaguar F - Type !
Jaguar E - Pace !
Jaguar F - Pace !
Jaguar
I - Pace CURRENT LAND ROVER PRODUCTS
* Land Rover Discovery Sport ( high end subcompact luxury SUV )
* Land Rover Discovery ( mid - size luxury SUV )
* Range Rover Evoque ( subcompact luxury SUV )
* Range Rover Velar ( high end compact luxury SUV )
* Range Rover Sport ( mid - size luxury SUV )
* Range Rover ( full - size luxury SUV ) Section::::Current Land Rover products . !
Land Rover Discovery Sport !
Land Rover Discovery !
Range Rover Evoque !
Range Rover Velar !
Range Rover Sport !
Range Rover SALES Section::::Sales .
In the year ended 31 March 2013 , Jaguar Land Rover sold a total of 374,636 units , of which 316,043 were Land Rovers and 58,593 were Jaguars .
In that period 21.6 % of sales were in Europe ( excluding the United Kingdom and Russia ) , 20.6 % in China , 19.3 % in the United Kingdom , 16.8 % in the United States , 4.8 % in Asia Pacific ( excluding China ) and 16.9 % in the rest of the world .
In 2015 , Jaguar Land Rover became the biggest car manufacturer in UK , producing 489,923 cars and overtaking Nissan , the previous leader .
In January 2014 , the Wall Street Journal reported that Jaguar Land Rover , sold a record 425,006 vehicles in 2013 as demand for its luxury vehicles increased in all major markets including in China , North America and Europe .
It sold a total of 604,009 vehicles during 2017 , comprising 431,161 Land Rover vehicles and 172,848 Jaguar vehicles .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS