HELL 'S KITCHEN ( U.S. TV SERIES )
Hell 's Kitchen is an American reality competition television series based on the British series of the same name .
Broadcast on Fox , it is hosted by celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay .
Two teams of chefs compete for a job as head chef at a restaurant .
A typical episode begins with a challenge between the teams ; the winning team gets some sort of a reward that usually involves some sort of recreational activity outside the Hell 's Kitchen , while the losers are given a " punishment " that usually involves some sort of menial task .
The second part is a dinner service , where each team works in their own kitchen , attempting , under close and hypercritical supervision from Chef Ramsay , to complete the service without getting kicked out before finishing for too many errors .
The usual wrap - up involves whichever team is declared the loser of the dinner service choosing two of their own to be up for elimination .
There are many possible variations ; both teams being kicked out before the end of dinner service is an example that has occurred on several occasions .
On September 9 , 2016 , Fox renewed Hell 's Kitchen for seasons 17 and 18 .
The seventeenth season , titled All - Stars , premiered on September 29 , 2017 .
The eighteenth season , titled Rookies vs. Veterans , premiered on September 28 , 2018 .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
Hell 's Kitchen is a reality television show that uses a progressive elimination format to narrow down a field of 12 to 20 aspiring chefs to a single winner over the course of one season .
The U.S. version of Hell 's Kitchen follows the format of the UK version though the show is recorded and not performed live , nor is there audience participation in the elimination of chefs .
The show is produced at Hell 's Kitchen , a modified warehouse in Los Angeles that includes the restaurant , dual kitchen facilities and a dormitory where the chefs reside while on the show .
They are also given knife sets that they get to keep , regardless of their progress .
At the start of each season , Gordon Ramsay breaks the chefs into two teams .
With the exception of the first and most recent seasons , this puts women on the red team and men on the blue team ; each is given a chef 's jacket with panels of that color on the shoulders .
The chefs remain on these teams throughout most of the competition ; Ramsay may reassign a chef to the other team if the team numbers are uneven or if he feels the chef will perform better on the other team .
Each episode typically includes a challenge and a dinner service , followed by the elimination of a chef .
When only five or six chefs remain , they are brought into a single common team wearing black - panelled jackets .
From this point onward , they compete individually to be one of the final two .
CHALLENGES
Section::::Challenges .
In challenges , the teams or individual is tasked with a cooking challenge by Ramsay .
The type of challenges are varied , including ingredient preparation , meal preparation and taste tests .
The first challenge of each season is a signature dish cook - off , giving the chefs an opportunity to show Ramsay their cooking .
Each season typically includes one or more challenges that allows teams to construct several dishes either for a banquet to be held the next dinner service or as part of designing their own menus .
Other challenges typically include a " taste it , now make it " task , where chefs must attempt to recreate a dish Ramsay has prepared after tasting it only , and a " blind taste - test " where chefs identify ingredients while blindfolded and wearing sound - blocking earcovers .
Some challenges have been full breakfast or lunch services , where the team completing the service first is declared the winner .
The winner of the challenge is determined by either a scoring system set for that challenge or by Ramsay 's and/or guest judges ' opinions .
The winning team or chef receives a reward ( a recreational activity away from Hell 's Kitchen and other potential prizes ) , while the losing team or chefs are forced to do a mundane task , such as cleaning the kitchens , preparing a specific ingredient for the following dinner , having to prepare the food for both kitchens , and sometimes eating something unsavory ( such as food waste blended into a smoothie ) for lunch .
DINNER SERVICE Section::::Dinner service .
For dinner services , the chefs are expected to work their station ( such as appetizers , meat , fish , or garnish ) on the kitchen line to prepare food in coordination with their teammates and to Ramsay 's high standards for quality and presentation .
Dinner service is for about 100 guests ( volunteers for the show ) , with each diner expecting to receive an appetizer , an entree , and a dessert .
The chefs are given menus and recipe books by Ramsay to study and memorize , which include some of Ramsay 's more difficult dishes including risotto and Beef Wellington .
The chefs spend several hours before each service preparing their ingredients .
Menus may be customized for a specific dinner service , such as ethnic - themed dishes or plates that resulted from the earlier challenge .
Some seasons feature a service allowing for the teams to develop their own menus , which are reviewed by Ramsay for quality and presentation beforehand .
Later seasons may feature a private dinner service , where each team must serve a five course meal to 12 guests , with each member leading their teammates to prepare one course .
Dinner services may include additional challenges .
A chef from each team may be asked to serve a table - side meal for their team , serve celebrities sitting at the kitchen 's chef 's table , or act as a server for the evening taking and fulfilling orders .
After the chefs are on a single black team , Ramsay will use one dinner service to ask each chef to run the pass to test their quality control , including deliberate mistakes made by the sous chefs or Ramsay himself .
During a service , Ramsay demands that all orders for each course for a table go out together , and will send back entire orders if one item is improperly prepared , such as being over- or undercooked or not seasoned correctly .
While the chefs are in two teams , Ramsay is assisted by two trusted sous - chefs , each monitoring one of the kitchens , demanding the same standards and alerting Ramsay to any issues .
Ramsay 's goal is to complete every dinner service , but exceptionally poor kitchen performance by one or both teams will cause him to close one ( or both sides ) of the kitchen early and send the team(s ) back to the dorms .
Ramsay may also evict individual chefs from the kitchen based on repeated poor performances during a service , and on rare occasions ( once every two seasons on average ) , may eliminate a chef on the spot .
ELIMINATION
Section::::Elimination .
Once the dinner service is complete , Ramsay gathers everyone in the kitchen , announces which team is the losing team , and directs them to select two chefs from their team as nominees for elimination .
Often , both teams are declared losers , or a different number of chefs may be requested for nomination .
In some cases , Ramsay has named both teams winners , but still requires both teams to nominate someone for elimination .
This is a group consensus , but Ramsay may occasionally name a chef " best of the worst " on their team and instruct them to choose the nominees .
This concept , however , has faded away over time due to the " best of the worst " sometimes making nominations based on personal bias rather than kitchen performance .
Ramsay has also on some occasions declared that nobody would be sent home , but those cases are generally followed by a double - elimination , a team reassignment , or occur after someone has been sent home immediately due to insubordination or an extremely poor performance .
Ramsay reassembles the teams in the dining hall and hears out the nominations from the losing team(s ) .
Ramsay may also nominate other chefs for elimination if he believes it appropriate .
After giving these nominees the chance to defend themselves , Ramsay selects one to hand over their jacket and " leave Hell 's Kitchen .
" On rarer occasions , Ramsay can overrule nominations or even eliminate a chef who has not been nominated , even a chef on a winning team .
The eliminated chef is shown leaving the restaurant , providing some last thoughts on the experience .
After dismissing the chefs , Ramsay goes back upstairs to his office .
He symbolically hangs the chef 's jacket on a sharp hook below their picture in a row with the others , igniting the chef 's picture and signaling their departure .
During this scene , there is a voiceover of Ramsay explaining his reasons for eliminating the chef .
If an eliminated chef has performed exceptionally well , Ramsay may allow them to keep their jacket as a token of their success up to that point , if he sees fit .
Chefs may be eliminated from the competition due to medical reasons , both voluntarily and involuntarily .
Chefs that violate the competition 's rules may be immediately eliminated .
Chefs may also exit the competition voluntarily for any other reason ; though this is not encouraged , their wishes are ultimately granted ( with reasons by Ramsay explained , if applicable ) .
Once the number of chefs drops below a certain level ( usually once 5 or 6 are left ) they are awarded black jackets and assembled into a single team .
Eliminations continue until two are left .
FINAL SERVICE Section::::Final service .
In the finale , the final two chefs are each given the opportunity to develop their own menus and lead a brigade of former competitors through a full dinner service on their own .
In the first five seasons , this included the opportunity to decorate half of the Hell 's Kitchen restaurant to their liking .
Prior to the dinner service , the two chefs compete in a challenge to prepare their menus , and the winner will earn the advantage of picking their brigade of chefs first .
Ramsay will ensure that all menu items meet his standards for high cuisine prior to service , and he and his sous chefs will oversee the service to make sure that his high quality standards are retained , but does not otherwise get involved , allowing the two remaining chefs to demonstrate their ability to run the line .
The finalists are allowed to reassign stations , or even kick their teammates out of the kitchen should they see fit ; the latter has happened four times in the show 's history .
Ramsay uses his own observations and those from the diners and other sources to decide who is the winning chef .
He has two doors in his office leading out to the balcony above the Hell 's Kitchen seating area .
Each chef stands at a door and Ramsay tells them to both turn their handles at the same time .
After a commercial break , only the door of the winning chef is unlocked allowing the winner to walk through and be greeted by the crowd below .
The winning chef receives two prizes including the opportunity to work as the head chef or executive chef at a restaurant of Ramsay 's choosing , as well as a cash prize of $ 250,000 .
In a similar manner to the voiceover at each elimination , Ramsay has a voiceover to explain his reasons for choosing that chef as the winner .
CAST 123456789101112131415161718Jean - Philippe Susilovic , a Belgian maître d'hôtel , comes from Petrus , one of Ramsay 's London restaurants and appeared in the first seven seasons and later returned for Season 11 .
He left after Season 12 and was replaced by Marino Monferrato for Season 13 .
Susilovic was also the maître d'hôtel for the first series of the original British version .
James Lukanik replaced Susilovic for Seasons 8–10 .
Each team also has the services of one of two sous - chefs .
The current sous - chefs are Season 10 winner Christina Wilson and James " Jocky " Petrie .
Previous sous - chefs were Mary Ann Salcedo , Gloria Felix , Season 2 winner Heather West , Scott Leibfried , James Avery , Aaron Mitrano and Andi Van Willigan .
In Season 15 , Wilson filled in for Van Willigan - Cutspec who was getting married at the time of filming but returned for one episode when her reception was one of the themed dinner services for that season .
Van - Willigan returned in season 16 but was replaced by Wilson again for Seasons 17 and 18 to spend time with her infant son .
PRODUCTION
BROADCASTING Section::::Production .
Section::::Broadcasting .
The theme song is Fire by the Ohio Players .
When the U.S. version is broadcast in the U.K. , Italy , Portugal and some countries ( shown on the table below ) , it features only the instrumental version .
The instrumental version also appeared in the uncensored DVD release for the U.S. version .
SETTING
Section::::Setting .
For the show 's first two seasons , the Hell 's Kitchen restaurant set itself was housed in the former studios of Los Angeles television station KCOP at 915 North La Brea Avenue , in Hollywood , which at one time hosted production of game
shows
Tic Tac Dough and The Joker 's Wild .
KCOP was acquired by News Corporation in 2001 and its studios were integrated with those of Fox affiliate KTTV in 2003 , leaving the La Brea facility vacant .
Originally the studio was put up for sale , but in the end they were retooled for the production of Hell 's Kitchen .
The dining room area was the location of the former KCOP news studios , and living quarters for the contestants were built behind the restaurant .
Before season three , the Hell 's Kitchen facility was moved to Century Studios at 3322 La Cienega Place in Los Angeles .
Since the fourth season , Hell 's Kitchen 's venue has been located at 8660 Hayden Place in Culver City .
According to Arthur Perkins , the soundstage is only open for audience members when taping is taking place .
The studio sits on the former location of the famous RKO Forty Acres backlot , which was used in movies such as Gone With The Wind and television series such as The Andy Griffith Show and Adventures of Superman .
The studio building sits on the location of the military camp seen in the television series Gomer Pyle U.S.M.C ..
ACCUSATIONS OF STAGING Section::::Accusations of staging .
The series has drawn numerous online and editorial accusations of staging and dramatic license , mostly due to editing techniques of the producers , who splice together several hours of footage from a dinner service , in order to make certain contestants appear as poor performers , later justifying their elimination .
This was most obvious when one episode featured clips showing an already eliminated contestant in the background , still cooking .
One of the most controversial accusations of staging on Hell 's Kitchen relates to an incident with contestant Joseph Tinnelly from Season 6 , who , during one elimination round , angrily confronted Ramsay , challenging him to fight , and was then escorted off the set .
The incident drew immediate fire from critics as an overplayed and possibly faked scene , conducted to cause action and tension on the show in order to spark viewer interest .
In a 2013 interview , Ramsay admitted that the vast majority of his anger towards contestants was acting , his on - camera rage being done to force contestants to give their all and that when off - camera he treated all contestants with friendliness and respect .
Ramsay further stated he would often meet with eliminated contestants after their departure from the show , offering positive criticism and advice .
Staff and production members further affirmed that in real life , Ramsay was a sociable and friendly person and most of the on - camera drama is played out for the benefit of the audience .
SEASONS Notes RECEPTION AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Reception . Section::::Awards and nominations .
Hell 's Kitchen has been nominated for three Primetime Emmy Awards in the Outstanding Art Direction for Variety , Music or Nonfiction Programming category in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 .
It has also been nominated for two Art Directors Guild Awards in the Television — Awards Show , Variety , Music or Non - Fiction Program category in 2007 and 2008 , winning one in 2008 .
It has also been nominated for a Teen Choice Award for Choice Summer Series .
In 2009 , Gordon Ramsay won an Astra Award for Favourite International Personality or Actor .
At the 2011 People 's Choice Awards , Hell 's Kitchen was nominated for Favorite Reality Show and Gordon Ramsay was nominated for Favorite TV Chef .
At the 2014 Reality TV Awards ceremony , Hell 's Kitchen won an award for best new cast .
In 2015 , Hell 's Kitchen won awards for best overall show and guilty pleasure at the 2015 Reality TV Awards .
U.S. NIELSEN RATINGS
Section::::U.S. Nielsen ratings . !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Season
premiere !
scope="col " colspan="2 " Season finale ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " TV season !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Time slot ( ET / PT1 ! 2 ! 3 ! 4 ! 5 ! 6 ! 7 ! 8 !
rowspan="2 " 9 !
rowspan="2 " 10 !
11 !
12 !
13 !
14 !
15 !
16 !
17 !
18 OTHER MEDIA
HOME MEDIA
Section::::Other media .
Section::::Home media .
Visual Entertainment has not released the first fourteen seasons of Hell 's Kitchen in Region 1 .
Season 14 was released on March 15 , 2016 , and to the Blu - ray format for the first time .
In Region 4 , Shock Entertainment has released seasons 1–8 on DVD in Australia .
!
scope="col " rowspan="2 " DVD / BD title ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " No . ofepisodes !
scope="col " colspan="3 " Release dates ! scope="col " Region 1 ( CAN ) ! scope="col " Region 1 ( US ) ! scope="col " Region 4 ( AUS ) VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
On September 11 , 2008 , Ubisoft released for the Wii , Nintendo DS , Microsoft Windows , and iOS , which features the likeness of Ramsay , and the many important tasks shown in the U.S. version of the show .
On April 2 , 2009 , Ludia and Social2u released the official Facebook version of the Hell 's Kitchen video game .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS