LIST OF NATIONAL BASKETBALL ASSOCIATION AWARDS
The National Basketball Association ( NBA ) presents 12 annual awards to recognize its teams , players , and coaches for their accomplishments .
This does not include the NBA championship trophy which is given to the winning team of the NBA Finals .
The NBA 's championship trophy made its first appearance after the inaugural NBA Finals in 1947 .
In 1964 , it was named after Walter A. Brown who was instrumental in merging the Basketball Association of America and the National Basketball League into the NBA .
The Brown Trophy design remained the same until 1977 when the current trophy design was first introduced although it retained the Walter A. Brown title .
In 1984 , the trophy was renamed to honor former NBA commissioner Larry O'Brien .
The NBA 's first individual awards were the Rookie of the Year and the All - Star Game Most Valuable Player , both of which were introduced in .
The only individual award of the postseason is the Bill Russell Finals MVP .
The Executive of the Year is the only award not presented by the NBA .
It is named annually by Sporting News but is officially recognized by the NBA .
Through the 2015–16 season , each individual award , with the exception of the Finals MVP , was awarded at the end of the regular season while the NBA Playoffs were ongoing .
This procedure was different from the other major professional sports leagues , which have long handed out individual awards after their postseasons have concluded .
The 2016–17 season was the first in which the NBA held an awards show after the completion of the Finals , during which the winners of all season - long individual awards are announced except for the winner of the J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award , which continued to be announced during the playoffs until 2017 and in 2018 was announced after the playoffs but before the awards show .
Aside from these annual awards , the league also has weekly and monthly honors during the regular season for its players and coaches .
TEAM
TROPHIES
Larry O'Brien Trophy align="center
" 1977 The NBA 's championship trophy ; awarded to the winning team of the NBA Finals . Golden State WarriorsWalter A. Brown Trophy align="center " 1947The NBA 's first championship trophy which was awarded to the winning team of the NBA Finals until it was replaced with the Larry O'Brien Trophy .
N / A
; trophy retired after 1977align="center " HONORS All - NBA Team align = center
1947All - Rookie Team align = center 1963Two 5-player teams ( a first and second team ) composed of the top rookies during the regular season as voted by NBA head coachesAll - Defensive Team align
= center 1969Two 5-player teams ( a first and second team ) composed of the best defensive players in the league during the regular season as voted by a panel of sportswriters and broadcasters throughout the United States and Canada.align="center " INDIVIDUAL AWARDS All - Star Game MVP align = center 1951Awarded to the best performing player of the annual NBA All - Star Game as voted by a panel of media members .
LeBron James ( Cleveland CavaliersRookie of the Year(Eddie Gottlieb Trophy )
align = center 1953Awarded to the top rookie of the NBA regular season as voted by a panel of sportswriters throughout the United States and Canada .
Ben Simmons ( Philadelphia 76ersMost Valuable Player(Maurice Podoloff Trophy ) align = center 1956Awarded to the best performing player of the NBA regular season as voted by a panel of sportswriters and media members .
James Harden ( Houston RocketsCoach of the Year(Red Auerbach Trophy ) align = center 1963Awarded to the best coach of the NBA regular season as voted by a panel of sportswriters and media members .
Dwane Casey ( Toronto RaptorsNBA Finals
Most Valuable Player(Bill Russell Trophy )
align = center 1969Named after Bill Russell ; awarded to the best performing player of the NBA Finals as voted by a panel of nine media members .
Kevin Durant ( Golden State WarriorsExecutive of the Year align = center 1973Awarded to the NBA 's top front office executive as voted by the executives from the league 's 30 teams .
Daryl Morey ( Houston RocketsCitizenship Award(J. Walter Kennedy Trophy ) align = center 1975Named after J. Walter Kennedy ; awarded to a team member who showed " great service and dedication to the community " as voted by the PBWA .
J. J. Barea ( Dallas MavericksDefensive Player of the Year align = center 1983Awarded to the top defensive player of the NBA regular season as voted by a panel of sportswriters throughout the United States and Canada .
Rudy Gobert ( Utah JazzSixth Man of the Year
align = center 1983Awarded to the best performing player as a substitute ( or sixth man ) during the NBA regular season as voted by a panel of sportswriters .
Lou Williams ( Los Angeles ClippersMost Improved Player align = center 1986Awarded to the most improved player in the NBA as voted by a panel of sportswriters throughout the United States and Canada .
Victor Oladipo ( Indiana PacersSportsmanship Award(Joe Dumars Trophy ) align = center 1996Awarded to the player who most displays " the ideals of sportsmanship on the court with ethical behavior , fair play and integrity " as voted by NBA players .
Kemba Walker ( Charlotte HornetsTeammate of the Year(Twyman – Stokes Trophy ) align = center 2013Awarded to the " ideal teammate " who exemplifies " selfless play and commitment and dedication to his team " as voted by NBA players .
Jamal Crawford ( Minnesota TimberwolvesLifetime Achievement Award align = center 2017Awarded to the NBA player who has had a lifetime of achievement in the NBA .
Oscar Robertson ( Cincinnati Royals , Milwaukee Bucks)align="center " SEE ALSO * 50 Greatest Players in NBA History
* NBA Rookie of the Month Award
* Top 10 Coaches in NBA History
*
Top 10 Teams in NBA History
* List of NBA All - Stars * Sports Illustrated NBA All - Decade Team ( 2009 ) * Sports Illustrated NBA All - Decade awards and honors ( 2009 )
NOTES
*
Though the award winner is usually determined by nine votes , fans balloting on NBA.com accounted for the tenth vote in at least one NBA Finals .
REFERENCES General Specific