RADIATOR SPRINGS Radiator Springs is a fictional town in the Cars series created as a composite of multiple real places on historic U.S. Route 66 from Kansas to Arizona .
It appears in the 2006 Pixar film Cars and the associated franchise , as well as a section of the Disney California Adventure theme park .
VICINITY Section::::Vicinity .
The setting for the town of Radiator Springs is situated between Gallup , New Mexico and the Sonoran Desert in California .
Radiator Springs ' position in relation to I-40 , as shown on a map during a flashback in the 2006 film , is similar to that of Peach Springs on Arizona State Route 66 .
The village is a composite of multiple locations ; before making the film , Pixar sent a group of fifteen artists with Carburetor County sheriff and Oklahoma historian Michael Wallis as guide to take photos , talk to Route 66 people and learn the history of tiny towns along more than 1200 miles of road through five states .
In one restaurant , John Lasseter ordered one of every item on the menu for the Pixar group and spent four hours talking to the owner , absorbing information on the efforts to rebuild the historic byway to its neon - lit heyday .
Lasseter told film critic Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post - Dispatch that much of the story is based on the recollections of barber Angel Delgadillo in the Route 66 town of Seligman , Arizona , where business withered soon after the opening of I-40 . Much of the film is based on research trips to visit automakers and NASCAR tracks in the United States .
Flo 's V8 café is designed to look like a V8 engine head on , with a circular air filter , tappet covers , spark plugs , pistons and connecting rods as the supports for the shelter .
The blinking neon lights on the spark plugs blink in the firing order of a Ford flathead V8 .
ROUTE 66 Section::::Route 66 .
Many characters and places in the film are directly inspired by real Route 66 places and people .
To quote the Pixar crew : Among the many references to Route 66 landmarks and personalities : * The Cozy Cone Motel 's design is based on the two Wigwam Motels along Route 66 , in Holbrook , Arizona and Rialto , California .
These were once two out of seven built motels , with individual cabins shaped like teepees .
Three Wigwam Motels remain ; the third ( and oldest ) is in Cave City , Kentucky , far from Route 66 .
The recently restored Tee Pee Motel in Wharton , Texas , south of Houston , is of similar design but unrelated .
The name " Cozy Cone " was inspired by the Cozy Dog Drive - In of Springfield , Illinois , which lays claim to being birthplace of the corn dog .
* The character " Fillmore " , referring to the famous San Francisco music venue The Fillmore , was at one time to be named " Waldmire " after Bob Waldmire , a self - proclaimed hippie artist known to Rt .
66 fans for his detailed pen - and - ink maps and postcards of the route .
Though Waldmire 's family owns the Cozy Dog Drive - In , Bob , having since become a vegan , preferred not to see his name put on a character that would become a McDonald 's Happy Meal toy .
* Ramone 's House of Body Art is based primarily on the U - Drop Inn in Shamrock , Texas .
It opened in 1936 as Tower Conoco ( from its distinctive Art Deco spire ) with the U - Drop Inn Cafe and a retail building attached .
Many other establishments built along Route 66 in its heyday had Art Deco elements that might be reflected in the design of Ramone 's .
*
The mountain is Tucumcari Mountain in Tucumcari , New Mexico with the hand - painted ' T ' replaced by ' RS ' for Radiator Springs .
The neon " 100 % Refrigerated Air " on the Cozy Cone motel is a reference to the Blue Swallow Motel in Tucumcari .
* Lizzie 's Curio Shop in Radiator Springs resembles the Route 66 jumble of memorabilia and knick - knacks at Hackberry General Store in Hackberry , Arizona and the Sand Hills Curiosity Shop , aka the City Meat Market building in Erick , Oklahoma .
The yellow billboard for Lizzie 's Curio Shop reading "
HERE IT IS " with an image of a Model T
is based on the Jack Rabbit Trading Post signage in Joseph City , Arizona .
* Sheriff is voiced by Michael Wallis , an American historian and author of Route 66 : The Mother Road .
*
The characters " Flo " and " Sally " are based on Fran Houser of the Midpoint Café and Dawn Welch of the Rock Café respectively .
*
The bridge that McQueen sees Sally driving on resembles several bridges on Route 66 , including the Cyrus Avery Route 66 Memorial Bridge in Tulsa , the Colorado Street Bridge in Pasadena , California , and the now - closed bridge over Diablo Canyon at Two Guns , Arizona .
*
The character Tex Dinoco is n't a Route 66 resident , but was inspired by the Cadillacs horns at The Big Texan Steak Ranch .
* Part of the inspiration for Mater was Dean Walker of the Route 66 Association , he is known as the " Crazy Backwards Walker " , he can be able to twist his feet and walk backwards , another inspiration for Mater was the 1951 tow truck , now owned by CARS on the ROUTE .
The epilogue shows a map of the area of Arizona around Radiator Springs , including car - related place names such as " Carburetor County " and " Cadillac Range " .
The latter is a large north - to - south mountain range with many fin - backed jagged peaks , a reference to the famous Cadillac Ranch sculpture in Amarillo , Texas .
Where the main road crosses the Cadillac Range is marked " Tailfin Pass 5942 " ( i.e. feet altitude , = 1.8111 kilometers ) .
CONTINUITY Section::::Continuity .
There are a few sights of the front page of a newspaper named The Daily Exhaust , which serves primarily as a vehicle to explain the NASCAR history behind the Fabulous Hudson Hornet of the early 1950s .
During the 2006 film 's closing credits , the characters are at a drive - in watching clips of the Pixar films " Toy Car Story " ( Toy Story ) , " Monster Trucks ,
Inc. " ( Monsters , Inc. ) and A Bug 's Life ( " Bug " as in Volkswagen Beetle ) , whose characters have been rendered as vehicles in the style of Cars .
Mack the red Mack Super - Liner comments that " they 're just using the same actor over and over " , an in - joke referring to John Ratzenberger , who voiced Mack and characters featured in the clips .
The cinema itself is similar in design to an NRHP - listed 66 Drive - In in Carthage , Missouri , but without the later addition of widescreen and FM radio .
The group of small birds from the 2000 Pixar short film For the Birds made a cameo appearance in Cars .
As Mack is en route to California at 17:44 in the film , the group of small birds can briefly be seen ( and heard ) sitting on their familiar telephone wire .
In addition , the Pizza Planet truck from Toy Story also makes a cameo outside of the race track , at the final race in the movie .
OTHER SETTINGS
Section::::Other settings .
The rail grade crossing at which Lightning McQueen outruns
a passenger train on his way to Radiator Springs is protected by a pair of antique " upper - quadrant " wigwag crossing signals which accurately depict those once made by the Magnetic Signal Company in both appearance and start - up .
Few are left in actual operation in the United States , and many have been replaced with modern crossing gates , red lights and bells .
" Ornament Valley " is a reference to Monument Valley .
This is not on Route 66 , but is a side trip in northern Arizona .
Willy 's Butte resembles the landmark of Mexican Hat , Utah , but also resembles a classic Pontiac hood ornament .
The track on which the opening race ( Motor Speedway of the South ) takes place is based on an enlarged version of Bristol Motor Speedway .
The venue for the Piston Cup tiebreaker race ( the Los Angeles International Speedway ) is a conglomeration of the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , the Arroyo Seco in Pasadena where the Rose Bowl is located , as well as the Auto Club Speedway in Fontana .
The sign " City of Emeryville – Closed for the race " is a nod to Pixar 's headquarters in Emeryville , California in the San Francisco Bay Area .
SEE ALSO * Radium Springs , New Mexico
* Peach Springs , Arizona REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS