I HAVE A DREAM
" I Have a Dream " is a public speech that was delivered by American civil rights activist Martin Luther King Jr. during the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28 , 1963 , in which he called for civil and economic rights and an end to racism in the United States .
Delivered to over 250,000 civil rights supporters from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington , D.C. , the speech was a defining moment of the civil rights movement .
Beginning with a reference to the Emancipation Proclamation , which freed millions of slaves in 1863 , King said " one hundred years later , the Negro still is not free " .
Toward the end of the speech , King departed from his prepared text for a partly improvised peroration on the theme
" I have a dream " , prompted by Mahalia Jackson 's cry :
" Tell them about the dream , Martin ! "
In this part of the speech , which most excited the listeners and has now become its most famous , King described his dreams of freedom and equality arising from a land of slavery and hatred .
Jon Meacham writes that , " With a single phrase , Martin Luther King Jr. joined Jefferson and Lincoln in the ranks of men who 've shaped modern America " .
The speech was ranked the top American speech of the 20th century in a 1999 poll of scholars of public address .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom was partly intended to demonstrate mass support for the civil rights legislation proposed by President Kennedy in June .
Martin Luther King and other leaders therefore agreed to keep their speeches calm , also , to avoid provoking the civil disobedience which had become the hallmark of the Civil Rights Movement .
King originally designed his speech as a homage to Abraham Lincoln 's Gettysburg Address , timed to correspond with the centennial of the Emancipation Proclamation .
SPEECH TITLE AND THE WRITING PROCESS Section::::Speech title and the writing process .
King had been preaching about dreams since 1960 , when he gave a speech to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) called " The Negro and the American Dream " .
This speech discusses the gap between the American dream and reality , saying that overt white supremacists have violated the dream , and that " our federal government has also scarred the dream through its apathy and hypocrisy , its betrayal of the cause of justice " .
King suggests that " It may well be that the Negro is God 's instrument to save the soul of America . "
In 1961 , he spoke of the Civil Rights Movement and student activists ' " dream " of equality—"the American Dream ... a dream as yet
unfulfilled"—in
several national speeches and statements , and took " the dream " as the centerpiece for these speeches .
On November 27 , 1962 , King gave a speech at Booker T. Washington High School in Rocky Mount , North Carolina .
That speech was longer than the version which he would eventually deliver from the Lincoln Memorial .
And while parts of the text had been moved around , large portions were identical , including the " I have a dream " refrain .
After being rediscovered , the restored and digitized recording of the 1962 speech was presented to the public by the English department of North Carolina State University .
Martin Luther King had also delivered a " dream " speech in Detroit , in June 1963 , when he marched on Woodward Avenue with Walter Reuther and the Reverend C. L. Franklin , and had rehearsed other parts .
Mahalia Jackson , who sang " How I Got Over " , just before the speech in Washington , knew about King 's Detroit speech .
The March on Washington Speech , known as " I Have a Dream Speech " , has been shown to have had several versions , written at several different times .
It has no single version draft , but is an amalgamation of several drafts , and was originally called " Normalcy , Never Again " .
Little of this , and another " Normalcy Speech " , ended up in the final draft .
A draft of " Normalcy , Never Again " is housed in the Morehouse College Martin Luther King Jr. Collection of the Robert W. Woodruff Library , Atlanta University Center and Morehouse College .
The focus on
" I have a dream " comes through the speech 's delivery .
Toward the end of its delivery , noted African American gospel singer Mahalia Jackson shouted to King from the crowd , " Tell them about the dream , Martin . "
King departed from his prepared remarks and started " preaching " improvisationally , punctuating his points with " I have a dream . "
The speech was drafted with the assistance of Stanley Levison and Clarence Benjamin Jones in Riverdale , New York City .
Jones has said that " the logistical preparations for the march were so burdensome that the speech was not a priority for us " and that , " on the evening of Tuesday , Aug. 27 , [ 12 hours before the march ] Martin still did n't know what he was going to say " .
Leading up to the speech 's rendition at the Great March on Washington , King had delivered its
" I have a dream " refrains in his speech before 25,000 people in Detroit 's Cobo Hall immediately after the 125,000-strong Great Walk to Freedom in Detroit , June 23 , 1963 .
After the Washington ,
D.C. March , a recording of King 's Cobo Hall speech was released by Detroit 's Gordy Records as an LP entitled " The Great March To Freedom " .
SPEECH Section::::Speech .
Widely hailed as a masterpiece of rhetoric , King 's speech invokes pivotal documents in American history , including the Declaration of Independence , the Emancipation Proclamation , and the United States Constitution .
Early in his speech , King alludes to Abraham Lincoln 's Gettysburg Address by saying " Five score years ago ...
" In reference to the abolition of slavery articulated in the Emancipation Proclamation , King says : " It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long night of their captivity . "
Anaphora ( i.e. , the repetition of a phrase at the beginning of sentences ) is employed throughout the speech .
Early in his speech , King urges his audience to seize the moment ; " Now is the time " is repeated three times in the sixth paragraph .
The most widely cited example of anaphora is found in the often quoted phrase
" I have a dream " , which is repeated eight times as King paints a picture of an integrated and unified America for his audience .
Other occasions include " One hundred years later " , " We can never be satisfied " , " With this faith " , " Let freedom ring " , and " free at last " .
King was the sixteenth out of eighteen people to speak that day , according to the official program .
Among the most quoted lines of the speech are " I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin , but by the content of their character .
I have a dream today ! "
According to U.S. Representative John Lewis , who also spoke that day as the president of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee , " Dr. King had the power , the ability , and the capacity to transform those steps on the Lincoln Memorial into a monumental area that will forever be recognized .
By speaking the way he did , he educated , he inspired , he informed not just the people there , but people throughout America and unborn generations . "
The ideas in the speech reflect King 's social experiences of ethnocentric abuse , the mistreatment and exploitation of blacks .
The speech draws upon appeals to America 's myths as a nation founded to provide freedom and justice to all people , and then reinforces and transcends those secular mythologies by placing them within a spiritual context by arguing that racial justice is also in accord with God 's will .
Thus , the rhetoric of the speech provides redemption to America for its racial sins .
King describes the promises made by America as a " promissory note " on which America has defaulted .
He says that " America has given the Negro people a bad check " , but that " we 've come to cash this check " by marching in Washington , D.C. SIMILARITIES AND ALLUSIONS Section::::Similarities and allusions .
King 's speech used words and ideas from his own speeches and other texts .
For years , he had spoken about dreams , quoted from Samuel Francis Smith 's popular patriotic hymn " America " ( " My Country , ' Tis of Thee " ) , and of course referred extensively to the Bible .
The idea of constitutional rights as an " unfulfilled promise " was suggested by Clarence Jones .
The final passage from King 's speech closely resembles Archibald Carey Jr. 's address to the 1952 Republican National Convention : both speeches end with a recitation of the first verse of " America " , and the speeches share the name of one of several mountains from which both exhort " let freedom ring " .
King also is said to have used portions of Prathia Hall 's speech at the site of a burned - down African American church in Terrell County , Georgia , in September 1962 , in which she used the repeated phrase
" I have a dream " .
The church burned down after it was used for voter registration meetings .
The speech also alludes to in the second stanza of the speech .
Additionally , King quotes from ( " I have a dream that every valley shall be exalted ...
")
and ( " But let justice roll down like water ...
") .
He also alludes to the opening lines of Shakespeare 's Richard III ( " Now is the winter of our discontent
/ Made glorious summer ...
")
when he remarks that " this sweltering summer of the Negro 's legitimate discontent will not pass until there is an invigorating autumn ...
" RHETORIC Section::::Rhetoric .
The " I Have a Dream " speech can be dissected by using three rhetorical lenses : voice merging , prophetic voice , and dynamic spectacle .
Voice merging is the combining of one 's own voice with religious predecessors .
Prophetic voice is using rhetoric to speak for a population .
A dynamic spectacle has origins from the Aristotelian definition as " a weak hybrid form of drama , a theatrical concoction that relied upon external factors ( shock , sensation , and passionate release ) such as televised rituals of conflict and social control . "
Voice merging is a common technique used amongst African American preachers .
It combines the voices of previous preachers and excerpts from scriptures along with their own unique thoughts to create a unique voice .
King uses voice merging in his peroration when he references the secular hymn " America . "
The rhetoric of King 's speech can be compared to the rhetoric of Old Testament prophets .
During King 's speech , he speaks with urgency and crisis giving him a prophetic voice .
The prophetic voice must " restore a sense of duty and virtue amidst the decay of venality .
" An evident example is when King declares that , " now is the time to make justice a reality for all of God 's children . "
Why King 's speech was powerful is debated , but essentially , it came at a point of many factors combining at a key cultural turning point .
Executive speechwriter Anthony Trendl writes , " The right man delivered the right words to the right people in the right place at the right time . "
" Given the context of drama and tension in which it was situated " , King 's speech can be classified as a dynamic spectacle .
A dynamic spectacle is dependent on the situation in which it is used .
It can be considered a dynamic spectacle because it happened at the correct time and place : during the Civil Rights Movement and the March on Washington .
RESPONSES Section::::Responses .
The speech was lauded in the days after the event , and was widely considered the high point of the March by contemporary observers .
James Reston , writing for The New York Times , said that " Dr. King touched all the themes of the day , only better than anybody else .
He was full of the symbolism of Lincoln and Gandhi , and the cadences of the Bible .
He was both militant and sad , and he sent the crowd away feeling that the long journey had been worthwhile . "
Reston also noted that the event " was better covered by television and the press than any event here since President Kennedy 's inauguration " , and opined that " it will be a long time before [ Washington ] forgets the melodious and melancholy voice of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. crying out his dreams to the multitude . "
An article in The Boston Globe by Mary McGrory reported that King 's speech " caught the mood " and " moved the crowd " of the day " as no other " speaker in the event .
Marquis Childs of The Washington Post wrote that King 's speech " rose above mere oratory " .
An article in the Los Angeles Times commented that the " matchless eloquence " displayed by King—"a supreme orator " of " a type so rare as almost to be forgotten in our age"—put to shame the advocates of segregation by inspiring the " conscience of America " with the justice of the civil - rights cause .
The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , which viewed King and his allies for racial justice as subversive , also noticed the speech .
This provoked the organization to expand their COINTELPRO operation against the Southern Christian Leadership Conference ( SCLC ) , and to target King specifically as a major enemy of the United States .
Two days after King delivered " I Have a Dream " , Agent William C. Sullivan , the head of COINTELPRO , wrote a memo about King 's growing influence :
In the light of King 's powerful demagogic speech yesterday he stands head and shoulders above all other Negro leaders put together when it comes to influencing great masses of Negroes .
We must mark him now , if we have not done so before , as the most dangerous Negro of the future in this Nation from the standpoint of communism , the Negro and national security .
The speech was a success for the Kennedy administration and for the liberal civil rights coalition that had planned it .
It was considered a " triumph of managed protest " , and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred .
Kennedy had watched King 's speech on television and been very impressed .
Afterwards , March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with President Kennedy .
Kennedy felt the March bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill .
Meanwhile , some of the more radical Black leaders who were present condemned the speech ( along with the rest of the march ) as too compromising .
Malcolm X later wrote in his autobiography : " Who ever heard of angry revolutionaries swinging their bare feet together with their oppressor in lily pad pools , with gospels and guitars and ' I have a dream ' speeches ? "
LEGACY
Section::::Legacy .
The March on Washington put pressure on the Kennedy administration to advance its civil rights legislation in Congress .
The diaries of Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. , published posthumously in 2007 , suggest that President Kennedy was concerned that if the march failed to attract large numbers of demonstrators , it might undermine his civil rights efforts .
In the wake of the speech and march , King was named Man of the Year by TIME magazine for 1963 , and in 1964 , he was the youngest person ever awarded the Nobel Peace Prize .
The full speech did not appear in writing until August 1983 , some 15 years after King 's death , when a transcript was published in The Washington Post .
In 1990 , the Australian alternative comedy rock band Doug Anthony
All Stars released an album called Icon .
One song from Icon , " Shang - a - lang " , sampled the end of the speech .
In 1992 , the band Moodswings , incorporated excerpts from Martin Luther King Jr. 's " I Have a Dream " speech in their song " Spiritual High , Part III " on the album Moodfood .
In 2002 , the Library of Congress honored the speech by adding it to the United States National Recording Registry .
In 2003 , the National Park Service dedicated an inscribed marble pedestal to commemorate the location of King 's speech at the Lincoln Memorial .
The Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial was dedicated in 2011 .
The centerpiece for the memorial is based on a line from King 's
" I Have A Dream " speech : "
Out of a mountain of despair , a stone of hope . "
A -high relief of King named the " Stone of Hope " stands past two other pieces of granite that symbolize the " mountain of despair . "
In August 2012 , the Dutch DJ and producer Bakermat released the single " One Day " , which consists of an integrated sample of the speech .
The re - release in 2014 became a hit in several European countries .
On August 26 , 2013 , UK 's BBC Radio 4 broadcast " God 's Trombone " , in which Gary Younge looked behind the scenes of the speech and explored " what made it both timely and timeless " .
On August 28 , 2013 , thousands gathered on the mall in Washington D.C. where King made his historic speech to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the occasion .
In attendance were former U.S. Presidents Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter , and incumbent President Barack Obama , who addressed the crowd and spoke on the significance of the event .
Many of King 's family were in attendance .
On October 11 , 2015 , The Atlanta Journal - Constitution published an exclusive report about Stone Mountain officials considering installation of a new " Freedom Bell " honoring King and citing the speech 's reference to the mountain " Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia . "
Design details and a timeline for its installation remain to be determined .
The article mentioned inspiration for the proposed monument came from a bell - ringing ceremony held in 2013 in celebration of the 50th anniversary of King 's speech .
On April 20 , 2016 , Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew announced that the U.S. $ 5 bill , which has featured the Lincoln Memorial on its back , would undergo a redesign prior to 2020 .
Lew said that a portrait of Lincoln would remain on the front of the bill , but the back would be redesigned to depict various historical events that have occurred at the memorial , including an image from King 's speech .
Ava DuVernay was commissioned by the Smithsonian 's National Museum of African American History and Culture to create a film which debuted at the museum 's opening on September 24 , 2016 .
This film , August 28 : A Day in the Life of a People ( 2016 ) , tells of six significant events in African - American history that happened on the same date , August 28 .
Events depicted include ( among others ) the speech .
In October 2016 , Science Friday in a segment on its crowd sourced update to the Voyager Golden Record included the speech .
COPYRIGHT DISPUTE
Section::::Copyright dispute .
Because King 's speech was broadcast to a large radio and television audience , there was controversy about its copyright status .
If the performance of the speech constituted " general publication " , it would have entered the public domain due to King 's failure to register the speech with the Register of Copyrights .
However , if the performance only constituted " limited publication " , King retained common law copyright .
This led to a lawsuit , Estate of Martin Luther King , Jr. , Inc. v. CBS , Inc. , which established that the King estate does hold copyright over the speech and had standing to sue ; the parties then settled .
Unlicensed use of the speech or a part of it can still be lawful in some circumstances , especially in jurisdictions under doctrines such as fair use or fair dealing .
Under the applicable copyright laws , the speech will remain under copyright in the United States until 70 years after King 's death , until 2038 .
ORIGINAL COPY OF THE SPEECH Section::::Original copy of the speech .
As King waved goodbye to the audience , he handed George Raveling the original typewritten
" I Have a Dream " speech .
Raveling , a star Villanova Wildcats college basketball player , had volunteered as a security guard for the event and was on the podium with King at that moment .
In 2013 , Raveling still had custody of the original copy , for which he had been offered $ 3,000,000 , but he has said he does not intend to sell it .
SEE ALSO
* Prathia Hall REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Full text at the BBC * Video of " I Have a Dream " speech , from LearnOutLoud.com *
" I Have a Dream " Text and Audio from AmericanRhetoric.com
* Deposition concerning recording of the " I Have a Dream " speech * Lyrics of the traditional spiritual " Free At Last " * MLK : Before He Won the Nobel – slideshow by Life magazine * Chiastic outline of Martin Luther King Jr. 's " I Have a Dream " speech