M-80 ( EXPLOSIVE )
M-80s are an American class of large powerful firecrackers , sometimes called salutes .
M-80s were originally made in the early 20th century by the U.S. military to simulate explosives or artillery fire ; later , M-80s were manufactured as fireworks .
Traditionally , M-80s were made from a small cardboard tube , often red , approximately long and inside diameter , with a fuse or wick coming out of the side ; this type of fuse is commonly known as cannon fuse or Visco fuse , after a company responsible for standardizing the product .
The tubes often hold approximately 2½–3 grams of pyrotechnic flash powder ; many sources state that an M-80 carries 3 grams of powder .
LEGALITY CANADA Section::::Legality .
Section::::Canada .
M-80s are not authorized under the law , thus making importation , possession , transportation , storage or manufacturing illegal in Canada .
Firecrackers , including the M-80 , can be purchased from Native Reserves in Canada , as they have different governing laws .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
M-80s are classified as consumer fireworks ( class 1.4 G , formerly known as Class C ) , as opposed to display fireworks ( which were Class B , and are now 1.3 G ) .
Because an M-80 is a pyrotechnic device containing a charge in excess of 50 milligrams of pyrotechnic flash power , civilian use requires a license issued by federal authorities .
This is the result of the Child Protection Act of 1966 and regulation by the Consumer Product Safety Commission ( CPSC ) , with the purpose of limiting the potential property damage and bodily harm M-80s can cause .
This law also covers cherry bombs .
In 1975 , federal regulations were passed to limit all consumer - grade fireworks available for general sale to the public in the United States to a maximum of 50 milligrams flash powder , down from a previous maximum of 200 milligrams .
However , firecrackers mounted onto a rocket stick , or other aerial firework devices , such as rockets , Roman candles , and cakes etc . , may still have significantly more , up to 130 mg , or more , depending on device and classification , and can be legally purchased by any American civilian citizen .
A person with a federal explosives license , issued by the ATF , may be allowed to purchase M-80s .
Federal and state officials sometimes distribute them to farmers to scare away wildlife damaging their crops .
FAKE
M-80 Section::::Fake
M-80 .
Many firecrackers sold legally in the United States to consumers bear names and designations indicating
the original " M-80 " , such as for example " M-80 Firecracker " , " M-8000 " , or " M- # # " ( where # # is a number ) , those differ from the actual " M-80 " as in they are subject to the regulations with regard to the sale of explosives and fireworks to the general public .
These firecrackers most commonly have a small capsule with up to 50 mg of powder and a fuse in it .
Surrounding the capsule is plaster or a similar material , and finally a red tube and two plastic endcaps .
Because of the size of these firecrackers , buyers are occasionally deceived into thinking that the entire tube is full .
Also the fuse , at times , protrudes from the ends of these firecrackers , as opposed to the middle of the tube in real M-80s .
Genuine M-80s have paper endcaps , and contain 50–60 times more powder .
Contrary to urban legend , an M-80
that contains 3,000 mg of powder is not equivalent to a quarter - stick of dynamite .
Dynamite generally contains a stable nitroglycerin based high explosive , whereas M-80s or any other kind of firecracker contains a low explosive powder , like flash powder or black powder .
Some illicits , however , contain(ed ) , or were reported to contain , small amounts of picric acid ( similar to TNT ) , for greater effect .
ACCIDENTS Section::::Accidents .
Cases of documented injuries and accidents accompanied civilian M-80 use during the 1950s and 1960s , and still occur , as M-80s are still produced and sold to the public .
There have been documented cases of users losing their fingers or hands .
During a 1976 Richmond Coliseum KISS concert , a fan threw an M-80 onto the stage , leaving drummer Peter Criss with partial hearing loss for the remainder of the night .
In 1983 , an explosion at a secret unlicensed fireworks factory producing M-80 and M-100 fireworks near Benton , Tennessee killed eleven , injured one , and inflicted damage within a radius of several miles .
The operation was by far the largest known illegal fireworks operation , and the initial blast , heard as far away as fifteen miles from the site , was arguably the largest fireworks explosion ever documented .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* John Donner , A Professional 's Guide to Pyrotechnics :
Understanding and Making Exploding Fireworks , Paladin Press , 1997 .