SAGUARO
The saguaro ( , ) ( Carnegiea gigantea ) is an arborescent ( tree - like ) cactus species in the monotypic genus Carnegiea , which can grow to be over tall .
It is native to the Sonoran Desert in Arizona , the Mexican State of Sonora , and the Whipple Mountains and Imperial County areas of California .
The saguaro blossom is the state wildflower of Arizona .
Its scientific name is given in honor of Andrew Carnegie .
In 1994 , Saguaro National Park , near Tucson , Arizona , was designated to help protect this species and its habitat .
The image of the saguaro is indelibly linked with that of the American Southwest , especially in western films .
The common name saguaro came into the English language through the Spanish language , originating in the Mayo language .
Saguaros have a relatively long lifespan , often exceeding 150 years .
They may grow their first side arm any time from 75–100 years of age , but some never grow any arms .
A saguaro without arms is called a spear .
Arms are developed to increase the plant 's reproductive capacity , as more apices lead to more flowers and fruit .
The growth rate of saguaros is strongly dependent on precipitation ; saguaros in drier western Arizona grow only half as fast as those in and around Tucson .
Saguaros grow slowly from seed , never from cuttings , and grow to be over in height .
The largest known living saguaro is the Champion Saguaro growing in Maricopa County , Arizona , measuring high with a girth of .
The tallest saguaro ever measured was an armless specimen found near Cave Creek , Arizona .
It was in height before it was toppled in 1986 by a windstorm .
A saguaro is able to absorb and store considerable amounts of rainwater , visibly expanding in the process , while slowly using the stored water as needed .
This characteristic enables the saguaro to survive during periods of drought .
When rain is plentiful and the saguaro is fully hydrated it can weigh between .
GENOME Section::::Genome .
The saguaro genome is around 1 billion base pairs long .
Sequencing has revealed that the genome of the saguaro 's chloroplast is the smallest known among non - parasitic flowering plants .
SPINES
Section::::Spines .
The spines on a saguaro can grow up to per day .
When held up to the light or bisected , alternating light and dark bands transverse to the long axis of spines can be seen .
These transverse bands have been correlated to daily growth .
In columnar cacti , spines almost always grow in areoles which originate at the apex of the plant .
A spine stops growing in its first season .
Areoles are moved to the side and the apex continues to grow upwards .
Thus , older spines are towards the base of a columnar cactus and newer spines are near the apex .
Studies are underway to examine the relationship of carbon and oxygen isotope ratios in the tissues of spines of an individual to its climate and photosynthetic history ( acanthochronology ) .
FLOWERS Section::::Flowers .
The white , waxy flowers appear in April through June , opening well after sunset and closing in mid - afternoon .
They continue to produce nectar after sunrise .
Flowers are self - incompatible , thus requiring cross - pollination .
Large quantities of pollen are required for complete pollination because many ovules are present .
This pollen is produced by the extremely numerous stamens , which in one notable case totaled 3,482 in a single flower .
A well - pollinated fruit contains several thousand tiny seeds .
Saguaros have a redundant pollination system , i.e. full fruit set is possible even if only a fraction of the pollinating species are present .
Main pollinators are honey bees , bats , and white - winged doves .
In most years , diurnal visitors , mostly honey bees , are the main contributors for fruit .
Other diurnal pollinators are birds such as Costa 's hummingbird , the black - chinned hummingbird , the broad - billed hummingbird , the hooded oriole , Scott 's oriole , the Gila woodpecker , the gilded flicker , the verdin , and the house finch .
The primary nocturnal pollinator is the lesser long - nosed bat , feeding on the nectar .
A number of floral characteristics are geared toward bat pollination : nocturnal opening of the flowers , nocturnal maturation of pollen , very rich nectar , position high above ground , durable blooms that can withstand a bat 's weight , and fragrance emitted at night .
Further , the amino acids in the pollen appear to help sustain lactation in bats .
FRUIT Section::::Fruit .
The ruby red fruits are long and ripen in June , each containing around 2,000 seeds , plus sweet , fleshy connective tissue .
The fruits are edible and prized by local people .
The fruits can not be picked by hand , but must instead be harvested using a pole ( often a saguaro rib ) long , to the end of which is attached another pole .
The O'odham tribes have a long history of saguaro fruit use .
The Tohono O'odham tribes celebrate the beginning of their summer growing season with a ceremony using a fermented drink made from the bright red fruit , to summon rains vital for their crops .
NESTS Section::::Nests .
Native birds such as Gila woodpeckers , purple martins , house finches , and gilded flickers live inside holes in saguaros .
Flickers excavate larger holes higher on the stem .
The nest cavity is deep , and the parents and young are entirely hidden from view .
The saguaro creates callus tissue on the wound .
When the saguaro dies and its soft flesh rots , the callus remains as a so - called saguaro boot , which was used by natives for storage .
The Gila woodpeckers ( Melanerpes uropygialis ) create new nest holes each season rather than reuse the old ones , leaving convenient nest holes for other birds , such as elf owls , flycatchers , and wrens .
In recent years , early - breeding , aggressive , non - native birds have taken over the nests to the detriment of elf owls that breed and nest later .
LAWS Section::::Laws .
Harming a saguaro in any manner , including cactus plugging , is illegal by state law in Arizona , and when houses or highways are built , special permits must be obtained to move or destroy any saguaro affected .
Exceptions to this general understanding exist ; for example , a private landowner whose property is or less , where the initial construction has already occurred , may remove a saguaro from the property .
This is common when the cactus falls over in a storm , its location interferes with a house addition , or it becomes a potential hazard to humans .
Contrary to published statements , there is no law mandating prison sentences of 25 years for cutting a cactus down ; however it is considered a class four felony with a possible 3 year , 9 month maximum sentence .
ETHNOBOTANY
* The saguaro is an important source of food and shelter for the Tohono O'odham .
Saguaro spines are sometimes used as sewing needles and the ribs are used to make harvesting tools .
* The ribs of the saguaro were used for construction and other purposes by Native Americans .
A fine example can be seen in the roofing of the cloisters of the Mission San Xavier del Bac on the Tohono O'odham lands near Tucson .
*
The Seri people of northwestern Mexico used the plant , which they call mojépe , for a number of purposes .
LOCATION AND IMAGERY Section::::Location and imagery .
The saguaro is often used as an emblem in commercials and logos that attempt to convey a sense of the Southwest , even if the product has no connection to Arizona or the Sonoran Desert .
For instance , no naturally occurring saguaros are found within 250 miles ( 400 km ) of El Paso , Texas , but the silhouette is found on the label of Old El Paso brand products .
Though the geographic anomaly has lessened in recent years , Western films once enthusiastically placed saguaros in the Monument Valley of Arizona , as well as New Mexico , Utah , and Texas .
The Dallas , Texas - based band , Reverend Horton Heat , pokes fun at this phenomenon in their song
" Ai n't no Saguaro in Texas " .
No wild saguaros are found anywhere in New Mexico , Texas , Colorado , Utah , or Nevada , nor in the high deserts of northern Arizona .
GALLERY
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Bibliography
* Benson , L. ( 1981 ) .
The Cacti of Arizona .
University of Arizona Press . .
* Drezner TD ( 2005 ) Saguaro ( Carnegiea gigantea , Cactaceae ) growth rate over its American range and the link to summer precipitation .
Southwest Nat 50:65–68 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Flora of North America :
Carnegiea gigantea * Jepson Flora Project :
Carnegiea gigantea
* Calphotos :
Carnegiea gigantea * USDA Plants Profile :
Carnegiea gigantea * Saguaro cactus.net