IRON CURTAIN
The Iron Curtain was the name for the physical boundary dividing Europe into two separate areas from the end of World War II in 1945 until the end of the Cold War in 1991 .
The term symbolizes the efforts by the Soviet Union to block itself and its satellite states from open contact with the West and its allied states .
On the east side of the Iron Curtain were the countries that were connected to or influenced by the Soviet Union , while on the west side were the countries that were allied to the United States or nominally neutral .
Separate international economic and military alliances were developed on each side of the Iron Curtain : * Member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance and the Warsaw Pact , with the Soviet Union as the leading state
* Member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and with the United States as the pre - eminent power
Physically , the Iron Curtain took the form of border defences between the countries of Europe in the middle of the continent .
The most notable border was marked by the Berlin Wall and its Checkpoint Charlie , which served as a symbol of the Curtain as a whole .
The events that demolished the Iron Curtain started in discontent in Poland , and continued in Hungary , the German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) , Bulgaria , Czechoslovakia , and Romania .
Romania became the only communist state in Europe to overthrow its government with violence .
The use of the term iron curtain as a metaphor for strict separation goes back at least as far as the early 19th century .
It originally referred to fireproof curtains in theaters .
Although its popularity as a Cold War symbol is attributed to its use in a speech Winston Churchill gave on the 5 March 1946 in Fulton , Missouri , German Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels had already used the term in reference to the Soviet Union .
PRE – COLD WAR
USAGE Section::::Pre – Cold War usage .
Various usages of the term " iron curtain " (; ; ; Czech and Slovak : Železná opona ; ; ; ; ; ; ) pre - date Churchill 's use of the phrase .
The concept goes back to the Babylonian Talmud of the 3rd to 5th centuries CE , where Tractate Sota 38b refers to a " mechitza shel barzel " , an iron barrier or divider : " אפילו מחיצה של ברזל אינה מפסקת בין ישראל לאביהם שבשמים " ( Even an iron barrier can not separate [ the people of ] Israel from their heavenly father ) .
The term " iron curtain " has since been used metaphorically in two rather different senses – firstly to denote the end of an era and secondly to denote a closed geopolitical border .
The source of these metaphors can refer to either the safety curtain deployed in theatres ( the first one was installed by the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane in 1794 ) or to roller shutters used to secure commercial premises .
The first metaphorical usage of " iron curtain " , in the sense of an end of an era , perhaps should be attributed to British author Arthur Machen ( 1863–1947 ) , who used the term in his 1895 novel
The Three Impostors : " ...
the door clanged behind me with the noise of thunder , and I felt that an iron curtain had fallen on the brief passage of my life " .
The English translation of a Russian text shown immediately below repeats the use of " clang " with reference to an " iron curtain " , suggesting that the Russian writer , publishing 23 years after Machen , may have been familiar with the popular British author .
Queen Elisabeth of the Belgians used the term " Iron Curtain " in the context of World War I to describe the political situation between Belgium and Germany in 1914 .
The first recorded application of the term to Communist Russia , again in the sense of the end of an era , comes in Vasily Rozanov 's 1918 polemic The Apocalypse of Our Times , and it is possible that Churchill read it there following the publication of the book 's English translation in 1920 .
The passage runs : The first English - language use of the term iron curtain applied to the border of communist Russia in the sense of " an impenetrable barrier " was used in 1920 by Ethel Snowden , in her book Through Bolshevik Russia .
G.K. Chesterton used the phrase in a 1924 essay in The Illustrated London News .
Chesterton , while defending Distributism , refers to " that iron curtain of industrialism that has cut us off not only from our neighbours ' condition , but even from our own past " .
The term also appears in the 1933 satirical novel England , Their England ; used there to describe the way an artillery barrage protected the infantry from an enemy assault : " ...
the western sky was a blaze of yellow flame .
The iron curtain was down " .
Sebastian Haffner used the metaphor in his book Germany : Jekyll & Hyde , published in London in 1940 , in introducing his discussion of the Nazi rise to power in Germany in 1933 : " Back then to March 1933 .
How , a moment before the iron curtain was wrung down on it , did the German political stage appear ? "
All German theatres had to install an iron curtain ( eiserner Vorhang ) as an obligatory precaution to prevent the possibility of fire spreading from the stage to the rest of the theatre .
Such fires were rather common because the decor often was very flammable .
In case of fire , a metal wall would separate the stage from the theatre , secluding the flames to be extinguished by firefighters .
Douglas Reed used this metaphor in his book Disgrace Abounding : " The bitter strife [ in Yugoslavia between Serb unionists and Croat federalists ] had only been hidden by the iron safety - curtain of the King 's dictatorship " .
A May 1943 article in Signal , a Nazi illustrated propaganda periodical published in many languages , bore the title " Behind the Iron Curtain " .
It discussed " the iron curtain that more than ever before separates the world from the Soviet Union " .
The German Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels wrote in his weekly newspaper Das Reich that if the Nazis should lose the war a Soviet - formed " iron curtain " would arise because of agreements made by Stalin , Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill at the Yalta Conference : " An iron curtain would fall over this enormous territory controlled by the Soviet Union , behind which nations would be slaughtered " .
The first recorded oral intentional mention of an Iron Curtain in the Soviet context occurred in a broadcast by Lutz von Krosigk to the German people on 2 May 1945 :
" In the East the iron curtain behind which , unseen by the eyes of the world , the work of destruction goes on , is moving steadily forward " .
Churchill 's first recorded use of the term " iron curtain " came in a 12 May 1945 telegram he sent to U.S. President Harry S. Truman regarding his concern about Soviet actions , stating " [ a]n iron curtain is drawn down upon their front .
We do not know what is going on behind " .
He was further concerned about " another immense flight of the German population westward as this enormous Muscovite advance towards the centre of Europe " .
Churchill concluded " then the curtain will descend again to a very large extent , if not entirely .
Thus a broad land of many hundreds of miles of Russian - occupied territory will isolate us from Poland " .
Churchill repeated the words in a further telegram to President Truman on 4 June 1945 , in which he protested against such a U.S. retreat to what was earlier designated as , and ultimately became , the U.S. occupation zone , saying the military withdrawal would bring " Soviet power into the heart of Western Europe and the descent of an iron curtain between us and everything to the eastward " .
At the Potsdam Conference , Churchill complained to Stalin about an " iron fence " coming down upon the British Mission in Bucharest .
The first American print reference to the " Iron Curtain " occurred when C.L. Sulzberger of The New York Times first used it in a dispatch published on 23 July 1945 .
He had heard the term used by Vladko Maček , a Croatian politician , a Yugoslav opposition leader who had fled his homeland for Paris in May 1945 .
Maček told Sulzberger , " During the four years while I was interned by the Germans in Croatia
I saw how the Partisans were lowering an iron curtain over Jugoslavia [ Yugoslavia ] so that nobody could know what went on behind it " .
The term was first used in the British House of Commons by Churchill on 16 August 1945 when he stated " it is not impossible that tragedy on a prodigious scale is unfolding itself behind the iron curtain which at the moment divides Europe in twain " .
Allen Dulles used the term in a speech on 3 December 1945 , referring to only Germany , following his conclusion that " in general the Russians are acting little better than thugs " , had " wiped out all the liquid assets " , and refused to issue food cards to emigrating Germans , leaving them " often more dead than alive " .
Dulles concluded that " [ a]n iron curtain has descended over the fate of these people and very likely conditions are truly terrible .
The promises at Yalta to the contrary , probably 8 to 10 million people are being enslaved " .
DURING THE COLD WAR BUILDING ANTAGONISM Section::::During the Cold War .
Section::::Building antagonism .
The antagonism between the Soviet Union and the West that came to be described as the " iron curtain " had various origins .
During the summer of 1939 , after conducting negotiations both with a British - French group and with Nazi Germany regarding potential military and political agreements , the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed the German – Soviet Commercial Agreement ( which provided for the trade of certain German military and civilian equipment in exchange for Soviet raw materials ) and the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact ( signed in late August 1939 ) , named after the foreign secretaries of the two countries ( Vyacheslav Molotov and Joachim von Ribbentrop ) , which included a secret agreement to split Poland and Eastern Europe between the two states .
The Soviets thereafter occupied Eastern Poland ( September 1939 ) , Latvia ( June 1940 ) , Lithuania ( 1940 ) , northern Romania ( Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina , late June 1940 ) , Estonia ( 1940 ) and eastern Finland ( March 1940 ) .
From August 1939 , relations between the West and the Soviets deteriorated further when the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany engaged in an extensive economic relationship by which the Soviet Union sent Germany vital oil , rubber , manganese and other materials in exchange for German weapons , manufacturing machinery and technology .
Nazi – Soviet trade ended in June 1941 when Germany broke the Pact and invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa .
In the course of World War II , Stalin determined to acquire a buffer area against Germany , with pro - Soviet states on its border in an Eastern bloc .
Stalin 's aims led to strained relations at the Yalta Conference ( February 1945 ) and the subsequent Potsdam Conference ( August 1945 ) .
People in the West expressed opposition to Soviet domination over the buffer states , and the fear grew that the Soviets were building an empire that might be a threat to them and their interests .
Nonetheless , at the Potsdam Conference , the Allies assigned parts of Poland , Finland , Romania , Germany , and the Balkans to Soviet control or influence .
In return , Stalin promised the Western Allies that he would allow those territories the right to national self - determination .
Despite Soviet cooperation during the war , these concessions left many in the West uneasy .
In particular , Churchill feared that the United States might return to its pre - war isolationism , leaving the exhausted European states unable to resist Soviet demands .
( President Franklin D. Roosevelt had announced at Yalta that after the defeat of Germany , U.S. forces would withdraw from Europe within two years . )
IRON CURTAIN SPEECH Section::::Iron Curtain speech .
Winston Churchill 's of 5 March 1946 , at Westminster College , used the term " iron curtain " in the context of Soviet - dominated Eastern Europe : From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the Continent .
Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe .
Warsaw , Berlin , Prague , Vienna , Budapest , Belgrade , Bucharest and Sofia ; all these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere , and all are subject , in one form or another , not only to Soviet influence but to a very high and in some cases increasing measure of control from Moscow .
Much of the Western public still regarded the Soviet Union as a close ally in the context of the recent defeat of Nazi Germany and of Imperial Japan .
Although not well received at the time , the phrase iron curtain gained popularity as a shorthand reference to the division of Europe as the Cold War strengthened .
The Iron Curtain served to keep people in and information out , and people throughout the West eventually came to accept and use the metaphor .
Churchill 's " Sinews of Peace " address was to strongly criticise the Soviet Union 's exclusive and secretive tension policies along with the Eastern Europe 's state form , Police State ( Polizeistaat ) .
He expressed the Allied Nations ' distrust of the Soviet Union after the World War II .
In September that year , US - Soviet Union cooperation collapsed due to the US disavowal of the Soviet Union 's opinion on the German problem in the Stuttgart Council , and then followed the announcement by US President , Harry S. Truman , of a hard line anti - Soviet , anticommunist policy .
After that the phrase became more widely used as anti - Soviet term in the West .
In addition , Churchill mentioned in his speech that regions under the Soviet Union 's control were expanding their leverage and power without any restriction .
He asserted that in order to put a brake on this ongoing phenomenon , the commanding force of and strong unity between the UK and the US was necessary .
Stalin took note of Churchill 's speech and responded in Pravda soon afterward .
He accused Churchill of warmongering , and defended Soviet " friendship " with eastern European states as a necessary safeguard against another invasion .
He further accused Churchill of hoping to install right - wing governments in eastern Europe with the goal of agitating those states against the Soviet Union .
Andrei Zhdanov , Stalin 's chief propagandist , used the term against the West in an August 1946 speech : POLITICAL , ECONOMIC AND MILITARY REALITIES EASTERN
BLOC Section::::Political , economic and military realities .
Section::::Eastern Bloc .
While the Iron Curtain remained in place , much of Eastern Europe and parts of Central Europe ( except West Germany , Liechtenstein , Switzerland and Austria ) found themselves under the hegemony of the Soviet Union .
The Soviet Union annexed : * Estonia , * Latvia * Lithuania as Soviet Socialist Republics within the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
Germany effectively gave Moscow a free hand in much of these territories in the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact of 1939 , signed before Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 .
Other Soviet - annexed territories included : * Eastern Poland ( incorporated into Ukrainian and Byelorussian SSRs ) , * Part of eastern Finland ( became part of the Karelo - Finnish SSR )
* Northern Romania ( part of which became the Moldavian SSR ) .
* Kaliningrad Oblast , the northern half of East Prussia , taken in 1945 .
Between 1945 and 1949 the Soviets converted the following areas into Soviet satellite states : *
The German Democratic Republic * The People 's Republic of Bulgaria * The People 's Republic of Poland * The Hungarian People 's Republic * The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic * The People 's Republic of Romania * The People 's Socialist Republic of Albania ( which re - aligned itself in the 1960s away from the Soviet Union and towards the People 's Republic of China ) Soviet - installed governments ruled the Eastern Bloc countries , with the exception of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , which retained its full independence .
The majority of European states to the east of the Iron Curtain developed their own international economic and military alliances , such as COMECON and the Warsaw Pact .
WEST OF THE IRON CURTAIN Section::::West of the Iron Curtain .
To the west of the Iron Curtain , the countries of Western Europe , Northern Europe , and Southern Europe – along with Austria , West Germany , Liechtenstein and Switzerland – operated market economies .
With the exception of a period of fascism in Spain ( until 1975 ) and Portugal ( until 1974 ) and a military dictatorship in Greece ( 1967–1974 ) , democratic governments ruled these countries .
Most of the states of Europe to the west of the Iron Curtain – with the exception of neutral Switzerland , Liechtenstein , Austria , Sweden , Finland , Malta and Republic of Ireland – allied themselves with the United States and Canada within NATO .
Economically , the European Community and the European Free Trade Association represented Western counterparts to COMECON .
Most of the nominally neutral states were economically closer to the United States than they were to the Warsaw Pact .
FURTHER DIVISION IN THE LATE 1940S Section::::Further division in the late 1940s .
In January 1947 Harry Truman appointed General George Marshall as Secretary of State , scrapped Joint Chiefs of Staff ( JCS )
directive 1067 ( which embodied the Morgenthau Plan ) and supplanted it with JCS 1779 , which decreed that an orderly and prosperous Europe requires the economic contributions of a stable and productive Germany .
"
Administration officials met with Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov and others to press for an economically self - sufficient Germany , including a detailed accounting of the industrial plants , goods and infrastructure already removed by the Soviets .
After five and a half weeks of negotiations , Molotov refused the demands and the talks were adjourned .
Marshall was particularly discouraged after personally meeting with Stalin , who expressed little interest in a solution to German economic problems .
The United States concluded that a solution could not wait any longer .
In a 5 June 1947 speech , Marshall announced a comprehensive program of American assistance to all European countries wanting to participate , including the Soviet Union and those of Eastern Europe , called the Marshall Plan .
Stalin opposed the Marshall Plan .
He had built up the Eastern Bloc protective belt of Soviet - controlled nations on his Western border , and wanted to maintain this buffer zone of states combined with a weakened Germany under Soviet control .
Fearing American political , cultural and economic penetration , Stalin eventually forbade Soviet Eastern bloc countries of the newly formed Cominform from accepting Marshall Plan aid .
In Czechoslovakia , that required a Soviet - backed Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 , the brutality of which shocked Western powers more than any event so far and set in a motion a brief scare that war would occur and swept away the last vestiges of opposition to the Marshall Plan in the United States Congress .
Relations further deteriorated when , in January 1948 , the U.S. State Department also published a collection of documents titled Nazi - Soviet Relations , 1939 – 1941 :
Documents from the Archives of The German Foreign Office , which contained documents recovered from the Foreign Office of Nazi Germany revealing Soviet conversations with Germany regarding the Molotov - Ribbentrop Pact , including its secret protocol dividing eastern Europe , the 1939 German - Soviet Commercial Agreement , and discussions of the Soviet Union potentially becoming the fourth Axis Power .
In response , one month later , the Soviet Union published Falsifiers of History , a Stalin - edited and partially re - written book attacking the West .
After the Marshall Plan , the introduction of a new currency to Western Germany to replace the debased Reichsmark and massive electoral losses for communist parties , in June 1948 , the Soviet Union cut off surface road access to Berlin , initiating the Berlin Blockade , which cut off all non - Soviet food , water and other supplies for the citizens of the non - Soviet sectors of Berlin .
Because Berlin was located within the Soviet - occupied zone of Germany , the only available methods of supplying the city were three limited air corridors .
A massive aerial supply campaign was initiated by the United States , Britain , France , and other countries , the success of which caused the Soviets to lift their blockade in May 1949 .
EMIGRATION RESTRICTIONS Section::::Emigration restrictions .
One of the conclusions of the Yalta Conference was that the western Allies would return all Soviet citizens who found themselves in their zones to the Soviet Union .
This affected the liberated Soviet prisoners of war ( branded as traitors ) , forced laborers , anti - Soviet collaborators with the Germans , and anti - communist refugees .
Migration from east to west of the Iron Curtain , except under limited circumstances , was effectively halted after 1950 .
Before 1950 , over 15 million people ( mainly ethnic Germans ) emigrated from Soviet - occupied eastern European countries to the west in the five years immediately following World War II .
However , restrictions implemented during the Cold War stopped most East - West migration , with only 13.3 million migrations westward between 1950 and 1990 .
More than 75 % of those emigrating from Eastern Bloc countries between 1950 and 1990 did so under bilateral agreements for " ethnic migration .
"
About 10 % were refugees permitted to emigrate under the Geneva Convention of 1951 .
Most Soviets allowed to leave during this time period were ethnic Jews permitted to emigrate to Israel after a series of embarrassing defections in 1970 caused the Soviets to open very limited ethnic emigrations .
The fall of the Iron Curtain was accompanied by a massive rise in European East - West migration .
AS
A PHYSICAL ENTITY Section::::As a physical entity .
The Iron Curtain took physical shape in the form of border defenses between the countries of western and eastern Europe .
There were some of the most heavily militarised areas in the world , particularly the so - called " inner German border " – commonly known as die Grenze in German – between East and West Germany .
The inner German border was marked in rural areas by double fences made of steel mesh ( expanded metal ) with sharp edges , while near urban areas a high concrete barrier similar to the Berlin Wall was built .
The installation of the Wall in 1961 brought an end to a decade during which the divided capital of divided Germany was one of the easiest places to move west across the Iron Curtain .
The barrier was always a short distance inside East German territory to avoid any intrusion into Western territory .
The actual borderline was marked by posts and signs and was overlooked by numerous watchtowers set behind the barrier .
The strip of land on the West German side of the barrier – between the actual borderline and the barrier – was readily accessible but only at considerable personal risk , because it was patrolled by both East and West German border guards .
Several villages , many historic , were destroyed as they lay too close to the border , for example Erlebach .
Shooting incidents were not uncommon , and a total of 28 East German border guards and several hundred civilians were killed between 1948 – 1981 ( some may have been victims of " friendly fire " by their own side ) .
Elsewhere along the border between West and East , the defense works resembled those on the intra - German border .
During the Cold War , the border zone in Hungary started from the border .
Citizens could only enter the area if they lived in the zone or had a passport valid for traveling out .
Traffic control points and patrols enforced this regulation .
Those who lived within the border - zone needed special permission to enter the area within of the border .
The area was very difficult to approach and heavily fortified .
In the 1950s and 1960s , a double barbed - wire fence was installed from the border .
The space between the two fences were laden with land mines .
The minefield was later replaced with an electric signal fence ( about from the border ) and a barbed wire fence , along with guard towers and a sand strip to track border violations .
Regular patrols sought to prevent escape attempts .
They included cars and mounted units .
Guards and dog patrol units watched the border 24/7 and were authorised to use their weapons to stop escapees .
The wire fence nearest the actual border was irregularly displaced from the actual border , which was marked only by stones .
Anyone attempting to escape would have to cross up to before they could cross the actual border .
Several escape attempts failed when the escapees were stopped after crossing the outer fence .
In parts of Czechoslovakia , the border strip became hundreds of meters wide , and an area of increasing restrictions was defined as the border was approached .
Only people with the appropriate government permissions were allowed to get close to the border .
The Soviet Union built a fence along the entire border to Norway and Finland .
It is located one or a few kilometres from the border , and has automatic alarms detecting if someone climbs over it .
In Greece , a highly militarised area called the " Επιτηρούμενη Ζώνη " ( " Surveillance Area " ) was created by the Greek Army along the Greek - Bulgarian border , subject to significant security - related regulations and restrictions .
Inhabitants within this 25 km wide strip of land were forbidden to drive cars , own land bigger than 60 m and had to travel within the area with a special passport issued by Greek military authorities .
Additionally , the Greek state used this area to encapsulate and monitor a non - Greek ethnic minority , the Pomaks , a Muslim and Bulgarian - speaking minority which was regarded as hostile to the interests of the Greek state during the Cold War because of its familiarity with their fellow Pomaks living on the other side of the Iron Curtain .
The Hungarian outer fence became the first part of the Iron Curtain to be dismantled .
After the border fortifications were dismantled , a section was rebuilt for a formal ceremony .
On 27 June 1989 , the foreign ministers of Austria and Hungary , Alois Mock and Gyula Horn , ceremonially cut through the border defences separating their countries .
The creation of these highly militarised no - man 's lands led to de facto nature reserves and created a wildlife corridor across Europe ; this helped the spread of several species to new territories .
Since the fall of the Iron Curtain , several initiatives are pursuing the creation of a European Green Belt nature preserve area along the Iron Curtain 's former route .
In fact , a long - distance cycling route along the length of the former border called the Iron Curtain Trail ( ICT ) exists as a project of the European Union and other associated nations .
The trail is long and spans from Finland to Greece .
The term " Iron Curtain " was only used for the fortified borders in Europe ; it was not used for similar borders in Asia between communist and capitalist states ( these were , for a time , dubbed the Bamboo Curtain ) .
The border between North Korea and South Korea is very comparable to the former inner German border , particularly in its degree of militarisation , but it has never conventionally been considered part of any Iron Curtain .
HELMSTEDT - MARIENBORN CROSSING
FALL OF THE IRON CURTAIN Section::::Fall of the Iron Curtain .
Following a period of economic and political stagnation under Brezhnev and his immediate successors , the Soviet Union decreased its intervention in Eastern Bloc politics .
Mikhail Gorbachev ( General Secretary from 1985 ) decreased adherence to the Brezhnev Doctrine , which held that if socialism were threatened in any state then other socialist governments had an obligation to intervene to preserve it , in favor of the " Sinatra Doctrine " .
He also initiated the policies of glasnost ( openness ) and perestroika ( economic restructuring ) .
A wave of Revolutions occurred throughout the Eastern Bloc in 1989 .
After receiving an informal clearance from Gorbachev ( who said " there will not be a new 1956 " ) on March 3 . 1989 , on May 2 of the same year the Hungarian government announced and started in Rajka ( in the locality known as the " city of three borders " , on the border with Austria and Czechoslovakia ) the destruction of the Iron Curtain , whose last section will be demolished with an official ceremony , attended by the highest authorities of the Federal Republic of Austria , on 27 June 1989 , which had the function of calling all European peoples still under the yoke of the national - communist regimes to freedom .
In April 1989 the People 's Republic of Poland legalised the Solidarity organisation , which captured 99 % of available parliamentary seats in June .
These elections , in which anti - communist candidates won a striking victory , inaugurated a series of peaceful anti - communist revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe that eventually culminated in the fall of communism .
On 19 August 1989 , more than 600 East Germans attending the " Pan - European Picnic " on the Hungarian border broke through the Iron Curtain and fled into Austria .
Hungarian border guards had threatened to shoot anyone crossing the border , but when the time came , they did not intervene and allowed the people to cross .
In a historic session from 16 to 20 October , the Hungarian parliament adopted legislation providing for multi - party parliamentary elections and a direct presidential election .
The legislation transformed Hungary from a People 's Republic into the Republic of Hungary , guaranteed human and civil rights , and created an institutional structure that ensured separation of powers among the judicial , legislative , and executive branches of government .
In November 1989 , following mass protests in East Germany and the relaxing of border restrictions in Czechoslovakia , tens of thousands of East Berliners flooded checkpoints along the Berlin Wall , crossing into West Berlin .
In the People 's Republic of Bulgaria , the day after the mass crossings across the Berlin Wall , leader Todor Zhivkov was ousted .
In the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic , following protests of an estimated half - million Czechoslovaks , the government permitted travel to the west and abolished provisions guaranteeing the ruling Communist party its leading role , preceding the Velvet Revolution .
In the Socialist Republic of Romania , on 22 December 1989 , the Romanian military sided with protesters and turned on Communist ruler Nicolae Ceauşescu , who was executed after a brief trial three days later .
In the People 's Socialist Republic of Albania , a new package of regulations went into effect on 3 July 1990 entitling all Albanians over the age of 16 to own a passport for foreign travel .
Meanwhile , hundreds of Albanian citizens gathered around foreign embassies to seek political asylum and flee the country .
The Berlin Wall officially remained guarded after 9 November 1989 , although the inter - German border had become effectively meaningless .
The official dismantling of the Wall by the East German military did not begin until June 1990 .
In July 1990 , the day East Germany adopted the West German currency , all border - controls ceased and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl convinced Gorbachev to drop Soviet objections to a reunited Germany within NATO in return for substantial German economic aid to the Soviet Union . MONUMENTS Section::::Monuments .
There is an Iron Curtain monument in the southern part of the Czech Republic at approximately .
A few hundred meters of the original fence , and one of the guard towers , has remained installed .
There are interpretive signs in Czech and English that explain the history and significance of the Iron Curtain .
This is the only surviving part of the fence in the Czech Republic , though several guard towers and bunkers can still be seen .
Some of these are part of the Communist Era defences , some are from the never - used Czechoslovak border fortifications in defence against Adolf Hitler , and some towers were , or have become , hunting platforms .
Another monument is located in Fertőrákos , Hungary , at the site of the Pan - European Picnic .
On the eastern hill of the stone quarry stands a metal sculpture by Gabriela von Habsburg .
It is a column made of metal and barbed wire with the date of the Pan - European Picnic and the names of participants .
On the ribbon under the board is the Latin text : " In necessariis unitas – in dubiis libertas – in omnibus caritas . "
( Unity in unavoidable matters – freedom in doubtful matters – love in all things . )
The memorial symbolises the iron curtain and recalls forever the memories of the border breakthrough in 1989 .
Another monument is located in the village of Devín , now part of Bratislava , Slovakia , at the confluence of the Danube and Morava rivers .
Another monument is located in Fertőrákos , Hungary , at the site of the Pan - European Picnic .
On the eastern hill of the stone quarry stands a metal sculpture by Gabriela von Habsburg .
It is a column made of metal and barbed wire with the date of the Pan - European Picnic and the names of participants .
On the ribbon under the board is the Latin text : " In necessariis unitas – in dubiis libertas – in omnibus caritas . "
( Unity in unavoidable matters – freedom in doubtful matters – love in all things . )
The memorial symbolises the iron curtain and recalls forever the memories of the border breakthrough in 1989 .
There are several open air museums in parts of the former inner German border , as for example in Berlin and in Mödlareuth , a village that has been divided for several hundred years .
The memory of the division is being kept alive in many other places along the Grenze .
ANALOGOUS TERMS
Section::::Analogous terms .
Throughout the Cold War the term " curtain " would become a common euphemism for boundaries – physical or ideological – between communist and capitalist states .
* An analogue of the Iron Curtain , the Bamboo Curtain , surrounded the People 's Republic of China .
As the standoff between the West and the countries of the Iron and Bamboo curtains eased with the end of the Cold War , the term fell out of any but historical usage .
* The short distance , 3.8 km ( 2.4 mi ) , between the Soviet Union ( Big Diomede ) and the U.S. ( Little Diomede Island , state of Alaska ) in the Bering Sea became known as the " Ice Curtain " during the Cold War .
* A field of cacti surrounding the U.S. Naval station at Guantanamo Bay planted by Cuba was occasionally termed the " Cactus Curtain " .
*
The phrase " Grass Curtain " was used by South Sudanese during the First Sudanese Civil War to describe the oppression that hid political violence in Southern Sudan from wider attention . SEE ALSO
* Berlin Wall
* Cold War * Danube River Conference of 1948
* Eastern Bloc
* Removal of Hungary 's border fence * Revolutions of 1989
* Telephone tapping in the Eastern Bloc
* Western betrayal
* Bamboo Curtain Section::::See also .
Post Cold War :
* European Green Belt , a body of conservationists preserving the former Iron Curtain security zone which has become a wildlife preserve
* Iron Curtain Trail , a long - distance cycling route within the European Green Belt
Geography : * Blue Banana at the west of the curtain
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Lewkowicz , N. , ( 2008 )
The German Question and the Origins of the Cold War ( IPOC :
Milan )
* Watry , David M. Diplomacy at the Brink : Eisenhower , Churchill , and Eden in the Cold War .
Baton Rouge :
Louisiana State University Press , 2014 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Freedom Without Walls : German Missions in the United States Looking Back at the Fall of the Berlin Wall – official homepage in English
* Information about the Iron Curtain with a detailed map and how to make it by bike
* " Peep under the Iron Curtain " , a cartoon first published on 6 March 1946 in Daily Mail * Field research along the northern sections of the former German - German border , with detailed maps , diagrams , and photos .
*
The Lost Border : Photographs of the Iron Curtain * Remnants of the Iron Curtain along the Greek - Bulgarian border , the Iron Curtain 's Southernmost part * Iron Curtain
* Iron Curtain Information
* Historic film footage of Winston Churchill 's " Iron Curtain " speech ( from " Sinews of Peace " address ) at Westminster College , 1946
* DIE NARBE DEUTSCHLAND is a 16-hour - long experimental single shot documentary showing the former Iron Curtain running through Germany in its entirety from above , 2008 - 2014