PITAYA
A pitaya ( ) or pitahaya ( ) is the fruit of several different cactus species indigenous to the Americas .
Pitaya usually refers to fruit of the genus Stenocereus , while pitahaya or dragon fruit refers to fruit of the genus Hylocereus , both in the Cactaceae family .
The dragon fruit is cultivated in Southeast Asia , Florida , the Caribbean , Australia , and throughout tropical and subtropical world regions .
VERNACULAR NAMES OF HYLOCEREUS Section::::Vernacular names of Hylocereus .
These fruits are commonly known in English as " dragon fruit " , reflecting its vernacular Asian names .
The names pitahaya and pitaya derive from Mexico , and pitaya roja in Central America and northern South America , possibly relating to pitahaya for names of tall cacti species with flowering fruit .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Pitahaya - producing cacti of the genus Hylocereus , originally native to a region including Mexico , Guatemala , Nicaragua , Costa Rica , El Salvador , and northern South America .
The dragon fruit is cultivated in Southeast Asia , Florida , the Caribbean , Australia , and throughout tropical and subtropical world regions .
VARIETIES
STENOCEREUS Section::::Varieties .
Section::::Stenocereus .
Stenocereus fruit ( sour pitayas ) are a variety that is commonly eaten in the arid regions of the Americas .
They are more sour and refreshing , with juicier flesh and a stronger taste .
The sour pitaya or pitaya agria ( S. gummosus ) in the Sonoran Desert has been an important food source for indigenous peoples of the Americas .
The Seri people of northwestern Mexico still harvest the fruit , and call the plant ziix is ccapxl " thing whose fruit is sour " .
The fruit of related species , such as S. queretaroensis and the dagger cactus ( S. griseus ) , are also locally important foods .
The fruit of the organ pipe cactus ( S. thurberi , called ool by the Seris ) is the pitaya dulce " sweet pitaya " .
It still has a more tart aroma than Hylocereus fruit , described as somewhat reminiscent of watermelon ; it has some uses in traditional medicine .
DRAGON FRUIT HYLOCEREUS Section::::Dragon fruit Hylocereus .
Sweet pitahayas come in three types , all with leathery , slightly leafy skin : * Hylocereus undatus ( Pitaya blanca or white - fleshed pitahaya ) has pink - skinned fruit with white flesh .
This is the most commonly seen " dragon fruit " .
* Hylocereus costaricensis ( Pitaya roja or red - fleshed pitahaya , also known as Hylocereus polyrhizus ) has red - skinned fruit with red flesh .
* Hylocereus megalanthus ( Pitaya amarilla or yellow pitahaya , also known as Selenicereus megalanthus ) has yellow - skinned fruit with white flesh .
Early imports from Colombia to Australia were designated Hylocereus ocampensis ( supposedly , the red fruit ) and Cereus triangularis ( supposedly , the yellow fruit ) .
It is not quite certain to which species these taxa refer , though the former is probably the red pitaya .
The fruit normally weighs from ; some may reach .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
After thorough cleaning of the seeds from the pulp of the fruit , the seeds may be stored when dried .
Ideally , the fruit is unblemished and overripe .
Seeds grow well in a compost or potting soil mix – even as a potted indoor plant .
Pitaya cacti usually germinate after between 11 and 14 days after shallow planting .
As they are cacti , overwatering is a concern for home growers .
As their growth continues , these climbing plants will find something to climb on , which can involve putting aerial roots down from the branches in addition to the basal roots .
Once the plant reaches a mature 10 pounds in weight , the plant may flower .
Commercial plantings can be done at high density with between 1100 and 1350 plants per hectare .
Plants can take up to five years to come into full commercial production , at which stage yields of 20 to 30 tons per hectare can be expected .
Pitaya flowers bloom overnight and usually wilt by the morning .
They rely on nocturnal pollinators such as bats or moths for fertilization .
Self - fertilization will not produce fruit in some species , and while cross - breeding has resulted in several " self - fertile " varieties , cross - pollinating with a second plant species generally increases fruit set and quality .
This limits the capability of home growers to produce the fruit .
However , the plants can flower between three and six times in a year depending on growing conditions .
Like other cacti , if a healthy piece of the stem is broken off , it may take root in soil and become its own plant .
The plants can endure temperatures up to and very short periods of frost , but will not survive long exposure to freezing temperatures .
The cacti thrive most in USDA zones 10–11 , but may survive outdoors in zone 9a or 9b .
Hylocereus has adapted to live in dry tropical climates with a moderate amount of rain .
The dragon fruit sets on the cactus - like trees 30–50 days after flowering and can sometimes have 5 - 6 cycles of harvests per year .
In numerous regions , it has escaped cultivation to become a weed and is classified as an invasive weed in some countries .
PESTS AND DISEASES Section::::Pests and diseases .
Overwatering or excessive rainfall can cause the flowers to drop and fruit to rot .
Also , extended over - watering can cause maturing fruit to split on the branch .
Birds can be a nuisance .
The bacterium Xanthomonas campestris causes the stems to rot .
Dothiorella fungi can cause brown spots on the fruit , but this is not common .
Other fungi known to infect pitaya include Botryosphaeria dothidea , Colletotrichum gloesporioides and Bipolaris cactivora .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
The fruit 's texture is sometimes likened to that of the kiwifruit because of its black , crunchy seeds .
The flesh is bland , mildly sweet and low in calories .
The seeds have a nutty taste .
The seeds are rich in lipids .
Dragon fruit is also used to flavor ( and color ) juices and alcoholic beverages , such as " Dragon 's Blood Punch " and the " Dragotini " .
The flowers can be eaten or steeped as tea .
The red and purple colors of Hylocereus fruits are due to betacyanins , a family of pigments that includes betanin , the same substance that gives beets , Swiss chard , and amaranth their red color .
NUTRIENTS
Section::::Nutrients .
As the nutrient content of raw pitaya has not been thoroughly analyzed as of 2018 , the US Department of Agriculture reports one limited entry from a manufacturer , showing that a 100 gram amount of pitaya contains 268 calories , 82 % carbohydrates , 4 % protein , and 11 % of the Daily Value each for vitamin C and calcium ( table ) .
SEED OILS Section::::Seed oils .
The fatty acid compositions of two pitaya seed oils were determined as follows : ! !
Hylocereus costaricensis ( Red - fleshed pitaya ) !
Hylocereus undatus ( White - fleshed pitaya )
GALLERY
SEE ALSO
* List of culinary fruits * Opuntia – prickly pear cacti with edible " cactus figs " or " tunas "
fruit REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS