ECHINOPSIS PACHANOI Echinopsis pachanoi ( syn .
Trichocereus pachanoi ) — known as San Pedro cactus — is a fast - growing columnar cactus native to the Andes Mountains at in altitude .
It is found in Argentina , Bolivia , Chile , Ecuador and Peru , and it is cultivated in other parts of the world .
Uses for it include traditional medicine and traditional veterinary medicine , and it is widely grown as an ornamental cactus .
It has been used for healing and religious divination in the Andes Mountains region for over 3,000 years .
It is sometimes confused with its close relative Echinopsis peruviana ( Peruvian torch cactus ) .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Echinopsis pachanoi is known by many names throughout South America such as achuma , huachuma , wachuma , aguacolla , hahuacollay , or giganton .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Echinopsis pachanoi is native to Ecuador and Peru .
Its stems are light to dark green , sometimes glaucous , with a diameter of and usually 6–8 ribs .
The whitish areoles may produce up to seven yellow to brown spines , each up to long ; the plant is sometimes spineless .
The areoles are spaced evenly along the ribs , approximately apart .
Echinopsis pachanoi is normally tall and has multiple branches , usually extending from the base .
The tallest recorded specimen was tall .
White flowers are produced at the end of the stems ; they open at night .
The flowers are large , around long with a diameter of up to .
There are black hairs along the length of the tube leading to the flower .
Oblong dark green fruits are produced after fertilization , about across and long .
TRADITIONAL USES Section::::Traditional uses .
Echinopsis pachanoi has a long history of being used in Andean traditional medicine .
Archeological studies have found evidence of use going back two thousand years , to Moche culture .
Although Roman Catholic church authorities after the Spanish conquest attempted to suppress its use , this failed , as shown by the Christian element in the common name " San Pedro cactus " – Saint Peter cactus .
The name is attributed to the belief that just as St Peter holds the keys to heaven , the effects of the cactus allow users " to reach heaven while still on earth . "
ALKALOIDS Section::::Alkaloids .
The San Pedro cactus contains a number of alkaloids , including the well - studied chemical mescaline ( 0.21–1.8 % ) , and also 3,4-dimethoxyphenethylamine , 3-Methoxytyramine , 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenethylamine , 4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine , anhalonidine , anhalinine , hordenine , and tyramine .
Mescaline ( 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine ) is a psychedelic drug and entheogen , which is also found in some other species of genus Echinopsis ( i.e. Echinopsis lageniformis , Echinopsis peruviana , and Echinopsis scopulicola ) and the species Lophophora williamsii ( peyote ) .
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the highest concentration of active substances is found in the layer of green photosynthetic tissue just beneath the skin .
There are various mescaline extraction techniques , simple ( simmering in water 5 to 7 hours ) and complex ( such as an acid - base extraction ) , the latter technique yielding a material with a significantly higher concentration of mescaline .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
The San Pedro cactus grows in USDA hardiness zones 8b to 10 .
The San Pedro cactus is very easy to grow in most areas .
Because it grows naturally in the Peruvian Andes Mountains at high altitude and with high rainfall , it can withstand temperatures far below that of many other cacti .
It requires fertile , free - draining soil .
They average half a meter per year of new growth .
They are susceptible to fungal diseases if over - watered , but are not nearly as sensitive as many other cacti , especially in warm weather .
They can be sunburned and display a yellowing chlorotic reaction to overexposure to sunlight .
In winter , plants will etiolate , or become thin , due to lower levels of light .
This may be problematic if the etiolated zone is not sufficiently strong to support future growth as the cactus may break in strong winds .
PROPAGATION FROM CUTTINGS Section::::Propagation from cuttings .
Like many other plants , Echinopsis pachanoi can be propagated from cuttings .
The result is a genetic clone of the parent plant .
A long cactus column can be also laid on its side on the ground ( like a log ) , and eventually roots will sprout from it and grow into the ground .
After time , sprouts will form and cactus columns will grow upward out of it along its length .
FROM SEED Section::::From Seed .
Like a lot of its relatives Trichocereus pachanoi as a species is easily grown from seed , often by means of a so - called " Takeaway Tek " .
This term refers to the practice of the sowing of Trichocereus ( and sometimes other types of cactus ) seed into plastic containers such as those many food takeaways are delivered in .
This creates a semi - controlled humidity environment chamber for 6 months to a year , in which the seed may germinate and then grow relatively unbothered by environmental contamination .
LEGALITY Section::::Legality .
In most countries it is legal to cultivate the San Pedro cactus , but in countries where possession of mescaline and related compounds is illegal and highly penalized , cultivation for the purposes of consumption is most likely illegal and also highly penalized .
This is the case in the United States , Australia , Canada , Sweden , Germany , and New Zealand , where it is currently legal to cultivate the San Pedro cactus for gardening and ornamental purposes , but not for consumption .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Ayahuasca * List of psychoactive plants REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Psychoactive Cacti vault – Erowid