U.S. HISTORY OF ALCOHOL MINIMUM PURCHASE AGE BY STATE
The alcohol laws of the United States regarding minimum age for purchase have changed over time .
This history is given in the table below .
Unless otherwise noted , if different alcohol categories have different minimum purchase ages , the age listed below is set at the lowest age given ( e.g. if the purchase age is 18 for beer and 21 for wine or spirits , as was the case in several states , the age in the table will read as " 18 " , not " 21 " ) .
In addition , the purchase age is not necessarily the same as the minimum age for consumption of alcoholic beverages , although they have often been the same .
As one can see in the table below , there has been much volatility in the states ' drinking ages since the repeal of Prohibition in 1933 .
Shortly after the ratification of the 21st amendment in December , most states set their purchase ages at 21 since that was the voting age at the time .
Most of these limits remained constant until the early 1970s .
From 1969 to 1976 , some 30 states lowered their purchase ages , generally to 18 .
This was primarily because the voting age was lowered from 21 to 18 in 1971 with the 26th amendment .
Many states started to lower their minimum drinking age in response , most of this occurring in 1972 or 1973 .
Twelve states kept their purchase ages at 21 since repeal of Prohibition and never changed them .
From 1976 to 1983 , several states voluntarily raised their purchase ages to 19 ( or , less commonly , 20 or 21 ) , in part to combat drunk driving fatalities .
In 1984 , Congress passed the National Minimum Drinking Age Act , which required states to raise their ages for purchase and public possession to 21 by October 1986 or lose 10 % of their federal highway funds .
By mid-1988 , all 50 states and the District of Columbia had raised their purchase ages to 21 ( but not Puerto Rico , Guam , or the Virgin Islands , see Additional Notes below ) .
South Dakota and Wyoming were the final two states to comply with the age 21 mandate .
The current drinking age of 21 remains a point of contention among many Americans , because of it being higher than the age of majority ( 18 in most states ) and higher than the drinking ages of most other countries .
The National Minimum Drinking Age Act is also seen as a congressional sidestep of the tenth amendment .
Although debates have not been highly publicized , a few states have proposed legislation to lower their drinking age , while Guam has raised its drinking age to 21 in July 2010 . !
State ! !
Pre - Prohibition(prior to 1919 ) ! !
Post - Prohibition(after 1933 ) ! !
1970s
/ 26th
Amendment(adopted in 1971 ) ! !
1980s /
Drinking Age Act of 1984 ! !
21st century !
Alabama !
Alaska !
Arizona !
Arkansas !
California !
Colorado !
Connecticut !
Delaware !
District of Columbia !
Florida !
Georgia !
Hawaii !
Idaho !
Illinois !
Indiana !
Iowa !
Kansas !
Kentucky !
Louisiana
For an established religious purpose;When a person under twenty - one years of age is accompanied by a parent , spouse , or legal guardian twenty - one years of age or older;For medical purposes when purchased as an over the counter medication , or when prescribed or administered by a licensed physician , pharmacist , dentist , nurse , hospital , or medical institution;In a private residence , which shall include a residential dwelling and up to twenty contiguous acres , on which the dwelling is located , owned by the same person who owns the dwelling;The sale , handling , transport , or service in dispensing of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to lawful ownership of an establishment or to lawful employment of a person under twenty - one years of age by a duly licensed manufacturer , wholesaler , or retailer of beverage alcohol . ) !
Maine !
Maryland !
Massachusetts !
Michigan !
Minnesota !
Mississippi !
Missouri !
Montana !
Nebraska !
Nevada !
New Hampshire !
New Jersey !
New Mexico !
New York !
North Carolina !
North Dakota !
Ohio !
Oklahoma !
Oregon !
Pennsylvania !
Rhode Island !
South Carolina !
South Dakota !
Tennessee !
Texas !
Utah !
Vermont !
Virginia !
Washington !
West Virginia !
Wisconsin !
Wyoming !
American Samoa !
Northern Mariana Islands !
Puerto Rico !
Virgin Islands !
Guam
ADDITIONAL NOTES
* Contrary to popular belief , since the National Minimum Drinking Age Act of 1984 , not all states specifically prohibit minors ' and young adults ' consumption of alcohol in private settings .
That is because the federal law is concerned only with purchase and public possession , not private consumption , and contains several exceptions .
As of January 1 , 2007 , 14 states and the District of Columbia ban underage consumption outright , 19 states do not specifically ban underage consumption outright , and 17 states have family member or location exceptions to their underage consumption laws .
Federal law explicitly provides for religious , medical , employment and private club possession exceptions ; as of 2005 , 31 states have family member or location exceptions to their underage possession laws .
*
In the 1960s the age for buying or drinking beer and wine in the District of Columbia ( Washington , D.C. ) was 18 ; the age for hard liquor was 21 .
Residents from Virginia and Maryland would often drive to D.C. to obtain alcohol .
In Louisiana , the 1987 law raising the age from 18 to 21 was deliberately written solely to comply with the National Minimum Drinking Age Act of 1984 to avoid losing highway funding , while still allowing 18- to 20-year - olds to drink as before .
Not only did it still allow 18- to 20-year - olds to consume in private , it contained a major loophole allowing bars and stores to sell alcohol to 18- to 20-year - olds without penalty ( despite purchase being technically illegal ) which meant that the de facto age was still 18 .
In other words , the drinking age was 21 only on paper .
This loophole was closed in 1995 , but in 1996 the Louisiana Supreme Court declared a drinking age of 21 unconstitutional .
That briefly lowered the de jure purchase age to 18 , causing an uproar which prompted the Louisiana Supreme Court to reverse its decision , raising the age to 21 three months later .
Other exceptions still remain to this day , including drinking in a private residence , and Louisiana still has some of the most liberal general alcohol laws of any state .
*
Some states were " dry " well before national Prohibition was enacted in 1919 , in some cases since achieving statehood .
Also , some states did not become fully " wet " until several years after the repeal of Prohibition in 1933 ( e.g. Mississippi in 1966 ) .
Since 1966 , all states and territories of the USA have been " wet " , but dry counties and towns still exist in some states .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
94 .
Citation for Wisconsin drinking law : https://www.revenue.wi.gov/Pages/FAQS/ise-atundrg.aspx