LIST OF GRAY WOLF POPULATIONS
BY
COUNTRY
The global grey wolf population is estimated to be 300,000 .
Once abundant over much of North America and Eurasia , the grey wolf inhabits a smaller portion of its former range because of widespread destruction of its habitat , human encroachment of its habitat , and the resulting human - wolf encounters that sparked broad extirpation .
Considered as a whole , however , the grey wolf is regarded as being of least concern for extinction according to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources .
Today , wolves are protected in some areas , hunted for sport in others , or may be subject to extermination as perceived threats to people , livestock , and pets .
Wolves tend to quickly adapt to change , and are often referred to as an indicator species ; a species delineating an ecoregion or indicating an environmental condition such as a disease outbreak , pollution , species competition or climate change .
Wolves do not seem to be able to adapt as readily to expanding civilisation the way coyotes do .
While human expansion has seen an increase in the latter 's numbers , it has caused a drop in those of the former .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Europe , excluding Russia , Belarus and Ukraine , has 12,000 wolves in over 28 countries .
Greenland has a population of 20–100 wolves , which are afforded protection in approximately 90 % of their range , though no compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Portugal has a stable wolf population of 200–300 , which is afforded full protection .
Compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Spain 's wolf population is estimated at 2,000–3,000 and growing .
Wolves are considered a game species , though they are protected in the southern regions of the country .
Compensation is paid for livestock damage , though this varies according to region .
The population is expanding southwards and eastwards from the northwest , having recently reached Madrid , Ávila , Guadalajara and Salamanca .
A southern relict population has survived in Andalusia , although contrary to the populations in the northwest and centre of the country , it is not doing well .
In Italy , wolves are a protected species with current estimates indicating that there are 600 - 700 wolves living in the wild ( according to other sources between 1269 and 1800 https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13364-015-0247-8 ) .
The population is steady .
The largest concentrations of wolves occur in the Italian national parks in Abruzzo , mostly in the Abruzzo , Lazio e Molise , in Calabria , in the Pollino , on Appennino Tosco - Emiliano , and , more recently , on the Alps .
Isolated individuals have been sighted in the vicinity of human populated areas such as Tuscany , Bologna , Parma and Tarquinia .
Wolves have also been sighted denning 25 miles from Rome , with one small population living in the regional park of Castelli Romani .
Currently , Italian wolf populations are said to have been increasing at a rate of 6 % a year since the 1970s , though 15 % of the total Italian wolf population is reported to succumb annually to illegal poaching and road accidents .
Compensation is paid by regional governments for livestock damage .
Italy 's leading wolf biologist , professor Luigi Boitani of the Sapienza University of Rome , expressed concern that the Italian wolf recovery may have been too successful , due to a large portion of the public refusing to concede to the possibility of rising wolf populations requiring management in the future .
In France the population is said to be composed of 70 - 180 individuals and growing rapidly .
Wolves crossed over into Southern France from Italy through the Alps in the 1990s .
Estimates in 2005 put the figure at between 80 and 100 .
Under the Berne Convention , wolves are listed as an endangered species and killing them is illegal .
Official culls are permitted to protect farm animals so long as there is no threat to the national population as a whole .
Compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Wolves were first spotted in Germany in 1998 , and are thought to have migrated from western Poland .
Currently , there are around 150 wolves in 26 packs now roaming in Germany , most of them in the eastern German region of Lusatia , and they are now still expanding their range to the west and north .
In July 2012 , for the first time in 150 years , wolves were born in Heidekreis in Lower Saxony , which confirms the spread of wolves from the eastern part of Germany .
In 2011 wolves were spotted in Belgium and the Netherlands in several locations .
The different lone wolves are probably from the French or Italian populations .
Since wildlife corridors and wildlife crossings over highways are being created that connect wildlife areas in the Netherlands , such as the Veluwezoom National Park and the Oostvaardersplassen with the Klever Reichswald in Germany , nature conservation organisations expect wolves to migrate to the low countries in the near future .
In 2018 , a wolf was recorded in Flanders , Belgium for the first time in over a century .
The wolf 's radio collar showed that it had come from Germany through the Netherlands , and that it had covered 500 km in just 10 days .
In Switzerland there is one wolf pack in the Calanda mountain and several lone wolves .
Wolves are afforded protection , and livestock damage compensation is paid by Cantons .
Swiss authorities gave permission to shoot eight wolves between the years 2000 and 2013 .
Norway 's wolf population is located in the south - east , close to the Swedish border , and consists of around 68 wolves .
The population is protected and compensation is paid for livestock damage , however in 2016 Norway planned to kill more than two - thirds of its population , with as many as 47 at risk of being shot .
In 2015 more than 11,000 hunters applied for licenses to kill 16 wolves .
Sweden has a protected population of around 300 wolves .
Compensation is paid for livestock damage .
The last wolf in Denmark was shot in 1813 , but in 2009 , 2010 and 2012 there was speculation that a wolf had crossed the border from Germany due to numerous observations , with the latest in Thy National Park .
This was confirmed after an autopsy , which also concluded that the particular wolf had died from side effects of a cancerous tumor .
It was the first known wolf in Denmark for 199 years .
In 2013 , three different lone wolves have been observed in Denmark .
According to local biologists based on sound recordings , one pair have had pups .
Compensation is paid for livestock damage .
In July 2017 an adult wolf with eight pups was filmed , making it the first time in 200 years that wolfpups had been born in Denmark Finland was estimated in 2013 to have an almost stable population of 97–106 wolves .
Wolves are legally hunted only in areas with high reindeer densities .
Compensation for livestock losses are paid by the state and insurance companies .
The population is connected to the large Russian wolf population .
Poland has a population of approximately 2500 wolves and increasing .
Since 1995 , they have been a protected species , and compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Estonia has a quite stable wolf population of around 200 , down from around 500 in the middle of the 1990s .
The official standpoint considers the optimal population to be 100–200 .
At rough scale the distribution range includes the whole country .
In 2007 , new version of the law on nature conservation introduced compensation for livestock damage , paid by the state .
Lithuania has a population of 300 - 400 which are increasing in number .
The species is not protected , and only insured livestock receives compensation .
Latvia has an unprotected population of 600 wolves , down from 900 in the middle of the 1990s .
No compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Belarus is home to a population of 1,500–2,000 wolves .
With the exception of specimens in nature reserves , wolves in Belarus are largely unprotected .
They are designated a game species , and bounties ranging between € 60 and € 70 are paid to hunters for each wolf killed .
This is a considerable sum in a country where the average monthly wage is € 230 .
No compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Ukraine has an unprotected , yet stable population of 2,000 wolves .
Since May 2007 , the killing of pregnant females and pups is banned .
No compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Many of the wolves live in the Zone of alienation north of Chernobyl , where they face few natural threats .
This applies equally to the Belarusian part of the zone .
The Czech Republic has a stable and protected population of 20 wolves , though there are no livestock damage compensation programmes .
Slovakia has a stable population of 350 - 400 wolves , which are considered a game species , though with some exceptions .
No compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Slovenia has a stable population of c. 40–60 wolves .
Since 1991 , they have been a protected species , and compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Croatia has a stable population of around 200 wolves .
Since May 1995 , they have been a protected species , and the willful killing of wolves can result in a fine equivalent to $ 6,000 .
However , according to Dr. Djuro Huber of the University of Zagreb , illegal wolf killings increased after the protection scheme began , resulting in the deaths of 40 wolves .
Compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Bosnia and Herzegovina is thought to have a population of 400 wolves , though they are decreasing in number and are afforded no legal protection .
Compensation for livestock losses is not paid .
The former State Union of Serbia and Montenegro has a stable population of 500 wolves , though it is unknown if they are afforded any protection and no compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Hungary has a stable population of 250 wolves , which are protected , though with some exceptions .
No compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Romania has an increasing population of 2,500 wolves , which are granted legal protection .
No compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Bulgaria has a stable population of 1,000–1,200 wolves , which are granted no legal protection .
Wolves are considered a nuisance and have an active bounty on them .
No compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Greece has a stable population of approximately 700 wolves , which are legally protected .
Compensation is paid for livestock losses , with over 80 % of it from insurance .
The Republic of Macedonia has an increasing , yet unprotected population of 1,000 wolves , with no livestock compensation programmed .
Albania has a protected population of 250 wolves , which are increasing in number , though no compensation is paid for livestock losses .
Turkey has population of about 7,000 wolves , though this seem to be an overestimate .
There are some local extinctions especially in the western parts of Turkey and the wolf population is declining in Turkey as a whole .
Historically , the wolf has officially been considered a pest species
and so it was hunted throughout the year without any limits .
It was only in 2003 that the wolf received the status of a game species .
Although wolves in Turkey are not legally protected , the gained status of a game species means that wolves can only be hunted with a license using established quotas which are restricted to hunting seasons .
No compensation is paid for livestock damage .
Although wolves in Russia have no legal protection , they number 25,000–30,000 , and are probably increasing in number in some regions , such as Koryak Okrug and Kalmykia .
Some villages in Chechnya 's Nadterechny district have been reporting increasing wolf numbers since the decrease of military activities .
On the other hand , in more populated regions of Central and Southern Russia the number of wolves is very small .
In some regions , bounties are paid for the destruction of wolves and dens .
Wolves live in comparatively few numbers in the Sikhote - Alin region due to competition with increasing tiger numbers .
This competitive exclusion of wolves by tigers has been used by Russian conservationists to convince hunters in the Far East to tolerate the big cats , as they limit ungulate populations less than wolves , and are effective in controlling the latter 's numbers .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
Iran has a population of 3,000 wolves .
As of 2015 the government pays for livestock killed by wolves .
There is also a $ 3,000 fine for hunting wolves .
Syria has an unprotected , unknown number of wolves , thought to be roughly numbering 200 .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Iraq has a stable population of around 115 wolves ; no livestock compensation is paid .
Lebanon has a population of about 50 wolves .
Wolves are afforded no legal protection , nor is livestock damage compensation paid .
Israel has a stable population of 150 protected wolves .
Some livestock damage compensation paid .
Jordan has an unprotected , unknown number of wolves , thought to be roughly numbering 200 .
The population is decreasing due to hunting .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Saudi Arabia has a stable population of 250 to 700 wolves , which are given no legal protection .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
India has a decreasing population of roughly 1,000 wolves , which are legally protected .
Populations are decreasing due to hunting from farmers .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Wolves in China appear to be decreasing in all their ranges .
Currently , Heilongjiang has roughly 650 wolves , Xinjiang has 10,000 and Tibet has 2,000 .
In 2006 , the Chinese government began plans to auction licenses to foreigners to hunt wild animals , including wolves .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Mongolia has a stable population of 10,000–20,000 wolves , which are given no legal protection , nor is livestock damage compensation paid .
Kazakhstan has a stable population of about 30,000 wolves .
About 2,000 are killed yearly for a $ 40 bounty , though the animal 's numbers have risen sharply .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Turkmenistan has a stable population of 1,000 wolves , which are unprotected .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Uzbekistan has a stable population of 2,000 wolves , which are unprotected .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Kyrgyzstan has a stable population of 4,000 wolves , which are unprotected .
No livestock damage compensation is paid .
Tajikistan has a population of 1,700 wolves in 2016 , which are stable and unprotected .
There are currently no recent or reliable estimates on wolf populations in Afghanistan , Nepal or Bhutan .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
Canada has over 60,000 wolves , which are legally considered a big game species , though they are afforded protection in 3 % of Canada 's territory .
The Northwest Territories , Nunavut and Yukon have 5,000 wolves each , British Columbia has 8,500 wolves , Alberta 4,200 , Saskatchewan 4,300 , Manitoba 4,000 - 6,000 , Ontario 9,000 , Quebec 5,000 and Labrador 2,000 .
Canada currently has no livestock damage compensation programmes .
In the fall of 2012 , the government of British Columbia was considering a cull of the wolf population in some areas .
In the winter of 2015 the government of British Columbia began undertaking a cull of up to 184 wolves in an effort to combat dwindling caribou populations in the South Selkirk Mountains and the South Peace region .
The cull , like ones before it , is opposed by some environmental groups .
On 12 March 2012 , a grey wolf , mistakenly thought to be a coyote , was shot in Newfoundland .
It was the first confirmed grey wolf in Newfoundland since ca . 1930 .
The United States as a whole has up to 18,000 wolves , about two thirds of which are in Alaska .
They are increasing in number in all their ranges .
Usually , however , wolves in the United States are mostly seen during the winter months in northern Minnesota , northern Wisconsin , Michigan 's Upper Peninsula , and portions of Washington , Idaho , northern Oregon , and Montana , as the majority of wolf populations migrate from Canada to the Northwestern states & some of the Midwestern and Great Lakes States during the winter months for the competition over eating bison , elk , white tailed deer and other large ungulates , disputed between other carnivores such as grizzly bear , cougar , and coyote .
Wolf recovery has been so successful that the United States Fish & Wildlife Service removed the western gray wolf from the federal endangered species list on March 28 , 2008 .
Due to the controversy over wolf shootings , a coalition of environmental groups sued the federal government to put the gray wolf back on the Endangered Species list .
On July 18 , 2008 , a federal judge ruled in favor of renewed endangered species protection .
Alaska has a stable population of 10,500 - 12,000 wolves , which are legally hunted from August to April ( in deer - rich areas ) as a big game species .
Minnesota has a population of 4,100 wolves , which are legally protected , though they are occasionally culled for depredation control .
Minnesota used to have control over its wolf population , but this was revoked by a federal appellate court on August 1 , 2017 , making wolf management the charge of the federal government .
The court decided to retain the state 's minimum population of 1,600 animals .
It has been argued by state officials that management should remain in the hands of the state , allowing for the wolf to be removed from protected status , since the population has exceeded recovery goals for more than 25 years .
Both Wisconsin and Michigan have healthy populations of 750 each .
On December 19 , 2014 , all wolves in states of Michigan , Wisconsin , and Minnesota became protected again under the U.S. Endangered Species Act .
The Northern Rocky Mountain states ( Wyoming , Idaho and Montana ) have an approximate population of 1,657 wolves in 282 packs ( including 85 breeding pairs ) .
Two gray wolves were captured in north - central Washington state in July 2008 , one of which was a nursing female .
This is the first evidence of reproducing wolves in the state since the 1930s .
As of the end of 2014 , Washington has at least 68 wolves in 16 packs with 5 breeding pairs .
In northeast Oregon , also in July 2008 , wolf howls were heard by biologists who identified at least 2 adults and 2 pups .
This was the first confirmed breeding pair in Oregon .
By December 2011 , Oregon 's gray wolf population had grown to 24 .
One of the Oregon gray wolves , known as OR-7 , traveled more than to the Klamath Basin and crossed the border into California .
Wolf OR-7 became the first wolf west of the Cascades in Oregon since the last bounty was claimed in 1947 .
Oregon 's wolf population increased to 77 wolves in 15 packs with 8 breeding pairs as of the end of 2015 .
As a result , Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife proposed to delist wolves from their protected species list .
On January 14 , 2009 , the United States Department of the Interior removed the Canadian gray wolf from the Endangered Species List in every American state except Wyoming .
This move was blocked by lawsuits filed by conservation groups , but was successfully delisted on April 15 , 2011 by the US Congress as part of a budget bill .
On August 31 , 2012 , Governor Matt Mead of Wyoming announced that wolves were no longer on the endangered species list in the state of Wyoming ; therefore , they no longer need special protections from the US Fish and Wildlife Service .
The wolf population in Wyoming is then controlled by the state .
But on September 23 , 2014 , wolves in Wyoming are again listed as nonessential experimental population under the Endangered Species Act .
Overall , as of the end of 2014 , the Northwestern United States , with the exception of Alaska , has an estimated population of 1,802 wolves .
The wolf has been extirpated from Mexico since the 1970s when the U.S. and Mexican governments cooperated to capture all remaining wild Mexican wolves and initiate a captive - breeding program in an attempt to save the local subspecies .
The Mexican Wolf was reintroduced into the Apache - Sitgreaves National Forest in Arizona in 1998 as part of a captive breeding program .
There are at least 42 wild Mexican wolves in the southwest United States in 2008 .
In 2014 , there are around 83 Mexican wolves in the wild .
On October 27 , 2014 , a collared wolflike canid was seen in north of Grand Canyon , in November 2014 , the same animal was videoed , it was confirmed to be a northwestern wolf from the Northern Rocky Mountains in November 21 , 2014 .
On December 28 , 2014 , it was shot dead in southwestern Utah near the Arizona border .
SEE ALSO
* Wolves in the British Isles
* Subspecies of Canis lupus
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY