NEW YORK ( FILM )
New York is a 2009 Indian spy thriller film directed by Kabir Khan , produced by Aditya Chopra under Yash Raj Films , and screenplay by Sandeep Srivastava .
Visual effects are by Visual Computing Labs ,
Tata Elxsi Ltd. It stars John Abraham , Neil Nitin Mukesh , Katrina Kaif and Irrfan Khan .
New York begins in 1999 , ends in 2008 , and tells the story of three students studying at the fictional New York State University whose lives are changed by the September 11 attacks and its aftermath .
It received universal critical acclaim and was declared a blockbuster at the box office grossing 65 crores which sums to 114 crores at present day .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the United States in 2008 , the FBI arrest Omar Aijaz ( Neil Nitin Mukesh ) after finding guns in the trunk of a taxi cab he owned .
Omar , a young Muslim man originally from Delhi , is then taken into custody and interrogated by FBI Agent Roshan ( Irrfan Khan ) , also a Muslim man originally from South Asia who has been living in the United States for twenty years .
Omar then discovers that he was set up by the FBI in order to force him to spy on a former college friend , Sameer Shaikh ( John Abraham ) , whom he has not seen in seven years and who the FBI believes is a terrorist .
In the process , Omar discovers that Sam has married Maya ( Katrina Kaif ) , a mutual friend whom Omar had a crush on in university and finds out that Sameer and Maya have a young son , Danyal ( Aidan Wagner ) .
Roshan orders Omar to tell him everything he knows about Sameer .
The film then flashes back to September 1999 , when Omar begins his studies at the New York State University .
He is befriended by his international student counselor Maya and learns that though she was born and raised in New York , she is fluent in Hindi because of her mother 's interest in Bollywood films .
Omar also meets Sam , another Indian American who is also Muslim and fluent in Hindi due to the fact that his father is a professor of Indian studies .
Over the next two years , all three become inseparable friends and gradually Omar falls in love with Maya .
When Omar realises that she loves Sam , however , he distances himself from them both .
Their carefree days finally end with the onset of 9/11 .
After finishing his story , Omar agrees to help Roshan ( rather reluctantly ) , if only to prove that both he and Sam are innocent .
He reunites with Maya and Sam and stays in their house , all the while spying for the FBI .
Omar learns that Maya is a civil rights activist who is helping one of Sam 's employees ,
Zilgai ( Nawazuddin Siddiqui ) overcome his experience as a former 9/11 detainee .
Zilgai was eventually released due to lack of evidence and has been having difficulty adjusting back to " normal " life .
As time progresses , Omar feels satisfied that he can find nothing to warrant the FBI 's suspicions and is ready to leave when a series of events forces him to reconsider .
In the process , Omar learns from Sam that ten days after 9/11 , Sam was arrested and detained for a period of nine months as a suspected terrorist , a charge which everyone , including the FBI and Roshan , now agree was incorrect .
Though he was eventually released due to lack of evidence , the impact of being detained and tortured permanently changed Sam in ways which are difficult for those surrounding him to understand , leaving him with feelings of deep resentment towards the FBI .
Omar thus finds that Sam ultimately resorted to plans for terrorism as a means of revenge .
In addition , Maya is unable to help Zilgai resolve the trauma of being a detainee .
After a routine traffic stop escalates and an NYPD police officer gives Maya a very rough full - body search , Zilgai becomes agitated .
He drops Maya at her home and eventually kills the police officer the same night .
After being declared a fugitive , Zilgai leads the police on a long chase ultimately ending in his suicide .
The climax of the film rests upon the attempts of Maya , Omar , and Roshan to prevent Sam from committing an act of terrorism by telling him that if he perpetuates towards terrorism , others will suffer as he has .
Finally convinced , Sam surrenders and aborts his attempt to bomb the FBI building .
However , the moment he drops his cell - phone ( which was originally intended as a detonator for the bomb ) he is shot and killed by FBI snipers .
The cell phone falls benign to the ground without activating anything .
Maya , who was running toward Sam , is also killed by stray gunfire and Omar , bereft of speech , breaks down .
Six months later , he is comforted by Roshan who explains to him that ; everybody was right in their place , but the timing was wrong .
As for Sam , the path he chose killed him .
Everybody has moved on after 9/11 , as its high time .
Omar has adopted Danyal , and Roshan has received commendation for aiding in the anti - terrorism cause .
They reconcile each other .
The film ends with all three of them going out for pasta and a side note describing the after effects of 9/11 .
CAST * John Abraham as Sameer
" Sam " Shaikh * Neil Nitin Mukesh as Omar Aijaz * Katrina Kaif as Maya Shaikh
* Irrfan Khan as Agent Roshan * Nawazuddin Siddiqui as Zilgai
* Samrat Chakrabarti as Yakub * Aidan Wagner as Daniyal Shaikh * Jakir
Ajmeri
* Ali Quli Mirza THEMES Section::::Themes .
New York explores the aftermath of 9/11 .
In a June 2009 interview with the Indo - Asian News Service ( IANS ) , director Kabir Khan argued that the film " is based on part of the political canvas of 9/11 , but it speaks of prejudices after the great human tragedy .
It is a definite and very relevant subject about post-9/11 prejudices that have increased after the attacks [ ... ] We have in fact divided time in a pre- and post-9/11 world in the film to highlight its obvious repercussions in times to come .
The repercussions of the attacks are still very strongly felt globally and will continue to do so . "
Khan continued to state that the film had the full support of the New York Film Commission , " as it is not an anti - something film .
It is a very balanced story and not a jingoistic film .
"
In a separate interview with IANS , actor John Abraham argued that , " in its own strange way , New York begins where Pakistani film Khuda Ke Liye ended .
That 's the interesting part of the film [ ... ]
Each director has his own way of interpreting and researching the plight of legal detainees . "
Abraham continued by suggesting that this is why Khan and Shoaib Mansoor offer different interpretations of these events in their respective films .
The plot of this movie is similar to the season 1 and episode 21 of TV series Lost .
New York was the first Indian film which focused on this theme , later followed by Karan Johar 's My Name is Khan , starring Shahrukh Khan and Kajol , Kurbaan , starring Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor and Vishwaroopam , starring Kamal Hassan and Andrea Jeremiah .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Production began in September 2008 and filming lasted over a period of 100 days .
Most of the shoot took place in New York although some of the scenes which took place in New York were actually shot in Philadelphia .
New York is the first Hindi film to have a production schedule there .
In preparation for his role as an American Muslim of Indian origin , Abraham studied the Quran ( he had likewise studied Sanskrit and learned to play the flute for his role in Water ) .
Khan had to submit his script for approval from U.S. authorities before making the film .
He stated : " We had to submit the script to seek permission to shoot in Guantanamo as well as in the States and we got their green signal to go ahead very easily .
The film may be about 9/11 and what happens post it , but they did not object to our theme and did not even raise any questions .
The US officials were very cooperative and we shot for around three days at this high - profile prison . "
RELEASE BOX
OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
New York grossed a record Rs 350 million during its first three days in India , with theatres at their highest occupancy since January at 80–85 % .
During its first week , it ranked number one in the box office in India and grossed Rs 618.9 million worldwide , and was declared a hit .
Its total gross in India after a 6-week run was Rs .
New York 's opening weekend was highly successful in India and the Middle East .
It also proved popular in Australia and did well in the UK and U.S. Of its opening in India , Khan commented : " I always believed that New York will be a word of mouth film which would open on a decent note and then show an increase in business with every passing day .
When I was told by friends and people from industry that it had opened to a houseful response in the very first show at so many places across the country , even I was taken aback .
" It is the sixth highest - grossing film of 2009 .
It grossed Rs . .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
New York was universally well received by all critics .
Subhash K. Jha gave New York a rave review arguing that New York " is what cinema in contemporary times should be , must be , though it seldom is " and designates it " an important film " which " cares about the prejudices that have taken over the world .
Jha also states that , " stereotypical portrayals of the cultural diaspora are fortunately rare in this piece of contemporary art which has plenty of heart , a heart that never overflows in an embarrassing torrent of emotions . "
Devansh Patel , film critic for London 's Hounslow Chronicle , gave New York five out of five stars stating that it is , " the most thought provoking movie
Yash Raj Films has ever come up with . "
Nikhat Kazmi of the Times of India gave it four out of five stars , describing New York as , " an extremely taut and highly emotive piece of political drama [ ... ]
topical , meaningful , and entertaining , all at the same time . "
Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave it four out of five stars arguing that New York is " one of the finest films produced by this premier production house , Yash Raj [ ... ]
the screenplay is its biggest star , without a doubt .
Given the fact that New York is n't one of those routine masala fares , Kabir has injected songs only when required .
Cinematography is striking . "
Joginder Tuteja of the Indo - Asian News Service ( IANS ) calls the film " a must watch " and gave it four out of four stars .
He states : " When a hardcore commercial flick gets a standing ovation and a huge round of applause at the end of the show , you know that there is something definitely right that the director has done .
In this regard , Kabir Khan can take a bow because he has done exceedingly well in making a film that is not frivolous , has a message and still carries enough commercial ingredients to reach out to masses as well as classes . "
jayant of the Hindustan Times argues that comparing New York " to Mark Pellington 's Arlington Road would be grossly unfair .
If anything , this is a much better movie than that 1999 , part - spooky conspiracy theory .
The central theme itself is closer to Shoaib Mansoor 's Khuda Kay Liye ( 2007 ) , and you can sense how the superior execution here makes all the filmmaking difference . "
Additionally , Shekhar describes New York in NDTV as , " an A - list film that gets a straight A. "
Sandhya Iyer of the Sakaal Times gave the film three and a half out of four stars arguing that " New York manages to be gripping , thanks to an excellent screenplay .
Most importantly , the story has the right mix of realism and drama – one that Kabir Khan unfolds with quiet confidence . "
Mathures Paul of The Statesman states : " Finally , here 's a film that entertains and makes viewers think . " HIGH PROFILE SCREENINGS Section::::High profile screenings .
New York was the opening film for the 33rd Cairo International Film Festival , 10 November 2009 .
The film 's director , Kabir Khan , was in attendance and addressed the audience at the end of its screening .
New York was also screened at the Pusan International Film Festival in October 2009 .
Yash Chopra of New York 's Yash Raj Films won the Asian Filmmaker of the Year award .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The Soundtrack was released on 10 June 2009 .
the songs and theme featured in the Soundtrack are composed by Pritam , Julius Packiam and Pankaj Awasthi and the Lyrics are penned by Sandeep Shrivastava and Junaid Wasi .
Julius Packiam composed the film score .
All the songs were major hits during release with the songs " Hai Junoon " and " Tune Jo Na Kaha " declared Chartbusters .
HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
The DVD for New York was released on 8 August 2009 .
Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama gave the DVD four out of five stars .
The DVD includes ( but is not limited to ) 2.5 hours of special features such as : " Making of the Film , " " Deleted Scenes , " " New York Special – Zoom TV , " " The New Yorkers – CNN - IBN , " and a number of music videos .
SEE ALSO
* List of cultural references to the September 11 attacks *
The Reluctant Fundamentalist * Khuda Kay Liye ( 2007 )
a Pakistani film related to the same .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Bansal , Robin .
" I was myself in New York :
Katrina , " Times of India , 21 June 2009 .
* Jamkhandikar , Shilpa . "
Just A Minute With :
John Abraham on ' New York ' .
" Reuters , 20 June 2009 .
* Jha , Subhash K.
" How did Kabir Khan marry Mini Mathur ? , " Times of India , 6 July 2009 .
* Khan , Kabir . "
Identity Proof . "
Indian Express , 13 December 2009 .
* Parab , Kanika . "
Bollywood Revisits 9–11 .
" Huffington Post , 29 June 2009 .
* Patel , Devansh . "
" New York is about America 's attitude before and after 9/11 " – Irrfan Khan , " Bollywood Hungama , 18 June 2009 .
* Press Trust of India .
" Neil 's " reality check " in New York before film 's shoot , " Deccan Herald , 20 June 2009 .
* Syed , Aijaz Zaka . "
New York , the Untold Story . "
Khaleej Times , 29 July 2009 .
* Zaman , Rana Siddiqui . "
True Tales :
Kabir Khan says " New York " tells the 9/11 story the media missed . "
The Hindu , 29 June 2009 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* New York at Yash Raj Films