SWIM DIAPER
A swim diaper is a diaper that is made for those who are incontinent , usually babies or young children , which is worn underneath a bathing suit , or as a bathing suit .
Swim diapers can be reusable and disposable .
They are not intended to be absorbent .
Typically , it is assumed that a swim diaper should be absorbent , or contain urine , like a regular diaper .
However , the purpose of a swim diaper is only to contain solid waste ; the lack of absorbency prevents the swim diaper from inflating with water .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Often reusable swim diapers are lined with a fiber which encourages the solid waste to cling to the fiber without an absorbency layer .
A snug fit in the legs and waist are key to function .
Brands such as Splash About and The Honest Co use tightly knit polyester or neoprene as their material .
The disadvantages of a reusable swim diaper is that they must be washed to be reused .
On the other hand , a disposable swim diaper is only partially biodegradable and repeated purchases may cost more than reuse .
One brand of disposable swim diapers is Little Swimmers , marketed under the Kimberly - Clark Huggies brand .
Procter & Gamble produces the rival brand Pampers Splashers .
Both are sold in three sizes : small ( 16–26 lb or 7–12 kg ) , medium ( 24–34 lb or 11–15 kg ) and large ( over 32 lb or 14 kg+ ) .
Due to their design for swimwear , they are not as absorbent and not intended for regular diapering .
SWIM DIAPERS
AT PUBLIC POOLS
Section::::Swim diapers at public pools .
Some public pools require swim diapers for use by young children and the incontinent out of hygiene concerns .
For the same reason , other pools do not allow swim diapers at all .
Sick children who are not potty - trained and do not wear swim diapers may be responsible for the transmission of e. coli from fecal matter .
When not used properly , or when using inferior products , health experts caution that swim diapers may not protect pool water against communicable diseases , such as norovirus .
REFERENCES