LAVA LAMP
A lava lamp ( or Astro lamp ) is a decorative novelty item , invented in 1963 by British chemist David George Smith and British accountant Edward Craven Walker , the founder of the British lighting company Mathmos .
The lamp consists of a bolus of a special coloured wax mixture inside a glass vessel , the remainder of which contains clear or translucent liquid ; the vessel is then placed on a box containing an incandescent light bulb whose heat causes temporary reductions in the density and viscosity of the wax .
The warmed wax rises through the surrounding liquid , cools , loses its buoyancy , and falls back to the bottom of the vessel in a cycle that is visually suggestive of pāhoehoe lava , hence the name .
The lamps are designed in a variety of styles and colours .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
A classic lava lamp contains a standard incandescent or halogen lamp which heats a tall ( often tapered ) glass bottle .
A formula from 1968 US patent consisted of water and a transparent , translucent , or opaque mix of mineral oil , paraffin wax , and carbon tetrachloride .
The clear water or mineral oil can optionally be coloured with transparent dyes .
Common wax has a density much lower than that of water , and would float on top under any temperature .
However , carbon tetrachloride is heavier than water ( also nonflammable and miscible with wax ) and is added to the wax to make its density at room temperature slightly higher than that of the water .
When heated , the wax mixture becomes less dense than the water , because the wax expands more than water when both are heated .
It also becomes fluid , and blobs of wax ascend to the top of the device where they cool ( which increases their density relative to that of the water ) and then they descend .
A metallic wire coil in the base of the bottle acts as a surface tension breaker to recombine the cooled blobs of wax after they descend .
However , lava lamps made in China for the US market since 1970 do not use carbon tetrachloride , because its use was banned that year due to toxicity .
The manufacturer ( Haggerty ) stated that their current formulation is a trade secret .
The underlying fluid mechanics phenomenon is a form of Rayleigh – Taylor instability .
The bulb is normally 25 to 40 watts .
Generally , it will take 45–60 minutes for the wax to warm up enough to form freely rising blobs , when operating the lamp at standard room temperature .
It may take as long as 2 to 3 hours if the room is below standard room temperature .
Once the wax is molten , the lamp should not be shaken or knocked over or the two fluids may emulsify , and the fluid surrounding the wax blobs will remain cloudy rather than clear .
Some recombination will occur as part of the normal cycle of the wax in the container , but the only means to recombine all of the wax is to turn off the lamp and wait a few hours .
The wax will settle back down at the bottom , forming one blob once again .
Severe cases can require many heat - cool cycles to clear .
In 2015 , a new design was introduced into the market that uses ferrofluid in place of wax .
HISTORY Section::::History .
British accountant Edward Craven - Walker had the idea for the lava lamp in 1963 after watching a homemade egg timer , which was made from a cocktail shaker filled with liquids , as it was bubbling on a stove top in a pub .
He hired British inventor David George Smith to develop the device and the chemical formula required put his idea into practice .
Smith is credited as the inventor on the original for a " Display Device " , that was filed and assigned to Craven - Walker 's company in 1965 , and subsequently issued in 1968 .
Craven - Walker 's company was named Crestworth and was based in Poole , Dorset , in the United Kingdom .
Craven - Walker named the lamp " Astro " and had variations such as the " Astro Mini " and the " Astro Coach " lantern .
In 1965 , two men named Adolph Wertheimer and Hy Spector were intrigued by Walker 's product when they saw it at a German trade show .
They bought the American rights and began the Lava Manufacturing Corporation in Chicago , IL to sell what they called the Lava Lite Lamp .
In the late 1970s , the US rights were sold to Larry Haggerty , who created a subsidiary of his company , Haggerty Enterprises , called Lava World International , which produced American lava lamps for over 30 years .
Craven - Walker retained the rights for the rest of the world , and took on two business partners in the late 1980s named Cressida Granger and David Mulley .
Eventually Granger and Mulley took over the company and they changed the name to Mathmos in 1992 .
Edward Craven - Walker remained a consultant until his death in 2000 .
Mathmos continues to make Lava Lamps and related products .
Mathmos won two Queens Awards for Export , as well as Best Multi - Media prize at the Design Week awards .
Astro lava lamp was launched in 1963 and celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2013 .
Mathmos lava lamps are still made in the original factory in Poole , Dorset .
In 2003 , American lava lamp maker , Lava World International ( formerly known as Lava - Simplex - Scribe Internationale ) , shipped production to China .
In 2008 , they were acquired by Talon Merchant Capital and the name was again changed to Lava Lite LLC .
As of 2016 , lava lamps were being sold under Lifespan brands in North America .
In 2018 , the ' Lava Lamp ' brand was acquired by toy and gift maker , Schylling Inc. of North Andover , MA .
HAZARDS Section::::Hazards .
In 2004 , 24-year - old Philip Quinn from Kent , Washington was killed by a lava lamp on a kitchen stove .
Heat from the stove built up pressure in the lamp until it exploded and a shard of glass pierced his heart , causing fatal bleeding .
Quinn was found dead in his home on September 24 .
2004 .
The circumstances of his death were later reenacted in a 2006 episode of the popular science TV series MythBusters .
The show found that even if shards of glass are not thrown with lethal velocity during such an attempt , the resulting spray of hot liquid from the lamp could easily cause severe burns to anyone nearby .
The show noted that the safety instructions clearly state that lava lamps should not be heated by any source other than the specifically rated bulbs and purpose - designed bases that are provided .
SEE ALSO
* Lava * Lavarand , a random number generator that used lava lamps
* Plasma globe * Bubble light NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official site ( UK )
* How Do Lava Lamps Work ?
( from The Straight Dope )
* How Liquid Motion Lamps Work ( from howstuffworks.com )
* Basics of lava - lamp convection , by Balázs Gyüre and Imre M. Jánosi , Phys .
Rev. E , 80 , 046307 ( 2009 ) .
* Lava lamps creators mark 50 years of 1960s icon - BBC News
* The history of the original lava lamp - Flow of lava