DRY THUNDERSTORM
A dry thunderstorm or heat storm is a thunderstorm that produces thunder and lightning , but most or all of its precipitation evaporates before reaching the ground .
Dry lightning refers to lightning strikes occurring in this situation .
Both are so common in the American West that they are sometimes used interchangeably .
The latter term is a technical misnomer since lightning itself is neither wet nor dry .
Dry thunderstorms occur essentially in dry conditions , and their lightning is a major cause of wildfires .
Because of that , the National Weather Service , and other agencies around the world , issue forecasts for its likelihood over large areas .
WHERE DRY THUNDERSTORMS OCCUR
Section::::Where dry thunderstorms occur .
Dry thunderstorms generally occur in deserts or places where the lower layers of the atmosphere usually contain little water vapor .
Any precipitation that falls from elevated thunderstorms can be entirely evaporated as it falls through the lower dry layers .
They are common during the summer months across much of western North America and other arid areas .
The shaft of precipitation that can be seen falling from a cloud without reaching the ground is called " virga " .
A thunderstorm does not have to be completely dry to be considered dry ; in many areas is the threshold between a " wet " and " dry " thunderstorm .
HAZARDS
Section::::Hazards .
Dry thunderstorms are notable for two reasons : they are the most common natural origin of wildland fires , and they can produce strong gusty surface winds that can fan flames .
DUST STORMS
Section::::Dust storms .
Strong winds often develop around dry thunderstorms as the evaporating precipitation causes excessive cooling of the air beneath the storm , which increases its density and thereby its weight relative to the surrounding air .
This cool air then descends rapidly and fans out upon impacting the ground , an event often described as a dry microburst .
As the gusty winds expand outward from the storm , dry soil and sand are often picked up by the strong winds , creating dust and sand storms known as haboobs .
FIRES Section::::Fires .
In areas where trees or other vegetation are present , there is little to no rain that can prevent the lightning from causing them to catch fire .
Storm winds also fan the fire and firestorm , causing it to spread more quickly .
Pyrocumulonimbus are cumuliform clouds that can form over a large fire and that are particularly dry .
When the higher levels of the atmosphere are cooler , and the surface is thus warmed to extreme temperatures due to a wildfire , volcano , or other event , convection will occur , and produce clouds and lightning .
They are similar to any cumulus cloud but ingest extra particulates from the fire .
This increases the voltage difference between the base and the top of the cloud , helping to produce lightning .
SEE ALSO
* Bolt from the blue * Heat lightning * Lightning strike REFERENCES