VISA POLICY OF MACAU
The Government of the Macau Special Administrative Region allows citizens of specific countries / territories to travel to Macau for tourism or business purposes for periods ranging from 180 days to 14 days without having to obtain a visa .
For other entry purposes , such as establishing residence on a long term basis , a different policy applies .
The Serviço de Migração ( Immigration Department ) , under the Public Security Police Force , is the government agency responsible for immigration matters , whilst the Public Security Police Force itself is responsible for enforcing immigration laws in Macau .
All visitors must hold a passport valid for 1 month .
UNRESTRICTED
STAY
Section::::Unrestricted stay .
Under Macanese laws , holders of the following documents are residents of Macau and are allowed to return to Macau :
* Macau Resident Identity Card * Macao Special Administrative Region passport * Macao Special Administrative Region Travel Permit * Visit Permit for Residents of Macao to HKSAR SHORT STAYS
IN MACAU VISA EXEMPTIONS
Section::::Short stays in Macau .
Section::::Visa exemptions .
Holders of passports issued by following countries and Hong Kong permanent residents can enter Macau as a visitor without a visa ( for a maximum period as stated below ) : 1 YEAR ( 1 )
6 MONTHS ( 1 ) 90 DAYS ( 56 ) *
All European Union citizens valign = top } 30 DAYS
( 22 ) valign = top Holders of a travel document issued by Portugal to non - citizens who are unable to obtain national passports are also exempt from possessing a visa to enter Macau for a maximum of 30 days .
14 DAYS (
1 ) } UNLIMITED ACCESS
* Laissez - Passer holders
* Holders of diplomatic passports * Holders of diplomatic or consular identity cards issued by the Macau SAR } NOT IN FORCE Section::::Not in force .
Macau plans to introduce a visa - free regime with .
ENTRY PROCEDURES FOR CHINESE NATIONALS NOT RESIDING IN MACAU Section::::Entry procedures for Chinese nationals not residing in Macau .
Special regulations are in force for persons of Chinese nationality who are not residents of Macau . !
Residency !
Travel document !
Duration of stay
MAINLAND CHINA Section::::Mainland China .
Mainland Chinese visitors to Macau are required to hold a Two - way Permit .
The duration of stay is the one indicated on the exit endorsement , but if the duration indicated is longer than 90 days , the person must report to PSPF for a " special authorization of stay " within the first 90 days of entry .
For those who are travelling to a third country or region , they can alternatively use their Chinese passports , Chinese Travel Documents or Travel Permits to and from Taiwan for Mainland Residents for a maximum stay of 7 days .
Non - permanent residents of Hong Kong with residency in mainland China are required to travel with the Two - way Permit along with the valid entry endorsement when travelling directly between Hong Kong and Macau .
HONG KONG Section::::Hong Kong .
Permanent residents of Hong Kong holding valid Hong Kong Permanent Identity Cards or Hong Kong Re - entry Permits are granted a stay of 1 year upon entry .
However , holders of Hong Kong SAR passports are only granted a stay of 7 days provided they are travelling to a third country or region .
Non - permanent residents of Hong Kong who are of Chinese nationality and without mainland residency
( i.e. , those who traveled to Hong Kong with a One - way Permit for permanent settlement ) are required to use their Hong Kong Document of Identity for Visa Purposes when entering Macau .
They can stay for a maximum of 30 days .
ENTRY PROCEDURES FOR VISA NATIONALS Section::::Entry procedures for visa nationals .
Those holding travel documents that are not listed above will be required to obtain a visa for entry to Macau , either prior to arrival or on arrival .
Visa on arrival is valid for 30 days and can be used multiple times during its validity without the need of obtaining a new one .
The application fee is MOP 100 per individual , MOP 200 per family passport , and MOP 50 per child under age 12 and per member of a tourist group of more than 10 people .
Alternatively , they can apply for an " Authorization to Enter and Stay " through a representative in Macau .
Nationals of the following countries must obtain a visa in advance through the Chinese diplomatic mission ( unless they hold a Hong Kong identity card ) .
They can apply for an " Authorization to Enter and Stay " through a representative only when there are no Chinese diplomatic missions in their country or region of residence .
valign = top ENTRY REFUSAL Section::::Entry refusal .
Under Macanese law , visitors will be denied entry if : * they have been deported from Macau , * they have been prohibited from entering , staying in or transiting through Macau in accordance with local or international law .
In addition , visitors may be denied entry if :
* they are frequently entering Macau without justification ,
* they have criminal convictions resulting in incarceration , * they have , or have the intention of , committing a crime , *
they have no proof to support that they are bona fide visitors who will leave Macau at the end of their visit ( e.g. , insufficient funds , not possessing onward tickets or not possessing genuine travel documents ) .
EXTENDING SHORT STAYS IN MACAU
Section::::Extending short stays in Macau .
Visitors who have entered with short stay status can extend their " Authorization to Stay " , should their travel plans change , by no more than 90 days .
This can be done by applying at the local Serviço de Migração office .
TRANSIT Section::::Transit .
Nationals who would normally require visas may enter Macau without a visa for 48 hours if they arrive and depart from Macau International Airport .
LONG STAYS SPECIAL AUTHORIZATION
TO STAY FOR NON - RESIDENT STUDENTS
Section::::Long stays .
Section::::Special Authorization to Stay for Non - resident Students .
Non - resident students in possession of a valid travel document have to go to the Foreigners Subdivision of the Serviço de Migração office located in Taipa , to apply for a " Special Authorization to Stay " ( , ) .
The Special Authorization to Stay for Non - resident Students is usually valid until 31 December if the study program ends on a date beyond the year , or valid until the last day of the program if the study program ends within the same year .
For those who are enrolled in a study program which ends on a date beyond the year , can renew their Special Authorization to Stay for Non - resident Students before the expiry ( expiries usually 31 December ) , only if the Non - resident student continues to be enrolled in the study program at the same higher institute in Macau .
RESIDENCE Section::::Residence .
Those wanting to take up residence in Macau for purposes of investment can do so via the Macau Trade and Investment Office in Macau , and then visit the local Serviço de Migração office .
Those wanting to take up residence for other reasons , such as employment , are required to make their application at their local Serviço de Migração office .
The procedure varies depending on nationality and residency status .
Chinese and Portuguese nationals should make their application via the Comissariado de Residentes at the local Serviço de Migração office , whilst foreign nationals should apply via the Comissariado de Estrangeiros at the local Serviço de Migração office .
VISITOR STATISTICS SEE ALSO
* Visa policy of China
* Visa policy of Hong Kong
* Visa requirements for Chinese citizens of Macau REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Immigration and residence service , Public Security Police Force
* Macau SAR Identification Department