ISOTOPE Isotopes are variants of a particular chemical element which differ in neutron number , and consequently in mass number .
All isotopes of a given element have the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons in each atom .
The term isotope is formed from the Greek roots isos ( ἴσος " equal " ) and topos ( τόπος " place " ) , meaning " the same place " ; thus , the meaning behind the name is that different isotopes of a single element occupy the same position on the periodic table .
The number of protons within the atom 's nucleus is called atomic number and is equal to the number of electrons in the neutral ( non - ionized ) atom .
Each atomic number identifies a specific element , but not the isotope ; an atom of a given element may have a wide range in its number of neutrons .
The number of nucleons ( both protons and neutrons ) in the nucleus is the atom 's mass number , and each isotope of a given element has a different mass number .
For example , carbon-12 , carbon-13 and carbon-14 are three isotopes of the element carbon with mass numbers 12 , 13 and 14 respectively .
The atomic number of carbon is 6 , which means that every carbon atom has 6 protons , so that the neutron numbers of these isotopes are 6 , 7 and 8 respectively .
ISOTOPE VS .
NUCLIDE Section::::Isotope vs. nuclide .
A nuclide is a species of an atom with a specific number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus , for example carbon-13 with 6 protons and 7 neutrons .
The nuclide concept ( referring to individual nuclear species ) emphasizes nuclear properties over chemical properties , whereas the isotope concept ( grouping all atoms of each element ) emphasizes chemical over nuclear .
The neutron number has large effects on nuclear properties , but its effect on chemical properties is negligible for most elements .
Even in the case of the lightest elements where the ratio of neutron number to atomic number varies the most between isotopes it usually has only a small effect , although it does matter in some circumstances ( for hydrogen , the lightest element , the isotope effect is large enough to strongly affect biology ) .
The term isotopes ( originally also isotopic elements , now sometimes isotopic nuclides ) is intended to imply comparison ( like synonyms or isomers ) , for example : the nuclides , , are isotopes ( nuclides with the same atomic number but different mass numbers ) , but , , are isobars ( nuclides with the same mass number ) .
However , because isotope is the older term , it is better known than nuclide , and is still sometimes used in contexts where nuclide might be more appropriate , such as nuclear technology and nuclear medicine .
NOTATION Section::::Notation .
An isotope and/or nuclide is specified by the name of the particular element ( this indicates the atomic number ) followed by a hyphen and the mass number ( e.g. helium-3 , helium-4 , carbon-12 , carbon-14 , uranium-235 and uranium-239 ) .
When a chemical symbol is used , e.g. " C " for carbon , standard notation ( now known as " AZE notation " because A is the mass number , Z the atomic number , and E for element ) is to indicate the mass number ( number of nucleons ) with a superscript at the upper left of the chemical symbol and to indicate the atomic number with a subscript at the lower left ( e.g. , , , , , and ) .
Because the atomic number is given by the element symbol , it is common to state only the mass number in the superscript and leave out the atomic number subscript ( e.g. , , , , , and ) .
The letter m is sometimes appended after the mass number to indicate a nuclear isomer , a metastable or energetically - excited nuclear state ( as opposed to the lowest - energy ground state ) , for example ( tantalum-180 m ) .
The common pronunciation of the AZE notation is different from how it is written : is commonly pronounced as helium - four instead of four - two - helium , and as uranium two - thirty - five ( American English ) or uranium - two - three - five ( British ) instead of 235 - 92-uranium .
RADIOACTIVE , PRIMORDIAL , AND STABLE ISOTOPES Section::::Radioactive , primordial , and stable isotopes .
Some isotopes / nuclides are radioactive , and are therefore referred to as radioisotopes or radionuclides , whereas others have never been observed to decay radioactively and are referred to as stable isotopes or stable nuclides .
For example , is a radioactive form of carbon , whereas and are stable isotopes .
There are about 339 naturally occurring nuclides on Earth , of which 286 are primordial nuclides , meaning that they have existed since the Solar System 's formation .
Primordial nuclides include 32 nuclides with very long half - lives ( over 100 million years ) and 253 that are formally considered as " stable nuclides " , because they have not been observed to decay .
In most cases , for obvious reasons , if an element has stable isotopes , those isotopes predominate in the elemental abundance found on Earth and in the Solar System .
However , in the cases of three elements ( tellurium , indium , and rhenium ) the most abundant isotope found in nature is actually one ( or two ) extremely long - lived radioisotope(s ) of the element , despite these elements having one or more stable isotopes .
Theory predicts that many apparently " stable " isotopes / nuclides are radioactive , with extremely long half - lives ( discounting the possibility of proton decay , which would make all nuclides ultimately unstable ) .
Of the 253 nuclides never observed to decay , only 90 of these ( all from the first 40 elements ) are theoretically stable to all known forms of decay .
Element 41 ( niobium ) is theoretically unstable via spontaneous fission , but this has never been detected .
Many other stable nuclides are in theory energetically susceptible to other known forms of decay , such as alpha decay or double beta decay , but no decay products have yet been observed , and so these isotopes are said to be " observationally stable " .
The predicted half - lives for these nuclides often greatly exceed the estimated age of the universe , and in fact there are also 27 known radionuclides ( see primordial nuclide ) with half - lives longer than the age of the universe .
Adding in the radioactive nuclides that have been created artificially , there are 3,339 currently known nuclides .
These include 905 nuclides that are either stable or have half - lives longer than 60 minutes .
See list of nuclides for details .
HISTORY RADIOACTIVE ISOTOPES Section::::History .
Section::::Radioactive isotopes .
The existence of isotopes was first suggested in 1913 by the radiochemist Frederick Soddy , based on studies of radioactive decay chains that indicated about 40 different species referred to as radioelements ( i.e. radioactive elements ) between uranium and lead , although the periodic table only allowed for 11 elements from uranium to lead .
Several attempts to separate these new radioelements chemically had failed .
For example , Soddy had shown in 1910 that mesothorium ( later shown to be Ra ) , radium ( Ra , the longest - lived isotope ) , and thorium X ( Ra ) are impossible to separate .
Attempts to place the radioelements in the periodic table led Soddy and Kazimierz Fajans independently to propose their radioactive displacement law in 1913 , to the effect that alpha decay produced an element two places to the left in the periodic table , whereas beta decay emission produced an element one place to the right .
Soddy recognized that emission of an alpha particle followed by two beta particles led to the formation of an element chemically identical to the initial element but with a mass four units lighter and with different radioactive properties .
Soddy proposed that several types of atoms ( differing in radioactive properties ) could occupy the same place in the table .
For example , the alpha - decay of uranium-235 forms thorium-231 , whereas the beta decay of actinium-230 forms thorium-230 .
The term " isotope " , Greek for " at the same place " , was suggested to Soddy by Margaret Todd , a Scottish physician and family friend , during a conversation in which he explained his ideas to her .
He won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Chemistry in part for his work on isotopes .
In 1914 T. W. Richards found variations between the atomic weight of lead from different mineral sources , attributable to variations in isotopic composition due to different radioactive origins .
STABLE ISOTOPES Section::::Stable isotopes .
The first evidence for multiple isotopes of a stable ( non - radioactive ) element was found by J. J. Thomson in 1913 as part of his exploration into the composition of canal rays ( positive ions ) .
Thomson channeled streams of neon ions through a magnetic and an electric field and measured their deflection by placing a photographic plate in their path .
Each stream created a glowing patch on the plate at the point it struck .
Thomson observed two separate patches of light on the photographic plate ( see image ) , which suggested two different parabolas of deflection .
Thomson eventually concluded that some of the atoms in the neon gas were of higher mass than the rest .
F. W. Aston subsequently discovered multiple stable isotopes for numerous elements using a mass spectrograph .
In 1919 Aston studied neon with sufficient resolution to show that the two isotopic masses are very close to the integers 20 and 22 , and that neither is equal to the known molar mass ( 20.2 ) of neon gas .
This is an example of Aston 's whole number rule for isotopic masses , which states that large deviations of elemental molar masses from integers are primarily due to the fact that the element is a mixture of isotopes .
Aston similarly showed that the molar mass of chlorine ( 35.45 ) is a weighted average of the almost integral masses for the two isotopes Cl and Cl .
VARIATION IN PROPERTIES BETWEEN ISOTOPES
CHEMICAL AND MOLECULAR PROPERTIES Section::::Variation in properties between isotopes .
Section::::Chemical and molecular properties .
A neutral atom has the same number of electrons as protons .
Thus different isotopes of a given element all have the same number of electrons and share a similar electronic structure .
Because the chemical behavior of an atom is largely determined by its electronic structure , different isotopes exhibit nearly identical chemical behavior .
The main exception to this is the kinetic isotope effect : due to their larger masses , heavier isotopes tend to react somewhat more slowly than lighter isotopes of the same element .
This is most pronounced by far for protium ( ) , deuterium ( ) , and tritium ( ) , because deuterium has twice the mass of protium and tritium has three times the mass of protium .
These mass differences also affect the behavior of their respective chemical bonds , by changing the center of gravity ( reduced mass ) of the atomic systems .
However , for heavier elements the relative mass difference between isotopes is much less , so that the mass - difference effects on chemistry are usually negligible .
( Heavy elements also have relatively more neutrons than lighter elements , so the ratio of the nuclear mass to the collective electronic mass is slightly greater . )
Similarly , two molecules that differ only in the isotopes of their atoms ( isotopologues ) have identical electronic structure , and therefore almost indistinguishable physical and chemical properties ( again with deuterium and tritium being the primary exceptions ) .
The vibrational modes of a molecule are determined by its shape and by the masses of its constituent atoms ; so different isotopologues have different sets of vibrational modes .
Because vibrational modes allow a molecule to absorb photons of corresponding energies , isotopologues have different optical properties in the infrared range .
NUCLEAR PROPERTIES AND STABILITY Section::::Nuclear properties and stability .
Atomic nuclei consist of protons and neutrons bound together by the residual strong force .
Because protons are positively charged , they repel each other .
Neutrons , which are electrically neutral , stabilize the nucleus in two ways .
Their copresence pushes protons slightly apart , reducing the electrostatic repulsion between the protons , and they exert the attractive nuclear force on each other and on protons .
For this reason , one or more neutrons are necessary for two or more protons to bind into a nucleus .
As the number of protons increases , so does the ratio of neutrons to protons necessary to ensure a stable nucleus ( see graph at right ) .
For example , although the neutron : proton ratio of is 1:2 , the neutron :
proton ratio of is greater than 3:2 .
A number of lighter elements have stable nuclides with the ratio 1:1 ( Z = N ) .
The nuclide ( calcium-40 ) is observationally the heaviest stable nuclide with the same number of neutrons and protons ; ( theoretically , the heaviest stable one is sulfur-32 ) .
All stable nuclides heavier than calcium-40 contain more neutrons than protons .
NUMBERS OF ISOTOPES PER ELEMENT Section::::Numbers of isotopes per element .
Of the 80 elements with a stable isotope , the largest number of stable isotopes observed for any element is ten ( for the element tin ) .
No element has nine stable isotopes .
Xenon is the only element with eight stable isotopes .
Four elements have seven stable isotopes , eight have six stable isotopes , ten have five stable isotopes , nine have four stable isotopes , five have three stable isotopes , 16 have two stable isotopes ( counting as stable ) , and 26 elements have only a single stable isotope ( of these , 19 are so - called mononuclidic elements , having a single primordial stable isotope that dominates and fixes the atomic weight of the natural element to high precision ; 3 radioactive mononuclidic elements occur as well ) .
In total , there are 253 nuclides that have not been observed to decay .
For the 80 elements that have one or more stable isotopes , the average number of stable isotopes is 253/80 = 3.1625 isotopes per element .
EVEN AND ODD NUCLEON NUMBERS Section::::Even and odd nucleon numbers .
+
Even / odd Z , N ( Hydrogen-1 included as OE ) !
p , n!!EE!!OO!!EO!!OE!!Total
Stable 14755348253
Long - lived2143533
All primordial16895653286
The proton : neutron ratio is not the only factor affecting nuclear stability .
It depends also on evenness or oddness of its atomic number Z , neutron number N and , consequently , of their sum , the mass number A. Oddness of both Z and N tends to lower the nuclear binding energy , making odd nuclei , generally , less stable .
This remarkable difference of nuclear binding energy between neighbouring nuclei , especially of odd - A isobars , has important consequences : unstable isotopes with a nonoptimal number of neutrons or protons decay by beta decay ( including positron decay ) , electron capture or other exotic means , such as spontaneous fission and cluster decay .
The majority of stable nuclides are even - proton - even - neutron , where all numbers Z , N , and A are even .
The odd - A stable nuclides are divided ( roughly evenly ) into odd - proton - even - neutron , and even - proton - odd - neutron nuclides .
Odd - proton - odd - neutron nuclei are the least common .
EVEN ATOMIC NUMBER Section::::Even atomic number .
The 148 even - proton , even - neutron ( EE ) nuclides comprise ~ 58 % of all stable nuclides and all have spin 0 because of pairing .
There are also 22 primordial long - lived even - even nuclides .
As a result , each of the 41 even - numbered elements from 2 to 82 has at least one stable isotope , and most of these elements have several primordial isotopes .
Half of these even - numbered elements have six or more stable isotopes .
The extreme stability of helium-4 due to a double pairing of 2 protons and 2 neutrons prevents any nuclides containing five or eight nucleons from existing for long enough to serve as platforms for the buildup of heavier elements via nuclear fusion in stars ( see triple alpha process ) .
+ Even - odd long - lived ! ! !
Decay!!Half - life alpha 7.04
a These 53 stable nuclides have an even number of protons and an odd number of neutrons .
They are a minority in comparison to the even - even isotopes , which are about 3 times as numerous .
Among the 41 even - Z elements that have a stable nuclide , only two elements ( argon and cerium ) have no even - odd stable nuclides .
One element ( tin ) has three .
There are 24 elements that have one even - odd nuclide and 13 that have two odd - even nuclides .
Of 35 primordial radionuclides there exist four even - odd nuclides ( see table at right ) , including the fissile .
Because of their odd neutron numbers , the even - odd nuclides tend to have large neutron capture cross sections , due to the energy that results from neutron - pairing effects .
These stable even - proton odd - neutron nuclides tend to be uncommon by abundance in nature , generally because , to form and enter into primordial abundance , they must have escaped capturing neutrons to form yet other stable even - even isotopes , during both the s - process and r - process of neutron capture , during nucleosynthesis in stars .
For this reason , only and are the most naturally abundant isotopes of their element .
ODD ATOMIC NUMBER Section::::Odd atomic number .
Forty - eight stable odd - proton - even - neutron nuclides , stabilized by their even numbers of paired neutrons , form most of the stable isotopes of the odd - numbered elements ; the very few odd - proton - odd - neutron nuclides comprise the others .
There are 41 odd - numbered elements with Z = 1 through 81 , of which 39 have stable isotopes ( the elements technetium ( ) and promethium ( ) have no stable isotopes ) .
Of these 39 odd Z elements , 30 elements ( including hydrogen-1 where 0 neutrons is even ) have one stable odd - even isotope , and nine elements : chlorine ( ) , potassium ( ) , copper ( ) , gallium ( ) , bromine ( ) , silver ( ) , antimony ( ) , iridium ( ) , and thallium ( ) , have two odd - even stable isotopes each .
This makes a total 30 + 2(9 ) =
48 stable odd - even isotopes .
There are also five primordial long - lived radioactive odd - even isotopes , , , , , and .
The last two were only recently found to decay , with half - lives greater than 10 years .
Only five stable nuclides contain both an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutrons .
The first four " odd - odd " nuclides occur in low mass nuclides , for which changing a proton to a neutron or vice versa would lead to a very lopsided proton - neutron ratio ( , , , and ; spins 1 , 1 , 3 , 1 ) .
The only other entirely " stable " odd - odd nuclide is ( spin 9 ) is thought to be the rarest of the 253 stable isotopes , and is the only primordial nuclear isomer , which has not yet been observed to decay despite experimental attempts .
Many odd - odd radionuclides ( like tantalum-180 ) with comparatively short half lives are known .
Usually , they beta - decay to their nearby even - even isobars that have paired protons and paired neutrons .
Of the nine primordial odd - odd nuclides ( five stable and four radioactive with long half lives ) , only is the most common isotope of a common element .
This is the case because it is a part of the CNO cycle .
The nuclides and are minority isotopes of elements that are themselves rare compared to other light elements , whereas the other six isotopes make up only a tiny percentage of the natural abundance of their elements .
ODD NEUTRON NUMBER Section::::Odd neutron number .
+ Neutron number parity ( H with 0 neutrons included as even ) ! N ! ! Even!!Odd Stable19558
Long - lived267
All primordial22165
Actinides with odd neutron number are generally fissile ( with thermal neutrons ) , whereas those with even neutron number are generally not , though they are fissionable with fast neutrons .
All observationally stable odd - odd nuclides have nonzero integer spin .
This is because the single unpaired neutron and unpaired proton have a larger nuclear force attraction to each other if their spins are aligned ( producing a total spin of at least 1 unit ) , instead of anti - aligned .
See deuterium for the simplest case of this nuclear behavior .
Only , and have odd neutron number and are the most naturally abundant isotope of their element .
OCCURRENCE IN NATURE Section::::Occurrence in nature .
Elements are composed of one nuclide ( mononuclidic elements ) or of more naturally occurring isotopes .
The unstable ( radioactive ) isotopes are either primordial or postprimordial .
Primordial isotopes were a product of stellar nucleosynthesis or another type of nucleosynthesis such as cosmic ray spallation , and have persisted down to the present because their rate of decay is so slow ( e.g. uranium-238 and potassium-40 ) .
Post - primordial isotopes were created by cosmic ray bombardment as cosmogenic nuclides ( e.g. , tritium , carbon-14 ) , or by the decay of a radioactive primordial isotope to a radioactive radiogenic nuclide daughter ( e.g. uranium to radium ) .
A few isotopes are naturally synthesized as nucleogenic nuclides , by some other natural nuclear reaction , such as when neutrons from natural nuclear fission are absorbed by another atom .
As discussed above , only 80 elements have any stable isotopes , and 26 of these have only one stable isotope .
Thus , about two - thirds of stable elements occur naturally on Earth in multiple stable isotopes , with the largest number of stable isotopes for an element being ten , for tin ( ) .
There are about 94 elements found naturally on Earth ( up to plutonium inclusive ) , though some are detected only in very tiny amounts , such as plutonium-244 .
Scientists estimate that the elements that occur naturally on Earth ( some only as radioisotopes ) occur as 339 isotopes ( nuclides ) in total .
Only 253 of these naturally occurring nuclides are stable in the sense of never having been observed to decay as of the present time .
An additional 35 primordial nuclides ( to a total of 289 primordial nuclides ) , are radioactive with known half - lives , but have half - lives longer than 80 million years , allowing them to exist from the beginning of the Solar System .
See list of nuclides for details .
All the known stable nuclides occur naturally on Earth ; the other naturally occurring nuclides are radioactive but occur on Earth due to their relatively long half - lives , or else due to other means of ongoing natural production .
These include the afore - mentioned cosmogenic nuclides , the nucleogenic nuclides , and any radiogenic nuclides formed by ongoing decay of a primordial radioactive nuclide , such as radon and radium from uranium .
An additional ~3000 radioactive nuclides not found in nature have been created in nuclear reactors and in particle accelerators .
Many short - lived nuclides not found naturally on Earth have also been observed by spectroscopic analysis , being naturally created in stars or supernovae .
An example is aluminium-26 , which is not naturally found on Earth , but is found in abundance on an astronomical scale .
The tabulated atomic masses of elements are averages that account for the presence of multiple isotopes with different masses .
Before the discovery of isotopes , empirically determined noninteger values of atomic mass confounded scientists .
For example , a sample of chlorine contains 75.8 % chlorine-35 and 24.2 % chlorine-37 , giving an average atomic mass of 35.5 atomic mass units .
According to generally accepted cosmology theory , only isotopes of hydrogen and helium , traces of some isotopes of lithium and beryllium , and perhaps some boron , were created at the Big Bang , while all other nuclides were synthesized later , in stars and supernovae , and in interactions between energetic particles such as cosmic rays , and previously produced nuclides .
( See nucleosynthesis for details of the various processes thought responsible for isotope production . )
The respective abundances of isotopes on Earth result from the quantities formed by these processes , their spread through the galaxy , and the rates of decay for isotopes that are unstable .
After the initial coalescence of the Solar System , isotopes were redistributed according to mass , and the isotopic composition of elements varies slightly from planet to planet .
This sometimes makes it possible to trace the origin of meteorites .
ATOMIC MASS OF ISOTOPES Section::::Atomic mass of isotopes .
The atomic mass ( m ) of an isotope ( nuclide ) is determined mainly by its mass number ( i.e. number of nucleons in its nucleus ) .
Small corrections are due to the binding energy of the nucleus ( see mass defect ) , the slight difference in mass between proton and neutron , and the mass of the electrons associated with the atom , the latter because the electron : nucleon ratio differs among isotopes .
The mass number is a dimensionless quantity .
The atomic mass , on the other hand , is measured using the atomic mass unit based on the mass of the carbon-12 atom .
It is denoted with symbols " u " ( for unified atomic mass unit ) or " Da " ( for dalton ) .
The atomic masses of naturally occurring isotopes of an element determine the atomic mass of the element .
When the element contains N isotopes , the expression below is applied for the average atomic mass
formula_1 :
formula_2 where m , m , … , m are the atomic masses of each individual isotope , and
x , … ,
x are the relative abundances of these isotopes .
APPLICATIONS OF ISOTOPES PURIFICATION OF ISOTOPES Section::::Applications of isotopes .
Section::::Purification of isotopes .
Several applications exist that capitalize on properties of the various isotopes of a given element .
Isotope separation is a significant technological challenge , particularly with heavy elements such as uranium or plutonium .
Lighter elements such as lithium , carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen are commonly separated by gas diffusion of their compounds such as CO and NO .
The separation of hydrogen and deuterium is unusual because it is based on chemical rather than physical properties , for example in the Girdler sulfide process .
Uranium isotopes have been separated in bulk by gas diffusion , gas centrifugation , laser ionization separation , and ( in the Manhattan Project ) by a type of production mass spectrometry .
USE OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
*
Isotope analysis is the determination of isotopic signature , the relative abundances of isotopes of a given element in a particular sample .
For biogenic substances in particular , significant variations of isotopes of C , N and O can occur .
Analysis of such variations has a wide range of applications , such as the detection of adulteration in food products or the geographic origins of products using isoscapes .
The identification of certain meteorites as having originated on Mars is based in part upon the isotopic signature of trace gases contained in them .
* Isotopic substitution can be used to determine the mechanism of a chemical reaction via the kinetic isotope effect .
*
Another common application is isotopic labeling , the use of unusual isotopes as tracers or markers in chemical reactions .
Normally , atoms of a given element are indistinguishable from each other .
However , by using isotopes of different masses , even different nonradioactive stable isotopes can be distinguished by mass spectrometry or infrared spectroscopy .
For example , in ' stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture ( SILAC ) ' stable isotopes are used to quantify proteins .
If radioactive isotopes are used , they can be detected by the radiation they emit ( this is called radioisotopic labeling ) .
* Isotopes are commonly used to determine the concentration of various elements or substances using the isotope dilution method , whereby known amounts of isotopically - substituted compounds are mixed with the samples and the isotopic signatures of the resulting mixtures are determined with mass spectrometry .
USE OF NUCLEAR PROPERTIES
* A technique similar to radioisotopic labeling is radiometric dating : using the known half - life of an unstable element , one can calculate the amount of time that has elapsed since a known concentration of isotope existed .
The most widely known example is radiocarbon dating used to determine the age of carbonaceous materials .
* Several forms of spectroscopy rely on the unique nuclear properties of specific isotopes , both radioactive and stable .
For example , nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy can be used only for isotopes with a nonzero nuclear spin .
The most common nuclides used with NMR spectroscopy are H , D , N , C , and P.
* Mössbauer spectroscopy also relies on the nuclear transitions of specific isotopes , such as Fe .
* Radionuclides also have important uses .
Nuclear power and nuclear weapons development require relatively large quantities of specific isotopes .
Nuclear medicine and radiation oncology utilize radioisotopes respectively for medical diagnosis and treatment .
SEE ALSO
* Abundance of the chemical elements
* Atom * Geotraces * Isobars * Isotones
* Isodiaphers * Isotope dilution *
Isotopologue * Isotopomer
* List of elements by stability of isotopes * List of nuclides * List of particles * Nuclear medicine ( includes medical isotopes )
* Radionuclide ( or radioisotope )
* Table of nuclides * Mass spectrometry * Reference materials for stable isotope analysis NOTES * Isotopes are nuclides having the same number of protons ; compare :
* Isotones are nuclides having the same number of neutrons .
formula_3
* Isobars are nuclides having the same mass number , i.e. sum of protons plus neutrons .
formula_4 * Nuclear isomers are different excited states of the same type of nucleus .
A transition from one isomer to another is accompanied by emission or absorption of a gamma ray , or the process of internal conversion .
Isomers are by definition both isotopic and isobaric .
( Not to be confused with chemical isomers . )
* Isodiaphers are nuclides having the same neutron excess , i.e. number of neutrons minus number of protons .
formula_5 * Bainbridge mass spectrometer REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Nuclear Science web portal Nucleonica
*
The Karlsruhe Nuclide Chart * National Nuclear Data Center Portal to large repository of free data and analysis programs from NNDC * National Isotope Development Center Coordination and management of the production , availability , and distribution of isotopes , and reference information for the isotope community * Isotope Development & Production for Research and Applications ( IDPRA )
U.S. Department of Energy program for isotope production and production research and development * International Atomic Energy Agency Homepage of International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) , an Agency of the United Nations ( UN ) * Atomic Weights and Isotopic Compositions for All Elements Static table , from NIST ( National Institute of Standards and Technology )
* Atomgewichte , Zerfallsenergien und Halbwertszeiten aller Isotope
* Exploring the Table of the Isotopes at the LBNL * Current isotope research and information isotope.info * Emergency Preparedness and Response : Radioactive Isotopes by the CDC ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention )
* Chart of Nuclides Interactive Chart of Nuclides ( National Nuclear Data Center ) * Interactive Chart of the nuclides , isotopes and Periodic Table * The LIVEChart of Nuclides – IAEA with isotope data .
* Annotated bibliography for isotopes from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
* The Valley of Stability ( video ) – a virtual " flight " through 3D representation of the nuclide chart , by CEA ( France )