BETTY DRAPER Elizabeth " Betty " Hofstadt Francis ( formerly Draper ) is a fictional character on AMC 's television series Mad Men , portrayed by January Jones .
The character 's appearance is often compared to that of Grace Kelly .
Jones received two Golden Globe nominations and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for her performance .
She also won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series twice along with the cast of Mad Men .
CASTING AND CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT Section::::Casting and character development .
The character of Betty Draper was not originally part of the pilot episode , though she did appear in the pilot .
The script established that lead character Don Draper was married , but only by a mention in dialogue , and there was no intention to show his home life .
January Jones was instead initially considered , along with Elisabeth Moss , for the ambitious workplace character Peggy Olson ; Moss was ultimately cast as Peggy .
Show creator Matthew Weiner then wrote two scenes featuring Betty Draper , and Jones successfully auditioned for the part two days later .
Although there were no full script or any plots written for Betty Draper at the time , Jones was promised by Weiner that the character would be developed .
Weiner has attributed Mad Men 's visual style to the influence of film director Alfred Hitchcock , who featured a signature " icy blonde " female character in many of his films .
Betty Draper 's character has also been compared to that of Peyton Place 's Constance MacKenzie : " cold , remote , and emotionally unavailable . "
FICTIONAL CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY
BACKSTORY Section::::Fictional character biography .
Section::::Backstory .
Betty was born Elizabeth Hofstadt in 1932 .
According to her son 's birth certificate , she was born in Cape May , New Jersey , where her wealthy family summered .
She grew up in Lower Merion , Pennsylvania , a suburb of Philadelphia located on the " Main Line " .
She is of German ancestry .
Betty graduated from Bryn Mawr College with an anthropology degree and briefly modeled in Italy ( where she became fluent in Italian ) before moving to Manhattan .
It was during this time that she met Don Draper – he was writing ad copy for a fur company , and she was one of their models .
He began courting her by buying her the fur coat she wore at a shoot .
Betty and Don were married in May 1953 .
Her favorite movie is Singin ' in the Rain ( 1952 ) .
Betty 's mother Ruth died early in 1960 , three months before the events of the episode " Ladies Room " .
Her father , Gene ( Ryan Cutrona ) , had a girlfriend named Gloria , whom Betty disliked and whom her father married sometime in the 18 months between seasons 1 and 2 ; Gloria left Gene when he began showing signs of mental deterioration in Season 3 .
He moved in with the Drapers during season 3 and later died in that season , set in 1963 .
Betty has a brother , William , who is married to Judy and whose daughters Don and Betty consider to be " rowdy .
"
Betty 's confidantes have included her neighbor Francine Hanson and Glen Bishop , the young son of divorcée Helen Bishop .
Ill - suited for parenting , Betty has a strained relationship with her children , particularly with her daughter Sally .
SEASON ONE
Section::::Season one .
Betty and Don Draper live in a large house in suburban Ossining , New York , with their children Sally ( played by Kiernan Shipka ) and Bobby .
In the second episode , set in the spring of 1960 , Betty starts to see a psychiatrist to address repeated spells of numbness in her hands , which medical doctors have indicated are psychosomatic .
It was during these meetings that , after having discovered the psychiatrist was giving reports of her sessions to Don , she voiced her suspicion that her husband was unfaithful .
By the start of the second season , set in February 1962 , she had discontinued the consultations .
SEASON TWO
Section::::Season two .
During the second season episode " A Night to Remember " , Betty and Don seem to have reached an agreement , but after a dinner party where Betty is embarrassed to be considered a " demographic " by Don and his associates , she confronts her husband for the first time about his adultery , specifically with Bobbie Barrett .
Don , however , denies having an affair .
The next day , with a glass of wine in hand , Betty searches through Don 's belongings for proof of his indiscretions but does not find any .
Betty awakens Don - who is sleeping on the couch - that night and explains that she does n't want things to " be like this .
"
He repeats that he did not do anything , and when she asks if he hates her , he insists that he loves her and does n't want to " lose this . "
When preparing dinner the next day , an Utz commercial featuring Jimmy Barrett airs on the television .
After seeing this , Betty calls Don at work and tells him she does n't want him to come home .
Betty does turn to Don when she learns her father Gene has suffered a stroke .
She and Don leave the children with a neighbor and drive to visit her father .
Betty is visibly impatient with both her father 's wife Gloria and her brother William .
She and Don are careful to present a united front .
At the end of a stressful day , Betty makes Don sleep on the floor of the guestroom , but later joins him on the floor where they make love .
The next morning , Betty 's father mistakes Betty for her mother Ruth , suggesting they " go upstairs .
" Betty is severely shocked and frightened , but tries to pretend that everything is all right .
When she and Don return to New York , Betty surprises Don by asking him to leave again .
In the Season 2 finale , Betty discovers she is pregnant .
Although she brings up the subject of abortion with her doctor and has sex with a random man she picks up at a bar , at the end of the episode she asks Don to return home , and tells him she is pregnant .
SEASON THREE
Section::::Season three .
Season 3 begins with Betty in her third trimester , seemingly reconciled with Don .
In Episode 5 , she gives birth to Eugene Scott Draper , whom she names after her father .
After giving birth , Betty comes to the quick realization that her dream of everything being perfect will never come true .
During Episode 3 , Betty and Don attend a country club party hosted by Roger Sterling and his new wife , Jane Siegel Sterling , where Betty meets Henry Francis , who is later revealed to be an advisor to then - New York governor Nelson A. Rockefeller .
Henry is infatuated with Betty , and though she seems reluctant to return his feelings at first , as the season progresses , their affair intensifies .
Betty eventually ends it , feeling guilty .
In Episode 11 , Betty corners Don , after getting into a locked drawer in the desk in his home office that contains pictures and documents of Don 's past life .
( Don had inadvertently left his keys in his clothes , and Betty heard them jingling in the dryer ) .
She forces him to give her an explanation , and he haltingly tells her about his life as Dick Whitman , how he came to exchange dog tags with Lieutenant Don Draper , and his half - brother Adam 's suicide .
While apparently somewhat sympathetic to his feelings of guilt about Adam 's death , Betty is highly conflicted about Don 's having hidden this aspect of his life from her .
After President Kennedy 's assassination and Margaret Sterling 's wedding ( the following day ) , Betty meets with Henry , who confesses his desire to marry her .
They passionately kiss , and after the encounter , Betty returns home to tell Don she no longer loves him , leaving him stunned .
This culminates in her seeing a divorce lawyer in the season 3 finale .
During the same episode , Roger , whose daughter is friends with Henry 's daughter , unintentionally reveals to Don that Betty and Francis are involved .
An incensed Don confronts Betty .
After calling her a whore , he assures her that she " wo n't get a nickel " in the ensuing divorce , and he intends to seek sole custody of the children .
The next morning , Don and Betty inform the children they are separating , and both older children react badly .
After moving into Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce 's new office , Don calls Betty and tells her he will not fight her , and he wishes her the best .
She tells him he 'll always be their children 's father .
The season ends with Betty taking a plane to Reno with baby Gene and Henry .
SEASON FOUR
Section::::Season four .
Betty 's presence in season four is diminished compared to the previous seasons .
Season 4 opens with Betty , Henry , and the children still living in the former Draper residence ( which Don owns ) following Betty 's marriage to Henry .
The residence is a point of contention for Don and Betty , as Don is still paying the mortgage , and Betty is required by their divorce agreement to move out but has not .
Throughout Season 4 , Betty finds her marriage to Henry strained by tensions with Don and by deteriorating relations with Sally .
When she discovers Sally has become friends with her old confidant , Glen Bishop , Betty forces them to end the friendship .
Glen 's reappearance is the catalyst for Betty to finally insist to Henry that it 's time for them to move because of the " low - caliber people " taking over the neighborhood , much to Sally 's distress .
In the season finale " Tomorrowland " , Betty and Francis are packing to move out of the Ossining house and into a new home in nearby Rye , New York .
When the children 's nanny , Carla , lets Glen into the house to say goodbye to Sally , Betty becomes upset and fires Carla , refusing to give her a reference .
This angers Henry , with whom Betty feels increasingly dissatisfied .
At the end of the episode Betty waits for Don at the now - empty Ossining house , telling him she is unhappy with her new life .
Don senses her desire to try and repair things between them , but instead informs her of his engagement to Megan Calvet .
Betty congratulates him but is visibly disheartened and angry that Don has moved on .
They leave the house through opposite doors .
SEASON FIVE
Section::::Season five .
Betty 's presence in season five is further reduced due to January Jones ' pregnancy .
In the episode , " Tea Leaves " , Betty and her family are now shown to be living in a large Victorian estate in Rye , New York .
Since the season four finale , she has put on a significant amount of weight and dislikes leaving the house .
Her mother - in - law , Pauline , advises Betty to take diet pills since Pauline believes Henry is unhappy in the marriage .
Betty goes to her doctor to get a prescription , but he finds a lump in her throat that could be cancerous .
When it turns out to be benign , Betty is barely relieved and returns to focusing on her dumpy physical condition .
By the episode " Dark Shadows " , Betty attends Weight Watchers meetings to attempt to regain her old form but receives mixed results ; she notes that it is difficult to take the weight off .
Betty is often seen eating very little in an attempt to lose weight but appears to weaken when she consumes whipped cream directly from the can and occasionally sneaks sweets .
Betty regresses further when she goes to Don 's NYC apartment to pick up her kids and becomes jealous and bitter over the lovely , modern accommodations and Megan 's lissome beauty .
She then tries to stir up rancor by mentioning Anna Draper to Sally , but after Megan and ( particularly ) Don tell Sally more about Anna , Betty is defeated , as Sally expresses visible contempt for her mother , further straining their relationship .
However , when Sally begins menstruating for the first time while visiting her father in New York , she immediately returns to Rye and seeks out her mother for help .
Here , Betty is finally shown to be a reasonably caring mother to Sally .
Showing what is at this point uncharacteristic warmth , Betty recognizes that Sally needs her and provides comfort and guidance to her daughter .
SEASON SIX
Section::::Season six .
Betty spends most of the beginning of the sixth season losing the excess weight she gained over the past year .
After visiting NYC 's Lower East Side in search of one of Sally 's friends and being snidely dismissed by one of the young people there as a bottle blonde , she dyes her hair brunette .
Betty 's hair later reverts to its original blonde color .
When Henry announces that he wants to run for public office , she has mixed feelings about the idea ( still being concerned about her weight ) .
In episode 8 ( " The Better Half " ) , Betty is back to her original weight and actively campaigning alongside her husband .
Henry sees the excess attention that Betty receives and is turned on by it , as is Betty , who is beginning to feel more confident about herself .
When one of Henry 's colleagues makes a pass at her at a fundraising dinner , she informs him that she 's had three children , to which he replies that he does n't care .
But he 's misunderstood her meaning ; she then tells him triumphantly , " No , look at me .
Can you believe I 've had three children ? "
before leaving with Henry .
Betty goes to Bobby 's summer camp for a family weekend in " The Better Half " , driving down without Henry .
Don , also on his way to the camp , sees the newly svelte Betty lost at a gas station , and they go down to the campground together .
They spend the afternoon with Bobby , and everyone has a wonderful time .
That night Don visits Betty 's cabin , and they share a drink , reminiscing about the early years of their marriage and the kids .
Don accepts Betty 's tacit invitation to enter her cabin , and they make love .
Betty and Don talk afterward , and Betty admits that she 's happy with Henry , is no longer as mad at Don as she once was , and feels sorry for Megan , who does n't know that loving Don is the worst way of getting to him .
The next morning Don wakes up alone and goes down to the cafeteria , where he sees Betty and Henry eating together .
Don says hello to them and goes off to eat , alone , at the other side of the room .
In " The Quality of Mercy " , Betty takes Sally on an overnight trip to interview at Miss Porter 's boarding school .
She detects Sally is troubled by something but does n't realize it 's because Sally saw Don in bed with his downstairs neighbor , Sylvia Rosen .
Sally is accepted at Miss Porter 's , but Betty soon calls Don with the news that Sally has gotten suspended because she bought beer with a fake I.D. and got drunk with some other girls .
Betty sadly blames herself for Sally 's troubles and tells Don , " the good is n't beating out the bad . "
SEASON SEVEN
Section::::Season seven .
In episode 3 , " Field Trip , " the distinctly un - maternal Betty questions if she is a good mother , and if her children love her , after a field trip with Bobby to a farm goes sour .
Bobby trades Betty 's sandwich for a bag of gumdrops , leaving Betty with no food .
Betty orders Bobby to eat the candy and is visibly irritated with him for the rest of the day .
When they return home , neither is willing to talk about what happened .
Henry insists that the children love her , but Betty believes it will change in time .
In episode 5 , " Runaways " , Betty speaks her mind about the Vietnam War , causing a rough patch between herself and the conservative Henry during a dinner party .
Bobby overhears the arguing and sees Henry sleeping in the den .
When Sally comes home after getting hurt faux sword - fighting at Miss Porter 's , Bobby asks her if Betty and Henry are getting a divorce .
Sally assures him they are n't , and Bobby tells her he wishes he could go with her to school .
At the end of the episode , Betty resents Henry for telling her what to do , say , and think .
In episode 9 , " New Business , " Betty is revealed to be pursuing a master 's degree in psychology at Fairfield University in Connecticut .
In episode 13 , " The Milk and Honey Route , " Betty begins to feel dizzy and winded at school and falls down while climbing the stairs , fracturing her rib .
When she sees her doctor , Betty is shocked to discover that her recent lightheadedness is a sign of aggressive , advanced lung cancer that has begun to spread throughout her body .
Both Henry and Sally pressure her to undergo chemotherapy , but she stoically refuses , saying " I 've learned to believe people when they say it 's over . "
She writes a letter to Sally , telling her in a matter - of - fact way how she wants to be dressed and made up for her funeral , and then stating : " Sally , I always worried about you because you marched to the beat of your own drum , but now I know that 's good .
I know your life will be an adventure .
I love you , Mom . "
In the series finale , " Person to Person , " Betty insists to Don ( and apparently to Henry ) that her children should live with her brother William and his wife after her death , so that the boys will have a woman in their lives .
Betty is last seen reading a newspaper at her kitchen table while smoking a cigarette , as Sally washes dishes in the background .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Betty Draper appeared in Comcast 's list of TV 's Most Intriguing Characters .
TV Guide named her one of the most fashionable TV characters .
She was also included in Glamours list of the 12 Most Stylish TV Characters .
HuffPost named her as one of the Worst TV Characters in 2012 , saying " her unchanging narcissism and her selfish petulance simply bore us to tears " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
January Jones has earned nominations and accolades for her portrayal of Betty Draper .
She was jointly nominated on six occasions for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series , in 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2013 , and 2015 , winning twice in 2009 and 2010 .
In 2009 and 2010 , Jones was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series ( Drama ) .
In 2010 , Jones was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
AMC Character Page
* Guardian.co.uk Profile