THE HOUSE OF THE RISING SUN
" The House of the Rising Sun " is a traditional folk song , sometimes called " Rising Sun Blues " .
It tells of a life gone wrong in New Orleans ; many versions also urge a sibling or parents and children to avoid the same fate .
The most successful commercial version , recorded in 1964 by British rock group The Animals , was a number one hit on the UK Singles Chart and also in the United States and France .
As a traditional folk song recorded by an electric rock band , it has been described as the " first folk rock hit " .
ORIGIN AND EARLY VERSIONS
ORIGIN Section::::Origin and early versions .
Section::::Origin .
Like many classic folk ballads , " The House of the Rising Sun " is of uncertain authorship .
Musicologists say that it is based on the tradition of broadside ballads , and thematically it has some resemblance to the 16th - century ballad The Unfortunate Rake .
According to Alan Lomax , " Rising Sun " was used as the name of a bawdy house in two traditional English songs , and it was also a name for English pubs .
He further suggested that the melody might be related to a 17th - century folk song , " Lord Barnard and Little Musgrave " , also known as " Matty Groves " , but a survey by Bertrand Bronson showed no clear relationship between the two songs .
Lomax proposed that the location of the house was then relocated from England to New Orleans by white southern performers .
However , Vance Randolph proposed an alternative French origin , the " rising sun " referring to the decorative use of the sunburst insignia dating to the time of Louis XIV , which was brought to North America by French immigrants .
" House of Rising Sun " was said to have been known by miners in 1905 .
The oldest published version of the lyrics is that printed by Robert Winslow Gordon in 1925 , in a column " Old Songs That Men Have Sung " in Adventure magazine .
The lyrics of that version begin :
There is a house in New Orleans , it 's called the Rising Sun
It 's been the ruin of many a poor girl Great God , and I for one
The oldest known recording of the song , under the title " Rising Sun Blues " , is by Appalachian artists Clarence " Tom " Ashley and Gwen Foster , who recorded it in 1928 .
Ashley said he had learned it from his grandfather , Enoch Ashley .
Roy Acuff , an " early - day friend and apprentice " of Ashley 's , learned it from him and recorded it as " Rising Sun " on November 3 , 1938 .
Several older blues recordings of songs with similar titles are unrelated , for example , " Rising Sun Blues " by Ivy Smith ( 1927 ) and " The Risin ' Sun " by Texas Alexander ( 1928 ) .
The song was among those collected by folklorist Alan Lomax , who , along with his father , was a curator of the Archive of American Folk Song for the Library of Congress .
On an expedition with his wife to eastern Kentucky , Lomax set up his recording equipment in Middlesboro , Kentucky , in the house of the singer and activist Tilman Cadle .
In 1937 , he recorded a performance by Georgia Turner , the 16-year - old daughter of a local miner .
He called it The Rising Sun Blues .
Lomax later recorded a different version sung by Bert Martin and a third sung by Daw Henson , both eastern Kentucky singers .
In his 1941 songbook Our Singing Country , Lomax credits the lyrics to Turner , with reference to Martin 's version .
EARLY FOLK AND BLUES RELEASES
Section::::Early folk and blues releases .
In 1941 , Woody Guthrie recorded a version .
A recording made in 1947 by Libby Holman and Josh White ( who is also credited with having written new words and music that have subsequently been popularized in the versions made by many other later artists ) was released by Mercury Records in 1950 .
White learned the song from a " white hillbilly singer " , who might have been Ashley , in North Carolina in 1923–1924 .
Lead Belly recorded two versions of the song , in February 1944 and in October 1948 , called " In New Orleans " and " The House of the Rising Sun " , respectively ; the latter was recorded in sessions that were later used on the album Lead Belly 's Last Sessions ( 1994 , Smithsonian Folkways ) .
In 1957 , Glenn Yarbrough recorded the song for Elektra Records .
The song is also credited to Ronnie Gilbert on an album by The Weavers released in the late 1940s or early 1950s .
Pete Seeger released a version on Folkways Records in 1958 , which was re - released by Smithsonian Folkways in 2009 .
Andy Griffith recorded the song on his 1959 album Andy Griffith Shouts the Blues and Old Timey Songs .
In 1960 , Miriam Makeba recorded the song on her eponymous RCA album .
Joan Baez recorded it in 1960 on her self - titled debut album ; she frequently performed the song in concert throughout her career .
Nina Simone recorded her first version for the album Nina at the Village Gate in 1962 .
Tim Hardin sang it on This
is Tim Hardin , recorded in 1964 but not released until 1967 .
The Chambers Brothers recorded a version on Feelin ' the Blues , released on Vault records ( 1970 ) .
VAN RONK
ARRANGEMENT Section::::Van Ronk arrangement .
In late 1961 , Bob Dylan recorded the song for his debut album , released in March 1962 .
That release had no songwriting credit , but the liner notes indicate that Dylan learned this version of the song from Dave Van Ronk .
In an interview for the documentary
No Direction Home , Van Ronk said that he was intending to record the song and that Dylan copied his version .
Van Ronk recorded it soon thereafter for the album Just Dave Van Ronk .
THE ANIMALS ' VERSION Section::::The Animals ' version .
An interview with Eric Burdon revealed that he first heard the song in a club in Newcastle , England , where it was sung by the Northumbrian folk singer Johnny Handle .
The Animals were on tour with Chuck Berry and chose it because they wanted something distinctive to sing .
The Animals ' version transposes the narrative of the song from the point of view of a woman led into a life of degradation to that of a man whose father was now a gambler and drunkard , rather than the sweetheart in earlier versions .
The Animals had begun featuring their arrangement of " House of the Rising Sun " during a joint concert tour with Chuck Berry , using it as their closing number to differentiate themselves from acts that always closed with straight rockers .
It got a tremendous reaction from the audience , convincing
initially reluctant producer Mickie Most that it had hit potential , and between tour stops
the group went to a small recording studio on Kingsway in London to capture it .
RECORDING AND RELEASES Section::::Recording and releases .
The song was recorded in just one take on May 18 , 1964 , and it starts with a now - famous electric guitar A minor chord arpeggio by Hilton Valentine .
According to Valentine , he simply took Dylan 's chord sequence and played it as an arpeggio .
The performance takes off with Burdon 's lead vocal , which has been variously described as " howling , " " soulful , " and as " ... deep and gravelly as the north - east English coal town of Newcastle that spawned him . "
Finally , Alan Price 's pulsating organ part ( played on a Vox Continental ) completes the sound .
Burdon later said , " We were looking for a song that would grab people 's attention . "
As recorded , " House of the Rising Sun " ran four and a half minutes , regarded as far too long for a pop single at the time .
Producer Most , who initially did not really want to record the song at all , said that on this occasion : " Everything was in the right place ...
It only took 15 minutes to make so I ca n't take much credit for the production " .
He was nonetheless now a believer and declared it a single at its full length , saying " We 're in a microgroove world now , we will release it . "
In the United States , however , the original single ( MGM 13264 ) was a 2:58 version .
The MGM Golden Circle reissue ( KGC 179 ) featured the unedited 4:29 version , although the record label gives the edited playing time of 2:58 .
The edited version was included on the group 's 1964 U.S. debut album The Animals , while the full version was later included on their best - selling 1966 U.S. greatest hits album , The Best of the Animals .
However , the very first American release of the full - length version was on a 1965 album of various groups entitled Mickie Most Presents British Go - Go ( MGM SE-4306 ) , the cover of which , under the listing of " House of the Rising Sun " , described it as the " Original uncut version " .
Americans could also hear the complete version in the movie Go Go Mania in the spring of 1965 .
" House of the Rising Sun " was not included on any of the group 's British albums , but it was reissued as a single twice in subsequent decades , charting both times , reaching number 25 in 1972 and number 11 in 1982 , using the famous Wittelsbach organ .
The Animals version was played in 6/8 meter , unlike the 4/4 of most earlier versions .
Arranging credit went only to Alan Price .
According to Burdon , this was simply because there was insufficient room to name all five band members on the record label , and Alan Price 's first name was first alphabetically .
However , this meant that only Price received songwriter 's royalties for the hit , a fact that has caused bitterness ever since , especially with Valentine .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
" House of the Rising Sun " was a trans - Atlantic hit : after reaching the top of the UK pop singles chart in July 1964 , it topped the U.S. pop singles chart two months later , on September 5 , 1964 , where it stayed for three weeks , and became the first British Invasion number one unconnected with The Beatles .
It was the group 's breakthrough hit in both countries and became their signature song .
The song was also a hit in a number of other countries , including Ireland , where it reached No . 10 and dropped off the charts one week later .
According to John Steel , Bob Dylan told him that when he first heard The Animals ' version on his car radio , he stopped to listen , " jumped out of his car " and " banged on the bonnet " , inspiring him to go electric .
Dave Van Ronk said that The Animals ' version — like Dylan 's version before it — was based on his arrangement of the song .
Dave Marsh described the Animals ' take on " The House of the Rising Sun " as " ...
the first folk - rock hit , " sounding " ...
as if they 'd connected the ancient tune to a live wire . "
Writer Ralph McLean of the BBC agreed that " It was arguably the first folk rock tune , " calling it " a revolutionary single " , after which " the face of modern music was changed forever . "
The Animals ' rendition of the song is recognized as one of the classics of British pop music .
Writer Lester Bangs labeled it " a brilliant rearrangement " and " a new standard rendition of an old standard composition .
" It ranked number 122 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " .
It is also one of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " .
The RIAA ranked it number 240 on their list of " Songs of the Century " .
In 1999 it received a Grammy Hall of Fame Award .
It has long since become a staple of oldies and classic rock radio formats .
A 2005 Channel Five poll ranked it as Britain 's fourth - favorite number one song .
CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 1964 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition !
scope="col"Chart ( 1972 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition !
scope="col"Chart ( 1982 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition CERTIFICATIONS
FRIJID PINK VERSION
Section::::Frijid Pink version .
In 1969 , the Detroit band Frijid Pink recorded a psychedelic version of " House of the Rising Sun " , which became an international hit in 1970 .
Their version is in 4/4 time ( like Van Ronk 's and most earlier versions , rather than the 6/8 used by the Animals ) and was driven by Gary Ray Thompson 's distorted guitar with fuzz and wah - wah effects , set against the frenetic drumming of Richard Stevers .
According to Stevers , the Frijid Pink recording of " House of the Rising Sun " was done impromptu when there was time left over at a recording session booked for the group at the Tera Shirma Recording Studios .
Stevers later played snippets from that session 's tracks for Paul Cannon , the music director of Detroit 's premier rock radio station , WKNR ; the two knew each other , as Cannon was the father of Stevers 's girlfriend .
Stevers recalled , " we went through the whole thing and [ and Cannon ] did n't say much .
Then ' House [ of the Rising Sun ] ' started up and I immediately turned it off because it was n't anything I really wanted him to hear . "
However , Cannon was intrigued and had Stevers play the complete track for him , then advising Stevers , " Tell Parrot
[ Frijid Pink 's label ] to drop "
God Gave Me You "
[ the group 's current single ] and go with this one . "
Frijid Pink 's " House of the Rising Sun " debuted at number 29 on the WKNR hit parade dated January 6 , 1970 , and broke nationally after some seven weeks — during which the track was re - serviced to radio three times — with a number 73 debut on the Hot 100 in Billboard dated February 27 , 1970 ( number 97 Canada 1970/01/31 ) with a subsequent three - week ascent to the top 30 en route to a Hot 100 peak of number seven on April 4 , 1970 .
The certification of the Frijid Pink single " House of the Rising Sun " as a gold record for domestic sales of one million units was reported in the issue of Billboard dated May 30 , 1970 .
The Frijid Pink single of " House of the Rising Sun " would give the song its most widespread international success , with top 10 status reached in Austria ( number three ) , Belgium ( Flemish region , number six ) , Canada ( number three ) , Denmark ( number three ) , Germany ( two weeks at number one ) , Greece , Ireland ( number seven ) , Israel ( number four ) , the Netherlands ( number three ) , Norway ( seven weeks at number one ) , Poland ( number two ) , Sweden ( number six ) , Switzerland ( number two ) , and the UK ( number four ) .
The single also charted in Australia ( number 14 ) , France ( number 36 ) , and Italy ( number 54 ) .
SALES AND CERTIFICATIONS BILLBOARDS COUNTRY
CHART Section::::Billboards country chart .
The song has twice been a hit record on Billboards country chart .
JODY MILLER VERSION Section::::Jody Miller version .
In 1973 , Jody Miller 's version reached number 29 on the country charts and number 41 on the Adult Contemporary chart .
GEORDIE VERSION Section::::Geordie version .
Recorded by Brian Johnson 's band Geordie for their 1974 album Do n't Be Fooled by the Name , Johnson went on to become vocalist for AC / DC .
THIN LIZZY
INSTRUMENTAL
VERSION
Section::::Thin Lizzy instrumental version .
The song was recorded as an electric but fairly mellow instrumental on the Deep Purple tribute album recorded by Thin Lizzy circa 1972 , Funky Junction Play a Tribute to Deep Purple .
Here it was simply called " Rising Sun " , and credited to Leo Muller , the German businessman and label - owner .
DOLLY PARTON VERSION
Section::::Dolly Parton version .
In September 1981 , Dolly Parton released a cover of the song as the third single from her album 9 to 5 and Odd Jobs .
Like Miller 's earlier country hit , Parton 's remake returns the song to its original lyric of being about a fallen woman .
The Parton version makes it quite blunt , with a few new lyric lines that were written by Parton .
Parton 's remake reached number 14 on the U.S. country singles chart and crossed over to the pop charts , where it reached number 77 on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it also reached number 30 on the U.S. Adult Contemporary chart .
Parton has occasionally performed the song live , including on her 1987–88 television show , in an episode taped in New Orleans .
FIVE FINGER DEATH PUNCH VERSION Section::::Five Finger Death Punch version .
The American heavy metal band
Five Finger Death Punch released a cover of " House of the Rising Sun " on their fifth studio album , The Wrong Side of Heaven and the Righteous Side of Hell , Volume 2 , which was later released as the album 's second single and the band 's third single of the Wrong Side era .
The references to New Orleans have been changed to Sin City , a reference to the negative effects of gambling in Las Vegas .
The song was a top ten hit on mainstream rock radio in the United States .
It was also featured in the video game Guitar Hero Live .
JOHNNY HALLYDAY VERSION (
IN FRENCH )
Section::::Johnny Hallyday version ( in French ) .
The song was covered in French by Johnny Hallyday .
His version ( titled " Le Pénitencier " ) was released in October 1964 and spent one week at number one on the singles sales chart in France ( from October 17 to 23 ) .
In Wallonia ( French Belgium ) , his single spent 28 weeks on the chart , also peaking at number one .
He performed the song during his 2014 US tour .
CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 1964 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition
align="center " 1 POSSIBLE REAL LOCATIONS Section::::Possible real locations .
Various places in New Orleans have been proposed as the inspiration for the song , with varying plausibility .
The phrase " House of the Rising Sun " is often understood as a euphemism for a brothel , but it is not known whether the house described in the lyrics was an actual or a fictitious place .
One theory is that the song is about a woman who killed her father , an alcoholic gambler who had beaten his wife .
Therefore , the House of the Rising Sun may be a jailhouse , from which one would be the first person to see the sunrise ( an idea supported by the lyric mentioning " a ball and chain , " though that phrase has been slang for marital relationships for at least as long as the song has been in print ) .
Because women often sang the song , another theory is that the House of the Rising Sun was where prostitutes were detained while being treated for syphilis .
Since cures with mercury were ineffective , going back was very unlikely .
Only three candidates that use the name Rising Sun have historical evidence — from old city directories and newspapers .
The first was a small , short - lived hotel on Conti Street in the French Quarter in the 1820s .
It burned down in 1822 .
An excavation and document search in early 2005 found evidence that supported this claim , including an advertisement with language that may have euphemistically indicated prostitution .
Archaeologists found an unusually large number of pots of rouge and cosmetics at the site .
The second possibility was a " Rising Sun Hall " listed in late 19th - century city directories on what is now Cherokee Street , at the riverfront in the uptown Carrollton neighborhood , which seems to have been a building owned and used for meetings of a Social Aid and Pleasure Club , commonly rented out for dances and functions .
It also is no longer extant .
Definite links to gambling or prostitution ( if any ) are undocumented for either of these buildings .
A third was " The Rising Sun " , which advertised in several local newspapers in the 1860s , located on what is now the lake side of the 100 block of Decatur Street .
In various advertisements it is described as a " Restaurant , " a " Lager Beer Salon , " and a " Coffee House .
" At the time , New Orleans businesses listed as coffee houses often also sold alcoholic beverages .
Dave Van Ronk claimed in his biography " The Mayor of MacDougal Street " that at one time when he was in New Orleans someone approached him with a number of old photos of the city from the turn of the century .
Among them " was a picture of a foreboading stone doorway with a carving on the lintel of a stylized rising sun ...
It was the Orleans Parish women 's prison . "
Bizarre New Orleans , a guidebook on New Orleans , asserts that the real house was at 1614 Esplanade Avenue between 1862 and 1874 and was said to have been named after its madam , Marianne LeSoleil Levant , whose surname means " the rising sun " in French .
Another guidebook , Offbeat New Orleans , asserts that the real House of the Rising Sun was at 826–830 St. Louis St. between 1862 and 1874 , also purportedly named for Marianne LeSoleil Levant .
The building still stands , and Eric Burdon , after visiting at the behest of the owner , said , " The house was talking to me . "
There is a contemporary B&B called the House of the Rising Sun , decorated in brothel style .
The owners are fans of the song , but there is no connection with the original place .
Not everyone believes that the house actually existed .
Pamela D. Arceneaux , a research librarian at the Williams Research Center in New Orleans , is quoted as saying : An alternative view proposed by Drew Maloney is that the ' House of the Rising Sun ' refers to a place of worship such as a Masonic Temple , Christian Church or perhaps a Pagan Roman Temple .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes EXTERNAL LINKS
* Songfacts " House Of The Rising Sun " entry *
The sheet music *
The REAL Meaning Behind The Song
" House Of The Rising Sun
*
The Rising Sun Blues : Turner , Georgia , Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive