JOHN BROWN 'S
RAID
ON
HARPERS FERRY John Brown 's raid on Harpers Ferry ( also known as John Brown 's raid or The raid on Harpers Ferry ) was an effort by abolitionist John Brown to initiate an armed slave revolt in 1859 by taking over a United States arsenal at Harpers Ferry , Virginia .
Brown 's party of 22 was defeated by a company of U.S. Marines , led by First Lieutenant Israel Greene .
Colonel Robert E. Lee was in overall command of the operation to retake the arsenal .
John Brown had originally asked Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass , both of whom he had met in his transformative years as an abolitionist in Springfield , Massachusetts , to join him in his raid , but Tubman was prevented by illness and Douglass declined , as he believed Brown 's plan would fail .
BROWN 'S PREPARATION
Section::::Brown 's preparation .
John Brown rented the Kennedy Farmhouse , with a small cabin nearby , north of Harpers Ferry near the community of Dargan in Washington County , Maryland , and took up residence under the name Isaac Smith .
Brown came with a small group of men minimally trained for military action .
His group included 18 men besides himself ( 13 white men , 5 black men ) .
Northern abolitionist groups sent 198 breech - loading .52 caliber Sharps carbines ( " Beecher 's Bibles " ) and 950 pikes ( obtained in late September from Charles Blair of Collinsville Axe Company in Collinsville , Connecticut ) , in preparation for the raid .
The United States Armory was a huge complex of buildings that manufactured small arms for the U.S. Army ( 1801–1861 ) , with an Arsenal ( storehouse ) that was thought to contain 100,000 muskets and rifles at the time .
Brown attempted to attract more black recruits .
He tried recruiting Frederick Douglass as a liaison officer to the slaves in a meeting held in a quarry at Chambersburg , Pennsylvania .
It was at this meeting that ex - slave " Emperor " Shields Green consented to join with John Brown on his attack on the United States Armory , Green stating to Douglass
" I believe I will go with the old man " .
Douglass declined , indicating to Brown that he believed the raid was a suicide mission .
The plan was " an attack on the federal government " that " would array the whole country against us ...
You will never get out alive " , he warned .
The Kennedy Farmhouse served as " barracks , arsenal , supply depot , mess hall , debate club , and home " .
It was very crowded and life there was tedious .
Brown was worried about arousing neighbors ' suspicions .
As a result , the raiders had to stay indoors during the daytime , without much to do but study , drill , argue politics , discuss religion , and play cards and checkers .
Brown 's daughter - in - law Martha served as cook and housekeeper .
His daughter Annie served as lookout .
Brown wanted women at the farm , to prevent suspicions of a large all - male group .
The raiders went outside at night to drill and get fresh air .
Thunderstorms were welcome since they concealed noise from Brown 's neighbors .
Brown did not plan to have a sudden raid and escape to the mountains .
Rather , he intended to use those rifles and pikes he captured at the arsenal , in addition to those he brought along , to arm rebellious slaves with the aim of striking terror in the slaveholders in Virginia .
He believed that on the first night of action , 200 - 500 black slaves would join his line .
He ridiculed the militia and regular army that might oppose him .
He planned to send agents to nearby plantations , rallying the slaves .
He planned to hold Harpers Ferry for a short time , expecting that as many volunteers , white and black , would join him as would form against him .
He would move rapidly southward , sending out armed bands along the way .
They would free more slaves , obtain food , horses and hostages , and destroy slaveholders ' morale .
Brown planned to follow the Appalachian Mountains south into Tennessee and even Alabama , the heart of the South , making forays into the plains on either side .
ADVANCE KNOWLEDGE OF RAID
Section::::Advance knowledge of raid .
Brown paid Hugh Forbes $ 600 to be his drillmaster .
Forbes was an English mercenary who served Giuseppe Garibaldi in Italy .
Forbes ' Manual for the Patriotic Volunteer was found in Brown 's papers after the raid .
Brown and Forbes argued over strategy and money .
Forbes wanted more money so that his family in Europe could join him .
Forbes sent threatening letters to Brown 's backers in an attempt to get money .
Failing in this effort , Forbes traveled to Washington , DC , and met with U.S. Senators William H. Seward and Henry Wilson .
He denounced Brown to Seward as a " vicious man " who needed to be restrained , but did not disclose any plans for the raid .
Forbes partially exposed the plan to Senator Wilson and others .
Wilson wrote to Samuel Gridley Howe , a Brown backer , advising him to get Brown 's backers to retrieve the weapons intended for use in Kansas .
Brown 's backers told him that the weapons should not be used " for other purposes , as rumor says they may be . "
In response to warnings , Brown had to return to Kansas to shore up support and discredit Forbes .
Some historians believe that this trip cost Brown valuable time and momentum .
Estimates are that at least eighty people knew about Brown 's planned raid in advance .
Many others had reasons to believe that Brown was contemplating a move against the South .
One of those who knew was David J. Gue of Springdale , Iowa .
Gue was a Quaker who believed that Brown and his men would be killed .
Gue , his brother , and another man decided to warn the government " to protect Brown from the consequences of his own rashness . "
Gue sent an anonymous letter dated August 20 , 1859 to Secretary of War John B. Floyd .
The letter said that " old John Brown , ' late of Kansas , " was planning to organize a slave uprising in the South .
It said that Brown had a secret agent " in an armory " in Maryland .
The letter said that Brown was stockpiling weapons at a secret location in Maryland .
Gue warned that Brown planned to leave Maryland and enter Virginia at Harpers Ferry .
Gue acknowledged that he was afraid to disclose his identity but asked Floyd not to ignore his warning " on that account . "
He was hoping that Floyd would send soldiers to Harpers Ferry .
He hoped that the extra security would motivate Brown to call off his plans .
Even though President Buchanan offered a $ 250 reward for Brown , Floyd did not connect the John Brown of Gue 's letter to the John Brown of Pottawatomie , Kansas fame .
He knew that Maryland did not have an armory ( Harpers Ferry is just across the river from Maryland ) .
Floyd figured that the letter writer was a crank and forgot about it .
He later said that " a scheme of such wickedness and outrage could not be entertained by any citizen of the United States . "
THE RAID OCTOBER 16 Section::::The raid .
Section::::October 16 .
On Sunday night , October 16 , 1859 , Brown left four of his men behind as a rear - guard : his son , Owen Brown , Barclay Coppock , and Frank Meriam ; he led the rest into the town of Harpers Ferry , Virginia .
Brown detached a party under John Cook Jr. to capture Colonel Lewis Washington , great - grandnephew of George Washington , at his nearby Beall - Air estate , some of his slaves , and two relics of George Washington : a sword allegedly presented to Washington by Frederick the Great and two pistols given by Marquis de Lafayette , which Brown considered talismans .
The party carried out its mission and returned via the Allstadt House , where they took more hostages .
Brown 's main party captured several watchmen and townspeople in Harpers Ferry .
Brown 's men needed to capture the weapons and escape before word could be sent to Washington .
The raid was going well for Brown 's men .
They cut the telegraph wire and seized a Baltimore & Ohio train passing through .
A free black man was the first casualty of the raid .
Heyward Shepherd , an African - American baggage handler on the train , confronted the raiders ; they shot and killed him .
For some reason , Brown let the train continue , and the conductor alerted the authorities down the line .
Brown had been sure that he would win the support of local slaves in joining the rebellion , but a massive uprising did not occur , because word had not been spread about the uprising , so the slaves nearby did not know about it .
Although the white townspeople soon began to fight back against the raiders , Brown 's men succeeded in capturing the armory that evening .
OCTOBER 17
Section::::October 17 .
Army workers discovered Brown 's men early on the morning of October 17 .
Local militia , farmers and shopkeepers surrounded the armory .
When a company of militia captured the bridge across the Potomac River , any route of escape for the raiders was cut off .
During the day , four townspeople were killed , including the mayor .
Realizing his escape was cut , Brown took nine of his captives and moved into the smaller engine house , which would come to be known as John Brown 's Fort .
The raiders blocked entry of the windows and doors and traded sporadic gunfire with surrounding forces .
At one point Brown sent out his son , Watson , and Aaron Dwight Stevens with a white flag , but Watson was mortally wounded and Stevens was shot and captured .
The raid was rapidly failing .
One of Brown 's men , William H. Leeman , panicked and made an attempt to flee by swimming across the Potomac River , but he was shot and fatally injured while doing so .
During the intermittent shooting , Brown 's other son , Oliver , was also hit ; he died after a brief period .
At around 3:00 p.m. a militia company led by Captain E.G. Alburtis arrived by train from Martinsburg , Virginia .
Most of the militia members were Baltimore & Ohio Railroad employees .
The militia forced the raiders inside the engine house .
They broke into the guardroom and freed over two dozen prisoners .
Eight militiamen were wounded .
Alburtis said that he could have ended the raid with help from other citizens .
By 3:30 that afternoon , President James Buchanan ordered a company of U.S. Marines ( the only government troops in the immediate area ) to march on Harpers Ferry under the command of Brevet Colonel Robert E. Lee , lieutenant colonel of the 2nd U.S. Cavalry Regiment .
Lee had been on leave from his regiment , stationed in Texas , when he was hastily called to lead the detachment and had to command it while wearing his civilian clothes .
OCTOBER 18
Section::::October 18 .
Lee first offered the role of attacking the engine house to the local militia units on the spot .
Both militia commanders declined , and Lee turned to the Marines .
On the morning of October 18 , Colonel Lee sent Lt . J. E. B. Stuart , serving as a volunteer aide - de - camp , under a white flag of truce to negotiate a surrender of John Brown and his followers .
Colonel Lee informed Lt .
Israel Greene that if Brown did not surrender , he was to direct the Marines in attacking the engine house .
Stuart walked towards the front of the engine house where he told Brown that his men would be spared if they surrendered .
Brown refused and as Stuart walked away , he signaled a " thumbs down " to Lt . Greene and his men standing nearby .
Soon after , Greene led a detachment of Marines to attack the engine house .
Marines equipped with sledgehammers tried to break through the door , but their efforts were unsuccessful .
Greene found a wooden ladder , and he and about 10 Marines used it as a battering ram to force the front doors open .
Greene was the first through the door and with the assistance of Lewis Washington , identified and singled out John Brown .
Greene later recounted what events occurred next : Quicker than thought I brought my saber down with all my strength upon [ Brown 's ] head .
He was moving as the blow fell , and I suppose I did not strike him where I intended , for he received a deep saber cut in the back of the neck .
He fell senseless on his side , then rolled over on his back .
He had in his hand a short Sharpe 's cavalry carbine .
I think he had just fired as I reached Colonel Washington , for the Marine who followed me into the aperture made by the ladder received a bullet in the abdomen , from which he died in a few minutes .
The shot might have been fired by someone else in the insurgent party , but I think it was from Brown .
Instinctively as Brown fell I gave him a saber thrust in the left breast .
The sword I carried was a light uniform weapon , and , either not having a point or striking something hard in Brown 's accouterments , did not penetrate .
The blade bent double .
In three minutes , all of the raiders still alive were taken prisoner and the action was over .
OCTOBER 19
Section::::October 19 .
Robert E. Lee made a synopsis of the events that took place at Harpers Ferry .
According to Lee 's notes , Lee believed John Brown was a madman , " ...
the plan [ raiding the Harpers Ferry Arsenal ] was the attempt of a fanatic or madman . "
Lee also believed that the blacks in the raid were forced by Brown .
"
The blacks , whom he [ John Brown ] forced from their homes in this neighborhood , as far as I could learn , gave him no voluntary assistance .
"
Lee attributed John Brown 's " temporary success " by creating panic and confusion and by " magnifying " the number of participants involved in the raid .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Colonel Lee and Jeb Stuart searched the surrounding country for fugitives who had participated in the attack .
Few of Brown 's associates escaped , and among those who did , some were sheltered by abolitionists in the north , including William Still .
Brown was taken to the court house in nearby Charles Town for trial .
He was found guilty of treason against the Commonwealth of Virginia and was hanged on December 2 .
( This execution was witnessed by the actor John Wilkes Booth , who would later assassinate President Abraham Lincoln . )
On the day of his execution , Brown wrote his last testament , which said , I John Brown am now quite certain that the crimes of this guilty , land : will never be purged away ; but with Blood .
I had as I now think : vainly flattered myself that without very much bloodshed ; it might be done .
Four other raiders were executed on December 16 and two more on March 16 , 1860 .
In his last speech , at his trial , he said to the court : ...
had I so interfered in behalf of the rich , the powerful , the intelligent ,
the so - called great , or in behalf of any of their friends , either father , mother , brother , sister , wife , or children , or any of that class , and suffered and sacrificed what I have in this interference , it would have been all right ; and every man in this court would have deemed it an act worthy of reward rather than punishment .
Southerners had a mixed attitude towards their slaves .
Many Southern whites lived in constant fear of another slave insurrection .
Paradoxically , whites claimed that slaves were well treated and content in bondage .
After the raid Southerners initially lived in fear of slave uprisings and invasion by armed abolitionists .
The South 's reaction entered the second phase at around the time of Brown 's execution .
Southerners were relieved that no slaves had volunteered to help Brown .
Southerners felt vindicated in their claims that slaves were content .
After Northerners had expressed admiration for Brown 's motives , with some treating him as a martyr , Southern opinion evolved into what James M. McPherson called " unreasoning fury . "
The first Northern reaction among antislavery advocates to Brown 's Raid was one of baffled reproach .
William Lloyd Garrison called the raid " misguided , wild , and apparently insane . "
But through the trial and his execution , Brown was transformed into a martyr .
Henry David Thoreau , in A Plea for Captain John Brown , said , " I think that for once the Sharp 's rifles and the revolvers were employed in a righteous cause .
The tools were in the hands of one who could use them , " and said of Brown , " He has a spark of divinity in him . "
Though " Harper 's Ferry was insane , " wrote the religious weekly the Independent , " the controlling motive of his demonstration was sublime .
" To the South , Brown was a murderer who wanted to deprive them of their property .
The North " has sanctioned and applauded theft , murder , and treason , " said De Bow 's Review .
CASUALTIES JOHN BROWN 'S RAIDERS Section::::Casualties .
Section::::John Brown 's raiders .
Killed
*
John Henry Kagi ( Shot and killed while crossing a river .
First buried in common grave at Harpers Ferry ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* Jeremiah G. Anderson ( At age 26 , was mortally wounded and killed by a Marine 's bayonet during the final assault on the engine house .
Body claimed by Winchester Medical College as a teaching cadaver ; last resting place unknown . )
* William Thompson ( First buried in common grave at Harpers Ferry ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* Dauphin Thompson ( Killed in the storming of the engine house .
First buried in common grave at Harpers Ferry ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* Oliver Brown ( At age 21 , the youngest of John Brown 's three sons to participate in the action , he was mortally wounded on the 17th inside the engine house and died the next day .
He was first buried in common grave at Harpers Ferry ; and reburied in 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* Watson Brown ( At age 24 , was mortally wounded outside the engine house while carrying a white flag to negotiate with the opposing militia
; he died two days later .
As his body was claimed by Winchester Medical College as a teaching cadaver , Union troops burned the college in an attack during the Civil War .
Brown was reburied in 1882 in a grave near his father 's in North Elba , New York . )
* Stewart Taylor .
Uxbridge , Ontario , Canada ( First buried in common grave at Harpers Ferry ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* William Leeman ( Shot while trying to escape across the Potomac River .
First buried in common grave at Harpers Ferry ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* Lewis Sheridan Leary ( A 24-year - old free black , he was mortally wounded while trying to escape across the Shenandoah River .
He was stationed in the rifle factory with Kagi .
Alleged to be buried at John Brown gravesite at North Elba , New York .
Cenotaph memorial in Oberlin , Ohio . )
* Dangerfield Newby ( At about 35 , he was born into slavery , with a white father who was not his master .
He was given permission to move to Ohio along with his mother and siblings , but when he tried to gain freedom for his wife and children , their master refused .
This inspired Newby to join Brown 's raid .
He was the first raider killed .
( His body was mutilated ; for example , his ears were cut off by someone in the crowd as souvenirs . )
First he was buried at Harpers Ferry ; reburied in 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
Captured
* John Brown ( also wounded ) Tried , convicted and executed by hanging December 2 , 1859 , in nearby Charles Town .
* Aaron Dwight Stevens ( shot and captured October 18 .
Hanged March 16 , 1860 in Charles Town .
First buried at Eagleswood Mansion New Jersey ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
* Edwin Coppock ( At age 24 , he shot and killed the mayor of Harpers Ferry , Fontaine Beckham , during the raid .
He was later executed at Charles Town on December 16 , 1859 and was buried in Salem , Ohio . )
* John Anthony Copeland ,
Jr. ( A 25-year - old free black , he joined the raiders along with his uncle Lewis Leary .
He was captured during the raid and executed on December 16 , 1859 , in Charles Town .
The body was claimed by Winchester Medical College as a teaching cadaver .
The last resting place is unknown .
Cenotaph memorial in Oberlin , Ohio . )
* Shields Green ( At about age 23 , Green was an escaped slave from South Carolina ; captured in the engine house on October 18 , 1859 and hanged December 16 , 1859 in Charles Town .
The body was claimed by Winchester Medical College as a teaching cadaver .
The last resting place is unknown .
Cenotaph memorial in Oberlin , Ohio . )
* John Edwin Cook ( Escaped into Pennsylvania but soon captured .
Hanged December 16 , 1859 in Charles Town .
Body sent to New York . )
* Albert E. Hazlett ( Escaped into Pennsylvania but soon captured .
Hanged March 16 , 1860 .
Buried at Eagleswood Mansion in Perth Amboy , New Jersey ; reburied 1899 in a common grave near John Brown at North Elba , New York . )
Four raiders escaped and were captured about six months later .
Escaped and never captured *
Barclay Coppock ( Died during US Civil War . )
* Charles Plummer Tidd ( Died during US Civil War . )
* Osborne Perry Anderson ( Served as a soldier in Union Army , and wrote a memoir about the raid .
Died 1870 )
* Owen Brown ( Served as an officer in Union Army .
Died January 8 , 1889 .
Pasadena , California ( Brown 's Mountain ) )
* Francis Jackson Meriam ( Served in the army as a captain in the 3rd South Carolina Colored Infantry . )
OTHERS Section::::Others .
Civilians
* Heyward Shepherd ( Free African - American B&O baggage master ; killed .
Buried in African - American Cemetery on Rt . 11 in Winchester , Va. , grave is unmarked )
* Thomas Boerly ( Townsperson ; killed . )
* George W. Turner ( Townsperson ; killed . )
* Fontaine Beckham ( Town mayor ; killed . )
* A slave belonging to Col . Washington was killed .
* A slave belonging to hostage John Allstad was killed .
( Some claim the two slaves voluntarily joined Brown 's raiders , others say Brown forced them to fight .
Regardless , one was killed trying to escape across the Potomac River , the other was wounded and later died in the Charles Town jail . )
9 other civilians were wounded .
Marines * Private Luke Quinn ( Killed during the storming of the engine house . )
Buried in Harpers Ferry Catholic Cemetery on Rte . 340 .
* Private Matthew Ruppert ( Shot in the face during the storming of the engine house ; survived . )
LIBERATED SLAVES
Section::::Liberated slaves .
Mayor Beckham 's Will Book called for the liberation of Isaac Gilbert , his wife , and three children upon his death .
When Edwin Coppock killed Beckham the five slaves were free .
LEGACY HERITAGE AREA Section::::Legacy .
Section::::Heritage Area .
In 1944 , Harpers Ferry and some surrounding areas were designated as a National Monument .
Congress later designated it as the Harpers Ferry National Historical Park in 1963 .
It is managed by the National Park Service .
The park includes the historic town of Harpers Ferry , notable as a center of 19th - century industry and as the scene of the uprising .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
* Sante Fe Trail ( 1940 ) , an American western film set before the Civil War that mostly depicts John Brown 's campaign during Bleeding Kansas and ends with the raid on the Harpers Ferry , starring Ronald Reagan , Errol Flynn , and Raymond Massey .
* John Brown 's trial and execution are briefly covered in the TV miniseries The Blue and the Gray ( 1982 ) .
* Harry Paget Flashman , the title character of George MacDonald Fraser 's flashman novels , takes a reluctant part in the raid in the tenth novel , Flashman and the Angel of the Lord .
CONFLICTING INTERPRETATIONS Section::::Conflicting interpretations .
In his day , Brown was seen by abolitionists as admirable in principles , though misguided and ultimately unsuccessful .
For the Southern slave states he was a traitor and a threat to the nation .
Even after 100 years there is no consensus on how he is to be seen .
The National Park Service plays down Brown and the raid in its literature concerning the Historical Park ; Brown is not even mentioned on the home page of the Park .
The conflicts over meaning of the events are particularly clear with regard to the Heyward Shepherd monument .
SEE ALSO
* List of incidents of civil unrest in the United States * Origins of the American Civil War NOTES CITATIONS FURTHER READING
*
Earle , Jonathan .
John Brown 's Raid on Harpers Ferry : A Brief History with Documents ( 2008 ) excerpt and text search
* Field , Ron .
Avenging Angel ; John Brown 's Raid on Harpers Ferry 1859 ( 2012 ) .
Osprey Raid Series # 36 .
Osprey Publishing .
* Fraser , George MacDonald .
Flashman and the Angel of the Lord ( 1994 )
* Lee , Robert E. " Col . Robert E. Lee 's Report Concerning the Attack at Harper 's Ferry , October 19 , 1859
" online * Horwitz , Tony .
Midnight Rising : John Brown and the Raid That Sparked the Civil War ( 2011 )
Henry Holt and Company
* Mason , J.M. " Senate Select Committee Report on the Harper 's Ferry Invasion , June 15 , 1860
" online * Nalty , Bernard C.
The United States Marines at Harpers Ferry and in the Civil War ( 1959 ) History & Museums Division , United States Marine Corps .
online
* National Park Service History Series .
John Brown 's Raid , Virginia Beach , VA : The Dunning Company Publishers ( 2009 )
* Nevins , Allan .
The Emergence of Lincoln : Prelude to Civil War , 1859–1861 ( 1950 ) , vol 4 of The Ordeal of the Union , esp ch
3 pp 70–97 * Oates , Stephen B.
To Purge this Land with Blood : A Biography of John Brown ( 1984 ) .
Amherst , MA :
The University of Massachusetts Press .
* Potter , David M. The Impending Crisis : 1848–1861 ( 1976 )
pp
356–84 ; Pulitzer Prize winning history
* Reynolds , David S. John Brown , Abolitionist : The Man Who Killed Slavery , Sparked the Civil War , and Seeded Civil Rights ( 2006 )
* Villard , Oswald Garrison .
John Brown , 1800–1859 :
A Biography Fifty Years After ( 1910 ) 738 pages , full text
online * Thomas , Emory M. Robert E. Lee : A Biography ( 1995 ) .
New York :
W.W. Norton & Company .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* John Brown –
150 Years After Harpers Ferry by Terry Bisson , Monthly Review , October 2009