DAMART
Damart is a French company which specialises in clothing .
Established in 1953 the brand became a household name in France and the UK .
Although the brand specialises in a material called Thermolactyl , known for its insulation qualities , the label has expanded to include fashion items for the senior 's market .
DAMART BRAND Section::::Damart brand .
Damart is the most well known brand of a company , now called Damartex , which originated in France in 1953 .
It was founded by the Despature brothers and primarily manufactured thermal clothing using Thermolactyl fibre .
Today the Damartex group employs around 4,000 people worldwide , with around 650 of these in the UK .
In 1976 , Damart went public being listed on the Paris Stock Exchange .
In 2003 Damart celebrated its 50th anniversary , with 130 stores across Europe and an active customer base of 10 million .
IN THE UK Section::::In the UK .
In the UK , Damart has three offices .
Two of these are located in West Yorkshire , one in Bingley ( HQ ) , and one in Steeton ( warehouse ) .
There is also one located in Earby ( mailings distribution centre ) .
Earby shut in 2009 and all mailings are done from Steeton .
Damart has closed its physical UK retail stores , with the exception of its store in Bingley , and now operates as a mail order , telephone order and online retailer .
CORONATION STREET Section::::Coronation Street .
Many of Coronation Street 's stars wear items from Damart 's range when filming in order to keep out the cold conditions presented by the streets of Weatherfield .
Damart has also provided items for the wardrobe of some of the soap 's characters over the years including Maggie Jones ( Blanche Hunt ) and Anne Kirkbride ( Deirdre Barlow ) .
BREAST CANCER AWARENESS Section::::Breast cancer awareness .
In 2002 , Damart entered into partnership with the Breast Cancer Campaign and has since raised £ 82,000 for breast cancer awareness through sales of its limited edition pink vest .
The Pink Vest campaign has seen a publicity contribution from a number of stars over the years , the most recent being Alison King , Coronation Street 's Carla Connor .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
In 2005 Damart caused a stir by sending a promotional offer to many of its elderly customers , disguised as a red final reminder letter .
The letter was entitled ' Final reminder from Damart 's financial director ' and had ' Account Settlement ' pasted across the page .
WORLDWIDE
Section::::Worldwide .
Damartex headquarters is in France .
The company also has a presence in the USA , Japan , Australia , Belgium and Switzerland .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * UK Website