VENOMOID
A venomoid is a venomous snake that has undergone a surgical procedure to remove or inhibit the production of snake venom .
This procedure has been used for venomous snakes kept as pets or used in public demonstrations in order to remove the risk of injury or death when handled .
The removal of venom glands or fangs of exhibited animals may be by surgery or simple mutilation ; some or all of these procedures have been considered illegal and unethical .
Removal of fangs is uncommon , as snakes frequently regenerate teeth , and the more invasive procedure of removing the underlying maxillary bone would be fatal .
Most venomoid procedures consist of either removing the venom gland itself , or severing the duct between the gland and the fang .
However , the duct and gland have been known to regenerate , and supposedly " safe " snakes have killed mice and successfully envenomated humans .
Advocates of this procedure state that it is done for safety reasons and have published methods for this surgery .
However , this procedure is highly controversial among herpetologists , and is considered animal cruelty by many experts on venomous snakes , particularly in reference to the procedure being performed by unlicensed hobbyists with inadequate analgesia .
For instance , a veterinarian review on reptile surgery published in 2006 stated that " such practices should be discouraged " due to both ethical and animal welfare concerns .
Legal questions have been raised about amateur venomoid surgeries , since the Australian 1986 Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act states that animals must be anesthetized for the duration of an operation .
In 2007 , the Victoria state government amended the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1986 to ban the removal of venom glands from snakes unless performed for a therapeutic reason by a registered veterinarian .
In addition , a 2008 tribunal ruled that venomoid snakes can not be handled by members of the public in Victoria , due to the risk of the venom glands regrowing .
SEE ALSO
* Snake charming
* Docking ( animal )
* Onychectomy REFERENCES