FOUR TOPS
The Four Tops are a vocal quartet from Detroit , Michigan , USA , who helped to define the city 's Motown sound of the 1960s .
The group 's repertoire has included soul music , R&B , disco , adult contemporary , doo - wop , jazz , and show tunes .
Founded as the Four Aims , lead singer Levi Stubbs , Abdul " Duke " Fakir , Renaldo " Obie " Benson and Lawrence Payton remained together for over four decades , performing from 1953 until 1997 without a change in personnel .
The Four Tops were among a number of groups , including the Miracles , the Marvelettes , Martha and the Vandellas , the Temptations , and the Supremes , who established the Motown Sound heard around the world during the 1960s .
They were notable for having Stubbs , a baritone , as their lead singer , whereas most male and mixed vocal groups of the time were fronted by a tenor .
The group was the main male vocal group for the highly successful songwriting and production team of Holland – Dozier – Holland , who crafted a stream of hit singles for Motown .
These included two Billboard Hot 100 number - one hits for the Tops :
" I Ca n't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie Honey Bunch ) " in 1965 and " Reach Out
I 'll Be There " in 1966 .
After Holland - Dozier - Holland left Motown in 1967 , the Four Tops were assigned to a number of producers , primarily Frank Wilson , but generally with less success .
When Motown left Detroit in 1972 to move to Los Angeles , California , the Tops stayed in Detroit but signed a new recording deal with ABC Records ' Dunhill imprint .
Recording mainly in Los Angeles , they continued to have chart singles into the late 1970s , including the million - seller "
Ai n't No Woman " , their second release on Dunhill , produced by Steve Barri and the composers Dennis Lambert and Brian Potter .
In the 1980s , the Four Tops recorded for Casablanca Records , Arista Records and Motown , returning to that label on two occasions for brief stays .
Apart from their album Indestructible ( owned by Sony Music Entertainment ) , Universal Music Group controls the rights to their entire post-1963 catalog ( through various mergers and acquisitions ) and also their 1956 single , " Could It Be You " .
A change of lineup was forced on the group when Lawrence Payton died on June 20 , 1997 .
The group initially continued as a three - piece under the name the Tops , before Theo Peoples ( formerly of the Temptations ) was recruited as the new fourth member .
Peoples eventually took over the role of lead singer when Stubbs suffered a stroke in 2000 , with Ronnie McNeir then joining the group .
On July 1 , 2005 , Benson died of lung cancer .
Payton 's son Roquel Payton replaced him .
Levi Stubbs died on October 17 , 2008 .
Fakir , McNeir , Roquel Payton , and Harold " Spike " Bonhart , who replaced Peoples in 2011 , are still performing together as the Four Tops .
Fakir is the only surviving founding member of the group .
HISTORY EARLY YEARS Section::::History .
Section::::Early years .
All four members of the group began their careers together while they were high - school students in Detroit .
At the insistence of their friends , Pershing High students Levi Stubbs and Abdul " Duke " Fakir performed with Renaldo " Obie " Benson and Lawrence Payton from Northern High at a local birthday party .
The quartet decided to remain together and named the group the Four Aims .
With the help of Payton 's songwriter cousin Roquel Davis , the Aims signed to Chess Records in 1956 , changing their name to the Four Tops to avoid confusion with the Ames Brothers .
Over the next seven years , the Tops had unsuccessful tenures at Chess , Red Top , Riverside Records and Columbia Records .
Without any hit records to their name , they toured frequently , developing a polished stage presence and an experienced supper club act , as well as supporting Billy Eckstine .
In 1963 , Berry Gordy , Jr. , who had worked with Roquel Davis as a songwriter in the late 1950s , convinced the Tops to join the roster of his growing Motown record company .
JOINING MOTOWN
Section::::Joining Motown .
During their early Motown years , the Four Tops recorded jazz standards for the company 's Workshop label .
In addition , they sang backup on Motown singles by the Supremes ( " Run , Run , Run " ) , Martha and the Vandellas ( on the 1966 hit " My Baby Loves Me " ) and others .
In 1964 , Motown 's main songwriting and production team , Holland – Dozier – Holland , created a complete instrumental track without any idea of what to do with it .
They decided to craft the song as a more mainstream pop song for the Four Tops and proceeded to create " Baby I Need Your Loving " from the instrumental track .
On its release in mid-1964 , " Baby I Need Your Loving " made it to number 11 on the Billboard pop chart .
However , the song proved to be much more popular on trend - setting radio stations in key U.S. markets and has since grown in popularity over the years to be one of the group 's classic tracks .
After the single 's success , the Tops were pulled away from their jazz material and began recording more material in the vein of " Baby
I Need Your Loving " .
The first follow - up single , " Without the One You Love ( Life 's Not Worth While ) " , just missed both the pop and R&B Top 40 charts , but " Ask the Lonely " , written and produced by Motown A&R head Mickey Stevenson with Ivy Hunter , was a Top 30 pop hit and a Top 10 R&B hit in early 1965 .
From there , the group really began to make its mark .
SUCCESS
Section::::Success .
After their first number 1 hit , " I Ca n't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie , Honey Bunch ) " in June 1965 , the Four Tops released a long series of successful hit singles .
Among the first wave of these hits were the Top 10
" It 's the Same Old Song " , " Something About You " , " Shake Me , Wake Me ( When It 's Over ) " , and " Loving You Is Sweeter Than Ever " .
Four Tops records often represented the epitome of the Motown Sound : simple , distinctive melodies and rhymes , call - and - response lyrics , and the musical contributions of studio band , the Funk Brothers .
Holland - Dozier - Holland wrote most of Levi Stubbs 's vocals in a tenor range , near the top of his range , in order to get a sense of strained urgency in his gospel preacher - inspired leads .
They also wrote additional background vocals for a female group , the Andantes , on many of the songs , to add a high end to the low - voiced harmony of the Tops .
Ivy Hunter 's " Loving You Is Sweeter Than Ever " was one of a few exceptions .
August 1966 brought the release of the Four Tops ' all - time biggest hit and one of the most popular Motown songs ever . "
Reach Out
I 'll Be There " reached number 1 on the U.S. pop and R&B charts and the UK chart and soon became the Tops ' signature song .
It was almost immediately followed by the similar - sounding " Standing in the Shadows of Love " ; its depiction of heartbreak reflecting the opposite of the optimism in " Reach Out " .
It was another Top 10 hit for the Tops .
The Top 10 U.S. hit " Bernadette " centered around a man 's all - consuming obsession with his lover , continued the Four Tops ' successful run into April 1967 , followed by the Top 20 hits " 7-Rooms of Gloom " , and " You Keep Running Away " .
By now , the Tops were the most successful male Motown act in the United Kingdom ( in the United States , they were second to the Temptations ) , and began experimenting with more mainstream pop hits .
They scored hits with their versions of Tim Hardin 's " If I Were a Carpenter " in late 1967 ( mid-1968 in the U.S. ) and the Left Banke 's " Walk Away Renée " in early 1968 .
These singles and the original "
I 'm in a Different World " were their last hits produced by Holland - Dozier - Holland , who left Motown in 1967 after disputes with Berry Gordy over royalties and ownership of company shares .
LATE MOTOWN PERIOD Section::::Late Motown period .
Without Holland - Dozier - Holland , the hits became less frequent .
The group worked with a wide array of Motown producers during the late 1960s , including Ivy Hunter , Nickolas Ashford & Valerie Simpson , Norman Whitfield and Johnny Bristol , without significant chart success .
Their first major hit in a long time came in the form of 1970 's
" It 's All in the Game " , a pop Top 30 /
R&B Top
Ten hit produced by Frank Wilson .
Wilson and the Tops began working on a number of innovative tracks and albums together , echoing Whitfield 's psychedelic soul work with The Temptations .
Their 1970 album Still Waters Run Deep was a forerunner of the concept album .
It also served as an inspiration for Marvin Gaye 's 1971 classic album
What 's Going On , the title track of which was co - written by the Tops ' Obie Benson .
In addition to their own albums , the Tops were paired with The Supremes , who had just replaced lead singer Diana Ross with Jean Terrell , for a series of albums billed under the joint title in 1970 , and The Return of the Magnificent Seven and Dynamite !
in 1971 .
Whilst the albums themselves did not perform really well on the charts , The Magnificent Seven featured a Top 20 version of Ike & Tina Turner 's " River Deep - Mountain High " , produced by Ashford & Simpson .
The 1971 single " A Simple Game " featured backing vocals from members of The Moody Blues .
The song did not fare well on the U.S. charts , but reached number three on the UK charts .
ABC RECORDS AND CASABLANCA RECORDS Section::::ABC Records and Casablanca Records .
Motown as a company began to change during the early 1970s .
Older acts such as Martha and the Vandellas and The Marvelettes were slowly moved aside or dropped to focus on newer acts , such as Michael Jackson and The Jackson 5 , Rare Earth , and the now - solo Diana Ross .
In addition , the company moved its operations from Detroit to Los Angeles , California , where Berry Gordy planned to break into the motion picture and television industries .
In 1972 , it was announced that the entire company would move west and that all its artists had to move as well .
Many of the older Motown acts , already neglected by the label , opted to stay in Detroit , including The Funk Brothers studio backing band , Martha Reeves , and the Four Tops .
The Tops departed Motown for ABC - Dunhill , where they were assigned to writer - producers Dennis Lambert and Brian Potter and the label 's head of A&R , Steve Barri as producer , with The Tops ' own Lawrence Payton later also serving as a producer and writer .
He also took over lead vocal duties on several tracks .
The group 's first release on the label , " Keeper of the Castle " was their first pop Top 10 hit since " Bernadette " in 1967 .
Follow - ups included the million - selling " Ai n't No Woman ( Like the One I 've Got ) " , also a top 10 pop hit and their third R&B number 1 , and the Top 20 hit , " Are You Man Enough " , ( from the movie " Shaft in Africa " ) .
" Sweet Understanding Love " ; " Midnight Flower " ; and " One Chain Do n't Make No Prison " all reached the R&B Top 10 between 1972 and 1974 .
Two ABC / Dunhill singles , 1974 's
" I Just Ca n't Get You Out of My Mind " and 1975 's " Seven Lonely Nights " have become popular tunes in the southeast Beach / Shag Club Dance circuit .
After the release of " Catfish " ( a top 10 R&B hit ) in 1976 , the major hits started to dry up and the Tops left ABC after an album recorded in Philadelphia with the MFSB musicians resulted in only minor chart success in 1978 .
The group disappeared from the recording scene until the early 1980s .
Signing a deal with Casablanca Records , the Tops made a comeback in 1981 with the # 1 R&B hit " When She Was My Girl " .
Produced by David Wolfert , it just missed the Billboard pop Top 10 , peaking at # 11 .
The group also scored a UK Top 10 hit with the song and had another hit there with the follow - up , " Do n't Walk Away " .
RETURN TO MOTOWN Section::::Return to Motown .
By 1983 , The Tops had rejoined Motown , where their former ABC - Dunhill producer , Steve Barri was vice - president of A&R.
They were featured on the company 's television special , taking part in one of the highlights of the show - a battle - of - the - bands between The Tops and The Temptations , patterned after similar competitions Berry Gordy had staged during the 1960s .
Levi Stubbs and Temptation Otis Williams decided the Temptations / Tops battle would be a good one to take on the road and both groups began semi - regular joint tours .
The first of The Tops ' albums under their new Motown contract was Back Where I Belong .
A whole side of the album was produced by the Holland - Dozier - Holland , including the R&B Top 40 single , " I Just Ca n't Walk Away " .
Only one more Tops album would be released by Motown , Magic in 1985 .
The lead single from that album , " Sexy Ways " , was almost a Top 20 R&B hit , peaking at # 21 on the Soul Charts in mid-1985 .
In July of that year , the group performed at the Live Aid concert , singing three of their hit songs .
The album Hot Nights was completed in 1986 , but was then cancelled , as the group and the Motown label began to disagree over marketing and musical direction .
The following year , the Four Tops decided to leave for Arista Records , buying back several masters they had recorded for Hot Nights .
It 's not clear how many songs from Hot Nights were used on Indestructible , but the 2001 box set , Fourever includes the title track ( previously released as a single ) , Red Hot Love and The Four of Us ( previously released outside the U.S. on a CD single of " Loco in Acapulco " ) , as well as Indestructible .
The title track of 1988 's Indestructible was the group 's final Top 40 hit , reaching No . 35 .
It was also featured in the 1988 science - fiction cop film , Alien Nation .
Another track , " Loco in Acapulco " , written and produced by British pop musician Phil Collins and former Motown composer - producer Lamont Dozier , climbed into the UK Top 10 and made # 7 in early 1989 .
The Arista contract provided an opportunity to pair Levi Stubbs with fellow Arista artist , another legendary R&B vocalist from Detroit , Aretha Franklin , who was at the height of her own 1980s hit streak .
This pairing resulted in the song "
If Ever A Love There Was " , which became a popular R&B and Adult Contemporary hit , as well as being featured on the soundtrack of the motion picture
I 'm Gon na Git You Sucka .
In December 1988 , Pan Am Flight 103 became the group 's scheduled return flight to the U.S. for Christmas after completing their European tour .
A prolonged recording session and a performance at the television show Top of the Pops caused them to oversleep and miss the ill - fated flight which crashed in Lockerbie , Scotland , after a terrorist bomb was detonated on board .
They left London however using a later British Airways flight .
In addition to their own recordings , the Four Tops also worked in the fields of television and motion pictures .
The group as a whole performed a song for the 1982 film Grease 2 , and Levi Stubbs provided the vocals for the man - eating plant Audrey II in the 1986 musical film , Little Shop of Horrors ; and the voice of the evil Mother Brain on the Nintendo - based NBC Saturday morning cartoon from 1989 to 1991 .
LATER YEARS
Section::::Later years .
From the late 1980s , the Four Tops focused on touring and live performances .
They recorded only one album , returning again to Motown for 1995 's Christmas Here with You .
On June 20 , 1997 , 59-year - old Lawrence Payton died as a result of liver cancer , after singing for 44 years with the Four Tops who , unlike many Motown groups , never had a single lineup change until then .
At first , Levi Stubbs , Obie Benson , and Duke Fakir toured as a trio called The Tops .
In 1998 , they recruited former Temptation Theo Peoples to restore the group to a quartet .
By the turn of the century , Stubbs had become ill from cancer ; Ronnie McNeir was recruited to fill the Lawrence Payton position and Peoples stepped into Stubbs ' shoes as lead singer .
Stubbs later died on October 17 , 2008 at his home in Detroit .
The group also did commercials for the Detroit - based pizza chain
Happy 's Pizza , which became successful over the years .
The group was featured in several television specials during this time , including Motown 45 , and several by PBS , including a 50th - anniversary concert dedicated to the group ( available on DVD ) .
The concert turned out to be bittersweet ; it featured a brief appearance of the wheelchair - bound Levi Stubbs , and a memorial to Lawrence Payton , announced by Obie Benson .
Benson appeared on one more PBS special and died on July 1 , 2005 , from lung cancer .
The final PBS special , titled Motown : The Early Years , featured a message of Benson 's passing following the credits .
Lawrence Payton 's son Roquel ( real name Lawrence Payton , Jr. ) replaced Benson as the new bass ( Roquel could be seen in the pledge break interviews of Motown : The Early Years ) .
Theo Peoples also left the Tops to form his own group and was replaced by Harold ' Spike ' Bonhart as lead singer .
The group was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1990 , and into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 1999 .
In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked them # 79 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time .
The Four Tops were inducted into the Michigan Rock and Roll Legends Hall of Fame in 2005 .
THE FOUR TOPS CAREER AWARDS Section::::The Four Tops Career Awards .
The Four Tops have won many awards during their long and distinguished career , including the following : * Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ( 1990 )
* Vocal Group Hall of Fame ( 1999 )
* Hollywood Walk of Fame ( 1997 )
* Grammy Hall of Fame
( Reach Out
I 'll Be There-1998)("I
Ca n't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie Honey Bunch-2018 )
* Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award ( 2009 - 51st Annual Grammy Awards )
* Rhythm and Blues Foundation Pioneer Award ( 1997 )
* Billboard magazine Top 100 Artists of All Time(#77 ) * R&B Music Hall of Fame Induction ( 2013 ) * 100 Greatest Artists of All Time ( # 79-Rolling Stone )
* Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time ( 2003 )
* Michigan Rock and Roll Legends Hall of Fame- 2005.[6 ]
After similar releases in the Motown " Definitive DVD " series on The Miracles , The Temptations , The Supremes , and Marvin Gaye , the Four Tops ' Motown Definitive DVD , Reach Out , was finally released on November 11 , 2008 .
The Four Tops received The Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award as part of the 51st Annual Grammy Awards .
Speaking in January 2010 to noted UK soul writer Pete Lewis of the award - winning Blues & Soul , Fakir confirmed plans for the " new " Four Tops to release a new album , while revealing his personal feelings about the current line - up : " To me the new group is like an extension of the family , because we 've all been very close for so many years ...
Which makes it easier for ME , because I truly miss Lawrence , " Obie " AND Levi - I 'd be lying if I said I did n't - and not one of them could EVER be replaced .
But , you know , these new guys do perform well enough for the people to still enjoy the shows and still enjoy the music .
So for me , it kinda makes it bittersweet .
Because , at the end of the day , the legacy is still going on
and I 'm very pleased that it IS ! "
The Four Tops sang the National Anthem before the start of game 5 for the 2011 ALCS between the Texas Rangers & Detroit Tigers on October 13 , 2011 in Detroit , MI .
When singing the last line of " The Star Spangled Banner " , " ... and the home of the brave " , they quickly sang the words " Ai n't No country Like the One I Got " , before singing the last word , " brave " .
The Four Tops were honored with an induction into the R&B Music Hall of Fame at the Inaugural ceremony held at Cleveland State University 's Waetejen Auditorium on Saturday August 17 , 2013 .
In early 2018 , The Four Tops ' 1965 # 1 Pop Hit , " I Ca n't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie Honey Bunch ) " became their second song to be inducted into The Grammy Hall of Fame .
DISCOGRAPHY
BILLBOARD
HOT 100 US AND UK SINGLES
Section::::Discography .
Section::::Billboard Hot 100 US and UK singles .
The following singles reached the top 30 of the singles charts . !
rowspan="2"Year !
rowspan="2"Title !
colspan="5"Peak chart positions !
US !
USR&B !
USAC !
UK
" Baby I Need Your Loving " " Without the One
You Love
( Life 's Not Worth While )
" " Ask the Lonely " " I Ca n't Help Myself ( Sugar Pie Honey Bunch ) " " It 's the Same Old Song " " Something About You " " Shake Me , Wake Me ( When It 's Over ) " " Loving You Is Sweeter Than Ever " " Reach Out
I 'll Be There " " Standing in the Shadows of Love " " Bernadette " " 7-Rooms of Gloom " " You Keep Running Away " " If I Were a Carpenter " " Walk Away Renée " " Yesterday 's Dreams " " I 'm in a Different World " " What Is a Man " " Do What You Got ta Do " " Do n't Let Him Take Your Love from Me " " Still Water ( Love ) "
" It 's All in the Game " " River Deep – Mountain High " " Just Seven Numbers ( Can Straighten Out My Life ) "
" You Got ta Have Love in Your Heart " " In These Changing Times " " MacArthur Park ( part 2 ) " " A Simple Game " " ( It 's the Way )
Nature Planned It " " Keeper of the Castle " " Ai n't
No Woman (
Like the One I 've Got ) " " Are You Man Enough " " Sweet Understanding Love " " I Just Ca n't Get You Out of My Mind
" " One Chain Do n't Make No Prison " " Midnight Flower " " Seven Lonely Nights " " We Got ta All Stick Together
" " Catfish " " Feel Free " " When She Was My Girl " " Do n't Walk Away " " I Believe in You and Me
" " I Just Ca n't Walk Away
" " Sexy Ways " " Reach Out
I 'll Be There ' 88 " " Indestructible " " Loco in Acapulco "
" If Ever a Love There Was " ALBUMS Motown releases : * 1964 :
Four Tops ( US # 63 ; UK # 2 ) * 1965 :
Four Tops ' Second Album ( US # 20 ) * 1966 :
Four Tops Live !
( US # 17 ; UK # 4 )
* 1966 : On Top ( US # 32 ; UK # 9 ) * 1967 :
Four Tops ' Greatest Hits ( US # 4 ; UK # 1 ) * 1967 :
Reach Out ( US # 11 ; UK # 6 )
* 1967 :
Four Tops On Broadway ( US # 79 ) * 1968 : Yesterday 's Dreams ( US # 91 ) * 1969 : The Four Tops Now ( US # 74 ) * 1969 : Soul Spin ( US # 163 ) * 1970 :
Still Waters Run Deep ( US # 21 ) * 1970
: Changing Times ( US # 109 ) * 1970 : The Magnificent 7 ( with The Supremes ) ( US # 113 ; UK # 6 ) * 1971 : The Return of the Magnificent Seven ( with The Supremes ) ( US # 154 ) * 1971 : Dynamite ( with the Supremes ) ( US # 160 ) * 1971 : Mac Arthur Park * 1972 :
Nature Planned It ( US # 50 ) * 1973 : The Best of the 4 Tops ( US # 103 ) ABC releases : * 1972 : Keeper of the Castle ( US # 33 ) * 1973 :
Main Street People ( US # 66 ) * 1974 : Meeting of the Minds ( US # 118 ) * 1974 :
Live & in Concert ( US # 92 )
* 1975 :
Night Lights Harmony ( US # 148 ) * 1976 : Catfish ( US # 124 ) * 1977 :
The Show Must Go On * 1978
: At the Top Casablanca releases : * 1981 : Tonight ! ( US # 37 ) * 1982 : One More Mountain Motown releases : * 1983 :
Back Where I Belong
* 1985 :
Magic ( US # 140 ) * 1986 : Hot Nights ( unreleased ) Arista releases : * 1988 : Indestructible ( US # 149 )
Motown releases : * 1995 : Christmas Here with You Prism Leisure releases : * 2000 :
The Four Tops Collection ( recorded live at the MGM grand 1996 ) DVDS
*
The Four Tops :
Live at the MGM Grand : 40th Anniversary Special ( 1996 )
* The Four Tops :
The Four Tops ( semi- documentary /concert rehearsal- recorded live for French TV , 1971 ) 2004 .
*
The Four Tops : From the Heart : The 50th Anniversary Concert ( 2006 ) * The Four Tops : Reach Out :
Definitive Performances 1965 - 1973
( 2008 , Motown / Universal ) SEE ALSO
* List of best - selling music artists REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Vocal Group Hall of Fame page on the Four Tops * Levi Stubbs /
The Four Tops interview by Pete Lewis , ' Blues & Soul ' October 1992 ( republished November 2008 )
* History of Rock article * The Four Tops on Myspace * Four Tops ,
The Ed Sullivan Show
* Ronnie McNeir 2012 Interview at Soulinterviews.com .