GET HIM TO THE GREEK Get Him to the Greek is a 2010 American comedy film written , produced and directed by Nicholas Stoller and starring Russell Brand and Jonah Hill .
Released on June 4 , 2010 , the film is a spin - off sequel of Stoller 's 2008 film Forgetting Sarah Marshall , reuniting director Stoller with stars Hill and Brand and producer Judd Apatow .
Brand reprises his role as character Aldous Snow from Forgetting Sarah Marshall , while Hill plays an entirely new character referred to as Aaron Green instead of Matthew Van Der Wyk .
The film also stars Elisabeth Moss , Rose Byrne , Sean " Diddy " Combs , and Colm Meaney .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 2009 , British rock star Aldous Snow ( Russell Brand ) releases an album and a titular single , " African Child " , which is a commercial and critical failure .
In an interview , Aldous ' girlfriend , Jackie Q ( Rose Byrne ) , drunkenly declares they have a boring life .
Aldous relapses , ending their relationship .
He also loses custody of his son , Naples .
Meanwhile , in Los Angeles , Aaron Green ( Jonah Hill ) works as a talent scout at Pinnacle Records , a record company .
He lives with his girlfriend , Daphne ( Elisabeth Moss ) .
Pinnacle Records is performing poorly , and the head of the company , Sergio Roma ( Sean Combs ) , asks for ideas .
Aaron suggests that Aldous play at the Greek Theatre on the tenth anniversary of a performance there in 1999 .
Sergio sends Aaron to London to escort Aldous to Los Angeles .
Daphne informs Aaron that she has received a job offer in Seattle and that they are moving there .
They argue and apparently break up .
Aaron meets Aldous and learns that he had not been expecting him , thinking that the concert was not for two months .
They bar - hop across the city as Aaron tries to get Aldous to catch a flight to New York .
Daphne calls Aaron to apologize , only to learn that Aaron believes they broke up .
While partying , Aaron 's phone accidentally calls Daphne , informing her of Aaron 's activities .
Aaron and Aldous travel to New York for Aldous 's appearance on Today .
To keep Aldous sober , Aaron imbibes all of Aldous 's whiskey and marijuana .
While performing live on Good Morning America , Aldous is unable to remember the lyrics to his recent song , " African Child " , and replaces it with an old hit , " The Clap " , to cheers from the audience .
During their flight to Los Angeles , Aaron learns that Aldous has become depressed , as he misses his son and has been alienated from his own father , Jonathan ( Colm Meaney ) , for years .
Aaron suggests he visit him after the show ; instead , Aldous insists they go to Las Vegas to see Jonathan .
Sergio hooks up Aaron with a sexually violent girl , Destiny ( Carla Gallo ) , who takes him to a hotel room and rapes him .
After Aaron tells Aldous that he has been raped , Aldous gives him drugs to calm him down .
Aaron starts to have a bad trip and believes he is having a heart attack .
Jonathan agrees Aaron is having a heart attack , while Aldous attempts to calm Aaron down .
Aldous fights with Jonathan ; Sergio jumps into the fight , inadvertently setting the lounge on fire .
Aldous attempts to help Aaron by giving him an adrenaline shot .
They run out of the hotel , chased by Sergio .
Aldous and Aaron flee to Los Angeles , where Aaron convinces Aldous to visit Jackie Q. Jackie has been sleeping with Metallica 's drummer , Lars Ulrich ( playing himself ) , and confesses that Naples is not actually Aldous ' biological son .
Meanwhile , Aaron goes to his home to apologize to Daphne .
They are interrupted when Aldous arrives and proposes that they engage in a threesome .
Daphne agrees and Aaron hesitantly goes along .
Aaron angrily decides to kiss Aldous , ending the threesome .
Daphne and Aaron both immediately regret it , and Aaron angrily tells Aldous to go , criticizing his mental state .
Instead of preparing for his show , Aldous goes to the rooftop of the Standard Hotel , and calls Aaron , threatening to jump .
Aaron rushes to the hotel and attempts to talk Aldous down .
Aaron arrives just in time to stop Aldous from jumping .
Nevertheless , Aldous jumps into a pool several floors down , breaking his arm .
Aldous tells Aaron that he is lonely , sad , and embarrassed , but Aaron reminds Aldous that thousands of fans love him and are waiting to see him .
Aldous decides to perform at the Greek Theatre , even though Aaron pleads for him to go to the hospital .
Upon their arrival , Sergio offers Aaron drugs to give to Aldous so he will not cancel the concert .
Aaron , tired of Sergio 's abuse , quits on the spot .
Aaron walks stage - side with Aldous , trying to convince him to go to the hospital .
However , Aaron sees how happy Aldous is while performing and heads home to reconcile with Daphne .
Months later , Aldous , sober again , has returned to fame with a single ( produced by Aaron ) based on events from their night in Las Vegas .
CAST * Jonah Hill as Aaron Green , a record company employee * Russell Brand as Aldous Snow , a free - spirited rock star with a faltering career who first appears in Forgetting Sarah Marshall * Elisabeth Moss as Daphne Binks , Aaron 's girlfriend
* Rose Byrne as Jackie Q , a scandalous pop star , Aldous ' on and off girlfriend and Naples ' mother
* P. Diddy as Sergio Roma , a record company owner and Aaron 's boss who assigns him to manage Aldous * Aziz Ansari as Matty Briggs , one of Aaron 's co - workers * Nick Kroll as Kevin McLean , one of Aaron 's co - workers * Ellie Kemper as one of Aaron 's co - workers * Kali Hawk as Kali Coleman , one of Aaron 's co - workers * Jake Johnson as Jazz Man , one of Aaron 's co - workers * Colm Meaney as Jonathan Snow , Aldous ' father * Karl Theobald as Aldous ' assistant * Carla Gallo as Destiny , a groupie * T. J. Miller as Brian , a hotel clerk * Lino Facioli as Naples , Jackie Q and Aldous ' son , later revealed to have been fathered by a photographer * Kristen Schaal as a Today Show production assistant * Kristen Bell as Sarah Marshall , an actress and Aldous ' former girlfriend ( cameo )
* Lindsey Broad as Pocket Dial Girl
* Dinah Stabb as Lena Snow , Aldous ' mother CAMEO GUEST STARS
* Lars Ulrich
*
Tom Felton
* Christina Aguilera * Pink * Kurt F. Loder * Meredith Vieira
* Mario Lopez
* Pharrell Williams
* Paul Krugman
* Rick Schroder * Zöe Salmon * Katy Perry ( deleted scenes )
* Alanis Morissette ( deleted scenes ) * Meghan Markle ( uncredited ) * Dee Snider ( uncredited ) * Holly Weber ( uncredited ) *
Billy Bush
* Rachel Roberts Brand 's friends Karl Theobald ,
Greg " Mr Gee " Sekweyama and Jamie Sives also appear in the film .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
A week after the release of Forgetting Sarah Marshall , Universal Studios announced a new film Get Him to the Greek , reuniting Jonah Hill and Russell Brand with writer / director Nicholas Stoller and producer Judd Apatow .
Variety initially announced the project would focus on " fresh - out - of - college insurance adjuster ( Hill ) who is hired to accompany an out - of - control rock star ( Brand ) from London to a gig at L.A. 's Greek Theatre . "
In July 2008 , Brand mentioned that he would be reprising his Aldous Snow role from Forgetting Sarah Marshall , in a new film from Apatow in which the character was back on drugs .
In an interview with CHUD.com , Apatow would later reveal that Get Him to the Greek
was indeed a spin - off of Forgetting Sarah Marshall with Brand again playing a no - longer - sober Aldous Snow while in a different interview Nicholas Stoller said that Jonah Hill will play a different character named Aaron Green , a young music executive .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
While Brand was backstage at the Paramount studio lot preparing to present the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , he approached Christina Aguilera , Pink , and Katy Perry about filming cameos for Get Him to the Greek .
Rehearsals began on April 27 , 2009 and filming began on May 12 of that year .
The film was shot in New York City , Las Vegas , Los Angeles and London .
News footage featured in the film was filmed after a Russell Brand stand up performance of " Scandalous " at the O2 Arena in London , which most of the audience stayed for .
While filming in Trafalgar Square , Brand was pushed into a fountain by a passerby .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
Get Him to the Greek
grossed $ 61 million in the United States and Canada and $ 30.3 million overseas bringing its worldwide total to $ 91.3 million , against a production budget of $ 40 million .
In its opening weekend , the film debuted second at the box office behind Shrek Forever After with a gross of $ 17.6 million .
The film fell to fourth the following week with a weekend gross of $ 10.1 million .
In the UK , Get Him to the Greek opened at No . 1 grossing £ 1.6 million in its first week before dropping to No . 2 the following week with takings of £ 1 million .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes Get Him to the Greek has an approval rating of 72 % based on 195 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , "
Thanks to a suitably raunchy script and a pair of winning performances from Jonah Hill and Russell Brand , Get Him to the Greek is one of the year 's funniest comedies .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 65 out of 100 , based on 39 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film three out of four stars , writing : " under the cover of slapstick , cheap laughs , raunchy humor , gross - out physical comedy and sheer exploitation , Get Him to the Greek also is fundamentally a sound movie . "
CONTROVERSIES Section::::Controversies .
A scene in which Jonah Hill is forcibly raped has been lambasted by critics as being " particularly egregious " and " horrific " and of furthering rape culture by " reinforc(ing ) cultural myths surrounding the acceptance of rape . "
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
A 2-disc and 1-disc unrated and theatrical version of the film was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc on September 28 , 2010 .
MUSIC SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music .
Section::::Soundtrack .
Kim Garner , the senior vice president of marketing and artist development at Universal Republic Records , said that Brand and Universal Pictures " felt very strongly about doing something like this as opposed to a traditional soundtrack , " and that they " wanted to release it like we would an actual rock band 's album . "
The following songs were featured in the film , but not included in the soundtrack : * "
And Ghosted Pouts ( Take the Veil Cerpin Taxt ) " by The Mars Volta
* * " London Calling " by The Clash
* * " Anarchy in the U.K. " by The Sex Pistols * * " 20th Century Boy " by T.Rex * * " Rocks Off " by The Rolling Stones
* * " Another Girl , Another Planet " by The Only Ones * * " Strict Machine " by Goldfrapp * * " Ghosts N Stuff " by Deadmau5 featuring Rob Swire
* * " Personality Crisis " by The New York Dolls
* * " Girls on the Dance Floor " by Far East Movement
*
*
" Heureux Tous Les Deux " by Franck Alamo
*
* " Come on Eileen " by Dexys Midnight Runners
* * " Cretin Hop " by The Ramones
*
* " Stop Drop and Roll " by Foxboro Hot Tubs
*
* " Touch My Body " by Mariah Carey
* * " Love Today " by Mika * *
" Fuck Me
I 'm Famous " by DJ Dougal and Gammer
*
* " What Planet You On " by Bodyrox featuring Luciana
*
* " Inside of You " by Infant Sorrow ( which was originally featured in Forgetting Sarah Marshall ) .
* * " Licky feat .
Princess Superstar ( Herve Remix ) " by Larry Tee * REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Get Him to the Greek Production Notes