SAND THEFT Sand theft or unauthorised or illegal sand mining leads to a widely unknown global example of natural and non - renewable resource depletion problem comparable in extent to global water scarcity .
Beach theft is illegal removal of large quantities of sand from a beach leading to full or partial disappearance of the beach .
GLOBAL SAND AND BEACH THEFT Section::::Global sand and beach theft .
Sand theft is a worldwide phenomenon .
Beach theft , the large - scale removal of sand to the point that entire stretches of a beach disappear , is considerably less common .
Two instances of beach thefts have been widely reported in the media : one in Hungary in 2007 and another in Jamaica in 2008 .
The beach that was stolen in Hungary was an artificially created one on the banks of a river .
The other one is a genuine example of a beach theft .
In South India , the problem appears so pronounced that a particular Tamil term – manarkollai – has been coined .
JAMAICA Section::::Jamaica .
A beach theft was discovered in Jamaica in July 2008 .
The beach at Coral Springs , in Jamaica 's northern parish of Trelawny , was 400 metres of white sand .
The bulk of the sand in the 0.5-hectare beach , of approximately 500 truckloads , was found missing in July 2008 .
The beach was to form part of a resort complex , but the theft of its most important feature has led to its developers putting their plans on hold .
Illegal sand mining is a problem in Jamaica ; the local tradition of people building their own homes has caused a huge demand for construction material .
INVESTIGATION Section::::Investigation .
The disappearance of the beach was considered so important that Jamaica 's Prime Minister Bruce Golding took a personal interest in the theft and ordered a report into how such a large quantity of sand could have been stolen , transported and presumably sold .
Police carried out forensic tests on beaches along the coast to see if any of it matched the stolen sand .
A three - month police investigation failed to lead to anyone being charged .
There were unconfirmed reports about collusion between the criminals and some police officers , but Jamaican police denied any such collusion .
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
An incident of beach theft occurred in Hungary in 2007 .
In this case , multiple tonnes of sand were stolen by thieves from an artificial beach created by a resort in Mindszent alongside the banks of the Tisza river .
Approximately 6,000 cubic meters of sand were shipped in and lounge chairs , playground rides , and beach huts were added .
Owing to the harsh Hungarian winters , the owners of the resort covered the rides with tarpaulin and closed the resort for the season in September 2007 .
When one of the owners drove by , they noticed that the beach was gone .
Hungary 's participation in the Schengen Agreement , which allows free passage between EU member states without passport checks , was blamed for the theft by the authorities .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
The pink sands of Elafonisi , created by tidal and wave - induced deposits of pigmented microorganisms living in a symbiotic relationship with native seaweed , were a frequent subject of souvenir - taking by tourists until the Greek government declared the area a nature reserve and prohibited the sands ' removal ; even today , color saturation levels remain at only around 10 % of those in the early twentieth century .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
Although sand theft does not seem to be a serious problem at first , it is nonetheless a serious problem as the removal of sand facilitates soil salinisation .
For example , in Cape Verde , the theft of sand has caused the soil to salinify to such a degree , that a large number of orchards were permanently destroyed in the process .
SEE ALSO
* Resource depletion
* Sand replenishment * Illegal mining * Sand Wars REFERENCES