GOAL - LINE TECHNOLOGY
In association football , goal - line technology ( sometimes referred to as a Goal Decision System ) is the use of electronic aid to determine if a goal has been scored or not .
In detail , it is a method used to determine when the ball has completely crossed the goal line in between the goal - posts and underneath the crossbar with the assistance of electronic devices and at the same time assisting the referee in awarding a goal or not .
The objective of goal - line technology ( GLT ) is not to replace the role of the officials , but rather to support them in their decision - making .
The GLT must provide a clear indication as to whether the ball has fully crossed the line , and this information will serve to assist the referee in making his final decision .
Compared to similar technology in other sports , goal - line technology is a relatively recent addition to association football ; its integration having been opposed by the sport 's authorities .
In July 2012 , the International Football Association Board ( IFAB ) officially approved the use of goal line technology , amending the Laws of the Game to permit ( but not require ) its use .
Due to its expense , goal - line technology is only used at the highest levels of the game .
Goal - line technology is currently used in the top European domestic leagues , and at major international competitions such as the 2014 Men 's , 2018 Men 's and 2015 Women 's FIFA World Cups .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In association football , a goal is scored if the whole of the ball crosses the goal line between the goalposts and under the crossbar .
In most cases , this is relatively unambiguous ( goal nets being a low - tech way of verifying that the ball passed the correct side of the goalposts ) .
Occasionally however situations occur when it is difficult for referees and their assistants to tell if a goal has been scored before a rebound , save , or defender 's clearance from the goal area .
RULES Section::::Rules .
Since 2012 , goal - line technology has been permitted in matches .
Text relating to goal - line technology can now be found within four of the Laws of the Game :
* Law 1 ( The Field of Play ) : permitting modifications to the goal frame .
* Law 2 ( The Ball ) : permitting the use of approved balls with integrated technology .
* Law 5 ( The Referee ) : requiring the referee to test a goal - line technology system prior to a match and not use it if a fault is found .
* Law 10 ( The Method of Scoring ) :
permitting use of goal - line technology to verify whether or not goals have been scored .
It states that " the use of GLT must be stipulated in the respective competition rules " .
The Laws themselves are not specific as to the nature of Goal Line technology systems , however other documentation from FIFA , which is cited by the Laws , goes into more detail .
The FIFA Quality Programme for GLT Testing Manual precisely define the requirements of the systems .
Four basic requirements of a system are stipulated : * The system must address only the matter of whether a goal has been scored or not .
* The system must be accurate .
* The system must indicate the scoring of a goal immediately , confirming this within one second .
* The system must communicate its information solely to the match officials ( via vibration and visual alert on the referee 's watch )
FIFA have a system whereby a particular technology provider needs to show effectiveness to successfully obtain a license for their technology , then an installation within a particular stadium must pass a " final installation test " before use , and before each game the referee must check that the system is functional .
CURRENT IMPLEMENTATION Section::::Current implementation .
Due to the expense of goal - line technology systems , the technology is only currently used at the very top levels of the game .
In domestic competition , goal - line technology is only regularly used in a few major European leagues : Serie A , Ligue 1 , the Bundesliga , and the Premier League .
, FIFA 's website list 167 stadiums with licensed GLT installations , 166 of which use the Hawk - Eye system .
One stadium uses GoalControl , which is the other licensed provider .
HISTORY PRE - IMPLEMENTATION HISTORY Section::::History .
Section::::Pre - implementation history .
Prior to 2012 , competitions were unable to implement technology as provision was not made for it in the Laws .
The Laws of association football are controlled by the International Football Association Board ( IFAB ) , a body on which FIFA holds 50 % of the voting power , sufficient to veto any changes to the laws .
PRE-2011 Section::::Pre-2011 .
Compared to other sports , association football was late to allow technology to assist with in - game decisions .
The matter was a subject of debate within the game for over a decade with the game 's lawmakers resisting calls for its implementation .
Throughout the 2000s various incidents incited discussion as to the potential for goal - line technology in the game .
The lack of use of technology in association football was contrasted with other sports , which had incorporated video replays and other systems into their rules .
In response to this , FIFA decided to test a system by Adidas in which a football with an embedded microchip would send a signal to the referee if it crossed a sensor going through the goal .
According to FIFA president Sepp Blatter , " We did different tests at the Under-17 World Cup in Peru but the evidence was n't clear so we will carry out trials in junior competitions in 2007 " .
However , those trials did not materialise and by 2008 , Blatter had rejected the system outright , describing the technology as ' only 95 % accurate ' .
FIFA and IFAB were resistant to introducing technology in the game , voting in March 2010 to permanently ditch the technology .
Following several refereeing errors at the 2010 FIFA World Cup – including the disallowed goal in Germany 's 4–1 victory over England , when Frank Lampard hit a shot from outside of the penalty box that bounced off the crossbar and over the line ; the ball came back out and the goal was disallowed because the assistant referee did not call for a goal – Blatter announced that FIFA would reopen the goal - line technology discussion .
Before Euro 2012 , UEFA president Michel Platini dismissed the need for goal - line technology , instead arguing for placing additional assistant referees behind the goal .
However , in a Group D match with Ukraine losing 1–0 to England , the on - field officials did not see Ukraine 's Marko Dević 's shot briefly cross the line before it was cleared by England 's John Terry , although an offside in the build - up to the incident was too unnoticed by the match officials .
INITIAL TESTING Section::::Initial testing .
Heeding calls for the use of technology , in July 2011 FIFA began a process of sanctioned tests that eventually resulted in the approval of the systems used in the current game .
The first stage of testing considered multiple goal - line technology systems , with the requirement that the system notified the referee of the decision within one second of the incident happening .
The message needed to be relayed via a visual signal and vibration .
Tests were conducted by Empa between September and December 2011 .
Tested systems included : * A system from Carios Technologies , in collaboration with Adidas , based around a modified ball with an implanted chip and a magnetic field generated by thin cables behind the goal line .
The system could detect if the ball passed through the field .
* GoalRef : Another system based on generated magnetic fields and a sensor within the ball .
* Goalminder : A system based on cameras installed in the goal frame .
This provided a visual playback to officials rather than an automatic goal - or - no - goal alert .
* Hawk - Eye : A Sony - owned system based several on multiple high - speed cameras whose images are used to which triangulate the position of the ball .
Hawk - Eye systems were , and still are , used in several other sports for supporting officiating decisions .
SECOND PHASE OF TESTING Section::::Second phase of testing .
On 3 March 2012 , IFAB announced that two of the eight proposed systems had proceeded to the second stage of testing .
These were Hawk - Eye and GoalRef .
In the second phase of testing , the manufacturer of the technology chose a stadium to test its technology in a number of imagined scenarios .
Testing was also conducted in professional training sessions and in laboratories to account for different climatic conditions and other magnetic field distortions .
There were also tests on the watches to be worn by referees .
The systems underwent testing in some competitive matches .
GoalRef technology underwent match testing in some Danish Superliga matches in the first half of 2012 .
Following the second phase trials , on 5 July 2012 IFAB approved GoalRef in principle , making it available for use in professional matches under a set of revised Laws of the Game .
Each installation however would also require licensing approval for use in the individual stadium , on a 12-month basis .
The 2012 FIFA Club World Cup was the first tournament where GoalRef was used by a match referee .
Goal Ref was used for the first time on 6 December 2012 in the first match of the 2012 FIFA Club World Cup .
The first match to use the Hawk - Eye goal - line technology was Eastleigh F.C. versus A.F.C. Totton in the Hampshire Senior Cup final at St Mary 's Stadium , Southampton in England on 16 May 2012 .
Although it used Hawk - Eye , the system had no bearing on the referee 's decisions and the system readings were only available to FIFA 's independent testing agency .
The system was also in place for the technology 's second test on 2 June for England 's friendly match against Belgium .
INTRODUCTION Section::::Introduction .
Following the success of the trials , in July 2012 IFAB voted unanimously to officially amend the Laws of the Game to permit ( but not require ) goal - line technology .
In December 2012 , FIFA announced it would introduce goal - line technology at the 2012 FIFA Club World Cup in Japan .
Hawk - Eye technology was employed at Toyota Stadium , while GoalRef was used at International Stadium Yokohama .
GoalControl , a camera - based system which uses 14 high - speed cameras located around the pitch and directed at both goals , was used at 2013 Confederations Cup , partly as a trial for use at the next year 's World Cup .
The Football Association announced that Hawk - Eye would be used in the 2013–14 Premier League season .
On 16 December 2013 , it was announced that Hawk - Eye would be used in three of the four quarter - finals and subsequent matches in the League Cup .
The system was used when , on the very next day , in the Sunderland – Chelsea quarter - final , a goal from Frank Lampard was allowed .
The first goal to be decisively awarded using goal - line technology in the English Premier League was Edin Džeko 's goal for Manchester City against Cardiff City on 18 January 2014 .
Following success at the Confederations Cup , GoalControl was used at the 2014 FIFA World Cup .
The first goal given by the technology was in the 15 June 2014 group stage match between France and Honduras .
Goal Line Technology was implemented across the major European competitions .
In December 2014 , the Bundesliga clubs approved goal - line technology that will be introduced at the start of the 2015–16 Bundesliga season .
The league picked the cheaper Hawk - Eye system over two German technologies .
GoalControl was introduced for Ligue 1 for the start of the 2015–16 Ligue 1 season .
Ligue 1 later switched to using Hawk - Eye in 2018 after the GoalControl system made errors .
Goal Line Technology was used in the UEFA Europa League final , UEFA Champions League , European Championship and Copa America for the first time in 2016 .
CRITICISM HUMAN ELEMENT IS LOST Section::::Criticism .
Section::::Human element is lost .
While advocates for goal - line technology maintain that it would significantly reduce refereeing errors during play , there are also criticisms of the technology .
Much of the criticism came from within FIFA itself including former FIFA president Sepp Blatter .
Apart from the criticisms revolving around the technical aspects of the two proposed technologies , critics point out that such technology would impact on the human element of the game and remove the enjoyment of debating mistakes .
Sepp Blatter has been quoted as saying " Other sports regularly change the laws of the game to react to the new technology . ...
We do n't do it and this makes the fascination and the popularity of football " .
A study suggested that in the 2010–11 Premier League season " errors took place nearly 30 % of the time that video replays could help prevent " , but some people claim that instant replays would interrupt the flow of the game and take away possible plays .
Other critics believe it would be prohibitively expensive to implement the technology at all levels of the game and particularly for smaller / poorer football associations .
FIFA officials have expressed a preference for ' better refereeing ' as well as more match officials over implementing the technology .
Advocates in turn cite the many examples of incorrect goal - line decisions deciding important games and point out that the technology has improved much since the initial trials carried out by FIFA .
Advocates contend that any extra help for the referee should outweigh arguments that it would lead to non - uniform rules ( since not all football associations would be able to implement it ) .
Blatter had been opposed to goal - line technology until Frank Lampard 's disallowed goal in the 2010 World Cup where the ball clearly crossed the line .
The introduction of additional assistant referees , who are mostly positioned beside the goal - line , was partly in order to facilitate in such situations .
COST Section::::Cost .
In April 2013 , MLS commissioner Don Garber confirmed that MLS would not adopt goal - line technology for the 2014 season , citing cost as the overriding factor .
GoalControl installation would cost about $ 260,000 per stadium , and a further $ 3,900 for each game .
In early 2014 , the vast majority of teams in the two divisions of the German Bundesliga voted against introducing goal - line technology for financial reasons .
The costs per club would have ranged from € 250,000 for a chip inside the ball up to € 500,000 for Hawk - Eye or GoalControl .
The manager of 1 .
FC Köln , Jörg Schmadtke , summarized the vote with " The cost is so exorbitant , that using this ( technology ) is not acceptable " .
World governing body FIFA are set to make £ 300,000 from the Premier League 's decision to install goal - line technology in all top - flight stadiums before the start of next season .
Each of the 20 clubs will have to pay FIFA £ 15,000 to install , test and receive the ' FIFA quality seal ' for Hawk - Eye 's camera - based system , which is expected to cost around £ 250,000 per ground in total .
FIFA will also make an extra £ 15,000 from Wembley Stadium , which will have the technology installed for use in events such as the FA Cup semi - finals and final .
The Scottish Professional Football League stated in December 2017 that it would not be implementing goal - line technology , as it is only affordable for the richest leagues in Europe .
SEE ALSO
* Video assistant referee
* Photo finish
* Ghost goal
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * FIFA Quality programme page regarding GLT