INFINITY Infinity ( symbol : ) is a concept describing something without any bound or larger than any natural number .
Philosophers have speculated about the nature of the infinite , for example Zeno of Elea , who proposed many paradoxes involving infinity , and Eudoxus of Cnidus , who used the idea of infinitely small quantities in his method of exhaustion .
Modern mathematics uses the general concept of infinity in the solution of many practical and theoretical problems , such as in calculus and set theory , and the idea is also used in physics and the other sciences .
In mathematics , " infinity " is often treated as a number ( i.e. , it counts or measures things : " an infinite number of terms " )
but it is not the same sort of number as either a natural or a real number .
Georg Cantor formalized many ideas related to infinity and infinite sets during the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
In the theory he developed , there are infinite sets of different sizes ( called cardinalities ) .
For example , the set of integers is countably infinite , while the infinite set of real numbers is uncountable .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Ancient cultures had various ideas about the nature of infinity .
The ancient Indians and Greeks did not define infinity in precise formalism as does modern mathematics , and instead approached infinity as a philosophical concept .
EARLY GREEK
Section::::Early Greek .
The earliest recorded idea of infinity comes from Anaximander , a pre - Socratic Greek philosopher who lived in Miletus .
He used the word apeiron which means infinite or limitless .
However , the earliest attestable accounts of mathematical infinity come from Zeno of Elea ( born ) , a pre - Socratic Greek philosopher of southern Italy and member of the Eleatic School founded by Parmenides .
Aristotle called him the inventor of the dialectic .
He is best known for his paradoxes , described by Bertrand Russell as " immeasurably subtle and profound " .
In accordance with the traditional view of Aristotle , the Hellenistic Greeks generally preferred to distinguish the potential infinity from the actual infinity ; for example , instead of saying that there are an infinity of primes , Euclid prefers instead to say that there are more prime numbers than contained in any given collection of prime numbers .
However , recent readings of the Archimedes Palimpsest have found that Archimedes had an understanding about actual infinite quantities .
According to Nonlinear Dynamic Systems and Controls , Archimedes has been found to be " the first to rigorously address the science of infinity with infinitely large sets using precise mathematical proofs . "
EARLY INDIAN Section::::Early Indian .
The Jain mathematical text Surya Prajnapti ( c. 4th–3rd century BCE ) classifies all numbers into three sets : enumerable , innumerable , and infinite .
Each of these was further subdivided into three orders :
* Enumerable : lowest , intermediate , and highest
* Innumerable : nearly innumerable , truly innumerable , and innumerably innumerable
* Infinite : nearly infinite , truly infinite , infinitely infinite In this work , two basic types of infinite numbers are distinguished .
On both physical and ontological grounds , a distinction was made between ( " countless , innumerable " ) and ananta ( " endless , unlimited " ) , between rigidly bounded and loosely bounded infinities .
17TH CENTURY Section::::17th century .
European mathematicians started using infinite numbers and expressions in a systematic fashion in the 17th century .
In 1655 John Wallis first used the notation formula_1 for such a number in his De sectionibus conicis and exploited it in area calculations by dividing the region into infinitesimal strips of width on the order of formula_2
But in Arithmetica infinitorum ( 1655 also ) he indicates infinite series , infinite products and infinite continued fractions by writing down a few terms or factors and then appending " & c. " For example , " 1 , 6 , 12 , 18 , 24 , & c.
" In 1699 Isaac Newton wrote about equations with an infinite number of terms in his work De analysi per aequationes numero terminorum infinitas .
MATHEMATICS Section::::Mathematics .
Hermann Weyl opened a mathematico - philosophic address given in 1930 with : INFINITY SYMBOL Section::::Infinity symbol .
The infinity symbol formula_1 ( sometimes called the lemniscate ) is a mathematical symbol representing the concept of infinity .
The symbol is encoded in Unicode at and in LaTeX as codice_1 .
It was introduced in 1655 by John Wallis , and , since its introduction , has also been used outside mathematics in modern mysticism and literary symbology .
CALCULUS Section::::Calculus .
Leibniz , one of the co - inventors of infinitesimal calculus , speculated widely about infinite numbers and their use in mathematics .
To Leibniz , both infinitesimals and infinite quantities were ideal entities , not of the same nature as appreciable quantities , but enjoying the same properties in accordance with the Law of Continuity .
REAL ANALYSIS Section::::Real analysis .
In real analysis , the symbol formula_1 , called " infinity " , is used to denote an unbounded limit .
The notation formula_5 means that x grows without bound , and formula_6 means that x decreases without bound .
If f(t ) ≥ 0 for every t , then * formula_7 means that f(t ) does not bound a finite area from formula_8 to formula_9 *
formula_10 means that the area under f(t ) is infinite .
*
formula_11 means that the total area under f(t ) is finite , and equals formula_12 Infinity is also used to describe infinite series : *
formula_13 means that the sum of the infinite series converges to some real value
formula_14
*
formula_15 means that the sum of the infinite series diverges in the specific sense that the partial sums grow without bound .
Infinity can be used not only to define a limit but as a value in the extended real number system .
Points labeled
formula_16
and formula_17 can be added to the topological space of the real numbers , producing the two - point compactification of the real numbers .
Adding algebraic properties to this gives us the extended real numbers .
We can also treat formula_16 and formula_17 as the same , leading to the one - point compactification of the real numbers , which is the real projective line .
Projective geometry also refers to a line at infinity in plane geometry , a plane at infinity in three - dimensional space , and a hyperplane at infinity for general dimensions , each consisting of points at infinity .
COMPLEX ANALYSIS
Section::::Complex analysis .
In complex analysis the symbol formula_1 , called " infinity " , denotes an unsigned infinite limit .
formula_5 means that the magnitude formula_22 of x grows beyond any assigned value .
A point labeled formula_1 can be added to the complex plane as a topological space giving the one - point compactification of the complex plane .
When this is done , the resulting space is a one - dimensional complex manifold , or Riemann surface , called the extended complex plane or the Riemann sphere .
Arithmetic operations similar to those given above for the extended real numbers can also be defined , though there is no distinction in the signs ( therefore one exception is that infinity can not be added to itself ) .
On the other hand , this kind of infinity enables division by zero , namely formula_24 for any nonzero complex number z.
In this context it is often useful to consider meromorphic functions as maps into the Riemann sphere taking the value of formula_1 at the poles .
The domain of a complex - valued function may be extended to include the point at infinity as well .
One important example of such functions is the group of Möbius transformations .
NONSTANDARD ANALYSIS
Section::::Nonstandard analysis .
The original formulation of infinitesimal calculus by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz used infinitesimal quantities .
In the twentieth century , it was shown that this treatment could be put on a rigorous footing through various logical systems , including smooth infinitesimal analysis and nonstandard analysis .
In the latter , infinitesimals are invertible , and their inverses are infinite numbers .
The infinities in this sense are part of a hyperreal field ; there is no equivalence between them as with the Cantorian transfinites .
For example , if H is an infinite number , then H + H = 2H and H + 1 are distinct infinite numbers .
This approach to non - standard calculus is fully developed in .
SET THEORY Section::::Set theory .
A different form of " infinity " are the ordinal and cardinal infinities of set theory .
Georg Cantor developed a system of transfinite numbers , in which the first transfinite cardinal is aleph - null ( ℵ ) , the cardinality of the set of natural numbers .
This modern mathematical conception of the quantitative infinite developed in the late nineteenth century from work by Cantor , Gottlob Frege , Richard Dedekind and others , using the idea of collections , or sets .
Dedekind 's approach was essentially to adopt the idea of one - to - one correspondence as a standard for comparing the size of sets , and to reject the view of Galileo ( which derived from Euclid ) that the whole can not be the same size as the part ( however , see Galileo 's paradox where he concludes that positive integers which are squares and all positive integers are the same size ) .
An infinite set can simply be defined as one having the same size as at least one of its proper parts ; this notion of infinity is called Dedekind infinite .
The diagram gives an example : viewing lines as infinite sets of points , the left half of the lower blue line can be mapped in a one - to - one manner ( green correspondences ) to the higher blue line , and , in turn , to the whole lower blue line ( red correspondences ) ; therefore the whole lower blue line and its left half have the same cardinality , i.e. " size " .
Cantor defined two kinds of infinite numbers : ordinal numbers and cardinal numbers .
Ordinal numbers may be identified with well - ordered sets , or counting carried on to any stopping point , including points after an infinite number have already been counted .
Generalizing finite and the ordinary infinite sequences which are maps from the positive integers leads to mappings from ordinal numbers , and transfinite sequences .
Cardinal numbers define the size of sets , meaning how many members they contain , and can be standardized by choosing the first ordinal number of a certain size to represent the cardinal number of that size .
The smallest ordinal infinity is that of the positive integers , and any set which has the cardinality of the integers is countably infinite .
If a set is too large to be put in one to one correspondence with the positive integers , it is called uncountable .
Cantor 's views prevailed and modern mathematics accepts actual infinity .
Certain extended number systems , such as the hyperreal numbers , incorporate the ordinary ( finite ) numbers and infinite numbers of different sizes .
CARDINALITY OF THE CONTINUUM Section::::Cardinality of the continuum .
One of Cantor 's most important results was that the cardinality of the continuum formula_26 is greater than that of the natural numbers formula_27 ; that is , there are more real numbers R than natural numbers
N. Namely , Cantor showed that formula_28 ( see Cantor 's diagonal argument or Cantor 's first uncountability proof ) .
The continuum hypothesis states that there is no cardinal number between the cardinality of the reals and the cardinality of the natural numbers , that is , formula_29 ( see Beth one ) .
This hypothesis can neither be proved nor disproved within the widely accepted Zermelo – Fraenkel set theory , even assuming the Axiom of Choice .
Cardinal arithmetic can be used to show not only that the number of points in a real number line is equal to the number of points in any segment of that line , but that this is equal to the number of points on a plane and , indeed , in any finite - dimensional space .
The first of these results is apparent by considering , for instance , the tangent function , which provides a one - to - one correspondence between the interval ( −π/2 , π/2 ) and R ( see also Hilbert 's paradox of the Grand Hotel ) .
The second result was proved by Cantor in 1878 , but only became intuitively apparent in 1890 , when Giuseppe Peano introduced the space - filling curves , curved lines that twist and turn enough to fill the whole of any square , or cube , or hypercube , or finite - dimensional space .
These curves can be used to define a one - to - one correspondence between the points on one side of a square and the points in the square .
GEOMETRY AND TOPOLOGY Section::::Geometry and topology .
Infinite - dimensional spaces are widely used in geometry and topology , particularly as classifying spaces , such as Eilenberg−MacLane spaces .
Common examples are the infinite - dimensional complex projective space K(Z,2 ) and the infinite - dimensional real projective space K(Z/2Z,1 ) .
FRACTALS
Section::::Fractals .
The structure of a fractal object is reiterated in its magnifications .
Fractals can be magnified indefinitely without losing their structure and becoming " smooth " ; they have infinite perimeters — some with infinite , and others with finite surface areas .
One such fractal curve with an infinite perimeter and finite surface area is the Koch snowflake .
MATHEMATICS WITHOUT INFINITY Section::::Mathematics without infinity .
Leopold Kronecker was skeptical of the notion of infinity and how his fellow mathematicians were using it in the 1870s and 1880s .
This skepticism was developed in the philosophy of mathematics called finitism , an extreme form of mathematical philosophy in the general philosophical and mathematical schools of constructivism and intuitionism .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
In physics , approximations of real numbers are used for continuous measurements and natural numbers are used for discrete measurements ( i.e. counting ) .
It is therefore assumed by physicists that no measurable quantity could have an infinite value , for instance by taking an infinite value in an extended real number system , or by requiring the counting of an infinite number of events .
It is , for example , presumed impossible for any type of body to have infinite mass or infinite energy .
Concepts of infinite things such as an infinite plane wave exist , but there are no experimental means to generate them .
THEORETICAL APPLICATIONS OF PHYSICAL INFINITY Section::::Theoretical applications of physical infinity .
The practice of refusing infinite values for measurable quantities does not come from a priori or ideological motivations , but rather from more methodological and pragmatic motivations .
One of the needs of any physical and scientific theory is to give usable formulas that correspond to or at least approximate reality .
As an example , if any object of infinite gravitational mass were to exist , any usage of the formula to calculate the gravitational force would lead to an infinite result , which would be of no benefit since the result would be always the same regardless of the position and the mass of the other object .
The formula would be useful neither to compute the force between two objects of finite mass nor to compute their motions .
If an infinite mass object were to exist , any object of finite mass would be attracted with infinite force ( and hence acceleration ) by the infinite mass object , which is not what we can observe in reality .
Sometimes infinite result of a physical quantity may mean that the theory being used to compute the result may be approaching the point where it fails .
This may help to indicate the limitations of a theory .
This point of view does not mean that infinity can not be used in physics .
For convenience 's sake , calculations , equations , theories and approximations often use infinite series , unbounded functions , etc . , and may involve infinite quantities .
Physicists however require that the end result be physically meaningful .
In quantum field theory infinities arise which need to be interpreted in such a way as to lead to a physically meaningful result , a process called renormalization .
However , there are some theoretical circumstances where the end result is infinity .
One example is the singularity in the description of black holes .
Some solutions of the equations of the general theory of relativity allow for finite mass distributions of zero size , and thus infinite density .
This is an example of what is called a mathematical singularity , or a point where a physical theory breaks down .
This does not necessarily mean that physical infinities exist ; it may mean simply that the theory is incapable of describing the situation properly .
Two other examples occur in inverse - square force laws of the gravitational force equation of Newtonian gravity and Coulomb 's law of electrostatics .
At r=0 these equations evaluate to infinities .
COSMOLOGY Section::::Cosmology .
The first published proposal that the universe is infinite came from Thomas Digges in 1576 .
Eight years later , in 1584 , the Italian philosopher and astronomer Giordano Bruno proposed an unbounded universe in On the Infinite Universe and Worlds : " Innumerable suns exist ; innumerable earths revolve around these suns in a manner similar to the way the seven planets revolve around our sun .
Living beings inhabit these worlds . "
Cosmologists have long sought to discover whether infinity exists in our physical universe : Are there an infinite number of stars ?
Does the universe have infinite volume ?
Does space " go on forever " ?
This is an open question of cosmology .
The question of being infinite is logically separate from the question of having boundaries .
The two - dimensional surface of the Earth , for example , is finite , yet has no edge .
By travelling in a straight line with respect to the Earth 's curvature one will eventually return to the exact spot one started from .
The universe , at least in principle , might have a similar topology .
If so , one might eventually return to one 's starting point after travelling in a straight line through the universe for long enough .
The curvature of the universe can be measured through multipole moments in the spectrum of the cosmic background radiation .
As to date , analysis of the radiation patterns recorded by the WMAP spacecraft hints that the universe has a flat topology .
This would be consistent with an infinite physical universe .
However , the universe could be finite , even if its curvature is flat .
An easy way to understand this is to consider two - dimensional examples , such as video games where items that leave one edge of the screen reappear on the other .
The topology of such games is toroidal and the geometry is flat .
Many possible bounded , flat possibilities also exist for three - dimensional space .
The concept of infinity also extends to the multiverse hypothesis , which , when explained by astrophysicists such as Michio Kaku , posits that there are an infinite number and variety of universes .
LOGIC Section::::Logic .
In logic an infinite regress argument is " a distinctively philosophical kind of argument purporting to show that a thesis is defective because it generates an infinite series when either ( form A )
no such series exists or ( form B ) were it to exist , the thesis would lack the role ( e.g. , of justification ) that it is supposed to play . "
COMPUTING Section::::Computing .
The IEEE floating - point standard ( IEEE 754 ) specifies the positive and negative infinity values ( and also indefinite values ) .
These are defined as the result of arithmetic overflow , division by zero , and other exceptional operations .
Some programming languages , such as Java and J , allow the programmer an explicit access to the positive and negative infinity values as language constants .
These can be used as greatest and least elements , as they compare ( respectively ) greater than or less than all other values .
They have uses as sentinel values in algorithms involving sorting , searching , or windowing .
In languages that do not have greatest and least elements , but do allow overloading of relational operators , it is possible for a programmer to create the greatest and least elements .
In languages that do not provide explicit access to such values from the initial state of the program , but do implement the floating - point data type , the infinity values may still be accessible and usable as the result of certain operations .
ARTS , GAMES , AND COGNITIVE SCIENCES Section::::Arts , games , and cognitive sciences .
Perspective artwork utilizes the concept of vanishing points , roughly corresponding to mathematical points at infinity , located at an infinite distance from the observer .
This allows artists to create paintings that realistically render space , distances , and forms .
Artist M. C. Escher is specifically known for employing the concept of infinity in his work in this and other ways .
Variations of chess played on an unbounded board are called infinite chess .
Cognitive scientist George Lakoff considers the concept of infinity in mathematics and the sciences as a metaphor .
This perspective is based on the basic metaphor of infinity ( BMI ) , defined as the ever - increasing sequence < 1,2,3 ...
> .
The symbol is often used romantically to represent eternal love .
Several types of jewelry are fashioned into the infinity shape for this purpose .
SEE ALSO * 0.999 ...
* Aleph number *
Exponentiation *
Indeterminate form * Infinite monkey
theorem
*
Infinite set * Infinitesimal * Paradoxes of infinity
* Supertask * Surreal number
NOTES REFERENCES SOURCES * D. P. Agrawal ( 2000 ) .
Ancient Jaina Mathematics : an Introduction , Infinity Foundation .
* Bell , J. L. : Continuity and infinitesimals .
Stanford Encyclopedia of philosophy .
Revised 2009 .
*
Jain , L. C. ( 1973 ) .
"
Set theory in the Jaina school of mathematics " , Indian Journal of History of Science .
* H. Jerome Keisler :
Elementary Calculus : An Approach Using Infinitesimals .
First edition 1976 ; 2nd edition 1986 .
This book is now out of print .
The publisher has reverted the copyright to the author , who has made available the 2nd edition in .pdf format available for downloading at http://www.math.wisc.edu/~keisler/calc.html * O'Connor , John J. and Edmund F. Robertson ( 1998 ) . '
Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp Cantor ' , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
* O'Connor , John J. and Edmund F. Robertson ( 2000 ) . '
Jaina mathematics ' , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
* Pearce , Ian . ( 2002 ) . ' Jainism ' , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A Crash Course in the Mathematics of Infinite Sets , by Peter Suber .
From the St. John 's Review , XLIV , 2 ( 1998 )
1–59 .
The stand - alone appendix to Infinite Reflections , below .
A concise introduction to Cantor 's mathematics of infinite sets .
* Infinite Reflections , by Peter Suber .
How Cantor 's mathematics of the infinite solves a handful of ancient philosophical problems of the infinite .
From the St. John 's Review , XLIV , 2 ( 1998 )
1–59 .
* Infinity , Principia Cybernetica * Hotel Infinity
* John J. O'Connor and Edmund F. Robertson ( 1998 ) . '
Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp Cantor ' , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
* John J. O'Connor and Edmund F. Robertson ( 2000 ) . '
Jaina mathematics ' , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
* Ian Pearce ( 2002 ) . '
Jainism ' , MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .
* Source page on medieval and modern writing on Infinity
* The Mystery Of The Aleph : Mathematics , the Kabbalah , and the Search for Infinity
* Dictionary of the Infinite ( compilation of articles about infinity in physics , mathematics , and philosophy )