COLORED GOLD
Pure gold is slightly reddish yellow in color , but colored gold in various other colors can be produced .
Colored golds can be classified to three groups :
* Alloys with silver and copper in various proportions , producing white , yellow , green and red golds .
These are typically malleable alloys .
* Intermetallic compounds , producing blue and purple golds , as well as other colors .
These are typically brittle , but can be used as gems and inlays .
* Surface treatments , such as oxide layers .
Pure 100 % ( in practice , 99.9 % or better ) gold is 24 karat by definition , so all colored golds are less than this , with the common being
18 K ( 75 % ) , 14 K ( 58.5 % ) ,
10 K ( 41.6 % ) , and 9 K ( 37.5 % ) .
ALLOYS
WHITE GOLD
Section::::Alloys .
Section::::White gold .
White gold is an alloy of gold and at least one white metal ( usually nickel , manganese , or palladium ) .
Like yellow gold , the purity of white gold is given in karats .
White gold 's properties vary depending on the metals used and their proportions .
As a result , white gold alloys can be used for many different purposes ; while a nickel alloy is hard and strong , and , therefore , good for rings and pins , gold - palladium alloys are soft , pliable , and good for white gold gemstone settings , sometimes with other metals , like copper , silver , and platinum , added for weight and durability ( although this often requires specialized goldsmiths ) .
The term white gold is used very loosely in the industry to describe karat gold alloys with a whitish hue .
It is a common misconception that the color of the rhodium plating , which is seen on many commercial pieces , is actually the color of white gold .
The term " white " covers a large spectrum of colors that borders or overlaps pale yellow , tinted brown , and even very pale rose .
The jewelry industry often conceals these off - white colors by rhodium plating .
A common white gold formulation consists of 90 wt.% gold and 10 wt.% nickel .
Copper can be added to increase malleability .
The strength of gold – nickel – copper alloys is caused by formation of two phases , a gold - rich Au – Cu , and a nickel - rich Ni – Cu , and the resulting hardening of the material .
The alloys used in jewelry industry are gold – palladium – silver and gold – nickel – copper – zinc .
Palladium and nickel act as primary bleaching agents for gold ; zinc acts as a secondary bleaching agent to attenuate the color of copper .
The nickel used in some white gold alloys can cause an allergic reaction when worn over long periods ( also notably on some wristwatch casings ) .
This reaction , typically a minor skin rash from nickel dermatitis , occurs in about one out of eight people ; because of this , many countries do not use nickel in their white gold formulations .
YELLOW GOLD Section::::Yellow gold .
Examples of the common alloys for 18 K yellow gold : * 18 K Yellow gold : 75 % gold , 12.5 % copper , 12.5 %
silver * 18 K Yellow ( darker ) gold : 75 % gold , 15 % copper , 10 % silver ROSE , RED , AND PINK GOLD Section::::Rose , red , and pink gold .
Rose gold is a gold - copper alloy widely used for specialized jewelry .
Rose gold , also known as pink gold and red gold , was popular in Russia at the beginning of the nineteenth century , and was also known as Russian gold , although this term is now obsolete .
Rose gold jewelry is becoming more popular in the 21st century , and is commonly used for wedding rings , bracelets , and other jewelry .
Although the names are often used interchangeably , the difference between red , rose , and pink gold is the copper content :
the higher the copper content , the stronger the red coloration .
Pink gold uses the least copper , followed by rose gold , with red gold having the highest copper content .
Examples of the common alloys for 18 K rose gold , 18 K red gold , 18 K pink gold , and 12 K red gold : * 18 K red gold : 75 % gold , 25 % copper * 18 K rose gold : 75 % gold , 22.25 % copper , 2.75 % silver * 18 K pink gold : 75 % gold , 20 % copper ,
5 % silver * 12 K red gold : 50 % gold and 50 % copper .
Up to 15 % zinc can be added to copper - rich alloys to change their color to reddish yellow or dark yellow .
14 K red gold , often found in the Middle East , contains 41.67 % copper .
The highest karat version of rose gold , also known as crown gold , is 22 karat .
During ancient times , due to impurities in the smelting process , gold frequently turned a reddish color .
This is why many Greco - Roman texts , and even many texts from the Middle Ages , describe gold as " red " .
SPANGOLD
Section::::Spangold .
Some gold copper - aluminium alloys form a fine surface texture at heat treatment , yielding an interesting spangling effect .
At cooling , they undergo a quasi - martensitic transformation from body - centered cubic to body - centered tetragonal phase ; the transformation does not depend on the cooling rate .
A polished object is heated in hot oil to 150–200 ° C for 10 minutes then cooled below 20 ° C , forming a sparkly surface covered with tiny facets .
The alloy of 76 % gold , 19 % copper , and 5 % aluminium yields a yellow color ; the alloy of 76 % gold , 18 % copper and 6 % aluminium is pink .
GREEN GOLD Section::::Green gold .
Green gold was known to the Lydians as long ago as 860 BC under the name electrum , a naturally occurring alloy of silver and gold .
It actually appears as greenish - yellow rather than green .
Fired enamels adhere better to these alloys than to pure gold .
Cadmium can also be added to gold alloys to create a green color , but there are health concerns regarding its use , as cadmium is highly toxic .
The alloy of 75 % gold , 15 % silver , 6 % copper , and 4 % cadmium yields a dark - green alloy .
GREY GOLD Section::::Grey gold .
Grey gold alloys are usually made from gold and palladium .
A cheaper alternative which does not use palladium is made by adding silver , manganese , and copper to the gold in specific ratios .
INTERMETALLIC Section::::Intermetallic .
All the AuX intermetallics have the fluorite ( CaF ) crystal structure , and , therefore , are brittle .
Deviation from the stoichiometry results in loss of color .
Slightly nonstoichiometric compositions are used , however , to achieve a fine - grained two- or three - phase microstructure with reduced brittleness .
Another way of reducing brittleness is to add a small amount of palladium , copper , or silver .
The intermetallic compounds tend to have poor corrosion resistance .
The less noble elements are leached to the environment , and a gold - rich surface layer is formed .
Direct contact of blue and purple gold elements with skin should be avoided as exposure to sweat may result in metal leaching and discoloration of the metal surface .
PURPLE GOLD
Section::::Purple gold .
Purple gold ( also called amethyst gold and violet gold ) is an alloy of gold and aluminium rich in gold - aluminium intermetallic ( AuAl ) .
Gold content in AuAl is around 79 % and can therefore be referred to as 18 karat gold .
Purple gold is more brittle than other gold alloys ( a serious fault when it forms in electronics ) , as it is an intermetallic compound instead of a malleable alloy , and a sharp blow may cause it to shatter .
It is therefore usually machined and faceted to be used as a " gem " in conventional jewelry rather than by itself .
At a lower content of gold , the material is composed of the intermetallic and an aluminium - rich solid solution phase .
At a higher content of gold , the gold - richer intermetallic AuAl forms ; the purple color is preserved to about 15 % of aluminium .
At 88 % of gold the material is composed of AuAl and changes color .
The actual composition of AuAl is closer to AlAu as the sublattice is incompletely occupied .
BLUE GOLD Section::::Blue gold .
Blue gold is an alloy of gold and either gallium or indium .
Gold - indium contains 46 % gold ( about 11 karat ) and 54 % indium , forming an intermetallic compound AuIn .
While several sources remark this intermetallic to have " a clear blue color " , in fact the effect is slight :
AuIn has CIE LAB color coordinates of 79 , −3.7 , −4.2 which appears roughly as a greyish color .
With gallium , gold forms an intermetallic AuGa ( 58.5 % Au , 14ct ) which has slighter bluish hue .
The melting point of AuIn is 541 ° C , for AuGa
it is
492 ° C . AuIn is less brittle than AuGa , which itself is less brittle than AuAl .
A surface plating of blue gold on karat gold or sterling silver can be achieved by a gold plating of the surface , followed by indium plating , with layer thickness matching the 1:2 atomic ratio .
A heat treatment then causes interdiffusion of the metals and formation of the required intermetallic compound .
SURFACE
TREATMENTS
BLACK GOLD Section::::Surface treatments .
Section::::Black gold .
Black gold is a type of gold used in jewelry .
Black - colored gold can be produced by various methods :
* Electroplating , using black rhodium or ruthenium .
Solutions that contain ruthenium give a slightly harder black coating than those that contain rhodium .
* Patination by applying sulfur- and oxygen - containing compounds .
* Plasma - assisted chemical vapor deposition process involving amorphous carbon
* Controlled oxidation of gold containing chromium or cobalt
( e.g. 75 % gold , 25 % cobalt ) .
A range of colors from brown to black can be achieved on copper - rich alloys by treatment with potassium sulfide .
Cobalt - containing alloys , e.g. 75 % gold with 25 % cobalt , form a black oxide layer with heat treatment at 700–950 ° C .
Copper , iron and titanium can be also used for such effect .
Gold - cobalt - chromium alloy ( 75 % gold , 15 % cobalt , 10 % chromium ) yields a surface oxide that 's olive - tinted because of the chromium(III ) oxide content , is about five times thinner than Au - Co and has significantly better wear resistance .
The gold - cobalt alloy consists of gold - rich ( about 94 % Au ) and cobalt - rich ( about 90 % Co ) phases ; the cobalt - rich phase grains are capable of oxide - layer formation on their surface .
More recently , black gold can be formed by creating nanostructures on the surface .
A femtosecond laser pulse deforms the surface of the metal , creating an immensely increased surface area which absorbs virtually all the light that falls on it , thus rendering it deep black , but this method is used in high technology applications rather than for appearance in jewelry .
The blackness is due to the excitation of localized surface plasmons which creates strong absorption in a broad range in plasmon resonance .
The broadness of the plasmon resonance , and absorption wavelength range , depends on the interaction between different gold nanoparticles .
BLUE GOLD Section::::Blue gold .
Oxide layers can also be used to obtain blue gold from and an alloy of 75 % gold , 24.4 % iron , and 0.6 % nickel ; the layer forms on heat treatment in air between 450–600 ° C .
A rich sapphire blue colored gold of 20–23 K can also be obtained by alloying with ruthenium , rhodium and three other elements and heat - treating at 1800 ° C , to form the 3–6 micrometers thick colored surface oxide layer .
SEE ALSO
* Corinthian bronze * Crown gold * Electrum * Hepatizon * List of alloys * Mokume - gane , a mixed - metal laminate *
Orichalcum * Panchaloha , alloys used for making Hindu temple icons
* Shakudō , copper with 4–10 % gold
* Tumbaga REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS