FIRST PERSIAN INVASION OF GREECE
The first Persian invasion of Greece , during the Persian Wars , began in 492 BC , and ended with the decisive Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC .
The invasion , consisting of two distinct campaigns , was ordered by the Persian king Darius I primarily in order to punish the city - states of Athens and Eretria .
These cities had supported the cities of Ionia during their revolt against Persian rule , thus incurring the wrath of Darius .
Darius also saw the opportunity to extend his empire into Europe , and to secure its western frontier .
The first campaign in 492 BC , led by Mardonius , re - subjugated Thrace and forced Macedon to become a fully subordinate client kingdom part of Persia , after being a vassal to Persia as early as the late 6th century BC , probably in 512 BC .
However , further progress was prevented when Mardonius 's fleet was wrecked in a storm off the coast of Mount Athos .
The following year , having demonstrated his intentions , Darius sent ambassadors to all parts of Greece , demanding their submission .
He received it from almost all of them , except Athens and Sparta , both of whom executed the ambassadors .
With Athens still defiant , and Sparta now effectively at war with him , Darius ordered a further military campaign for the following year .
The second Persian campaign , in 490 BC , was under the command of Datis and Artaphernes .
The expedition headed first to the island Naxos , which it captured and burned .
It then island - hopped between the rest of the Cycladic Islands , annexing each into the Persian empire .
Reaching Greece , the expedition landed at Eretria , which it besieged , and after a brief time , captured .
Eretria was razed and its citizens enslaved .
Finally , the task force headed to Attica , landing at Marathon , en route for Athens .
There , it was met by a smaller Athenian army , which nevertheless proceeded to win a remarkable victory at the Battle of Marathon .
This defeat prevented the successful conclusion of the campaign , and the task force returned to Asia .
Nevertheless , the expedition had fulfilled most of its aims , punishing Naxos and Eretria , and bringing much of the Aegean under Persian rule , as well as the full inclusion of Macedon .
The unfinished business from this campaign led Darius to prepare for a much larger invasion of Greece , to firmly subjugate it , and to punish Athens and Sparta .
However , internal strife within the empire delayed this expedition , and Darius then died of old age .
It was thus left to his son Xerxes I to lead the second Persian invasion of Greece , beginning in 480 BC .
SOURCES
Section::::Sources .
The main source for the Greco - Persian Wars is the Greek historian Herodotus .
Herodotus , who has been called the ' Father of History ' , was born in 484 BC in Halicarnassus , Asia Minor ( then under Persian overlordship ) .
He wrote his ' Enquiries ' ( Greek — Historia ; English—(The ) Histories ) around 440–430 BC , trying to trace the origins of the Greco - Persian Wars , which would still have been relatively recent history ( the wars finally ending in 450 BC ) .
Herodotus 's approach was entirely novel , and at least in Western society , he does seem to have invented ' history ' as we know it .
As the British author Tom Holland has it : " For the first time , a chronicler set himself to trace the origins of a conflict not to a past so remote so as to be utterly fabulous , nor to the whims and wishes of some god , nor to a people 's claim to manifest destiny , but rather explanations he could verify personally . "
Some subsequent ancient historians , despite following in his footsteps , criticised Herodotus , starting with Thucydides .
Nevertheless , Thucydides chose to begin his history where Herodotus left off ( at the Siege of Sestos ) , and therefore evidently felt that Herodotus 's history was accurate enough not to need re - writing or correcting .
Plutarch criticised Herodotus in his essay " On The Malignity of Herodotus " , describing Herodotus as " Philobarbaros " ( barbarian - lover ) , for not being pro - Greek enough , which suggests that Herodotus might actually have done a reasonable job of being even - handed .
A negative view of Herodotus was passed on to Renaissance Europe , though he remained well read .
However , since the 19th century his reputation has been dramatically rehabilitated by archaeological finds which have repeatedly confirmed his version of events .
The prevailing modern view is that Herodotus generally did a remarkable job in his Historia , but that some of his specific details ( particularly troop numbers and dates ) should be viewed with skepticism .
Nevertheless , there are still some historians who believe Herodotus made up much of his story .
The Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus , writing in the 1st century BC in his Bibliotheca Historica , also provides an account of the Greco - Persian wars , partially derived from the earlier Greek historian Ephorus .
This account is fairly consistent with Herodotus 's .
The Greco - Persian wars are also described in less detail by a number of other ancient historians including Plutarch , Ctesias of Cnidus , and are alluded by other authors , such as the playwright Aeschylus .
Archaeological evidence , such as the Serpent Column , also supports some of Herodotus 's specific claims .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The first Persian invasion of Greece had its immediate roots in the Ionian Revolt , the earliest phase of the Greco - Persian Wars .
However , it was also the result of the longer - term interaction between the Greeks and Persians .
In 500 BC the Persian Empire was still relatively young and highly expansionist , but prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples .
Moreover , the Persian king Darius was a usurper , and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule .
Even before the Ionian Revolt , Darius had begun to expand the Empire into Europe , subjugating Thrace , expanding past the Danube river , conquering Paeonia , and forcing Macedon to become a client kingdom to Persia ; though the latter retaining an amount of autonomy up to 492 BC .
Attempts at further expansion into the politically fractious world of Ancient Greece may have been inevitable .
However , the Ionian Revolt had directly threatened the integrity of the Persian empire , and the states of mainland Greece remained a potential menace to its future stability .
Darius thus resolved to subjugate and pacify Greece and the Aegean , and to punish those involved in the Ionian Revolt .
The Ionian revolt had begun with an unsuccessful expedition against Naxos , a joint venture between the Persian satrap Artaphernes and the Miletus tyrant Aristagoras .
In the aftermath , Artaphernes decided to remove Aristagoras from power , but before he could do so , Aristagoras abdicated , and declared Miletus a democracy .
The other Ionian cities , ripe for rebellion , followed suit , ejecting their Persian - appointed tyrants , and declaring themselves democracies .
Aristagoras then appealed to the states of Mainland Greece for support , but only Athens and Eretria offered to send troops .
The involvement of Athens in the Ionian Revolt arose from a complex set of circumstances , beginning with the establishment of the Athenian Democracy in the late 6th century BC .
In 510 BC , with the aid of Cleomenes I , King of Sparta , the Athenian people had expelled Hippias , the tyrant ruler of Athens .
With Hippias 's father Peisistratus , the family had ruled for 36 out of the previous 50 years and fully intended to continue Hippias 's rule .
Hippias fled to Sardis to the court of the Persian satrap , Artaphernes , and promised control of Athens to the Persians if they were to help restore him .
In the meantime , Cleomenes helped install a pro - Spartan tyranny under Isagoras in Athens , in opposition to Cleisthenes , the leader of the traditionally powerful Alcmaeonidae family , who considered themselves the natural heirs to the rule of Athens .
In a daring response , Cleisthenes proposed to the Athenian people that he would establish a ' democracy ' in Athens , much to the horror of the rest of the aristocracy .
Cleisthenes 's reasons for suggesting such a radical course of action , which would remove much of his own family 's power , are unclear ; perhaps he perceived that days of aristocratic rule were coming to an end anyway ; certainly he wished to prevent Athens becoming a puppet of Sparta by whatever means necessary .
However , as a result of this proposal , Cleisthenes and his family were exiled from Athens , in addition to other dissenting elements , by Isagoras .
Having been promised democracy however , the Athenian people seized the moment and revolted , expelling Cleomenes and Isagoras .
Cleisthenes was thus restored to Athens ( 507 BC ) , and at breakneck speed began to establish democratic government .
The establishment of democracy revolutionised Athens , which henceforth became one of the leading cities in Greece .
The new - found freedom and self - governance of the Athenians meant that they were thereafter exceptionally hostile to the return of the tyranny of Hippias , or any form of outside subjugation ; by Sparta , Persia or anyone else .
Cleomenes , unsurprisingly , was not pleased with events , and marched on Athens with the Spartan army .
Cleomenes 's attempts to restore Isagoras to Athens ended in a debacle , but fearing the worst , the Athenians had by this point already sent an embassy to Artaphernes in Sardis , to request aid from the Persian Empire .
Artaphernes requested that the Athenians give him a ' earth and water ' , a traditional token of submission , which the Athenian ambassadors acquiesced to .
However , they were severely censured for this when they returned to Athens .
At some point later Cleomenes instigated a plot to restore Hippias to the rule of Athens .
This failed and Hippias again fled to Sardis and tried to persuade the Persians to subjugate Athens .
The Athenians dispatched ambassadors to Artaphernes to dissuade him from taking action , but Artaphernes merely instructed the Athenians to take Hippias back as tyrant .
Needless to say , the Athenians balked at this , and resolved instead to be openly at war with Persia .
Having thus become the enemy of Persia , Athens was already in a position to support the Ionian cities when they began their revolt .
The fact that the Ionian democracies were inspired by the example of Athens no doubt further persuaded the Athenians to support the Ionian Revolt ; especially since the cities of Ionia were ( supposedly ) originally Athenian colonies .
The city of Eretria also sent assistance to the Ionians for reasons that are not completely clear .
Possibly commercial reasons were a factor ; Eretria was a mercantile city , whose trade was threatened by Persian dominance of the Aegean .
Herodotus suggests that the Eretrians supported the revolt in order to repay the support the Milesians had given Eretria in a past war against Chalcis .
The Athenians and Eretrians sent a task force of 25 triremes to Asia Minor .
Whilst there , the Greek army surprised and outmaneuvered Artaphernes , marching to Sardis and there burning the lower city .
However , this was as much as the Greeks achieved , and they were then pursued back to the coast by Persian horsemen , losing many men in the process .
Despite the fact their actions were ultimately fruitless , the Eretrians and in particular the Athenians had earned Darius 's lasting enmity , and he vowed to punish both cities .
The Persian naval victory at the Battle of Lade ( 494 BC ) all but ended the Ionian Revolt , and by 493 BC , the last hold - outs were vanquished by the Persian fleet .
The revolt was used as an opportunity by Darius to extend the empire 's border to the islands of the East Aegean and the Propontis , which had not been part of the Persian dominions before .
The completion of the pacification of Ionia allowed the Persians to begin planning their next moves ; to extinguish the threat to the empire from Greece , and to punish Athens and Eretria .
492 BC :
MARDONIUS ' CAMPAIGN
Section::::492 BC :
Mardonius ' campaign .
In the spring of 492 BC an expeditionary force , to be commanded by Darius 's son - in - law Mardonius , was assembled , consisting of a fleet and a land army .
Whilst the ultimate aim was to punish Athens and Eretria , the expedition also aimed to subdue as many of the Greek cities as possible .
Departing from Cilicia , Mardonius sent the army to march to the Hellespont , whilst he travelled with the fleet .
He sailed round the coast of Asia Minor to Ionia , where he spent a short time abolishing the tyrannies that ruled the cities of Ionia .
Ironically , since the establishment of democracies had been a key factor in the Ionian Revolt , he replaced the tyrannies with democracies .
Thence the fleet continued on to the Hellespont , and when all was ready , shipped the land forces across to Europe .
The army then marched through Thrace , re - subjugating it , since these lands had already been added to the Persian Empire in 512 BC , during Darius 's campaign against the Scythians .
Upon reaching Macedon , the Persians forced it to become a fully subordinate part of the Persian Empire ; they had been vassals of the Persians since the late 6th century BC , but retained their general autonomy .
Meanwhile , the fleet crossed to Thasos , resulting in the Thasians submitting to the Persians .
The fleet then rounded the coastline as far as Acanthus in Chalcidice , before attempting to round the headland of Mount Athos .
However , they were caught in a violent storm , which drove them against the coastline of Athos , wrecking ( according to Herodotus )
300 ships , with the loss of 20,000 men .
Then , whilst the army was camped in Macedon , the Brygians , a local Thracian tribe , launched a night raid against the Persian camp , killing many of the Persians , and wounding Mardonius .
Despite his injury , Mardonius made sure that the Brygians were defeated and subjugated , before leading his army back to the Hellespont ; the remnants of the navy also retreated to Asia .
Although this campaign ended ingloriously , the land approaches to Greece had been secured , and the Greeks had no doubt been made aware of Darius 's intentions for them .
491 BC : DIPLOMACY
Section::::491 BC : Diplomacy .
Perhaps reasoning that the expedition of the previous year may have made his plans for Greece obvious , and weakened the resolve of the Greek cities , Darius turned to diplomacy in 491 BC .
He sent ambassadors to all the Greek city states , asking for " earth and water " , a traditional token of submission .
The vast majority of cities did as asked , fearing the wrath of Darius .
In Athens , however , the ambassadors were put on trial and then executed ; in Sparta , they were simply thrown down a well .
This firmly and finally drew the battle - lines for the coming conflict ; Sparta and Athens , despite their recent enmity , would together fight the Persians .
However , Sparta was then thrown into disarray by internal machinations .
The citizens of Aegina had submitted to the Persian ambassadors , and the Athenians , troubled by the possibility of Persia using Aegina as a naval base , asked Sparta to intervene .
Cleomenes travelled to Aegina to confront the Aeginetans personally , but they appealed to Cleomenes 's fellow king Demaratus , who supported their stance .
Cleomenes responded by having Demaratus declared illegitimate , with the help of the priests at Delphi ( whom he bribed ) ; Demaratus was replaced by his cousin Leotychides .
Now faced with two Spartan kings , the Aeginetans capitulated , and handed over hostages to the Athenians as a guarantee of their good behaviour .
However , in Sparta news emerged of the bribes Cleomenes had given at Delphi , and he was expelled from the city .
He then sought to rally the northern Peloponnesus to his cause , at which the Spartans relented , and invited him back to the city .
By 491 BC though , Cleomenes was widely considered insane and was sentenced to prison where he was found dead the following day .
Cleomenes was succeeded by his half - brother Leonidas I. 490 BC : DATIS AND ARTAPHERNES ' CAMPAIGN Section::::490 BC : Datis and Artaphernes ' campaign .
Taking advantage of the chaos in Sparta , which effectively left Athens isolated , Darius decided to launch an amphibious expedition to finally punish Athens and Eretria .
An army was assembled in Susa , and marched into Cilicia , where a fleet had been gathered .
Command of the expedition was given to Datis the Mede and Artaphernes , son of the satrap Artaphernes .
SIZE OF THE PERSIAN FORCE Section::::Size of the Persian force .
According to Herodotus , the fleet sent by Darius consisted of 600 triremes .
There is no indication in the historical sources of how many transport ships accompanied them , if any .
Herodotus claimed that 3,000 transport ships accompanied 1,207 triremes during Xerxes 's invasion in 480 BC .
Among modern historians , some have accepted this number of ships as reasonable ; it has been suggested either that the number 600 represents the combined number of triremes and transport ships , or that there were horse transports in addition to 600 triremes .
Herodotus does not estimate the size of the Persian army , only saying that they formed a " large infantry that was well packed " .
Among other ancient sources , the poet Simonides , a near - contemporary , says the campaign force numbered 200,000 , while a later writer , the Roman Cornelius Nepos estimates 200,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry .
Plutarch and Pausanias both independently give 300,000 , as does the Suda dictionary ; Plato and Lysias assert 500,000 ; and Justin 600,000 .
Modern historians generally dismiss these numbers as exaggerations .
One approach to estimate the number of troops is to calculate the number of marines carried by 600 triremes .
Herodotus tells us that each trireme in the second invasion of Greece carried 30 extra marines , in addition to a probable 14 standard marines .
Thus , 600 triremes could easily have carried 18,000–26,000 infantry .
Numbers proposed for the Persian infantry are in the range 18,000–100,000 .
However , the consensus is around 25,000 .
The Persian infantry used in the invasion was probably a heterogeneous group drawn from across the empire .
However , according to Herodotus , there was at least a general conformity in the type of armour and style of fighting .
The troops were , generally speaking , armed with a bow , ' short spear ' and sword , carried a wicker shield , and wore at most a leather jerkin .
The one exception to this may have been the ethnic Persian troops , who may have worn a corslet of scale armour .
Some contingents would have been armed somewhat differently ; for instance , the Saka were renowned axemen .
The ' elite ' contingents of the Persian infantry seem to have been the ethnic Persians , Medians , Cissians and the Saka ; Herodotus specifically mentions the presence of Persians and Saka at Marathon .
The style of fighting used by the Persians was probably to stand off from an enemy , using their bows ( or equivalent ) to wear down the enemy before closing in to deliver the coup de grace with spear and sword .
Estimates for the cavalry are usually in the 1,000–3,000 range .
The Persian cavalry was usually provided by the ethnic Persians , Bactrians , Medes , Cissians , and Saka ; most of these probably fought as lightly armed missile cavalry .
The fleet must have had at least some proportion of transport ships , since the cavalry was carried by ship ; whilst Herodotus claims the cavalry was carried in the triremes , this is improbable .
Lazenby estimates 30–40 transport ships would be required to carry 1,000 cavalry .
LINDOS Section::::Lindos .
Once assembled , the Persian force sailed from Cilicia firstly to the island of Rhodes .
A Lindian Temple Chronicle records that Datis besieged the city of Lindos , but was unsuccessful .
NAXOS Section::::Naxos .
The fleet then moved north along the Ionian coast towards Samos , before abruptly turning west into the Aegean Sea .
The fleet sailed next to Naxos , in order to punish the Naxians for their resistance to the failed expedition that the Persians had mounted there a decade earlier .
Many of the inhabitants fled to the mountains ; according to Herodotus , those that the Persians caught were enslaved .
The Persians then burnt the city and temples of the Naxians .
THE CYCLADES Section::::The Cyclades .
Moving on , the Persian fleet approached Delos , whereupon the Delians also fled from their homes .
Having demonstrated Persian power at Naxos , Datis now intended to show clemency to the other islands , if they submitted to him .
He sent a herald to the Delians , proclaiming : " Holy men , why have you fled away , and so misjudged my intent ?
It is my own desire , and the king 's command to me , to do no harm to the land where the two gods were born , neither to the land itself nor to its inhabitants .
So return now to your homes and dwell on your island .
" Datis then burned 300 talents of frankincense on the altar of Apollo on Delos , to show his respect for one of the gods of the island .
The fleet then proceeded to island - hop across the rest of Aegean on its way to Eretria , taking hostages and troops from each island .
KARYSTOS Section::::Karystos .
The Persians finally arrived off the southern tip of Euboea , at Karystos .
The citizens of Karystos refused to give hostages to the Persians , so they were besieged , and their land ravaged , until they submitted to the Persians .
SIEGE OF ERETRIA Section::::Siege of Eretria .
The task force then sailed around Euboea to the first major target , Eretria .
According to Herodotus , the Eretrians were divided amongst themselves as to the best course of action ; whether to flee to the highlands , or undergo a siege , or to submit to the Persians .
In the event , the majority decision was to remain in the city .
The Eretrians made no attempt to stop the Persians landing , or advancing , and thus allowed themselves to be besieged .
For six days the Persians attacked the walls , with losses on both sides ; however , on the seventh day two reputable Eretrians opened the gates and betrayed the city to the Persians .
The city was razed , and temples and shrines were looted and burned .
Furthermore , according to Darius 's commands , the Persians enslaved all the remaining townspeople .
BATTLE OF MARATHON Section::::Battle of Marathon .
The Persian fleet next headed south down the coast of Attica , landing at the bay of Marathon , roughly from Athens , on the advice of Hippias , son of the former tyrant of Athens , Peisistratus .
The Athenians , joined by a small force from Plataea , marched to Marathon , and succeeded in blocking the two exits from the plain of Marathon .
At the same time , Athens ' greatest runner , Pheidippides ( or Philippides ) was sent to Sparta to request that the Spartan army march to Athens ' aid .
Pheidippides arrived during the festival of Carneia , a sacrosanct period of peace , and was informed that the Spartan army could not march to war until the full moon rose ; Athens could not expect reinforcement for at least ten days .
They decided to hold out at Marathon for the time being , and they were reinforced by a contingent of hoplites from Plataea .
Stalemate ensued for five days , before the Athenians ( for reasons that are not completely clear ) decided to attack the Persians .
Despite the numerical advantage of the Persians , the hoplites proved devastatingly effective , routing the Persians wings before turning in on the centre of the Persian line ; the remnants of the Persian army left the battle and fled to their ships .
Herodotus records that 6,400 Persian bodies were counted on the battlefield ; the Athenians lost just 192 men and the Plataeans 11 .
In the immediate aftermath of the battle , Herodotus says that the Persian fleet sailed around Cape Sunium to attack Athens directly , although some modern historians place this attempt just before the battle .
Either way , the Athenians evidently realised that their city was still under threat , and marched as quickly as possible back to Athens .
The Athenians arrived in time to prevent the Persians from securing a landing , and seeing that the opportunity was lost , the Persians turned about and returned to Asia .
On the next day , the Spartan army arrived , having covered the in only three days .
The Spartans toured the battlefield at Marathon , and agreed that the Athenians had won a great victory .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
The defeat at Marathon ended for the time being the Persian invasion of Greece .
However , Thrace and the Cycladic islands had been resubjugated into the Persian empire , and Macedon reduced to a subordinate kingdom part of the empire ; since the late 6th century BC they had been vassals of the Persians , but remained having a broad scope of autonomy .
Darius was still fully intent on conquering Greece , to secure the western part of his empire .
Moreover , Athens remained unpunished for its role in the Ionian Revolt , and both Athens and Sparta were unpunished for their treatment of the Persian ambassadors .
Darius therefore began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition .
Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt , and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt , and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece .
This expedition was finally ready by 480 BC , and the second Persian invasion of Greece thereby began , under the command of Xerxes himself .
SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Significance .
For the Persians , the two expeditions to Greece had been largely successful ; new territories had been added to their empire and Eretria had been punished .
It was only a minor setback that the invasion had met defeat at Marathon ; that defeat barely dented the enormous resources of the Persian empire .
Yet , for the Greeks , it was an enormously significant victory .
It was the first time that Greeks had beaten the Persians , and showed them that the Persians were not invincible , and that resistance , rather than subjugation , was possible .
The victory at Marathon was a defining moment for the young Athenian democracy , showing what might be achieved through unity and self - belief ; indeed , the battle effectively marks the start of a ' golden age ' for Athens .
This was also applicable to Greece as a whole ; " their victory endowed the Greeks with a faith in their destiny that was to endure for three centuries , during which western culture was born " .
John Stuart Mill 's famous opinion was that " the Battle of Marathon , even as an event in British history , is more important than the Battle of Hastings " .
Militarily , a major lesson for the Greeks was the potential of the hoplite phalanx .
This style had developed during internecine warfare amongst the Greeks ; since each city - state fought in the same way , the advantages and disadvantages of the hoplite phalanx had not been obvious .
Marathon was the first time a phalanx faced more lightly armed troops , and revealed how devastating the hoplites could be in battle .
The phalanx formation was still vulnerable to cavalry ( the cause of much caution by the Greek forces at the Battle of Plataea ) , but used in the right circumstances , it was now shown to be a potentially devastating weapon .
The Persians seem to have more - or - less disregarded the military lessons of Marathon .
The composition of infantry for the second invasion seems to have been the same as during the first , despite the availability of hoplites and other heavy infantry in Persian - ruled lands .
Having won battles against hoplites previously , the Persians may simply have regarded Marathon as an aberration .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY ANCIENT SOURCES
* Herodotus , The Histories * Thucydides , History of The Peloponnesian Wars
* Diodorus Siculus , Library
* Lysias , Funeral Oration
* Plato , Menexenus
* Xenophon Anabasis
* Cornelius Nepos Lives of the Eminent Commanders ( Miltiades )
* Plutarch Parallel Lives ( Aristides , Themistocles ) , On the Malice of Herodotus
* Pausanias , Description of Greece
* Marcus Junianus Justinus Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus
* Photius , Bibliotheca or Myriobiblon : Epitome of Persica by Ctesias
* Suda lexicon MODERN SOURCES
* Lazenby , JF .
The Defence of Greece 490–479 BC .
Aris & Phillips Ltd. , 1993 ( )
* Lloyd , Alan .
Marathon : The Crucial Battle That Created Western Democracy .
Souvenir Press , 2004 .
( )
* Davis , Paul .
100 Decisive Battles .
Oxford University Press , 1999 .
* Higbie , C.
The Lindian Chronicle and the Greek Creation of their Past .
Oxford University Press , 2003 .
* Powell J. , Blakeley D.W. , Powell , T. Biographical Dictionary of Literary Influences : The Nineteenth Century , 1800 - 1914 .
Greenwood Publishing Group , 2001 .
* Fuller , J.F.C. A Military History of the Western World .
Funk & Wagnalls , 1954 .
* Fine , JVA .
The Ancient Greeks : A Critical History .
Harvard University Press , 1983 ( ) .
* Fehling , D. Herodotus and His " Sources " : Citation , Invention , and Narrative Art .
Translated by J.G. Howie .
Leeds :
Francis Cairns , 1989 .
* Ιστορία του Ελληνικού Έθνους ( History of the Greek nation volume Β ) , Athens 1971 * Kampouris , M. ( 2000 ) .
Η
Μάχη του Μαραθώνα ,
το λυκαυγές της κλασσικής Ελλάδος ( The battle of Marathon , the dawn of classical Greece ) .
Πόλεμος και ιστορία ( War and History magazine ) , no . 26 , January 2000 , Communications Editions , Athens .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Persian Wars at History of Iran on Iran Chamber Society
* Article in Greek about Salamis , includes Marathon and Xerxes ' campaign