THE BEACHES OF CHEYENNE
" The Beaches of Cheyenne " is a song co - written and recorded by American country music singer Garth Brooks .
It was released in December 1995 as the third single from his album Fresh Horses .
The song became Brooks 's 15th Billboard Number One hit in March 1996 .
BACKGROUND AND WRITING Section::::Background and writing .
On the 1995 TV Special , " The Garth Brooks Story , " Garth explains that the song 's meaning did n't end up the way he planned : "
[ It Was ] Supposed to be real funny .
Kind of like cowboys on the beach , kind of , swingin ' kind of thing .
Then it went to a guy on the beach that would come home from a suit and tie job .
He never had any cowboy talents , but he always wanted to be one .
So he just comes home slips off his shoes and goes out and walks on the beach and dreams of Wyoming and stuff .
Then out of just a fluke , one time passing through , it came with ...
every night she walks the beaches of Cheyenne .
We looked at each other and said , " This ai n't gon na be funny boys . "
Cheyenne , Wyoming is home to Cheyenne Frontier Days , one of the most notable rodeo events that takes place every summer .
CONTENT Section::::Content .
" The Beaches of Cheyenne " is a mid - tempo set in the key of G major .
Brooks 's vocals range from C4 ( middle C ) to E5 .
The lyrics describe a woman who " just went crazy " after her husband decides to participate in a rodeo against her wishes and is killed in the bull riding event after he " drew a bull no man could ride " .
The grieving woman , distraught that her last words to her husband were " I do n't give a damn if you never come back from Cheyenne " , ran out into the ocean .
Although her body was never found , the narrator explains that " If you go down by the water / You 'll see her footprints in the sand
/ 'Cause
every night she walks the beaches of Cheyenne . " TRACK LISTING Section::::Track listing .
European EP Single *
" The Beaches of Cheyenne " * * " Standing Outside The Fire " * *
" If Tomorrow Never Comes " * U.S. DJ Promo CD Single *
" The Beaches of Cheyenne " - 4:11 * U.S. 7
" Jukebox Single * " The Beaches of Cheyenne " - 4:13 * * " Ireland " * RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic considered " The Beaches of Cheyenne " one of the stronger tracks on the album , saying that Brooks " let his guard down " because , unlike the rest of the album , he was not " trying too hard . "
Entertainment Weekly critic Alanna Nash called it a " confusing ghost story . "
CHART HISTORY Section::::Chart history .
The song debuted on the Billboard country charts on the week of December 9 , 1995 , along with four album cuts from Fresh Horses : " The Old Stuff " , " Rollin ' " , "
It 's Midnight Cinderella " and " That Ol' Wind " , of which the latter two were later released as singles .
On the chart week of March 16 , 1996 , it became Brooks 's fifteenth Billboard Number One hit , holding the position for one week .
CHART POSITIONS Section::::Chart positions . !
align="left"Chart
( 1995–1996 ) !
align="center"Peakposition
YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 1996 ) !
scope="col"Position REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS