TOP GEAR CONTROVERSIES
The British motoring - themed television programme
Top Gear was often the focus of criticism .
The criticism has ranged from minor viewer complaints to serious complaints where broadcasting watchdogs such as Ofcom have been involved .
CLARKSON 'S
CRITICISM
Section::::Clarkson 's criticism .
One of the programme 's presenters , Jeremy Clarkson , has been critical of the BBC regarding the handling of the programme .
In the February 2006 issue of Top Gear Magazine , Clarkson revealed that he thought that the BBC did not take Top Gear seriously , making the length of the series far too long , and often replacing the show with live snooker coverage , despite Top Gear having considerably higher viewing figures .
In July 2006 , the BBC rejected a variety of complaints regarding the criticism , claiming the producers and presenters choose the way they are covered , and that the BBC do not have any control over it .
They argued that the presenters ' provocative comments are " an integral part of the programme and are not intended to be taken seriously . "
Regarding offensive remarks traded between presenters and members of the audience , the BBC said " this is part of the appeal of the show , and we trust most viewers are familiar enough with the style and tone of the show not to take offence . "
The BBC pointed out that they would act if such statements and actions were carried out with any degree of seriousness or if the programme breached legal and safety requirements .
STUDIO MOVE Section::::Studio move .
Top Gear was in negotiations with the BBC to move to Enstone in north Oxfordshire which was closer to Clarkson 's home in Chipping Norton .
However , the producers were unable to negotiate a deal , after their initial application was blocked due to opposition by local residents , who feared that Top Gear would create pollution and noise issues .
ACCUSATIONS OF HOMOPHOBIA Section::::Accusations of homophobia .
In December 2006 , the BBC upheld complaints from four viewers after comments made by Jeremy Clarkson were considered to be homophobic references , had the potential to offend and should not have been broadcast .
The complaints regarded comments made by Clarkson in the seventh episode of series six , in which Clarkson described the Daihatsu Copen as " a bit gay " .
He later described the vehicle as " ginger beer " , taken to be rhyming slang for the term " queer " .
The BBC said there was " no editorial purpose " for the remarks and the " Top Gear team had been reminded of the importance of avoiding such comments about sexual orientation . "
In December 2009 , it was reported that a gay couple had been denied tickets to see the show being filmed .
A BBC spokesperson said , " We do not – absolutely do not – discriminate against same sex couples ...
the whole implication that Top Gear is in any way homophobic is completely wrong . "
CULTURAL MOCKERY
GERMANY
Section::::Cultural mockery .
Section::::Germany .
During the first episode of series seven , a news segment featuring BMW 's Mini concept from the Tokyo Motor Show showcased a car that Hammond quoted as supposedly being " quintessentially British " , the only added feature being an integrated tea set .
Clarkson responded by mocking the car , claiming that they should build a car that is " quintessentially German " .
He suggested turn signals that displayed Hitler salutes , " a sat - nav that only goes to Poland " , and " ein fanbelt that will last a thousand years " , a reference to Adolf Hitler 's propaganda slogan of " the thousand - year Reich " .
These statements gained negative attention from the German government , and led to viewers ' complaints reaching the BBC Board of Governors .
In July 2006 , the BBC Governors ' Programme Complaints Committee rejected the protests : " the Committee did not believe that , when looking at the audience as a whole , they would have felt that the comments were anything more than Jeremy Clarkson using outrageous behaviour to amuse his audience , and that the remarks would not have led to anyone entertaining new or different feelings or concerns about Germans or Germany " .
ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
During the opening episode of series 14 , the presenters were seen taking the Aston Martin DBS Volante , Ferrari California and Lamborghini Gallardo LP560 - 4 Spyder on a road trip to Romania .
While driving through the Romanian countryside , Clarkson commented on Romania as being " Borat country , with gypsies and Russian playboys " , referring to the 2006 mockumentary starring Sacha Baron Cohen about the fictional journalist from Kazakhstan , which had filmed a few scenes in Romania .
The film had already stirred controversy in the country , with a number of local Roma who were involved in the film attempting to sue 20th Century Fox and Cohen .
Romanian newspapers claimed that the comments were " offensive " and " bad publicity for their country " .
The Romanian Times also reported that Clarkson called Romania a " gypsy land " .
Complaints were also rife regarding Clarkson 's actions to don a pork pie hat which he called a " gypsy " hat , while commenting : " I 'm wearing this hat
so the gypsies think I am [ another gypsy ] .
" The Romanian ambassador later sent a letter to the producers of Top Gear , in which he showed his appreciation for the show , highlighted the press 's freedom of expression , the non - discriminatory spirit , and the fact that 89.5 % of the country 's population is Romanian , 6.5 % is ethnic Hungarians , 2.5 % are ethnic Roma and 1.5 % are other ethnic groups .
He also asked for the show to be re - edited for future showings to exclude the offensive material .
The Daily Telegraph was hacked by a group of Romanians , who stated , " We are sick of being mis - represented as Gypsies , and thanks to Top Gear , have been publicly insulted " .
The group took over two pages of the website , covering them in Romanian flags and playing " Lonely Shepherd " by Gheorghe Zamfir ( featured on the soundtrack from the film Kill Bill ) .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
During the second episode of series 16 , the presenters mocked the Mexican Mastretta MXT sports car on account of it being designed in Mexico .
James May introduced the car as " The Tortilla " , then remarked that he did not remember what it was called .
Hammond then stated : " Cars reflect national characteristics [ ... ] a Mexican car 's just going to be a lazy , feckless , flatulent oaf with a moustache , leaning against a fence asleep , looking at a cactus with a blanket with a hole in the middle on as a coat " .
This was followed up by James May suggesting that all Mexican food resembles " refried sick " and " sick with cheese on it " , Richard Hammond remarking , " I 'm sorry , but just imagine waking up and remembering you 're Mexican " with a look of disgust on his face , and Jeremy Clarkson adding , " It 'd be brilliant because you could just go straight back to sleep again ! "
Clarkson ended the segment by suggesting that the Mexican ambassador to Britain would be too lazy to make any kind of complaint .
This prompted the Mexican ambassador , Eduardo Medina Mora , to write to the BBC : " The presenters of the program resorted to outrageous , vulgar and inexcusable insults to stir bigoted feelings against the Mexican people , their culture as well as their official representative in the United Kingdom .
These offensive , xenophobic and humiliating remarks only serve to reinforce negative stereotypes and perpetuate prejudice against Mexico and its people " .
BBC issued a letter defending the anti - Mexican jokes , stating that national stereotyping was a robust part of British humour , but apologizing to the Mexican ambassador for the remarks made about him personally .
The episode will have the Mexican comments cut from its broadcast in the United States .
Comedian Steve Coogan , who has appeared on the show three times , criticised the programme for its pitiful apology , suggesting that the usual defence of " a bit of a laugh " , or " harmless fun " was no longer appropriate , that the insults had gone too far , and described the comments as " as funny as a cold sweat followed by shooting pains down the left arm " .
He also criticised the show for what he described as lazy , adolescent humour and " casual racism " in reference specifically to this episode .
Yahoo editor , Richard Evans , described the programme 's conduct as another " Sachsgate waiting to happen " .
The presenters repeatedly referenced the incident in the following episodes of the series : The set of the 41st series of
Have I Got News for You , which depicts various recent news stories , includes a mocked - up image of Clarkson dressed like a Mexican in reference to the controversy .
The incident was referenced further in the India special , where Hammond accidentally painted a Mexican flag on his car after he intended to paint an Indian one .
The incident was referenced to once again in the second episode of series 19 , in which the presenters had to race three high - performance cars from Los Angeles to the Mexican border , where the last person to arrive would have to do a review of the Mastretta Sports car in an upcoming episode .
However the UK broadcast regulator Ofcom cleared the programme due to its " comedic intent and the context " :
In this case , Ofcom took into account that Top Gear is well known for its irreverent style and sometimes outspoken humour , as well as the regular format of the studio banter between the three presenters .
We considered that viewers of Top Gear were likely to be aware that the programme frequently uses national stereotypes as a comedic trope and that there were
few , if any , nationalities that had not at some point been the subject of the presenters ' mockery throughout the history of this long running programme .
For example , this same episode featured a competition between the UK 's Top Gear presenters and their Australian counterparts , throughout which the Australians were ridiculed for various national traits .
In this instance , therefore , Ofcom considered that the majority of the audience would be familiar with the presenters ' approach to mocking , playground - style humour , and would have considered that applying that approach to national stereotypes was in keeping with the programme 's usual content , and the presenters ' typical style .
Ofcom was of the view that the majority of the audience would therefore be likely to have understood that the comments were being made for comic effect .
ARGENTINA Section::::Argentina .
In September and October 2014 , the three presenters and a crew of 29 people were recording the Patagonia Special in Argentina , featuring three cars — a Porsche 928 GT , a Lotus Esprit and a Ford Mustang Mach I.
They had started in Bariloche on 19 September and travelled southward on the trans - Patagonian Route 40 , about .
On 2 October they had arrived in Ushuaia , at the southern end of Tierra del Fuego .
The plan was to film for three more days , and then to continue in Chile .
During filming , Twitter comments alleging the number plate " H982 FKL " on the Porsche was a reference to the 1982 Falklands War began to appear and the number plate " H1 VAE " was substituted .
Andy Wilman , executive producer for the show , said on 2 October : " Top Gear production purchased three cars for a forthcoming programme ; to suggest that this car was either chosen for its number plate , or that an alternative number plate was substituted for the original is completely untrue " ; Clarkson tweeted : " For once , we did nothing wrong " . "
H982 FKL " has been registered to the Porsche since its manufacture in May 1991 .
In the evening , veterans and other Argentinians entered the hotel lobby to confront the team .
Clarkson later wrote he " had to hide under a bed for a mob howling for his blood " .
Local police then told the team they could not and would not give them any assistance , and in the hostile atmosphere the team decided to leave Argentina .
Believing that the presenters were the main targets of the controversy , the crew decided to send Clarkson , May , Hammond and the women from the crew to Buenos Aires , while the rest would drive the cars and their equipment to the border into Chile .
May later stated that , prior to flying back to Britain , he and the other presenters had assisted in planning possible airlifts if the journey to the border became too dangerous .
The main Route 3 by which they had arrived in Rio Grande a day earlier , was closed to them because the ringway was filled with people , with " the mayor in front " .
They drove to the border at Radman by tertiary roads , about .
In Tolhuin , after , the convoy was stopped by an intimidating crowd , who threw eggs , rocks , and sticks .
The team decided to abandon the three show cars , and reached the border with Chile later that night .
At 2 a.m. , they had to find a tractor to ford the camera cars through the border river .
Pictures show that the abandoned cars had been attacked and damaged with stones .
The Porsche had the number plate " HI VAE " .
On 31 October 2014 , it was announced that the Argentine ambassador Alicia Castro met BBC Director of Television Danny Cohen to demand a formal apology , but the BBC refused to do so , making it clear that they intended to broadcast the special as a fair representation of the events that occurred .
The Christmas Special , split into two parts , aired on 27 and 28 December 2014 .
TESLA ROADSTER REVIEW Section::::Tesla Roadster review .
During episode seven of series 12 , Clarkson presented a segment featuring the Tesla Roadster , including a test drive .
The segment showed the car 's provided batteries running flat after , with Clarkson claiming that the recharge would take 16 hours .
Following this , he claimed that the car then broke down .
Tesla Motors spokesperson stated that the cars provided never reached less than 20 % charge , none needed to be pushed off the track at any point , the recharge time was 3.5 hours , and the brake failure shown in the segment was actually a blown fuse .
The BBC responded to these claims with a statement saying , " The tested Tesla was filmed being pushed into the shed in order to show what would happen if the Roadster had run out of charge .
Top Gear stands by the findings in this film and is content that it offers a fair representation of the Tesla 's performance on the day it was tested " , without addressing the other concerns .
The comments were made following Clarkson showing a limp windmill , and complaining that it would take countless hours to refuel the car , using such a source of electricity .
A BBC spokeswoman said several times in an interview that Top Gear was " an entertainment programme , and should not be taken seriously . "
After several weeks , Clarkson wrote a blog for The Times , acknowledging that " the film we had shot was a bit of a mess " , but defending the film 's claims .
Elon Musk , CEO of Tesla , wrote in a blog on 13 February 2013 that while delivering the vehicle the Tesla team found on a table a prepared script for the segment , demonstrating this was never a fair test .
In March 2011 Tesla Motors filed a suit accusing the BBC of libel .
In court Tesla Motors lost a major part of its high court libel claim on 19 October 2011 .
Mr Justice
Tugendhat said that no Top Gear viewer would have reasonably compared the car 's performance on the show 's airfield track to its likely performance on a public road .
On 28 October 2011 the carmaker looked set to lose the remaining malicious falsehood claim , Mr Justice Tugendhat saying " I shall strike out the claim in this action unless the plea of damage is amended by agreement between the parties , or with the permission of the court . "
SPECIFIC CRITICISM SERIES 2 Section::::Specific criticism .
Section::::Series 2 .
After a segment on the 1953 24 Hours of Le Mans , the programme received criticism for damaging a historic Jaguar C - Type valued at £ 1 million .
Top Gear responded that they had permission to " drive the car hard " but Adrian Hamilton , the car 's owner , and Top Gear 's test driver had different ideas on what that meant .
SERIES 3
Section::::Series 3 .
During the fifth episode of series three , Clarkson crashed a Toyota Hilux into a tree , during a segment in which he attempted to prove the sturdiness and reliability of the truck .
The tree belonged to the Churchill Parish in Somerset .
The villagers presumed that the damage had been accidental , or that someone had vandalised the tree , until the Top Gear episode was broadcast .
After the BBC was contacted , the director of Top Gear admitted guilt and the broadcaster paid compensation .
SERIES 9
Section::::Series 9 .
The BBC apologised to a number of Top Gear viewers following comments made during the first episode of series nine .
Clarkson asked Hammond following his 370 km / h ( 230 mph ) crash , " Are you now a mental ? " , which was followed by James May offering Richard Hammond a tissue " in case he dribbled " .
The BBC claimed the comments were meant as a joke , but also claimed they saw how the comments could cause offence to mentally disabled and brain - damaged viewers .
During the show 's American Special , the show received 91 complaints regarding a dead cow being tied to the roof of Jeremy Clarkson 's Camaro .
It was later revealed by the BBC that the cow had died several days previously and Clarkson had caused no harm or injury to it .
Episode five of series nine was criticised for Jeremy Clarkson 's reconstruction of a train crash that occurred in Hibaldstow , North Lincolnshire , near Scunthorpe .
The incident was mainly criticised due to its insensitivity regarding the Cumbria train crash that occurred only two days earlier .
The reconstruction , which was organised by Network Rail as part of its Do n't Run The Risk campaign , was criticised by Anthony Smith , chief executive of the rail watchdog Passenger Focus , who said : " We need to raise awareness of the issue , but now is not the right time . "
It was reported that the item had already been delayed several times , due to an earlier fatal level crossing crash .
The BBC defended their decision to broadcast the episode , claiming that " with only one programme remaining in the series , and the frequency of level crossing accidents , it may have been considered that there was no " appropriate " time to show the film without it " offending " somebody .
A repeat of the episode was due to be aired on 1 March 2007 , but due to the earlier complaints , and another death on a level crossing earlier that morning , was replaced with a new edition of " The Best of Top Gear " .
During the show 's Polar special at the end of series nine , Jeremy Clarkson was shown drinking gin and tonic while driving through an ice field in the Arctic .
Despite the producers ' and Clarkson 's claims that they were in international waters at the time , the BBC Trust found that the scene could " glamorise the misuse of alcohol " , and that the scene " was not editorially justified in the context of a family show pre - watershed " .
SERIES 10
Section::::Series 10 .
During the show 's Botswana special , a spokesperson for the Environmental Investigation Agency criticised the BBC for leaving tracks in Botswana 's Makgadikgadi salt pan .
The BBC denied that they had gone near any conservation areas , and asserted that they had followed the advice of environmental experts .
SERIES 12 Section::::Series 12 .
Following the first episode of series 12 , Jeremy Clarkson was criticised for making a joke regarding lorry drivers killing prostitutes , thought to be alluding to the Ipswich 2006 serial murders , although it is more likely that Clarkson was referring to the Yorkshire Ripper .
Ofcom received over 500 complaints , but say that the remark was not in breach of the broadcasting code .
Afterwards , Labour MP Chris Mole wrote a " strongly worded " letter to the BBC , saying that Clarkson should be sacked regarding the remarks .
In response to the complaints on the show , Clarkson announced he would apologise , but later revealed that he was , in fact , apologising for not posting the lap time of a car that was shown on the previous episode .
The incident was referenced when Stephen Fry appeared as the Star in a Reasonably Priced Car in July 2009 .
Clarkson introduced the interview by stating that Fry had " begun his career with a Lorry ( Laurie ) , so the one thing we can be certain he has n't done is killed a prostitute " .
SERIES 13
Section::::Series 13 .
During the final episode of series 13 , Clarkson and May were assigned to produce a spoof advert for the new Volkswagen Scirocco .
However , one of their spoof ads saw crowds of people leaving Warsaw in terror on buses and trains , because of the imminent German invasion of Poland .
At the end of the advert , Clarkson announced " Volkswagen Scirocco TDI : Berlin to Warsaw in one tank " .
The advert was uploaded to YouTube minutes after its broadcast , spurring angry comments from Polish viewers .
A spokeswoman for the show told the Daily Mail that the BBC had only received a handful of complaints , but complaints submitted to national broadcast watchdog Ofcom were expected to be higher .
Complaints were also received for three other incidents in the programme : a remake of a VW advertisement , in which a suicide is shown on - screen ; Clarkson mocking people who have autism , and the use of the word " pikey " , which Clarkson claims to be someone who sells " pegs and heather " to describe drivers of the Vauxhall VXR8 Bathurst .
SERIES 15
Section::::Series 15 .
In a conversation about women distracting the presenters while driving , Clarkson said he recently saw a woman wearing a burka who " tripped over the pavement " and revealed a " red g - string and stockings " .
Hammond said that this " did not happen " , but Clarkson maintained that it was true .
A Mediawatch spokesperson said Clarkson " should learn to keep quiet " .
However , one reporter defended Clarkson .
SERIES 16
Section::::Series 16 .
The BBC received 600 complaints following the third episode of series 16 , following an incident in which the presenters ' murdered ' a fat Albanian and attempted to find out which of three car boots he would fit into the best .
The episode was also criticised for its stereotypical views on Albania , claiming it is a nest for Albanian mafia car thieves .
SERIES 17
Section::::Series 17 .
This episode showed Clarkson and May parking their electric cars in disabled parking spaces .
Later the BBC defended its stars , stating that they had permission from the owners to park in the disabled spaces .
A later scene showed people pushing the electric Nissan Leaf up a street while Clarkson made jokes about it having run out of charge .
Nissan later discovered from onboard data logging that before the " test drive " its charge had been run down to only 40 % capacity .
Since then Top Gear has received criticism from electric car enthusiasts , newspapers , celebrities , and Nissan in response to their view on electric cars .
SERIES 19
Section::::Series 19 .
In an unaired version of Jeremy Clarkson reviewing the Toyota GT86 and the similar Subaru BRZ , he uses the eeny meeny miny moe rhyme to pick between the two cars , which has historically included the word " nigger " .
He mumbles through that part of the rhyme , and the Daily Mirror accused him of mumbling " nigger " .
In the aired version of the review , he says the word ' teacher ' instead of the racial epithet .
After denying the incident , once video evidence surfaced , Clarkson issued the following apology , though maintaining that he did not use the word .
" Ordinarily I do n't respond to newspaper allegations but on this occasion I feel I must make an exception .
A couple of years ago I recorded an item for Top Gear in which I quote the rhyme " eeny , meeny , miny , moe " .
Of course , I was well aware that in the best - known version of this rhyme there is a racist expression that I was extremely keen to avoid .
The full rushes show that I did three takes .
In two , I mumbled where the offensive word would normally occur and in the third I replaced it altogether with the word teacher .
Now when I viewed this footage several weeks later I realised that in one of the mumbled versions if you listen very carefully with the sound turned right up
it did appear that I 'd actually used the word I was trying to obscure .
I was mortified by this , horrified .
It is a word I loathe
and I did everything in my power to make sure that that version did not appear in the programme that was transmitted .
"
" I have here the note that was sent at the time to the production office and
it says : " I did n't use the N - word here
but I 've just listened through my headphones and
it sounds like I did .
Is there another take that we could use ? "
" Please be assured
I did everything in my power to not use that word , as I 'm sitting here begging your forgiveness for the fact
my efforts obviously were n't quite good enough , thank you . "
Though this incident happened before the ' slope ' comment in the Burma special , it did not surface until afterwards and the combined complaints caused many public figures to call for Clarkson to be fired and ultimately resulted in a ' final warning ' from the BBC regarding racist remarks .
SERIES 21
Section::::Series 21 .
The Top Gear presenters go across Burma and Thailand in lorries with the goal of building a bridge over the river Kwai .
After building a bridge over the Kok River , Clarkson is quoted as saying " That is a proud moment , but there 's a slope on it . "
as a native crosses the bridge , ' slope ' being a pejorative for Asians .
Top Gear Executive Producer Andy Wilman responded : When we used the word slope in the recent Top Gear Burma Special it was a light - hearted word play joke referencing both the build quality of the bridge and the local Asian man who was crossing it .
We were not aware at the time , and it has subsequently been brought to our attention , that the word slope is considered by some to be offensive and although it might not be widely recognised in the UK , we appreciate that it can be considered offensive to some here and overseas , for example in Australia and the USA .
If we had known that at the time we would not have broadcast the word in this context and regret any offence caused .
SERIES 23
Section::::Series 23 .
The BBC came under criticism for filming near the London Cenotaph but defended the decision to film there by saying " The filming took place a respectful distance away from the Cenotaph and it was all agreed with Westminster council in advance . "
DISMISSAL OF JEREMY CLARKSON FROM TOP GEAR Section::::Dismissal of Jeremy Clarkson from Top Gear .
In March 2015 , the BBC announced Jeremy Clarkson had been suspended for an alleged ' fracas ' and that the remaining episodes of the series would not be broadcast .
In response to this , over 1,000,000 people signed an online petition to try to get the BBC to reinstate Clarkson .
Perry McCarthy , a former Stig , criticised the BBC 's decision to pull the next episode from the schedule .
On 25 March , the BBC announced that they would not renew Clarkson 's contract which finished at the end of March 2015 .
The show received widespread criticism after Jeremy Clarkson 's contract was n't renewed , and subsequent departure of James May and Richard Hammond , after the new episode hosted by Chris Evans was widely deemed sub - standard .
REFERENCES