ENGLAND – WALES BORDER
The England –
Wales border , sometimes the Wales – England border or the Anglo - Welsh border , is the border between England and Wales , two constituent countries of the United Kingdom .
It runs for , from the Dee estuary , in the north , to the Severn estuary in the south .
It has followed broadly the same line since the 8th century , and in part that of Offa 's Dyke ; the modern boundary was fixed in 1536 , when the former marcher lordships which occupied the border area were abolished and new county boundaries were created .
The administrative boundary of Wales was confirmed in the Local Government Act 1972 .
Whether Monmouthshire was part of Wales , or an English county treated for most purposes as though it were Welsh , was also settled by the 1972 Act , which included it in Wales .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The modern boundary between Wales and England runs from the salt marshes of the Dee estuary adjoining the Wirral Peninsula , across reclaimed land to the River Dee at Saltney just west of Chester .
It then loops south to include within England an area southwest of Chester , before rejoining the Dee , and then loops east of the river to include within Wales a large area known as Maelor , formerly an exclave of Flintshire , between Bangor - on - Dee ( in Wales ) and Whitchurch ( in England ) .
Returning to the River Dee as far as Chirk , the boundary then loops to the west , following Offa 's Dyke itself for about , and including within England the town of Oswestry , before reaching the River Vyrnwy at Llanymynech .
It follows the Vyrnwy to its confluence with the River Severn , and then continues southwards , rising over Long Mountain east of Welshpool .
East of Montgomery , the boundary again follows the line of Offa 's Dyke for about , before looping eastwards to include within Wales a large area near Churchstoke .
It then runs westwards to the River Teme , and follows the river southeastwards through Knighton before turning south towards the River Lugg at Presteigne , which is within Wales .
The boundary continues southwards across hills to the River Wye , and follows the river upstream for a short distance to Hay - on - Wye , on the Welsh side of the border .
It continues southwards and rises through and across the Black Mountains , following the Hatterall Ridge past Llanthony on the Welsh side and Longtown on the English side , to reach the River Monnow near Pandy .
It then generally follows the river , past Pontrilas ( in England ) and Skenfrith ( in Wales ) , towards Monmouth , looping eastwards to include the town itself and a surrounding area within Wales .
At Redbrook , the boundary again reaches the Wye , and follows the river southwards , past Tintern and Chepstow on the Welsh side , to its confluence with the Severn at the Severn Bridge .
The boundary then continues down the Severn estuary towards the Bristol Channel , with the small island of Flat Holm being administered as part of Wales and the neighbouring island of Steep Holm as part of England .
ADMINISTRATIVE BOUNDARY
Section::::Administrative boundary .
The boundary passes between Flintshire , Wrexham County Borough , Powys , and Monmouthshire in Wales and Cheshire West and Chester , Shropshire , Herefordshire , and Gloucestershire in England .
There are several places where the border runs along the centre of a lane or street , resulting in properties on one side of the street being in Wales and those on the other side being in England .
Notable examples include Boundary Lane in Saltney and the main street of Llanymynech .
HISTORY ORIGINS Section::::History .
Section::::Origins .
Before and during the Roman occupation of Britain , all the native inhabitants of the island ( other than the Pictish / Caledonian tribes of what is now northern Scotland — and also excepting the Lloegyr of greater south - east England ) spoke Brythonic languages , a sub - family of the Insular Celtic languages , and were regarded as Britons .
The clear geographical divide between the mountainous western areas of southern Britain and the generally lower - lying areas to the east was reflected in the pattern of Roman occupation .
The main Roman military bases for the control of what became Wales were beyond the mountains , at Deva ( Chester ) , Viroconium ( Wroxeter , near Shrewsbury ) , and Isca Augusta ( Caerleon , near Newport ) , all located close to the later national border .
When the Roman garrison left around 410 , the various parts of Britain were left to govern and defend themselves .
The western area , later Wales , had become largely Christian , and soon comprised a number of separate kingdoms , the largest being Gwynedd in the northwest and Powys in the east .
Powys roughly coincided with the territory of the Celtic Cornovii tribe whose civitas or administrative centre during the Roman period was at Viroconium .
Gwynedd , at the height of its power , extended as far east as the Dee estuary .
Gradually , from the 5th century onwards , pagan tribes from the east , including the Angles and Saxons , conquered eastern and southern Britain , which later became England .
In the south , the Welsh kingdom of Gwent broadly covered the same area as the pre - Roman Silures , traditionally the area between the rivers Usk , Wye and the Severn estuary .
It was centred at different times on Venta ( Caerwent ) , from which it derived its name , and Isca Augusta ( Caerleon ) .
Gwent generally allied with , and at various times was joined with , the smaller Welsh kingdom of Ergyng , centred in present - day southern Herefordshire west of the Wye ( and deriving its name from the Roman town of Ariconium ) ; and the larger kingdom of Glywysing in modern Glamorgan .
The name Glywysing may indicate that it was founded by a British native of Glevum ( Gloucester ) .
The Battle of Mons Badonicus , circa 500 , could have been fought near Bath between the British , the victors , and Anglo - Saxons attempting to reach the Severn estuary , but its date and location are very uncertain and it may equally well have taken place in Somerset or Dorset .
However , it is more certain that the Anglo - Saxon kingdom of Wessex emerged in the 6th and 7th centuries in the upper Thames valley , Cotswolds and Hampshire areas .
In 577 , the Battle of Deorham in the southern Cotswolds was won by the Anglo - Saxons , and led to Wessex extending its control to the Severn estuary and the cities of Gloucester , Cirencester , and Bath .
This severed the land link between the Britons of Wales and those of the south west peninsula .
By about 600 , however , the area of modern Gloucestershire east of the Severn , as well as most of Worcestershire , was controlled by another group , the Hwicce , who may have arisen from intermarriage between Anglo - Saxon and British leading families , possibly the successors to the pre - Roman Dobunni .
The Hwicce came increasingly under Mercian hegemony .
At the Battle of Chester in 616 , the forces of Powys and other allied Brythonic kingdoms were defeated by the Northumbrians under Æthelfrith .
This divided the Britons of Wales from those in Northern England , including Lancashire , Cumbria , and south west Scotland , an area which became known as " Yr Hen Ogledd " or " the Old North " .
Within a few decades , the Welsh became engaged in further defensive warfare against the increasingly powerful kingdom of Mercia , based at Tamworth in what became the West Midlands of England .
The capital of Powys , Pengwern , at or near modern Shrewsbury , was conquered by Oswiu of Northumbria in 656 when he had become overlord of the Mercians .
Powys then withdrew from the lowland areas now in southern Cheshire , Shropshire and Herefordshire , which became known to Welsh poets as " The Paradise of Powys " .
The areas were occupied by Anglo - Saxon groups who became sub - kingdoms of Mercia , the Wreocensǣte or Wrekinset in the northern part of what became Shropshire , and the Magonsæte in the southern part .
Further south , the area north west of the Severn later known as the Forest of Dean seems to have remained in British ( that is , Welsh ) hands until about 760 .
OFFA 'S DYKE
Section::::Offa 's Dyke .
After Ine of Wessex abdicated in 726 , Æthelbald of Mercia established Mercia 's hegemony over the Anglo - Saxons south of the Humber .
However , campaigns by Powys against Mercia led to the building of Wat 's Dyke , an earthwork boundary extending from the Severn valley near Oswestry to the Dee at Basingwerk in what became Flintshire , perhaps to protect recently acquired lands .
After Æthelbald was killed in 757 , a brief civil war in Mercia then ended in victory for his distant cousin , Offa .
As king , he rebuilt Mercia 's hegemony over the southern English through military campaigns , and also caused the construction of Offa 's Dyke , around the years 770 and 780 .
Offa 's Dyke is a massive linear earthwork , up to wide ( including its surrounding ditch ) and high .
It is much larger and longer than Wat 's Dyke , but runs roughly parallel to it .
The earthwork was generally dug with the displaced soil piled into a bank on the Mercian ( eastern ) side , providing an open view into Wales and suggesting that it was built by Mercia to guard against attacks or raids from Powys .
The late 9th - century writer Asser wrote that Offa " terrified all the neighbouring kings and provinces around him , and ... had a great dyke built between Wales and Mercia from sea to sea " .
In the mid-20th century , Sir Cyril Fox completed a major survey of the Dyke and stated that it ran from the Dee to the Severn , as Asser suggested , but with gaps , especially in the Herefordshire area , where natural barriers of strong rivers or dense forests provided sufficient defence .
More recent research by David Hill and Margaret Worthington concluded that there is little evidence for the Dyke stretching " from sea to sea " , but that the earthwork built by Offa stretched some between Rushock Hill near Kington in Herefordshire , and Treuddyn in Flintshire .
Earthworks in the far north and south , including sections overlooking the Wye valley and east of the Wye at Beachley , may in their view have been built for different purposes at different times , although their conclusions are themselves disputed .
Offa 's Dyke largely remained the frontier between the Welsh and English in later centuries .
By the 9th century , the expanding power of Mercia led to it gaining control over Ergyng and nearby Hereford .
The system of shires which was later to form the basis of local administration throughout England and eventually Wales originated in Wessex , where it became established during the 8th century .
Wessex and Mercia gradually established an occasionally unstable alliance , with Wessex gaining the upper hand .
According to Asser , the southern Welsh kings , including Hywel ap Rhys of Glywysing , commended themselves to Alfred the Great of Wessex in about 885 .
Alfred 's son Edward the Elder also secured homage from the Welsh , although sporadic border unrest continued .
In the early 10th century , a document known as The Ordinance Concerning the Dunsaete records procedures for dealing with disputes between the English and the Welsh , and implies that areas west of the Wye in Archenfield were still culturally Welsh .
It stated that the English should only cross into the Welsh side , and vice versa , in the presence of an appointed man who had the responsibility of making sure that the foreigner was safely escorted back to the crossing point .
In 926 , Edward 's successor Athelstan , " King of the English " , summoned the Welsh kings including Hywel Dda of Deheubarth to a meeting at Hereford , and according to William of Malmesbury laid down the boundary between England and Wales , particularly the disputed southern stretch where he specified that the eastern bank of the Wye should form the boundary .
By the mid - eleventh century , most of Wales had become united under the king of Gwynedd , Gruffudd ap Llywelyn .
In 1055 , he marched on Hereford and sacked the city .
He also seized Morgannwg and the Kingdom of Gwent , together with substantial territories east of Offa 's Dyke , and raided as far as Chester and Leominster .
He claimed sovereignty over the whole of Wales , a claim recognised by the English , and historian John Davies states that Gruffudd was " the only Welsh king ever to rule over the entire territory of Wales . " .
However , after his most powerful ally – Earl Elfgar of Mercia and East Anglia – died , Harold and Tostig Godwinson took advantage of the situation – Gruffudd being besieged in Snowdonia – and invaded Wales .
In 1063 , Gruffudd was killed by his own men .
Harold returned many of the Welsh princes their lands , so that after Harold 's death at the Battle of Hastings , Wales was again divided without a leader to resist the Normans .
MARCH OF WALES Section::::March of Wales .
Immediately after the Norman conquest of England , King William installed one of his most trusted confidants , William FitzOsbern , as Earl of Hereford .
By 1071 he had started the building of Chepstow Castle , the first castle in Britain built of stone , near the mouth of the Wye .
It served as a base from which the Normans continued to expand westward into south Wales , establishing a castle at Caerleon and extinguishing the Welsh kingdom of Gwent .
William also installed Roger de Montgomerie at Shrewsbury , and Hugh d'Avranches at Chester , creating a new expansionist earldom in each case .
In the Domesday Book of 1086 , Norman lands are recorded west of the Wye at Chepstow and Caldicot in the Gwent Levels ( ) ; over the whole of north east Wales as far west as the River Clwyd , an area known to the Welsh as the Perfeddwlad ; and west of Offa 's Dyke , especially in Powys where a new castle was named , after its lord , Montgomery .
Domesday Book
no doubt records the extent of English penetration into Wales .
This suggests that Offa 's Dyke still approximately represented the boundary between England and Wales .
However , during the anarchy of Stephen various Welsh princes were able to occupy lands beyond it , including Whittington , Shropshire ( see Whittington Castle ) and Maelor Saesneg , hitherto in England .
These lands were brought under English lordship by Henry II of England , but became Marcher lordships , and so part of Wales .
This involved a loss of direct rule by the English crown .
Over the next four centuries , Norman lords established mostly small lordships , at times numbering over 150 , between the Dee and Severn and further west .
The precise dates and means of formation of the lordships varied , as did their size .
Hundreds of small castles , mostly of the motte and bailey type , were built in the border area in the 12th and 13th centuries , predominantly by Norman lords as assertions of power as well as defences against Welsh raiders and rebels .
Many new towns were established across the area , some such as Chepstow , Monmouth , Ludlow and Newtown becoming successful trading centres , and these tended to be a focus of English settlement .
However , the Welsh continued to attack English soil and supported rebellions against the Normans .
The Marches , or Marchia Wallia , were to a greater or lesser extent independent of both the English monarchy and the Principality of Wales , which remained based in Gwynedd in the north west of the country .
By the early 12th century , they covered the areas which would later become Monmouthshire and much of Flintshire , Montgomeryshire , Radnorshire , Brecknockshire , Glamorgan , Carmarthenshire and Pembrokeshire .
Some of the lordships , such as Oswestry , Whittington , Clun , and Wigmore had been part of England at the time of Domesday , while others such as the Lordship of Powys were Welsh principalities that passed by marriage into the hands of Norman barons .
In ecclesiastical terms , the ancient dioceses of Bangor and St. Asaph in the north , and St. David 's and Llandaff in the south , collectively defined an area which included both the Principality and the March , and coincided closely with later definitions of Wales .
The Principality of Wales ( ) covered the lands ruled by the Prince of Wales directly , and was formally founded in 1216 , and later recognised by the 1218 Treaty of Worcester between Llywelyn ab Iorwerth , Prince of Gwynedd , and King John of England .
Encompassing two - thirds of modern Wales , the principality operated as an effectively independent entity from the reign of Llywelyn until 1283 ( though it underwent a period of contraction during the early part of the reign of Dafydd ap Llywelyn in the 1240s , and again for several years from the beginning of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd 's rule in 1246 ) .
Its independence was characterised by a separate legal jurisprudence based on the well established laws of Cyfraith Hywel , and by the increasingly sophisticated court of the Aberffraw dynasty .
The Statute of Rhuddlan in 1284 followed the conquest of the Principality by Edward I of England .
It assumed the lands held by the Princes of Gwynedd under the title " Prince of Wales " as legally part of the lands of England , and established shire counties on the English model over those areas .
The Council of Wales , based at Ludlow Castle , was also established in the 15th century to govern the area .
FORMATION OF " ENGLAND AND WALES " AND COUNTY BOUNDARIES Section::::Formation of " England and Wales " and county boundaries .
However , the Marches remained outside the shire system , and at least nominally outside the control of the English monarchy , until the first Laws in Wales Act was introduced in 1535 under Henry VIII .
This , and a further Act in 1542 , had the effect of annexing Wales to England and creating a single state and legal jurisdiction , commonly referred to as England and Wales .
The powers of the marcher lordships were abolished , and their areas formed into new counties , or amalgamated into existing ones .
At this point , the boundary between England and Wales , which has existed ever since , was effectively fixed .
In the border areas , five new counties were created – Denbighshire , Montgomeryshire , Radnorshire , Brecknockshire and Monmouthshire – and Flintshire gained some additional territory .
However , several of the marcher lordships were incorporated in whole or in part into English counties .
The lordships of Ludlow , Clun , Caus and part of Montgomery were incorporated into Shropshire ; and Wigmore , Huntington , Clifford and most of Ewyas were included in Herefordshire .
According to John Davies : Thus was created the border between Wales and England , a border which has survived until today .
It did not follow the old line of Offa 's Dyke nor the eastern boundary of the Welsh dioceses ; it excluded districts such as Oswestry and Ewias , where the Welsh language would continue to be spoken for centuries , districts which it would not be wholly fanciful to consider as Cambria irredenta .
Yet , as the purpose of the statute was to incorporate Wales into England , the location of the Welsh border was irrelevant to the purposes of its framers .
An 1844 Act of Parliament later abolished several enclaves .
One of these , Welsh Bicknor , was an exclave of Monmouthshire between Gloucestershire and Herefordshire .
MONMOUTHSHIRE Section::::Monmouthshire .
Although Monmouthshire was included in the 16th century legislation , it was treated anomalously , with the result that its legal status as a Welsh county fell into some ambiguity and doubt until the 20th century .
It was omitted from the second Act of Union , which established the Court of Great Sessions , and like English shires it was given two Knights of the Shire , rather than one as elsewhere in Wales .
However , in ecclesiastical terms , almost all of the county remained within the Diocese of Llandaff , and most of its residents at the time spoke Welsh .
In the late 17th century under Charles II it was added to the Oxford circuit of the English Assizes , following which , according to the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica , it gradually " came to be regarded as an English county " .
Under that interpretation , the boundary between England and Wales passed down the Rhymney valley , along Monmouthshire 's western borders with Brecknockshire and Glamorgan , so including Newport , and other industrialised parts of what would now generally be considered to be South Wales , within England .
The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica unambiguously described the county as part of England , but noted that " whenever an act [ ... ] is intended to apply to [ Wales ] alone , then Wales is always coupled with Monmouthshire " .
Some legislation and UK government decisions , such as the establishment of a " Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire " in 1908 , referred to " Wales and Monmouthshire " , so that it was treated as one with Wales rather than as a legal part of Wales .
The county 's status continued to be a matter of debate in Parliament , especially as Welsh nationalism and devolution climbed the political agenda in the 20th century .
In 1921 the area was included within the Church in Wales .
The Welsh Office , established in 1966 , included Monmouthshire within its remit , and in 1969 George Thomas , Secretary of State for Wales , proposed to fully incorporate Monmouthshire into Wales .
The issue was finally clarified in law by the Local Government Act 1972 , which provided that " in every act passed on or after 1 April 1974 , and in every instrument made on or after that date under any enactment ( whether before , on or after that date ) " Wales " , subject to any alterations of boundaries ... " included " the administrative county of Monmouthshire and the county borough of Newport " .
The legal boundary between England and Wales therefore passes along Monmouthshire 's eastern boundaries with Herefordshire and Gloucestershire , essentially along the River Monnow and River Wye .
THE BORDER TODAY Section::::The border today .
The first legislation applying solely to Wales since the 16th century was passed in 1881 .
Subsequently , the border between England and Wales has taken on increasing legal and political significance .
In 1964 a separate department of state was established for Wales – the Welsh Office – which assumed an increasing range of administrative responsibilities from Whitehall .
By 1992 , the Welsh Office oversaw housing , local government , roads , historic buildings , health , education , economic development , agriculture , fisheries and urban regeneration , although the extent to which it was able to be autonomous from England in public policy is a matter of debate .
The establishment of devolved government in Wales through the Welsh Assembly , set up in 1999 , has led to a divergence between England and Wales on some Government policies .
One such is the fact that prescription charges were abolished in Wales in 2007 .
In 2008 , residents of the village of Audlem , Cheshire , from the border , " voted " to become part of Wales in what was originally a joke ballot .
Some residents sought to make a case for securing Welsh benefits such as free hospital parking and prescriptions .
The modern border lies between the town of Knighton and its railway station , and divides the village of Llanymynech where a pub straddles the line .
Knighton is the only town that can claim to be on the border as well as on Offa 's Dyke .
The postal and ecclesiastical borders are in places slightly different – for example the Shropshire village of Chirbury has Montgomery , as its post town , and the Welsh town of Presteigne is in the English Diocese of Hereford .
A competition was launched in 2005 to design one or more new iconic images , along the same lines as the " Angel of the North " , to be placed at the borders of Wales .
This became known as the " Landmark Wales " project , and a shortlist of 15 proposals was unveiled in 2007 .
However , the proposal was shelved after it failed to receive Lottery funding .
The main road links over the border in the south are the M4 Second Severn Crossing and the M48 Severn Bridge .
In July 2017 , the Welsh Secretary , Alun Cairns , announced that tolls would be abolished at the end of 2018 , claiming that this would boost the South Wales economy by around £ 100 m a year .
In September 2017 , Cairns confirmed that tolls would be reduced in January 2018 when VAT is removed .
It was announced by Cairns in October 2018 that the Severn Bridge tolls would cease on 17 December 2018 .
PLACE NAMES Section::::Place names .
In general , placenames of Welsh origin are found to the west of the border , and those of English origin to the east .
However , many historically Welsh names are also found east of the border , particularly around Oswestry in northern Shropshire , such as Gobowen ; in southern Shropshire , such as Clun ; and in southern Herefordshire , such as Kilpeck and Pontrilas .
Most of these areas were not incorporated fully into England until the 16th century , and native Welsh speakers still lived there until at least the 19th century .
Equally , placenames of English origin can be found on the Welsh side of the border where there was Mercian and Norman settlement , particularly in the north east , such as Flint , Wrexham and Prestatyn ; in English Maelor , such as Overton ; in central Powys , such as Newtown and Knighton ; and in southeastern Monmouthshire , including Chepstow and Shirenewton .
METAPHORICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Metaphorical significance .
The poet , playwright and prominent Welsh Nationalist , Saunders Lewis , referring to the Englishness of Caernarfon in his youth and the Welsh - speaking environment of his native Wallasey , addressed Cardiff university students with the words " The border between England and Wales runs through this room " .
SEE ALSO
* List of Anglo - Welsh Wars
* History of Wales *
Offa 's Dyke Path * Cultural relationship between the Welsh and the English
* Welsh Marches
*
Severnside derby * Anglo – Scottish border * Republic of Ireland –
United Kingdom border * Cross - border derby * Church of England border polls 1915–1916 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS