THE BOOK OF ELI
The Book of Eli is a 2010 American post - apocalyptic neo - Western action film directed by The Hughes Brothers , written by Gary Whitta , and starring Denzel Washington , Gary Oldman , Mila Kunis , Ray Stevenson , and Jennifer Beals .
The story revolves around Eli , a nomad in a post - apocalyptic world , who is told by a voice to deliver his copy of a mysterious book to a safe location on the West Coast of the United States .
The history of the post - war world is explained along the way , as is the importance of Eli 's task .
Filming began in February 2009 and took place in New Mexico .
The film was released in theaters in January 2010 .
Alcon Entertainment financed and co - produced the film with Silver Pictures , while it was distributed by Warner Bros. in the United States ; international sales were handled by Summit Entertainment .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Thirty years after a nuclear apocalypse , Eli ( Denzel Washington ) travels on foot toward the west coast of the former United States .
Along the way he demonstrates uncanny survival and fighting skills , hunting wildlife and swiftly defeating a group of desert bandits who try to ambush him .
Searching for water , he arrives in a ramshackle town rebuilt and overseen by Carnegie ( Gary Oldman ) .
Carnegie dreams of building more towns and of controlling the people by using the power of a certain book .
Henchmen scour the desolate landscape daily in search of it , but to no avail .
Carnegie also has control of a hidden water supply which he rations out to the townspeople .
In town Eli barters with a store owner , the Engineer ( Tom Waits ) , to recharge the battery of his portable music player .
While waiting , he goes across the street to the town bar , where a gang of bikers attack , but he quickly kills all fifteen .
Realizing Eli is a literate man like himself , Carnegie asks Eli to stay , making it clear that the offer is non - negotiable .
After Carnegie 's blind mistress Claudia ( Jennifer Beals ) gives Eli some food and water , Carnegie orders Claudia 's daughter Solara ( Mila Kunis ) to seduce Eli , but he turns her down .
While killing time , she finds his book .
Unperturbed , Eli offers to share his food with her , and before they eat , he says grace .
The following day , Solara repeats the prayer during breakfast with her mother , Carnegie overhears them and realizes Solara 's words relate to the book he has been seeking .
He soon forces Solara to tell him if Eli was reading a book , and realizes Eli 's book is the one he wants — a Bible .
Eli sneaks out of his room and Carnegie has his henchmen shoot at Eli , but the bullets seemingly just graze him , as if he is being protected .
Eli shoots most of Carnegie 's men and hits Carnegie in the leg with a ricocheted shotgun blast .
Solara , having left the town , leads Eli to a cave which is the town 's water supply , hoping she can accompany him on his travels .
Eli traps her inside and continues on alone .
Solara escapes and soon finds herself ambushed by two bandits who attempt to rape her , but Eli reappears and kills them .
As they continue on , Eli explains his mission to Solara .
According to Eli , his book is the last remaining copy of the Bible , as all other copies were intentionally destroyed following the nuclear war thirty years ago .
He says he was led to the book by a voice in his head , which then directed him to travel westward to a place where it would be safe .
The voice assured him that he would be protected and guided on his journey .
Eventually , Eli and Solara investigate an isolated house .
They fall into a trap , but manage to allay the suspicions of the residents , George ( Michael Gambon ) and Martha ( Frances de la Tour ) , who invite them in for tea .
When Eli realizes that the couple are cannibals , they attempt to leave just as Carnegie and his henchmen arrive .
In the ensuing shootout , George , Martha and many of Carnegie 's men are killed .
While Eli and Solara are captured , Carnegie threatens to kill Solara unless Eli surrenders the Bible .
With the Bible now in his possession , Carnegie shoots Eli , leaving him for dead .
Solara escapes by strangling the driver of the truck she was in and throwing a hand grenade under another truck .
She then drives back towards the house to find Eli .
Rather than chase her , Carnegie returns to the town , since his sole remaining vehicle is running low on fuel .
Solara finds Eli , and they drive until they reach the Golden Gate Bridge , and then row to Alcatraz Island , where they find a group intent on preserving what they can of literature and music .
Eli tells the guards that he has a copy of the King James Version of the Bible .
Once inside , Eli , revealed to be blind , begins to dictate the Bible from memory to Lombardi ( Malcolm McDowell ) , the leader of the group .
Meanwhile , back in the town , the Engineer opens the locked Bible where Carnegie discovers , to his dismay , that it is in Braille , and orders Claudia to read it to him .
She pretends that she can not remember how to read it , telling Carnegie his leg wound has become infected and due to limited enforcers the people have begun to run amok .
At the sanctuary , Eli has died , but not before he finished reciting the entire book .
The printing press at Alcatraz begins producing copies of the Bible , and Lombardi places one on a bookshelf between the Torah and Tanakh on one side and the Quran on the other .
Solara , though offered sanctuary , chooses to return home , taking with her Eli 's machete and other possessions .
CAST * Denzel Washington as Eli * Gary Oldman as Carnegie
* Mila Kunis as Solara
* Ray Stevenson as Redridge * Jennifer Beals as Claudia
* Evan Jones as Martz
* Joe Pingue as Hoyt * Frances de la Tour as Martha * Michael Gambon as George
* Tom Waits as Engineer * Chris Browning as Hijack Leader * Malcolm McDowell as Lombardi ( uncredited )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
In May 2007 , Columbia Pictures and Warner Bros. signed the Hughes brothers to direct The Book of Eli , based on a script by Gary Whitta .
( The brothers had last directed the 2001 film From Hell . )
Subsequently , Anthony Peckham rewrote the script , and in September 2008 Denzel Washington won the lead role .
The following October , Gary Oldman was cast to star alongside Washington .
Principal photography began in February 2009 and took place in New Mexico .
Alcon Entertainment financed the film and co - produced with Silver Pictures .
Jeff Imada choreographed the complex fight scenes , which feature the Filipino martial art of Kali .
Washington trained for months with Dan Inosanto and Imada for his role .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film was released in North America on January 15 , 2010 in 3,111 theaters .
It took in $ 11,672,970—$3,752 per theater , its opening day .
By the end of its opening four - day holiday weekend it grossed $ 38,437,553—$12,355 per theater .
It ranked number two , behind Avatar .
On its second weekend , it placed third with Legion taking its number two place and grossed $ 15,732,493—$5,057 per theater .
By its third weekend it dropped down to number five and made $ 8,908,286—$2,897 per theater .
The film has come to gross $ 94,835,059 in the United States and Canada , and $ 62,256,659 in other markets , with an estimated worldwide total of $ 157,091,718 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 47 % of 201 critics have given the film a positive review , with a rating average of 5.4/10 .
The site 's consensus is that " It 's certainly uneven , and many viewers will find that its reach exceeds its grasp , but The Book of Eli finds the Hughes brothers injecting some fresh stylish fun into the kind of post - apocalyptic wasteland filmgoers have seen more than enough of lately . "
Based on 33 critics reviews , Metacritic ( another review aggregator ) has assigned the film a weighted average score of 53 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Todd McCarthy of Variety predicted " this will not be one of ...
Denzel Washington 's bigger grossers . "
Chicago Sun - Times critic Roger Ebert gave the film 3 of 4 stars and said of the film : " You wo n't be sorry you went .
It grips your attention , and then at the end throws in several WTF !
moments , which are a bonus . "
Reviewing the film for The A.V. Club , Scott Tobias graded the film a B , and wrote " At a time when theaters are experiencing a glut of doomsday scenarios , the Hughes ' ashen , bombed - out future world looks a little too familiar , no matter how crisply they present it .
But the showdown between Washington and a deliciously hammy Oldman complicates the film 's overt religiosity ... " .
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a D , calling it " a ponderous dystopian bummer that might be described as The Road Warrior without car chases , or The Road without humanity .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc on May 31 , 2010 in the UK and on June 15 , 2010 in the United States and Canada .
The DVD took the top spot on all three national home video market charts in its first week .
It premiered No . 1 on Home Media Magazine 's Rental Chart , the Nielsen VideoScan Blu - ray chart , and the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert Sales Chart , where it outdistanced its nearest competitor in sales by a 3 to 1 margin .
SEE ALSO
* Eli ( biblical figure )
* Beware the Book of Eli REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS