WATERMELON Citrullus lanatus is a plant species in the family Cucurbitaceae , a vine - like ( scrambler and trailer ) flowering plant originating in West Africa .
It is cultivated for its fruit .
The subdivision of this species into two varieties , watermelons ( Citrullus lanatus ( Thunb . )
var .
lanatus ) and citron melons ( Citrullus lanatus var .
citroides ( L. H. Bailey )
Mansf . )
, originated with the erroneous synonymization of Citrullus lanatus ( Thunb . )
Matsum . & Nakai and Citrullus vulgaris Schrad .
by L.H. Bailey in 1930 .
Molecular data including sequences from the original collection of Thunberg and other relevant type material , show that the sweet watermelon ( Citrullus vulgaris Schrad . ) and the bitter wooly melon Citrullus lanatus ( Thunb . )
Matsum .
& Nakai are not closely related to each other .
Since 1930 , thousands of papers have misapplied the name Citrullus lanatus ( Thunb . )
Matsum . & Nakai for the watermelon , and a proposal to conserve the name with this meaning was accepted by the relevant nomenclatural committee and confirmed at the International Botanical Congress in Shenzhen .
The bitter South African melon first collected by Thunberg has become naturalized in semiarid regions of several continents , and is designated as a " pest plant " in parts of Western Australia where they are called pig melon .
Watermelon ( Citrullus lanatus ) is a scrambling and trailing vine in the flowering plant family Cucurbitaceae .
The species was long thought to have originated in southern Africa , but this was based on the erroneous synonymization by L. H. Bailey ( 1930 ) of a South African species with the cultivated watermelon .
The error became apparent with DNA comparison of material of the cultivated watermelon seen and named by Linnaeus and the holotype of the South African species .
There is evidence from seeds in Pharao tombs of watermelon cultivation in Ancient Egypt .
Watermelon is grown in tropical and subtropical areas worldwide for its large edible fruit , also known as a watermelon , which is a special kind of berry with a hard rind and no internal division , botanically called a pepo .
The sweet , juicy flesh is usually deep red to pink , with many black seeds , although seedless varieties have been cultivated .
The fruit can be eaten raw or pickled and the rind is edible after cooking .
Considerable breeding effort has been put into disease - resistant varieties .
Many cultivars are available that produce mature fruit within 100 days of planting the crop .
COMMON NAMES
Section::::Common names .
In Botswana , this is known as lerotse and an ingredient in the local dish bogobe jwa lerotse .
* Tswana : Lekatane ( s ) , Makatane ( pl )
* Afrikaans : Karkoer , Bitterboela , Bitterwaatlemoen , Tsamma , Kolokwint , etc .
* English : Tsamma melon , Wild watermelon , Colocynth , etc .
* Nama : T'sama
* Zulu : Ikhabe , etc .
* Southern Sotho : Lehapu , etc .
Former names :
* Kaffir melon DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The watermelon is an annual that has a prostrate or climbing habit .
Stems are up to 3 m long and new growth has yellow or brown hairs .
Leaves are 60 to 200 mm long and 40 to 150 mm wide .
These usually have three lobes which are themselves lobed or doubly lobed .
Plants have both male and female flowers on 40-mm - long hairy stalks .
These are yellow , and greenish on the back .
This plant is listed on the Threatened Species Programme of the South African National Biodiversity Institute .
The watermelon is a large annual plant with long , weak , trailing or climbing stems which are five - angled ( five - sided ) and up to long .
Young growth is densely woolly with yellowish - brown hairs which disappear as the plant ages .
The leaves are large , coarse , hairy pinnately - lobed and alternate ; they get stiff and rough when old .
The plant has branching tendrils .
The white to yellow flowers grow singly in the leaf axils and the corolla is white or yellow inside and greenish - yellow on the outside .
The flowers are unisexual , with male and female flowers occurring on the same plant ( monoecious ) .
The male flowers predominate at the beginning of the season ; the female flowers , which develop later , have inferior ovaries .
The styles are united into a single column .
The large fruit is a kind of modified berry called a pepo with a thick rind ( exocarp ) and fleshy center ( mesocarp and endocarp ) .
Wild plants have fruits up to in diameter , while cultivated varieties may exceed .
The rind of the fruit is mid- to dark green and usually mottled or striped , and the flesh , containing numerous pips spread throughout the inside , can be red or pink ( most commonly ) , orange , yellow , green or white .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The bitter wooly melon was formally described by Carl Peter Thunberg in 1794 and given the name Momordica lanata .
It was reassigned to the genus Citrullus in 1916 by Japanese botanists Jinzō Matsumura and Takenoshin Nakai .
The sweet watermelon was formally described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 and given the name Cucurbita citrullus .
It was reassigned to the genus Citrullus in 1836 by the German botanist Heinrich Adolf Schrader .
The bitter wooly melon is the sister species of Citrullus ecirrhosus Cogn .
from South African arid regions , while the sweet watermelon is closer to Citrullus mucosospermus ( Fursa ) Fursa from West Africa and populations from Sudan .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The watermelon is a flowering plant that originated in northeast Africa , where it is found growing wild .
Citrullus colocynthis " has sometimes been considered to be a wild ancestor of the watermelon ; its native range extends from north and west Africa to west India .
Evidence of the cultivation of both C. lanatus and C. colocynthis in the Nile Valley has been found from the second millennium BC onward , and seeds of both species have been found at Twelfth Dynasty sites and in the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun .
In the 7th century , watermelons were being cultivated in India , and by the 10th century had reached China , which is today the world 's single largest watermelon producer .
The Moors introduced the fruit into Spain and there is evidence of it being cultivated in Córdoba in 961 and also in Seville in 1158 .
It spread northwards through southern Europe , perhaps limited in its advance by summer temperatures being insufficient for good yields .
The fruit had begun appearing in European herbals by 1600 , and was widely planted in Europe in the 17th century as a minor garden crop .
European colonists and slaves from Africa introduced the watermelon to the New World .
Spanish settlers were growing it in Florida in 1576 , and it was being grown in Massachusetts by 1629 , and by 1650 was being cultivated in Peru , Brazil and Panama , as well as in many British and Dutch colonies .
Around the same time , Native Americans were cultivating the crop in the Mississippi valley and Florida .
Watermelons were rapidly accepted in Hawaii and other Pacific islands when they were introduced there by explorers such as Captain James Cook .
Seedless watermelons were initially developed in 1939 by Japanese scientists who were able to create seedless triploid hybrids which remained rare initially because they did not have sufficient disease resistance .
Seedless watermelons became more popular in the 21st century , rising to nearly 85 % of total watermelon sales in the United States in 2014 .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Watermelons are tropical or subtropical plants and need temperatures higher than about to thrive .
On a garden scale , seeds are usually sown in pots under cover and transplanted into well - drained sandy loam with a pH between 5.5 and 7 , and medium levels of nitrogen .
Major pests of the watermelon include aphids , fruit flies and root - knot nematodes .
In conditions of high humidity , the plants are prone to plant diseases such as powdery mildew and mosaic virus .
Some varieties often grown in Japan and other parts of the Far East are susceptible to fusarium wilt .
Grafting such varieties onto disease - resistant rootstocks offers protection .
The US Department of Agriculture recommends using at least one beehive per acre ( 4,000 m per hive ) for pollination of conventional , seeded varieties for commercial plantings .
Seedless hybrids have sterile pollen .
This requires planting pollinizer rows of varieties with viable pollen .
Since the supply of viable pollen is reduced and pollination is much more critical in producing the seedless variety , the recommended number of hives per acre ( pollinator density ) increases to three hives per acre ( 1,300 m per hive ) .
Watermelons have a longer growing period than other melons , and can often take 85 days or more from the time of transplanting for the fruit to mature .
Farmers of the Zentsuji region of Japan found a way to grow cubic watermelons by growing the fruits in metal and glass boxes and making them assume the shape of the receptacle .
The cubic shape was originally designed to make the melons easier to stack and store , but cubic watermelons may be triple the price of normal ones , so appeal mainly to wealthy urban consumers .
Pyramid - shaped watermelons have also been developed and any polyhedral shape may potentially be used .
CULTIVAR GROUPS
Section::::Cultivar groups .
A number of cultivar groups have been identified : CITROIDES GROUP
Section::::Citroides group .
DNA data reveal that C. lanatus var .
citroides Bailey is the same as Thunberg 's bitter wooly melon , C. lanatus and also the same as C. amarus Schrad .
It is not a form of the sweet watermelon C. vulgaris and not closely related to that species .
The citron melon or makataan - a variety with sweet yellow flesh that is cultivated around the world for fodder , and the production of citron peel and pectin .
LANATUS GROUP Section::::Lanatus group .
C. caffer Schrad .
is a synonym of C. amarus Schrad .
The variety known as tsamma is grown for its juicy white flesh .
The variety was an important food source for travellers in the Kalahari Desert .
Another variety known as karkoer or bitterboela is unpalatable to humans , but the seeds may be eaten .
A small - fruited form with a bumpy skin has caused poisoning in sheep .
VULGARIS GROUP Section::::Vulgaris group .
This is Linnaeus 's sweet watermelon ; it has been grown for human consumption for thousands of years .
* C. lanatus mucosospermus ( Fursa ) Fursa
This West African species is the closest wild relative of the watermelon .
It is cultivated for cattle feed .
Additionally , other wild species have bitter fruit containing cucurbitacin .
C. colocynthis ( L. ) Schrad .
ex Eckl . & Zeyh . , C. rehmii De Winter , and C. naudinianus ( Sond . )
Hook.f .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
The more than 1200 cultivars of watermelon range in weight from less than 1 kg to more than ; the flesh can be red , pink , orange , yellow or white .
* The ' Carolina Cross ' produced the current world record for heaviest watermelon , weighing .
It has green skin , red flesh and commonly produces fruit between .
It takes about 90 days from planting to harvest .
*
The ' Golden Midget ' has a golden rind and pink flesh when ripe , and takes 70 days from planting to harvest .
* The ' Orangeglo ' has a very sweet orange flesh , and is a large , oblong fruit weighing .
It has a light green rind with jagged dark green stripes .
It takes about 90–100 days from planting to harvest .
*
The ' Moon and Stars ' variety was created in 1926 .
The rind is purple / black and has many small yellow circles ( stars ) and one or two large yellow circles ( moon ) .
The melon weighs .
The flesh is pink or red and has brown seeds .
The foliage is also spotted .
The time from planting to harvest is about 90 days .
*
The ' Cream of Saskatchewan ' has small , round fruits about in diameter .
It has a thin , light and dark green striped rind , and sweet white flesh with black seeds .
It can grow well in cool climates .
It was originally brought to Saskatchewan , Canada , by Russian immigrants .
The melon takes 80–85 days from planting to harvest .
*
The ' Melitopolski ' has small , round fruits roughly in diameter .
It is an early ripening variety that originated from the Astrakhan region of Russia , an area known for cultivation of watermelons .
The Melitopolski watermelons are seen piled high by vendors in Moscow in the summer .
This variety takes around 95 days from planting to harvest .
*
The ' Densuke ' watermelon has round fruit up to .
The rind is black with no stripes or spots .
It is grown only on the island of Hokkaido , Japan , where up to 10,000 watermelons are produced every year .
In June 2008 , one of the first harvested watermelons was sold at an auction for 650,000 yen ( US$ 6,300 ) , making it the most expensive watermelon ever sold .
The average selling price is generally around 25,000 yen ( $ 250 ) .
*
Many cultivars are no longer grown commercially because of their thick rind , but seeds may be available among home gardeners and specialty seed companies .
This thick rind is desirable for making watermelon pickles , and some old cultivars favoured for this purpose include ' Tom Watson ' , ' Georgia Rattlesnake ' , and ' Black Diamond ' .
VARIETY IMPROVEMENT Section::::Variety improvement .
Charles Fredric Andrus , a horticulturist at the USDA Vegetable Breeding Laboratory in Charleston , South Carolina , set out to produce a disease - resistant and wilt - resistant watermelon .
The result , in 1954 , was " that gray melon from Charleston " .
Its oblong shape and hard rind made it easy to stack and ship .
Its adaptability meant it could be grown over a wide geographical area .
It produced high yields and was resistant to the most serious watermelon diseases : anthracnose and fusarium wilt .
Others were also working on disease - resistant varieties ; J. M. Crall at the University of Florida produced " Jubilee " in 1963 and C. V. Hall of Kansas State University produced " Crimson sweet " the following year .
These are no longer grown to any great extent , but their lineage has been further developed into hybrid varieties with higher yields , better flesh quality and attractive appearance .
Another objective of plant breeders has been the elimination of the seeds which occur scattered throughout the flesh .
This has been achieved through the use of triploid varieties , but these are sterile , and the cost of producing the seed by crossing a tetraploid parent with a normal diploid parent is high .
Today , farmers in approximately 44 states in the United States grow watermelon commercially .
Georgia , Florida , Texas , California and Arizona are the United States ' largest watermelon producers .
This now - common fruit is often large enough that groceries often sell half or quarter melons .
Some smaller , spherical varieties of watermelon — both red- and yellow - fleshed — are sometimes called " icebox melons " .
The largest recorded fruit was grown in Tennessee in 2013 and weighed . !
colspan=2Major watermelon producers , 2016 ( millions of tonnes )
World
colspan=2 PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2016 , global production of watermelons was 117 million tonnes , with China alone accounting for 68 % of the total .
Secondary producers with more than 1 % of world production included Turkey , Iran , Brazil , Uzbekistan , Algeria , the United States , Russia , Egypt , Mexico , and Kazakhstan .
FOOD AND BEVERAGE Section::::Food and beverage .
Watermelons are a sweet , popular fruit of summer , usually consumed fresh in slices , diced in mixed fruit salads , or as juice .
Watermelon juice can be blended with other fruit juices or made into wine .
The seeds have a nutty flavor and can be dried and roasted , or ground into flour .
In China , the seeds are eaten at Chinese New Year celebrations .
In Vietnamese culture , watermelon seeds are consumed during the Vietnamese New Year 's holiday , Tết , as a snack .
Watermelon rinds may be eaten , but most people avoid eating them due to their unappealing flavor .
They are used for making pickles , sometimes eaten as a vegetable , stir - fried or stewed .
The Oklahoma State Senate passed a bill in 2007 declaring watermelon as the official state vegetable , with some controversy about whether it is a vegetable or a fruit .
Citrullis lanatus , variety caffer , grows wild in the Kalahari Desert , where it is known as tsamma .
The fruits are used by the San people and wild animals for both water and nourishment , allowing survival on a diet of tsamma for six weeks .
In Southern Russia , they are sometimes preserved by fermenting them together with sauerkraut , much like the apples .
NUTRIENTS
Section::::Nutrients .
Watermelon fruit is 91 % water , contains 6 % sugars , and is low in fat ( table ) .
In a 100 gram serving , watermelon fruit supplies 30 calories and low amounts of essential nutrients ( table ) .
Only vitamin C is present in appreciable content at 10 % of the Daily Value ( table ) .
Watermelon pulp contains carotenoids , including lycopene .
The amino acid citrulline is produced in watermelon rind .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Tsamma juice , brand of watermelon juice * List of fruits
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS