PASTEURIZED EGGS
Pasteurized eggs are eggs that have been pasteurized in order to reduce the risk of food - borne illness in dishes that are not cooked or are only lightly cooked .
They may be sold as liquid egg products or pasteurized in the shell .
RATIONALE Section::::Rationale .
The 2013 United States Food and Drug Administration Food Code defines regular shell eggs as a potentially hazardous food , i.e. , " a food that requires time / temperature control for safety ( TCS ) to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation . "
All egg products sold in the U.S that are pasteurized due to the risk of food - borne illnesses are done per U.S. Department of Agriculture rules .
They also do not allow any egg products to be sold without going through the process of pasteurization .
They also do not recommend eating shell eggs that are raw or undercooked due to the possibility that Salmonella bacteria may be present .
Because of the risk of food - borne illness caused by Salmonella bacteria that may be present in raw eggs , the U.S. Department of Agriculture requires a safe - handling advisory statement on all packages of raw shell eggs that are not treated to destroy Salmonella as follows : " Safe Handling Instructions : To prevent illness from bacteria :
Keep eggs refrigerated , cook eggs until yolks are firm , and cook foods containing eggs thoroughly . "
SALMONELLOSIS
Section::::Salmonellosis .
The primary risk associated with eggs is food - borne illness caused by Salmonella enteritidis bacteria .
Salmonella enteritidis is a dangerous bacterium that can be transferred to humans through ingestion of raw or undercooked eggs .
Nearly four out of five Salmonella - related foodborne illness cases share a common vehicle : raw or undercooked shell eggs .
Salmonellosis , the illness that a Salmonella infection causes , is characterized by nausea , vomiting , abdominal cramps , diarrhea , fever , and headache .
The onset of its symptoms begins between six hours and 72 hours after the consumption of food contaminated with Salmonella bacteria .
As few as 15 bacterial cells can cause food - borne illness .
While the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate there are one million cases of salmonellosis per year in the US leading to 19,000 hospitalizations and 380 deaths , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) estimates that only 79,000 cases each year are the result of consuming eggs contaminated with Salmonella , of which only 30 result in death .
In Europe , all hens are required to be vaccinated against salmonellosis .
Eggs are not washed or refrigerated since condensation could lead to salmonellosis contamination .
In the US , it is important to keep eggs refrigerated since not all hens are vaccinated .
AVIAN FLU VIRUS
Section::::Avian flu virus .
The process of pasteurizing eggs also destroys avian flu virus .
FOOD CODE
COMPLIANCE Section::::Food code compliance .
The 2013 FDA Food Code states that in serving highly susceptible populations ( preschool age children ; older adults ; individuals with compromised immune systems ; and individuals who receive meals through custodial care - giving environments such as child or adult day care centers , kidney dialysis centers , hospitals , or nursing homes ): " Pasteurized eggs or egg products shall be substituted for raw eggs in the preparation of Foods such as Caesar salad , hollandaise or Béarnaise sauce , mayonnaise , meringue , eggnog , ice cream , egg - fortified beverages and recipes in which more than one egg is broken and the eggs are combined . "
The FDA Food Code has gained adoption by health jurisdictions throughout the U.S. PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
As distinct from whole shell eggs , " egg products " are defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as " eggs that are removed from their shells for processing .
"
The processing of egg products includes breaking eggs , filtering , mixing , stabilizing , blending , pasteurizing , cooling , freezing or drying , and packaging .
This is done at U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA)-inspected plants .
Egg products include whole eggs , whites , yolks and various blends with or without non - egg ingredients that are processed and pasteurized and may be available in liquid , frozen , and dried forms .
This is achieved by heating the products to a specified temperature for a specified period .
PASTEURIZED SHELL EGGS
Section::::Pasteurized shell eggs .
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture , in - shell pasteurized eggs may be used safely without cooking .
For example , they may safely be consumed raw ( as in raw cookie dough or eggnog ) or in undercooked forms ( such as a sunny - side up egg ) .
Many food service and health care providers use these eggs to prevent cross - contamination in their kitchens .
HISTORY Section::::History .
By traditional pasteurization methods , heating a raw shell egg to a high enough temperature to achieve pasteurization would also cook the egg .
However , beginning in the early 1980s , Dr. James P. Cox and R.W. Duffy Cox of Lynden , Washington , began developing methods to pasteurize shell eggs .
In the early 1990s , the Coxes were introduced to L. John Davidson .
Davidson recognized the market need and opportunity for a safer egg option for consumers and food operations around the country .
Davidson acquired a license agreement on the technology from the Cox Family and formed Pasteurized Egg Corporation to introduce safe egg technology to the consumer marketplace .
The process for pasteurizing shell eggs has been patented .
Currently , National Pasteurized Eggs Inc. of Lansing , Illinois , owns Dr. Cox 's patent to the pasteurization process .
Only National Pasteurized Eggs Inc. can provide pasteurized shell eggs produced through these patented processes .
The eggs can be found in all U.S. states under the brand Davidson 's Safest Choice ® , introduced in 2003 .
PROCESS Section::::Process .
Pasteurizing eggs in their shells is achieved through a technique that uses precise time and temperature zones within water baths .
Pasteurizing eggs in their shells can also be achieved through a process that involves treatment with ozone and reactive oxygen species under high and low pressures , followed by replacement with an inert gas , such as nitrogen .
Currently , shell eggs pasteurized using the heating technique are the only commercially available pasteurized eggs .
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture , Shell eggs can be pasteurized by a processor if FDA accepted the process for the destruction of Salmonella .
Pasteurized shell eggs are now available at some grocery stores and must be kept refrigerated to retain quality .
The equipment to pasteurize shell eggs is n't available for home use , and it is very difficult to pasteurize shell eggs at home without cooking the contents of the egg .
After pasteurization , the eggs are coated with food - grade wax to maintain freshness and prevent environmental contamination and stamped with a blue " P " in a circle to distinguish them from unpasteurized eggs .
QUALITY Section::::Quality .
Opinion on the quality of pasteurized shell eggs is mixed , and sometimes depends on whether comparisons involve experimental processes or products that are actually on the market .
Taste tests noted deficiencies in pasteurized shell eggs experimentally produced via a microwaved pasteurization process ( not for commercially available pasteurized shell eggs ) .
Using commercially available pasteurized shell eggs , a San Francisco Chronicle reporter noted a " slight chemical taste " for pasteurized shell eggs , and a Lifescript blogger noted a " barely detectable " flavor and aroma difference and stated the eggs were " worth " their price .
Relish magazine states that pasteurized shell eggs " look like real eggs , act like real eggs and taste like real eggs .
"
" Independent taste tests conducted in Good Housekeeping kitchens have not been able to tell any differences between raw and pasteurized eggs , " according to Food Safety News , and in two out of three tastings a Chicago Tribune reporter preferred pasteurized eggs flavor over farmers market eggs .
According to International Business Times , demand for pasteurized shell eggs within the food service industry is strong because , as of 2008 , " states such as California , Iowa , Michigan , Wisconsin and Illinois have adopted the most recent FDA Food Code , in which pasteurized shell eggs shall be substituted for raw eggs to at - risk groups . "
EXEMPTION Section::::Exemption .
The FDA Food Code exempts pasteurized shell eggs from the definition of " time / temperature control for safe food .
" requirement to carry a safe handling advisory statement .
The U.S. Department of Agriculture also states , " In - shell pasteurized eggs may be used safely without cooking . "
SEE ALSO
* Pasteurization REFERENCES