WACHOVIA
Wachovia was a diversified financial services company based in Charlotte , North Carolina .
Before its acquisition by Wells Fargo and Company in 2008 , Wachovia was the fourth - largest bank holding company in the United States , based on total assets .
Wachovia provided a broad range of banking , asset management , wealth management , and corporate and investment banking products and services .
At its height , it was one of the largest providers of financial services in the United States , operating financial centers in 21 states and Washington , D.C. , with locations from Connecticut to Florida and west to California .
Wachovia provided global services through more than 40 offices around the world .
The acquisition of Wachovia by Wells Fargo was completed on December 31 , 2008 , after a government - forced sale to avoid Wachovia 's failure .
The Wachovia brand was absorbed into the Wells Fargo brand in a process that lasted three years : on October 15 , 2011 , the last Wachovia branches in North Carolina were converted to Wells Fargo .
BUSINESS LINES Section::::Business lines .
Wachovia was the product of a 2001 merger between the original Wachovia Corporation , based in Winston - Salem , North Carolina ; and Charlotte - based First Union Corporation .
The company was organized into four divisions : General Bank ( retail , small business , and commercial customers ) , Wealth Management ( high - net - worth , personal trust , and insurance business ) , Capital Management ( asset management , retirement , and retail brokerage services ) , and Corporate and Investment Bank ( capital markets , investment banking , and financial advisory ) .
It served retail brokerage clients under the name Wachovia Securities nationwide as well as in six Latin American countries , and investment banking clients in selected industries nationwide .
In 2009 , Wachovia Securities was the first Wachovia business to be converted to the Wells Fargo brand , when the business became Wells Fargo Advisors .
Calibre was an independent consultant that was hired by Wachovia for the Family Wealth Group to research managers .
The group no longer uses Calibre .
The company 's corporate and institutional capital markets and investment banking groups operated under the Wachovia Securities brand , while its asset management group operated under the Evergreen Investments brand until 2010 , when the Evergreen fund family merged with Wells Fargo Advantage Funds , and institutional and high - net - worth products merged with Wells Capital Management and its affiliates .
Wachovia 's private equity arm operated as Wachovia Capital Partners .
Additionally , the asset - based lending group operated as Wachovia Capital Finance .
ORIGIN OF CORPORATE NAME Section::::Origin of corporate name .
Wachovia ( ) has its origins in the Latin form of the Austrian name Wachau .
When Moravian settlers arrived in Bethabara , North Carolina , in 1753 , they gave this name to the land they acquired , because it resembled the Wachau valley along the Danube River .
The area formerly known as Wachovia now makes up most of Forsyth County , and the largest city is now Winston - Salem .
FIRST UNION Section::::First Union .
First Union was founded as Union National Bank on June 2 , 1908 , a small banking desk in the lobby of a Charlotte hotel by H.M. Victor .
The bank merged with First National Bank and Trust Company of Asheville , North Carolina , in 1958 to become First Union National Bank of North Carolina .
First Union Corporation was incorporated in 1967 .
By the 1990s , it had grown into a Southern regional powerhouse in a strategy mirroring its longtime rival on Tryon Street in Charlotte , NCNB ( later NationsBank and now Bank of America ) .
In 1995 , however , it acquired First Fidelity Bancorporation of Newark , New Jersey ; at one stroke becoming a major player in the Northeast .
Its Northeastern footprint grew even larger in 1998 , when it acquired CoreStates Financial Corporation of Philadelphia .
One of CoreStates ' predecessors , the Bank of North America , had been the first bank proposed , chartered and incorporated in America on December 31 , 1781 .
A former Bank of North America branch in Philadelphia remains in operation today as a Wells Fargo branch WACHOVIA Section::::Wachovia .
Wachovia Corporation began on June 16 , 1879 in Winston - Salem , North Carolina as the Wachovia National Bank .
The bank was co - founded by James Alexander Gray and William Lemly .
In 1911 , the bank merged with Wachovia Loan and Trust Company , " the largest trust company between Baltimore and New Orleans " , which had been founded on June 15 , 1893 .
Wachovia grew to become one of the largest banks in the Southeast partly on the strength of its accounts from the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company , which was also headquartered in Winston - Salem .
On December 12 , 1986 , Wachovia purchased First Atlanta .
Founded as Atlanta National Bank on September 14 , 1865 , and later renamed to First National Bank of Atlanta , this institution was the oldest national bank in Atlanta .
This purchase made Wachovia one of the few companies with dual headquarters : one in Winston - Salem and one in Atlanta .
In 1991 , Wachovia entered the South Carolina market by acquiring South Carolina National Corporation , founded as the Bank of Charleston in 1834 .
In 1998 , Wachovia acquired two Virginia - based banks , Jefferson National Bank and Central Fidelity Bank .
In 1997 , Wachovia acquired both 1st United Bancorp and American Bankshares Inc , giving its first entry into Florida .
In 2000 , Wachovia made its final purchase , which was Republic Security Bank .
MERGER OF FIRST UNION AND WACHOVIA Section::::Merger of First Union and Wachovia .
On April 16 , 2001 , First Union announced it would acquire Wachovia , through the exchange of approximately $ 13.4 billion in First Union stock .
First Union offered two of its shares for each Wachovia share outstanding .
The announcement was made by Wachovia chairman L.M. " Bud " Baker Jr. and First Union chairman Ken Thompson .
Baker would become chairman of the merged bank , while Thompson would become president and CEO .
First Union was the nominal survivor , and the merged bank was based in Charlotte and adopted First Union 's corporate structure and retained First Union 's pre-2001 stock price history .
However , as an important part of the merger , the merged bank took Wachovia 's name and stock ticker symbol .
This merger was viewed with great surprise by the financial press and security analysts .
While Wachovia had been viewed as an acquisition candidate after running into problems with earnings and credit quality in 2000 , the suitor shocked analysts as many speculated that Wachovia would be sold to Atlanta - based SunTrust .
The deal met with skepticism and criticism .
Analysts , remembering the problems with the CoreStates acquisition , were concerned about First Union 's ability to merge with another large company .
Winston - Salem 's citizens and politicians suffered a blow to their civic pride because the merged company would be based in Charlotte .
The city of Winston - Salem was concerned both by job losses and the loss of stature from losing a major corporate headquarters .
First Union was concerned by the potential deposit attrition and customer loss in the city .
First Union responded to these concerns by placing the wealth management and Carolinas - region headquarters in Winston - Salem .
On May 14 , 2001 , SunTrust announced a rival takeover bid for Wachovia , the first hostile takeover attempt in the banking sector in many years .
In its effort to make the deal appeal to investors , SunTrust argued that it would provide a smoother transition than First Union and offered a higher cash price for Wachovia stock than First Union .
Wachovia 's board of directors rejected SunTrust 's offer and supported the merger with First Union .
SunTrust continued its hostile takeover attempt , leading to a bitter battle over the summer between SunTrust and First Union .
Both banks increased their offers for Wachovia , took out newspaper ads , mailed letters to shareholders , and initiated court battles to challenge each other 's takeover bids .
On August 3 , 2001 , Wachovia shareholders approved the First Union deal , rejecting SunTrust 's attempts to elect a new board of directors for Wachovia and ending SunTrust 's hostile takeover attempt .
Another problem concerned each bank 's credit card division .
In April 2001 , Wachovia agreed to sell its $ 8 billion credit card portfolio to Bank One .
The cards , which would have still been branded as Wachovia , would have been issued through Bank One 's First USA division .
First Union had sold its credit card portfolio to MBNA in August 2000 .
After entering into negotiations , the new Wachovia agreed to buy back its portfolio from Bank One in September 2001 and resell it to MBNA .
Wachovia paid Bank One a $ 350 million termination fee .
On September 4 , 2001 , First Union and Wachovia officially merged .
In order to prevent a repeat of the CoreStates problems , the new Wachovia took its time phasing - in the conversion of legacy Wachovia computer systems to First Union systems .
The company first began converting systems in the southeast United States ( where both banks had branches ) , before moving to First Union 's branches in the Northeast , which only had to change their signs to reflect the new company name and logo .
This process ended on August 18 , 2003 , almost 2 years after the merger took place .
In comparison to the CoreStates purchase , the merger of First Union and Wachovia was billed as a success by analysts .
The company 's deliberate pace of conversion seems to have prevented any large - scale customer attrition .
In fact , Wachovia was ranked number one in customer satisfaction among major banks by the University of Michigan 's annual American Customer Satisfaction Index for every year after the merger .
When Wachovia and First Union merged , Charlotte 's One , Two , and Three First Union buildings became One , Two , and Three Wachovia Center ( respectively ) , and the 55-story First Union Financial Center in downtown Miami became the Wachovia Financial Center .
The merger also affected the names of the indoor professional sports arenas in Philadelphia and Wilkes - Barre , Pennsylvania .
Formerly known as the First Union Center and the First Union Spectrum ( both Philadelphia ) and First Union Arena ( Wilkes - Barre ) , they were renamed the Wachovia Center ( now known as Wells Fargo Center ) , Wachovia Spectrum , and Wachovia Arena at Casey Plaza ( now known as Mohegan Sun Arena at Casey Plaza ) , respectively .
MERGER AND ACQUISITION HISTORY Section::::Merger and acquisition history .
The following is an illustration of the company 's major mergers and acquisitions and historical predecessors ( up to the Wachovia and First Union merger of 2001 ) .
The list is not comprehensive .
ACQUISITIONS Section::::Acquisitions .
Between 2001 and 2006 , Wachovia bought several other financial services companies in an attempt to become a national bank and comprehensive financial services company .
PRUDENTIAL SECURITIES Section::::Prudential Securities .
Wachovia Securities and the Prudential Securities Division of Prudential Financial , Inc. combined to form Wachovia Securities LLC on July 1 , 2003 .
Wachovia owned a controlling 62 % stake , while Prudential Financial retained the remaining 38 % .
At the time , the new firm had client assets of $ 532.1 billion , making it the nation 's third largest full service retail brokerage firm based on assets .
METROPOLITAN WEST SECURITIES Section::::Metropolitan West Securities .
On October 22 , 2003 , Wachovia announced it would acquire Metropolitan West Securities , an affiliate company of Metropolitan West Financial .
This acquisition added a portfolio of over $ 50 billion of securities on loan to the Wachovia Global Securities Lending division .
SOUTHTRUST
Section::::SouthTrust .
On November 1 , 2004 , Wachovia completed the acquisition of Birmingham , Alabama - based SouthTrust Corporation , a transaction valued at $ 14.3 billion .
The merger created the largest bank in the southeast United States , the fourth largest bank in terms of holdings , and the second largest in terms of number of branches .
Integration was completed by the end of 2005 .
FAILED MBNA PURCHASE Section::::Failed MBNA purchase .
In June 2005 , Wachovia negotiated to purchase monoline credit card company MBNA .
However , the deal fell through when Wachovia balked at MBNA 's purchase price .
Within a week of the deal 's collapse , MBNA entered into an agreement to be purchased by Wachovia 's chief rival , Bank of America .
Wachovia received $ 100 million out of this deal , the result of an agreement Wachovia predecessor First Union made in 2000 when it sold its credit card portfolio to MBNA .
This agreement required MBNA to pay this sum if it were ever sold to a competitor .
In late 2005 Wachovia announced that it would end its relationship with MBNA and start up its own credit card division so that the bank could issue its own Visa cards .
WESTCORP Section::::Westcorp .
Westcorp , Western Financial Bank 's parent company , WFS Financial Inc. and Wachovia announced a proposed acquisition by Wachovia in September 2005 .
Westcorp and WFS Financial Inc. shareholders approved the acquisition on Jan. 6 , 2006 and on March 1 , 2006 , the merger was complete .
This acquisition made Wachovia the ninth largest auto finance lender in the competitive U.S. auto finance market and provided Wachovia with a small retail and commercial banking presence in Southern California .
On February 12 , 2007 , the former 19 Western Financial Bank branches opened under the Wachovia name .
These branches became the launching point for a much larger Wachovia presence in California with the acquisition and integration of World Savings Bank in 2007 .
GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL /
WORLD SAVINGS BANK Section::::Golden West Financial / World Savings Bank .
Wachovia agreed to purchase Golden West Financial for a little under $ 25.5 billion on May 7 , 2006 .
This acquisition gave Wachovia an additional 285-branch network spanning 10 states .
Wachovia greatly raised its profile in California , where Golden West held $ 32 billion in deposits and operated 123 branches .
Golden West , which operated branches under the name World Savings Bank , was the second largest savings and loan in the United States .
The business was a small savings and loan in the San Francisco Bay area when it was purchased in 1963 for $ 4 million by Herbert and Marion Sandler .
Golden West specialized in option ARMs loans , marketed under the name " Pick - A - Pay . "
These loans gave the borrower a choice of payment plans , including the option to defer paying a part of the interest owed , which was then added onto the balance of the loan .
In 2006 , Golden West Financial was named the " Most Admired Company " in the mortgage services business by Fortune magazine .
By the time Wachovia announced its acquisition , Golden West had over $ 125 billion in assets and 11,600 employees .
By October 2 , 2006 Wachovia had closed the acquisition of Golden West Financial Corporation .
The Sandlers agreed to remain on the board at Wachovia .
The Sandlers sold their firm at the top of the market , saying that they were growing older and wanted to devote themselves to philanthropy .
A year earlier , in 2005 , World Savings lending had started to slow , after more than quadrupling since 1998 .
Some current and former Wachovia officials say that the merger was agreed to in days and that it was impossible to conduct a thorough vetting of World Savings ' loans .
They noted that the creditworthiness of World Savings borrowers edged down from 2004 to 2006 , while Pick - A - Pay borrowers had credit scores well below the industry average for traditional loans .
World Savings lending volume dipped again in 2006 shortly after the sale to Wachovia was initiated .
In 2007 , after the merger , World Savings , now known as Wachovia Mortgage began to attract more borrowers by taking a step that some regulators were starting to frown upon , and which the former World Savings management had been resisting for years : it allowed borrowers to make monthly payments based on an annual interest rate of just 1 percent .
While Wachovia Mortgage continued to scrutinize borrowers ' ability to manage increased payments , the move to rock - bottom rates lured customers whose financial reliability was harder to verify .
More than 70 % of the Pick - A - Pay loans were made in California , Florida and Arizona , where home prices have declined severely .
New York Times reporter Floyd Norris has called World Savings a " ticking timebomb " that created " zombie homeowners " .
While Wachovia Chairman and CEO G. Kennedy " Ken " Thompson had described Golden West as a " crown jewel " , investors did not react positively to the deal at the time .
Analysts have since said that Wachovia purchased Golden West at the peak of the US housing boom .
Wachovia Mortgage 's mortgage - related problems led to Wachovia suffering writedowns and losses that far exceeded the price paid in the acquisition , ending up in the fire - sale of Wachovia to Wells Fargo .
A. G.
EDWARDS Section::::A. G. Edwards .
On May 31 , 2007 , Wachovia announced plans to purchase A. G. Edwards for $ 6.8 billion to create the United States ' second largest retail brokerage firm .
The acquisition closed on October 1 , 2007 .
In early March 2008 Wachovia began to phase out the AG Edwards brand in favor of a unified Wachovia Securities .
HISTORICAL DATA ( 2000–2008 ) Section::::Historical data ( 2000–2008 ) .
Wachovia , excluding subsidiaries , was the fourth largest bank at the end of 2008 .
2007–2009 FINANCIAL CRISIS Section::::2007–2009 financial crisis .
Exposed to risky loans , such as adjustable rate mortgages acquired during the acquisition of Golden West Financial in 2006 , Wachovia began to experience heavy losses in its loan portfolios during the subprime mortgage crisis .
In the first quarter of 2007 , Wachovia reported $ 2.3 billion in earnings , including acquisitions and divestitures .
However , in the second quarter of 2008 , Wachovia reported a much larger than anticipated $ 8.9 billion loss .
On June 2 , 2008 , Wachovia chief executive officer Ken Thompson was forced to retire .
He 'd been head of Wachovia since 2000 , while it was still known as First Union .
The board replaced him on an interim basis with Chairman Lanty Smith .
Smith had already replaced Thompson as chairman a month earlier .
On July 9 , 2008 , Wachovia hired Treasury Undersecretary Bob Steel as chief executive in hopes that his experience would lead the company out of its difficulties .
GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION Section::::Government intervention .
After Steel took over , he insisted that Wachovia would stay independent .
However , its stock price plunged 27 percent on September 26 due to the seizure of Washington Mutual the previous night .
On the same day , several businesses and institutional depositors withdrew money from their accounts in order to drop their balances below the $ 100,000 insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) – an event known in banking circles as a " silent run . "
Ultimately , Wachovia lost a total of $ 5 billion in deposits that day — about one percent of the bank 's total deposits .
The large outflow of deposits attracted the attention of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency , which regulates national banks .
Federal regulators pressured Wachovia to put itself up for sale over the weekend .
Had Wachovia failed , it would have been a severe drain on the FDIC 's insurance fund due to its size ( it operated one of the largest branch networks on the East Coast ) .
As business halted for the weekend , Wachovia was already in FDIC - brokered talks with Citigroup and Wells Fargo .
Wells Fargo initially emerged as the frontrunner to acquire the ailing Wachovia 's banking operations , but backed out due to concerns over Wachovia 's commercial loans .
With no deal in place as September 28 dawned , regulators were concerned that Wachovia would n't have enough short - term funding to open for business the next day .
In order to obtain enough liquidity to do business , banks usually depend on short - term loans to each other .
However , the markets had been so battered by a credit crisis related to the housing bubble that banks were skittish about making such loans .
Under the circumstances , regulators feared that if customers pulled out more money , Wachovia would n't have enough liquidity to meet its obligations .
This would have resulted in a failure dwarfing that of WaMu .
When FDIC Chairwoman Sheila Bair got word of Wachovia 's situation , she initially decided to handle the situation like she 'd handled WaMu a day earlier .
Under this scenario , the Comptroller of the Currency would have seized Wachovia 's banking assets ( Wachovia Bank , N.A. and Wachovia Bank of Delaware , N.A. ) and placed them under the receivership of the FDIC .
The FDIC would have then sold the banking assets to the highest bidder .
Bair called Steel on September 28 and told him that the FDIC would be auctioning off Wachovia 's banking assets .
Bair felt this would best protect the small banks .
However , several Federal regulators , led by New York Fed President Tim Geithner , felt such a course would be politically unjustifiable so soon after WaMu 's seizure .
After a round of mediation between Geithner and Bair , the FDIC declared that Wachovia was " systemically important " to the health of the economy , and thus could not be allowed to fail .
It was the first time the FDIC had made such a determination since the passage of a 1991 law allowing the FDIC to handle large bank failures on short notice .
Later that night , in an FDIC - brokered deal , Citigroup agreed to buy Wachovia 's retail banking operations in an " open bank " transfer of ownership .
The transaction would have been facilitated by the FDIC , with the concurrence of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve and the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the President .
The FDIC 's open bank assistance procedures normally require the FDIC to find the cheapest way to rescue a failing bank .
However , when a bank is deemed " systemically important , " the FDIC is allowed to bypass this requirement .
Steel had little choice but to agree , and the decision was announced on the morning of September 29 , roughly 45 minutes before the markets opened .
From this point on , Citigroup became the source of liquidity allowing Wachovia to continue to operate until the acquisition was complete .
In its announcement , the FDIC stressed that Wachovia did not fail and was not placed into receivership .
In addition , the FDIC said that the agency would absorb Citigroup 's losses above $ 42 billion ; Wachovia 's loan portfolio was valued at $ 312 billion .
In exchange for assuming this risk , the FDIC would receive $ 12 billion in preferred stock and warrants from Citigroup .
The transaction would have been an all - stock transfer , with Wachovia Corporation stockholders to have received stock from Citigroup , valuing Wachovia stock at about one dollar per share for a total transaction value of about $ 2.16 billion .
Citigroup would have also assumed Wachovia 's senior and subordinated debt .
Citigroup intended to sell ten billion dollars of new stock on the open market to recapitalize its purchased banking operations .
The proposed closing date for the Wachovia purchase was by the end of the year , 2008 .
Wachovia expected to continue as a publicly traded company , retaining its retail brokerage arm , Wachovia Securities and Evergreen mutual funds .
At the time , Wachovia Securities had 14,600 financial advisers and managed more than $ 1 trillion , third in the U.S. after Merrill Lynch and Citigroup 's Smith Barney .
The announcement drew some criticism from Wachovia stockholders who felt the dollar - per - share price was too cheap .
Some of them planned to try to defeat the deal when it came up for shareholder approval .
However , institutional investors such as mutual funds and pension funds controlled 73 percent of Wachovia 's stock ; individual stockholders would have had to garner a significant amount of support from institutional shareholders to derail the sale .
Also , several experts in corporate dealmaking told The Charlotte Observer that such a strategy is very risky since federal regulators helped broker the deal .
One financial expert told the Observer that if Wachovia 's shareholders voted the deal down , the OCC could have simply seized Wachovia and placed it into the receivership of the FDIC , which would then sell it to Citigroup .
Had this happened , Wachovia 's shareholders risked being completely wiped out .
ACQUISITION
BY WELLS FARGO Section::::Acquisition by Wells Fargo .
Though Citigroup was providing the liquidity that allowed Wachovia to continue to operate , Wells Fargo and Wachovia announced on October 3 , 2008 , that they had agreed to merge in an all - stock transaction requiring no government involvement .
Wells Fargo announced it had agreed to acquire all of Wachovia for $ 15.1 billion in stock .
Wachovia preferred the Wells Fargo deal because it would be worth more than the Citigroup deal and keep all of its businesses intact .
Also , there is far less overlap between the banks , as Wells Fargo is dominant in the West and Midwest compared to the redundant footprint of Wachovia and Citibank along the East Coast .
Both companies ' boards unanimously approved the merger on the night of October 2 .
Citigroup explored its legal options and demanded that Wachovia and Wells Fargo cease discussions , claiming that Wells Fargo engaged in " tortious interference " with an exclusivity agreement between Citigroup and Wachovia .
That agreement states in part that until October 6 , 2008 " Wachovia shall not , and shall not permit any of its subsidiaries or any of its or their respective officers , directors , [ ... ] to [ ... ] take any action to facilitate or encourage the submission of any Acquisition Proposal . " .
Citigroup convinced Judge Charles E. Ramos of the Supreme Court of the State of New York , New York County to grant a preliminary injunction temporarily blocking the Wells Fargo deal .
This ruling was later overturned by Judge James M. McGuire of the Supreme Court of the State of New York , Appellate Division , First Department , partly because he believed Ramos did not have the right to rule on the case in Connecticut .
On October 9 , 2008 , Citigroup abandoned its attempt to purchase Wachovia 's banking assets , allowing the Wachovia - Wells Fargo merger to go through .
However , Citigroup pursued $ 60 billion in claims , $ 20 billion in compensatory and $ 40 billion in punitive damages , against Wachovia and Wells Fargo for alleged violations of the exclusivity agreement .
Wells Fargo settled this dispute with Citigroup Inc. for $ 100 Million on November 19 , 2010 .
Citigroup may have been pressured by regulators to back out of the deal ; Bair endorsed Wells Fargo 's bid because it removed the FDIC from the picture .
Geithner was furious , claiming that the FDIC 's reversal would undermine the government 's ability to quickly rescue failing banks .
However , Geithner 's colleagues at the Fed were not willing to take responsibility for selling Wachovia .
The Federal Reserve unanimously approved the merger with Wells Fargo on October 12 , 2008 .
The combined company retained the Wells Fargo name , and was based in San Francisco .
However , Charlotte remained as the headquarters for the combined company 's East Coast banking operations , and Wachovia Securities remained in Charlotte .
Three members of the Wachovia board joined the Wells Fargo board .
The merger created the largest branch network in the United States .
In filings unsealed two days before the merger approval in a New York federal court , Citigroup argued that its own deal was better for U.S taxpayers and Wachovia shareholders .
It said that it had exposed itself to " substantial economic risk " by stating its intent to rescue Wachovia after less than 72 hours of due diligence .
Citigroup had obtained an exclusive agreement in order to protect itself .
Wachovia suffered a $ 23.9 billion loss in the third quarter .
In September 2008 , the Internal Revenue Service issued a notice providing tax breaks to companies that acquire troubled banks .
According to analysts , these tax breaks were worth billions of dollars to Wells Fargo .
Vice Chairman Bill Thomas of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission indicated that these tax breaks may have been a factor in Wells Fargo 's decision to purchase Wachovia .
Wells Fargo 's purchase of Wachovia closed on December 31 , 2008 .
By the time Wells Fargo completed the acquisition of Wachovia , the byline " A Wells Fargo company " was added to the logo .
CONTROVERSIES
IDENTITY
THEFT
NEGLIGENCE
Section::::Controversies .
Section::::Identity theft negligence .
A May 2007
New York Times article described Wachovia 's negligence in screening and taking action against companies linked with identity theft .
With stolen identities , the companies used unsigned checks to remove funds from personal Wachovia bank accounts .
In total , Wachovia accepted $ 142 million in unsigned checks from " companies that made unauthorized withdrawals from thousands of accounts " , collecting millions of dollars in fees from them .
According to Pat Meehan , a U.S. attorney for Eastern District of Pennsylvania , Wachovia received " thousands of warnings that it was processing fraudulent checks , but ignored them " .
On April 25 , 2008 , Wachovia agreed to pay up to $ 144 million to end the investigation without admitting wrongdoing .
The investigation found that Wachovia had failed to conduct suitable due diligence , and that it would have discovered the thefts if it had followed normal procedures .
The penalty is one of the largest ever demanded by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency .
MEXICAN DRUG MONEY LAUNDERING
Section::::Mexican drug money laundering .
In April 2008 , the Wall Street Journal reported that federal prosecutors had initiated a probe into Wachovia and other U.S. banks for aiding drug money laundering by Mexican and Colombian money - transfer companies , also known as casas de cambio .
These companies help Mexican immigrants in the United States send remittances back to family in Mexico , but it is widely known that they also present a significant money - laundering risk .
However , not only is it a " lucrative industry " that is able to charge high fees , but Wachovia also viewed it as a way to gain a foothold in the Hispanic banking market .
In March 2010 , Wachovia admitted " serious and systemic " violations of the Bank Secrecy Act that allowed Mexican and Colombian drug cartels to launder $ 378.4 billion between 2004 and 2007 , the " largest violation of the Bank Secrecy Act " .
It negotiated a deferred prosecution agreement with the Justice Department to resolve criminal charges for willfully failing to set up an effective anti - money - laundering program .
It agreed to forfeit $ 110 million and pay a $ 50 million fine to the U.S. Treasury .
Reports in Bloomberg Businessweek in June 2010 and The Observer in April 2011 shed light on the extent to which Wachovia went to turn a blind eye , including by ignoring the warnings and suspicious activity reports ( SARs ) of its London - based director of anti - money - laundering .
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
* G. Kennedy Thompson 2001–2008
* Robert K. Steel 2008 SEE ALSO * Bank of Baltimore
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* ( Archive )
* Yahoo ! –
Wachovia Corporation Company Profile