BELGIUM –
NETHERLANDS RELATIONS Belgian – Dutch relations refer to interstate relations between the Belgium and the Netherlands .
It can be seen as one of the closest international relationships in existence , marked by shared history , culture , institutions and language , extensive people - to - people links , aligned security interests , sporting tournaments and vibrant trade and investment cooperation .
Relations were established after Belgium became independent from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1839 .
Both nations are great allies with cultural similarities and close cooperation between both governments .
The language spoken in Belgium is known as Nederlands / Dutch , is the most - spoken language in both countries .
Approximately 35,000 Belgian nationals live in the Netherlands , while there are around 111,000 Dutch nationals in Belgium .
Thanks to their shared history and the Dutch language , the Netherlands and Belgium have strong cultural ties .
In 1980 , the two countries set up the Dutch Language Union to encourage greater cooperation in the field of Dutch language and literature .
The Union offers services including language tools like dictionaries and a language advice service , education in and about Dutch , literature and reading skills , and activities promoting the Dutch language in Europe and the rest of the world .
The Union also works to showcase the two countries ' shared cultural heritage .
Belgium has an embassy in The Hague and consulates in Amsterdam , Maastricht , Nijmegen , Roosendaal , Rotterdam , Terneuzen , Vlissingen and Winsum , while the Netherlands has an embassy in Brussels and consulates in Antwerp , Ghent , Liège and Namur .
Both nations are members of the European Union and NATO and , together with Luxembourg , form the Low Countries and the Benelux economic union .
Many television programmes are made mutually between the two countries , such as
So You Think You Can Dance and Benelux '
Next Top Model .
The two countries were joint hosts of the UEFA Euro 2000 football tournament and unsuccessfully made a bid to host the 2018 World Cup football .
VISITS
STATE VISITS
* 1938 : Visit of King Leopold in Amsterdam .
* 1960 : Visit of Queen Juliana to Brussels .
* 2016 : State Visit of King Philippe to King Willem Alexander , the King and Queen were bestowed Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion .
OTHER Section::::Visits .
Section::::Other .
The Duke of Brabant was invited to attend the inauguration of King Willem Alexander and Queen mathilde
is a godmother of Princess Alexia of the Netherlands .
Queen Beatrix attended the state Funerals of King Baudouin and Queen Fabiola .
Queen Juliana attended the Wedding of King Baudoin and Queen Fabiola in 1960 .
COUNTRY COMPARISON Section::::Country comparison . ! !
Belgium !
Netherlands Metro )
SEE ALSO * Benelux * Foreign relations of Belgium
* Foreign relations of the Netherlands
* Belgium – Netherlands border REFERENCES