CEPHALOPOD INK Cephalopod ink is a dark pigment released into water by most species of cephalopod , usually as an escape mechanism .
All cephalopods , with the exception of the Nautilidae and the Cirrina ( deep - sea octopuses ) , are able to release ink .
The ink is released from the ink sacs ( located between the gills ) and is dispersed more widely when its release is accompanied by a jet of water from the siphon .
Its dark colour is caused by its main constituent , melanin .
Each species of cephalopod produces slightly differently coloured inks ; generally , octopuses produce black ink , squid ink is blue - black , and cuttlefish ink is a shade of brown .
A number of other aquatic molluscs have similar responses to attack , including the gastropod clade known as sea hares .
INKING BEHAVIOURS
Section::::Inking behaviours .
Two distinct behaviours have been observed in inking cephalopods .
The first is the release of large amounts of ink into the water by the cephalopod in order to create a dark , diffuse cloud ( much like a smoke screen ) that can obscure the predator 's view , allowing the cephalopod to make a rapid retreat by jetting away .
The second response to a predator is to release pseudomorphs ( " false bodies " ) , smaller clouds of ink with a greater mucus content , which allows them to hold their shape for longer .
These are expelled slightly away from the cephalopod in question , which will often release several pseudomorphs and change colour ( blanch ) in conjunction with these releases .
The pseudomorphs are roughly the same volume as and look similar to the cephalopod that released them , and many predators have been observed attacking them mistakenly , allowing the cephalopod to escape ( this behaviour is often referred to as the " blanch - ink - jet manoeuvre " ) .
Furthermore , green turtle ( Chelonia mydas ) hatchlings that have been observed mistakenly attacking pseudomorphs released by Octopus bocki have subsequently ignored conspecific octopuses .
However , many cephalopod predators ( for instance moray eels ) have advanced chemosensory systems , and some anecdotal evidence suggests that compounds ( such as tyrosinase ) found in cephalopod ink can irritate , numb or even deactivate such apparatus .
Unfortunately , few controlled experiments have been conducted to substantiate this .
Cephalopod ink is nonetheless generally thought to be more sophisticated than a simple " smoke screen " ; the ink of a number of squid and cuttlefish has been shown to function as a conspecific chemical alarm .
Octopuses have also been observed squirting ink at snails or crabs approaching their eggs .
Numerous cuttlefish species add a coat of ink to their eggs , presumably to camouflage them from potential predators .
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES Section::::Physical properties .
Sepia officinalis ink forms a polidisperse suspension composed by spheric particles with a size between 80 and 150 nm ( measured by TRPS and SEM ) .
The particles have a density of , which may be due to the amount of metals that has in its composition ( 4.7 % in weight ) .
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
Section::::Chemical composition .
Cephalopod ink contains a number of chemicals in a variety of different concentrations , depending on the species .
However , its main constituents are melanin and mucus .
It can also contain , among other things , tyrosinase , dopamine and L - DOPA , as well as small amounts of free amino acids , including taurine , aspartic acid , glutamic acid , alanine and lysine .
USE BY HUMANS Section::::Use by humans .
Cephalopod ink has , as its name suggests , been used in the past as ink for pens and quills ; the Greek name for cuttlefish , and the taxonomic name of a cuttlefish genus , Sepia , is associated with the brown colour of cuttlefish ink ( for more information , see sepia ) .
Modern use of cephalopod ink is generally limited to cooking , where it is used as a food colouring and flavouring , for example in pasta and sauces .
For this purpose it is generally obtainable from fishmongers or gourmet food suppliers .
The ink is extracted from the ink sacs during preparation of the dead cephalopod , usually squid , and therefore contains no mucus .
Recent studies have shown that cephalopod ink is toxic to some cells , including tumor cells .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* An article on harvesting squid ink