CALL OF DUTY :
MODERN WARFARE 2 Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 is a first - person shooter video game developed by Infinity Ward and published by Activision .
It was released worldwide on November 10 , 2009 for Microsoft Windows , the PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 .
A version for OS X was developed by Aspyr and released on May 20 , 2014 .
The Xbox 360 version was made backward compatible for the Xbox One in 2018 .
It is the sixth installment of the Call of Duty series and the direct sequel to , continuing the same storyline .
It was released in conjunction with two other Call of Duty games : for the Nintendo DS , and , a port of Call of Duty 4 adapted by Treyarch for the Wii console .
The game 's campaign follows the Task Force 141 , a special forces unit fronted by Captain Soap MacTavish , as they hunt Vladimir Makarov , leader of the Russian Ultranationalist party , and the United States Army Rangers , who are defending the country from a Russian invasion .
The game 's main playable characters are Sergeant Gary " Roach " Sanderson , of the 141 , and Private James Ramirez , of the Army Rangers , with Captain MacTavish becoming playable later in the campaign .
An expansive multiplayer mode is featured in the game , with several new features and modes that were not seen in its predecessor .
Development for the game began in 2008 , when it was still known as Call of Duty 6 .
It uses the IW 4.0 engine , an improved version of Call of Duty 4s IW 3.0 .
Infinity Ward was inspired by real - life conflicts when developing the campaign mode .
They initially tested the multiplayer mode by playing an in - house beta version of the game .
Modern Warfare 2 was officially announced on February 11 , 2009 .
Teasing of the game began in March , with short trailers being released for the game and , eventually , a full reveal trailer .
The multiplayer mode was revealed shortly after .
Two downloadable content packs were released for it post - release , each containing four new multiplayer maps .
Modern Warfare 2 has been critically acclaimed by various gaming websites as one of the greatest first - person shooters of all time .
Within 24 hours of release , the game sold approximately 4.7 million copies in North America and the United Kingdom .
As of early 2018 , the game has sold over 25 million copies and still has an active multiplayer base with third party servers being hosted in Melbourne , Australia .
In addition to its release , a comic book series based on one of the game 's characters was also produced , entitled .
Despite the game 's success , it was subject to , with one surrounding a playable level that had the player carry out a terror attack on an airport .
A sequel , , was released in 2011 and finishes the Modern Warfare storyline .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The gameplay of Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 revolves around fast - paced gunfights against enemy combatants .
The player controls a soldier , and can perform several actions , including jump , sprint , crouch , lay prone , and aim down their gun 's iron sights .
When the player is shot by an enemy , blood will splatter their heads - up display ( HUD ) , denoting that they have taken damage ; if the player avoids gunfire by taking cover , their health will recover .
The HUD also displays other information , such as a compass , a mini - map , and the player 's current ammunition count .
The game features traditional guns , including assault rifles , shotguns , handguns , and sniper rifles .
The player will be given specific guns at the beginning of each level , but may switch them out with another gun they find .
Some guns have attachments , such as suppressors , and heartbeat sensors .
The player can also use grenades and flashbangs when faced with a large group of enemies , as well as a knife for close quarters combat .
In some levels , the player will be given special equipment , such as night vision goggles , or a laser designator .
Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 has three different game modes : Campaign , Spec Ops , and Multiplayer .
Campaign is a single - player mode where the player completes eighteen levels connected by an overarching plot .
Each level features a series of objectives to fulfill , and the player will often switch characters between levels .
If the player dies during a level , they will respawn at the most recent checkpoint .
Levels can be played on one of four difficulties , and each level can be replayed after it has been completed .
Spec Ops mode features twenty - three additional levels that can be played individually or cooperatively with a partner .
These levels provide specific challenges , such as defusing three bombs within a short period of time .
If one player is shot down while playing cooperatively , they will begin crawling , and can shoot enemies with a handgun .
If they are not revived by the other player , then they will die and fail the level .
There are five tiers of Spec Ops levels , with each tier harder than the previous .
Only the first tier is available from the beginning , as later tiers can be unlocked with enough stars .
The player earns stars by completing the levels on one of three difficulties , with the number of stars earned corresponding to the difficulty chosen .
Multiplayer mode allows players to compete against each other in team - based and deathmatch - based game types on various maps .
Each game type has an objective that requires unique strategies to complete .
If the player kills three or more players in a row without dying , they achieve a " killstreak " , which gives the player a tactical advantage during a match .
These include a Predator missile , a sentry gun , and a " tactical nuke " .
Alternatively , if the player dies several times without a kill , they will be rewarded with a " deathstreak " bonus , which evens the match for the player .
A match ends when either a team or player has reached a predefined number of points , or the allotted time expires in which case the team or player with the most points wins .
The player 's performance in the Multiplayer is tracked with experience points , which can be earned by killing opposing players , completing objectives , or by completing a match .
As the player gains experience , they advance in level , unlocking new weapons .
The player will also unlock perks , which modify gameplay elements such as unlimited sprint and increased bullet damage .
PLOT CHARACTERS AND SETTING Section::::Plot .
Section::::Characters and setting .
During the single - player campaign , the player controls five different characters from a first - person perspective .
The player primarily controls Sergeant Gary " Roach " Sanderson , a British member of an international Special Forces unit named Task Force 141 .
In addition to Roach , the player will also assume control of Private First Class Joseph Allen ( Troy Baker ) and Private James Ramirez of the United States Army Rangers .
The now Captain John " Soap " MacTavish ( Kevin McKidd ) serves as a senior member of Task Force 141 , acting as Roach 's superior officer and becomes the playable character in the final three missions of the game .
Lastly , the player briefly assumes the role of an astronaut stationed on the International Space Station during the height of the war between the United States and Russia .
The game 's non - playable characters ( NPCs ) feature prominently in the story :
For Task Force 141 , Lieutenant Simon " Ghost " Riley ( Craig Fairbrass ) , who conceals his face with a skull print balaclava serves as Soap 's second in command .
For the United States Army Rangers , Sergeant Foley ( Keith David ) , along with his subordinate , Corporal Dunn ( Barry Pepper ) , is initially Joseph Allen 's squad leader , and becomes James Ramirez 's squad leader later in the story .
Lieutenant General Shepherd ( Lance Henriksen ) is the commander of the United States Army Rangers and Task Force 141 .
Other supporting characters returning from Call of Duty 4 include Captain John Price ( Billy Murray ) , MacTavish 's former commanding officer in the British Special Air Service who was imprisoned in Russia , and Russian informant " Nikolai " ( Sven Holmberg ) .
STORY Section::::Story .
Despite the efforts of the U.S. Marine Corps and British Special Air Service in the previous game , the ultranationalists seize control of the Russian Federation , making Imran Zakhaev a martyr and straining diplomatic relations with the United States .
Shortly after this , an ultranationalist named Vladimir Makarov , Zakhaev 's right - hand man , begins a campaign of revenge against the West , by committing acts of terrorism on European and International soil over the course of five years .
In 2016 , Private First Class Joseph Allen participates in a military operation alongside United States Army Rangers stationed in Afghanistan , by assisting them in taking back a city from insurgents .
Impressed by Allen 's capabilities , General Shepherd recruits him into Task Force 141 .
While Allen prepares for an upcoming assignment , Captain John " Soap " MacTavish and Sergeant Gary " Roach " Sanderson infiltrate a Russian airbase in the Tian Shan mountains to retrieve an Attack Characterization System ( ACS ) module from a downed American satellite .
Allen is soon sent on an undercover mission for the CIA , joining Vladimir Makarov in a mass shooting at an airport in Moscow , Russia .
Afterwards , Makarov kills Allen , aware of his true identity , and leaves his body behind to spark a war between Russia and the United States .
Outraged by an apparent American - sponsored terrorist attack , Russia retaliates by launching a surprise invasion on the East Coast of the United States .
With no evidence of Makarov 's involvement in the airport massacre , Task Force 141 is sent to Rio de Janeiro to capture his arms dealer , Alexandro Rojas .
They succeed and learn that Makarov 's nemesis is being held in a Russian gulag .
They assault the gulag and rescue the prisoner :
Captain Price , Soap 's previous commanding officer in the SAS .
Price agrees to help Task Force 141 but insists on ending the United States ' war with Russia .
After raiding a Russian port , Price launches a ballistic missile towards Washington , D.C. and detonates it in the upper atmosphere .
The resulting EMP blast disables all electronic devices across the Eastern Seaboard , giving the Americans a much - needed advantage .
Soldiers fighting in D.C. narrowly avoid a bombing run of Russian - occupied strategic structures by the United States Air Force , lighting green flares atop the White House to show that the city remains in American hands .
Meanwhile , Task Force 141 narrows Makarov 's hiding place to two locations ; an aircraft boneyard in Afghanistan , and Makarov 's safehouse on the Georgian - Russian border .
Roach and Simon " Ghost " Riley successfully raid the safehouse , but are then betrayed and murdered by Shepherd .
It soon becomes evident that Shepherd is the catalyst of the Russian - U.S. war , intent on cementing his status as a national hero and prolonging military action as revenge for the men he lost to the nuclear device five years earlier , during the .
Price and Soap learn of Shepherd 's betrayal and escape a battle between his and Makarov 's forces at the boneyard .
After learning of Shepherd 's mountain base in Afghanistan from Makarov , Price and Soap raid the base to take revenge on Shepherd in a suicide mission .
The duo pursue Shepherd 's boat , and Price manages to shoot down his helicopter extraction as he and Soap tumble over a waterfall .
A dazed Soap stumbles towards the crash site and attempts to kill Shepherd , but is stabbed in the chest .
While Price arrives and engages Shepherd in a fist fight , Soap pulls the knife out of his chest and throws it at Shepherd , killing him .
Nikolai arrives and helps Price evacuate Soap for medical attention .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Modern Warfare 2 was originally announced as Call of Duty 6 .
The game was first announced under the title Call of Duty :
Modern Warfare 2 by Activision on December 3 , 2008 .
Activision subsequently retracted its announcement , stating that any information about an upcoming Call of Duty game was " speculative . "
Infinity Ward then asserted that it had not officially confirmed its latest project at that time .
On February 11 , 2009 , Activision officially announced Modern Warfare 2 and set a tentative release date for " Holiday 2009 .
" The game was tested in an internal beta by the development team .
While both Call of Duty 4 and had been preceded by public multiplayer betas , no such beta was released for Modern Warfare 2 because it was determined that , according to Community Manager Robert Bowling , no public beta was needed unless the internal beta did not provide adequate feedback .
Infinity Ward announced on October 2009 that the PC version of Modern Warfare 2 would not support the use of user - run dedicated servers or in - game console commands .
This announcement was received poorly by some members of the PC community , eventually instigating a response from Infinity Ward in an attempt to put the community at ease .
During brainstorming sessions , an idea came forth on what if the ending of Modern Warfare was a loss , leading to the sequel .
In an interview with Jesse Stern , he talked to producers of Infinity Ward with ideas such as " outbreaks , viruses , chemical warfare , and even outlandish things such as aliens and the living dead .
"
Stern mentioned having the game based on real - life conflicts before they halted further planning at first due to events in the 2008 South Ossetia war and in the Mumbai terrorist attacks .
GAME ENGINE Section::::Game engine .
The game utilizes the in - house IW 4.0 game engine , which is claimed to be a generation beyond the capabilities of the engine used in Call of Duty 4 .
Although proprietary , the game is based on an unspecified i d Tech engine , and can accommodate larger worlds , enhanced graphic detail , and more efficient rendering .
Infinity Ward has addressed the issue of enemies that continually respawn at different points of a level .
The developer demonstrated that the game engine uses a " dynamic AI " , which has replaced the infinite respawn system and allows enemies to act more independently .
These " smarter " enemies are designed to actively seek out and drive the player forward through a level , and can break away from set behaviors such as following a designated route in order to attack .
The player can not depend on enemies to be found in the same locations as a previous play - through because enemies will behave differently each time a level is played .
AUDIO Section::::Audio .
On August 20 , 2009 , Robert Bowling revealed through Twitter that Kevin McKidd , Craig Fairbrass , Barry Pepper , Keith David , and Glenn Morshower were confirmed voice actors for the game .
It was later confirmed that McKidd would voice the protagonist , " Soap " MacTavish .
Fairbrass , who voiced Gaz in Call of Duty 4 , provided voice work for " Ghost " .
Billy Murray reprised his role as Captain Price from Call of Duty 4 .
Rapper 50 Cent provided voice work for the Special Ops and multiplayer modes , portraying " one of the squad [ member ] voices . "
The main theme of Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 was provided by Hollywood composer Hans Zimmer , while the rest of the score was composed by Lorne Balfe .
The soundtrack was released on June 1 , 2010 .
The iTunes page for the soundtrack incorrectly lists Zimmer as the soundtrack 's only composer .
MARKETING AND RELEASE Section::::Marketing and release .
On March 25 , 2009 , a teaser trailer for the game was revealed at the Game Developer Choice Awards ceremony in San Francisco .
The teaser was posted on Infinity Ward 's website , and released on the Xbox Live Marketplace and the PlayStation Network a short time later .
A second teaser was released on May 10 , 2009 and showed gameplay features such as snowmobile driving and underwater actions .
The teaser announced that the game would be " revealed " on TNT during the NBA Eastern Conference Finals on May 24 , 2009 .
The " reveal " was the first full - length trailer , which debuted extended sequences of actual in - game scenes and combat ; the trailer was subsequently made available on the Modern Warfare 2 official website , which was kept updated for the occasion .
A fourth trailer was released on July 27 , 2009 , and showed the first footage of the game 's multiplayer mode .
On October 4 , 2009 , a second full - length cinematic trailer was released and revealed that part of the game would take place in a war - torn Washington , D.C. On July 21 , 2009 , Infinity Ward 's Robert Bowling revealed through Twitter that a Modern Warfare 2 controller was in the works .
Peripherals manufacturer Mad Catz was contracted by Activision to create a line of Modern Warfare 2 controllers and accessories for all platforms that the game would be available on .
Activision stated , in its quarterly earnings report , that pre - orders for the game had broken a company record ; more copies of Modern Warfare 2 had been pre - ordered than any other game that the company had published before .
In September 2009 , Monster Energy teamed up with Activision to bring special redeemable codes on the Monster Energy website , where people may submit codes included in Monster Energy packs to redeem items such as Xbox 360 Premium Themes and a Modern Warfare 2 Map Pack code .
TITLE Section::::Title .
The original teaser trailer confirmed that the game 's title of Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 was officially shortened to just Modern Warfare 2 .
After photographs of the official retail boxes were posted by Robert Bowling , Activision confirmed that the standard - edition Modern Warfare 2 packaging would feature the Call of Duty brand logo in order to reflect the game 's association with the Call of Duty franchise .
It is speculated that the decision was influenced by findings that brand awareness for the game was significantly lower without the Call of Duty logo .
However , the developers still prefer to simply call the game Modern Warfare 2 as they consider it a new IP .
The menus in the game also refer to the title as simply Modern Warfare 2 .
RETAIL VERSIONS
Section::::Retail versions .
Modern Warfare 2 was released in four different retail versions across the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 platforms : Standard , Hardened , Veteran , and Prestige .
The standard version consists of the game and an instructional manual , and is the only version available for the Microsoft Windows platform .
The Hardened Edition consists of the game and manual ( which are packaged in a steel book case ) , an art book , and a token that allows one to download Call of Duty Classic , a hi - definition version of the original Call of Duty game , from Xbox Live Arcade or the PlayStation Store ( Classic was released individually on December 2 , 2009 ) .
The Prestige Edition contains all of the elements of the Hardened Edition , but also includes a set of fully functioning night vision goggles , imprinted with the Modern Warfare 2 logo , and a stand modeled after the head of the character " Soap " MacTavish .
The goggles are powered by five AA batteries and can see up to 50 feet in absolute darkness .
On September 15 , 2009 , Activision and Microsoft jointly announced a special , limited Modern Warfare 2 version of the Xbox 360 with a 250 GB hard disk .
The unit is highlighted by special game product branding and includes two wireless controllers and a headset .
This is the first Xbox 360 to come with a 250 GB hard drive .
On September 18 , UK and rep of Ireland retailer GAME announced a Veteran Edition of Modern Warfare 2 would be exclusive to rep of Ireland and UK .
It will come with a 12 " ( 30.5 cm ) tall statue of " Soap " MacTavish with interchangeable arms and weapons ; has the same contents as the Hardened Edition .
In September 2009 , a Veteran Statue Bundle of Modern Warfare 2 was posted on the EB Games website and is available for all platforms .
Modern Warfare 2 was ported to OS X by Aspyr years after the game 's original release .
This version was released on May 20 , 2014 , alongside the OS X port for .
The Xbox 360 version of Modern Warfare 2 was made backward compatible with the Xbox One on August 28 , 2018 .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
Activision announced that two downloadable map packs would be released for Modern Warfare 2 .
At E3 2009 , Microsoft stated that these map packs would first be made available for the Xbox 360 via Xbox Live before they would be released for other platforms .
Robert Bowling stated that the community response to the game and the first ten downloadable map packs would be used in designing other potential map packs .
The first map pack , titled the " Stimulus Package , " was released first for Xbox Live on March 30 , 2010 and for PlayStation Network and PC on May 4 , 2010 in North America .
The pack contains five maps : reincarnations of the Crash and Overgrown maps from Call of Duty 4 , and three new maps : Bailout , a multi - level apartment complex ; Storm , an industrial park littered with heavy machinery ; and Salvage , an abandoned car junkyard in the middle of the snow .
Within 24 hours of its release , it was downloaded over one million times .
Within the first week it had been downloaded 2.5 million times , breaking Xbox Live DLC records .
In addition to integrating the maps into all existing game types , the Stimulus Package adds two new game modes , randomizing the built - in game types in either normal or hardcore mode .
Activision released the second downloadable map pack , titled the " Resurgence Package " , exclusively for Xbox Live on June 3 , 2010 in North America .
This release was followed by the PlayStation Network and PC versions on July 6 in North America and on July 7 worldwide .
The package includes five new multiplayer maps : reincarnations of the Strike and Vacant maps from Call of Duty 4 , and three new maps :
Carnival , a desolated amusement park ; Trailer Park , a mobile home park ; and Fuel , an oil refinery .
Both of the map packs were made available for purchase on OS X on May 20 , 2014 , when the OS X port of the game was released .
COMIC
Section::::Comic .
A six - part comic book mini - series related to the game has also been produced .
Announced by Robert Bowling on August 17 , 2009 , is focused on the backstory of the character Ghost , who appears in the video game as a member of Task Force 141 .
The series is published by WildStorm .
The first issue of the series debuted on November 11 , 2009 .
SHORT FILM Section::::Short film .
A fan - made prequel to Modern Warfare 2 , entitled , premiered at .
The video was produced by We Can Pretend , visual effects by The Junction , and was endorsed by Activision .
The first film , Find Makarov , was a non - canon fan made film .
Activision contacted We Can Pretend about the video and helped produce a second canon short film , Find Makarov : Operation Kingfish .
The prequel tells the story of how Task Force 141 first tried to capture Vladimir Makarov , who was known then as Kingfish .
It also tells how Soap got his facial scars , and how Price was captured and incarcerated in a gulag .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Modern Warfare 2 received universal critical acclaim , especially its console versions .
Reviewers praised the in - depth story mode , mini missions , and multiplayer .
1UP.com stated " Mixing real - world locations with
bombastic set - pieces MW2 continues the guided , thrill - ride experiences of its predecessor , and adds even more depth to its multiplayer offerings .
It might not have fixed all the problems from the first game , but there 's just so much quality content packed into this game that it will almost certainly be one of the most - played games in your library for a long time to come " .
Game Informer noted " Modern Warfare 2 is a masterpiece of careful iteration , with an unmatched presentation and a well of content that will take months to run dry " .
IGN commented " For those planning to check out everything Modern Warfare 2 has to offer – online competition , full co - op Spec Ops mode , as well as the campaign – you 're looking at a no - brainer purchase " .
GameTrailers stated " The air of unpredictability and the care that was paid to each separate element puts it in lofty company .
The multiplayer has n't received an overhaul , but considering most shooters are still playing catch - up with Call of Duty 4 , the tweaks and twists make it the best multiplayer shooting experience in the industry .
Few games manage to meet such high expectations " .
Computer and Video Games called the game " Loud , epic and incredibly polished , [ and ] this year 's biggest must - have shooter " .
Criticisms of the game are directed towards a variety of aspects , but focus on the short length of the single player campaign .
IGN 's Mark Bozon remarks that the single - player of " Modern Warfare 2 is surprisingly short , and does n't live up to the standard set by previous Call of Duty games .
" In addition , many reviewers have complained about the lack of innovation to the formula of the series .
Famitsu named Modern Warfare 2 as the number one game on the top 10 video games sold in 2009 , beating games such as , , Halo 3 and Grand Theft Auto IV .
It also gave the game a score of 39/40 , being one of the few Western games released in Japan to have the same score as Grand Theft Auto IV .
SALES AND REVENUE Section::::Sales and revenue .
According to preliminary sales figures from Activision , Modern Warfare 2 sold approximately 4.7 million units in the United States and the UK combined in the first 24 hours of its release .
The total revenue from first day sales in the U.S. and the UK was $ 310 million , making Modern Warfare 2 the biggest entertainment launch in history at the time , surpassing in revenue its predecessor , , as well as items from other media types .
After five days of sales , the game had earned revenue figures of $ 550 million worldwide .
As of January 18 , 2010 , it has taken over $ 1 billion in sales .
Activision also claims that Modern Warfare 2 had 8 million players online within the first five days , constituting the largest ' army ' of players in the world .
On March 8 , 2010 , Robert Bowling announced that the game had amassed 25 million unique players .
In June 2010 , Activision 's CFO Thomas Tippl revealed that the game had sold 20 million copies .
In August 2011 , Activision Publishing CEO Eric Hirshberg revealed that the game had sold 22 million copies .
A month later in September 2011 , Modern Warfare 3 producer Mark Rubin , said that the game 's sales are between 28 and 29 million .
In November 2013 , IGN put the game 's sales at 22.7 million .
According to the NPD Group , Modern Warfare 2 sold approximately 4.2 million units for the Xbox 360 and 1.87 million units for the PlayStation 3 in the U.S. during the month of November 2009 .
In Japan , Modern Warfare 2 sold 64,000 copies for the PlayStation 3 and 42,000 copies for the Xbox 360 in its first week of sales .
The game later sold 117,000 copies on the PlayStation 3 and 61,000 on the Xbox 360 .
Anita Frazier of the NPD Group reported in March 2010 that the game had sold slightly under 10 million copies in the U.S. alone .
The game is the second best - selling game of all time in both the UK and the U.S. After it became backward compatible with the Xbox One , the NPD Group reported that Modern Warfare 2 was the eighth - best selling video game in the United States during August 2018 .
It had sold more copies in that month than the then - most recent entry in the series , , which came out in November 2017 .
During the previous month , before becoming backward compatible , Modern Warfare 2 was at only number 321 on the best sellers list .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
Modern Warfare 2 received awards from various gaming sites and publications , it gained high praise from some video game magazines .
At the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards , Modern Warfare 2 received the Best Shooter and Best Multiplayer awards .
Both GameSpy and GameTrailers gave the game the Best Overall Game of 2009 award and received from GameTrailers overall six awards .
GameSpot and Metacritic , both gave it the Best Xbox 360 Game award , the Pakistani game reviewing site , PakGamers , has awarded Modern Warfare 2 with ' Best Xbox 360 Game of 2009 ' .
and from GameTrailers received the game the Best Multiplayer award including the Best First - Person Shooter award .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Various portions of the campaign have caused some , including the of a massacre carried out in a Russian airport , on the mission " No Russian " , the fourth mission in the game .
Anders Behring Breivik claims in his manifesto that he used this video game to perpetrate the 2011 Norway attacks .
Coop Norway , a chain of retail stores in Norway , removed the game from its shelves as a result of this attack .
A YouTube user claimed that two paintings in the multiplayer map Favela offended Muslims .
Activision removed the controversial paintings and apologized for its offense to Muslims .
The amended Favela map was added back into the Xbox 360 and PS3 versions of the game , however was permanently taken out of the PC version .
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS
Section::::Technical problems .
After the successful hack on the PlayStation 3 in January 2011 , some Modern Warfare 2 players on the PlayStation 3 have had their stats hacked or completely deleted .
Infinity Ward replied that their advice was to play in private games , waiting for Sony to fix the problems on the platform side , saying that they could not patch the security problem themselves .
NOTES AND REFERENCES Notes References BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS