ITV HUB
The ITV Hub ( formerly ITV Player ) is an online video on demand service accessible though the main ITV website itv.com .
The service offers a variety of programmes from homegrown programming to imports across ITV , ITV2 , ITVBe , ITV3 , ITV4 and CITV .
Some sports programming is available to watch again via the service , the 2010 FIFA World Cup and highlights being examples .
Some programmes , imports and movies are not currently available due to rights issues , and until the latest version , most children 's programming in particular was generally unavailable .
Programmes are available for 30 days on the site after being first shown on ITV .
The service was originally called ITV Catch Up but was then rebranded ' ITV Player ' on 5 December 2008 as part of ITV 's aim to create a recognisable and consistent brand for video - on - demand content across the web and TV .
ITV Player was also branded as ITV Net Player and referred to as the ITV Network Player in branding and communication around programming intended for consumption across the UK , such as on Virgin Media , before adopting the current name . , the service has over 1 million registered users .
On 23 November 2015 , ITV gave the app and website a revamp , it was renamed ' ITV Hub ' and was given a new look and logo .
WEB PLATFORMS Section::::Web platforms .
The service started out as a website before being extended to television and other platforms .
Initially the website version used Microsoft Silverlight as opposed to Adobe Flash ( used by BBC iPlayer and Channel 4 's 4oD ) and Windows Media Video .
ITV adopted Flash for its player on 15 September 2009 .
In November 2009 the website was revamped again improving navigation as well as making the site more visually appealing .
The service is free to use funded by pre- , mid- and post - roll adverts .
Previously users have been able to use ad - blocking software to skip the adverts shown .
During Summer 2010 , the ITV website was upgraded to detect ad - blocking software .
Video is sent at multiple bit rates and uses adaptive technology in the player to best determine rate based on users connection .
Improvements were made in June / July 2011 to the website version to incorporate subtitles and CITV programming .
The website version relaunched with a cleaner , less cluttered new look on Monday 22 August 2011 .
The new look seamlessly fits in with the redesigned itv.com and has upgraded search features , images and a new Flash video player designed to make playback more reliable .
In January 2012 , the site was due to be overhauled to offer paid - for content in addition to the existing free 30-day catch up , however this was delayed until 29 October 2012 .
Content that has only aired on ITV ( rather than also on ITV2 , 3 , 4 , or CITV ) is only available to viewers located in ITV plc regions ( in England , Wales , the Channel Islands , southern Scotland , and on UTV in Northern Ireland ) .
If the same programme was also broadcast in central and northern Scotland , then users located in those areas may be able to view it on the catch up service of STV .
The ITV Hub website will attempt to detect your location automatically , using that provided by your ISP .
On 6 June 2016 , ITV Hub replaced the UTV Player service in Northern Ireland , following the latter 's sale to ITV plc in February 2016 .
ITV HUB+ Section::::ITV Hub+ .
ITV brought out a paid subscription service called ITV Hub+ which enables viewers to watch and download shows without adverts .
While abroad in another EU member state , subscribers will continue to receive access but will be limited to catch - up .
TELEVISION PLATFORMS SONY BRAVIA Section::::Television platforms .
Section::::Sony Bravia .
As of July 2017 , ITV Player is available on YouView enabled Sony Bravia TVs .
BT TV Section::::BT TV .
In December 2008 , ITV Player was added to BT TV 's TV Replay service , the deal was ITV 's first with a set - top - box VOD operator .
It allows access to popular ITV , ITV2 , ITV3 and ITV4 shows up to 8 days after their transmission as well as a selection of archive shows .
FREESAT Section::::Freesat .
A place for a full version of ITV Player has been reserved on Freesat channel 903 .
A beta release was made available in December 2010 for Humax receivers , requiring the input of a code .
The beta was made public on 26 July 2011 , with support expected to be extended beyond Humax devices .
On 31 July 2012 , an update was released for Manhattan receivers which included support for ITV Player .
In November 2012 , both EchoStar and Samsung receivers also received ITV Player support .
Although the ITV Hub Player app is available to viewers around the UK on multiple platforms , it is not available to Freesat viewers using second genereration Freesat receivers if their regional variation is set using postcodes starting DG or TD .
It is not clear why this contradiction exists .
NOW TV / ROKU Section::::Now TV / Roku .
On 29 January 2014 , ITV announced it would make ITV Player available on Sky 's Now TV box .
It was later made available on the NowTV & Roku devices on 11 June 2014 .
SKY Section::::Sky .
On 30 January 2012 , it was announced that ITV Player would be added to Sky 's On Demand service on 31 January 2012 .
The service is accessible through the main on Demand menu as well as a dedicated ITV Player section .
ITV Player initially only offered archive content , with catch - up programming becoming available on 26 September 2012 .
SAMSUNG SMART TV & BLU
RAY PLAYERS Section::::Samsung Smart TV & Blu Ray Players .
On 6 July 2012 , it was announced that ITV Player had been made available on Samsung 's Smart TVs and Blu - ray players through their Samsung Smart TV service , for 2011 and later devices .
VIRGIN MEDIA Section::::Virgin Media .
On 8 January 2009 , it was announced that ITV Net Player would be added to Virgin Media 's digital cable TV service .
The deal allows Virgin Media 's 3.5 million TV customers to view over 40 hours of programming from ITV , ITV2 , ITV3 and ITV4 each week .
Popular shows such as Coronation Street and Emmerdale are all available for seven days after being broadcast as part of Virgin Media 's free Catch up TV service .
The service began a three - day deployment programme on 24 February 2009 .
Virgin Media 's viewers were able to choose from 500 hours of ITV comedies , documentaries and dramas , on demand through the TV Choice section , however the contract to supply archive content ended on 23 February 2013 .
YOUVIEW Section::::YouView .
ITV Player was one of four service available at the launch of YouView in July 2012 .
At launch the ITV Player app contained options to resume watching recent programmes and browse by channel , day and A - to - Z , but lacked integrated search and contained non - skippable adverts .
During 2013 , ITV intend to introduce paid - for content into ITV Player on YouView .
GAMES CONSOLES PLAYSTATION 3 Section::::Games consoles .
Section::::PlayStation 3 .
ITV Player was released on 14 December 2010 on PlayStation 3 via the PlayStation Network utilising the web - browser to distribute content rather than an app .
It was free and ad - funded with pre- , mid- and post-
roll video ads being sold and served by ITV .
Under the terms of the deal with Sony , STV , UTV and Channel Television were able to add their own equivalent services so they were also accessible from the PS3 platform on a similar basis to ITV Player .
After the re - brand to ITV Hub , the service is no longer available on the PS3 .
XBOX ONE AND XBOX 360
Section::::Xbox One and Xbox 360 .
ITV Hub was launched for Xbox One on Friday 10 February 2017 , this was made possible by a new Universal Windows Platform app which integrates with Windows 10 and Xbox One .
The STV Player app run by STV , who currently hold the ITV licence for Scotland , has been launched on Xbox 360 .
The STV Player app contains much of the content found on ITV Player and requires a Scottish postcode to be entered prior to use .
MOBILE PLATFORMS
Section::::Mobile platforms .
On 11 May 2011 , ITV chief executive Adam Crozier announced that a dedicated ITV Player application would be released on a " wide range of mobiles and tablets " during 2011 .
The app features programming from ITV , ITV2 , ITV3 and ITV4 for up to seven days after broadcast .
However content is only available to view in the UK and ITV programming is blocked in the STV and UTV regions .
A Wi - Fi connection is also required .
The mobile apps were developed by digital agency Candyspace .
During 2013 , ITV intend to introduce paid - for content into ITV Player across all mobile platforms .
ANDROID DEVICES Section::::Android devices .
An application for devices running Google 's Android operating system was released on 20 June 2011 .
The app requires Android 2.2 ( Froyo ) or higher and Adobe AIR .
Each show is broken up to feature non - skippable advert breaks .
Users are forced to register an email address to use the app to allow ITV to " keep you informed about improvements and other exciting developments at ITV . "
On 14 January 2013 , ITV Player 2.0 was released adding support for Android 3.x Gingerbread to 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich and a re - engineered user interface .
Due to Adobe not updating support for Android , Flash is not readily available for Android 4.1 Jelly Bean
so the existing ITV Player can not be used .
A new app was trialled but was only available on Samsung products and received poor reviews on Google Play Store .
Upon the release of the app on 9 May 2013 , Samsung entered into an exclusivity agreement with ITV , with the ITV Player app available exclusively on Samsung devices until 31 August .
ITV 's online product director , James Micklethwait , cited " fragmentation of the Android ecosystem " as the motive behind the deal .
New ITV hub does n't work with many android devices .
IOS DEVICES Section::::iOS devices .
An application for Apple 's iOS ( iOS 4.3 or later ) operating system and either the iPad ( 1st generation or later ) ,
iPhone ( 3GS or later ) and iPod Touch ( 3rd generation or later ) , was launched on 1 July 2011 .
In June 2013 , the iOS app was updated to add a trial premium section , allowing subscribers to watch catch - up content without advertising , as well as pay to view live streams of ITV3 and ITV4 .
Early reviews of the updated app on the App Store were generally negative , with users commenting that the subscription option provided poor value for money .
WINDOWS PHONE
Section::::Windows Phone .
As of May 2014 the ITV Player has been released for Windows Phone which is just like the Android and iOS versions .
However , the STV Player app run by STV , who currently hold the ITV licence for Scotland , has been launched on Windows Phone .
Users of the STV Player can input their postcode to verify they live in Scotland , thus allowing users who are visiting other regions of the UK , to use the app and view content .
The STV Player app contains much of the content found on ITV Player .
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
ITV does not syndicate its content to other providers such as YouTube and SeeSaw like Channel 4 or Channel 5 .
Although some ITV programmes can be seen on such services , this is where these services have negotiated rights with the production companies involved and not ITV .
The beta launch of the Virgin Media Player saw ITV programmes become available but Virgin Media have licensed ITV 's archive ( a separate service also available on ITV.com under the TV shows section ) which is not currently part of the ITV Player .
SPONSORSHIP Section::::Sponsorship .
Since March 2018 , Domino 's Pizza have sponsored the ITV Hub , being the platform 's first ever sponsor .
SEE ALSO * STV Player
* BBC iPlayer *
All 4 * My5 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS