FAN DEATH
Fan death is a well - known superstition in Korean culture , where it is thought that running an electric fan in a closed room with unopened or no windows will prove fatal .
Despite no concrete evidence to support the concept , belief in fan death persists to this day in Korea .
ORIGINS OF THE BELIEF Section::::Origins of the belief .
Where the idea came from is unclear , but fears about electric fans date almost to their introduction to Korea , with stories dating to the 1920s and 1930s warning of the risks of nausea , asphyxiation , and facial paralysis from the new technology .
One conspiracy theory is that the South Korean government created or perpetuated the myth as propaganda to curb the energy consumption of South Korean households during the 1970s energy crisis , but Slate reports that the myth is much older than that – dating almost as far back as the introduction of electric fans in Korea , and cites a 1927 article about " Strange Harm from Electric Fans " .
PROPOSED CAUSES HYPERTHERMIA ( HEAT STRESS )
Section::::Proposed causes .
Section::::Hyperthermia ( heat stress ) .
Air movement will increase sweat evaporation , which cools the body .
But in extreme heat – when the blown air is warmer than the body 's temperature – it will increase the heat stress placed on the body , potentially speeding the onset of heat exhaustion and other detrimental conditions .
The American Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) discourages people from using fans in closed rooms without ventilation when the heat index is above .
The EPA does , however , approve of using a fan if a window is open and it is cooler outside , or when the heat index in a closed room is lower .
HYPOTHERMIA Section::::Hypothermia .
Hypothermia is abnormally low body temperature caused by inadequate thermoregulation .
As the metabolism slows down at night , one becomes more sensitive to temperature , and thus supposedly more prone to hypothermia .
People who believe this theory think a fan operating in a closed room all night can lower temperature to the point of causing hypothermia .
ASPHYXIATION Section::::Asphyxiation .
It is alleged that fans may cause asphyxiation by oxygen displacement and carbon dioxide intoxication .
In the process of human respiration , inhaled fresh air is exhaled with a lower concentration of oxygen gas ( O ) and higher concentration of carbon dioxide gas ( CO ) , causing a gradual reduction of O and buildup of CO in a completely unventilated room .
This belief bears a similarity to a once - popular misconception which claimed that a person in a closed room with plants would asphyxiate if the room was not kept ventilated , as the plant 's respiratory processes would supposedly consume all the oxygen in the room .
MEDIA COVERAGE Section::::Media coverage .
During the summer , mainstream South Korean news sources regularly report alleged cases of fan death .
A typical example is this excerpt from the July 4 , 2011 , edition of The Korea Herald , an English - language newspaper :
This article also noted there was " no evidence " the fan caused the death , however .
University of Miami researcher Larry Kalkstein says a misunderstanding in translation resulted in his accidental endorsement of the fan death theory , which he denies is a real phenomenon .
Ken Jennings , writing for Slate , says that based on " a recent email survey of contacts in Korea " , opinion seems to be shifting among younger Koreans : " A decade of Internet skepticism seems to have accomplished what the preceding 75 years could not : convinced a nation that Korean fan death is probably hot air . "
SOUTH KOREAN
GOVERNMENT
Section::::South Korean government .
The Korea Consumer Protection Board ( KCPB ) , a South Korean government - funded public agency , issued a consumer safety alert in 2006 warning that " asphyxiation from electric fans and air conditioners " was among South Korea 's five most common summer accidents or injuries , according to data they collected .
The KCPB published the following :
SEE ALSO
* Culture of South Korea * Culture - bound syndrome * List of common misconceptions REFERENCES