WABOBA
Waboba is an outdoor toy and sporting goods brand based in Stockholm , Sweden and with offices in Guangzhou , China and Atlanta , Georgia .
Waboba is the creator of the original balls that bounce on water .
Even though Waboba began with " the ball that bounces on water " in 2005 , it has since expanded to introduce a range of accessories and land items .
The slogan used in advertising is Keep Life Fun .
The name Waboba is a registered trademark and the balls are internationally patented .
NAME Section::::Name .
Even though Waboba is short for WAter
BOuncing BAll , the name is specific to the brand and its products only .
HISTORY Section::::History .
All balls can bounce on water when thrown at a shallow angle with sufficient speed to hydroplane .
This was the principle employed by WW2-period British inventor Barnes Wallace when he developed the " bouncing bomb " used in the famous " Dambusters " raid against the Ruhr District dams .
He had been inspired by the story of a technique historically used by the British navy that bounced spherical canon balls off the ocean surface to achieve accurate hits against enemy ships .
Wallace worked out the physics by bouncing marbles , steel spheres and various size and shape balls across a pond and then a long trough before progressing to larger scale experiments .
Even solid steel balls would bounce across water .
Ordinary Tennis balls or any other plastic balls will skip on water if thrown at a low angle at a fast speed .
In Sweden in the early 1980s , inventor Jan Von Heland got the idea of commercialising something that skips on water after throwing a Frisbee upside down and noticing it skims the surface of water much like skipping a rock .
Over the years , he began to test different shapes , materials , and compositions until he discovered in 2002 that a ball could bounce more efficiently than other balls on water if it was soft and had a Lycra covering which enables easy flow separation at the hydrodynamic stagnation point .
In 2004 , Jan created the commercial concept for marketing balls that bounce on water multiple times with little effort , and eventually patented what has become the Waboba Ball .
The patent reveals prior art in commercialised water skipping balls such as the " skidderball " and other patent claimants .
However the boldness of the Waboba PR marketing efforts that suggested the waboba was the first ball to bounce on water , and the reluctance of online media to fact - check the spurious claims led to articles incorrectly claiming uniqueness .
The ball composition is made of different types of Polyurethane covered in Lycra , allowing it to bounce on water and float .
Its patented design and durability gives Waboba its quality .
To bounce the ball on the water , one must throw like skipping a rock .
The ball bounces high on the water in between players when thrown at the right angle ( overhand ) with the right force.[1 ]
The ball does not bounce on land .
In 2005 , the Waboba Ball in widespread advertising made the false claim to be the first ball to bounce on water , a claim easily debunked by history and by simply throwing a tennis ball the same way and seeing that they easily bounce on water , and introduced it to the market where it later evolved into the Waboba Extreme .
However the Waboba does bounce very well on water and can do so multiple times but bouncing on water is not unique to the branded ball .
To date , there are now 6 different types of Waboba balls ( Pro , Extreme , Surf , Blast , Big Kahuna , and Fetch ) as well as several land items and accessories .
GEOGRAPHICAL SPREAD
Section::::Geographical spread .
The Waboba Ball was first introduced in Sweden in 2005 where it sold for two years before it was introduced to new markets in Europe , United States and Australia in the summer of 2007 .
In summer 2008 , Waboba entered markets in Canada , South Africa , and the United Kingdom .
During the fall of 2008 and spring 2009 , Waboba was introduced in Brazil , China , Singapore , Kuwait , Dubai , Germany , Portugal , Scandinavia , France , Spain , and Cyprus .
By 2013 , Waboba is present in all European countries and continents except Antarctica PRODUCTS WATER BOUNCING BALLS
* Pro - engineered for athletic control and accuracy in the lake or ocean .
* Extreme - bounces fast , far , and high in the lake or ocean .
* Surf , for beginners .
It 's soft and easy to handle in the lake or ocean .
* Big Kahuna , the biggest and most versatile Waboba ball for all water environments - lakes , oceans , and pools .
* Blast , engineered for pool play .
* Fetch , water - retrieval ball for dogs WATER ACCESSORIES
* Catch - neoprene glove paired with the Waboba Pro for water play .
* Waboba Lacrosse -
in 2014 , Waboba partnered with STX to release water lacrosse using FiddleSTX and a Waboba Extreme ball .
LAND ITEMS
* Moon - super high - bouncing land ball
* Street - unusual shape gives it an unpredictable bounce * Flyer - an oversized shuttlecock that lets you hit it with your hands , knees , feet , or rackets .
AWARDS
* Special Needs Approved by AblePlay * Dr. Toy Best Toy for Vacation
* Gold Award , Family Review Center
* Moon Ball
2013 Toy of the Year Award winner by Creative Child Magazine THE GAME OFFICIAL MATCH GAME Section::::The game .
Section::::Official match game .
The object of the 4v4 game is to bounce the Waboba Pro on the water in order to pass to team members and score points by bouncing the ball into a goal .
Described as a cross between ultimate frisbee and water polo , the official match game is a team water sport played with the Pro ball that bounces on water .
Teams consist of 3 field players , a goalkeeper and 2 substitutes .
The winner of the game is the team that scores the most goals .
The object of the game is to pass the ball with at least one bounce on water between team members in order to score goals .
No direct passes allowed .
There are no offside rules
so teams have the ability to spread players across the game field , facilitating long , uninterrupted passes .
ULTIMATE
WABOBA Section::::Ultimate Waboba .
Use any Waboba ball .
Each team , a minimum of 2 players per team , passes the Waboba to each other to complete a round .
A team gets 1 point when each team member has caught the ball without interruption from the opposing team .
A pass must bounce on the water before being caught .
First team to 3 points wins .
Passes have to be made within 5 seconds after receiving the ball .
No holding players allowed .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
An elastic ball that bounces on water , the Waboba water balls flatten like a pancake when they hits the water surface , increasing its lift and propelling it upward .
When it hits the water at a shallow angle , it too creates a bowl - shaped depression .
But because it is soft , the ball flattens into a disc - shape when it hits the surface and this allows it to aquaplane efficiently across the surface .
And the angle of the bowl - shaped depression causes it to launch into the air where the ball regains its shape , making it look as if it has bounced .
The process is remarkably similar to the way stones skip across water , even though they are denser than the liquid .
A shallow impact with the water surface creates a bowl - shaped depression that launches the stone into the air as it leaves .
NAVAL USE Section::::Naval use .
Researchers with the U.S. Navy 's University Laboratory Initiative have been studying the mechanics and elasticity of the Waboba balls .
The military branch is interested in how elasticity affects motion in water .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Telegraph.co.uk
* Gizmag.com
*
Metro.se * Waboba International