BRITISH EMPIRE IN WORLD WAR II
When the United Kingdom declared war on Nazi Germany at the outset of World War II it controlled to varying degrees numerous crown colonies , protectorates and the Indian Empire .
It also maintained unique political ties to four semi - independent Dominions — Australia , Canada , South Africa , and New Zealand — as part of the Commonwealth .
In 1939 the British Commonwealth was a global superpower , with direct or de facto political and economic control of 25 % of the world 's population , and 30 % of its land mass .
The contribution of the British Empire and Commonwealth in terms of manpower and materiel was critical to the Allied war effort .
From September 1939 to mid-1942 Britain led Allied efforts in almost every global military theatre .
Commonwealth forces ( United Kingdom , Colonial , Imperial and Dominion ) , totalling close to 15 million serving men and women , fought the German , Italian , Japanese and other Axis armies , air forces and navies across Europe , Africa , Asia , and in the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic , Indian , Pacific and Arctic Oceans .
Commonwealth forces fought in Britain , and across Northwestern Europe in the effort to slow or stop the Axis advance .
Commonwealth airforces fought the Luftwaffe to a standstill over Britain , and its armies fought and destroyed Italian forces in North and East Africa and occupied several overseas colonies of German - occupied European nations .
Following successful engagements against Axis forces , Commonwealth troops invaded and occupied Libya , Italian Somaliland , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Iran , Iraq , Syria , Lebanon , Iceland , the Faroe Islands , and Madagascar .
The Commonwealth defeated , held back or slowed the Axis powers for three years while mobilizing their globally integrated economy , military , and industrial infrastructure to build what became , by 1942 , the most extensive military apparatus of the war .
These efforts came at the cost of 150,000 military deaths , 400,000 wounded , 100,000 prisoners , over 300,000 civilian deaths , and the loss of 70 major warships , 39 submarines , 3,500 aircraft , 1,100 tanks and 65,000 vehicles .
During this period the Commonwealth built an enormous military and industrial capacity .
Britain became the nucleus of the Allied war effort in Europe , and hosted governments in exile in London to rally support in occupied Europe for the Allied effort .
Canada delivered almost $ 4 billion in direct financial aid to the United Kingdom , and Australia and New Zealand began shifting to domestic production to provide material aid to US forces in the Pacific .
Following the US entry into the war in December 1941 , the Commonwealth and United States coordinated their military efforts and resources globally .
As the scale of the US military involvement and industrial production increased , the US undertook command of many theatres , relieving Commonwealth forces for duty elsewhere , and expanding the scope and intensity of Allied military efforts .
However , it also proved difficult to co - ordinate the defence of far - flung colonies and Commonwealth countries from simultaneous attacks by the Axis Powers .
In part this was exacerbated by disagreements over priorities and objectives , as well as the deployment and control of joint forces .
The governments of Britain and Australia , in particular , turned to the United States for support .
Although the British Empire and the Commonwealth countries all emerged from the war as victors , and the conquered territories were returned to British rule , the costs of the war and the nationalist fervour that it had stoked became a catalyst for the decolonisation which took place in the following decades .
PRE - WAR PLANS FOR DEFENCE Section::::Pre - war plans for defence .
From 1923 , defence of British colonies and protectorates in East Asia and Southeast Asia was centred on the " Singapore strategy " .
This made the assumption that Britain could send a fleet to its naval base in Singapore within two or three days of a Japanese attack , while relying on France to provide assistance in Asia via its colony in Indochina and , in the event of war with Italy , to help defend British territories in the Mediterranean .
Pre - war planners did not anticipate the fall of France :
Nazi occupation , the loss of control over the Channel , and the employment of French Atlantic ports as forward bases for U - boats directly threatened Britain itself , forcing a significant reassessment of naval defence priorities .
During the 1930s , a triple threat emerged for the British Commonwealth in the form of right - wing , militaristic governments in Germany , Italy and Japan .
Germany threatened Britain itself , while Italy and Japan 's imperial ambitions looked set to clash with the British imperial presence in the Mediterranean and East Asia respectively .
However , there were differences of opinion within the UK and the Dominions as to which posed the most serious threat , and whether any attack would come from more than one power at the same time .
DECLARATION OF WAR AGAINST GERMANY Section::::Declaration of war against Germany .
On 1 September 1939 , Germany invaded Poland .
Two days later , on 3 September , after a British ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations was ignored , Britain and France declared war on Germany .
Britain 's declaration of war automatically committed India , the Crown colonies , and the protectorates , but the 1931 Statute of Westminster had granted autonomy to the Dominions so each decided their course separately .
Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies immediately joined the British declaration on 3 September , believing that it applied to all subjects of the Empire and Commonwealth .
New Zealand followed suit simultaneously , at 9.30 pm on 3 September ( local time ) , after Peter Fraser consulted the Cabinet ; although as Chamberlain 's broadcast was drowned by static , the Cabinet ( led by Fraser as Prime Minister Mickey Savage was terminally ill ) delayed until the Admiralty announced to the fleet a state of war , then backdated the declaration to 9.30 pm .
South Africa took three days to make its decision ( on 6 September ) , as the Prime Minister General J. B. M. Hertzog favoured neutrality but was defeated by the pro - war vote in the Union Parliament , led by General Jan Smuts , who then replaced Hertzog .
Canadian Prime Minister Mackenzie King declared support for Britain on the day of the British declaration , but also stated that it was for Parliament to make the formal declaration , which it did so one week later on 10 September .
The Irish Free State , which had been a dominion until 1937 , remained neutral EMPIRE AND COMMONWEALTH CONTRIBUTION Section::::Empire and Commonwealth contribution .
While the war was initially intended to be limited , resources were mobilized quickly , and the first shots were fired almost immediately .
Just hours after the Australian declaration of war , a gun at Fort Queenscliff fired across the bows of a ship as it attempted to leave Melbourne without required clearances .
On 10 October 1939 , an aircraft of No . 10 Squadron RAAF based in England became the first Commonwealth air force unit to go into action when it undertook a mission to Tunisia .
The first Canadian convoy of 15 ships bearing war goods departed Halifax just six days after the nation declared war , with two destroyers and .
A further 26 convoys of 527 ships sailed from Canada in the first four months of the war , and by 1 January 1940 Canada had landed an entire division in Britain .
On 13 June 1940 Canadian troops deployed to France in an attempt to secure the southern flank of the British Expeditionary Force in Belgium .
As the fall of France grew imminent , Britain looked to Canada to rapidly provide additional troops to strategic locations in North America , the Atlantic and Caribbean .
Following the Canadian destroyer already on station from 1939 , Canada provided troops from May 1940 to assist in the defence of the British Caribbean colonies , with several companies serving throughout the war in Bermuda , Jamaica , the Bahamas and British Guiana .
Canadian troops were also sent to the defence of the colony of Newfoundland , on Canada 's east coast , the closest point in North America to Germany .
Fearing the loss of a land link to the British Isles , Canada was also requested to also occupy Iceland , which it did from June 1940 to the spring of 1941 , following the initial British invasion .
From mid - June 1940 , following the rapid German invasions and occupations of Poland , Denmark , Norway , France , Belgium , Luxembourg and the Netherlands , the British Commonwealth was the main opponent of Germany and the Axis , until the entry into the war of the Soviet Union in June 1941 .
During this period Australia , India , New Zealand and South Africa provided dozens of ships and several divisions for the defence of the Mediterranean , Greece , Crete , Lebanon and Egypt , where British troops were outnumbered four to one by the Italian armies in Libya and Ethiopia .
Canada delivered a further 2nd Canadian Infantry Division , pilots for two air squadrons , and several warships to Britain to face a possible invasion from the continent .
In December 1941 , Japan launched , in quick succession , attacks on British Malaya , the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor , and Hong Kong .
Substantial financial support was provided by Canada to the UK and Commonwealth dominions , in the form of over $ 4 billion in aid through the Billion Dollar Gift and Mutual Aid and the War Appropriation Act .
Over the course of the war over 1.6 million Canadians served in uniform ( out of a prewar population of 11 million ) , in almost every theatre of the war , and by war 's end the country had the third - largest navy and fourth - largest air force in the world .
By the end of the war , almost a million Australians had served in the armed forces ( out of a population of under 7 million ) , whose military units fought primarily in Europe , North Africa , and the South West Pacific .
The British Commonwealth Air Training Plan ( also known as the " Empire Air Training Scheme " ) was established by the governments of Australia , Canada , New Zealand and the UK resulting in : * joint training at flight schools in Canada , Southern Rhodesia , Australia and New Zealand ; * formation of new squadrons of the Dominion air forces , known as " Article XV squadrons " for service as part of Royal Air Force operational commands , and ; * in practice , the pooling of RAF and Dominion air force personnel , for posting to both RAF and Article XV squadrons .
FINANCES Section::::Finances .
Britain borrowed everywhere
it could and made heavy purchases of munitions and supplies in India and Canada during the war , as well as other parts of the Empire and neutral countries .
Canada also made gifts .
Britain 's sterling balances around the world amounted to ₤3.4 billion in 1945 or the equivalent of about $ US 200 billion in 2016 dollars .
However , Britain treated this as a long - term loan with no interest and no specified repayment date .
Just when the money would be made available by London was an issue , for the British treasury was nearly empty by 1945 .
CRISIS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN Section::::Crisis in the Mediterranean .
In June 1940 , France surrendered to invading German forces , and Italy joined the war on the Axis side , causing a reversal of the Singapore strategy .
Winston Churchill , who had replaced Neville Chamberlain as British Prime Minister the previous month ( see Norway debate ) , ordered that the Middle East and the Mediterranean were of a higher priority than the Far East to defend .
Australia and New Zealand were told by telegram that they should turn to the United States for help in defending their homeland
should Japan attack :
Commonwealth forces played a major role in North and East Africa following Italy 's entry to the war , participating in the invasion of Italian Libya and Somaliland , but were forced to retreat after Churchill diverted resources to Greece and Crete .
FALL OF SINGAPORE Section::::Fall of Singapore .
The Battle of Singapore was fought in the South - East Asian theatre of World War II when the Japanese Empire invaded British Malaya and its stronghold of Singapore .
Singapore was the major British military base in South East Asia and nicknamed the " Gibraltar of the East " .
The fighting in Singapore lasted from 31 January 1942 to 15 February 1942 .
It followed a humiliating naval engagement in December 1941 in which two British capital ships were sunk .
It resulted in the fall of Singapore to the Japanese , and the largest surrender of British - led military personnel in history .
About 80,000 British , Australian and Indian troops became prisoners of war , joining 50,000 taken by the Japanese in the Malayan campaign .
Britain 's Prime Minister Winston Churchill called the ignominious fall of Singapore to the Japanese the " worst disaster " and " largest capitulation " in British history .
AFRICA Section::::Africa .
Africa was a large continent whose geography gave it strategic importance during the war .
North Africa was the scene of major campaigns against Italy and Germany ; East Africa was the scene of a major campaign against Italy .
The vast geography provided major transportation routes linking the United States to the Middle East and Mediterranean regions .
The sea route around South Africa was heavily used even though it added 40 days to voyages that had to avoid the dangerous Suez region .
Lend Lease supplies to Russia often came this way .
Internally , long - distance road and railroad connections facilitated the British war effort .
The Union of Africa had dominion status and was largely self - governing , the other British possessions were ruled by the colonial office , usually with close ties to local chiefs and kings .
France had extensive possessions in Africa , but they played a much smaller role in the war , since they were largely tied to Vichy France .
Portuguese holdings played a minor role .
Italian holdings were the target of successful British military campaigns .
The Belgian Congo , and two other Belgian colonies , were major exporters .
In terms of numbers and wealth , the British -controlled the richest portions of Africa , and made extensive use not only of the geography , but the manpower , and the natural resources .
Civilian colonial officials made a special effort to upgrade the African infrastructure , promote agriculture , integrate colonial Africa with the world economy , and recruit over a half million soldiers .
Before the war , Britain had made few plans for the utilization of Africa , but it quickly set up command structures .
The Army set up the West Africa Command , which recruited 200,000 soldiers .
The East Africa Command was created in September 1941 to support the overstretched Middle East Command .
The Southern Command was the domain of South Africa .
The Royal Navy set up the South Atlantic Command based in Sierra Leone , that became one of the main convoy assembly points .
The RAF Coastal Command had major submarine - hunting operations based in West Africa , while a smaller RAF command Dealt with submarines in the Indian Ocean .
Ferrying aircraft from North America and Britain was the major mission of the Western Desert Air Force .
In addition smaller more localized commands were set up throughout the war .
Before the war , the military establishments were very small throughout British Africa , and largely consisted of whites , who comprised only two percent of the population outside Africa .
As soon as the war began , newly created African units were set up , primarily by the Army .
The new recruits were almost always volunteers , usually provided in close cooperation with local tribal leaders .
During the war , military pay scales far exceeded what civilians natives could earn , especially when food , housing and clothing allowances are included .
The largest numbers were in construction units , called Pioneer Units , with over 82,000 soldiers ..
The RAF and Navy also did some recruiting .
East Africa provided the largest number of men , over 320,000 , chiefly from Kenya , Tanganyika , and Uganda .
They did some fighting , a great deal of guard duty , and construction work .
80,000 served in the Middle East .
A special effort was made not to challenge white supremacy , certainly before the war , and to a large extent during the war itself .
Nevertheless , the soldiers were drilled and train to European standards , given strong doses of propaganda , and learn leadership and organizational skills that proved essential to the formation of nationalistic and independence movements after 1945 .
There were minor episodes of discontent , but nothing serious , among the natives .
Afrikaner nationalism was a factor in South Africa , But the proto - German Afrikaner prime minister was replaced in 1939 by Jan Smuts , an Afrikaner who was An enthusiastic supporter of the British Empire .
His government closely cooperated with London and raised 340,000 volunteers ( 190,000 were white , or about one - third of the eligible white men ) .
INDIA Section::::India .
Serious tension erupted over American support for independence for India , a proposition Churchill vehemently rejected .
For years Roosevelt had encouraged Britain 's disengagement from India .
The American position was based on principled opposition to colonialism .
The politically active Indian population was deeply divided .
One element was so insistent on the expulsion of the British , that it sided with Germany and Japan , and formed the Indian National Army ( INA ) from Indian prisoners of war .
It fought as part of the Japanese invasion of Burma and eastern India .
There was a large pacifist element , which rallied to Gandhi 's call for abstention from the war ; he said that violence in every form was evil .
There was a high level of religious tension between the Hindu majority and the Muslims minority .
For the first time the Muslim community became politically active , giving strong support for the British war effort .
Over 2 million Indians volunteered for military service , including a large Muslim contingent .
The British were sensitive to demands of the Muslim League , led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah , since it needed Muslim soldiers in India and Muslim support all across the Middle East .
London used the religious tensions in India as a justification to continue its rule , saying it was needed to prevent religious massacres of the sort that did happen in 1947 .
The imperialist element in Britain was strongly represented in the Conservative party ; Churchill himself had long been its leading spokesman .
On the other hand , Attlee and the Labour Party favoured independence and had close ties to the Congress Party .
The British cabinet sent Sir Stafford Cripps to India with a specific peace plan offering India the promise of dominion status after the war .
Congress demanded independence immediately and the Cripps mission failed .
Roosevelt gave support to Congress , sending his representative Louis Johnson to help negotiate some sort of independence .
Churchill was outraged , refused to cooperate with Roosevelt on the issue , and threatened to resign as prime minister if Roosevelt pushed too hard .
Roosevelt pulled back .
In 1942 when the Congress Party launched a Quit India Movement of non - violent civil disobedience , the Raj police immediately arrested tens of thousands of activists ( including Gandhi ) , holding them for the duration .
Meanwhile , wartime disruptions caused severe food shortages in eastern India ; hundreds of thousands died of starvation .
To this day a large Indian element blames Churchill for the Bengal famine of 1943 .
In terms of the war effort , India became a major base for American supplies sent to China , and Lend Lease operations boosted the local economy .
The 2 million Indian soldiers were a major factor in British success in the Middle East .
Muslim support for the British war effort proved decisive in the British decision to partition the Raj , forming of the new state of Pakistan .
VICTORY Section::::Victory .
On 8 May 1945 , the World War II Allies formally accepted the unconditional surrender of the armed forces of Nazi Germany and the end of Adolf Hitler 's Third Reich .
The formal surrender of the occupying German forces in the Channel Islands was not until 9 May 1945 .
On 30 April Hitler committed suicide during the Battle of Berlin , and so the surrender of Germany was authorized by his replacement , President of Germany Karl Dönitz .
The act of military surrender was signed on 7 May in Reims , France , and ratified on 8 May in Berlin , Germany .
In the afternoon of 15 August 1945 , the Surrender of Japan occurred , effectively ending World War II .
On this day the initial announcement of Japan 's surrender was made in Japan , and because of time zone differences it was announced in the United States , Western Europe , the Americas , the Pacific Islands , and Australia / New Zealand on 14 August 1945 .
The signing of the surrender document occurred on 2 September 1945 .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
By the end of the war in August 1945 , British Commonwealth forces were responsible for the civil and/or military administration of a number of non - Commonwealth territories , occupied during the war , including Eritrea , Libya , Madagascar , Iran , Iraq , Lebanon , Italian Somaliland , Syria , Thailand and portions of Germany , Austria and Japan .
Most of these military administrations were handed over to old European colonial authorities or to new local authorities soon after the end of the hostilities .
Commonwealth forces administered occupation zones in Japan , Germany and Austria until 1955 .
World War II confirmed that Britain was no longer the great power it had once been , and that it had been surpassed by the United States on the world stage .
Canada , Australia and New Zealand moved within the orbit of the United States .
The image of imperial strength in Asia had been shattered by the Japanese attacks , and British prestige there was irreversibly damaged .
The price for India 's entry to the war had been effectively a guarantee for independence , which came within two years of the end of the war , relieving Britain of its most populous and valuable colony .
The deployment of 150,000 Africans overseas from British colonies , and the stationing of white troops in Africa itself led to revised perceptions of the Empire in Africa .
HISTORIOGRAPHY Section::::Historiography .
In terms of actual engagement with the enemy , historians have recounted a great deal in South Asia and Southeast Asia , as summarized by Ashley Jackson :
British historians of the Second World War have not emphasized the critical role played by the Empire in terms of money , manpower and imports of food and raw materials .
MILITARY HISTORIES OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE 'S COLONIES , DOMINIONS , MANDATES AND PROTECTORATES
Section::::Military histories of the British Empire 's colonies , dominions , mandates and protectorates .
The contributions from individual colonies , dominions , mandates and protectorates to the war effort were extensive and global .
Further information about their involvement can be found in the military histories of the individual colonies and dominions listed below .
AFRICA
* Ascension Island
* Bechuanaland Protectorate *
Cameroons
* Gambia * Gold Coast * Kenya * Mauritius * Nigeria * Northern Rhodesia
* Nyasaland
* Seychelles * Sierra Leone * Somaliland * South Africa * South West Africa * Southern Rhodesia
* Sudan * Tanganyika * Togoland
* Uganda Protectorate *
Zanzibar Protectorate AMERICAS * Bermuda
* Canada * Cayman Islands * Dominica * Falkland Islands
* Grenada
* Guiana * Honduras * Jamaica * Newfoundland * Saint Lucia * Saint Vincent *
Trinidad and Tobago
* Turks and Caicos * Windward Islands
EAST
ASIA
* Hong Kong EUROPE
* Cyprus
* Gibraltar * Guernsey * Isle of Man *
Jersey
*
Malta
* United Kingdom
MIDDLE EAST
*
Bahrain Protectorate * Egypt
* Kuwait Protectorate * Palestine * Qatar Protectorate * Transjordan * Trucial States OCEANIA
* Australia
*
Fiji * Gilbert and Ellice Islands * Nauru * New Guinea * New Hebrides * New Zealand * Norfolk Island * Papua * Solomon Islands
* Tonga Proctetorate * Western Samoa SOUTH
ASIA
* Ceylon
* India SOUTHEAST ASIA
* Brunei Protectorate *
Burma
* Malaya * North Borneo
* Sarawak * Straits Settlements SEE
ALSO
* Diplomatic history of World War II * Historiography of the British Empire
HOMEFRONT
* Australian home front during the Second World War
* Christmas Island Mutiny and Battle
* Gibraltar evacuation in the Second World War
* British home front during the Second World War
* Japanese occupation of the Andaman Islands * Japanese occupation of British Borneo * Japanese occupation of Burma * Japanese occupation of Hong Kong * Japanese occupation of Malaya * Japanese occupation of Nauru * Japanese occupation of Singapore * German occupation of the Channel Islands MAJOR MILITARY FORMATIONS AND UNITS
* List of British Empire corps of the Second World War
* List of British Empire divisions in the Second World War
* List of British Empire brigades of the Second World War * East Africa Command * Far East Command * India Command * Malaya Command * Middle East Command * Persia and Iraq Command
* West Africa Command * Pacific Fleet * Eastern Fleet * Home Fleet * Mediterranean Fleet * Reserve Fleet * Bomber Command * Ferry Command * Fighter Command * RAF Squadrons * British Commonwealth Air Training Plan
* British Commonwealth Occupation Force
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Butler , J.R.M. et al .
Grand Strategy ( 6 vol 1956–60 ) , official overview of the British war effort ;
Volume 1 : Rearmament Policy ; Volume 2 : September 1939 – June 1941 ; Volume 3 , Part 1 : June 1941 – August 1942 ; Volume 3 , Part 2 : June 1941 – August 1942 ; Volume 4 : September 1942 – August 1943 ; Volume 5 : August 1943 – September 1944 ; Volume 6 : October 1944 – August 1945 * Edgerton , David .
Britain 's War Machine : Weapons , Resources , and Experts in the Second World War
( Oxford University Press ; 2011 )
445 pages
* Hague , Arnold : The allied convoy system 1939–1945 : its organization , defence and operation .
St .
Catharines , Ontario :
Vanwell , 2000 .
* Leacock , Stephen .
Our British empire ; its structure , its history , its strength ( 1941 ) online free to borrow
* Roberts , Andrew .
Masters and Commanders – How Roosevelt , Churchill , Marshall and Alanbrooke Won the War in the West ( 2008 )
* Stacey , C P. ( 1970 ) Arms , Men and Governments : The War Policies of Canada , 1939–1945 Queen 's Printer , Ottawa ( Downloadable PDF ) ISBN D2 - 5569
* Toye , Richard .
Churchill 's Empire ( Pan , 2010 ) .
FURTHER READING
* Bousquet , Ben and Colin Douglas .
West Indian Women at War : British Racism in World War II ( 1991 )
online
* Butler , J.R.M. et al .
Grand Strategy ( 6 vol 1956–60 ) , official overview of the British war effort ;
Volume 1 : Rearmament Policy ; Volume 2 : September 1939 – June 1941 ; Volume 3 , Part 1 : June 1941 – August 1942 ; Volume 3 , Part 2 : June 1941 – August 1942 ; Volume 4 : September 1942 – August 1943 ; Volume 5 : August 1943 – September 1944 ; Volume 6 : October 1944 – August 1945 * Churchill , Winston .
The Second World War ( 6 vol 1947–51 ) , classic personal history with many documents
* Eccles , Karen E , and Debbie McCollin , edfs .
World War II and the Caribbean ( 2017 ) .
* Edgerton , David .
Britain 's War Machine : Weapons , Resources , and Experts in the Second World War
( Oxford University Press ; 2011 )
445 pages
* Harrison , Mark Medicine and Victory : British Military Medicine in the Second World War ( 2004 ) .
* Hastings , Max .
Winston 's War : Churchill , 1940–1945 ( 2010 )
* Jackson , Ashley .
The British Empire and the Second World War ( Continuum , 2006 ) .
604pp ; the standard scholarly history .
* Khan , Yasmin .
The Raj at War : A People 's History of India 's Second World War ( 2015 )
* Raghavan , Srinath .
India 's War : World War II and the Making of Modern South Asia ( 2016 )
BRITISH ARMY
* Allport , Alan .
Browned Off and Bloody - Minded
: The British Soldier Goes to War , 1939–1945
( Yale UP , 2015 )
* Atkinson , Rick .
The Day of Battle : The War in Sicily and Italy , 1943–1944 ( 2008 ) excerpt and text search
* Buckley , John .
British Armour in the Normandy Campaign 1944 ( 2004 )
* D'Este , Carlo .
Decision in Normandy :
The Unwritten Story of Montgomery and the Allied Campaign ( 1983 ) . .
* Ellis ,
L.F. The War in France and Flanders , 1939–1940 ( HMSO , 1953 )
online
* Ellis , L.F. Victory in the West , Volume 1 : Battle of Normandy ( HMSO , 1962 )
* Ellis , L.F. Victory in the West , Volume 2 : Defeat of Germany ( HMSO , 1968 ) * Fraser , David .
And We Shall Shock Them : The British Army in World War II ( 1988 ) .
* Graham , Dominick .
Tug of War : The Battle for Italy 1943–1945 ( 2004 )
* Hamilton , Nigel .
Monty :
The Making of a General : 1887–1942 ( 1981 ) ; Master of the Battlefield : Monty 's War Years 1942–1944 ( 1984 )
; Monty : The Field - Marshal 1944–1976 ( 1986 ) .
* Lamb , Richard .
War
In Italy , 1943–1945 : A Brutal Story ( 1996 ) * Thompson , Julian .
The Imperial War Museum Book of the War in Burma 1942–1945 ( 2004 )
* Sebag - Montefiore , Hugh .
Dunkirk :
Fight to the Last Man ( 2008 )
ROYAL NAVY
* Barnett , Corelli .
Engage the Enemy More Closely :
The Royal Navy in the Second World War ( 1991 )
* Marder , Arthur .
Old Friends , New Enemies :
The Royal Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy , vol . 2 : The Pacific War , 1942–1945 with Mark Jacobsen and John Horsfield ( 1990 )
* Roskill , S. W.
The White Ensign : British Navy at War , 1939–1945 ( 1960 ) .
summary
* Roskill , S. W. War at Sea 1939–1945 , Volume 1 : The Defensive London : HMSO , 1954 ; War at Sea 1939–1945 , Volume 2 : The Period of Balance , 1956 ; War at Sea 1939–1945 , Volume 3 : The Offensive , Part 1 , 1960 ; War at Sea 1939–1945 , Volume 3 : The Offensive , Part 2 , 1961 .
online vol 1 ;
online vol 2 ROYAL AIR FORCE * Bungay , Stephen .
The Most Dangerous Enemy : The Definitive History of the Battle of Britain ( 2nd ed .
2010 )
* Collier , Basil .
Defence of the United Kingdom ( HMSO , 1957 )
online
*
Fisher , David E , A Summer Bright and Terrible :
Winston Churchill , Lord Dowding , Radar , and the Impossible Triumph of the Battle of Britain
( 2005 ) excerpt online
* Hastings , Max .
Bomber Command ( 1979 )
* Hansen , Randall .
Fire and Fury : The Allied Bombing of Germany , 1942–1945 ( 2009 )
*
Hough , Richard and Denis Richards .
The Battle of Britain ( 1989 )
480 pp
* Messenger , Charles , " Bomber " Harris and the Strategic Bombing Offensive , 1939–1945 ( 1984 ) , defends Harris * Overy , Richard .
The Battle of Britain : The Myth and the Reality ( 2001 ) 192 pages excerpt and text search
* Richards , Dennis , et al .
Royal Air Force , 1939–1945 :
The Fight at Odds – Vol . 1
( HMSO 1953 ) , official history vol 1 online edition vol 2 online edition ; vol 3 online edition * Shores , Christopher F. Air War for Burma : The Allied Air Forces Fight Back in South - East Asia 1942–1945 ( 2005 )
* Terraine , John .
A Time for Courage : The Royal Air Force in the European War , 1939–1945 ( 1985 )
* Verrier , Anthony .
The Bomber Offensive ( 1969 ) , British * Webster , Charles and Noble Frankland , The Strategic Air Offensive Against Germany , 1939–1945 ( HMSO , 1961 ) , 4 vol .
Important official British history
* Wood , Derek , and Derek D. Dempster .
The Narrow Margin : The Battle of Britain and the Rise of Air Power 1930–40 ( 1975 )
online edition EXTERNAL LINKS *
" The British Empire at War Research Group " For comprehensive coverage and up - to - date bibliography
* Checklist of official histories * Britain in World War II
* The 11th Day :
Crete 1941