CIRCUMBINARY PLANET
A circumbinary planet is a planet that orbits two stars instead of one .
Because of the short orbits of some binary stars , the only way for planets to form is by forming outside the orbit of the two stars .
However new studies showed that there is a strong hint that the planet and stars originate from a single disk .
OBSERVATIONS AND DISCOVERIES CONFIRMED PLANETS PSR B1620 - 26 Section::::Observations and discoveries .
Section::::Confirmed planets .
Section::::PSR B1620 - 26 .
The first confirmed circumbinary extrasolar planet was found orbiting the system PSR B1620 - 26 , which contains a millisecond pulsar and a white dwarf and is located in the globular cluster M4 .
The existence of the third body was first reported in 1993 , and was suggested to be a planet based on 5 years of observational data .
In 2003 the planet was characterised as being 2.5 times the mass of Jupiter in a low eccentricity orbit with a semimajor axis of 23 AU .
HD 202206 Section::::HD 202206 .
The first circumbinary extrasolar planet around a main sequence star was found in 2005 in the system HD 202206 : a Jupiter - size planet orbiting a system composed of a Sun - like star and a brown dwarf .
HW VIRGINIS Section::::HW Virginis .
Announced in 2008 , the eclipsing binary system HW Virginis , comprising a subdwarf B star and a red dwarf , was claimed to also host a planetary system .
The claimed planets have masses at least 8.47 and 19.23 times that of Jupiter respectively , and were proposed to have orbital periods of 9 and 16 years .
The proposed outer planet is sufficiently massive that it may be considered to be a brown dwarf under some definitions of the term , but the discoverers claimed that the orbital configuration implies it would have formed like a planet from a circumbinary disc .
Both planets may have accreted additional mass when the primary star lost material during its red giant phase .
Further work on the system showed that the orbits proposed for the candidate planets were catastrophically unstable on timescales far shorter than the age of the system .
Indeed , the authors found that the system was so unstable that it simply can not exist , with mean lifetimes of less than a thousand years across the whole range of plausible orbital solutions .
Like other planetary systems proposed around similar evolved binary star systems , it seems likely that some mechanism other than claimed planets is responsible for the observed behaviour of the binary stars - and that the claimed planets simply do not exist .
KEPLER-16 Section::::Kepler-16 .
On 15 September 2011 , astronomers , using data from NASA 's Kepler spacecraft , announced the first partial - eclipse - based discovery of a circumbinary planet .
The planet , called Kepler-16b , is about 200 light years from Earth , in the constellation Cygnus , and is believed to be a frozen world of rock and gas , about the mass of Saturn .
It orbits two stars that are also circling each other , one about two - thirds the size of our sun , the other about a fifth the size of our sun .
Each orbit of the stars by the planet takes 229 days , while the planet orbits the system 's center of mass every 225 days ; the stars eclipse each other every three weeks or so .
KEPLER-453 Section::::Kepler-453 .
In 2015 , astronomers confirmed the existence of Kepler-453b , a circumbinary planet with orbital period of 240.5 days .
KEPLER-1647 Section::::Kepler-1647 .
A new planet , called Kepler-1647b , was announced on June 13 , 2016 .
It was discovered using the Kepler telescope .
The planet is a gas giant , similar in size to Jupiter which makes it the second largest circumbinary planet ever discovered , next to PSR B1620 - 26 .
It is located in the stars ' habitable zone , and it orbits the star system in 1107 days , which makes it the longest period of any confirmed transiting exoplanet so far .
MXB 1658 - 298 Section::::MXB 1658 - 298 .
A massive planet around this Low Mass X - ray Binary ( LMXB ) system was found by the method of periodic delay in X - ray eclipses .
OTHER OBSERVATIONS
Section::::Other observations .
Claims of a planet discovered via microlensing , orbiting the close binary pair MACHO-1997-BLG-41 , were announced in 1999 .
The planet was said to be in a wide orbit around the two red dwarf companions , but the claims were later retracted , as it turned out the detection could be better explained by the orbital motion of the binary stars themselves .
Several attempts have been made to detect planets around the eclipsing binary system CM Draconis , itself part of the triple system GJ 630.1 .
The eclipsing binary has been surveyed for transiting planets , but no conclusive detections were made and eventually the existence of all the candidate planets was ruled out .
More recently , efforts have been made to detect variations in the timing of the eclipses of the stars caused by the reflex motion associated with an orbiting planet , but at present no discovery has been confirmed .
The orbit of the binary stars is eccentric , which is unexpected for such a close binary as tidal forces ought to have circularised the orbit .
This may indicate the presence of a massive planet or brown dwarf in orbit around the pair whose gravitational effects maintain the eccentricity of the binary .
Circumbinary discs that may indicate processes of planet formation have been found around several stars , and are in fact common around binaries with separations less than 3 AU .
One notable example is in the HD 98800 system , which comprises two pairs of binary stars separated by around 34 AU .
The binary subsystem HD 98800 B , which consists of two stars of 0.70 and 0.58 solar masses in a highly eccentric orbit with semimajor axis 0.983 AU , is surrounded by a complex dust disc that is being warped by the gravitational effects of the mutually - inclined and eccentric stellar orbits .
The other binary subsystem , HD 98800 A , is not associated with significant amounts of dust .
SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS Section::::System characteristics .
The Kepler results indicate circumbinary planetary systems are relatively common ( as of October 2013 the spacecraft had found seven planets out of roughly 1000 eclipsing binaries searched ) .
STELLAR CONFIGURATION Section::::Stellar configuration .
There is a wide range of stellar configurations for which circumbinary planets can exist .
Primary star masses range from 0.69 to 1.53 solar masses ( Kepler-16 A & PH1 Aa ) , star mass ratios from 1.03 to 3.76 ( Kepler-34 & PH1 ) , and binary eccentricity from 0.023 to 0.521 ( Kepler-47 & Kepler-34 ) .
The distribution of planet eccentricities , range from nearly circular e=0.007 to a significant e=0.182 ( Kepler-16 & Kepler-34 ) .
No orbital resonances with the binary have been found .
ORBITAL DYNAMICS Section::::Orbital dynamics .
The binary stars Kepler-34 A and B have a highly eccentric orbit ( e=0.521 ) around each other and their interaction with the planet is strong enough that a deviation from Kepler 's laws is noticeable after just one orbit .
CO - PLANARITY Section::::Co - planarity .
All Kepler circumbinary planets that were known as of August 2013 orbit their stars very close to the plane of the binary ( in a prograde direction ) which suggests a single - disk formation .
However , not all circumbinary planets are co - planar with the binary : Kepler-413b is tilted 2.5 degrees which may be due to the gravitational influence of other planets or a third star .
Taking into account the selection biases , the average mutual inclination between the planetary orbits and the stellar binaries is within ~3 degrees , consistent with the mutual inclinations of planets in multi - planetary systems .
AXIAL TILT PRECESSION Section::::Axial tilt precession .
The axial tilt of Kepler-413b 's spin axis might vary by as much as 30 degrees over 11 years , leading to rapid and erratic changes in seasons .
MIGRATION Section::::Migration .
Simulations show that it is likely that all of the circumbinary planets known prior to a 2014 study migrated significantly from their formation location with the possible exception of Kepler-47(AB)c .
SEMI - MAJOR AXES CLOSE TO CRITICAL RADIUS Section::::Semi - major axes close to critical radius .
The minimum stable star to circumbinary planet separation is about 2 - 4 times the binary star separation , or orbital period about 3 - 8 times the binary period .
The innermost planets in all the Kepler circumbinary systems have been found orbiting close to this radius .
The planets have semi - major axes that lie between 1.09 and 1.46 times this critical radius .
The reason could be that migration might become inefficient near the critical radius , leaving planets just outside this radius .
Recently , it has been found that the distribution of the innermost planetary semi - major axes is consistent with a log - uniform distribution , taking into account the selection biases , where closer - in planets can be detected more easily .
This questions the pile - up of planets near the stability limit as well as the dominance of planet migration .
ABSENCE OF PLANETS AROUND SHORTER PERIOD BINARIES Section::::Absence of planets around shorter period binaries .
Most Kepler eclipsing binaries have periods less than 1 day but the shortest period of a Kepler eclipsing binary hosting a planet is 7.4 days ( Kepler-47 ) .
The short - period binaries are unlikely to have formed in such a tight orbit and their lack of planets may be related to the mechanism that removed angular momentum allowing the stars to orbit so closely .
One exception is the planet around an X - ray binary MXB_1658 - 298 , which has an orbital period of 7.1 hrs .
PLANET SIZE LIMIT Section::::Planet size limit .
As of June 2016 , all but one of the confirmed Kepler circumbinary planets are smaller than Jupiter .
This can not be a selection effect because larger planets are easier to detect .
Simulations had predicted this would be the case .
HABITABILITY Section::::Habitability .
All the Kepler circumbinary planets are either close to or actually in the habitable zone .
None of them are terrestrial planets , but large moons of such planets could be habitable .
Because of the stellar binarity , the insolation received by the planet will likely be time - varying in a way quite unlike the regular sunlight Earth receives .
Transit Probability Circumbinary planets are generally more likely to transit than planets around a single star .
The probability when the planetary orbit overlaps with the stellar binary orbit has been obtained .
For planets orbiting eclipsing stellar binaries ( such as the detected systems ) , the analytical expression of the transit probability in a finite observation time has been obtained .
LIST OF CIRCUMBINARY PLANETS CONFIRMED CIRCUMBINARY PLANETS MassSemimajor axisOrbital period UNCONFIRMED OR DOUBTFUL MassSemimajor
axisOrbital periodDT Virginis c 8.5 ± 2.5 1168 33081 2010
Imaging Kepler-47
d
Unknown Unknown 187.3 2013
Transit FW Tauri
b 10 ± 4 330 2013
Imaging A PAIR OF PLANETS AROUND HD 202206 OR A CIRCUMBINARY PLANET ?
Section::::A pair of planets around HD 202206 or a circumbinary planet ?
HD 202206 is a Sun - like star orbited by two objects , one of 17 Mj and one of 2.4 Mj .
The classification of HD 202206 b as a brown dwarf or " superplanet " is currently unclear .
The two objects could have both formed in a protoplanetary disk with the inner one becoming a superplanet , or the outer planet could have formed in a circumbinary disk .
A dynamical analysis of the system further shows a 5:1 mean motion resonance between the planet and the brown dwarf .
These observations raise the question of how this system was formed , but numerical simulations show that a planet formed in a circumbinary disk can migrate inward until it is captured in resonance .
FICTION Section::::Fiction .
Circumbinary planets are common in many science fiction stories :
*
In the Trigun series , the planet orbits a binary star system .
*
In the Star Wars series , planet Tatooine orbits in a close binary system .
*
In the series Doctor Who , planet Gallifrey once orbited a binary star system .
Another binary system featured in The Chase .
*
In the Star Fox series , the planets orbit Lylat and Solar ( an M - class red dwarf )
*
In the Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy series , the circumbinary planet Magrathea is described as the " impossible planet " .
*
Watcher 's Web ( Return of the Aghyrians : Book 1 ) by Jansen , Patty .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Planets in Binary Star Systems , Nader Haghighipour , Springer , 2010 ,