HYDROGEN INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE
VEHICLE
A hydrogen internal combustion engine vehicle ( HICEV ) is a type of hydrogen vehicle using an internal combustion engine .
Hydrogen internal combustion engine vehicles are different from hydrogen fuel cell vehicles ( which use electrochemical conversion of hydrogen rather than combustion ) ; the hydrogen internal combustion engine is simply a modified version of the traditional gasoline - powered internal combustion engine .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Francois Isaac de Rivaz designed in 1806 the De Rivaz engine , the first internal combustion engine , which ran on a hydrogen / oxygen mixture .
Étienne Lenoir produced the Hippomobile in 1863 .
Paul Dieges patented in 1970 a modification to internal combustion engines which allowed a gasoline - powered engine to run on hydrogen .
Tokyo City University have been developing hydrogen internal combustion engine from 1970 .
Recently developed hydrogen fueled Bus and Truck .
Mazda has developed Wankel engines that burn hydrogen .
The advantage of using ICE ( internal combustion engine ) such as wankel and piston engines is that the cost of retooling for production is much lower .
Existing - technology ICE can still be used to solve those problems where fuel cells are not a viable solution as yet , for example in cold - weather applications .
Between 2005 - 2007 , BMW tested a luxury car named the BMW Hydrogen 7 , powered by a hydrogen ICE , which achieved 301 km / h ( 187 mph ) in tests .
At least two of these concepts have been manufactured .
HICE forklift trucks have been demonstrated based on converted diesel internal combustion engines with direct injection .
Alset GmbH developed a hybrid hydrogen systems that allows vehicle to use petrol and hydrogen fuels individually or at the same time with an internal combustion engine .
This technology was used with Aston Martin Rapide S during the 24 Hours Nürburgring race .
The Rapide S was the first vehicle to finish the race with hydrogen technology .
LOW EMISSIONS Section::::Low emissions .
The combustion of hydrogen with oxygen produces water as its only product :
In contrast , combustion of high temperature combustion fuels , such as kerosene , gasoline , or natural gas , with air can produce oxides of nitrogen , known as NO .
Tuning a hydrogen engine in 1976 to produce the greatest amount of emissions possible resulted in emissions comparable with consumer operated gasoline engines from 1976 .
ADAPTATION OF EXISTING ENGINES Section::::Adaptation of existing engines .
The differences between a hydrogen ICE and a traditional gasoline engine include hardened valves and valve seats , stronger connecting rods , non - platinum tipped spark plugs , a higher voltage ignition coil , fuel injectors designed for a gas instead of a liquid , larger crankshaft damper , stronger head gasket material , modified ( for supercharger ) intake manifold , positive pressure supercharger , and a high temperature engine oil .
All modifications would amount to about one point five times ( 1.5 ) the current cost of a gasoline engine .
These hydrogen engines burn fuel in the same manner that gasoline engines do .
The theoretical maximum power output from a hydrogen engine depends on the air / fuel ratio and fuel injection method used .
The stoichiometric air / fuel ratio for hydrogen is 34:1 .
At this air / fuel ratio , hydrogen will displace 29 % of the combustion chamber leaving only 71 % for the air .
As a result , the energy content of this mixture will be less than it would be if the fuel were gasoline .
Since both the carbureted and port injection methods mix the fuel and air prior to it entering the combustion chamber , these systems limit the maximum theoretical power obtainable to approximately 85 % of that of gasoline engines .
For direct injection systems , which mix the fuel with the air after the intake valve has closed ( and thus the combustion chamber has 100 % air ) , the maximum output of the engine can be approximately 15 % higher than that for gasoline engines .
Therefore , depending on how the fuel is metered , the maximum output for a hydrogen engine can be either 15 % higher or 15 % less than that of gasoline if a stoichiometric air / fuel ratio is used .
However , at a stoichiometric air / fuel ratio , the combustion temperature is very high and as a result it will form a large amount of nitrogen oxides ( NOx ) , which is a criteria pollutant .
Since one of the reasons for using hydrogen is low exhaust emissions , hydrogen engines are not normally designed to run at a stoichiometric air / fuel ratio .
Typically hydrogen engines are designed to use about twice as much air as theoretically required for complete combustion .
At this air / fuel ratio , the formation of NOx is reduced to near zero .
Unfortunately , this also reduces the power output to about half that of a similarly sized gasoline engine .
To make up for the power loss , hydrogen engines are usually larger than gasoline engines , and/or are equipped with turbochargers or superchargers .
SEE ALSO
* Hydrogen fuel enhancement *
Liquid nitrogen vehicle
* List of hydrogen internal combustion engine vehicles
* Timeline of hydrogen technologies REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * EERE - Hydrogen internal combustion engine vehicle