IRRATIONAL NUMBER
In mathematics , the irrational numbers are all the real numbers which are not rational numbers , the latter being the numbers constructed from ratios ( or fractions ) of integers .
When the ratio of lengths of two line segments is an irrational number , the line segments are also described as being incommensurable , meaning that they share no " measure " in common , that is , there is no length ( " the measure " ) , no matter how short , that could be used to express the lengths of both of the two given segments as integer multiples of itself .
Among irrational numbers are the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its diameter , Euler 's number e , the golden ratio φ , and the square root of two ; in fact all square roots of natural numbers , other than of perfect squares , are irrational .
It can be shown that irrational numbers , when expressed in a positional numeral system ( e.g. as decimal numbers , or with any other natural basis ) , do not terminate , nor do they repeat ,
i.e. , do not contain a subsequence of digits , the repetition of which makes up the tail of the representation .
For example , the decimal representation of the number starts with 3.14159 , but no finite number of digits can represent exactly , nor does it repeat .
The proof that the decimal expansion of a rational number must terminate or repeat is distinct from the proof that a decimal expansion that terminates or repeats must be a rational number , and although elementary and not lengthy , both proofs take some work .
Mathematicians do not generally take " terminating or repeating " to be the definition of the concept of rational number .
Irrational numbers may also be dealt with via non - terminating continued fractions .
As a consequence of Cantor 's proof that the real numbers are uncountable and the rationals countable , it follows that almost all real numbers are irrational .
HISTORY
ANCIENT GREECE Section::::History .
Section::::Ancient Greece .
The first proof of the existence of irrational numbers is usually attributed to a Pythagorean ( possibly Hippasus of Metapontum ) , who probably discovered them while identifying sides of the pentagram .
The then - current Pythagorean method would have claimed that there must be some sufficiently small , indivisible unit that could fit evenly into one of these lengths as well as the other .
However , Hippasus , in the 5th century BC , was able to deduce that there was in fact no common unit of measure , and that the assertion of such an existence was in fact a contradiction .
He did this by demonstrating that if the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle was indeed commensurable with a leg , then one of those lengths measured in that unit of measure must be both odd and even , which is impossible .
His reasoning is as follows :
* Start with an isosceles right triangle with side lengths of integers a , b , and c.
The ratio of the hypotenuse to a leg is represented by c : b .
* Assume a , b , and c are in the smallest possible terms ( i.e. they have no common factors ) .
*
By the Pythagorean theorem : c = a+b = b+b = 2b .
( Since the triangle is isosceles , a = b ) .
*
Since c = 2b , c is divisible by 2 , and therefore even .
* Since c is even , c must be even .
* Since c is even , dividing c by 2 yields an integer .
Let y be this integer ( c = 2y ) .
* Squaring both sides of c = 2y yields
c = ( 2y ) , or c = 4y .
* Substituting 4y for c in the first equation ( c = 2b ) gives us 4y= 2b .
* Dividing by 2 yields 2y =
b.
* Since y is an integer , and 2y = b , b is divisible by 2 , and therefore even .
* Since b is even , b must be even .
*
We have just shown that both b and c must be even .
Hence they have a common factor of 2 .
However this contradicts the assumption that they have no common factors .
This contradiction proves that c and b can not both be integers , and thus the existence of a number that can not be expressed as a ratio of two integers .
Greek mathematicians termed this ratio of incommensurable magnitudes alogos , or inexpressible .
Hippasus , however , was not lauded for his efforts : according to one legend , he made his discovery while out at sea , and was subsequently thrown overboard by his fellow Pythagoreans " … for having produced an element in the universe which denied the … doctrine that all phenomena in the universe can be reduced to whole numbers and their ratios . "
Another legend states that Hippasus was merely exiled for this revelation .
Whatever the consequence to Hippasus himself , his discovery posed a very serious problem to Pythagorean mathematics , since it shattered the assumption that number and geometry were inseparable – a foundation of their theory .
The discovery of incommensurable ratios was indicative of another problem facing the Greeks : the relation of the discrete to the continuous .
Brought into light by Zeno of Elea , who questioned the conception that quantities are discrete and composed of a finite number of units of a given size .
Past Greek conceptions dictated that they necessarily must be , for " whole numbers represent discrete objects , and a commensurable ratio represents a relation between two collections of discrete objects . "
However Zeno found that in fact " [ quantities ] in general are not discrete collections of units ; this is why ratios of incommensurable [ quantities ] appear … .[Q]uantities
are , in other words , continuous .
" What this means is that , contrary to the popular conception of the time , there can not be an indivisible , smallest unit of measure for any quantity .
That in fact , these divisions of quantity must necessarily be infinite .
For example , consider a line segment : this segment can be split in half , that half split in half , the half of the half in half , and so on .
This process can continue infinitely , for there is always another half to be split .
The more times the segment is halved , the closer the unit of measure comes to zero , but it never reaches exactly zero .
This is just what Zeno sought to prove .
He sought to prove this by formulating four paradoxes , which demonstrated the contradictions inherent in the mathematical thought of the time .
While Zeno 's paradoxes accurately demonstrated the deficiencies of current mathematical conceptions , they were not regarded as proof of the alternative .
In the minds of the Greeks , disproving the validity of one view did not necessarily prove the validity of another , and therefore further investigation had to occur .
The next step was taken by Eudoxus of Cnidus , who formalized a new theory of proportion that took into account commensurable as well as incommensurable quantities .
Central to his idea was the distinction between magnitude and number .
A magnitude " ... was not a number but stood for entities such as line segments , angles , areas , volumes , and time which could vary , as we would say , continuously .
Magnitudes were opposed to numbers , which jumped from one value to another , as from 4 to 5 .
" Numbers are composed of some smallest , indivisible unit , whereas magnitudes are infinitely reducible .
Because no quantitative values were assigned to magnitudes , Eudoxus was then able to account for both commensurable and incommensurable ratios by defining a ratio in terms of its magnitude , and proportion as an equality between two ratios .
By taking quantitative values ( numbers ) out of the equation , he avoided the trap of having to express an irrational number as a number .
" Eudoxus ' theory enabled the Greek mathematicians to make tremendous progress in geometry by supplying the necessary logical foundation for incommensurable ratios .
" This incommensurability is dealt with in Euclid 's Elements , Book X , Proposition 9 . As a result of the distinction between number and magnitude , geometry became the only method that could take into account incommensurable ratios .
Because previous numerical foundations were still incompatible with the concept of incommensurability , Greek focus shifted away from those numerical conceptions such as algebra and focused almost exclusively on geometry .
In fact , in many cases algebraic conceptions were reformulated into geometric terms .
This may account for why we still conceive of x and x as x squared and x cubed instead of x to the second power and x to the third power .
Also crucial to Zeno 's work with incommensurable magnitudes was the fundamental focus on deductive reasoning that resulted from the foundational shattering of earlier Greek mathematics .
The realization that some basic conception within the existing theory was at odds with reality necessitated a complete and thorough investigation of the axioms and assumptions that underlie that theory .
Out of this necessity , Eudoxus developed his method of exhaustion , a kind of reductio ad absurdum that " … established the deductive organization on the basis of explicit axioms … " as well as " … reinforced the earlier decision to rely on deductive reasoning for proof .
" This method of exhaustion is the first step in the creation of calculus .
Theodorus of Cyrene proved the irrationality of the surds of whole numbers up to 17 , but stopped there probably because the algebra he used could not be applied to the square root of 17 .
It was not until Eudoxus developed a theory of proportion that took into account irrational as well as rational ratios that a strong mathematical foundation of irrational numbers was created .
INDIA Section::::India .
Geometrical and mathematical problems involving irrational numbers such as square roots were addressed very early during the Vedic period in India .
There are references to such calculations in the Samhitas , Brahmanas , and the Shulba Sutras ( 800 BC or earlier ) .
( See Bag , Indian Journal of History of Science , 25(1 - 4 ) , 1990 ) .
It is suggested that the concept of irrationality was implicitly accepted by Indian mathematicians since the 7th century BC , when Manava ( c. 750 – 690 BC ) believed that the square roots of numbers such as 2 and 61 could not be exactly determined .
However , historian Carl Benjamin Boyer writes that " such claims are not well substantiated and unlikely to be true " .
It is also suggested that Aryabhata ( 5th century AD ) , in calculating a value of pi to 5 significant figures , used the word āsanna ( approaching ) , to mean that not only is this an approximation but that the value is incommensurable ( or irrational ) .
Later , in their treatises , Indian mathematicians wrote on the arithmetic of surds including addition , subtraction , multiplication , rationalization , as well as separation and extraction of square roots .
Mathematicians like Brahmagupta ( in 628 AD ) and Bhaskara I ( in 629 AD ) made contributions in this area as did other mathematicians who followed .
In the 12th century Bhaskara II evaluated some of these formulas and critiqued them , identifying their limitations .
During the 14th to 16th centuries , Madhava of Sangamagrama and the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics discovered the infinite series for several irrational numbers such as π and certain irrational values of trigonometric functions .
Jyeṣṭhadeva provided proofs for these infinite series in the Yuktibhāṣā .
MIDDLE AGES
Section::::Middle Ages .
In the Middle ages , the development of algebra by Muslim mathematicians allowed irrational numbers to be treated as algebraic objects .
Middle Eastern mathematicians also merged the concepts of " number " and " magnitude " into a more general idea of real numbers , criticized Euclid 's idea of ratios , developed the theory of composite ratios , and extended the concept of number to ratios of continuous magnitude .
In his commentary on Book 10 of the Elements , the Persian mathematician Al - Mahani ( d. 874/884 ) examined and classified quadratic irrationals and cubic irrationals .
He provided definitions for rational and irrational magnitudes , which he treated as irrational numbers .
He dealt with them freely but explains them in geometric terms as follows :
In contrast to Euclid 's concept of magnitudes as lines , Al - Mahani considered integers and fractions as rational magnitudes , and square roots and cube roots as irrational magnitudes .
He also introduced an arithmetical approach to the concept of irrationality , as he attributes the following to irrational magnitudes :
The Egyptian mathematician Abū Kāmil Shujā ibn Aslam ( c. 850 – 930 ) was the first to accept irrational numbers as solutions to quadratic equations or as coefficients in an equation , often in the form of square roots , cube roots and fourth roots .
In the 10th century , the Iraqi mathematician Al - Hashimi provided general proofs ( rather than geometric demonstrations ) for irrational numbers , as he considered multiplication , division , and other arithmetical functions .
Iranian mathematician , Abū Ja'far al - Khāzin ( 900–971 ) provides a definition of rational and irrational magnitudes , stating that if a definite quantity is : Many of these concepts were eventually accepted by European mathematicians sometime after the Latin translations of the 12th century .
Al - Hassār , a Moroccan mathematician from Fez specializing in Islamic inheritance jurisprudence during the 12th century , first mentions the use of a fractional bar , where numerators and denominators are separated by a horizontal bar .
In his discussion he writes , " ... , for example , if you are told to write three - fifths and a third of a fifth , write thus , formula_1 . "
This same fractional notation appears soon after in the work of Leonardo Fibonacci in the 13th century .
MODERN PERIOD
Section::::Modern period .
The 17th century saw imaginary numbers become a powerful tool in the hands of Abraham de Moivre , and especially of Leonhard Euler .
The completion of the theory of complex numbers in the 19th century entailed the differentiation of irrationals into algebraic and transcendental numbers , the proof of the existence of transcendental numbers , and the resurgence of the scientific study of the theory of irrationals , largely ignored since Euclid .
The year 1872 saw the publication of the theories of Karl Weierstrass ( by his pupil Ernst Kossak ) , Eduard Heine ( Crelle 's Journal , 74 ) , Georg Cantor ( Annalen , 5 ) , and Richard Dedekind .
Méray had taken in 1869 the same point of departure as Heine , but the theory is generally referred to the year 1872 .
Weierstrass 's method has been completely set forth by Salvatore Pincherle in 1880 , and Dedekind 's has received additional prominence through the author 's later work ( 1888 ) and the endorsement by Paul Tannery ( 1894 ) .
Weierstrass , Cantor , and Heine base their theories on infinite series , while Dedekind founds his on the idea of a cut ( Schnitt ) in the system of all rational numbers , separating them into two groups having certain characteristic properties .
The subject has received later contributions at the hands of Weierstrass , Leopold Kronecker ( Crelle , 101 ) , and Charles Méray .
Continued fractions , closely related to irrational numbers ( and due to Cataldi , 1613 ) , received attention at the hands of Euler , and at the opening of the 19th century were brought into prominence through the writings of Joseph - Louis Lagrange .
Dirichlet also added to the general theory , as have numerous contributors to the applications of the subject .
Johann Heinrich Lambert proved ( 1761 ) that π can not be rational , and that e is irrational if n is rational ( unless n = 0 ) .
While Lambert 's proof is often called incomplete , modern assessments support it as satisfactory , and in fact for its time it is unusually rigorous .
Adrien - Marie Legendre ( 1794 ) , after introducing the Bessel – Clifford function , provided a proof to show that π is irrational , whence
it follows immediately that π is irrational also .
The existence of transcendental numbers was first established by Liouville ( 1844 , 1851 ) .
Later , Georg Cantor ( 1873 ) proved their existence by a different method , which showed that every interval in the reals contains transcendental numbers .
Charles Hermite ( 1873 ) first proved e transcendental , and Ferdinand von Lindemann ( 1882 ) , starting from Hermite 's conclusions , showed the same for π .
Lindemann 's proof was much simplified by Weierstrass ( 1885 ) , still further by David Hilbert ( 1893 ) , and was finally made elementary by Adolf Hurwitz and Paul Gordan .
EXAMPLES
SQUARE
ROOTS Section::::Examples .
Section::::Square roots .
The square root of 2 was the first number proved irrational , and that article contains a number of proofs .
The golden ratio is another famous quadratic irrational and there is a simple proof of its irrationality in its article .
The square roots of all natural numbers which are not perfect squares are irrational and a proof may be found in quadratic irrationals .
GENERAL ROOTS Section::::General roots .
The proof above for the square root of two can be generalized using the fundamental theorem of arithmetic .
This asserts that every integer has a unique factorization into primes .
Using it we can show that if a rational number is not an integer then no integral power of it can be an integer , as in lowest terms there must be a prime in the denominator that does not divide into the numerator whatever power each is raised to .
Therefore , if an integer is not an exact k power of another integer , then that first integer 's k root is irrational .
LOGARITHMS Section::::Logarithms .
Perhaps the numbers most easy to prove irrational are certain logarithms .
Here is a proof by contradiction that log 3 is irrational .
Notice that log 3 ≈ 1.58 > 0 .
Assume log 3 is rational .
For some positive integers m and n , we have
It follows that However , the number 2 raised to any positive integer power must be even ( because it is divisible by 2 ) and the number 3 raised to any positive integer power must be odd ( since none of its prime factors will be 2 ) .
Clearly , an integer can not be both odd and even at the same time : we have a contradiction .
The only assumption we made was that log 3 is rational ( and so expressible as a quotient of integers m / n with n ≠ 0 ) .
The contradiction means that this assumption must be false , i.e. log 3 is irrational , and can never be expressed as a quotient of integers m / n with n ≠ 0 .
Cases such as log 2 can be treated similarly .
TRANSCENDENTAL AND ALGEBRAIC IRRATIONALS Section::::Transcendental and algebraic irrationals .
Almost all irrational numbers are transcendental and all real transcendental numbers are irrational ( there are also complex transcendental numbers ) : the article on transcendental numbers lists several examples .
So e and π are irrational for all nonzero rational r , and , e.g. , e is irrational , too .
Irrational numbers can also be found within the countable set of real algebraic numbers ( essentially defined as the real roots of polynomials with integer coefficients ) , i.e. , as real solutions of polynomial equations where the coefficients formula_7 are integers and formula_8 .
Any rational root of this polynomial equation must be of the form r /s , where r is a divisor of a and s is a divisor of a.
If a real root formula_9 of a polynomial formula_10 is not among these finitely many possibilities , it must be an irrational algebraic number .
An exemplary proof for the existence of such algebraic irrationals is by showing that x = ( 2 + 1 ) is an irrational root of a polynomial with integer coefficients : it satisfies ( x − 1 ) = 2 and hence x − 2x − 1 = 0 , and this latter polynomial has no rational roots ( the only candidates to check are ±1 , and x , being greater than 1 , is neither of these ) ,
so x is an irrational algebraic number .
Because the algebraic numbers form a subfield of the real numbers , many irrational real numbers can be constructed by combining transcendental and algebraic numbers .
For example , 3 + 2 , + and e are irrational ( and even transcendental ) .
DECIMAL EXPANSIONS Section::::Decimal expansions .
The decimal expansion of an irrational number never repeats or terminates ( the latter being equivalent to repeating zeroes ) , unlike any rational number .
The same is true for binary , octal or hexadecimal expansions , and in general for expansions in every positional notation with natural bases .
To show this , suppose we divide integers n by m ( where m is nonzero ) .
When long division is applied to the division of n by m , only m remainders are possible .
If 0 appears as a remainder , the decimal expansion terminates .
If 0 never occurs , then the algorithm can run at most m − 1 steps without using any remainder more than once .
After that , a remainder must recur , and then the decimal expansion repeats .
Conversely , suppose we are faced with a repeating decimal , we can prove that it is a fraction of two integers .
For example , consider : Here the repetend is 162 and the length of the repetend is 3 .
First , we multiply by an appropriate power of 10 to move the decimal point to the right so that it is just in front of a repetend .
In this example we would multiply by 10 to obtain : Now we multiply this equation by 10 where r is the length of the repetend .
This has the effect of moving the decimal point to be in front of the " next " repetend .
In our example , multiply by 10 : The result of the two multiplications gives two different expressions with exactly the same " decimal portion " , that is , the tail end of 10,000A matches the tail end of 10A exactly .
Here , both 10,000A and 10A have after the decimal point .
Therefore , when we subtract the 10A equation from the 10,000A equation , the tail end of 10A cancels out the tail end of 10,000A leaving us with : Then is a ratio of integers and therefore a rational number .
IRRATIONAL POWERS
Section::::Irrational powers .
Dov Jarden gave a simple non - constructive proof that there exist two irrational numbers a and b , such that a is rational : Consider ; if this is rational , then take a = b = .
Otherwise , take a to be the irrational number and b = .
Then a = ( ) = = = 2 , which is rational .
Although the above argument does not decide between the two cases , the Gelfond –
Schneider theorem shows that is transcendental , hence irrational .
This theorem states that if a and b are both algebraic numbers , and a is not equal to 0 or 1 , and b is not a rational number , then any value of a is a transcendental number ( there can be more than one value if complex number exponentiation is used ) .
An example that provides a simple constructive proof is The base of the left side is irrational and the right side is rational , so one must prove that the exponent on the left side , formula_17 , is irrational .
This is so because , by the formula relating logarithms with different bases , which we can assume , for the sake of establishing a contradiction , equals a ratio m / n of positive integers .
Then formula_19 hence formula_20 hence formula_21
hence formula_22 , which is a contradictory pair of prime factorizations and hence violates the fundamental theorem of arithmetic ( unique prime factorization ) .
A stronger result is the following : Every rational number in the interval formula_23 can be written either as a for some irrational number a or as n for some natural number n. Similarly , every positive rational number can be written either as formula_24 for some irrational number a or as formula_25 for some natural number n. OPEN QUESTIONS Section::::Open questions .
It is not known if formula_26 ( or formula_27 ) is irrational .
In fact , there is no pair of non - zero integers formula_28 for which it is known whether formula_29 is irrational .
Moreover , it is not known whether or not the set formula_30 is algebraically independent over formula_31 .
It is not known if formula_32 Catalan 's constant , or the Euler – Mascheroni constant formula_33 are irrational .
It is not known if either of the tetrations
formula_34 or formula_35 is rational for some integer formula_36 SET OF ALL IRRATIONALS Section::::Set of all irrationals .
Since the reals form an uncountable set , of which the rationals are a countable subset , the complementary set of irrationals is uncountable .
Under the usual ( Euclidean ) distance function d(x , y ) =
x − y , the real numbers are a metric space and hence also a topological space .
Restricting the Euclidean distance function gives the irrationals the structure of a metric space .
Since the subspace of irrationals is not closed , the induced metric is not complete .
However , being a G - delta set — i.e . , a countable intersection of open subsets — in a complete metric space , the space of irrationals is completely metrizable : that is , there is a metric on the irrationals inducing the same topology as the restriction of the Euclidean metric , but with respect to which the irrationals are complete .
One can see this without knowing the aforementioned fact about G - delta sets : the continued fraction expansion of an irrational number defines a homeomorphism from the space of irrationals to the space of all sequences of positive integers , which is easily seen to be completely metrizable .
Furthermore , the set of all irrationals is a disconnected metrizable space .
In fact , the irrationals have a basis of clopen sets so the space is zero - dimensional .
SEE ALSO
* Brjuno number
*
Computable number
*
Dedekind cut *
Diophantine approximation * Golden Ratio * nth root
* Proof that e is irrational
* Proof that π is irrational * Square root of 2
* Square root of 3 * Square root of 5
* Transcendental number
* Trigonometric number REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Adrien - Marie Legendre , Éléments de Géometrie , Note IV , ( 1802 ) ,
Paris * Rolf Wallisser , " On Lambert 's proof of the irrationality of π "
, in Algebraic Number Theory and Diophantine Analysis , Franz Halter - Koch and Robert F. Tichy , ( 2000 ) , Walter de Gruyer EXTERNAL LINKS
* Zeno 's Paradoxes and Incommensurability ( n.d . ) .
Retrieved April 1 , 2008