HARMONIC DAMPER
A harmonic damper is a device fitted to the free ( accessory drive ) end of the crankshaft of an internal combustion engine to counter torsional and resonance vibrations from the crankshaft .
This device must be interference fit to the crankshaft in order to operate in an effective manner .
An interference fit ensures the device moves in perfect step with crankshaft .
It is essential on engines with long crankshafts ( such as straight-6 , straight-8 engines ) and V8 engines with cross plane cranks .
Harmonics and torsional vibrations can greatly reduce crankshaft life , or cause instantaneous failure if the crankshaft runs at or through an amplified resonance .
Dampers are designed with a specific weight ( mass ) which is dependent on the damping material / method used and the freedom it affords the mass move allowing to reduce mechanical Q factor , or damp , crankshaft resonances .
A harmonic balancer ( sometimes crankshaft damper , torsional damper , or vibration damper ) is the same thing as a harmonic damper except that the balancer includes a counterweight to externally balance the rotating assembly .
The harmonic balancer often serves as a pulley for the accessory drive belts turning the alternator , water pump and other crankshaft driven devices .
NEED Section::::Need .
The need for a damper will depend on the age of the engine design , its manufacture , strength of components , usable powerband , rev range and , most importantly , the quality of the engine 's tune .
The engine 's tune especially in computer controlled applications can have a dramatic effect on durability , the aggressiveness of the tune puts the engine at risk of detonation which can be catastrophic to all rotating assembly components .
Modern ( roughly 1988 + )
DOHC , SOHC flat 4 , I4 , flat 6 , I6 , V6 , flat 8 , and flat - plane V8 have no need for this device .
With or without the presence of a damper , a crankshaft will act as a torsional spring to some extent .
Impulses applied to the crankshaft by the connecting rods will " wind " this spring , which will respond ( as a spring – mass system ) by unwinding and re - winding in the opposite direction .
This crankshaft winding will usually be damped out naturally .
However , at certain crankshaft rotational speeds , such winding can overlap with the crankshaft 's natural resonant frequency , thereby increasing the frequency 's amplitude and possibly leading to crankshaft damage .
TORSIONAL CRANKSHAFT MOVEMENT AND HARMONICS Section::::Torsional crankshaft movement and harmonics .
Each time a cylinder fires , the force of the combustion is imparted to the crankshaft rod journal .
The rod journal deflects in a torsional motion to some degree under this force .
Harmonic vibrations result from the torsional motion imparted on the crankshaft .
These harmonics are a function of many factors including frequencies created by the actual combustion and the natural frequencies the metals make under the stresses of combustion and flexing .
In some engines , the torsional motion of the crankshaft at certain speeds can synchronize with the harmonic vibrations , causing a resonance .
In some cases the resonance may stress the crankshaft to the point of cracking or complete failure .
COUNTERING
TORSIONAL CRANK MOTION AND HARMONIC VIBRATION Section::::Countering torsional crank motion and harmonic vibration .
The harmonic balancer helps minimize torsional crankshaft harmonics and resonance .
The damper is composed of two elements : an inertia mass and an energy dissipating element .
Most often made of rubber , this element may be composed of a synthetic elastomer , a clutch , a spring or fluid .
The mass counteracts the torsional crank motions and in concert with the energy dissipating element absorbs the harmonics vibrations .
CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Construction .
An OEM damper consists of an outer mass bonded / vulcanized to an inner hub .
An aftermarket performance damper consists of a mass which is attached /
mounted to a housing ( steel , aluminum , titanium , etc . )
based on the different types of damper and where the mass is controlled differently .
The first three use older technology ; First is the liquid type damper which surrounds the mass immersed in the housing which is then bonded or welded together .
Second is the o - ring type which surrounds the mass with a number of o - rings as it sits in its housing .
Third is the friction type which has clutches and spring acting on the mass inside the outer housing .
Fourth is the newest type in which the mass sits over and is attached an elastomer ring which is then attached to the outer housing .
The crankshaft and damper together become ( in its torsional response ) a spring – mass – damper system again which can only occur by the two being interference fit together .
ENGINE DESIGN , MATERIALS & OTHER FACTORS
Section::::Engine design , materials & other factors .
Over time engine development has continually advanced in almost all areas from material , operation , and function .
Many of the advances were led by the Japanese manufacturers as they have made quality and durability the cornerstone of their programs .
The Japanese advanced the proliferation of forged crankshafts with rotating assemblies at 0 gram balance .
Forged crankshafts are much stronger and are significantly less apt to exhibit detrimental torsional crankshaft movement which also mitigates harmonic frequencies .
This progression has also seen the addition of forged rods and pistons initially in forced induction engines and more recently in normally aspirated engines .
Adding these additional forged components ramps the engines rigidity reducing concern about crankshaft damage even further .
With the advent of computer aided design and finite element analysis , manufacturers can now find and re - engineer weaker areas .
Regardless of some of these improvements , certain engines , like the traditional V8 , have a firing order prone to excessive harmonics by nature necessitating the use of this device .
The flat plane V8 , traditionally used in more exotic engines , does not suffer from the excessive harmonics and therefore may use a solid undampened device .
Modern ( roughly 1988 + )
DOHC , SOHC Flat 4 , Flat 6 ,
Flat 8 , Flat Plane V8 have no need for this device .
Over the years many of these engines use solid cast iron or aluminum crank pulley or audible NVH damper ( reducing engine noise heard in the occupant compartment ) .
Audible NVH has been the biggest factor in OE manufacturer decisions throughout the vehicle .
In addition the pulleys on these engines are mounted loosely with a location fit negating any potential to act as an engine protective damper .
Continental has recently provided detailed information on the maximum acceptable noise ( NVH ) that should be heard from under the hood from the engine in their Elite Belt program http://www.thequietbelt.com/#the-art-of-silence .
IDENTIFICATION Section::::Identification .
The damper will be fitted at the front of the engine ( opposite the clutch or transmission ) just beyond the cover of the timing chain , gears , or belt , and behind the accessory drive pulley ( which may carry one or more V , serpentine , or cogged belts . )
In older vehicles the pulley and damper were separate units that were bolted together .
In late model vehicles the two have been combined into one unit .
Timing marks are almost always engraved for purposes of setting the ignition timing .
MAINTENANCE Section::::Maintenance .
OE dampers are predominantly made using rubber as the bonding agent between the inner hub and the outer mass .
Rubber is susceptible to operational and environmental factors .
Rubber only has a finite ability to withstand operating temperatures plus any fluids that may find their way onto the damper .
They are also susceptible to low temperatures which can make the rubber brittle .
Any cracking of the elastomer(rubber ) would be an immediate indicator of the need to replace the unit .
OE dampers must be balanced , unless acting as an external balancer ( Harmonic Balancer ) , as the quality of materials ( usually cast or sintered iron ) do not lend themselves to acceptable / perfect balance specifications straight from manufacturing .
Most aftermarket dampers are rebuildable , excluding the fluid type .
When used in racing ( drag , circle track , road race , etc . )
they require regular inspection to ensure their proper function .
When used on street driven vehicles , the damper manufacturer can provide inspection and service intervals based on the particulars of the engine the damper is being used on .
EFFECTS OF REMOVAL Section::::Effects of removal .
Some performance enthusiasts have been known to remove the harmonic balancer , believing that its mass reduces engine performance .
Removal of this device from a traditional engine is very risky due to the potential for crankshaft damage .
If the device has weight mounted on it to balance the rotating assembly , the effects may be felt immediately and could be catastrophic .
ORIGINAL INVENTION Section::::Original invention .
Both Frederick Henry Royce and Frederick W. Lanchester have strong claims to the invention of the vibration damper , with the latest research showing Rolls - Royce using a crankshaft slipper ( friction ) vibration damper on their 1906 30HP models ; however , Royce had not submitted it for patent .
Lanchester had developed a theoretical multi - plate viscous design in 1910 ( patent 21,139 , 12 September 1910 ) .
Royce developed a viscous damper in 1912 that was then further developed and carried through to the B60 engine of the 1950s .
SEE ALSO
* Balance shaft
* Engine balance * Noise and vibration on maritime vessels
* Tuned mass damper
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://www.atiracing.com/products/dampers/sae.htm * http://www.atiracing.com/products/dampers/101/index.htm