RABIES TRANSMISSION
Rabies is mostly transmitted to humans , and between animals , through the saliva of infected animals .
Transmission is generally through a bite from any infected animal .
Transmission between humans is extremely rare , although it can happen through organ transplants , or through bites .
After a typical human infection by bite , the virus enters the peripheral nervous system .
It then travels along the nerves towards the central nervous system .
During this phase , the virus can not be easily detected within the host , and vaccination may still confer cell - mediated immunity to prevent symptomatic rabies .
Once the virus reaches the brain , it rapidly causes encephalitis and symptoms appear .
This is called the " prodromal " phase and at this time , treatment is usually unsuccessful .
Rabies may also inflame the spinal cord producing myelitis .
ANIMALS Section::::Animals .
Any mammal may become infected with the rabies virus and develop symptoms , including humans .
But dogs are , by far , the main source of human rabies deaths , contributing up to 99 % of all rabies transmissions to humans according to the World Health Organization .
Infected monkeys , raccoons , foxes , skunks , cattle , wolves , bats , and cats are also known to transmit rabies to humans .
Rabies may also spread through exposure to infected domestic farm animals , groundhogs , weasels , bears and other wild carnivores .
Small rodents such as squirrels , hamsters , guinea pigs , gerbils , chipmunks , rats , and mice and lagomorphs like rabbits and hares are almost never found to be infected with rabies and are not known to transmit rabies to humans .
Vampire bats can transmit rabies to humans in the ' new world ' tropics .
The virus is usually present in the nerves and saliva of a symptomatic rabid animal .
The route of infection is usually , but not necessarily , by a bite .
In many cases the infected animal is exceptionally aggressive , may attack without provocation , and exhibits otherwise uncharacteristic behaviour .
( Note that " uncharacteristic behaviour " may include uncharacteristic friendliness as well as the stereotypically violent mode of rabies .
Since rabies can be transmitted through contact with saliva , not just through bites , this " tame " mode of rabies is no less dangerous . )
It has been suggested that transmission may very rarely occur via an aerosol through mucous membranes ; and that transmission in this form might conceivably endanger people exploring caves populated by rabid bats .
However , non - bite transmission of rabies is very rare , and aerosol transmission has never been well documented in the natural environment .
REFERENCES