US AIRWAYS FLIGHT 1549 US Airways Flight 1549 was an Airbus A320 - 214 which , in the climbout after takeoff from New York City 's LaGuardia Airport on January 15 , 2009 , struck a flock of Canada geese just northeast of the George Washington Bridge and consequently lost all engine power .
Unable to reach any airport , pilots Chesley Sullenberger and Jeffrey Skiles glided the plane to a ditching in the Hudson River off Midtown Manhattan .
All 155 people aboard were rescued by nearby boats and there were few serious injuries .
The accident came to be known as the " Miracle on the Hudson " , and a National Transportation Safety Board official described it as " the most successful ditching in aviation history .
"
The Board rejected the notion that the pilot could have avoided ditching by returning to LaGuardia or diverting to nearby Teterboro Airport .
The pilots and flight attendants were awarded the Master 's Medal of the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators in recognition of their " heroic and unique aviation achievement " .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
On January 15 , 2009 , US Airways Flight 1549 with call sign ' CACTUS 1549 ' was scheduled to fly from New York City 's LaGuardia Airport ( LGA ) to Charlotte Douglas ( CLT ) , with direct onward service to Seattle – Tacoma International Airport .
The aircraft was an Airbus A320 - 214 powered by two GE Aviation / Snecma - designed CFM56 - 5B4 / P turbofan engines .
The pilot in command was 57-year - old Chesley Sullenberger , a former fighter pilot who had been an airline pilot since leaving the United States Air Force in 1980 .
At the time , he had logged 19,663 total flight hours , including 4,765 in an A320 ; he was also a glider pilot and expert on aviation safety .
First officer Jeffrey B. Skiles , 49 , had accrued 15,643 career flight hours , but this was his first Airbus A320 assignment since qualifying to fly it .
There were 150 passengers and three flight attendants aboard .
ACCIDENT TAKEOFF AND BIRD STRIKE
Section::::Accident .
Section::::Takeoff and bird strike .
The flight was cleared for takeoff to the northeast from LaGuardia 's Runway 4 at 3:24:56 pm Eastern Standard Time ( 20:24:56 UTC ) .
With Skiles in control , the crew made its first report after becoming airborne at 3:25:51 as being at and climbing .
The weather at 2:51 p.m. was visibility with broken clouds at , wind from 290 ° ; an hour later it was few clouds at , wind from 310 ° .
At 3:26:37 Sullenberger remarked to Skiles : " What a view of the Hudson today . "
At 3:27:11 the plane struck a flock of Canada geese at an altitude of about north - northwest of LaGuardia .
The pilots ' view was filled with the large birds ; passengers and crew heard very loud bangs and saw flames from the engines , followed by silence and an odor of fuel .
Realizing that both engines had shut down , Sullenberger took control while Skiles worked the checklist for engine restart .
The aircraft slowed but continued to climb for a further 19 seconds , reaching about at an airspeed of about , then began a glide descent , accelerating to at 3:28:10 as it descended through .
At 3:27:33 , Sullenberger radioed a mayday call to New York Terminal Radar Approach Control ( TRACON ) : " ...
this is Cactus 1539
[ siccorrect call sign was Cactus 1549 ] , hit birds .
We 've lost thrust on both engines .
We 're turning back towards LaGuardia " .
Air traffic controller Patrick Harten told LaGuardia 's tower to hold all departures , and directed Sullenberger back to Runway 13 .
Sullenberger responded , " Unable " .
Sullenberger asked controllers for landing options in New Jersey , mentioning Teterboro Airport .
Permission was given for Teterboro 's Runway 1 , but Sullenberger responded : " We ca n't do it ...
We 're gon na be in the Hudson " .
The aircraft passed less than above the George Washington Bridge .
Sullenberger commanded over the cabin address system , " Brace for impact " , and the flight attendants relayed the command to passengers .
Meanwhile , air traffic controllers asked the Coast Guard to caution vessels in the Hudson and ask them to prepare to assist with rescue .
DITCHING AND EVACUATION Section::::Ditching and evacuation .
About ninety seconds later , at 3:31 pm , the plane made an unpowered ditching , descending southwards at about into the middle of the North River section of the Hudson tidal estuary , at on the New York side of the state line , roughly opposite West 50th Street ( near the Intrepid Sea , Air & Space Museum ) in Manhattan and Port Imperial in Weehawken , New Jersey .
Flight attendants compared the ditching to a " hard landing " with " one impact , no bounce , then a gradual deceleration .
"
The ebb tide then began to take the plane southward .
Sullenberger opened the cockpit door and ordered evacuation .
The crew began evacuating the passengers through the four overwing window exits and into an inflatable slide / raft deployed from the front right passenger door ( the front left slide failed to operate , so the manual inflation handle was pulled ) .
A panicked passenger opened a rear door , which a flight attendant was unable to reseal .
Water was also entering a hole in the fuselage and through cargo doors that had come open , so as the water rose the attendant urged passengers to move forward by climbing over seats .
One passenger was in a wheelchair .
Finally , Sullenberger walked the cabin twice to confirm it was empty .
The air and water temperatures were about and respectively .
Some evacuees waited for rescue knee - deep in water on the partially submerged slides , some wearing life - vests .
Others stood on the wings or , fearing an explosion , swam away from the plane .
One passenger , after helping with the evacuation , found the wing so crowded that he jumped into the river and swam to a boat .
RESCUE Section::::Rescue .
Sullenberger had ditched near boats which facilitated rescue .
NY Waterway ferries Thomas Jefferson and then Governor Thomas H. Kean both
arrived within minutes and began taking people aboard using a Jason 's cradle .
Sullenberger advised the ferry crews to rescue those on the wings first , as they were in more jeopardy than those on the slides , which detached to become life rafts .
As the plane drifted , passengers on one slide , fearing that the boat would crush them , shouted for it to steer away .
The last person was taken from the plane at 3:55 pm .
About 140 New York City firefighters responded to nearby docks , as did police , helicopters , and various vessels and divers .
Other agencies provided medical help on the Weehawken side of the river , where most passengers were taken .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
There were five serious injuries , including a deep laceration in flight attendant Doreen Welsh 's leg .
Seventy - eight people were treated , mostly for minor injuries and hypothermia ; twenty - four passengers and two rescuers were treated at hospitals , with two passengers kept overnight .
One passenger now wears glasses because of eye damage from jet fuel .
No pets were being carried on the flight .
Each passenger later received a letter of apology , $ 5,000 in compensation for lost baggage ( and $ 5,000 more if they could demonstrate larger losses ) and refund of the ticket price .
In May 2009 they received any belongings that had been recovered .
In addition , they reported offers of $ 10,000 each in return for agreeing not to sue US Airways .
Many passengers and rescuers
later experienced post - traumatic stress symptoms such as sleeplessness , flashbacks , and panic attacks ; some began an email support group .
Patrick Harten , the controller who had worked the flight , said that " the hardest , most traumatic part of the entire event was when it was over " , and that he was " gripped by raw moments of shock and grief " .
In an effort to prevent similar accidents , officials captured and gassed 1,235 Canada geese at 17 locations across New York City in mid-2009 and coated 1,739 goose eggs with oil to smother the developing goslings .
INVESTIGATION Section::::Investigation .
The partially submerged plane was moored to a pier near the World Financial Center in Lower Manhattan , roughly downstream from the ditching location .
The left engine , detached by the ditching , was recovered from the riverbed .
On January 17 the aircraft was barged to New Jersey .
The initial National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) evaluation that the plane had lost thrust after a bird strike was confirmed by analysis of the cockpit voice and flight data recorders .
Two days earlier the plane had experienced a less severe compressor stall , but the affected engine was restarted .
A faulty temperature sensor was replaced , and inspection verified the engine had not been damaged in that incident .
On January 21 , the NTSB found evidence of soft - body damage in the right engine along with organic debris including a feather .
The left engine also evidenced soft body impact , with : " dents on both the spinner and inlet lip of the engine cowling .
Five booster inlet guide vanes are fractured and eight outlet guide vanes are missing .
"
Both engines , missing large portions of their housings , were sent to the manufacturer for examination .
On January 31 , the plane was moved to Kearny , New Jersey .
The bird remains were later identified by DNA testing to be Canada geese , which typically weigh more than engines are designed to withstand ingesting .
Because the plane was assembled in France the European Aviation Safety Agency ( the European counterpart of the FAA ) and the Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses pour la Sécurité de l'Aviation Civile ( the French counterpart of the NTSB ) joined the investigation , with technical assistance from Airbus and GE Aviation / Snecma , respectively the manufacturers of the airframe and the engines .
The NTSB used flight simulators to test the possibility that the flight could have returned safely to LaGuardia or diverted to Teterboro ; only seven of the thirteen simulated returns to La Guardia succeeded , and only one of the two to Teterboro .
Furthermore , the NTSB report called these simulations unrealistic : " The immediate turn made by the pilots during the simulations did not reflect or account for real - world considerations . "
A further simulation , conducted with the pilot delayed by 35 seconds , crashed .
In testimony before the NTSB , Sullenberger maintained that there had been no time to bring the plane to any airport , and that attempting to do so would likely have killed those onboard and more on the ground .
The Board ultimately ruled that Sullenberger had made the correct decision , reasoning that the checklist for dual - engine failure is designed for higher altitudes , when pilots have more time to deal with the situation , and that while simulations showed that the plane might have just barely made it back to LaGuardia , those scenarios assumed an instant decision to do so , with no time allowed for assessing the situation .
On May 4 , 2010 the NTSB issued its final report , which identified the probable cause as " the ingestion of large birds into each engine , which resulted in an almost total loss of thrust in both engines .
" The final report credited the outcome to four factors : good decision - making and teamwork by the cockpit crew ( including decisions to immediately turn on the APU and to ditch in the Hudson ) ; the fact that the A320 is certified for extended overwater operation ( and hence carried life vests and additional raft / slides ) even though not required for that route ; the performance of the flight crew during the evacuation ; and the proximity of working vessels to the ditching site .
Contributing factors were good visibility and a fast response from the ferry operators and emergency responders .
The report also makes a range of recommendations to improve safety in such situations .
Author and pilot William Langewiesche asserted that insufficient credit was given to the A320 's fly - by - wire design , by which the pilot uses a side - stick to make control inputs to the flight control computers .
The computers then impose adjustments and limits of their own to keep the plane stable , which the pilot can not override even in an emergency .
This design allowed the pilots of Flight 1549 to concentrate on engine restart and deciding the course , without the burden of manually adjusting the glidepath to reduce the plane 's rate of descent .
However , Sullenberger said that these computer - imposed limits also prevented him from achieving the optimum landing flare for the ditching , which would have softened the impact .
In 2010 , the damaged plane ( excluding its engines ) was acquired for the Carolinas Aviation Museum in Charlotte , North Carolina , which held a reception on June 11 to commemorate the arrival in Charlotte of the plane 's body , with Sullenberger as keynote speaker and the passengers invited .
CREW AWARDS AND HONORS Section::::Crew awards and honors .
An NTSB board member called the ditching " the most successful ... in aviation history .
These people knew what they were supposed to do and they did it and as a result , no lives were lost . "
The crew , especially Sullenberger , was praised , notably by New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and New York State Governor David Paterson , who said : " We had a Miracle on 34th Street .
I believe now we have had a Miracle on the Hudson . "
U.S. President George W. Bush said he was " inspired by the skill and heroism of the flight crew , " and praised the emergency responders and volunteers .
President - elect Barack Obama said that everyone was proud of Sullenberger 's " heroic and graceful job in landing the damaged aircraft . "
He thanked the crew , whom he invited to his inauguration five days later .
The Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators awarded the crew a Master 's Medal on January 22 , 2009 ; this is awarded only rarely , for outstanding aviation achievements at the discretion of the Master of the Guild .
New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg presented the crew with the Keys to the City , and Sullenberger with a replacement copy of a library book lost on the flight , Sidney Dekker 's Just Culture : Balancing Safety and Accountability .
Rescuers received Certificates of Honor .
The crew received a standing ovation at the Super Bowl XLIII on February 1 , 2009 , and Sullenberger threw out the first pitch at the 2009 Major League Baseball season for the San Francisco Giants .
His Giants jersey was inscribed with the name " Sully " and the number 155the count of people aboard the plane .
On July 28 , passengers Dave Sanderson and Barry Leonard organized a thank you luncheon for emergency responders from Hudson County , New Jersey , on the shores of Palisades Medical Center in North Bergen , New Jersey , where 57 passengers had been brought following their rescue .
Present were members of the U.S. Coast Guard , North Hudson Regional Fire and Rescue , NY Waterway Ferries , the American Red Cross , Weehawken Volunteer First Aid , the Weehawken Police Department , West New York E.M.S. , North Bergen E.M.S. , the Hudson County Office of Emergency Management , the New Jersey E.M.S. Task Force , the Guttenberg Police Department , McCabe Ambulance , the Harrison Police Department , and doctors and nurses who treated survivors .
Sullenberger was named Grand Marshal for the 2010 Tournament of Roses Parade in Pasadena , California .
In August 2010 , Jeppesen issued an approach plate titled " Hudson Miracle APCH , " dedicated to the five crew of Flight 1549 and annotated " Presented with Pride and Gratitude from your friends at Jeppesen . "
Sullenberger retired on March 3 , 2010 , after thirty years with US Airways and its predecessor , Pacific Southwest Airlines .
At the end of his final flight he was reunited with Skiles and a number of the passengers from Flight 1549 .
In 2013 , the entire crew was inducted into the International Air & Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air & Space Museum .
MEDIA AND POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Media and popular culture .
The accident was recorded by several closed - circuit television cameras .
Various television reports and documentaries produced soon afterwards contained extensive video of the ditching and rescue , and recorded interviews with the aircrew , passengers , rescuers , and other key participants .
These included : *
On February 8 , 2009 , the CBS program 60 Minutes broadcast three segments that included interviews with the aircrew as well as their reunion with passengers .
The program aired again on July 5 , 2009 .
* " Flight 1549 :
A Routine Takeoff Turns Ugly " * " Flight 1549 : Saving 155 Souls
In Minutes " * " Flight 1549 : An Emotional Reunion " *
On February 19 , 2009 , Channel 4 in the United Kingdom aired a documentary titled The Miracle of the Hudson Plane Crash included personal accounts from passengers , rescuers , and witnesses .
*
On February 21 , 2009 , KGO - TV in San Francisco broadcast an interview in the " Face to Face " series .
Dan Ashley talked to Captain and Mrs. Sullenberger about their experiences during and since the accident .
*
On March 4 , 2009 , the Discovery Channel broadcast a one - hour documentary titled Hudson Plane Crash – What Really Happened , with computer - generated imagery ( CGI ) animations of the flight , and interviews with passengers , crew , witnesses , rescuers , and aviation safety experts .
*
On January 10 , 2010 , TLC aired a documentary titled Brace For Impact , aired again on April 14 in Australia as Brace For Impact : Inside The Hudson Plane Crash .
*
In March 2011 , Ric Elias , a front - row passenger shared his experience during a TED conference .
* Beginning in June 2011 , the University of North Carolina School of Filmmaking and Process Pictures , LLC worked with the Carolinas Aviation Museum to produce a documentary , which also looked at the impact of the incident on society .
The crash was featured in the Discovery Channel ( Canada ) / National Geographic TV series Mayday on the episode Hudson Splash Down .
It was also recreated in a National Geographic Channel TV special titled " Miracle Landing on the Hudson , " and in the United Kingdom for a Channel 5 special in 2011 .
Garrison Keillor honored the entire flight crew by writing a song and performing it on his show , A Prairie Home Companion .
The ditching is referenced in the song " A Real Hero " by College and Electric Youth , best known from the 2011 movie Drive .
The lyrics of the second verse describe the water landing and the survival of the passengers and crew , as well as alluding to the freezing river .
Sullenberger 's memoir , Highest Duty :
My Search for What
Really Matters was adapted into a feature film Sully : Miracle on the Hudson , directed by Clint Eastwood , with Tom Hanks as Sullenberger and Aaron Eckhart as co - pilot Jeff Skiles .
It was released by Warner Bros. on September 9 , 2016 .
SEE ALSO
* List of airline flights that required gliding
* Garuda Indonesia Flight 421 , emergency landing on Bengawan Solo river after a dual engine flameout in 2002 * Pan Am Flight 6 , successful no - lives - lost ditching of a Boeing 377 Stratocruiser in the Pacific Ocean , 1956
* Caspian Airlines Flight 7908 , brought down by mechanical failure caused by bird strikes , killing 168 people * Ryanair Flight 4102 , which was brought down by bird strikes
* Scandinavian Airlines Flight 751 , emergency landing in woodland north of Stockholm after dual engine overheating & failure and a brief low - altitude glide ; no fatalities
* TACA Flight 110 , landed on to a levee east of New Orleans International Airport after dual engine flameout ; no casualties * The 1963 Aeroflot Tupolev Tu-124 Neva river ditching , a planned landing in a river which resulted in no casualties * Air Transat Flight 236 , emergency landing in the Azores after gliding for almost 100 miles NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS US
AIRWAYS PRESS RELEASES
* " US Airways Flight 1549 Initial Report " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 15 , 2009
* " Press Release : " Press Release :
US Airways Flight 1549 Update # 2 " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 15 , 2009
* " Press Release : US Airways Flight 1549 Update # 3 " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 15 , 2009
* " US Airways Flight 1549 Update # 7 " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 16 , 2009
* " US Airways Flight 1549 Update # 8 " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 16 , 2009
* " US Airways Update Regarding Crew of Flight 1549 " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 16 , 2009
* Parker , Doug ( January 15 , 2009 ) . "
US Airways CEO Doug Parker makes statement regarding flight 1549 " .
US Airways .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 16 , 2009
* " US Airways CEO Doug Parker Invited to Speak at Honor Ceremony Regarding Flight 1549 " .
phx.corporate-ir.net .
Tempe , Arizona .
January 16 , 2009
* " US Airways update regarding crew of flight 1549 " .
Tempe Arizona , January 19 , 2009 .
OTHER LINKS