LEGO ROCK BAND Lego Rock Band is a music video game , part of the Rock Band series , that incorporates elements from Lego video games .
It was developed by TT Fusion in cooperation with Harmonix , and published by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment in partnership with MTV Games .
The game was released on 3 November 2009 for Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii home consoles in the United States .
A Nintendo DS version was also developed in conjunction with Backbone Entertainment .
The game , as with other games in the Rock Band series , allows up to four players to use instrument controllers to play lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals on a number of rock music songs .
In addition , aspects of building with Lego bricks are incorporated into the game , allowing players to customize their avatars and other band assistants , and include additional Lego - themed gameplay modes .
The gameplay and the game 's 45-song soundtrack has been selected to create a " family - friendly " game .
Players are able to export the songs from the game into other Rock Band titles , while downloadable content that passes family - friendly filters can be incorporated into the game ; however , songs released after Rock Band 3 are not compatible due to changes in the song format .
Lego Rock Band was met with moderate reviews , which praised the inclusion of both the Rock Band and Lego video game aspects incorporated into the game , but questioned some selections on the game 's soundtrack and some features that would be at odds with the target audience of the game .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Lego Rock Band is based primarily on the same gameplay as the main Rock Band series , though it includes aspects of collecting and building with Lego bricks as in Traveller 's Tales 's other Lego - themed games .
Up to four local players can play lead and bass guitar , drums , or vocals across the songs in the game using specially designed Rock Band or Guitar Hero controllers .
During each song , players attempt to match notes ( shown as Lego bricks ) as they scroll on - screen in time with the current song .
On lead and bass guitar , notes are hit by holding down the frets indicated on - screen and using the controller 's strum bar when the note passes through the target area of the track .
Drummers simply hit one of the four colored drum pads indicated as the notes cross the target area , with wide orange notes indicating kick drum notes .
Singers have to sing in relative pitch to the song 's original pitch .
Completing consecutive series of notes will build up a player 's scoring multiplier and add to the band 's total Lego " studs " ( equivalent to points ) for the song .
Certain phrases of notes are glowing " energy phrases " ; successfully completing these adds energy to the player 's " Overdrive " meter .
When they have enough energy , a player can activate Overdrive to double the band 's studs multiplier .
Players are rewarded with up to 5 stars for completing a song based on their performance .
Players can choose from five difficulties ( " Super Easy " , " Easy " , " Medium " , " Hard " , and " Expert " ) at the start of each song , with higher difficulties generally having more notes of the song in the track .
Super Easy is a difficulty unique to Lego Rock Band .
Super Easy uses the same charts as Easy , but on Super Easy it does n't matter what pitch is hit for vocals , which fret is held for guitar and bass so long as the player strums in time , or which drum head is hit for drums .
Lego Rock Band also includes other features not found in Rock Band 2 to make the game easier , such as an " Automatic Kick Drum " modifier which eliminates the need to use the drum controller 's bass drum pedal .
It is also impossible to fail a song when a player is performing poorly ; instead , poor performances consume studs that have already been earned for the song , although the player will have a chance to recover lost studs before the end of the song .
Certain songs which feature long intros or outros , such as "
Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic " by The Police , can also be played in " Short Song Mode " , in order to help younger players with shorter attention spans stay interested in the game .
GAME MODES Section::::Game modes .
The main game mode is the " Story Mode " , which is structured similarly to the " Tour " mode of the other Rock Band games .
The Story mode follows the player 's band through their career , starting by playing gigs at smaller venues and taking requests for special performances .
New gigs , venues , and vehicles to get to those venues are unlocked as the band earns stars and fans .
By completing gigs , players earn objects they can use to customize their Lego avatars , decorate their " Rock Den " , or buy staff members to help their band earn fans and studs .
The story mode also includes special gigs called " Rock Power Challenges " in which the band uses the " power of rock " to complete a task such as demolishing a building or escaping a dinosaur , by playing a select song from the setlist which is in - context with the task at hand .
During Rock Power Challenges , players take turns playing sections of the song rather , and poor performances can lead to failure of the challenge .
Players can also play in " Free Play " mode which allows them to play any song without having to enter Story Mode .
NINTENDO DS
VERSION Section::::Nintendo DS version .
The Nintendo DS version of Lego Rock Band is similar to the PlayStation Portable game Rock Band Unplugged and the Nintendo DS version of Rock Band 3 .
During each song , the player switches between the various instruments , trying to keep all four members of the band " happy " ; this is done by successfully completing a series of notes for the specific instrument , and then correctly hitting a final , purple note to increase that band member 's happiness .
Band members ' happiness will fall over time , requiring the player to continually switch between band members to maintain the band 's overall mood and score multiplier .
The game uses the touchpad , stylus , and face buttons of the DS , and does not require or support additional peripherals like the console versions do .
Up to four people can play at a time , each using a separate DS and playing their own instrument .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Lego Rock Bands 45-song soundtrack was selected to be " suitable for younger audiences " , unlike those of other Rock Band games .
The Nintendo DS version of the game features a 25-song subset of the songs in the console versions .
The Lego Rock Band Music Store includes downloadable content ( DLC ) from the standard Rock Band Music Store which has " been identified to be suitable for all ages " .
Also , any songs exported from the original Rock Band and its Track Packs deemed " Family Friendly " can be used in the game .
All songs available in Lego Rock Band are compatible with other entries in the Rock Band series and can be exported to those games for along with the use of a unique code included on a paper insert included in the game case .
Songs from the Rock Band Network can not be played in Lego Rock Band due to the songs being unrated .
No songs released as DLC after Rock Band 3s release are compatible with previous games , including Lego Rock Band , due to changes in the file format .
The Wii version of the game can not use any downloaded or exported songs , and its songs can not be exported to other games .
As of 5 years after the game 's release , it is no longer possible to export the in game songs .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Industry rumors circulated in early 2009 of the game 's existence and appeared to be true when mention of the game was shown in a slide ( that was later removed ) in Harmonix 's Dan Teasdale 's presentation at the 2009 Game Developers Conference .
The game was announced officially on 21 April 2009 .
TT Fusion 's head of animation , Matt Palmer , stated that Harmonix had approached Traveler 's Tales who , in turn , approached TT Fusion on the game concept around October 2008 .
At that time , about 50 % of the studio was against the concept , but had come around by the end of 2008 , realizing that they " were n't just skinning one franchise on another " .
Despite skepticism for the viability of the game , the game is stated to combine " two compelling properties " by Traveller 's Tales managing director Tom Stone , and has been called " a social game experience that crosses every generation and every genre of rock " by MTV Games senior vice president Bob Picunko .
Iggy Pop voices the in - game tutorials for the game , and lends his trademark shirtless image to a Lego avatar for the game .
David Bowie , along with his band and a venue loosely based on his music video for " Let 's Dance " , also appears in the game .
The bands Queen , Blur , and Spinal Tap have Lego avatars for the game ( in the Nintendo DS version , however , the Spinal Tap minifigures are not available ) .
In the case of Queen guitarist Brian May , he had required that the developers represent his hair style on his Lego caricature .
John Drake of Harmonix stated the presence of Pop and Bowie add " rock credibility " to the family - friendly title .
TT Fusion opted to map the motions of the Lego mini - figurines to key frame animation instead of motion capture which had been used on previous Rock Band titles , as it allowed for them to animate more exaggerated motions and effects .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Game Informer gave the game a score of 8 of 10 , praising some of its new features like the Super Easy mode , but criticizing the soundtrack as hit and miss , and a bit repetitive if the player does not have any downloaded songs .
Jack DeVries of IGN gave the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions a 7.0/10 , calling the presentation " adorable " and " just so damn cute " , but still thinks of this game as " half a game for the full price " mainly because of the reduced soundtrack .
The Wii version fared less well , receiving a 5.5/10 , due to " terrible looks " and " hard to read text .
"
In contrast , the DS version scored an impressive 8.4 from IGN 's Craig Harris , who praised it as feeling fresh and new compared to the console versions .
GameTrailers gave the game 7.9 criticising the lack of previous features such as online play , and called the Lego presentation superficial , saying the purchase decision will lie squarely on the song preferences .
The game has sold approximately 600,000 units by March 2010 .
Lego Rock Band was nominated for the " Best Family Game " Interactive Achievement Award from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences , but it lost to .
The nominees also included Guitar Hero 5 , Wii Fit Plus , and Wii Sports Resort .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site * Lego Rock Band website