FLASHFORWARD
FlashForward is an American television series , adapted for television by Brannon Braga and David S. Goyer , which aired for one season on ABC between September 24 , 2009 , and May 27 , 2010 .
It is based on the 1999 novel Flashforward by Canadian science fiction writer Robert J. Sawyer .
The series revolves around the lives of several people as a mysterious event causes nearly everyone on the planet to simultaneously lose consciousness for two minutes and seventeen seconds on October 6 , 2009 .
During this blackout , people see what appear to be visions of their lives on April 29 , 2010 , a global " flashforward " six months into the future .
In May 2010 , ABC announced that FlashForward had been cancelled .
The season finale for Season 1 was shot before it was known
the show would be cancelled and showed another flashforward event happening more than 20 years in the future .
This more closely followed the original book , which featured a flashforward that peered 21½ years into the future .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
FlashForward is constructed around a high - concept narrative where a mysterious event has caused nearly everyone on the planet to simultaneously lose consciousness for 137 seconds , during which time people see what appears to be a vision of their own life approximately six months in the future : a global " flashforward " .
A team of Los Angeles FBI agents , led by Stanford Wedeck ( Vance ) and spearheaded by Mark Benford ( Fiennes ) and his partner Demetri Noh ( Cho ) , begin the process of determining what happened , why , and whether it will happen again .
Benford contributes a unique perspective on the investigation ; in his flashforward , he saw the results of six months of investigation that he had done on the flashforward event , and he and his team use those clues to recreate the investigation .
The team investigates a number of events related to the flashforward , including " Suspect Zero " , who did not lose consciousness during the event because of a quantum entanglement device ( QED ) , the sinister " D. Gibbons / Dyson Frost " , and a similar mass loss of consciousness in Somalia many years earlier in 1991 .
Meanwhile , personal revelations contained within the flashforwards occupy the personal lives of the principal characters .
Mark Benford sees himself relapsing into alcoholism ; his wife sees herself with another man ; Demetri Noh sees nothing , which could mean that he will not be alive to see the day everyone else has glimpsed or , perhaps , that his future was not set on the day of the flashforward .
Other characters grapple with similarly unexpected or surprising revelations in their flashforwards .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS * Joseph Fiennes as FBI Special Agent Mark Benford –
Mark 's flashforward guides the investigation of the events of October 6 .
The husband of Olivia Benford and father of Charlie Benford , he is a recovering alcoholic .
In his flashforward , he sees himself working on the Mosaic investigation when armed masked men enter his office .
He also sees himself drinking , which he tries to hide from his wife .
( 22 episodes )
* John Cho as FBI Special Agent Demetri Noh – Mark Benford 's partner at the FBI .
He had no flashforward and fears that means he will die , especially after he receives a mysterious phone call telling him that he will be murdered .
He is engaged to Zoey , a lawyer who believed her flashforward was about their wedding until she realized it was possibly his funeral .
Demetri survives March 15 , the date he was supposed to have been killed , thanks to Mark 's assistance .
( 22 episodes )
* Courtney B. Vance as FBI Assistant Director Stanford Wedeck – head of the FBI Los Angeles field office .
He oversees Mark Benford 's team and the October 6 investigation .
His flashforward shows him on a toilet reading a newspaper .
( 22 episodes )
* Sonya Walger as Dr. Olivia Benford – Mark 's wife and a successful surgeon at a major hospital .
She supervises Dr. Bryce Varley .
In her flashforward , she is romantically involved with Dr. Lloyd Simcoe , although she had never met him before the blackout .
They meet when she treats his autistic son , Dylan .
( 21 episodes )
* Christine Woods as FBI Special Agent Janis Hawk – works at the Los Angeles field office as part of Mark Benford 's team .
In her vision she was pregnant and having a sonogram , which she finds hard to believe because she is single and a lesbian .
She is in charge of watching over Simon later in the series .
In " Queen Sacrifice " , it was revealed that she is a mole reporting to those responsible for the blackout to keep tabs on the FBI 's investigation .
In " Goodbye Yellow Brick Road " , it is revealed that she is actually a double agent for both the FBI and CIA and at the request of Agent Vogel ( who is her CIA contact and handler ) was directed to investigate and identify the mysterious blackout conspirators .
( 18 episodes )
* Jack Davenport as Dr. Lloyd Simcoe – an academic at Stanford .
Lloyd 's estranged wife and mother of his son died during the blackout .
He has a son with autism , Dylan , who knows Olivia and whom Charlie mysteriously recognizes .
His research partner is Simon Campos , and Lloyd believes they are responsible for the blackout but , according to Simon 's uncle , Teddy , they only amplified it , causing it to affect the whole world .
( 17 episodes ) * Zachary Knighton as Dr. Bryce Varley – a surgical intern reporting to Dr. Olivia Benford .
He was on the verge of committing suicide due to a diagnosis of stage 4 renal cell carcinoma ( kidney cancer ) when the blackout occurred .
After the blackout he experiences a renewed will to live , and sees his vision as a gift .
In " Course Correction " , Bryce learns that his cancer is in remission .
( 16 episodes )
* Peyton List as Nicole Kirby – a 19-year - old student and Charlie Benford 's babysitter .
She was a childhood friend of Aaron Stark 's daughter , Tracy .
Nicole 's flashforward shows her being held underwater by a stranger .
She is able to speak Japanese as she spent time in Japan as a child and is able to help Bryce Varley interpret his flashforward which included a sign in Japanese / Kanji .
( 14 episodes )
* Dominic Monaghan as Dr. Simon Campos – a quantum physicist and research partner of Stanford academic Lloyd Simcoe , who does n't believe he is responsible for the blackout .
He told people that in his flashforward he sees himself fighting and later killing a man , which was actually a lie .
In " Revelation Zero ( Part 2 ) " , it is revealed that he is " Suspect Zero " ; he was given a ring that kept him awake during the blackout .
His uncle is the middle man in the deal , and Simon 's younger sister is kidnapped by the people that want to control the blackouts .
Simon 's uncle had previously killed Simon 's father , and after he also kills Simon 's professor , Simon kills him .
( 15 episodes )
* Brían F. O'Byrne as Aaron Stark – a recovering alcoholic , he is Mark Benford 's AA sponsor and close friend .
His daughter , Tracy , was presumed killed in action in Afghanistan , but his flashforward showed his daughter alive , mysteriously .
In " The Gift " , he comes home to find Tracy in his living room .
Agents of the military contractor Jericho later kidnap Tracy from his home , and in " The Garden of Forking Paths " , Agent Wedeck provides him assistance in getting to Afghanistan to find Tracy .
( 17 episodes )
RECURRING CHARACTERS PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The pilot was written by David S. Goyer ( who also directed ) and Brannon Braga , from Robert J. Sawyer 's novel , with Goyer and Braga executive producing alongside Jessika Borsiczky Goyer , Vince Gerardis , and Ralph Vicinanza .
FlashForward was originally developed at HBO , which sold its option because it thought the show would be a better fit for a broadcast network .
After purchasing the series and ordering a pilot , ABC picked up FlashForward for thirteen episodes in May 2009 .
On October 12 , 2009 , ABC picked up the series for a 22-episode season .
Later the same day , it was announced ABC had ordered a further three episodes for a 25-episode first season , which was later adjusted to 24 .
On October 21 , 2009 , it was announced that executive producer Marc Guggenheim would leave ABC 's FlashForward .
Co - creator and executive producer David S. Goyer stepped in to replace him as showrunner .
On February 5 , 2010 , Goyer announced he would be stepping down as showrunner to focus on feature films and directing .
He remained involved with the show , however .
Goyer was replaced as showrunner by his wife , Jessika Goyer , along with Lisa Zwerling and Timothy J. Lea .
On May 13 , 2010 , it was reported that FlashForward would not be renewed for a second season because of the decline of viewers .
Season 1 , Part 1 of the series was released on DVD on February 23 , 2010 .
This DVD has the first ten episodes , plus bonus material .
The full series was released on DVD on August 31 , 2010 ( including more bonus material ) .
The full series was also supposed to be released on Blu - ray on the same date , but the Blu - ray release was indefinitely delayed and later cancelled .
The first 2 discs of the 5-disc full series set are the same as the 2-disc set of episodes 1 - 10 .
Each episode 's title sequence includes a hidden image within the FlashForward logo to show a piece of what the episode is about .
These images are visible when the sequence is paused at the right time .
EPISODES RECEPTION RATINGS AND VIEWERSHIP Section::::Reception . Section::::Ratings and viewership .
Although launching to large audiences of 12.47 million viewers in the US , the show 's ratings rapidly declined to ratings about one - third that figure .
The show 's scheduling in the US was held to blame by some people ; an unexpected extended hiatus may have contributed to the deteriorating fanbase .
However , in other countries such as the UK , where the show was given prime time scheduling on terrestrial television , ratings also dwindled .
In the UK , the show was screened on Channel Five , a channel which receives fairly poor viewing figures in comparison to its peers .
The show was watched by an average of 8.5 million viewers per episode , ranking it 44th most watched show of the season .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
FlashForward received generally positive reviews , with a Metacritic score of 72 out of 100 , based on 26 critic reviews .
In September 2009 , Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle deemed the series " enormously entertaining " with a " tantalizing premise " , while Ginia Bellafante of the New York Times wrote that it " begins in such a spirit of bracing suspense that [ she was ] challenged to recall another pilot that lured [ her ] so quickly into addiction .
"
Variety Brian Lowry gave a more measured review , opining , " It 's an intriguing , mind - bending concept that 's mostly well executed [ ... ] there 's a solid desire to see more but not such wonderment as to proclaim unwavering fealty until the show peers a little farther down the road . "
Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker graded the series " B+ " , stating , " FF is n't perfect .
Much thought has been given to plot and character but not enough to the visuals
: This is one of the most drab - looking of intelligent shows .
Thematically , FF makes major philosophical points — living in the moment , etc.—but instead of dramatizing them , it often just has its characters speak them . "
Tucker described the show as " sci - fi - ish conspiracy suspense with excellent prime - time - soap drama " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
+ Awards and nominations for FlashForward !
Year ! !
Presenter ! !
Award ! !
Result rowspan="2
" Constellation Awards Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Broadcast Program - Outstanding Created Environment in a Broadcast Program or Commercial - rowspan="2 " Constellation Awards INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTION
Section::::International distribution .
FlashForward has sold in over 100 territories worldwide .
Overseas air - dates are typically close to the original U.S. broadcasts , in an attempt to limit piracy .
The series airs on AXN in Mexico , Argentina , Chile , Brazil , Bulgaria , Colombia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Japan , AXN in Poland , Portugal , Romania , Serbia , Venezuela , and Uruguay .
It airs in Australia on the Seven Network , in Austria on ORF1 , in Canada on /A\ , and in Estonia on Fox Life .
In Greece it is broadcast on FX , in Hong Kong on TVB Pearl , in New Zealand on TV2 , and in Russia on Channel One .
In Singapore it is shown on MediaCorp Channel 5 and Starhub Fox Channel – Channel 505 , in Slovakia on TV JOJ , in Slovenia on TV3 Slovenia , in South Africa on M - Net , in Taiwan on Public Television Service , and in Turkey on Dizimax and ATV .
In Western Europe , FlashForward airs on Kanal 5 in Denmark , Nelonen in Finland , Canal + and TF1 in France , ProSieben in Germany by RTÉ Two , in Ireland , TV 2 in Norway , Cuatro in Spain , TV4 in Sweden , TSR1 , La 2 & SF zwei in Switzerland , ORF1 in Austria , Five in the United Kingdom , Fox in Italy , Veronica in the Netherlands , BeTV in Belgium , and SIC in Portugal .
It is also aired in the Philippines on Studio 23 .
In Israel it airs on Satellite TV yes stars Action as well as Cable TV HOT3 . , in Indonesia by RCTI .
SEE ALSO
* Conflict thesis , a.k.a .
Draper – White thesis
* Particle accelerators in popular culture * The Feynman Lectures on Physics NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS