PERCY JACKSON Perseus " Percy " Jackson is a fictional character , the title character and narrator of Rick Riordan 's Percy Jackson & the Olympians series .
He is also one of seven main protagonists of the sequel series
The Heroes of Olympus , appearing in every book except The Lost Hero , and appears in the ongoing Trials of Apollo series , making him one of the few characters to appear in all three series of the Camp Half - Blood chronicles .
He has also been a narrator and protagonist in Riordan 's Greco - Roman / Egyptian crossover stories , part of the Demigods and Magicians collection .
The character serves as the narrator in Percy Jackson 's Greek Gods and Percy Jackson 's Greek Heroes , also by Rick Riordan .
Percy Jackson is played by Logan Lerman in the film adaptations of the novels and by Chris McCarrell on the .
CREATION AND CONCEPTION Section::::Creation and conception .
Development of the character
Percy Jackson began when Rick Riordan started inventing stories for his son Haley Riordan , who was diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia in the spring of 2002 .
When Haley was in second grade and he was studying Greek mythology , he asked his father to tell him bedtime stories based on those myths .
When his father ran out of ideas , Haley suggested that he make up new stories that combined existing mythological characters with new ones .
This led Riordan to create the fictional character of Percy Jackson and the story of his travels across the United States to recover Zeus 's lightning - bolt .
Haley then suggested it be written as a novel .
Riordan received input on the manuscript from some of his middle school students before taking the idea of Percy Jackson to a publisher .
Riordan has said that Percy Jackson 's original character was " inspired by my son 's own struggle " at school .
Haley and Percy have been cited as the " same age " and share several character traits , though they are by no means the same person .
Riordan has also stated that Percy has " [ his ] sense of humor " and is also " based on many of the students
[ he has ] had in the past . "
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
In the story , Percy Jackson is portrayed as a demigod , the son of the mortal Sally Jackson and the Greek god Poseidon .
He has ADHD and dyslexia , allegedly because he is hardwired to read Ancient Greek and has inborn " battlefield reflexes " .
Percy 's birthday is August 18 .
In the first novel of the series , The Lightning Thief , he is twelve years old .
His personality is described as " changeable like the sea " and hard to predict — with the important exception that he is dangerously loyal to his friends and family .
The goddess Athena describes this as his fatal flaw .
Percy 's " powers " , which start small and develop as the books proceed , include controlling water , making hurricanes , breathing underwater , and talking to horse - like animals and fish .
He also becomes an accomplished sword - fighter and leader .
Throughout Percy Jackson & The Olympians , Percy grows more confident and brave .
He serves as the first head counselor of the Poseidon cabin at his demigod summer camp – Camp Half - Blood .
After The Last Olympian , the next time Percy is seen is in The Son of Neptune , the second book in the sequel series
The Heroes of Olympus .
He is suffering from amnesia and slowly struggles to regain his memory over the course of the novel .
For a while in the book he can not remember anything other than Annabeth Chase , his long - time friend .
He arrives at a Roman establishment called Camp Jupiter , and is elected praetor as a result of the help he offers them on a quest .
During the remaining three books in the third - person his character develops significantly .
He develops an irrational fear of drowning ; is humbled by weakening sword - fighting skills ; and expresses a new tendency to make ambiguous moral choices in defense of his friends and family .
One of the character 's darkest moments comes in The House of Hades , when Percy discovers that he can control the water in a person 's body , and uses it to torture the goddess Akhlys .
Percy 's girlfriend Annabeth Chase is present and brings him to his senses , but remains haunted by his readiness to use that new power .
At the end of The Blood of Olympus , Percy and Annabeth reveal plans to finish their senior year of high school together in New York , and then attend college in New Rome ( a demigod - only city located in California , guarded by Camp Jupiter ) .
In The Hidden Oracle , Percy has been accepted to the college with a full scholarship , provided he can pass his SATs and graduate on time despite the semester he spent away ( while missing during The Lost Hero ) .
Percy 's concern for his future and family leads him to uncharacteristically turn down Lester Papadopoulous 's request for help on a quest to regain his godhood ( Papadopoulous being the mortal form of the god Apollo ) .
FRIENDS AND FAMILY FAMILY Section::::Friends and family .
Section::::Family .
Percy is the son of Poseidon ; his mother , Sally Jackson , married a man named Gabe Ugliano when Percy was young .
Ugliano was abusive towards Percy and Sally , the latter of whom leaves him in The Lightning Thief .
Between the time of The Battle of the Labyrinth and The Last Olympian , Sally Jackson marries Paul Blofis , a man she met in a writing seminar .
Percy likes and respects his new step - father and eventually reveals to him that he is a demigod .
Though understandably shocked , Paul still stays with the Jackson family and accepts Percy 's complicated life .
In The Hidden Oracle , Percy 's mother is seven months pregnant with Paul 's child ( Percy 's half sister ) .
Percy has a brother named Tyson , who is a cyclops .
Though Percy is related to virtually every character and creature in Greek mythology through his father Poseidon , Tyson is one of the only beings whom he acknowledges as family .
Percy first met Tyson at a school called Meriwether Prep , and did not learn of their relationship until much later .
Percy is also distantly related to horses , pegasi , some other monsters , and numerous gods and demigods through his father .
Significant examples of this would be that he is technically a grandson of Kronos , nephew to Hades , Zeus , and numerous other Olympians as well as the half - nephew of Chiron .
FRIENDS Section::::Friends .
Percy 's oldest friend is Grover Underwood , a satyr originally tasked with protecting him and bringing him safely to Camp Half - Blood .
His next - oldest friend is Annabeth Chase , whom he meets when she helps nurse him back to health after his first fight with the Minotaur .
The two accompany him on his first , and most of his subsequent , quests .
Percy is also close to many other characters in the book series .
His closest friends include Thalia Grace , daughter of Zeus and leader of the Hunters of Artemis ; Luke Castellan , son of Hermes ( at first Percy 's friend , then his enemy , and finally Percy 's friend at the time of his death ) ; Nico di Angelo , son of Hades ; Rachel Elizabeth Dare , a mortal Pythia , or host of a prophetic spirit ; Hazel Levesque , daughter of Pluto ; Leo Valdez , son of Hephaestus ; Jason Grace , son of Jupiter ; Piper McLean , daughter of Aphrodite ; and Frank Zhang , son of Mars .
Frank Zhang is also a descendant of Periclymenus , descendant of Poseidon , and so distantly related to Percy .
Finally , Percy has an interesting relationship with Clarisse La Rue , daughter of Ares and Camp Half - Blood 's resident bully , whom he allegedly dislikes but often helps .
ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Romantic relationships .
Percy 's oldest romantic relationship is with Annabeth Chase .
Their relationship gradually changes throughout the first series , with the goddess Aphrodite first insinuating that it was romantic in The Titan 's Curse , when Percy undertakes a quest to free Annabeth from the Titan Atlas .
However , Percy 's first move towards a serious relationship does not occur until the final pages of The Last Olympian .
Percy 's other important romantic relationship occurs in the interim of his first .
As the final battle with the Titans approaches after The Battle of the Labyrinth , Percy spends time with his mortal friend Rachel Dare .
Their relationship causes conflict between Percy and Annabeth Chase .
Towards the end of The Last Olympian Rachel realizes that her attraction is not to Percy , but to his mythological world , because of her destiny as the next Oracle of Delphi .
Three other characters in the novels are romantically interested in Percy , though he remains mostly oblivious .
Nico di Angelo 's hero worship of Percy turns into an ever - worsening crush on him ; at the same time , Nico resents Percy because he believes the son of Poseidon allowed his sister Bianca to die in battle .
The second is Calypso , who was banished to the island of Ogygia .
Calypso later meets Percy 's friend Leo Valdez ; he manages to save her , where Percy could not .
The third is Reyna Ramírez - Arellano , who , silently attracted to her comrade Jason Grace , finds herself attracted to many of Percy 's similar traits .
MAGICAL ANIMAL COMPANIONS
Section::::Magical animal companions .
Percy has several animal companions .
The first is Blackjack , a black pegasus that Percy liberates from the Princess Andromeda in The Sea of Monsters .
Blackjack is first referred to as a " mare " in The Sea of Monsters , though he is called a stallion in all later books .
Blackjack becomes Percy 's personal steed and companion .
Blackjack is unfailingly loyal to Percy , and on several occasions manages to save Percy 's life .
Blackjack always calls Percy " boss " and is quite fond of sugar cubes and doughnuts .
Blackjack has two friends named Porkpie and Guido , both white pegasi , who sometimes accompany him .
All three are intelligent beings capable of interacting with other demigods independent of their horse - to - human translator , Percy .
Percy 's second magical companion is Mrs. O'Leary , who is introduced in the fourth novel , Battle of the Labyrinth .
She is a hellhound that he receives from Daedalus ( whom Percy meets as a sword master named Quintus ) before the inventor dies .
Though Mrs. O'Leary is described as " the size of a tank " , the magical veil known as the Mist causes her to appear as a poodle to mortals .
Percy often refers to her as " his dog " .
Percy sometimes uses Mrs. O'Leary 's ability to " shadow travel " to cross large distances almost instantaneously .
His brother Tyson and dead friend Charles Beckendorf are Mrs. O'Leary 's other caretakers , though she is also fond of Nico di Angelo , son of Hades .
He also knows a hippocampus named Rainbow who likes Percy 's half - brother Tyson .
It first appears in The Sea of Monsters , where it helps Percy and his friends enter Luke Castellan 's boat Princess Andromeda .
It later saves the life of Tyson and returns to help the two brothers on several occasions .
Percy has also traveled with a small calico kitten called Small Bob by Bob the Titan .
Small Bob was accidentally created by one of Atlas 's servants who was attempting to summon a group of spartoi .
When Percy is trapped in Tartarus during The House of Hades , Annabeth , Bob , and he find and travel with the kitten .
He is fond of Bob and protective of the traveling group , leading Bob to call him " a good monster " .
Small Bob can transfer into a full sized saber - toothed tiger at will and occasionally appears as an x - ray for a few seconds at a time .
His purr is disproportionately loud for an animal of his size .
Small Bob remains in Tartarus with Iapetus to help hold open the Doors of Death .
It is unclear if he lives or dies , but he is not mentioned again .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Percy is described as handsome , with messy jet black hair , a " Mediterranean " complexion , and sea - green eyes like his father Poseidon .
His mother notes that Percy looked just like his father , and his friend Hazel says that he has the looks of a Roman god .
ABILITIES Section::::Abilities .
Like most demigods , Percy has ADHD and dyslexia , the former because of his godly battle instincts , and the latter because his brain takes more naturally to Ancient Greek than to English .
After being trained at Camp Half - Blood , he has developed a Greek fighting style ( described as unpredictable by New Romans ) and is an expert swordsman .
After bathing in the River Styx , Percy was given the curse of Achilles , making him invulnerable except for the small of his back .
He loses this power when it is washed away in the Little Tiber surrounding New Rome , as part of his acceptance there .
In addition , he has an " empathy link " with his first friend from Camp Half - Blood , Grover .
As a son of Poseidon , one of the " Big Three " ( the others being Zeus and Hades ) , Percy is more powerful than most of the gods ' other children .
He also has a degree of authority over his father 's subjects .
Percy is gifted with several semi - divine abilities : the ability to manipulate water and currents ; enhanced strength / energy and senses while near the water ; the ability to breathe underwater and operate old sailing ships with his mind ; mental communication with marine animals , equine animals , water nymphs , and some of his relatives ; and the creation of small earthquakes and hurricanes .
Water also provides Percy with a measure of protection from injury and fire .
All of Percy 's abilities correspond to the myths about and abilities of his father .
WEAPONS Section::::Weapons .
Percy 's main weapon is Anaklusmos ( " Riptide " ) , a sword made of celestial bronze given to him by Chiron the centaur , on the instructions of Poseidon ; the sword 's history goes back to Heracles , who was gifted that sword by the nymph Zoë Nightshade , a daughter of Atlas .
Riptide can change shape ; when it is not a sword , it appears as a ballpoint pen engraved with its name .
It reappears in the character 's pocket when lost .
Since it is made of celestial bronze it will harm gods , demigods , and monsters , but simply passes through mortals .
Percy has also used magic javelins made by his brother Tyson , magically camouflaging armor made by Charles Beckendorf , and the wand of Carter Kane .
In The Sea of Monsters , his half - brother Tyson gives him a wristwatch that changes into a shield covered with designs , but the watch is damaged in The Titan 's Curse and lost in The Battle of the Labyrinth .
Percy has several magical items obtained from battles against monsters .
The first of these is the horn of the Minotaur , which he obtains after killing the beast on Half - Blood Hill .
Another is the head of Medusa , which he cuts off after killing the gorgon .
He gives the head away several times , finally leaving it with his mother who " disposes of it " .
He also obtains a bullet- and sword - proof lionskin coat when he killed the Nemean lion , which he later sacrifices as an offering to Poseidon in order to save his love interest .
REFERENCES