MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL POSTSEASON
The Major League Baseball postseason is an elimination tournament held after the conclusion of the MLB regular season .
As of 2012 , the playoffs for each league — American and National — consist of a one - game wild - card playoff between two wild card teams , two best - of - five Division Series ( LDS ) featuring the wild - card winner and the winner of each division , and finally the best - of - seven League Championship Series ( LCS ) .
The winners of the American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) and the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) play each other in the best - of - seven World Series .
FORMAT HISTORY
BEFORE 1969 :
ONE ROUND Section::::Format history .
Section::::Before 1969 :
One round .
Major League Baseball is the oldest of America 's major professional sports organizations , steeped in tradition with roots dating back to the 1870s .
The final series to determine its champion has been called the " World Series " ( originally " World 's Championship Series " and then " World 's Series " ) as far back as the National League 's contests with the American Association starting at the beginning of the 1880s .
In 1903 , the two modern Major League Baseball leagues began annual postseason play with a one - round system in which the American League team with the best record faced the National League team with the best record in a best - of - seven series ( in 1903 , 1919 , 1920 , and 1921 it was best - of - nine ) called the World Series ; however , there was no 1904 Series because the National League Champion , the New York Giants , refused to play .
This single - tiered approach persisted through 1968 , even with the expansions of 1961–1962 that expanded both leagues to 10 teams .
1969–1993 :
TWO ROUNDS
Section::::1969–1993 : Two rounds .
In 1969 , both leagues expanded to twelve teams , which made it more difficult to compete for a league championship because there were more teams competing for the AL and NL pennants .
In addition , a team would play other clubs in its own region of the country more than clubs in the rest of the country , creating an unbalanced schedule that in some years could give a team from one region an advantage in fighting for a single pennant .
To remedy this , and imitating the other major sports ' long - standing playoff traditions , Major League Baseball split each league into Eastern and Western divisions , creating four divisions overall and no worse than a sixth - place finish for any team in any division until later expansions in 1977 and 1993 .
This created a new postseason round , which was dubbed the League Championship Series ( LCS ) , a best - of - five series .
In 1985 the LCS was expanded to a best - of - seven series .
Under this system , it was possible for one of the best teams in a league to be left out of the postseason if it did n't win its division .
Most notably , in , the Atlanta Braves and San Francisco Giants finished with the two best records in the majors , with 104 and 103 wins , respectively .
However , since both teams played in the National League West , the Giants missed the postseason by a single game .
The baseball players ' strike of 1981 uniquely — for this era — added another round to the postseason .
Because the strike split the season into two roughly equal halves , the division winners of each half of the 1981 season first met in a best - of - five Division Series .
The winners of the division series then progressed to the league championship series , with the remainder of the postseason following a similar format to other years in this era .
1994–2011
: THREE ROUNDS Section::::1994–2011 :
Three rounds .
Major League Baseball went through a realignment in 1994 , when both the American and National leagues expanded to three divisions : Eastern , Central , and Western .
To avoid a playoff with an odd number of divisional winners , the league added a wild card playoff spot to each league , imitating the original post - merger NFL system .
The wild - card for each league would be the team with the best record that did not win their division , eliminating a circumstance where a team with the second - best record in the entire league would miss the playoff because of not winning its division .
This new format doubled the postseason contenders in each league from two to four , and from four teams overall to eight .
The addition of a second wild card spot occurred in 2012 .
The additional teams meant another elimination round was necessary .
This new round would become the new first round of the postseason , the best - of - five Division Series .
This term had first been used for the extra round required in 1981 due to the " split - season " scheduling anomaly following the midseason baseball players strike .
This format was in place for the 1994 season , but that year 's players ' strike canceled the postseason .
The format was realized on the field in 1995 .
Under this format , in the two Divisional Series , the wild card team played the divisional champion outside its own division that had the better record , with the remaining two teams playing each other in the second Division Series for each league .
The two Division Series winners from each league go on to play each other in the League Championship Series .
As with the previous postseason format , the winners of each League Championship Series met in the World Series .
2012–PRESENT :
EXPANDED WILD CARD
Section::::2012–present :
Expanded wild card .
With the adoption of the new collective bargaining agreement in November 2011 , baseball commissioner Bud Selig announced that a new playoff system would begin within two years ; the change was ultimately put into place in 2012 .
The format chosen was the one - game wild - card playoff .
Under this format , a second wild card team has been added to each league , i.e. , the team with the second - highest win total in each league among non - division winners .
The two wild card teams play in a one - game playoff after the end of the regular season , with the winner advancing to the Division Series .
The divisional champions qualify for the Division Series just as in the previous format ; however , under the expanded wild card format the winner of the one - game wild card playoff faces the top - seeded divisional champion in the Division Series , regardless of whether the two teams are in the same division , while the second- and third - seeded divisional champions play each other in the other Division Series .
The format for placement in the League Championship Series and World Series remains .
HOME - FIELD ADVANTAGE WORLD SERIES Section::::Home - field advantage .
Section::::World Series .
The World Series used several different formats in its early years .
Initially it generally followed an alternating home - and - away pattern , except that if a seventh game was possible , its site was determined by coin toss prior to the sixth game .
In 1924 the Series began using a 2 - 3 - 2 format , presumably to save on travel costs , a pattern that has continued to this day with the exception of a couple of the World War II years when wartime travel restrictions compelled a 3 - 4 format ( used in 1943 and 1945 , but not in the 1944 series , which was contested between crosstown rivals the St. Louis Browns and St. Louis Cardinals ; all games were held in the same stadium in St. Louis ) .
From the start of the 2 - 3 - 2 format through the 2002 season , home - field advantage generally alternated between leagues each year .
Prior to the 1994 strike , the National League champion received home - field advantage in even - numbered years and the American League champion in odd - numbered years ; these were reversed for 1995–2002 ( because 1994 would have been the NL 's turn to have home - field , but the World Series was cancelled by the aforementioned strike ) .
That changed starting in 2003 .
The 2002 All - Star Game had ended in a tie , much to the displeasure of both fans and sportswriters who complained about a lack of intensity and competitiveness on the part of the players .
This hit especially close to home for Commissioner Bud Selig , as the game had been played in his home city of Milwaukee , Wisconsin .
In response , to give some real meaning to the game , in 2003 MLB began assigning home - field advantage in the World Series to the winner of that year 's All - Star Game , which is typically held in mid - July .
Following the acceptance of a new collective bargaining agreement after the 2016 season , home - field advantage in the World Series will no longer be tied to the outcome of the All - Star Game , but will instead go to the team with the better regular - season record .
LEAGUE CHAMPIONSHIP SERIES Section::::League Championship Series .
Until 1998 , the LCS alternated home - field advantage with a 2 - 3 format in the best - of-5 era ( 1969–84 ) and a 2 - 3 - 2 format when it went to best - of-7
( 1985–present ) .
Since 1998 the team with the better record has had this advantage , except that in no case can the wild card ever secure the extra home game , regardless of regular - season records .
DIVISION SERIES Section::::Division Series .
Until 1998 , the Division Series rotated which of the three division champions would not have home - field advantage , with the wild card never having it .
Now the two division winners with the best records in each league have home field , with the least - winning divisional winner and the wild card not having home field .
The DS used a 2 - 3 format until 1998 and now uses a 2 - 2 - 1 format .
This is seen as a more fair distribution of home - field advantage because previously under the 2 - 3 format , the team hosting the first two games had absolutely no chance of winning the series at home .
With the current 2 - 2 - 1 format however , both teams have the home - field advantage in a sense .
While one team gets to host three games ( including the critical first and last game ) , the other team does get two chances out of three ( games 3 and 4 ) of winning the series on its home field .
With the adoption of the expanded playoff format in 2012 , the five - game Division Series began with two home games for the lower seeds , followed by up to three home games for the higher seeds .
This one - year change eliminated a travel day prior to a decisive Game 5 of a Division Series and was necessary because the 2012 regular - season schedule was announced before the agreement on the new postseason was reached .
For 2013 , the Division Series returned to the 2 - 2 - 1 format that was used from 1998 to 2011 .
POSTSEASON BONUSES Section::::Postseason bonuses .
There are three factors that determine the actual amount of bonus money paid to any individual player :
( 1 ) the size of the bonus pool ; ( 2 ) their team 's success in the season / post - season ; and ( 3 ) the share of the pool assigned to the individual player .
HOW THE BONUS POOL IS DETERMINED
Section::::How
the Bonus Pool is determined .
There is a separate pool for each series – the Wild Card games , the Division Series , the League Championship Series , and the World Series .
The players ' bonus pool is funded with 60 % of the gate receipts for each of the Wild Card games , the first three games of each Division Series , the first four games of each LCS and the first four games of the World Series ; limiting the funding for the pool to these games , the minimum number in each series , removes incentive to extend the series for merely fiscal sake .
The value of the gate is determined by the size of the venues , the amount of high - priced premium seating in the venues , the number of games played in the series and whether the games sell out .
Ticket prices for each series are set by MLB , not the home teams , so they are relatively uniform across baseball .
HOW MUCH THE WINNER AND LOSER RECEIVES FROM EACH POOL
Section::::How much the winner and loser receives from each pool .
The World Series winner gets 36 % , the World Series loser gets 24 % , both League Championship Series losers get 12 % , the four Division Series losers get 3.25 % , and the two Wild Card playoff losers get 1.5 % .
HOW THE TEAM 'S
SHARE OF THE POOL IS DIVIDED Section::::How
the team 's share of the pool is divided .
The division of the team 's share of the pool is voted upon by the players who have been on the team during the entire regular season , in a meeting chaired by their union representative .
This meeting follows the trade deadline on July 31 .
Players who have been with the team for the full season automatically receive a full share .
At the meeting , the full - season players vote on whether anyone else — including players who have not been with the team for the full season , coaches , and trainers — is to be granted a full share , less than a full share , a cash award , or no share .
After the World Series , the pool of money is split according to the shares determined in the vote .
There is no limit to the number of shares that may be granted , but a greater number of shares dilutes the value of each share , and consequently the amount each player is awarded .
As an example , playoff - pool full - share holders for the St. Louis Cardinals received each when the team won the World Series in 2006 .
SEE ALSO
* Babe Ruth Award ( best player in the postseason ; since 2007 ) * " Esurance MLB Awards " Best Major Leaguer , Postseason * MLB division winners * Professional baseball REFERENCES