TIANANMEN SQUARE Tiananmen Square or Tian'anmen
Square ( 天安門 , Pinyin : Tiān'ānmén ; Wade – Giles : Tʻien - an - mên ) is a city square in the centre of Beijing , China , named after the Tiananmen ( " Gate of Heavenly Peace " ) located to its north , separating it from the Forbidden City .
The square contains the Monument to the People 's Heroes , the Great Hall of the People , the National Museum of China , and the Mausoleum of Mao Zedong .
Mao Zedong proclaimed the founding of the People 's Republic of China in the square on October 1 , 1949 ; the anniversary of this event is still observed there .
Tiananmen Square is within the top ten largest city squares in the world ( 440,500 m – 880×500 m or 109 acres – 960×550 yd ) .
It has great cultural significance as it was the site of several important events in Chinese history .
Outside China , the square is best known for the armed suppression of the pro - democracy June 1989 Tiananmen Square protests .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Tiananmen ( " Gate of Heavenly Peace " ) , a gate in the wall of the Imperial City , was built in 1415 during the Ming dynasty .
In the 17th century , fighting between Li Zicheng 's rebel forces and the forces of the Manchu - led Qing dynasty caused heavy damage to , or even destroyed , the gate .
Tiananmen Square was designed and built in 1651 , and has since been enlarged by four times its original size in the 1950s .
Near the centre of the square stood the " Great Ming Gate " , the southern gate to the Imperial City , renamed " Great Qing Gate " during the Qing dynasty , and " Gate of China " during the Republican era .
Unlike the other gates in Beijing , such as the Tiananmen and the Zhengyangmen , this was a purely ceremonial gateway , with three arches but no ramparts , similar in style to the ceremonial gateways found in the Ming tombs .
This gate had a special status as the " Gate of the Nation " , as can be seen from its successive names .
It normally remained closed , except when the Emperor passed through .
Commoner traffic was diverted to side gates at the western and eastern ends of the square , respectively .
Because of this diversion in traffic , a busy marketplace , called " Chess Grid Streets " , was developed in the big , fenced square to the south of this gate .
In 1860 , during the Second Opium War , when British and French troops invaded Beijing , they pitched camp near the gate and briefly considered burning down the gate and the entire Forbidden City .
They decided ultimately to spare the Forbidden City and instead burn down the Old Summer Palace .
The Xianfeng Emperor eventually agreed to let the foreign powers barrack troops – and later establish diplomatic missions – in the area , hence there was the Legation Quarter immediately to the east of the square .
When the forces of the Eight - Nation Alliance besieged Beijing during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 , they badly damaged the office complexes and burnt down several ministries .
After the Boxer Rebellion ended , the area became a space for the foreign powers to assemble their military forces .
In 1954 , the Gate of China was demolished , allowing for the enlargement of the square .
In November 1958 , a major expansion of Tiananmen Square started , which was completed after only 11 months , in August 1959 .
This followed the vision of Mao Zedong to make the square the largest and most spectacular in the world , and intended to hold over 500,000 people .
In that process , a large number of residential buildings and other structures have been demolished .
On its southern edge , the Monument to the People 's Heroes has been erected .
Concomitantly , as part of the Ten Great Buildings constructed between 1958–59 to commemorate the ten - year anniversary of the People 's Republic of China , the Great Hall of the People and the Revolutionary History Museum ( now the National Museum of China ) were erected on the western and eastern sides of the square .
For the first decade of the PRC , each National Day ( October 1 ) was marked by a large military parade in Tiananmen Square , in conscious emulation of the annual Soviet celebrations of the Bolshevik Revolution .
After the disaster of the Great Leap Forward , the CCP decided to cut costs and have only smaller annual National Day celebrations in addition to a large celebration with a military parade every 10 years .
However , the chaos of the Cultural Revolution prevented such an event from taking place on National Day , 1969 .
Ten years later , in 1979 , the CCP again decided against a large scale celebration , coming at a time when Deng Xiaoping was still consolidating power and China had suffered a rebuff in a border war with Vietnam early in the year .
By 1984 , with the situation much improved and stabilized , the PRC held a military parade for the first time since 1959 .
The aftermath of the Tiananmen Square massacre prevented any such activities in October 1989 , but military parades have been held in 1999 and 2009 , on the 50th and 60th anniversaries of the PRC 's founding .
On May 8 , 2015 , a military parade was also held to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II .
In 1971 , large portraits of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Vladimir Lenin , Joseph Stalin , Sun Yat - sen , and Mao Zedong were erected in the square , painted by artist Ge Xiaoguang , who is also responsible for producing the famous portrait of Mao that hangs over the Gate of Heavenly Peace .
In 1980 , with the downgrading of political ideology following Mao 's death , the portraits were taken down and thenceforth only brought out on Labor Day ( May 1 ) and National Day .
In 1988 , the CCP leadership decided to display only the portraits of Sun and Mao on national holidays .
The year after Mao 's death in 1976 , a mausoleum was built near the site of the former Gate of China , on the main north - south axis of the square .
In connection with this project , the square was further increased in size to become fully rectangular and being able to accommodate 600,000 people .
The urban context of the square was altered in the 1990s with the construction of National Grand Theatre in its vicinity and the expansion of the National Museum .
PANORAMA CONFIGURATION Section::::Configuration .
Used as a massive meeting place since its creation , its flatness is contrasted by the 38-metre ( 125 ft ) high Monument to the People 's Heroes , and the Mausoleum of Mao Zedong .
The square lies between two ancient , massive gates : the Tiananmen to the north and the Zhengyangmen ( better known as Qianmen ) to the south .
Along the west side of the square is the Great Hall of the People .
Along the east side is the National Museum of China ( dedicated to Chinese history predating 1919 ) .
Chang'an Avenue , which is used for parades , lies between the Tian'anmen and the square .
Trees line the east and west edges of the Square , but the square itself is open , with neither trees nor benches .
The square is lit with large lamp posts which are fitted with video cameras .
It is heavily monitored by uniformed and plain - clothes police officers .
EVENTS Section::::Events .
Tiananmen Square has been the site of a number of political events and student protests .
Perhaps the most notable events are protests during the May Fourth Movement in 1919 , the proclamation of the People 's Republic of China by Mao Zedong on October 1 , 1949 , the Tiananmen Square protests in 1976 after the death of Zhou Enlai , and the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 after the death of Hu Yaobang , the latter resulted in military suppression and the deaths of hundreds , if not thousands , of civilian protestors .
One of the most famous images that appears during these protests was when a man stood in front of a line of moving tanks and refused to move , which was captured on Chang'an Avenue near the square .
Other notable events include annual mass military displays on each anniversary of the 1949 proclamation until 1 October 1959 ; the 1984 military parade for the 35th anniversary of the People 's Republic of China which coincided with the ascendancy of Deng Xiaoping ; military displays and parades on the 50th anniversary of the People 's Republic of China in 1999 ; the Tiananmen Square self - immolation incident in 2001 ; military displays and parades on the 60th anniversary of the People 's Republic of China in 2009 , and an incident in 2013 involving a vehicle that plowed into pedestrians .
ACCESS Section::::Access .
The square , located in the center of the city , is readily accessible by public transport .
Line 1 of the Beijing Subway has stops at Tiananmen West and Tiananmen East , respectively , to the northwest and northeast of the square on Chang'an Avenue .
Line 2 's Qianmen Station is directly south of the square .
City bus routes 1 , 5 , 10 , 22 , 52 , 59 , 82 , 90 , 99 , 120 , 126 , 203 , 205 , 210 and 728 stop north of the Square .
Buses 2 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 17 , 20 , 22 , 44 , 48 , 53 , 54 , 59 , 66 , 67 , 72 , 82 , 110 , 120 , 126 , 301 , 337 , 608 , 673 , 726 , 729 , 901 , 90 , 特2 , 特4 and 特7 stop to the south of the Square .
The square is normally open to the public , but remains under heavy security .
Before entry , visitors and their belongings are searched , a common practice at many Chinese tourist sites , although the square is somewhat unusual in that domestic visitors often have their identification documents checked and the purpose of their visit questioned .
Both plain - clothes and uniformed police officers patrol the area .
There are numerous fire extinguishers placed in the area to put out flames should a protester attempt self - immolation .
IMAGE GALLERY
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS