RITA BENNETT Rita Bennett ( née Brandon ; later Morgan ) is a fictional character created by Jeff Lindsay for his book series about a vigilante serial killer named Dexter Morgan .
She also appeared in the television series Dexter , based on Lindsay 's books .
She was the girlfriend and later wife of Dexter in both media .
Portrayed by Julie Benz , Rita was a series regular in the first four seasons .
The character made her last television appearance in 2010 ; she was a special guest star in Dexter season
five opener entitled " My Bad " .
The character appeared in seven of the eight Dexter novels .
In the novels , Dexter initially considers Rita little more than part of his disguise as a normal human being , and the perfect cover for his secret life as a serial killer .
He later admits to growing quite fond of Rita , whom he married in the third book , Dexter in the Dark .
In the television series , Rita is portrayed as a loving and caring mother who is emotionally damaged due to physical abuse by her former husband , Paul Bennett .
Rita is the mother of Astor Bennett ( Christina Robinson ) and Cody Bennett ( Preston Bailey ) , and later in the television series , gives birth to Dexter 's son , Harrison .
In the book series , she and Dexter have a daughter , Lily Anne .
Benz received positive reviews for her portrayal of Rita , winning a Satellite Award and Saturn Award , and receiving a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination .
Dexter executive producer Clyde Phillips claimed the staff did not know how Rita would leave until late in the fourth season , but that it began to feel inevitable as the story evolved .
Benz was notified the day before the script was distributed to the cast and was disappointed , but found the scene revealing her departure to be " very poetic " .
The character 's departure was considered controversial by some reviewers ; E ! writer Kristin Dos Santos said that it " might go down as one of the most shocking ever on television . "
APPEARANCES LITERATURE
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Literature .
Rita Bennett was a character in the Dexter series of novels written by author Jeff Lindsay .
Rita first appears in the original novel Darkly Dreaming Dexter .
In the book series , Dexter Morgan primarily considers her a part of his " disguise " , but he does care for her in his own emotionless way .
In Darkly Dreaming Dexter , the two are already together , but it is explained that Dexter started dating her solely to improve his " disguise " as a normal person .
Because she was brutalized by her now - jailed ex - husband , Rita fears intimacy and does not expect much of Dexter ; this suits the asexual Dexter perfectly .
By the novel 's climax , Dexter admits that he is fond of her children , Astor and Cody , the closest he can get to feeling love .
By a humorous misunderstanding , the couple become engaged in Dearly Devoted Dexter and married at the end of Dexter in the Dark .
In the books , Rita is scatter - brained and easily upset , prone to speaking in disjointed , rambling sentences that Dexter often finds incomprehensible .
The only quality that Dexter truly appreciates about her is that she is an excellent cook .
She is a physical fitness buff ; she and Dexter regularly go for runs , long bike rides , and weightlifting sessions together .
In the fifth book , Dexter is Delicious , she gives birth to Dexter 's daughter Lily Anne .
In Dearly Devoted Dexter , Dexter discovers that Cody and Astor are budding sociopaths and decides to provide them with the same " guidance " that his adoptive father Harry gave to him ; namely , to teach them how to be careful , efficient killers of those who " deserve it " .
Rita is kept in the dark about the true nature of their relationship .
She suspects that something is wrong with the children when she discovers them torturing a cat , but Dexter is able to reassure her that they did n't understand what they were doing .
The television series is based on Darkly Dreaming Dexter .
In Dexter 's Final Cut , Dexter has an affair with TV star Jackie Forrest , and briefly considers leaving Rita .
At the end of the novel , however , both Rita and Jackie are murdered by Robert Chase , a pedophile intent on kidnapping Astor .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
Rita Bennett appears in the premiere episode of Dexter , entitled " Dexter " and is introduced as Dexter Morgan 's girlfriend .
It is revealed early on that Rita was physically and sexually abused by Paul Bennett ( Mark Pellegrino ) , her ex - husband and the father of her children , Astor ( Christina Robinson ) and Cody ( Preston Bailey ) .
Dexter 's sister Debra Morgan answered a domestic violence call and saved her life .
Rita , who is ignorant of Dexter 's secret life as a serial killer , appears regularly throughout the first season as his main source of support .
She plays a much larger role in the episode " Return to Sender " , in which Paul is released from prison and demands to be at Astor 's birthday party .
Rita asks that he not come to the party .
In " Circle of Friends " , Rita tells Paul he can see his children only through supervised visits for six months before she will consider letting him have unsupervised visitation rights .
She hands him divorce papers that include that clause , and Paul signs them .
In " Father Knows Best " , however , Paul begins threatening Rita again when she prevents him from seeing the children .
He forces his way into her house , where she defends herself by hitting him over the head with a baseball bat .
In " Seeing Red " , Paul presses charges against Rita for assault .
When Paul visits Rita 's house , he threatens Dexter when they are alone in the kitchen ; Dexter reacts by hitting him with a frying pan .
After Paul loses consciousness , Dexter drives him back to his hotel and plants drugs on him .
Dexter alerts
the police and Paul is sent back to prison .
In the second season premiere Rita takes Astor and Cody to see Paul in prison .
He insists that Dexter dragged him out of Rita 's house before drugging him and tipping off the police — and that if she could find his missing shoe it would prove his innocence .
Rita tells him that there is no shoe , despite having found it more than a month previously .
She later admits that she found the shoe , but refuses to acknowledge that Dexter is involved .
That night she receives a call from the prison and learns that Paul was killed in an inmate altercation .
In " Waiting to Exhale " , after Paul 's funeral , Rita confronts Dexter about his involvement in Paul 's death , and he is forced to admit to having a heroin addiction in order to cover up his real secret .
Rita threatens to leave Dexter if he does not commit to a program to deal with his " addiction " .
He starts attending Narcotics Anonymous meetings , where a mysterious woman named Lila Tournay ( Jaime Murray ) volunteers to be his sponsor .
In " See - Through " Rita 's visiting mother , Gail ( JoBeth Williams ) , suspects that Dexter is hiding something from the family .
In " Dex , Lies , and Videotape " , Rita breaks up with Dexter after a phone call from Lila reveals , he lied to her .
In " That Night , a Forest Grew , " Rita stands up to her mother and insists that she move out of the house .
Rita tells Dexter that he is no longer welcome to visit her house or her children .
He apologizes , admitting that his affair with Lila was a mistake , but she is still hesitant to forgive him .
When Dexter breaks up with Lila , she retaliates by pursuing his co - worker and friend , Angel Batista ( David Zayas ) .
In " There 's Something About Harry , " Rita and Dexter reconcile and visit the beach together .
In the second season finale , Dexter is forced to lie about running away with Lila , in front of Debra .
Lila , feeling hurt , leaves with what she recognizes as Dexter 's bag of murder equipment .
She goes to Rita 's house and drugs the babysitter in order to abduct the children .
When Dexter realizes that Astor and Cody are missing , he goes to Lila 's apartment .
She starts a fire and locks the three of them inside .
Rita calls Debra for help and Debra decides to skip her flight to Oregon , with her boyfriend Frank Lundy ( Keith Carradine ) .
Dexter manages to pass Astor and Cody through a small window to the outside , and escapes after breaking down a thin wall .
In the season three opener " Our Father , " Rita realizes that she is pregnant with Dexter 's child .
In " All In The Family " , after an unsuccessful marriage proposal , Dexter tries to convince Rita that he is looking for more than a convenient merger of finances and parenthood .
In " Turning Biminese , " Rita is hospitalized after a medical emergency and Dexter can not be found .
Dexter is hesitant when Rita suggests that they buy a house and move in together .
Rita becomes angry at Dexter 's refusal to help organize their wedding .
In the third season finale , " Do You Take Dexter Morgan ? " , Rita and Dexter get married .
In the fourth season opener , Rita and Dexter are living happily together in a suburban neighborhood with Astor , Cody , and new baby Harrison .
In " Remains to be Seen " Dexter is in a terrible car accident , and Rita demands that he give her his keys so that she can drive him .
In " If I Had a Hammer , " friction begins to develop in the couple 's relationship , and Dexter seeks guidance from Arthur Mitchell ( John Lithgow ) , a family man who appears to balance his responsibilities with his secret life as the " Trinity Killer " .
In " Hungry Man , " Rita works hard to prepare Thanksgiving dinner .
She shares a kiss with the next door neighbor , Elliot Larson ( Rick Peters ) , when she asks if she can use his stove .
Dexter arrives for an appointment with Rita for marriage counseling , but gets called to a crime scene as soon as he arrives .
Soon after , Rita confesses that she and Elliot kissed , although Dexter tries to brush it off .
Rita later admits that she felt hurt that he did not seem to care about her indiscretion .
Dexter then punches Elliot and warns him to stay away from Rita , which reassures her that Dexter loves her .
In the fourth season finale , Dexter asks her to go out of town so they can have a belated honeymoon ; in reality , Dexter wants to keep her safe from Mitchell , who has learned his real identity and threatened to kill him and his family .
After killing Mitchell , Dexter returns home and finds a message from Rita that she returned to pick up her identification for the flight .
Dexter finds her dead in the bathtub — Mitchell 's last victim .
In the fifth season premiere
" My Bad " , Dexter realizes , much to his own surprise , that he genuinely loved Rita and is devastated by her death .
Julie Benz reprised her role as Rita as a special guest star in a flashback to her and Dexter 's first date , and as a corpse .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and characterization .
The character of Rita Bennett was originally invented by Jeff Lindsay for his series of novels about Dexter Morgan , and she is featured in all but the final book in the series .
Clyde Phillips and Melissa Rosenberg wanted to bring the character into the television series when casting for the TV version , Dexter .
Julie Benz was given a copy of the script in 2005 and was asked to audition for the part .
She was surprised because the script was " one of the best pilot scripts [ she ] ever read . "
She also read for the part of Debra and joked that she would have auditioned for Dexter 's role .
Benz had been a fan of Michael C. Hall from his role in Six Feet Under .
She said in an interview with Vanity Fair , " I was such a fan , to the point where my cell - phone ring was the show 's theme song .
I had to change it once I got cast ! " .
Benz performed for four seasons , until her character was killed in the series .
Rita is presented in the series as a loving and caring mother .
As a result of being abused by her husband , Rita has no interest in sex , which suits the asexual Dexter perfectly .
She developed a strong character .
At the beginning of season two , the producers approached Benz about character growth .
They wanted to make Rita stronger and less shattered than she was in the first season .
Benz has said that she was " Very sad to hear that .
Because I loved playing her in season one where she was this very damaged , fragile bird who was just struggling so hard to make a better world for her kids , but just could not do it .
"
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Rita 's death was alluded to by Dexter producers , who told media outlets " The Getaway " included a series - changing twist , leading to widespread speculation about it .
Security precautions were taken to prevent the finale 's secrets from becoming exposed .
Network staff members were forced to sign non - disclosure agreements , and decoy scripts were drafted and disseminated to protect the twist ending .
In one of the alternatives , Dexter learned about a child murderer escaping from prison , and tried to decide whether to join Rita on vacation or go after the escaped killer .
Nobody but essential cast and staff were allowed on the set during filming of the episode , and the scripts and DVDs of the episode were watermarked before they were taken off the set .
Clyde Phillips claimed the Dexter staff did not know how the finale would conclude until late in the season , but he said Rita 's death began to feel inevitable as the story evolved .
Benz said she had been told that Lithgow knew about it from the beginning of the season .
Phillips said the staff felt obligated to do more than kill the Trinity Killer in the final episode , especially because he felt the death of the third season antagonist ( played by Jimmy Smits ) was not handled " as well as we could have " .
The writers discussed the idea of having Debra find out about Dexter 's secret life , but decided they could not anticipate how drastically the series would be changed by that .
Benz heard rumors from David Zayas that her character would be killed in the episode , but she was not notified until much later .
The producers met with her the day before the season finale script was distributed to the cast .
She said , " It was a tough meeting .
In a bizarre way , it felt like a scene from Defending Your Life . "
Benz described the death scene as " very poetic " .
Clyde Philips said , " She was n't happy .
She loved being with us .
We loved having her with us .
She took it ... professionally .
She was greatly disappointed .
She 's a professional .
She works in television .
She knew that this was a possibility . "
The mystery writer J.A. Jance wrote in the Los Angeles Times , " Yes , it 's a bit of a shock to discover that some of the TV series ' characters who died last season or the season before are back among the living between the covers of Lindsay 's new book .
Rita , Dexter 's long - suffering wife who died a terrible death in a bathtub in last year 's season finale , is alive and well and having a baby in Dexter Is Delicious .
But my advice to readers is this : Do n't quibble .
Get over it .
After all , fiction is an alternate universe to begin with , and Lindsay 's dark , comedic fiction is an alternate universe once removed .
Patrick McCann and Colin Wrinn were very upset about her death in Season 4 of the hit TV show , Dexter , but Colin Whelan did not care for her . "
RECEPTION CRITICAL REACTION
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reaction .
The character of Rita has been well received by critics , who praised Benz 's portrayal .
Eric Goldman of IGN has said , " Dexter does a solid job of developing the roles of the supporting cast , with Rita , Deb , Doakes and LaGuerta all getting a good amount of development " .
He added , " There were a couple of forced moments in " Popping Cherry " , most notably the drug dealer who came to Rita 's house , in broad daylight , demanding money for her ex - husband 's debts ; it was all a bit over the top and cliché .
On the other hand , it was interesting to note Dexter 's inaction in that scene , making one wonder if perhaps he fears that any public display of physical defense , even for Rita , might result in him going too far and revealing what he is . "
Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post has said , " Rita always felt like the light in that dark show " , and " In the beginning Rita was the vessel through which the audience could love Dexter . "
UGO.com placed Rita Bennett 7th on a list of " Top 11 Girlfriends on TV " .
Zap2it created a poll entitled " Best Mom " as part of their " Greatest TV Characters " series of polls ; Rita was voted 12th on a list of 14 characters .
The TV.com staff were less appreciative , listing her as 7th out of the " Ten Most Annoying Characters on TV " .
They noted that " While we mostly love the beatific Julie Benz , her complaining wifey character has been reduced to little more than whimpering and murmuring about Dexter 's commitment to the family ... " and summarised with " Might Rita die next week ?
For the first time since the series began , we really feel like we would n't miss her . "
Rita was killed in the fourth season finale " The Getaway .
" This was a subject of controversy since the character continuing living in the books .
E !
writer Kristin Dos Santos called the ending " horrifying " and said , " This death just might go down as one of the most shocking deaths ever on television . "
Claire Zulkey said that the twist ending was intense , and the teleplay was woven with feature several moments that had led him to expect different conclusions .
He praised what he expected to be a " re - set " of the series after Rita 's death .
Marcia White of The Express - Times declared Dexter " one of the best cable dramas on TV " and called the final scene between Dexter and Rita completely shocking .
Mark Dawidziak of The Plain Dealer said the episode was shocking and suspenseful , calling Dexter " a series that leaves you guessing as the psychological ambiguities run deeper and darker " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Julie Benz has been well received for her portrayal of Rita Bennett , winning and being nominated for a multitude of awards .
These including one Satellite Award win for Best Supporting Actress and a Saturn Award win for Best Supporting Actress .
She was also nominated for a Scream Award for Best Horror Actress and was jointly nominated , in 2009 and 2010 , for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Ensemble in a Drama Series . !
Year !
Group !
Category !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS