WHITECHAPEL ( TV SERIES )
Whitechapel is a British television drama series produced by Carnival Films , in which detectives in London 's Whitechapel district dealt with murders which replicated historical crimes .
The first series was first broadcast in the UK on 2 February 2009 and depicted the search for a modern copycat killer replicating the murders of Jack the Ripper .
A second series was commissioned by ITV in September 2009 with the focus on the Kray twins .
The first episode of this second series was broadcast on 11 October 2010 .
A third series was commissioned by ITV in March 2011 , which was extended to six episodes as three two - part stories .
The first and second series were broadcast in the United States on six consecutive Wednesday evenings beginning 26 October 2011 on the BBC America cable network .
The third was broadcast in the US starting on Wednesday 28 March 2012 , also on BBC America .
On 24 September 2012 , ITV renewed Whitechapel for a fourth and final series consisting of six episodes .
The first episode was broadcast on 4 September 2013 .
On 16 November 2013 , lead actor Rupert Penry - Jones confirmed that ITV had decided not to recommission the show .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The first series was written by Ben Court and Caroline Ip .
ITV Director of Drama Laura Mackie said " Whitechapel is a very modern take on the detective genre which combines the Victorian intrigue of the original case with the atmospheric backdrop of a contemporary East End of London .
This is not simply about bloodthirstily recreating the Ripper murders , but rather focusing on the three main characters at the heart of the story and the black humour that binds the team together . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Whitechapel debuted on 2 February 2009 at 9 pm with 8.13 million viewers on the overnight ratings .
Series one received positive reviews , and holds a Metacritic score of 75 out of 100 , indicating " generally favourable " reviews .
A review in the Leicester Mercury said that it was " Life on Mars , without the time - travel " adding " what Whitechapel lacked in originality , it more than made up for with atmosphere and enthusiasm . "
After Episode 2 was broadcast on 9 February , Andrew Billen in The Times said that he had warmed to it more and more , adding , " slowly , the show is making Ripperologists of us all , as Jack 's ' canonical ' murders are separated from the ones he actually committed .
It is all in the worst possible taste and bloody good fun . "
However , The Daily Telegraph was less impressed , writing " The premise was feeble , the script imbecilic , the acting on autopilot , the direction lacking in any glimmer of tension . "
Series two received favourable reviews , and holds a Metacritic score of 69 out of 100 , indicating " generally favourable " reviews .
MAIN CAST
* Rupert Penry - Jones as D.I. Joseph Chandler
* Phil Davis as D.S. Ray Miles
* Steve Pemberton as Edward Buchan * Christopher Fulford as D.C. Fitzgerald ( Series 1 )
* Johnny Harris as D.C. Sanders ( Series 1 ) * Sam Stockman as D.C. Emerson Kent * George Rossi as D.C. John McCormack ( Series 1–2 ) * Alex Jennings as Commander Anderson ( Series 1–2 ) * Claire Rushbrook as Dr. Caroline Llewellyn
* Ben Bishop as D.C.
Finlay Mansell ( Series 2–4 )
* Hannah Walters as D.C.
Megan Riley ( Series 3–4 ) SERIES OVERVIEW
EPISODE LIST SERIES 1 ( 2009 )
Section::::Episode list .
Section::::Series 1 ( 2009 ) .
Guest starring ; * Paul Hickey as Dr David Cohen , a doctor at the local hospital .
* Sally Leonard as Frances Coles , one of the intended murder victims .
* Simon Tcherniak as Dr George Phillips , Frances ' boyfriend .
* Branko Tomović as Antoni Pricha , one of the main suspects in the new Jack the Ripper case .
* Sophie Stanton as Mary Bousefield , a police officer and victim of the new Ripper .
* Jane Riley as Sarah Smith , a key witness in the enquiry .
* Ben Loyd - Holmes as Private John Leary , the first suspect in the Ripper case .
Series one and two were broadcast as a single six - episode season on BBC America , and were subsequently released on DVD as such .
For the BBC America SERIES 2 ( 2010 )
Section::::Series 2 ( 2010 ) .
Guest starring ; * Peter Serafinowicz as DCI Cazenove , the corrupt Head of the Organised Crime Division .
* Craig Parkinson as Jimmy and Johnny Kray , the heirs to the legacy of the original Kray twins * Chrissie Cotterill as Angie Brooks , mother of the Kray twins .
* Andrew Tiernan as Steven Dukes , a local gangster who help the Krays rise to power .
Series one and two were broadcast as a single six - episode season on BBC America , and were subsequently released on DVD as such .
For the BBC America SERIES 3 ( 2012 )
Section::::Series 3 ( 2012 ) .
Whitechapel was commissioned for a third series in March 2011 , but unlike the previous two series , which were each based on a single event , the new series was split into three separate two - part stories , which each focused on a different case .
For the BBC America SERIES 4 ( 2013 )
Section::::Series 4 ( 2013 ) .
Whitechapel was commissioned for a fourth series in October 2012 , and follows the same format as the third series , featuring three individual cases .
For the BBC America REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Whitechapel on BBC America