ANGLERFISH
The anglerfish is a fish of the teleost order Lophiiformes ( ) .
It is a bony fish named for its characteristic mode of predation , in which a fleshy growth from the fish 's head ( the esca or illicium ) acts as a lure .
Some anglerfish are also notable for extreme sexual dimorphism and sexual symbiosis of the small male with the much larger female , seen in the suborder Ceratioidei .
In these species , males may be several orders of magnitude smaller than females .
Anglerfish occur worldwide .
Some are pelagic ( dwelling away from the sea floor ) , while others are benthic ( dwelling close to the sea floor ) ; some live in the deep sea ( e.g. , Ceratiidae ) , while others on the continental shelf ( e.g. , the frogfishes Antennariidae and the monkfish / goosefish Lophiidae ) .
Pelagic forms are most laterally compressed , whereas the benthic forms are often extremely dorsoventrally compressed ( depressed ) , often with large upward - pointing mouths .
EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
A mitochondrial genome phylogenetic study suggested the anglerfishes diversified in a short period of the early to mid - Cretaceous , between 130 and 100 million years ago .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
FishBase , Nelson , * Suborder Lophoiodei * Lophiidae ( goosefishes or monkfishes ) * Suborder Antennarioidei * Antennariidae ( frogfishes ) * Tetrabrachiidae ( four - armed frogfishes ) * Brachionichthyidae ( handfishes ) * Lophichthyidae ( Boschma 's frogfish ) * Suborder Chaunacoidei * Chaunacidae ( sea toads )
* Suborder Ogcocephaloidei * Ogcocephalidae ( batfishes ) * Suborder Ceratioidei * Centrophrynidae ( prickly seadevils ) * Ceratiidae ( warty seadevils )
* Himantolophidae ( footballfishes ) * Diceratiidae ( doublespine seadevils ) * Melanocetidae ( black seadevils ) * Thaumatichthyidae ( wolf - trap seadevils ) * Oneirodidae ( dreamers ) * Caulophrynidae ( fanfin seadevils )
* Neoceratiidae ( needlebeard seadevil ) * Gigantactinidae ( whipnose seadevils ) * Linophrynidae ( leftvent seadevils ) ANATOMY Section::::Anatomy .
All anglerfish are carnivorous and are thus adapted for the capture of prey .
Ranging in color from dark gray to dark brown , deep - sea species have large heads that bear enormous , crescent - shaped mouths full of long , fang - like teeth angled inward for efficient prey grabbing .
Their length can vary from to over with weights up to .
Frogfish and other shallow - water anglerfish species are ambush predators , and often appear camouflaged as rocks , sponges or seaweed .
Most adult female ceratioid anglerfish have a luminescent organ called the esca at the tip of a modified dorsal ray ( the illicium , or " fishing rod " ) .
The organ has been hypothesized to serve the obvious purpose of luring prey in dark , deep - sea environments , but also serves to call males ' attention to the females to facilitate mating .
The source of luminescence is symbiotic bacteria that dwell in and around the esca , enclosed in a cup - shaped reflector containing crystals , probably consisting of guanine .
In some species , the bacteria recruited to the esca are incapable of luminescence independent of the anglerfish , suggesting they have developed a symbiotic relationship and the bacteria are unable to synthesize all of the chemicals necessary for luminescence on their own .
They depend on the fish to make up the difference .
Electron microscopy of these bacteria in some species reveals they are Gram - negative rods that lack capsules , spores , or flagella .
They have double - layered cell walls and mesosomes .
A pore connects the esca with the seawater , which enables the removal of dead bacteria and cellular waste , and allows the pH and tonicity of the culture medium to remain constant .
This , as well as the constant temperature of the bathypelagic zone inhabited by these fish , is crucial for the long - term viability of bacterial cultures .
The light gland is always open to the exterior , so it is possible that the fish acquires the bacteria from the seawater .
However , it appears that each species uses its own particular species of bacteria , and these bacteria have never been found in seawater .
Haygood ( 1993 ) theorized that esca discharge bacteria during spawning and the bacteria are thereby transferred to the eggs .
In most species , a wide mouth extends all around the anterior circumference of the head , and bands of inwardly inclined teeth line both jaws .
The teeth can be depressed so as to offer no impediment to an object gliding towards the stomach , but prevent its escape from the mouth .
The anglerfish is able to distend both its jaw and its stomach , since its bones are thin and flexible , to enormous size , allowing it to swallow prey up to twice as large as its entire body .
BEHAVIOR SWIMMING AND ENERGY CONSERVATION Section::::Behavior .
Section::::Swimming and energy conservation .
In 2005 , near Monterey , California , at 1474 metres depth , an ROV filmed a female ceratioid anglerfish of the genus Oneirodes for 24 minutes .
When approached , the fish retreated rapidly , but in 74 % of the video footage , it drifted passively , oriented at any angle .
When advancing , it swam intermittently at a speed of 0.24 body lengths per second , beating its pectoral fins in - phase .
The lethargic behaviour of this ambush predator is suited to the energy - poor environment of the deep sea .
Another in situ observation of three different whipnose anglerfish showed unusual upside - down swimming behavior .
Fish were observed floating upside - down completely motionless with the illicium hanging down stiffly in a slight arch in front of the fish .
The illicium was hanging over small visible burrows .
It was suggested this is an effort to entice prey and an example of low - energy opportunistic foraging and predation .
When the ROV approached the fish , they exhibited burst swimming , still upside - down .
The jaw and stomach of the anglerfish can extend to allow it to consume prey up to twice its size .
Because of the small amount of food available in the anglerfish 's environment this adaptation allows the anglerfish to store food when there is an abundance .
PREDATION Section::::Predation .
The name " anglerfish " derives from the species ' characteristic method of predation .
Anglerfish typically have at least one long filament sprouting from the middle of their heads , termed the illicium .
The illicium is the detached and modified first three spines of the anterior dorsal fin .
In most anglerfish species , the longest filament is the first .
This first spine protrudes above the fish 's eyes and terminates in an irregular growth of flesh ( the esca ) , and can move in all directions .
Anglerfish can wiggle the esca to make it resemble a prey animal , which lures the anglerfish 's prey close enough for the anglerfish to devour them whole .
Some deep - sea anglerfish of the bathypelagic zone emit light from their esca to attract prey .
This bioluminescence is a result of symbiosis with bacteria .
The mechanism that ceratioids use to harness them is unknown , but researchers speculate that the bacteria enter the esca through small pores from seawater .
Once inside , they multiply until their density is sufficient to produce a bright collective glow .
Because anglerfish are opportunistic foragers , they show a range of preferred prey with fish at the extremes of the size spectrum , whilst showing increased selectivity for certain prey .
One study examining the stomach contents of threadfin anglerfish off the Pacific coast of Central America
found these fish primarily ate two categories of benthic prey : crustaceans and teleost fish .
The most frequent prey were pandalid shrimp .
52 % of the stomachs examined were empty , supporting the observations that anglerfish are low energy consumers .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Some anglerfish , like those of the Ceratiidae , or sea devils employ an unusual mating method .
Because individuals are locally rare , encounters are also very rare .
Therefore , finding a mate is problematic .
When scientists first started capturing ceratioid anglerfish , they noticed that all of the specimens were female .
These individuals were a few centimetres in size and almost all of them had what appeared to be parasites attached to them .
It turned out that these " parasites " were highly reduced male ceratioids .
This indicates some taxa of anglerfish use a polyandrous mating system .
Certain ceratioids rely on parabiotic reproduction .
Free - living males and unparasitized females in these species never have fully developed gonads .
Thus , males never mature without attaching to a female , and die if they can not find one .
At birth , male ceratioids are already equipped with extremely well - developed olfactory organs that detect scents in the water .
Males of some species also develop large , highly specialized eyes that may aid in identifying mates in dark environments .
The male ceratioid lives solely to find and mate with a female .
They are significantly smaller than a female anglerfish , and may have trouble finding food in the deep sea .
Furthermore , growth of the alimentary canals of some males becomes stunted , preventing them from feeding .
Some taxa have jaws that are never suitable or effective for prey capture .
These features mean the male must quickly find a female anglerfish to prevent death .
The sensitive olfactory organs help the male to detect the pheromones that signal the proximity of a female anglerfish .
However , the methods anglerfish use to locate mates vary .
Some species have minute eyes that are unfit for identifying females , while others have underdeveloped nostrils , making them unlikely to effectively find females by smell .
When a male finds a female , he bites into her skin , and releases an enzyme that digests the skin of his mouth and her body , fusing the pair down to the blood - vessel level .
The male becomes dependent on the female host for survival by receiving nutrients via their shared circulatory system , and provides sperm to the female in return .
After fusing , males increase in volume and become much larger relative to free - living males of the species .
They live and remain reproductively functional as long as the female lives , and can take part in multiple spawnings .
This extreme sexual dimorphism ensures that when the female is ready to spawn , she has a mate immediately available .
Multiple males can be incorporated into a single individual female with up to eight males in some species , though some taxa appear to have a " one male per female " rule .
Symbiosis is not the only method of reproduction in anglerfish .
In fact , many families , including the Melanocetidae , Himantolophidae , Diceratiidae , and Gigantactinidae , show no evidence of male symbiosis .
Females in some of these species contain large , developed ovaries and free - living males have large testes , suggesting these sexually mature individuals may spawn during a temporary sexual attachment that does not involve fusion of tissue .
Males in these species also have well - toothed jaws that are far more effective in hunting than those seen in symbiotic species .
Finally , sexual symbiosis may be an optional strategy in some species of anglerfishes .
In the Oneirodidae , females carrying symbiotic males have been reported in Leptacanthichthys and Bertella — and others that were not still developed fully functional gonads .
One theory suggests the males attach to females regardless of their own reproductive development if the female is not sexually mature , but when both male and female are mature , they spawn then separate .
One explanation for the evolution of sexual symbiosis is that the relatively low density of females in deep - sea environments leaves little opportunity for mate choice among anglerfish .
Females remain large to accommodate fecundity , as is evidenced by their large ovaries and eggs .
Males would be expected to shrink to reduce metabolic costs in resource - poor environments and would develop highly specialized female - finding abilities .
If a male manages to find a female , then symbiotic attachment is ultimately more likely to improve lifetime fitness relative to free living , particularly when the prospect of finding future mates is poor .
An additional advantage to symbiosis is that the male 's sperm can be used in multiple fertilizations , as he stays always available to the female for mating .
Higher densities of male - female encounters might correlate with species that demonstrate facultative symbiosis or simply use a more traditional temporary contact mating .
The spawn of the anglerfish of the genus Lophius consists of a thin sheet of transparent gelatinous material wide and greater than long .
The eggs in this sheet are in a single layer , each in its own cavity .
The spawn is free in the sea .
The larvae are free - swimming and have the pelvic fins elongated into filaments .
Such an egg sheet is rare among fish .
THREATS Section::::Threats .
Northwest European Lophius species are listed by the ICES as " outside safe biological limits " .
Additionally , anglerfish are known to occasionally rise to the surface during El Niño , leaving large groups of dead anglerfish floating on the surface .
In 2010 , Greenpeace International added the American angler ( Lophius americanus ) , the angler ( Lophius piscatorius ) , and the black - bellied angler ( Lophius budegassa ) to its seafood red list — a list of fish commonly sold worldwide with a high likelihood of being sourced from unsustainable fisheries .
HUMAN CONSUMPTION Section::::Human consumption .
One family , the Lophiidae , is of commercial interest with fisheries found in western Europe , eastern North America , Africa , and East Asia .
In Europe and North America , the tail meat of fish of the genus Lophius , known as monkfish or goosefish ( North America ) , is widely used in cooking , and is often compared to lobster tail in taste and texture .
In Asia , especially Korea and Japan , monkfish liver , known as ankimo , is considered a delicacy .
TIMELINE OF GENERA Section::::Timeline of genera .
Anglerfish appear in the fossil record as follows : REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Anderson , M. Eric , and Leslie , Robin W. 2001 .
Review of the deep - sea anglerfishes ( Lophiiformes : Ceratioidei ) of southern Africa .
Ichthyological Bulletin of the J.L.B. Smith Institute of Ichthyology ;
No . 70 .
J.L.B. Smith Institute of Ichthyology , Rhodes University EXTERNAL LINKS
* Tree of Life web project : Lophiiformes * Photos – Anglerfish