PRESIDENTIAL MEMORANDUM
A presidential memorandum is a type of executive action issued by the President of the United States to manage and govern the actions , practices , and policies of the various departments and agencies found under the executive branch of the United States government .
It has the force of law and is usually used to delegate tasks , direct specific government agencies to do something , or to start a regulatory process .
There are three types of presidential memoranda : presidential determination or presidential finding , memorandum of disapproval , and hortatory memorandum .
Sometimes used interchangeably , an executive order is a more prestigious form of executive action that must cite the specific constitutional or statutory authority the president has to use it .
Unlike executive orders , memoranda are not required by law to be published in the Federal Register , but publication is necessary in order to have " general applicability and legal effect " .
The Federal Register gives publication priority to executive orders and presidential proclamations over memoranda .
Memoranda can be amended or rescinded by executive orders or another memorandum , but executive orders take legal precedence and can not be changed by a memorandum .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the past , presidential memoranda have been referred to as presidential letters . !
President !
Number Issued Barack Obama 644 Donald Trump ( ) 109 PRESIDENTIAL DETERMINATION Section::::Presidential determination .
Presidential determination , or presidential finding , are memoranda required by a statute and must be issued before certain actions are taken .
For example , a presidential determination on the status of a country must be released before sanctions are imposed on the country .
MEMORANDUM OF DISAPPROVAL Section::::Memorandum of disapproval .
A memorandum of disapproval is a public veto statement .
HORTATORY MEMORANDUM Section::::Hortatory memorandum .
A hortatory memorandum is issued as a broad policy statement , but unlike a Presidential Proclamation is directed to executive agencies .
NATIONAL SECURITY PRESIDENTIAL MEMORANDUM Section::::National security presidential memorandum .
In 2017 , President Donald Trump changed the National security directives to National security presidential memorandum .
They operate like executive orders , but are only in the area of national security .
They date back to President Harry S. Truman and have been called many different names .
SEE ALSO
* Executive order ( United States )
* Presidential directive * Presidential proclamation * Memorandum of conversation REFERENCES