LOVE FINDS A HOME
Love Finds a Home is a 2009 made - for - television Christian drama film , the eighth and final installment based on a series of books by Janette Oke .
It aired on Hallmark Channel on September 5 , 2009 .
The film is based on the book Love Finds a Home by Janette Oke .
Sarah Jones , Haylie Duff , and Jordan Bridges reprise their roles from Love Takes Wing .
The film is the eighth in the Love Comes
Softly series of television movies on Hallmark Channel that includes Love Comes Softly ( 2003 )
, Love 's Enduring Promise ( 2004 ) , Love 's Long Journey ( 2005 ) , Love 's Abiding Joy ( 2006 ) , Love 's Unending Legacy ( 2007 ) , Love 's Unfolding Dream ( 2007 ) , and Love Takes Wing ( 2009 ) , as well as two 2011 prequels ; Love Begins and
Love 's Everlasting Courage , which are not based on any novels .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A pregnant Dr. Annie Watson ( Haylie Duff ) is going to stay with her best friend , Dr. Belinda Owens ( Sarah Jones ) while her husband Peter is off on a surveying job .
Annie 's mother - in - law Mary ( Patty Duke ) , a seen - it - all midwife whose homeopathic remedies and folksy wisdom are at odds with Belinda 's scientific knowledge , comes along .
As Belinda deals with the headaches Mary is causing , she must also address issues at home .
While her adopted daughter Lillian ( Courtney Halverson ) discovers the joys and pains of first love , Belinda and her husband Lee ( Jordan Bridges ) find their own relationship suffering over Belinda 's inability to get pregnant .
Just as the town learned to put its faith in Belinda as their doctor , Belinda must learn to accept that the best guidance for her own problems may come from unlikely sources .
Annie gives birth to a daughter , Melinda ( Lindy ) , and the movie ends with Mary hopping into a buggy to leave and Belinda whispering something in her ear .
When her husband asks what she said , the answer is : " Oh , I just told her that I 'll need a midwife soon . "
CAST * Sarah Jones as Dr. Belinda Owens * Patty Duke as Mary Watson
* Jordan Bridges as Lee Owens * Haylie Duff as Dr. Annie Watson * Courtney Halverson as Lillian Owens * Michael Trevino as Joshua Coil * Jeffrey Muller as Peter Watson DIFFERENCES FROM THE NOVEL
* Lee and Lillian are not from the novel , as are many other characters and situations .
Belinda is still unmarried in this novel , and marries Drew Simpson at the close of the novel .
* Missie and Marty , the original female leads from the earlier novel series , are also present in the novel whereas they are absent in this adaptation .
ANACHRONISMS
* The pennies Mrs. McQueen gave to Lillian at Belinda 's office have an image of the Lincoln Memorial on them .
The Lincoln Memorial did not appear on pennies until 1959 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Love Finds a Home at Hallmark Channel
* Love Finds a Home at Hallmark Channel 's Press Site