EMILY FITCH Emily Fitch is a fictional character in the television series Skins , played by Kathryn Prescott .
She is introduced in the third series .
Her twin sister Katie is played by Kathryn 's real - life twin Megan Prescott .
CHARACTERISATION Section::::Characterisation .
On her blog , Emily notes her name means " to rival " which she finds ironic , as she 's a twin .
What 's even more ironic to her is that her sister 's name means " pure and virginal , " a nod to how many boyfriends Katie has had .
During Naomi 's episode in series 3 , stylist Kirstie Stanway began to differentiate between Emily and her twin sister Katie 's hair and makeup to show that the twins are starting to " move along their own paths " .
Originally , an entire scene was supposed to be filmed with Naomi and Emily in the lake , but the water was so cold that the actors were unable to stay in the water , and Kathryn Prescott was taken to a standby ambulance with suspected hypothermia .
Director Simon Massey choreographed Naomi and Emily 's sex scene prior to filming so that , on the set , the actions would come instinctively to the actors and they would be able to complete the scene in a limited number of takes .
Prescott stated that the scene concerned her , though she said that she was not pressured to do anything in the script that made her uncomfortable .
In her most difficult times , she finds a source of support in her friendship with JJ Jones , after running into him at a clinic where she was receiving a course of counselling and learning about his Asperger syndrome .
It is to him that she first confides about her homosexuality , in turn encouraging him to take control of Freddie and Cook 's feud , and it is to her that he finally loses his virginity .
Emily 's character becomes more confident in series 4 , following her coming out and subsequent relationship with Naomi .
Prescott accidentally let slip that the couple " die happy " in relation to not being able to act as Emily in the following series .
Ed Hime , writer of Emily 's series 4 episode stated that " hugeness of Emily 's love makes her unique in Skins world and those kinds of people are scary to be in relationships " .
He commented that Emily has the traits of an " intrepid detective " , citing Emily 's traits - " her purity , intelligence , bravery and tenacity " are " traits that make a great private eye " .
Ed Hime praised Prescott for having " beautiful eyes that just take everything in " and stated that she was great at " giving Naomi longing looks " .
Prescott commented that she " thought Naomi was a bitch " for cheating , pointing out costar Loveless would agree as well , but had let slip that the couple end up happy .
CHARACTER HISTORY Section::::Character history .
Emily was born in 1992 to Rob and Jenna Fitch .
She is the younger twin , often being overshadowed by Katie .
Growing up , the two made up a secret language only each other could understand , called " Twin " .
SERIES 3
Section::::Series 3 .
Emily 's first appearance in the series occurs when she is getting ready for her first day at Roundview College .
Angry at her sister for using all the hot water and taking her clothes , Emily resigns herself to getting a ride to college from Danny , who comments that she should be more like Katie .
During the assembly , Emily can be seen observing Naomi , who appears to be angry and shocked at the same time .
Before class , Effy comments that Emily is like a " doormat " .
Introducing herself , Emily reveals her on interesting fact is that she has never had a boyfriend , in contrast to Katie 's statement .
At Cook 's birthday party , Emily tells Katie that she was straight , not the other way around .
She states that " she just felt like kissing somebody " but later apologises to Naomi .
During Pandora 's pyjama party , Emily kisses Naomi , to which the latter reciprocates , who reasons " it 's just the drugs " .
Unknown to her , Katie actually sees Naomi and Emily kissing for the second time in the bouncy castle and appears to be shaken .
In the " Naomi " centric episode , Emily encourages Naomi to run for president , but Naomi refuses .
Later when Naomi arrives home , Emily is found waiting with another registration form in the Naomi 's room .
Emily leaves when Naomi is rude and standoffish to her but Emily returns and confronts her coldly telling her that she is not obsessed with pursuing a sexual relationship with her .
Naomi suggests she stay the night with her , the two ending up drunk .
The following morning , Emily wakes up alone ; Naomi having left for college .
Emily leaves a note in Naomi 's bed , where the latter cries herself to sleep following the humiliation of Cook 's presidential campaign .
After , Naomi and Emily escape to the countryside the next day and cycle to one of Emily 's favourite places by a lake .
After swimming in the lake , they light a campfire .
The two then kiss and proceed to make love .
Emily wakes up the following morning to find Naomi preparing to leave .
She pleas for Naomi not to leave her a second time , and telling her that she should accept that she needs to be loved .
That night , she visits Emily 's house , but Emily refuses to open the door , not wanting Naomi to see her after she had been crying .
They sit on opposite sides of the door , and Naomi admits that she does need somebody to love her .
Emily offers her hand through the door 's catflap to Naomi , who finally reciprocates Emily 's feelings .
In JJ , Emily meets JJ at a clinic where she is getting counselling to be more truthful about herself , and secretly confides to him about her homosexuality , which he accidentally lets slip to Katie .
In return , Emily encourages him to take control of Cook and Freddie 's feud and make peace with Effy .
At the end of the episode , she offers to take JJ 's virginity , which he does .
Katie 's injuries make her too embarrassed to leave the house , so Emily disguises herself as her sister and sits for her exam .
Katie ignores Emily when her sister comes out to her , telling her " you 're not gay
, you 're just stupid " .
Unknown to Emily , Katie later confronts Naomi after Emily comes out to her parents , telling her to stay away from Emily , telling Naomi that Emily slept with JJ while she and Naomi were having problems ; thus causing Emily and Naomi to fight .
This enables Emily and Katie to go to the school ball with JJ and Freddie ( respectively ) .
Eventually , Naomi shows up at the ball , angry at Emily for not telling her about JJ .
Emily later overhears Naomi and Katie arguing , and pulls Katie away , both fighting each other .
Emily gains the upper hand but does n't hurt her sister , instead picking her up and saying that she loves Katie , but Emily is n't her ; and walks off with Naomi .
SKINS :
THE NOVEL Section::::Skins : The Novel .
The novel , written by Ali Cronin describes the summer between series 3 and 4 .
Emily and Naomi are happily together , but Emily must join her family for a vacation to France .
Naomi worries about her future , debating whether to choose Emily or further her education .
Matters are made worse when Katie takes Emily 's phone away , thus effectively cutting off the two from communicating with each other .
In the end , Emily notes that she herself is selfish ,
even though Naomi and herself made up she is preventing Naomi from pursuing her education .
SERIES 4
Section::::Series 4 .
Emily 's first appears in series 4 at a nightclub , kissing Naomi .
She 's visibly shocked when Sophia commits suicide , unaware that Sophia has passed by her several minutes before .
Her centric episode focuses on the couple 's happiness , but Emily becomes suspicious when the police turns up and interviews them both on Sophia 's suicide .
Behind Naomi 's back , Emily visits Sophia 's family , taking a wooden box and a university prospectus with a key inside .
She leaves and later , when flicking through the prospectus , she finds a photo of Sophia laughing with Naomi .
She realises that Naomi did in fact know the dead girl and suspects that she might have cheated on her with Sophia .
She interrupts Naomi 's class by slamming the picture of Sophia and Naomi into the window , the two argue about lying and Naomi admits that she indeed met Sophia at a University open day which she was attending behind Emily 's back .
She insists they just talked and that nothing had happened between them .
Still a bit doubtful , Emily tells her about the key she found and Naomi believes it is for Sophia 's locker at the army base .
They discover that Sophia was infatuated with Naomi and Emily makes up with her , having sex with Naomi in an army storage closet .
Later , Emily , unable to understand why their mother ca n't accept her homosexuality and her relationship with Naomi , decides to move out leaving Katie heartbroken .
Emily becomes suspicious when Naomi talks to other girls during a party .
At dawn , Emily meets up with Sophia 's brother , Matt , to open up the box .
Despite Naomi showing up and telling Emily to forget it , Emily goes to the roof and opens the box to find Sophia 's sketchbook .
Through Sophia 's drawings that depict her one - day affair with Naomi , Emily finds out that Naomi did in fact cheat on her .
A distraught Emily leaves the roof with Naomi crying and calling after her .
Emily returns home and tearfully tells her father that Naomi had cheated on her .
As he consoles her , Rob tells her that he once cheated on Jenna , and that she should not worry as it gets better after it is worse .
Emily goes back to Naomi 's house , reading a note on the front door saying , " I 'll do anything " .
The episode ends with Emily walking through the front door , seemingly following her father 's advice .
When Rob Fitch declares he 's bankrupt , the entire Fitch family moves into Naomi 's house , much to the anger of Emily .
Emily throws an impromptu BBQ with revellers from the night before , Katie watches as Emily carries on the hedonism , Naomi blatantly does n't want to be there , and Emily wants more pills .
Then Emily turns increasingly angry and hedonistic , kissing a girl in front of everyone then pushing Naomi into the pool .
Revealing her secret about Sophia , Naomi watches as Emily bursts into tears and lashes out at her mother , earning a slap from Katie .
The twins later reconcile however , when Katie realises how heartbroken Emily is .
Emily receives two B´s and a C from her A - Levels .
In the finale , Emily forgives Naomi after hearing the latter 's confession of loving Emily since she was 12 .
Moved by the heartfelt confession , the two make amends and are seen being happy together .
SERIES 7
Section::::Series 7 .
In season 7 , Emily reappears in the two - part episode Skins Fire .
She does not physically appear in part one although she is heard having an argument with Naomi , now living in London with Effy Stonem over Skype , and it is made clear that she is in New York City on a lucrative internship .
Naomi is missing her enormously , and her close friendship with Effy is the only thing keeping her going .
Emily appears in person in part two , having gotten some time off on her internship , and has decided to visit Naomi in London .
Secretly , Naomi resists Effy 's urging to tell Emily about her recent cancer diagnosis , saying that if she were to do so , Emily would drop everything and return to London at once , and the internship she worked so hard to get would be over , and her cancer is not yet serious .
However , as Naomi 's cancer progresses and eventually becomes terminal , Naomi becomes devastated at the inevitable pain she will have to cause Emily now that she has left it so late to tell her .
Eventually , Emily is informed , and Effy greets her at the airport .
A devastated Emily wordlessly slaps her across the face , before getting upset with her for having spent the time with Naomi that she could have spent , and tells her not to follow her to the hospital .
Later on , however , Effy enters the hospital to find Emily has not yet entered Naomi 's room , and she admits she does n't know how she can forgive Naomi for not telling her sooner .
Effy consoles her as she breaks down in tears and acknowledges that Naomi will die , and urges her to be strong for her as Naomi was when Emily fell out with her family .
Bracing herself , Emily enters Naomi 's room and climbs into bed with her , embracing her and sobbing into her shoulder .
Naomi gives Effy a smile over her shoulder , happy that she can die peacefully with her beloved Emily by her side .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The " Naomily " storyline of Series 3 and 4 proved popular with lesbian viewers ; a poll conducted by American gay women 's media website AfterEllen.com ranked Naomi and Emily as the top two fictional lesbian and bisexual characters .
AfterEllen.com also ranked her No.4 in their Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters .
Emily has consistently been described as " brave " .
A critic for PopSugar.com found Emily 's plea to Naomi as Naomi left the campsite " heartbreaking " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Emily Fitch on the official E4 Skins site * Emily Fitch Character Blog on E4 Skins site * Emily Fitch on Myspace