FREAK SHOW
A freak show is an exhibition of biological rarities , referred to in popular culture as " freaks of nature " .
Typical features would be physically unusual humans , such as those uncommonly large or small , those with both male and female secondary sexual characteristics , people with other extraordinary diseases and conditions , and performances that are expected to be shocking to the viewers .
Heavily tattooed or pierced people have sometimes been seen in freak shows , as have attention - getting physical performers such as fire - eating and sword - swallowing acts .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the mid-16th century , freak shows became popular pastimes in England .
Deformities began to be treated as objects of interest and entertainment , and the crowds flocked to see them exhibited .
A famous early modern example was the exhibition at the court of Charles I of Lazarus and Joannes Baptista Colloredo , two conjoined brothers born in Genoa , Italy .
While Lazarus appeared to be otherwise ordinary , the underdeveloped body of his brother dangled from his chest .
When Lazarus was not exhibiting himself , he covered his brother with his cloak to avoid unnecessary attention .
As well as exhibitions , freak shows were popular in the taverns and fairgrounds where the freaks were often combined with talent displays .
For example , in the 18th century , Matthias Buchinger , born without arms or lower legs , entertained crowds with astonishing displays of magic and musical ability , both in England and later , Ireland .
It was in the 19th century , both in England and the United States , where freak shows finally reached maturity as successful commercially run enterprises .
During the late 19th century and the early 20th century freak shows were at their height of popularity ; the period 1840s through to the 1940s saw the organized for - profit exhibition of people with physical , mental or behavioral rarities .
Although not all abnormalities were real , some being alleged , the exploitation for profit was seen as an accepted part of American culture .
The attractiveness of freak shows led to the spread of the shows that were commonly seen at amusement parks , circuses , dime museums and vaudeville .
The amusement park industry flourished in the United States by the expanding middle class who benefited from short work weeks and a larger income .
There was also a shift in American culture which influenced people to see leisure activities as a necessary and beneficial equivalent to working , thus leading to the popularity of the freak show .
The showmen and promoters exhibited all types of freaks .
People who appeared non - white or who had a disability were often exhibited as unknown races and cultures .
These " unknown " races and disabled whites were advertised as being undiscovered humans to attract viewers .
For example , those with microcephaly , a condition linked to mental retardation and characterized by a very small , pointed head and small overall structure , were considered or characterized as " missing links " or as atavistic specimens of an extinct race .
Hypopituitary dwarfs who tend to be well proportioned and physically attractive , were advertised as lofty .
Achondroplastic dwarfs , whose head and limbs tend to be out of proportion to their trunks , were characterized as exotic mode .
Those who were armless , legless , or limbless were also characterized in the exotic mode as animal - people , such as " The Snake - Man " , and " The Seal man " .
There were four ways freak shows were produced and marketed .
The first was the oral spiel or lecture .
This featured a showman or professor who managed the presentation of the people or " freaks " .
The second was a printed advertisement usually using long pamphlets and broadside or newspaper advertisement of the freak show .
The third step included costuming , choreography , performance , and space used to display the show , designed to emphasize the things that were considered abnormal about each performer .
The final stage was a collectable drawing or photograph that portrayed the group of freaks on stage for viewers to take home .
The collectable printed souvenirs were accompanied by recordings of the showmen 's pitch , the lecturer 's yarn , and the professor 's exaggerated accounts of what was witnessed at the show .
Exhibits were authenticated by doctors who used medical terms that many could not comprehend but which added an air of authenticity to the proceedings .
Freak show culture normalized a specific way of thinking about gender , race , sexual aberrance , ethnicity , and disability .
Scholars believe that freak shows contributed significantly to the way American culture views nonconforming bodies .
Freak shows were a space for the general public to scrutinize bodies different from their own , from dark - skinned people , to victims of war and diseases , to ambiguously sexed bodies .
People felt that paying to view these " freaks " gave them permission to compare themselves favorably to the freaks .
During the first decade of the twentieth century the popularity of the freak show was starting to dwindle .
In their prime , freak shows had been the main attraction of the midway , but by 1940 they were starting to lose their audience , with credible people turning their backs on the show .
In the nineteenth century science supported and legitimized the growth of freak shows , but by the twentieth century , the medicalization of human abnormalities contributed to the end of the exhibits ' mystery and appeal .
THE AMERICAN MUSEUM Section::::The American Museum .
P. T. Barnum was considered the father of modern - day advertising , and one of the most famous showmen / managers of the freak show industry .
In the United States he was a major figure in popularizing the entertainment .
However , it was very common for Barnum 's acts to be schemes and not altogether true .
Barnum was fully aware of the improper ethics behind his business as he said , " I do n't believe in duping the public , but I believe in first attracting and then pleasing them . "
During the 1840s Barnum began his museum , which had a constantly rotating acts schedule , which included The Fat Lady , midgets , giants , and other people deemed to be freaks .
The museum drew in about 400,000 visitors a year .
P.T. Barnum 's American Museum was one of the most popular museums in New York City to exhibit freaks .
In 1841 Barnum purchased The American Museum , which made freaks the major attraction , following mainstream America at the mid-19th century .
Barnum was known to advertise aggressively and make up outlandish stories about his exhibits .
The façade of the museum was decorated with bright banners showcasing his attractions and included a band that performed outside .
Barnum 's American Museum also offered multiple attractions that not only entertained but tried to educate and uplift its working - class visitors .
Barnum offered one ticket that guaranteed admission to his lectures , theatrical performances , an animal menagerie , and a glimpse at curiosities both living and dead .
One of Barnum 's exhibits centered around Charles Stratton , the dwarf " General Tom Thumb " who was then 4 years of age but was stated to be 11 .
Charles had stopped growing after the first 6 months of his life , at which point he was 25 inches ( 64 cm ) tall and weighed 15 pounds ( 6.8 kg ) .
With heavy coaching and natural talent , the boy was taught to imitate people from Hercules to Napoleon .
By 5 , he was drinking wine , and by 7 smoking cigars for the public 's amusement .
During 1844–45 , Barnum toured with Tom Thumb in Europe and met Queen Victoria , who was amused and saddened by the little man , and the event was a publicity coup .
Barnum paid Stratton handsomely - about $ 150.00 a week .
When Stratton retired , he lived in the most esteemed neighborhood of New York , he owned a yacht , and dressed in the nicest clothing he could buy .
In 1860 , The American Museum had listed and archived thirteen human curiosities in the museum , including an albino family , The Living Aztecs , three dwarfs , a black mother with two albino children , The Swiss Bearded Lady , The Highland Fat Boys , and What Is It ?
( Henry Johnson , a mentally disabled black man ) .
Barnum introduced the " man - monkey " William Henry Johnson , a microcephalic black dwarf who spoke a mysterious language created by Barnum .
In 1862 , he discovered the giantess Anna Swan and Commodore Nutt , a new Tom Thumb , with whom Barnum visited President Abraham Lincoln at the White House .
During the Civil War , Barnum 's museum drew large audiences seeking diversion from the conflict .
Barnum 's most popular and highest grossing act was the Tattooed Man , George Contentenus .
He claimed to be a Greek - Albanian prince raised in a Turkish harem .
He had 338 tattoos covering his body .
Each one was ornate and told a story .
His story was that he was on a military expedition but was captured by native people , who gave him the choice of either being chopped up into little pieces or receive full body tattoos .
This process supposedly took three months and Contentenus was the only hostage who survived .
He produced a 23-page book , which detailed every aspect of his experience and drew a large crowd .
When Contentenus partnered with Barnum , he began to earn more than $ 1,000 a week .
His wealth became so staggering that the New York Times wrote , " He wears very handsome diamond rings and other jewelry , valued altogether at about $ 3,000 [ $ 71,500 in 2014 dollars ] and usually goes armed to protect himself from persons who might attempt to rob him . "
Though Contentenus was very fortunate , other freaks were not .
Upon his death in 1891 , he donated about half of his life earnings to other freaks who did not make as much money as he did .
One of Barnum 's most famous hoaxes was early in his career .
He hired a blind and paralyzed former slave for $ 1,000 .
He claimed this woman was 160 years old , but she was actually only 80 years old .
This lie helped Barnum make a weekly profit of nearly $ 1,000 .
This hoax was one of the first , but one of the more convincing .
Barnum retired in 1865 when his museum burnt to the ground .
Though Barnum was and still is criticized for exploitation , he paid the performers fairly handsome sums of money .
Some of the acts made the equivalent of what some sport stars make today .
TOM NORMAN Section::::Tom Norman .
Barnum 's English counterpart was Tom Norman , a renowned Victorian showman , whose traveling exhibitions featured Eliza Jenkins , the " Skeleton Woman " , a " Balloon Headed Baby " and a woman who bit off the heads of live rats — the " most gruesome " act Norman claimed to have seen .
Other acts included fleas , fat ladies , giants , dwarves and retired white seamen , painted black and speaking in an invented language , billed " savage Zulus " .
He displayed a " family of midgets " which in reality was composed of two men and a borrowed baby .
He operated a number of shops in London and Nottingham , and exhibited travelling shows throughout the country .
Most famously , in 1884 , Norman came into contact with Joseph Merrick , sometimes called " the Elephant Man " , a young man from Leicester who suffered from extreme deformities .
Merrick arrived in London and into Norman 's care .
Norman , initially shocked by Merrick 's appearance and reluctant to display him , nonetheless exhibited him at his penny gaff shop at 123 Whitechapel Road , directly across the road from the London Hospital .
Because of its proximity to the hospital , the shop received medical students and doctors as visitors .
One of these was a young surgeon named Frederick Treves who arranged to have Merrick brought to the hospital to be examined .
The exhibition of the Elephant Man was reasonably successful , particularly with the added income from a printed pamphlet about Merrick 's life and condition .
At this time , however , public opinion about freak shows was starting to change and the display of human novelties was beginning to be viewed as distasteful .
After only a few weeks with Norman , the Elephant Man exhibition was shut down by the police , and Norman and Merrick parted ways .
Treves later arranged for Merrick to live at the London Hospital until his death in 1890 .
In Treves ' 1923 memoir , The Elephant Man and Other Reminiscences made Norman infamous as a drunk who cruelly exploited Merrick .
Norman counteracted these claims in a letter in the World 's Fair newspaper that year , as well as his own autobiography .
Norman 's opinion was that he provided Merrick ( and his other exhibits ) a way of making a living and remaining independent , but that on entering the London Hospital , Merrick remained a freak on display , only with no control over how or when he was viewed .
DIME MUSEUM Section::::Dime Museum .
A different way to display a freak show was in a dime museum .
In a Dime Museum , freak show performers were exhibited as an educational display of people with different disabilities .
For a cheap admission viewers were awed with its dioramas , panoramas , georamas , cosmoramas , paintings , relics , freaks , stuffed animals , menageries , waxworks , and theatrical performances .
No other type of entertainment appealed to such diverse audiences before .
In the 1870s dimes grew and grew , hitting their peak in the 1880s and 1890s , being available for all from coast to coast .
New York City was the dime museum capital with an entertainment district that included German beer gardens , theaters , vendors , photography , studios , and a variety of other amusement institutions .
New York also had more dime museums than any place in the world .
Freak shows were the main attraction of most dime museums during 1870—1900 with the human oddity as the king of museum entertainment .
There were five types of human abnormalities that were on display in dime museums :
natural freaks , those born with physical or mental abnormalities , such as midgets and " pinheads " ; self - made freaks , those who cultivated freakdom , for example tattooed people ; novelty artists which were considered freaks because of their " freakish " performances such as snake charmers , mesmerists , hypnotists , and fire - eaters ; non - western freaks , people who were promoted as exotic curiosities , for example savages and cannibals , usually promoted as being from Africa .
Most dime museums had no seats in the curio halls .
Visitors were directed from platform to platform by a lecturer , whose role was to be the master of ceremonies .
During his performance , the lecturer , also known as the " Professor , " held the audience 's attention by describing the freaks displayed on the various stages .
The lecturer needed to have both charisma and persuasiveness in addition to a loud voice .
His rhetorical style usually was styled after the traditional distorted spiel of carnival barkers , filled with classical and biblical suggestions .
Dime museum freak shows also provided audiences with medical testimonials provided by " doctors " , psychologists and other behavioral " experts " who were there to help the audience understand a particular problem and to validate a show 's subject .
As the nineteenth century ended and the twentieth began there was a shift in popularity of the dime museum
and it began its downward turn .
Audiences now had a wide variety of different types of popular entertainment to choose from .
Circuses , street fairs , world 's fairs , carnivals , and urban amusement parks , all of which exhibited freaks , began to take business away from the dime museums .
CIRCUS
Section::::Circus .
In the circus world , freak shows , also called sideshows , were an essential part of the circus .
The largest sideshow was attached to the most prestigious circus , Ringling Brothers , Barnum and Bailey , known as the " big one " .
It was a symbol of the peak of the practice and its acceptance in American society .
It was at this time that single human oddities started joining traveling circuses during the early 1800s , but these shows were n't organized into anything like the sideshows we know until the midcentury .
During the 1870s it was common to see most circuses having freak shows , eventually making the circus a major place for the display of human oddities .
Most of the museums and side shows that had traveled with major circuses were disgracefully owned during most of 1876 .
By 1880 human phenomena were now combined with a variety of entertainment acts from the sideshows .
By 1890 tent size and the number of sideshow attractions began to increase , with most sideshows in large circuses with twelve to fifteen exhibits plus a band .
Bands typically were made up of black musicians , blackface minstrel bands , and troupes of dancers dressed as Hawaiians .
These entertainers were used to attract crowds and provide a festive atmosphere inside the show tent .
By the 1920s the circus was declining as a major form of amusement , due to competition such as amusement parks ; movie houses and burlesque tours ; and the rise of the radio .
Circuses also saw a large decline in audience during the depression as economic hard times and union demands were making the circus less and less affordable and valuable .
DISABILITY Section::::Disability .
Freak shows were viewed as a normal part of American culture in the late 19th century to the early 20th century .
The shows were viewed as a valuable form of amusement for middle - class people and were quite profitable for the showmen .
Some scholars have argued that freak shows were also beneficial for people with disabilities , giving them jobs and a steady income , rather than being institutionalized for their disabilities .
Other scholars have argued that the showmen and managers exploited freak show performers ' disabilities just for profit .
Changing attitudes about physical differences led to the decline of the freak show as a form of entertainment towards the end of the 19th century .
As previously mysterious anomalies were scientifically explained as genetic mutations or diseases , freaks became the objects of sympathy rather than fear or disdain .
Laws were passed restricting freak shows for these reasons .
For example , Michigan law forbids the " exhibition [ of ] any deformed human being or human monstrosity , except as used for scientific purposes " .
During the start of the 20th Century , movies and television began to satisfy audiences ' thirst to be entertained .
People could see similar types of acts and abnormalities from the comfort of their own homes or a nice theater , they no longer needed to pay to see freaks .
Though movies and television played a big part in the decline of the freak show , the rise of disability rights was the true cause of death .
It was finally viewed as wrong to profit from others ' misfortune : the days of manipulation were done .
However , in many places freak shows are still popular features .
Today , popular networks like TLC offer shows that exploit people in the same way that Barnum 's museum did .
Their shows like " Little People , Big World " and " My 600 Pound Life " look at the oddities of human nature and create audiences for them .
This rise in demand only causes more shows to be produced , such as " The Man with a Half Body " and " I Am the Elephant Man .
" These modern freaks are also paid handsomely , bringing in on average $ 8,000 an episode .
Though paid well , the freaks of the 19th Century did n't always enjoy the quality of life that this idea led to .
Frank Lentini , the three - legged man , was quoted saying , " My limb does not bother me as much as the curious , critical gaze . "
Although freak shows were viewed as a place for entertainment , they were also a place of employment for those who could advertise , manage , and perform in its attractions .
In an era before there was welfare or worker 's compensation , severely disabled people often found that placing themselves on exhibition was their only choice and opportunity for making a living .
Despite current values of the wrongness of exploitation of those with disabilities , during the nineteenth century performing in an organized freak show was a relatively respectable way to earn a living .
Many freak show performers were lucky and gifted enough to earn a livelihood and have a good life through exhibitions , some becoming celebrities , commanding high salaries and earning far more than acrobats , novelty performers , and actors .
The salaries of dime museum freaks usually varied from twenty - five to five hundred dollars a week , making a lot more money than lecture - room variety performers .
Freak shows provided more independence to some disabled people than today 's affirmative action programs .
Freaks were seen to have profitable traits , with an opportunity to become celebrities obtaining fame and fortune .
At the height of freak shows ' popularity , they were the only job for dwarves .
Many scholars have argued that freak show performers were being exploited by the showmen and managers for profit because of their disabilities .
Many freaks were paid generously but had to deal with museum managers who were often insensitive about the performers ' schedules , working them long hours just to make a profit .
This was particularly hard for top performers since the more shows these freaks were in , the more tickets were sold .
A lot of entertainers were abused by small - time museum operators , kept to grueling schedules , and given only a small percentage of their total earnings .
Individual exhibits were hired for about one to six weeks by dime museums .
The average performer had a schedule that included ten to fifteen shows a day and was shuttled back and forth week after week from one museum to another .
When a popular freak show performer came to a dime museum in New York he was overworked and exploited to make the museum money .
For example : Fedor Jeftichew , ( known as " Jo - Jo , the Dog - Faced Boy " ) appeared at the Globe Museum in New York , his manager arranged to have him perform twenty - three shows during a twelve to fourteen hour day .
HISTORICAL TIMELINE
Section::::Historical timeline .
The exhibition of human oddities has a long history : 1630s :
Lazarus Colloredo , and his conjoined twin brother , Joannes Baptista , who was attached at Lazarus ' sternum , tour Europe .
1704–1718 :
Peter the Great collected human oddities at the Kunstkammer in what is now St. Petersburg , Russia .
1738 : The exhibition of a creature who " was taken in a wook at Guinea ; ' tis a female about four feet high in every part like a woman excepting her head which nearly resembles the ape .
"
1739 : Peter the Great 's niece Anna Ioannovna had a parade of circus freaks escort Mikhail Alekseyevich Galitzine and his bride Avdotya Ivanovna Buzheninova to a mock palace made of ice .
1810–1815
: Sarah Baartman ( aka " Hottentot Venus " ) exhibited in England and France .
1829–1870 : " The Original Siamese twins " Chang and Eng Bunker were twin brothers who started performing in 1829 .
The Bunker brothers were conjoined twins .
They stopped performing in 1870 due to Chang suffering a stroke .
1842–1883 : In 1842 Charles Sherwood Stratton was presented on the freak show platform as " General Tom Thumb " .
Charles was suffering from Hypopituitary dwarfism ; he stopped performing in 1883 due to a stroke that led to his death .
1849–1867 : In 1849 Maximo and Bartola started performing in freak shows as " The Last of the Ancient Aztecs of Mexico " .
Both performers had microcephaly and stopped performing in 1867 after they got married to each other .
1860–1905 : Hiram and Barney Davis were presented as the " wild men " from Borneo .
Both brothers were mentally disabled , they stopped performing in 1905 after the death of Hiram Davis .
1884
: Joseph Merrick , exhibited as " The Elephant Man " by Tom Norman in London 's East End . 1912–1935 : Daisy and Violet Hilton , conjoined twin sisters who started performing at the age of four in 1912 .
They grew in popularity during the 1920s to the 1930s performing dance routines and playing instruments .
Stopped performing in 1935 due to financial troubles .
1932 :
Tod Browning 's Pre - Code - era film
Freaks tells the story of a traveling freakshow .
The use of real freaks in the film provoked public outcries , and the film was relegated to obscurity until its re - release at the 1962 Cannes Film Festival .
Two stars of the film were Daisy and Violet Hilton :
conjoined sisters who had been raised being exhibited in freak shows .
1960 :
Albert - Alberta Karas ( two siblings , each half man , half woman ) exhibits with Bobby Reynolds on sideshow tour .
1991
: Jim Rose Circus plays the Lollapalooza Festival , starting a new wave of performers and resurgence of interest in the genre .
1992 : Grady Stiles ( the lobster boy ) is shot in his home in Gibsonton , Florida .
1996 :
Chicago shock - jock Mancow Muller presented Mancow 's Freak Show at the United Center in the middle of 1996 , to a crowd of 30,000 .
The show included Kathy Stiles and her brother Grady III as the Lobster Twins .
2000–2010
: Ken Harck 's Brothers Grim Sideshow debuted at the Great Circus Parade in Milwaukee , Wisconsin .
The Milwaukee run included a fat lady and bearded lady Melinda Maxi , as well as self made freaks The Enigma and Katzen .
In later years the show has included Half - boy Jesse Stitcher and Jesus " Chuy " Aceves the Mexican Werewolf Boy and Stalking Cat .
Brothers Grim toured with the Ozz Fest music festival in 2006 , 2007 and 2010 .
2005 : " 999 Eyes Freakshow " was founded , touting itself as the " last genuine traveling freakshow in the United States .
" 999 Eyes portrays freaks in a very positive light , insisting that " what is different is beautiful . "
Freaks include Black Scorpion .
2007 : Wayne Schoenfeld brought together several sideshow performers to " The L.A. Circus Congress of Freaks and Exotics , " to photograph sideshow folks for " Cirque Du Soleil - Circus of the Sun .
" In attendance were : Bill Quinn , the halfman ; Percilla , the fat lady ; Mighty Mike Murga the Mighty Dwarf ; Dieguito El Negrito , a wildman ; Christopher Landry ; fireeaters ; sword swallowers , and more .
MODERN FREAK SHOWS Section::::Modern freak shows .
The entertainment appeal of the traditional " freak shows " is arguably echoed in numerous programmes made for television .
Extraordinary People on the British television channel Five or BodyShock show the lives of severely disabled or deformed people , and can be seen as the modern equivalent of circus freak shows .
To cater to current cultural expectations of disability narratives , the subjects are usually portrayed as heroic and attention is given to their family and friends and the way they help them overcome their disabilities .
On The Guardian , Chris Shaw however comments that " one man 's freak show is another man 's portrayal of heroic triumph over medical adversity " and carries on with " call me prejudiced but
I suspect your typical twentysomething watched this show with their jaw on the floor rather than a tear in their eye " .
A modern example of a traditional traveling freakshow would be The Space Cowboy 's ' Mutant Barnyard ' museum show or his ' Sideshow Wonderland ' human oddity exhibit that he runs with his partner Zoe L'amore . '
Sideshow Wonderland ' includes performers like Erik Sprague ' AKA : The LizardMan ' ; Donny Vomit ; Heather Holliday ; Jason Brott ' AKA :
The Penguin Boy ' ; Ruby Rubber Legs ; Elaine Davidson ; and Jeremy Hallam ' AKA : Goliath '
( Dwarf strongman ) .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Freak shows are a common subject in Southern Gothic literature , including stories such as Flannery O'Connor 's " A Temple Of The Holy Ghost , " Eudora Welty 's " Petrified Man " and " Keela the Outcast Indian Maiden , " Truman Capote 's " A Tree of Night , " and Carson McCullers ' The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter .
The musical Side Show centers around Daisy and Violet Hilton and their lives as conjoined twins on exhibition .
In J. K. Rowling 's Wizarding World creative universe , the Circus Arcanus is a freak show for individuals with rare magical conditions and deformities , as well as a variety of magical animal species and hominids .
The characters Nagini and Credence Barebone worked here during the 1920s , one , a Maledictus ( a woman with a magical blood disease that leads to the turning of that individual into an animal for the rest of their life , ) and the other , an Obscurial ( a young person who develops a magical parasite that sometimes envelops and controls their body , caused via the suppression of magical powers ) .
SEE ALSO
* Human zoo
* Comprachicos
* Geek show
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Martin Monestier , Human Freaks , Encyclopedic Book on the Human Freaks from the Beginning to Today .
( In French : Les Monstres humains : Oubliés de Dieu ou chefs - d'œuvres de la nature ) * Niall Richardson ( 2010 ) '
Transgressive Bodies ' ( Ashgate ) EXTERNAL LINKS
* Showhistory.com
* Shocked and Amazed - periodical devoted to sideshow and variety entertainment
* Freaks and prodigies - Section of Monstrous .
Com dedicated to freaks and prodigies * Sideshow World - " Preserving the past ... promoting the future " * Congress of Oddities : James G. Prodigies - freakshow ephemera from the collection of artist James G Mundie * Collection Guide to Human curiosity prints , playbills , broadsides and other printed material , 1695 - 1937 at Houghton Library , Harvard University