OSTEOPATHIC MEDICINE IN CANADA Osteopathic medicine in Canada is similar to conventional medicine in Canada , with the addition of osteopathic manipulation to diagnose and treat patients .
Osteopathic physicians hold equal practice rights to non - osteopathic physicians ( MDs ) in Canada .
North American osteopathic medicine requires an osteopathic physician to be trained and receive the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree granted by a College of Osteopathic Medicine accredited by the American Osteopathic Association .
The Canadian Osteopathic Association ( COA ) represents osteopathic physicians registered for medical practice across Canada , and the Canadian Osteopathic Medical Student Association ( COMSA ) is the affiliated student organization .
In Canada , the titles " osteopath " and " osteopathic physician " are protected in some provinces by the medical regulatory college for physicians and surgeons .
As of 2011 , there were approximately 20 U.S.-trained osteopathic physicians , all of which held a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree , practicing in all of Canada .
As of 2014 , no training programs have been established for osteopathic physicians in Canada .
Currently , there are no DO programs outside the United States .
DO programs are accredited by the Commission on Osteopathic College Accreditation ( COCA ) of the American Osteopathic Association .
The authority for licensure of osteopathic physicians lies with the provincial Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons .
LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR OSTEOPATHIC PHYSICIANS
Section::::Licensing requirements for osteopathic physicians .
This is a summary of the licensing requirements of osteopathic physicians in Canada : !
Province / Territory !
Scope of practise !
Requirements for Licensure
The Canadian Osteopathic Association started the Canadian Osteopathic Medical Student Association in 2011 .
SEE ALSO
* Canadian Osteopathic Association
* Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine * Osteopathic medicine in the United States
* Osteopathy in Canada REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Canadian Osteopathic Association website
* British Columbia Osteopathic Association website
* Ontario Federation of Osteopathic Professionals website