LIDL Lidl Stiftung &
Co. KG (; ) is a German global discount supermarket chain , based in Neckarsulm , Germany , that operates over 10,000 stores across Europe and the United States .
It belongs to Dieter Schwarz , who also owns the store chains Handelshof and hypermarket Kaufland .
Lidl is the chief competitor of the similar German discount chain Aldi in several markets , including the United States .
There are Lidl stores in every member state of the European Union , except Latvia and Estonia .
Lidl stores are also present in Switzerland , Serbia and the USA .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1930 , Josef Schwarz became a partner in Südfrüchte Großhandel Lidl & Co. , a fruit wholesaler , and he developed the company into a general food wholesaler .
As a result of the war , the company was destroyed in 1944 , and a 10-year reconstruction period soon started .
In 1977 , under his son Dieter Schwarz , the Schwarz - Gruppe began to focus on discount markets , larger supermarkets , and cash and carry wholesale markets .
He did not want to use the name Schwarz - Markt ( Schwarzmarkt means " black market " ) and rather use the name of Josef Schwarz 's former business partner , A. Lidl , but legal reasons prevented him from taking over the name for his discount stores .
When he discovered a newspaper article about the painter and retired schoolteacher Ludwig Lidl , he bought the rights to the name from him for 1,000 German marks .
Lidl is part of the Schwarz Group , the fifth - largest retailer in the world with sales of $ 82.4 billion ( 2011 ) .
The first Lidl discount store was opened in 1973 , copying the Aldi concept .
Schwarz rigorously removed merchandise that did not sell from the shelves , and cut costs by keeping the size of the retail outlets as small as possible .
By 1977 , the Lidl chain comprised 33 discount stores .
Lidl opened its first UK store in 1994 and grew rapidly during the first decade of the 21st century .
Since then , Lidl has grown consistently , and today has over 650 stores .
While it is still a small player in the United Kingdom , with a grocery market share of less than 5 % , its importance , along with that of continental , no frills competitor Aldi is growing , with half of shoppers in the United Kingdom visiting Aldi or Lidl over Christmas 2014 .
Sven Seidel was appointed CEO of the company in March 2014 , after the previous CEO Karl - Heinz Holland stepped down .
Holland had served as chief executive since 2008 but left due to undisclosed " unbridgeable " differences over future strategy .
Seidel stepped down from his position in February 2017 after Manager Magazin reported he had fallen out of favour with Klaus Gehrig , who has headed the Schwarz Group since 2004 .
Seidel was succeeded as CEO by Dane Jesper Højer , previously head of Lidl 's international buying operation .
In June 2015 , the company announced it would establish a United States headquarters in Arlington , Virginia .
Lidl has major distribution centers in Mebane , North Carolina , and Spotsylvania County , Virginia .
The company initially focused on opening locations in East Coast states , between Pennsylvania and Georgia , and as far west as Ohio .
In June 2017 , Lidl opened its first stores in the United States in Virginia Beach and other mid - Atlantic cities .
The company planned to open a total of one hundred U.S. stores by the summer of 2018 .
In November 2018 , Lidl announced plans to acquire 27 Best Market stores in New York and New Jersey .
CONTROVERSIES
*
In 2004 , Lidl was awarded the Big Brother Award in Germany for acting almost like a slave master towards its employees .
*
In 2005 , Lidl was caught putting additives in meat which allowed them to avoid salmonella testing and origin labeling , according to the National Food Agency in Sweden .
*
In 2008 , German newspaper Stern uncovered Lidl spying on its staff , including registration of employees ' toilet visits as well as personal details regarding employees ' love lives , personal finances , menstrual cycles and so on .
*
In 2008 , Lidl was fined € 1.5 million for the unauthorised surveillance of its employees in Baden - Württemberg , Germany .
*
In 2008 , Lidl was forced to issue an official apology because a Lidl store in Sweden deliberately poisoned homeless people by poisoning food in trash containers .
*
In 2009 , it was reported that appr .
300 sheets of paper containing Lidl employees ' personal information had been found in the trash bin of a car wash in Bochum , North Rhine - Westphalia , Germany .
Among the sheets were forms filled with details of the employees ' sick days and illnesses .
This included reproductive health ; for example , a female employee had the annotation
: " Wishes to become pregnant , fertilisation has been unsuccessful " .
*
In 2010 , cheese sold under Lidl 's private label Reinhardshof contained listeria .
The company failed to prompt a suspension of deliveries in time .
One person in Germany died of food poisoning after eating the cheese .
Lidl was fined € 1.5 million for violating food law .
*
In 2010 , the Hamburg Consumer Protection Agency filed an unfair competition complaint against Lidl .
The company had deceived customers by giving the false impression that the working conditions at Lidl suppliers were good .
In reality , the conditions were reported " inhumane " and in breach of conventions and standards .
*
In 2011 , minced meat steaks sold under Lidl 's private label Steak Country contained E. coli bacteria .
18 persons in France , predominantly children , fell seriously ill from the steaks .
Many of the children require lifetime treatment .
One child was left profoundly and permanently disabled .
*
In 2013 , it was reported that in Germany Lidl had failed to notify health officials of numerous rat infestations .
Instead , Lidl spread powdered rat poison on the product shelves , without informing customers of the rodenticide .
One of Berlin 's chief health inspectors warned that children who come in contact with rat poison may bleed to death .
*
In 2013 , Lidl sold gold coins in Germany .
Their gold value turned out to be significantly lower than the price that Lidl sold them for .
A bank would only pay one fifth of the price .
*
In 2014 , a former Lidl UK worker won a case against Lidl after reporting a food safety violation and being bullied from his job .
*
In 2015 , it was reported that Lidl had violated labour legislation in Poland such as forcing employees to work for over 13 hours a day , according to reports from the state labour inspectorate .
A chairman in the Solidarity trade union in Poland said that Lidl managers harass and intimidate employees who want to organize .
*
In 2015 , a Lidl warehouse worker committed suicide by hanging himself at his workplace in Rousset , Bouches - du - Rhône , France .
According to a labour inspection survey , Lidl had repeatedly harassed the worker with demeaning comments and unreachable orders .
The worker had told a relative that he had been doing the work of five employees .
*
In 2016 , Oxfam in Germany revealed the following about the working conditions on certain fruit plantations that supply Lidl : Workers have to work there simultaneously when pesticides are dropped on the plantation .
Workers have said that they suffer from frequent illnesses and miscarriages .
Work contracts are oral and for three months only .
Many workers do not want to form labour unions in fear of retaliation .
*
In 2016 , poisonous xylene was discovered in a gravy sold by Lidl UK .
*
In 2017 , all of Lithuania 's major newspapers reported that Lidl Lithuania , compared to other Lidl markets , sets higher prices on identical products despite lower expenses including rent , salaries , etc .
*
In 2017 , Italian police arrested 15 people from 4 of Lidl 's offices during investigation into ties with Laudani crime family .
*
In 2017 , Lidl was involved in controversy over eggs contaminated with insecticide fipronil .
*
In 2017 , a scandal over the heavy work load and intimidation of workers at Lidl broke in France .
*
In 2017 , it was discovered that Lidl removed crosses from pictures of churches on the Greek island Santorini used on packaging for its Eridanous line of products .
Lidl acknowledged it made a mistake and promised to deal with the issue .
*
In 2017 , Lidl was involved in another controversy related to crosses on churches .
Its branch in Camporosso , Italy , was using a picture of the church of Dolceacqua , Italy , for promotional purposes .
The cross was removed from the picture of the church .
*
In 2018 , it was reported that Lidl imports raw sausage from Poland into Germany .
Pig farmers in Germany have been worried that African swine fever , already present in Poland , will spread to Germany .
*
In 2018 , Lidl Tallaght in Ireland was destroyed by looters armed with a JCB during snow storm " Emma " .
Lidl 's new Tallaght store and pub is scheduled for completion in 2019 .
*
In 2018 , striking workers were assaulted and injured at one of Lidl 's suppliers , Fu Yuen Garment Co Ltd in Myanmar .
28 workers were wounded , six of them seriously .
The workers had been picketing the factory because of poor conditions and mistreatment .
OTHER SERVICES Section::::Other services .
In October 2009 , Lidl Movies was launched in the United Kingdom , undercutting Tesco DVD Rental , which had previously been the United Kingdom 's cheapest online rental service for DVDs .
The service was powered by OutNow DVD Rental .
OutNow went into liquidation in October 2011 , taking Lidl Movies with it .
In January 2012 , Lidl launched bakeries in their stores across Europe .
They consist of a small baking area with a number of ovens , together with an area where bread and pastries , such as croissants , are displayed for sale .
In August 2013 , Lidl UK also launched an online photo service , which prints photos and photo gifts at discounted prices .
APPROACH TO RETAILING Section::::Approach to retailing .
Like fellow German supermarket Aldi , Lidl has a zero waste , no - frills , pass the savings to the consumer approach of displaying most products in their original delivery cartons , allowing the customers to take the product directly from the carton .
When the carton is empty , it is simply replaced with a full one .
Staffing is minimal .
In contrast to Aldi , there are generally more branded products on offer .
Lidl distributes many low - priced gourmet foods by producing each of them in a single European Union country for its whole worldwide chain , but it also sources many local products from the country where the store is located .
Like Aldi , Lidl has special weekly offers , and its stock of non - food items often changes with time .
In contrast to Aldi , Lidl advertises extensively in its homeland of Germany .
The Lidl operation in the United Kingdom took a different approach than the head office , with focus on marketing and public relations , and providing employee benefits not required by law , including paying the independently verified living wage and offering a staff discount .
Upmarket products were introduced , especially in the lead - up to Christmas .
This required significant investment in marketing to produce dramatic sales growth but had an effect on Lidl 's logistical operation and pressure on profits .
Ronny Gottschlich , who ran the store chain in the United Kingdom for the six years to 2016 , was responsible for this approach .
This led to friction with head office , due to the cost involved , and in September 2016 , Gottschlich unexpectedly left and was replaced by the Austrian sales and operations director , German - national Christian Härtnagel .
Lidl continued to have ambitious investment plans in the United Kingdom , potentially ultimately doubling the number of stores to 1,500 .
In the financial year of 2015 , Lidl Great Britain 's revenue from its over 630 stores throughout Britain was £ 4.7 billion .
REFLECTIVE INQUIRY
Section::::Reflective inquiry .
Trade unions in Germany and other countries have maintained their position over time on Lidl handling workers and Lidl 's stance away from European directives on working time , and other criticisms .
These viewpoints have been published in the Black Book on the Schwarz Retail Company published in Germany and now also available in English .
The Times notes that Lidl managers work overtime hours and are directed to sign out of the Working Time Directive when starting with the company , while The Guardian reported other allegations in the United Kingdom and abroad .
Similar to quality control cameras in many US grocery markets , hidden cameras have been found in one store in Wasbek , north Germany , to monitor its workforce and make notes on employee behaviour , focusing on attempting to sack female workers who might become pregnant or to force staff at warehouses to do " piece - rate " work .
In July 2003 , a judge in Savona , Italy , sentenced Lidl for opposition to union policies , a crime in Italy .
Lidl has been criticised in both the United Kingdom and Ireland for not allowing workers to join unions .
This prompted a campaign by Labour Youth which ultimately led to former National Recruitment Officer and Acting Chairperson of the organisation , Darren Bates , resigning due to a lack of support for businesses which create jobs .
In November 2014 , Lidl UK staff were instructed not to speak any language other than English , not even Welsh ( a language used in Wales ) , with Lidl 's customers .
The Welsh Language Society ( Cymdeithas yr Iaith ) said the policy was " appalling " .
Cymdeithas yr Iaith 's chairman , Jamie Bevan , said that " since the Welsh language bill was passed four years ago , it is illegal to stop staff from speaking to customers in Welsh " .
NUMBER OF STORES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The company 's official US website * The company 's official UK website *
Yahoo ! —
Lidl & Schwarz Stiftung &
Co. KG Company Profile