BORDER CROSSING CARD
A Border Crossing Card ( BCC ) is an identity document as well as a B1 / B2 visa that allows entry into the United States by Mexican citizens .
As a standalone document , the BCC allows Mexican citizens to visit the border areas of the U.S. when entering by land or sea directly from Mexico for less than 72 hours .
The document also functions as a full B1 / B2 visa when presented with a valid Mexican passport .
Section 104 of the United States Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 ( IIRIRA ) serves as the legal basis for the issuance of Border Crossing Cards .
ELIGIBILITY
Section::::Eligibility .
The BCC is issued only to Mexican citizens residing in Mexico and by the U.S. diplomatic missions in Mexico .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The first generation of machine readable BCC 's , known as " laser visas " , was produced from April 1 , 1998 , until September 30 , 2008 .
The laminated , credit card - size document is both a BCC and a B1 / B2 visitor 's visa .
The cards are valid for travel until the expiration date on the front of the card , usually ten years after issuance .
They are nearly identical to the previous generation Permanent Resident Card .
October 1 , 2008 , marked the beginning of production of a second generation B1 / B2 visa / BCC .
The new card is similar in size to the old BCC , but contains enhanced graphics and technology .
The original BCC was produced by the now defunct Immigration and Naturalization Service but the current card is produced by the Department of State .
It is virtually identical to the Passport Card , which is issued to citizens and nationals of the United States for the purposes of land and sea border crossings , in its general design layout .
The card includes an RFID chip and Integrated Contactless Circuit and is part of the same PASS System that the Passport Card belongs to .
SEE ALSO
* B visa
* Enhanced Driver 's License * NEXUS card * Passport card REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Border Crossing Card
* What is a U.S. Visa ?
* About Visas - The Basics