ROOK ( BIRD )
The rook ( Corvus frugilegus ) is a member of the family Corvidae in the passerine order of birds .
It was given its binomial name by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 , The binomial is from Latin ; Corvus is for " raven " , and frugilegus is Latin for " fruit - gathering " , from frux , frugis , " fruit " , and legere , " to pick " .
The English name is ultimately derived from the bird 's harsh call .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
This species , at 45–47 cm in length , is similar in size to or slightly smaller than the carrion crow , with black feathers often showing a blue or bluish - purple sheen in bright sunlight .
The feathers on the head , neck and shoulders are particularly dense and silky .
The legs and feet are generally black and the bill grey - black .
Rooks are distinguished from similar members of the crow family by the bare grey - white skin around the base of the adult 's bill in front of the eyes .
The feathering around the legs also looks shaggier and laxer than the congeneric carrion crow .
The juvenile is superficially more similar to the crow because it lacks the bare patch at the base of the bill , but it has a thinner bill and loses the facial feathers after about six months .
Collective nouns for rooks include building , parliament , clamour and storytelling .
Their colonial nesting behaviour gave rise to the term rookery .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Rooks are resident in British Isles and much of north and central Europe but vagrant to Iceland and parts of Scandinavia , where they typically live south of the 60th latitude and in habitats that ravens dislike , such as open agricultural areas .
The rook also occurs as an eastern species in Asia where it differs in being slightly smaller on average , and having a somewhat more fully feathered face .
In the north of its range the species has a tendency to move south during autumn though more southern populations are apt to range sporadically also .
The species has been introduced to New Zealand , with several hundred birds being released there from 1862 to 1874 .
Although their range is very localised , the species is now regarded as an invasive pest and is the subject of active control .
Even so , the ecological and economic impacts of rooks in New Zealand have not been well - studied .
BEHAVIOUR AND ECOLOGY DIET Section::::Behaviour and ecology .
Section::::Diet .
Food is predominantly earthworms and insect larvae , which the bird finds by probing the ground with its strong bill .
It also eats cultivated cereal grain , smaller amounts of fruit , small mammals , acorns , small birds , their eggs and young , and carrion .
In urban sites , human food scraps are taken from rubbish dumps and streets , usually in the early hours when it is relatively quiet .
It can also be seen along the seashore , feeding on insects , crustaceans and edible flotsam .
Like other corvids , rooks in urban or suburban areas will sometimes favour sites with a high level of human interaction , and can often be found scavenging for food in places such as theme parks and piers .
BREEDING Section::::Breeding .
Nesting in a rookery is always colonial , usually in the very tops of the trees .
Branches and twigs are broken off trees ( very rarely picked up off the ground ) , though as many are likely to be stolen from nearby nests as are collected from trees .
Eggs are usually 3–5 in number , can appear by the end of February or early March and are incubated for 16–18 days .
Both adults feed the young , which are fledged by the 32nd or 33rd day .
In autumn , the young birds of the summer collect into large flocks together with unpaired birds of previous seasons , often in company with jackdaws .
It is during the autumn that spectacular aerial displays can be seen by adult birds that seem to delight in the autumn gales .
The species is monogamous , with the adults then forming long - term pair bonds .
VOICE Section::::Voice .
The call is usually described as kaah — it is similar to that of the carrion crow , but usually rather flatter in tone .
It is given both in flight and while perched , when the bird fans its tail and bows on each caw .
Calls in flight are usually given singly , in contrast to the carrion crow 's which are in groups of three or four .
Solitary birds often " sing " apparently to themselves , uttering strange clicks , wheezes and human - like notes .
INTELLIGENCE Section::::Intelligence .
Although outside of captivity rooks have not shown probable tool - use , captive rooks have shown the ability to use and understand puzzles .
One of the most commonly tested puzzles is the Trap - Tube Problem .
Rooks learned how to pull their reward out of the tube while avoiding a trap on one side .
In captivity , when confronted with problems , rooks have been documented as one of several species of birds capable of using tools as well as modifying tools to meet their needs .
Rooks learned that if they push a stone off a ledge into a tube , they will get food .
The rooks then discovered they could find and bring a stone and carry it to the tube if no stone was there already .
They also used sticks and wire , and figured out how to bend a wire into a hook to reach an item .
Rooks also understood the notion of water levels .
When given stones and a tube full of water with a reward floating , they not only understood that they needed to use the stones but also what is the best stone to use .
In one set of experiments , rooks managed to knock a reward off a platform by rolling a stone down a tube toward the base of the platform .
Rooks also seemed to understand the idea that a heavier stone will roll quicker and be more likely to knock the platform over .
In this same test , rooks showed they understood to pick a stone that was in a shape that rolled easily .
Rooks also show the ability to work together to receive a reward .
In order to receive a reward , multiple rooks had to pull strings along the lid of a box in order for it to move and them to reach the reward .
Rooks seem to have no preference regarding working as a group comparative to working singularly .
They also seem to have a notion of gravity , comparable to a six - month - old baby and exceeding the abilities of chimpanzees .
RELATIONSHIP WITH HUMANS Section::::Relationship with humans .
Rookeries were often perceived as nuisances in rural Britain , and it was previously the practice to hold rook shoots where the juvenile birds , known as " branchers " , were shot before they were able to fly .
These events were both very social and a source of food ( the rook becomes inedible once mature ) as the rook and rabbit pie was considered a great delicacy .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rook videos , photos & sounds on the Internet Bird Collection * Feathers of Rook ( Corvus frugilegus )