10 THINGS
I HATE ABOUT YOU ( TV SERIES )
10 Things I Hate About You is an American television sitcom broadcast on ABC Family beginning in 2009 .
Developed by Carter Covington , the show is a half - hour , single camera series based on the 1999 film of the same name .
It premiered on Tuesday , July 7 , 2009 at 8 pm and brought in 1.60 million viewers , a record for a 30-minute comedy debut on the ABC Family network .
Following its initial 10-episode run , a second set of 10 episodes aired from March 29 , 2010 to May 24 , 2010 .
On April 29 , executive producer Carter Covington announced on his Twitter account that the series had been canceled by ABC Family due to low ratings .
He later revealed his intended storylines for the next season in an interview with Entertainment Weekly Popwatch blog .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series is based on 10 Things I Hate About You , which is itself based on William Shakespeare 's The Taming of the Shrew .
The Stratford sisters , Kat ( Lindsey Shaw ) and Bianca ( Meaghan Martin ) , have just moved from Ohio to California .
As they start at their new school ( Padua High ) , they have very different goals .
It 's clear that one sister wants to stand out and the other just wants to fit in .
Kat is a cool , smart , strong - willed , forthright feminist who is looking to save the world and get out of school as fast as she can .
When she meets the intense Patrick Verona ( Ethan Peck ) , sparks begin to fly .
Bianca is a social butterfly whose main goal in life is to be popular , but when the head cheerleader makes her the mascot , she realizes she has a long way to go .
As they start a bumpy year at Padua High , Kat and Bianca attempt to navigate the popular crowd , boys and their over - protective dad ( Larry Miller ) .
Bianca tries everything to be popular and become a cheerleader – although getting involved with the boyfriend ( Chris Zylka ) of the most popular girl in school ( Dana Davis ) creates new challenges .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS
* Lindsey Shaw as Katerina
" Kat " Stratford : a high school junior and Bianca 's older sister
, Kat is a smart , strong - willed feminist with a ' sharp tongue ' .
She has an independent mind and deep ethical beliefs .
One of her long - time goals has been to go to college at Brown University .
She finds herself strangely drawn to Patrick .
She is shown to be a compulsive overachiever as she broke into school just to take a test .
She also tends to be inadvertently insensitive to other people 's feelings .
Izzy Eggerling plays a young Kat in the episode
" The Winner Takes It All " .
* Meaghan Martin as Bianca Stratford : A sophomore and Kat 's little sister .
Bianca will do anything to become popular and get a spot on the cheerleading squad .
She is as vapid as could be and dates the aspiring - male - model football star .
She is now learning that being popular is not as easy or simple as it seems .
She is shown to be quite caring at times .
Caitlin Carmichael plays a young Bianca in the episode
" The Winner Takes It All " .
* Ethan Peck as Patrick Verona : also a high school junior , Patrick is a quiet , brooding loner who often gets into trouble .
He has a ' disturbingly ' deep voice .
He is feared by most of the students including Mandella , Kat 's only friend , who is also the only one to believe he is a cold - blooded killer .
He meets Kat in the very first episode and instantly he grows to like her , because she is fearless , she has a warm heart
and she cares about other people as well as herself .
In the episode of the fire , Patrick is caught looking through Kat 's window ; she allows him in , only for her sister Bianca to walk in calling him ' cute ' .
Near the end of this episode an old woman previously talking to Kat tells her , ' your boyfriend ' left you something , which turned out to be her deceased mother 's records .
He takes an interest in Kat .
In the last episode , they are caught in bed together when Walter ( Kat 's dad ) walks in on them .
* Nicholas Braun as Cameron James : a sophomore , he is in love with Bianca from the first day he sees her , but he is awkward and inexperienced in the ways of dating .
He begins dating Dawn , Bianca 's best friend .
* Dana Davis as Chastity Church : a sophomore and the most popular girl in the school .
She is head cheerleader and comes from a wealthy family .
Her mother is Marcheline ( Shari Headley ) .
Chastity 's father is on the school board and she uses this to get whatever she wants ( she once even blackmailed her father ) .
Chastity is very catty and swears a vendetta on Bianca after she steals Joey from her .
In the last episode , she is demoted from her spot as head cheerleader because she threw a sponge at Bianca during their car wash , causing Michelle to kick her off the squad .
After this , she reveals to Bianca that she is transferring to another school .
According to Covington , Davis had asked to leave the show after the episode in question .
* Larry Miller as Dr. Walter Stratford : the girls ' overprotective father .
He is a gynecologist and widower .
He is wary of teenage boys and often lectures his daughters about sex .
His main rule is that Bianca does n't date until Kat does .
While normally serious , he does have a funny and loving side .
He is the only cast member from the film to reprise his role in the series .
RECURRING CHARACTERS
* Allie Gonino as Michelle
* Chris Zylka as Joey Donner * Kyle Kaplan as Michael Bernstein * Ally Maki as Dawn
* Jolene Purdy as Mandella
* Suzy Nakamura as Principal Holland * Leslie Grossman as Ms. Darlene Tharpe * Barret Swatek as Ms. Somers
* Jack Salvatore Jr. as Brad
* Justin Lee as Charlie Woo
* Cody McMains as Keith * Ashley Jackson as Tabitha Cook * Benjamin Stone as William " Blank " Blankenship DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
In 2008 , ABC Family announced their intention to create a comedy pilot based on the 1999 movie .
The pilot was written by Carter Covington , a self - professed fan of the original 1999 film .
ABC Family green - lit the comedy in October 2008 .
In November 2008 , casting was announced for the pilot , with production following that fall .
In February 2009 , the pilot was picked up when ABC Family ordered 9 additional episodes .
While Covington sought a " reimagined " adaptation , there are several connections between the pilot and movie , which gave the pilot the same feel .
Gil Junger , who directed the movie , also directed the pilot .
Richard Gibbs , who was credited for the original music in the 1999 movie , also composed the theme music for the pilot .
In addition , Larry Miller reprised his role as the overprotective father , Walter Stratford .
A cover of I Want You to Want Me by Cheap Trick ( which was covered for the film by Letters to Cleo )
was recorded by KSM .
A music video was shot which featured members of the cast with KSM .
The pilot was shot at a high school in Tujunga , California .
Due to budget constraints , future episodes were filmed at a soundstage in Santa Clarita , California , with only occasional external shots in Tujunga .
Covington served as the series ' showrunner , as well as an executive producer .
He stated that he wanted the show " to feel like a John Hughes film every week . "
Junger remained on board , and directed seven of the first 10 episodes of the series .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
20 episodes were produced , 12 of them directed by Gil Junger , who also directed the original film .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
10 Things has received a score of 66 out of 100 from review aggregator Metacritic .
Several critics praised the series for containing clever dialogue and appealing and rooted characters .
Brian Lowry of Variety described the show as " a solid roll for the cable network that was once an albatross around the neck of parent Disney .
"
One critic proclaimed the series as " best thing that ABC Family has ever produced . "
Randee Dawn of The Hollywood Reporter thought that the series " has genuine appeal . "
Less favorable reviews came from Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times , who called the series " not very inventive , " and The New York Post , whose mixed review concluded that the show is " silly , mindless fun " whose " actors are all terrific in that silly , mindless fun way that Disney teens tend to be . "
Mike Hale from The New York Times named the show to his top ten in 2009 , stating that " in the dog days of July , " the sitcom " may have been the best thing on television . "
DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases . !
DVD Title !
Region 1 !
Discs !
Episodes !
Extras !
Studio ABC Studios Shout !
Factory INTERNATIONAL RELEASE Section::::International release . !
Country / Region !
Network(s ) !
Series premiere !
Series Title in Country REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS