JULY 2018 LUNAR ECLIPSE
A total lunar eclipse occurred on 27 July 2018 .
The Moon passed through the center of Earth 's shadow in what was the first central lunar eclipse since 15 June 2011 .
It was also the second total lunar eclipse in 2018 , after the one on 31 January .
The eclipse occurred when the Moon was near its maximum distance from Earth , which caused the Moon to appear smaller than normal ( a phenomenon sometimes called a micromoon ) , and to travel at its slowest speed in its orbit around Earth .
This was the longest total lunar eclipse that will occur in the 21st century .
Totality lasted approximately one hour and 43 minutes , a period " just short of the theoretical limit of a lunar eclipse ( one hour and 47 minutes ) " .
The Moon remained at least partially in Earth 's shadow for four hours .
This lunar eclipse coincided with Mars being nearly as close as possible to Earth , a concurrence that happens once every 25,000 years .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
A lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes within Earth 's umbra ( shadow ) .
As the eclipse begins , Earth 's shadow first darkens the Moon slightly .
Then , the Earth 's shadow begins to cover part of the Moon , typically turning it a dark red - brown color ( the color can vary based on atmospheric conditions ) .
The Moon appears to be reddish because of Rayleigh scattering ( the same effect that causes sunsets to appear reddish and the daytime sky to appear blue ) and the refraction of that light by Earth 's atmosphere into its umbra .
The Moon 's brightness is exaggerated within the umbral shadow .
The southern portion of the Moon was closest to the center of the shadow , making it the darkest , and most red in appearance .
VISIBILITY Section::::Visibility .
The lunar eclipse was completely visible over Eastern Africa , Southern Africa , Southern Asia and Central Asia , seen rising over South America , Western Africa , and Europe , and setting over Eastern Asia , and Australia .
View of earth from moon at greatest eclipse MAP OBSERVATIONS
RELATED
ECLIPSES LUNAR YEAR SERIES SAROS SERIES Section::::Related eclipses .
Section::::Saros series .
This is the 38th member of Lunar Saros 129 .
The previous event was the July 2000 lunar eclipse .
The next event is the August 2036 lunar eclipse .
Lunar Saros 129 contains 11 total lunar eclipses between 1910 and 2090 .
Solar Saros 136 interleaves with this lunar saros with an event occurring every 9 years 5 days alternating between each saros series .
HALF - SAROS CYCLE Section::::Half - Saros cycle .
A lunar eclipse will be preceded and followed by solar eclipses by 9 years and 5.5 days ( a half saros ) .
This lunar eclipse is related to two total solar eclipses of Solar Saros 136 . !
July 22 , 2009 !
August 2 , 2027
SEE ALSO
* List of lunar eclipses and List of 21st - century lunar eclipses NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Where to see the eclipse and public events ( Go Stargazing )
* Hermit eclipse : 2018 - 07 - 27
*
Photo Reveals a Lunar Eclipse Like
Never Before