DAN CONNER Dan Conner is a fictional character in the Roseanne television series .
He is the husband to fellow primary character Roseanne Conner , and father to two daughters Darlene and Becky Conner , and two sons D.J. Conner and Jerry Garcia Conner .
He is portrayed by John Goodman .
Throughout the years , Goodman has won several awards , including a Golden Globe , for his portrayal of Dan Conner .
Roseanne ran from 1988 to 1997 .
It was revived in 2018 and had been renewed again , but was cancelled in May soon after the revival season as Roseanne Barr made controversial racist remarks on social media .
Broadcaster ABC and the other cast members wished to keep the show going in some form without Barr , and this culminated in the announcement of The Conners , a separate series from Roseanne featuring Dan and his family , on June 21 , 2018 .
Barr will not appear and her character will be killed off , making Dan a widower .
CREATION AND CONCEPTION Section::::Creation and conception .
When John Goodman was chosen to play Dan , co - star Roseanne Barr stated that she was happy , adding that she had a " big crush " on him from the start .
Dan is a loving , easygoing , funny , witty family man who at the beginning of the series was looking for a job , but quickly became a drywall contractor .
At one point during the second to last season , Goodman walked off the set after Barr had an on - set outburst .
It was speculated that he was growing tired of her outbursts .
While he considered leaving for good , Goodman held negotiations with its producers .
At first , he agreed to finish the episode , but later agreed to do an episode to explain his exit .
However , Goodman eventually agreed to return to the series and chose to reduce his role in Roseanne to focus on his film career .
After this announcement , he was in negotiations with the producers on how many episodes he would appear in the following season .
Ted Harbert , boss of ABC Entertainment , commented that Barr was excited to return for a ninth season , with or without Goodman , which could be about her and her sister , Jackie Harris , as single parents .
He attempted to dismiss the role of Dan , stating that Jackie has a lot more screen time than he does .
Los Angeles Daily News editor Phil Rosenthal criticized Harbert for his comments , describing Dan as the emotional anchor of the series .
Rosenthal compared Dan to daughter Becky Conner , who was portrayed by two different actresses due to scheduling conflicts over the years , and son D.J. Conner , who was portrayed by a different actor in the pilot than the one in later episodes .
He called Metcalf a wonderful actress , but added that Dan 's love for his wife showed viewers that she could be lovable despite her abrasiveness , similarly to Edith Bunker and Archie Bunker in All in the Family .
Rosenthal brought up similar departures that caused their respective programs to slip in quality , and warned that Roseanne may suffer the same fate if Goodman left .
In the end , Goodman signed on for one more season .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
Dan Conner is an easy - going , hardworking father .
Throughout the series he holds many occupations and is often seen balancing work , home , and personal interests .
He is the typical working - class father who provides comic relief , but also is a good example for his children .
He is an avid Chicago sports fan , including the Bears , Bulls , Cubs , and Blackhawks , and many of the shows make mention of the teams .
He also enjoys junk food , playing poker , and fixing motorcycles with his friends .
In many ways , he epitomizes the stereotypical American father and is widely considered one of the best TV dads of all time .
During the final episode of season 9 , when Roseanne reveals that the entire ninth season was written as a book based on her life and family , she changed certain elements of what she had not liked ; most notably , that Dan had actually died after having his heart attack in " The Wedding " , near the end of season 8 .
In 2017 , news of a revival of the series is said to be in the works , with most of the original cast members reprising their roles , including Goodman .
In season 10 , Dan is alive and well and stumbles upon an unpublished novel of Roseanne 's where he states that the book would have been a success had she not killed off the " most interesting character " ; vaguely implying that the season 9 finale revelations were the actual details made - up for Roseanne 's book .
A list of the top 25 television dad earners created by Brookstone listed Dan in the 24th place , with $ 17,856 a year .
They came to this determination through use of data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and human research firms .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Dan Conner has often been described as one of John Goodman 's most famous roles .
In an article about television dads , The Post and Courier editor Mindy Spar began discussing how 1990s TV dads became goofier than dads from earlier decades , calling Dan more like one of the children than the father .
IGN editor Edgar Arce called Dan Conner a prototypical everyman .
MSNBC commentator Gael Fashingbauer Cooper called Dan one of the first TV dads to be seen struggling to make ends meet .
She also praised the character , stating that without him , the Conner family home would not be able to last .
She added that in the later seasons , the series took risks with the character , such as his heart attack , his affair , and the revelation that he had died .
She compared this to the revelation of Lieutenant Colonel Henry Blake 's death in the M*A*S*H television series .
The relationship between Roseanne and Dan has received praise .
An article in the Sarasota Herald - Tribune called their relationship realistic , commenting that while they mock each other , viewers can feel their love while they deal with the kinds of problems real families face .
During the final season , Dan and Roseanne live apart after Dan cheats on her .
Daily News editor David Bianculli stated that while they were the most entertaining and realistic couples on television , they were one of the least during their separation .
The potential absence of Dan from all or most of the next season prompted Phil Rosenthal of the Los Angeles Daily News to describe it as a rare occasion where ending the show would be preferred to doing without .
Robinson described Dan 's potential absence as leaving a tremendous void , owing to his ability to make everyone around him better .
The revelation that Dan actually died and the latter part of the series being a work of fiction was not well received .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
John Goodman was nominated for several awards throughout his portrayal of Dan Conner , winning four , including one Golden Globe in 1993 .
Won : * Golden Globes : Best Performance by an Actor in a TV - Series - Comedy / Musical , 1993 * Viewers for Quality Television Series : Best Actor in a Quality Comedy Series , 1992
Nominated :
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1995
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1994
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1993
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1992
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1991
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1990
* Emmy Awards :
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , 1989
* Golden Globes : Best Performance by an Actor in a TV - Series - Comedy / Musical , 1991 * Golden Globes : Best Performance by an Actor in a TV - Series - Comedy / Musical , 1990 * Golden Globes : Best Performance by an Actor in a TV - Series - Comedy / Musical , 1989
* Screen Actors Guild Awards : Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series , 1995
* TV Land Awards : Favorite Elvis Impersonation , 2007
REFERENCES