LIST OF CAPTIVE ORCAS
This article gives a list of captive orcas , or killer whales , large predatory marine mammals that were first captured live and displayed in exhibitions in the 1960s , or were subsequently born in zoological facilities .
They soon became popular attractions at public aquariums and aquatic theme parks due to their intelligence , trainability , striking appearance , playfulness in captivity and sheer size .
As of September 2015 , 58 captive orcas reside at facilities in North and South America , Europe and Asia .
The first North Eastern Pacific orca , Wanda , was captured in November 1961 by a collecting crew from Marineland of the Pacific , and over the next 15 years , around 60 or 70 orcas were taken from Pacific waters for this purpose .
When the US Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 effectively stopped the capture of Pacific orcas , captures were made in Icelandic waters .
Since 2010 , captures have been made in Russian waters .
However , facilities in the United States such as SeaWorld have not collected wild orcas in over 35 years .
29 of 38 orcas on display in the US , Canada , Argentina , Spain , and France were born in captivity .
6 of the 7 displayed in Japan are captive - born .
An additional 13 orcas reported in China and Russia were captured in Russian waters .
Kalina , born in September 1985 , was the first captive - born orca calf to survive more than a few days .
In September 2001 , Kasatka gave birth to Nakai , the first orca conceived through artificial insemination , at SeaWorld San Diego .
This technique lets park owners maintain a more healthy genetic mix in the small groups of orcas at each park , while avoiding the stress of moving orcas for breeding purposes .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table .
! scope="col " Name ! scope="col " Gender ! scope="col " Origin ! scope="col " Date of death ! scope="col " Park ! scope="col " Birthdate LISTING OF INDIVIDUALS LIVING ADÁN Section::::Listing of individuals .
Section::::Living . Section::::Adán .
Adán ( Spanish variation of " Adam " ) measured about and weighed in at 330 pounds at birth .
He was born on October 13 , 2010 , at Loro Parque .
His mother , eight - year - old Kohana , showed no maternal interest in him at birth .
As a result , Adán had to be bottle fed by staff until May 2011 when he was permanently moved onto fish .
He had one little sister called Victoria , with whom Adán was very close to until her death .
Adán spends a lot of time with the park 's young female , Morgan .
Adán is a result of inbreeding between Kohana and Keto .
Adán 's only full - blooded sibling , Victoria , died in 2013 .
Adán has been introduced to all five orcas living in Loro Parque .
AMAYA
Section::::Amaya .
Amaya is a female orca born on December 2 , 2014 , at SeaWorld San Diego .
Her mother is Kalia and her father is Ulises .
Amaya was Kalia 's first calf .
Amaya was confirmed a female on December 13 .
Kasatka was there to assist Kalia during the birth alongside Makani and Nakai ( Kasatka 's calves ) .
Amaya was born tail first and was a length of 6.5 feet and a weight of 350 pounds at birth .
Amaya now weighs 509 pounds and has a length of 8.75 feet .
Amaya is 93.75 % Icelandic and 6.25 % southern resident .
Amaya is a very energetic and playful whale and spends a lot of time with her mom and with some of the younger whales such as Makani .
Amaya is very cooperative .
CORKY Section::::Corky .
Corky is a 53-year - old female orca at SeaWorld San Diego .
She is the longest - held captive orca in the world and is the largest female orca in captivity .
She is now the only survivor from the Northern Resident captures .
Around the age of four , Corky was captured in Pender Harbour off the coast of British Columbia on December 11 , 1969 .
From there , she went to Marineland of the Pacific and lived with three other orcas .
However , the two orcas who she was captured with died after three years and she spent most of her time at Marineland with an orca bull named Orky .
Corky has been pregnant seven times , resulting in four live births from 1977 to 1985 ( with two failures in 1986 and 1987 ) , none of which survived the first two months of life .
On January 21 , 1987 , during her seventh pregnancy , she and Orky were moved to SeaWorld San Diego .
She settled well in the new environment , but she had problems with one of the Icelandic orcas , Kandu V.
The two females fought for dominance and it peaked during a show in 1989 , resulting in Kandu 's death .
Corky is also used as the " Welcome Whale " for new trainers and new orcas .
She has also " adopted " some of the whales she has been with .
She has been a surrogate mother to Sumar , Splash , Orkid , and Keet .
Corky is easy to identify , mostly because of her large size for a female , her tall unbent dorsal fin , the small ' chips ' in her dorsal fin , and a nick in her left dorsal fluke .
She also has experienced problems in aggression from a male named Ulises . "
At SeaWorld , Ulises is dominant over some of the female orcas , especially the oldest female , Corky .
In fact , trainers would not allow Corky and Ulises to be in the same pool unless Kasatka , the then ultimate matriarch , was present to keep both whales calm . "
EARTH
Section::::Earth . was born at Kamogawa Sea World located in Chiba Prefecture , Japan on October 13 , 2008.http://orcahome.de/orcastat.htm
" Kamogawa is the location of Kamogawa Seaworld , which opened in 1970 . . .
Lovey gave birth to Earth on October 13 , 2008 , which makes Lovey the first captive - born mother in a Japanese marine park " .
His mother is Lovey and his father is Oscar who died on December 21 , 2012 .
IKAIKA Section::::Ikaika .
Ikaika ( pronounced ee - KY - ka which means " strong " in Hawaiian ) is a male orca born at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida on August 25 , 2002 .
He is the offspring of Tilikum ( father ) and Katina ( mother ) , making him Katina 's fifth calf .
To decide the name of the newborn whale a poll was taken .
The following names were chosen to be on the poll : Ikaika ( Hawaiian for " strong " ) , Mottaka ( Icelandic for " reception " ) , Ramu ( in honor of the late whale by that name ) , Tsunami ( Japanese ) and Ramius ( after the Captain in " The Hunt for Red October " ) .
Ikaika was transferred to Marineland ( Ontario ) Ontario , Canada on a breeding loan on November 18 , 2006 , in exchange for three male beluga whales – Juno , Aurek , and Klondike – who joined Spooky within the Wild Arctic area of SeaWorld Orlando .
Ikaika is a maturing male : his dorsal fin has started to collapse , his flukes have started to curl under , and he is about long and .
On November 13 , 2011 , Ikaika was transported to SeaWorld San Diego , where he joined six other whales ; Ulises , Corky , Orkid , Kasatka , Nakai , and Kalia .
KALIA Section::::Kalia .
Kalia was born at SeaWorld San Diego on December 21 , 2004 at 9:22 a.m. in Shamu Stadium 's main show pool following a little more than two hours of labor and was estimated to weigh between 300 pounds and 500 pounds and measure 6 to 7 feet .
Her parents are Kasatka and Keet .
She is also known as GreatGrandbaby Shamu .
Her siblings are Takara ( 1991 ) Nakai ( 2001 ) , Halyn ( 2005–2008 ) and Makani ( 2013 ) .
The name Kalia means " beauty " in Hawaiian .
Kalia met her father for the first time when he returned to San Diego in February 2012 .
Kalia gave birth to Amaya on December 2 , 2014 , at 12:34 pm .
Amaya 's father is Ulises , the form of conception is unknown , either naturally or through artificial insemination .
Since her mother 's passing in 2017 Kalia has taken over as the matriarch of the San Diego pod .
KATINA Section::::Katina .
Katina is a female who lives in SeaWorld Orlando .
She was captured near Iceland at about three years of age on October 26 , 1978 .
She is healthy and the most successful breeding female orca in captivity .
At and about , Katina is small compared to other females , but she is rather bulky .
Upon her capture , Katina was purchased by Marineland ( Ontario ) .
In 1979 , Katina was bought by SeaWorld and was sent to their park in San Diego .
In 1982 , Katina was moved to SeaWorld Ohio in Aurora , Ohio with another female named Kasatka , with whom she was captured in 1978 .
For two years , the two would perform in the Ohio park during the summer months and then be moved back to San Diego for the winter .
Finally , in 1984 , Katina was transferred to the SeaWorld in Orlando .
Katina became pregnant in early spring of 1984 at SeaWorld San Diego from a male named Winston .
Soon after , she was moved back to Sea World Ohio for the summer .
The trainers soon realized she was pregnant , so she was moved to Orlando at the end of the summer season , where she gave birth on September 26 , 1985 , to a female who was named Kalina .
Although ten orca calves had been born in captivity prior to Kalina , none had survived past a few weeks .
Kalina was the first orca calf to be successfully born and raised in captivity .
Kalina was taken from her mother at 4 years 5 months and conducted on a trip around all four SeaWorld parks .
In early 1987 , an adult male named Kanduke arrived in Orlando .
He and Katina soon mated .
Katina bore her second calf on November 4 , 1988 , a female named Katerina .
In early 1991 at a very early age Katerina was transferred out of Orlando .
Katerina died on May 5 , 1999 , at SeaWorld San Antonio at 10.5 years of age .
A male named Tilikum came to SeaWorld in January 1992 .
It was n't long before Katina was pregnant again .
She gave birth to her first son on September 9 , 1993 , named Taku .
Katina 's next calf came on December 27 , 1996 , a female named Unna .
Her fifth calf was a male born on August 25 , 2002 , named Ikaika .
Katina gave birth to her sixth calf , a female named Nalani , on September 18 , 2006 .
She gave birth to her seventh calf , a male named Makaio on October 9 , 2010 , at 7:28 p.m.
The great - grandmother went into labor at 6:47 p.m. and delivered a -long , 350-pound male calf .
He swam to the surface moments later for his first breath .
She has six grandchildren , Keet , Keto , Tuar , Skyla , Trua and Nalani , as well as four great grandchildren , Kalia , Halyn , Adán and Vicky .
Kalia gave birth to Katina 's first great - great grandchild , Amaya , on December 2 , 2014 .
Katina lives with two of her seven calves ( Nalani and Makaio ) and two of her grandchildren ( Trua and Nalani ) .
She is always with her calf , but is also with Nalani and Kayla quite often .
She is grouped with her son Makaio , Trua , Malia , Nalani and Kayla .
Katina appeared on a That 's My Baby episode , where she gave birth to Ikaika .
KAYLA Section::::Kayla .
Kayla is a female born on November 26 , 1988 , at SeaWorld San Antonio .
Her parents were Kenau and Orky II , both now deceased .
Kayla is about long and weighs about .
Kayla lived with her mother for the first two and a half years of her life .
Kenau was moved to SeaWorld Orlando in January 1991 , and Kayla was moved to SeaWorld Ohio in April 1991 .
Kayla lived there for the next eight years with another young female , named Katerina , who was three weeks older than she was .
After Katerina was moved out , an older female named Winnie was moved in .
In November 1999 , Kayla and Winnie were both transferred to SeaWorld San Antonio .
Kayla and Winnie joined a female named Haida II and her son Kyuquot .
A young male named Keto arrived in March 2001 .
Haida II died on August 1 of that year , making Winnie the new dominant female .
Winnie died on April 11 , 2002 .
Kayla became the new dominant orca in the stadium and was until her relocation to Orlando in 2006 .
After the death of Winnie , only three whales were left in the park : Kayla , Kyuquot , and Keto .
A young female by the name of Unna was moved to the park in December 2002 to settle down Kyuquot and Keto , because the two maturing males were constantly fighting over Kayla .
In November 2006 , Kayla was transferred to Sea World Orlando leaving behind a mate Keet , and their daughter Halyn was raised by Unna immediately after Kayla 's transfer .
Once Kayla arrived , she immediately gave up her dominant role to Katina , who has been the dominant female there since 1988 .
In spring 2007 , Kayla miscarried a male calf , likely the son of Keet .
Kayla gave birth to her first calf on October 9 , 2005 , a female named Halyn .
Halyn was moved to a special animal care facility to be hand raised .
Halyn lived in Animal Care in a different part of the park , and in May joined her family at Shamu Stadium .
Halyn 's father is Keet .
On June 15 , 2008 , Halyn died unexpectedly .
KEET Section::::Keet .
Keet is a bull orca who was born on February 2 , 1993 , in SeaWorld San Antonio .
The word " Keet " means orca in the Tlingit language .
His parents are Kalina and Kotar .
Keet currently measures about and weighs .
Keet is also known as Grandbaby Shamu because his mother is the first orca to be born and raised under human care successfully .
When he was 1 year and 8 months of age , his mother was moved to SeaWorld Orlando in Florida to support her next pregnancy , Keet 's brother Keto was born in 1995 .
Katerina , his aunt , was moved in from SeaWorld Ohio .
In 1995 , his father , Kotar , died .
On May 5 , 1999 , Katerina died .
Five months later , two females named Kayla and Winnie were moved in .
In November 1999 , he was moved to SeaWorld San Diego in California .
There , he met his brother , Keto , and his playmate , Sumar .
All three whales were moved to SeaWorld Ohio in February 2000 .
On February 15 , 2001 , Keet was returned to California ; Sumar followed three days later , while Keto was relocated to SeaWorld San Antonio in Texas .
Keet 's best friends were the bull Ulises and a maturing male named Splash .
On April 24 , 2004 , Keet was moved to his birthplace , meeting Kyuquot , Unna , Kayla , Keto , Tuar , and Tekoa .
Keet is a gentle and agile performer .
On December 21 , 2004 , he became a father for the first time when Kalia , his daughter , was born at SeaWorld San Diego .
On October 9 , 2005 , his mate Kayla gave birth to his second daughter Halyn , at SeaWorld San Antonio .
He may have fathered Unna 's stillborn in April 2006 and Kayla 's miscarriage in spring 2007 .
Keet may have fathered the possible 2 extra pregnancies of Unna claimed by Bridgette Pirtle .
Keet was the lowest ranking adult orca in the dominance chain at SeaWorld Texas .
He is very sweet and was often used as a " starter whale " for new trainers along with a younger male named Tuar .
On June 15 , 2008 , SeaWorld announced Halyn died unexpectedly ; a necropsy was performed and the test results have been announced .
Keet moved back to Seaworld San Diego on February 27 , 2012 , and he has been reunited with three of his old friends Corky , Ulises and Orkid .
He met his first daughter Kalia at the age of 7 when he returned .
Keet became a grandfather on December 2 , 2014 , when Kalia gave birth to Amaya .
KEIJO Section::::Keijo .
Keijo is a bull orca who was born in captivity at Marineland Antibes on November 20 , 2013 .
"
Keijo ( Finnish for " Elf " or " Supernatural Being " ) weighs about 330 pounds ( Jan 2014 ) .
His father is Wikie 's half - brother Valentin " .
KETO Section::::Keto .
Keto is a bull orca who was born on June 17 , 1995 .
His parents are Kalina and Kotar .
Keto has lived at all four Seaworld parks since he was separated from his mother at age 3 .
When Keto was 10 years old he was moved to Loro Parque with Tekoa , his half - niece Kohana , and his half - sister Skyla .
On Christmas Eve 2009 , Keto killed trainer Alexis Martinez during training .
KISKA Section::::Kiska .
Kiska is an Icelandic female residing at Marineland of Canada , and the only orca residing there , she has been nicknamed the " World 's Loneliest Orca " .
She was captured in 1979 along with King , Caren and a female who remained unnamed .
Kiska and the female were sold to Marineland of Canada while King and Caren went to Kamogawa Sea World .
The female was transferred to Kamogawa and died soon after .
Kiska still lives Marineland of Canada Today .
KOHANA Section::::Kohana .
Kohana is a female born at SeaWorld San Diego on May 3 , 2002 .
She is the second orca to be conceived through artificial insemination .
Her parents are Takara and Tilikum .
On April 25 , 2004 , Kohana and her mother were moved to SeaWorld Orlando .
On February 13 , 2006 , Kohana was moved to Loro Parque in Spain with three other orcas : Tekoa , Keto , and Skyla .
She often floats at the acrylic glass to interact with visitors .
She is intelligent and eager , and learns quickly .
On October 13 , 2010 , Kohana gave birth to her first calf ( a male ) named Adán , in the parks " Orca Ocean " killer whale exhibit , after a four - hour labor .
The calf weighed around , and was two meters long ( 6.5 ft ) .
Kohana 's calf is the first killer whale born in Loro Parque .
On August 3 , 2012 , Kohana gave birth to her second calf ( a female ) named Victoria ( or Vicky ) .
Like her older brother , Victoria was rejected by Kohana .
On June 16 , 2013 , Victoria suddenly died at the age of 10 months .
Vicky 's cause of death was later revealed to be intestinal problems .
KSHAMENK Section::::Kshamenk .
Kshamenk ( pronounced sha - MEN - k ) is a male orca that was taken from the wild off the coast of Argentina in 1992 .
The population he comes from is unknown .
He was approximately five years old at the time , making him roughly 30 years old .
Initial reports said that Kshamenk , along with three members of his pod , had stranded and been " rescued " by Mundo Marino .
However , it was later revealed that Mundo Marino had " force stranded " the whales by placing a large net between the whales and the shore .
When the tide went out , the whales were left stranded on the beach .
One was released , one died on the way to the aquarium , one beat himself to death on the walls of his enclosure , and one , Kshamenk , survived .
When Kshamenk arrived at Mundo Marino he was kept with a female orca , " Belen .
" They performed in the orca show together for eight years .
Kshamenk impregnated Belen in 1998 but the female calf was stillborn 16 months later .
Belen died shortly after in February 2000 , leaving Kshamenk alone .
After a veterinary evaluation in 2006 , Kshamenk was considered non - releasable .
In November 2001 Six Flags Worlds of Adventure , located in Aurora , Ohio , filed a request to import Kshamenk with the National Marine Fisheries Service .
35 anti - captivity organizations including , the Wild Earth Foundation , Humane Society of the United States , Cetacean Society International , and Earth Island Institute , opposed the transfer of Kshamenk in favor of his rehabilitation and release .
In July 2002 the Secretary of the Environment of Argentina and CITES Argentina denied the request of Mundo Marino to export the whale .
In Argentina it is illegal to export native fauna , and as a wild born orca , Kshamenk is a part of the commonwealth .
Kshamenk still resides at Mundo Marino .
On February 14 , 2013 , Kshamenk became a father via artificial insemination to Makani , a male calf born to Kasatka at SeaWorld San Diego , and to a female calf named Kamea , born to Takara at SeaWorld San Antonio on December 6 , 2013 .
KYUQUOT Section::::Kyuquot .
Kyuquot is an orca at the Seaworld San Antonio , Texas .
His parents are Tilikum and Haida II , he was born on Christmas Eve in 1991 , at Sealand Victoria , British Columbia , Canada .
Ky only lived here for a short amount of time .
After an incident in which a trainer died he moved to a SeaWorld park .
Kyuquot was very close to his mother , who died in 2001 .
Over time , Ky became very close to several females who came to Texas , but is now often grouped with his half - brother , Tuar .
He used to perform waterworks , though after several incidents , he was not allowed to anymore .
Ky is a very large male and can still do many athletic behaviors such as front flips .
He is the largest orca at San Antonio , weighing over 9,000 pounds .
He is a reliable whale and is most often grouped with Tuar , though he likes spending time with Takara and can be seen with any of his pod mates .
On April 19 , 2017 , Takara gave birth to Kyara , and after Kyara died at 3 months old , it was announced that DNA tests showed that Kyuquot was her father .
LOLITA
Section::::Lolita .
Lolita ( Low lita ) , originally known as Tokitae ( Toh - kih - tay ) , is an orca at the Miami Seaquarium .
She was a member of the L pod .
Researchers believe she is the only living offspring of matriarch L-25 " Ocean Sun " .
When she was about five years old she was captured on August 8 , 1970 , at Penn Cove , Puget Sound , off the coast of Washington , and is now the oldest captive orca .
The Penn Cove Capture became controversial due to the large number of wild orcas that were taken ( seven ) and the number of deaths that resulted : four juveniles died , as well as one adult female who drowned when she became tangled in a net while attempting to reach her calf .
When she first arrived at Miami Seaquarium , Lolita was put in the ' Whale Bowl ' .
Miami Seaquarium had another orca , Hugo , who lived in a different tank , called the ' Celebrity Bowl ' , which now houses manatees .
The two orcas would vocalize to each other , and Hugo was later moved into the Whale Bowl with Lolita .
At first , they were aggressive with each other , but then became more compatible with each other and more aggressive towards their trainers .
Lolita and Hugo mated several times , and it was reported that Lolita was pregnant from this .
However , she never delivered a live offspring .
Lolita has not seen another orca since Hugo died in 1980 .
She vocalizes in captivity , in the unique calls used only by her pod .
When played recordings of her wild family members , she responded .
She is still apparently healthy .
She is a large orca , measuring long and weighing .
This makes her one of the largest female orcas in captivity .
Lolita currently lives in the Miami Seaquarium 's Whale and Dolphin Stadium , where she performs 1–2 shows daily , and shares her tank with four Pacific White - Sided dolphins .
Despite her size , her tank is the smallest orca habitat in the United States , measuring 35 feet wide and 80 feet long .
Lolita is the subject of the documentary Lolita : Slave to Entertainment released in 2008 .
Various groups have called for Lolita to be released into the wild .
Whale activists have proceeded to sue the U.S. government in federal court in Seattle , claiming that Lolita , captured from Puget Sound waters in 1970 , should be accorded the same protection status granted to other Southern Resident orcas in 2005 , as members of an endangered species .
In February 2015 , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) included Lolita in the endangered Southern Resident pod while noting the inclusion does not affect her residency at the Miami Seaquarium .
LOVEY
Section::::Lovey . was born on January 11 , 1998 , at Kamogawa Sea World , to mother Stella and father Bingo / Thor .
She was the first orca calf born successfully in Japan ( there had been five calves born before her , but none lived for more than ten days ) .
The only other orca at KSW at the time of her birth was Oscar , who would mate with her later on , once she was older .
Her first calf was a male born on October 13 , 2008 , named Earth . "
Earth measures about 11.5 feet and weighs in at around 1,543 pounds ( 2011 ) . " .
Lovey 's stage name is Oyako , meaning " parent and child " in Japanese .
On July 19 , 2012 , Lovey gave birth to her second calf , a female named Luna . "
Luna measures about 7.8 feet and weighs in at around 620 pounds ( November 2012 ) .
Her father is Oscar . "
LYNN Section::::Lynn .
is a female calf residing at the Port of Nagoya Public Aquarium in Japan .
She currently measures long and weighs .
Lynn was born on November 13 , 2012 , to mother Stella and father Bingo .
Unlike most orcas , Lynn was born head first , as was her older sister Ran 2 .
A public naming contest was held from March 20 to May 6 , 2013 .
The park received a total of 19,384 applicants and 5,062 individual names , and settled on Lynn .
Initial western reports named her as Rin , the direct but inaccurate Hepburn romanization of her name in katakana .
Later content provided by the aquarium confirmed the correct transcription as Lynn .
MALIA Section::::Malia .
Malia was born to Taima and Tilikum at SeaWorld Orlando on March 12 , 2007 .
She was Taima 's third calf and her name means " calm and peaceful " in Hawaiian .
She is learning new behaviors all the time and is used in shows daily alongside the other young orcas at SeaWorld Orlando .
Malia 's mother Taima died in June 2010 after a difficult labor that resulted in a stillborn male calf .
Her eyepatches are long and skinny , and she has no marks , rakes , or chips in her tail fluke .
Her teeth have bore holes where the pulp has been drilled to prevent bacterial infection as her teeth are worn down or broken by chewing on tank equipment .
In January 2018 , it was noted that Malia had begun to develop what appears to be a phototoxic reaction to unknown medications she is being given , but SeaWorld has not made any public statements regarding her condition .
Photographs show her with a brownish lesion extending along her lower jaw , similar to the lesions that Kasatka displayed in the months before her death .
This may be a worrying sign that Malia is being treated for a serious infection , and that the illness is being exacerbated by exposure to sunlight in her clear , shallow enclosure with little protection from the sun .
MAKAIO Section::::Makaio .
Katina ( orca ) delivered her 7th calf on October 9 , 2010 , after a short 41-minute labor .
The father is Tilikum .
It was announced on November 3 , 2010 , that the calf was a healthy boy .
The calf has interacted with all the members of the pod , and plays well with them .
His name was decided by a poll with three names to vote for on SeaWorld Orlando 's official Facebook page .
The names were Nico , Greek for " Victory " , Makaio , the Hawaiian form of the name Matthew , meaning " Gift of God , " or Haruki , Japanese for " Shining Brightly .
" Makaio was the name chosen .
He can be seen in SeaWorld 's new killer whale
show One Ocean .
MAKANI Section::::Makani .
Kasatka 's fourth calf is a male , born on Valentine 's Day 2013 at 6:33 a.m.
His name was chosen by a poll .
The choices were " Hako " , Norse for " chosen son " , " Valentino " , Italian for " strong " , and " Makani " , Hawaiian for " the wind " .
His name was announced on June 14 , 2013 .
His siblings are Kalia , Nakai , and Takara .
His father is Kshamenk at Mundo Marino .
Makani can already swim upside down and wave his fluke .
Makani can also do complex behaviors .
Makani 's father , Kshamenk , is an Argentinian transient orca ( origin unknown ) and his mother , Kasatka , is a resident Icelandic orca , making him a hybrid of the two vastly different ecotypes .
Other such hybrids include the late Taima , her deceased sister Katerina , Taima 's three calves and Kamea .
MOANA
Section::::Moana .
On March 16 , 2011 , Wikie gave birth to Moana , her first calf in Marineland of Antibes .
Initially , it was stated that the calf was a girl so they had a naming contest on Facebook and the name " Moana " won ( which means " ocean " in Maori ) but a report in July confirmed that she was in fact a he .
Marineland confirmed that his name will not be changed .
It is also confirmed that Ulises of SeaWorld San Diego is the father .
The calf was conceived via artificial insemination .
Moana became a big brother when his mother gave birth to Keijo on November 20 , 2013 .
MORGAN Section::::Morgan .
Morgan was rescued from the Wadden Sea on June 23 , 2010 .
The estimated 1.5 year - old orca was alone , malnourished and underweight .
She was transferred to Dolfinarium Harderwijk where she was taken care of for several months .
After it became clear she could n't been released into the wild , the Dolfinarium searched for another facility to take care of her , because their basins were too small .
Morgan moved to Loro Parque on November 29 , 2011 .
In 2012 , Loro Parque announced there was a good possibility that Morgan is partially deaf .
In December 2017 , Loro Parque announced Morgan was pregnant with her first calf .
NAKAI Section::::Nakai .
On September 1 , 2001 , Nakai was born to Kasatka , with Tilikum being the father .
Unlike most orcas , he was born head first .
He was the first orca to be conceived through artificial insemination with a successful birth .
As of August 2017 , he weighed and was long .
Currently , he lives at SeaWorld San Diego with nine other whales , including his half brother Makani , his half sister Kalia and his half brother Ikaika .
He has lived there his entire life .
In late September 2012 , Nakai sustained a serious injury to his chin .
SeaWorld stated that the injury occurred during " contact with the pool 's environment " .
Nakai is one of the only captive males over the age of 10 to not have a collapsed dorsal fin , other males such as Ikaika and Trua are younger , have shorter fins , and have fully collapsed dorsal fins .
Nakai 's dorsal fin is nearly tall and is slightly leaning to the left .
The right side of his tail fluke is curved under but the left side has yet to curve .
NALANI Section::::Nalani .
Nalani is a young female orca who currently resides to SeaWorld Orlando , where she was born on September 18 , 2006 .
Her parents are Katina and Taku ( who is , due to inbreeding , also her brother ) .
She is Katina 's sixth calf , and was Taku 's second .
She is a very loving and curious youngster , but was very dependent on her mother in the first few years .
She is learning fast , as she is used in shows regularly alongside Trua , Malia , Kayla , and Katina .
An easy way to identify Nalani is how plump she is .
She 's grown to be bulky , like her mom , has round eyepatches , her dorsal fin has started to lean to her left side , and is the longest baby at Sea World Orlando .
ORKID
Section::::Orkid .
Orkid was born September 23 , 1988 , in SeaWorld San Diego , California .
Orkid 's parents are Kandu V ( her mother ) , and Orky II ( her father ) .
She was the first killer whale born in the San Diego Sea World Park successfully .
Orky II died only three days after Orkid was born .
She was named Orkid , in memory of her father ( most likely a combination of " Orky " and " kid " ) .
In August 1989 , Kandu V charged Corky II during a live show .
The blow broke Kandu V 's jaw , and severed an artery in Kandu 's head ; apparently in an act of trying to assert her dominance over Corky II .
As a result , she began spouting blood with every breath she took .
Forty five minutes later Kandu V sank to the bottom of the pool and died , bleeding to death .
Orkid witnessed this ; for weeks after the incident , she would circle the tanks calling out and vocalizing .
However , she was raised by Corky , and later befriended a male named Splash .
Orkid has been artificially inseminated many times , but has so far not gotten pregnant .
Orkid is highly intelligent ( having been affectionately nicknamed by trainers ' The Rocket Scientist ' ) , and knows hundreds of behaviors .
Only the most senior trainers are to work with her , as she has shown aggression toward trainers in the past .
After an incident in 2006 where she dragged a trainer to the bottom of the show pool , Orkid has been barred from performing waterworks with trainers .
SAKARI Section::::Sakari .
Sakari was born on January 7 , 2010 , at Sea World San Antonio .
Her mother is Takara and her father is Tilikum .
Siblings on her mother 's side include Kohana , Trua and Kamea .
" Sakari " means " sweet " in the Inuit language .
SHOUKA Section::::Shouka .
Born on February 25 , 1993 , in Antibes , France , to Sharkane and Kim 2 , the female killer whale 's first nine years were spent with her parents and siblings .
In 2002 , she was moved to Six Flags Worlds of Adventure ( former SeaWorld Ohio ) in Aurora , Ohio , near Cleveland .
After Worlds of Adventure was sold , in 2004 Shouka was moved to Six Flags Discovery Kingdom ( Marine World Africa USA ) in Vallejo , California .
She was the only orca at the park but had bottlenose dolphin companions named Merlin and Cupid for 7 years until they were relocated due to compatibility concerns .
In July 2012 , Shouka began to display aggressive behavior during one of her performances .
She lifted a trainer into the air and knocked her trainer back into an open door area that leads to the back of the stage .
Even after the trainer was gone , Shouka leaped two more times onto the stage .
Six Flags moved Shouka to SeaWorld San Diego the next month in August 2012 , where Corky immediately took her under her wing .
She is currently fully integrated into the pod of ten killer whales and is a highly athletic animal who enjoys working with her trainers .
Shouka is known for her bottlenose dolphin vocalizations and for her unique upward - curving tail flukes , which she has had since birth .
TAKARA
Section::::Takara .
Takara ( Japanese for " treasure " ) was born on July 9 , 1991 , at SWC to Kasatka and Kotar .
She was the second " Baby Shamu " born at SWC , after Orkid in 1988 .
She gave birth to her first calf , a female named Kohana on May 3 , 2002 .
Kasatka was by her side during the labor and she and Takara helped assist Kohana to the surface to take her first breath .
She was conceived via artificial insemination , the father being Tilikum , a deceased bull orca who had been living on the other side of the country at SeaWorld Orlando .
Takara is an average sized female measuring , and weighs 5,100 LBs .
Takara and Kohana were transferred to SeaWorld Orlando in 2004 .
A year later , Takara gave birth to her second calf , a male named Trua , fathered by Taku .
Kohana was later transferred out of Sea World Orlando to Loro Parque , a Spanish amusement park in the Canary Islands .
Takara was transferred to SeaWorld San Antonio in February 2009 in a supposed effort to improve space at SeaWorld Orlando .
The move angered many since it separated her from her son , Trua .
However , other SeaWorld visitors and workers reported that she would often act aggressively toward Trua .
It was later confirmed she was pregnant at the time ( again from Tilikum ) .
On January 7 , 2010 , Takara gave birth to another female calf in the main tank of the " Shamu Theatre " at Sea World San Antonio .
On March 16 , 2010 , she was named Sakari , which is an Inuit word for " sweet " .
Takara became a grandmother on October 12 , 2010 , when her calf Kohana gave birth to her first calf Adán on October 12 , 2010 .
Kohana had also given birth to Victoria on August 3 , 2012 .
Victoria died on June 16 , 2013 , when she was 10 months old , of intestinal issues .
Takara delivered her fourth calf on December 6 , 2013 , at 12:08 am Central Time .
The calf is a healthy female named Kamea .
She gave birth to her 5th calf , a female named Kyara , on April 19 , 2017 at 2:33 PM(CST ) .
Kyara then died 2 months later , on July 24th , due to pneumonia .
Takara was featured in an episode of That 's My Baby , where she gave birth to her first calf , Kohana .
TUAR Section::::Tuar .
Tuar is an 18-year - old male orca who lives at SeaWorld San Antonio .
His father is Tilikum and his mother is Kalina .
He was born at SeaWorld Orlando on June 22 , 1999 .
Tuar used to perform waterworks until they were stopped in 2010 .
TRUA Section::::Trua .
Trua is a male orca born at SeaWorld Orlando on November 23 , 2005 .
His parents are Takara and Taku .
Takara and Kohana ( his sister ) had just been moved to SeaWorld Orlando when she and Taku met .
At the time of Trua 's birth , Kohana was by Takara 's side and thus acted as the midwife .
Trua currently lives at Sea World Orlando with five other orcas :
Katina ( matriarch ) , Kayla , Nalani , Malia and Makaio .
Trua had been learning waterworks before they were stopped in 2010 .
Trua 's mother Takara was moved to SeaWorld San Antonio on February 5 , 2009 .
Trua is easily identified because of his three dots and belly freckles .
Trua has a dot in his eyepatch , and two dots on his neck .
His freckles earned him the nickname , " Freckles " .
ULISES Section::::Ulises .
Ulises is the oldest and largest male orca in captivity .
He is and weighs about .
He is currently living at SeaWorld San Diego in California with 9 other whales .
He is often nicknamed , " Uli " or " Uli Bear . "
He was captured in 1980 in Iceland and lived at several European parks including Barcelona Zoo , before being transported to SeaWorld San Diego in 1994 .
He became a father in 2011 , when his son Moana was born through artificial insemination to Wikie at Marineland Antibes , France .
On December 2 , 2014 , at 12:34 pm , a young female named Kalia gave birth to Ulises 's daughter , Amaya , at SeaWorld San Diego .
It is unknown whether or not the calf was conceived naturally or through artificial insemination .
He is believed to have a low sperm count .
DECEASED BABY SHAMU II
Section::::Deceased . Section::::Baby Shamu II .
Baby Shamu II was born at SeaWorld San Diego in California on January 5 , 1986 .
Her parents were Kenau and Winston .
Because she was the second orca born at a SeaWorld park , she was nicknamed Baby Shamu II .
The original Baby Shamu , aka Kalina , was her older half - sister , though Kalina had a different mother .
Baby Shamu II was never given a real name as she died on January 16 , 1986 , just 12 days after she was born .
The cause of death was a heart defect .
Baby Shamu II was half Icelandic orca and half Southern Resident orca .
She was 7 feet ( 2.1 m ) long
and she weighed 135 kg ( 297 lb ) .
BINGO Section::::Bingo .
Bingo was a 31-year - old male orca who lived at the Port of Nagoya Public Aquarium .
He was captured in Iceland in 1984 and is the father of Lovey , Lara , Sarah , Ran II and Lynn and the grandfather of Earth and Luna .
He died on August 2 , 2014 , of a respiratory illness .
CHIMO Section::::Chimo . Chimo ( also known as T4 ) , was a young female transient ( exclusive mammal - eater ) orca exhibited in Sealand of the Pacific in South Oak Bay at The Oak Bay Marina , near the city of Victoria , British Columbia , Canada from 1970 to 1972 .
Chimo was the only partially albino orca ever exhibited in captivity .
Years before her capture , another pure white orca was spotted in what is suspected to be the same pod , and named " Alice " .
Alice was never captured , and vanished in the 1960s .
Chimo was captured when trying to find a mate for the park 's star attraction , Haida .
Chimo 's probable mother was another orca by the name of Scarredjaw Cow ( T3 ) .
She was captured alongside Chimo .
Chimo died in 1972 from complications caused by Chédiak – Higashi syndrome , the syndrome which caused her albinism .
Chimo never bore any calves.[1 ] FREYA Section::::Freya .
Freya was a 35-year - old female orca who lived at Marineland of Antibes .
She was captured in October 1982 alongside Haida II , Kim II , Nootka IV , and an unnamed male .
She and Kim went to Marineland Antibes from Hafnarfjordur Aquarium .
She became the first European orca to become pregnant .
Freya gave birth in March 1991 to a stillborn calf .
She gave birth to another stillborn in March 1993 .
Sometime between this calf and her next , Freya had a tumor removed , leaving a white indent on her side .
Freya gave birth to Valentin on February 13 , 1996 .
In March 2001 , Freya had yet another stillborn calf .
In April 2003 , Freya gave birth to her final calf and her fourth stillborn .
She ceased to become pregnant due to birth control and the death of her mate Kim II in 2005 .
Freya was very depressed , but Valentin usually was able to cheer her up .
Freya became a grandmother on November 20 , 2013 , when Valentin fathered a calf named Keijo , however , since the calf 's mother Wikie was Valentin 's half - sister ,
Valentin being the father has not been confirmed .
After months of fighting an unknown illness , Freya lost her battle on June 20 , 2015 , leaving behind her son Valentin and likely grandson Keijo .
GUDRUN Section::::Gudrun .
Gudrun ( Goo drun ) was an Icelandic female orca who lived at Dolfinarium Harderwijk in the Netherlands and at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida .
Gudrun was caught close to the coast of Iceland on October 25 , 1976 .
She was kept in captivity in the Dolfinarium Harderwijk in the Netherlands , where she was the main attraction .
In 1987 , Gudrun was moved to SeaWorld Orlando in Florida , United States .
Gudrun gave birth to Taima on July 11 , 1989 , at 16:45 EST during a thunderstorm .
Gudrun gave birth to Nyar on December 31 , 1993 .
Nyar suffered with illness often .
She was so both mentally and physically ill , it was reported that Gudrun tried to drown her during several shows .
Nyar died at the age of two years in April 1996 .
On February 21 , 1996 , Gudrun went into labor with her last calf , which was fathered by Tilikum .
After 20 hours of labor , Gudrun was unable to deliver the calf .
Eventually after the physical intervention of park staff , Gudrun delivered a stillborn calf of underermined sex .
Due to complications from the delivery , she passed away four days later .
In 1982 , Gudrun was the subject of an experiment in two - communications , designed to see if she could learn new words and incorporate them into her vocabulary .
HOI WAI Section::::Hoi Wai .
Hoi Wai was a female Orca captured near Iceland in October 1977 .
Initially brought to the Saedyrasafnid Aquarium in Iceland , she was moved in late October 1977 to the Dolfinarium Harderwijk in the Netherlands .
Initially named Peanuts , she was moved to the Windsor Safari Park , where she was to stay until being moved to Ocean Park Hong Kong early in 1979 , and where she was renamed Suzie Wong .
Due to a dispute between SeaWorld and the safari park , she was transferred to Clacton Pier in August 1978 for the remainder of her training .
A storm on New Year 's Day 1979 damaged Clacton Pier , and she was sent back to Windsor Safari Park until the end of January .
On January 27 , 1979 , Suzie Wong was finally moved to Ocean Park Hong Kong , where she was renamed Hoi Wai , and would perform for life .
She died on April 21 , 1997 , after a bloody wound was found in her intestines .
Hoi wai was about long and weighed about .
She was the last orca at Ocean Park Hong Kong .
A newspaper claimed that her skeleton is preserved at Cape D'Aguilar Marine Reserve , near Shek O , but the skeleton is actually from a Bryde 's whale that stranded itself in Victoria Harbour in 1955 .
Hoi Wai made an appearance in a movie called Moon Warriors .
HYAK Section::::Hyak .
Hyak was about a year old when he was captured in Pender Harbour , British Columbia , Canada on April 24 , 1968 .
He was captured with six other pod members , including Corky II and Natsidalia , who was thought to be his mother .
He was probably from the A5 Pod .
The captured whales were kept at Pender Harbour for some weeks before being transferred , and Natsidalia did not survive .
Hyak was transferred to the Vancouver Aquarium , where he was kept with Skana , an orca captured the previous year .
After Skana died in 1980 , the aquarium purchased four new orcas captured in Iceland , and two of them — Finna and Bjossa — were transferred to the Vancouver Aquarium .
Hyak and Bjossa produced a calf in 1987 , but it only survived a short time .
He sired another calf on Bjossa — K'yosha , but he did not live to see the calf 's birth , as he died of pneumonia in February 1991 .
K'yosha only lived a few months beyond her father 's death .
JUNIOR Section::::Junior .
Junior was captured in Icelandic waters in November 1984 .
After a short stay at the Saedrysafnid Aquarium he arrived at Marineland Ontario in Canada on November 15 , 1986 .
He did not settle in well at his new home , was hard to train , and did not get on well with his fellow orca tankmates .
So Junior was put in a small tank in Marineland 's warehouse , with no natural sunlight or air , and with noisy overhead fans .
From time to time he shared his small tank with several dolphins .
Marineland tried to keep Junior 's conditions a secret , but members of the public released photos and films .
Junior died in 1994 .
K1 /
TAKU
Section::::K1 / Taku .
K1 was also named Taku .
He was captured in August 1973 in Pedder Bay , British Columbia .
While several other orcas that were caught with him were sold to other marine parks , K1 was too big to be sold .
He was released on October 27 , 1973 , with a radio tag attached to his dorsal fin .
Two nicks were cut by into his dorsal fin to make it easier to identify and find him .
He was given the adoption name of Taku .
K1 reunited with his pod and was seen many times .
K1 disappeared in 1997 and was presumed to have died at the age of 41 , as his year of birth was believed to be 1955 .
K1 was a full blooded Southern Resident orca .
He was long .
KALINA
Section::::Kalina .
Kalina ( September 26 , 1985 – October 4 , 2010 ) was the first captive - born orca calf to survive more than a few days .
Kalina 's mother is an Icelandic female named Katina , and her father , Winston ( also known as Ramu III ) was a Pacific Southern Resident , making Kalina an Atlantic / Pacific hybrid – a unique situation that would not have occurred in the wild .
Kalina measured and weighed approximately .
Kalina first appeared in shows at SeaWorld Orlando in 1987 , billed as " Baby Shamu " , performing with her mother .
On February 12 , 1990 , Kalina was transferred to SeaWorld Ohio .
She was moved again in October of that year to SeaWorld San Diego , and again on May 30 , 1991 , to SeaWorld San Antonio .
In October 1994 , Kalina was moved back to SeaWorld Orlando , where she lived with eight other killer whales , including her mother and a half sister .
Kalina gave birth to her first calf , a male named Keet , on February 2 , 1993 , at Sea World Texas .
Kalina was only seven and a half years old at the time of Keet 's birth – an extremely young age for an orca to become a mother .
Kalina became pregnant again shortly after Keet 's birth , and was moved back to SeaWorld Orlando in October 1994 , where she gave birth to her second calf , another male , Keto on June 17 , 1995 .
She gave birth to another male , Tuar , on June 22 , 1999 .
Kalina bore her fourth calf and first daughter , on February 9 , 2004 , named Skyla .
Skyla is now at Loro Parque along with Keto .
Kalina was a gentle whale , learned quickly , and was used a lot in shows .
She was used as a " starter whale " for new trainers .
On Monday October 4 , 2010 , less than four months after Taima 's death , Kalina died of preacute bacteremia septicemia at the age of 25 .
She has since become a great - grandmother with the birth of Amaya in December 2014 .
KANDU V
Section::::Kandu V. Kandu V was a dominant female Icelandic orca , caught in 1977 and kept at SeaWorld San Diego in California .
On August 21 , 1989 , she attempted to rake a 24-year - old newcomer orca , Corky II , during a live show .
She struck Corky behind her dorsal fin , the resulting impact fracturing Kandu 's upper jaw and severing major arteries .
The crowd was quickly ushered out , and after a 45-minute hemorrhage , Kandu V died .
Her daughter , Orkid , was 11 months old at the time of the accident .
KANDUKE Section::::Kanduke .
Kanduke ( can - duke ) was captured from T pod in British Columbia , Canada , in August 1975 .
When captured , he was about and weighed about , which made him about 4–5 years old .
His mother is thought to be T7 .
He was sent to Sealand of the Pacific , Victoria , and then sold to Marineland , Canada .
In January 1987 , he was sold and moved to SeaWorld Orlando .
While at Marineland of Canada , he did ' water work ' with his trainers , but once at SeaWorld he was described as a " moody and unpredictable " whale and the ' water work ' was stopped .
At SeaWorld Orlando , Kanduke often fought with a younger Icelandic male named Kotar .
The aggression became increasingly serious .
After an incident in which Kotar bit Kanduke 's penis and caused an infection and show cancellations , the exhibitors decided to move the smaller whale to the newly opened SeaWorld San Antonio .
On September 20 , 1990 , Kanduke died of St. Louis encephalitis , which is transmitted by mosquitoes .
The cause of his death was later determined using information from his necropsy report provided by the Freedom of Information Act .
This disease is non - existent in wild killer whales because they do n't spend enough time on the surface for mosquitoes to bite them .
However , in captivity , the behavior of " logging " ( i.e. just floating at the surface ) puts killer whales at risk for mosquito - borne illnesses .
Kanduke has since become a grandfather with the births of Sumar , Tekoa , and Malia .
KASATKA Section::::Kasatka .
Kasatka was a 41-year - old female orca who lived at SeaWorld San Diego and the mother of Takara , Nakai , Kalia and Makani .
She was the park 's dominant orca and she could be seen putting the other whales in their places including her own offspring .
She was captured off the coast of Iceland on October 26 , 1978 , about the age of two .
Her name probably comes from the Russian word Kasatka ( ) , a generic name for orcas .
She was long and weighs around .
Kasatka became a grandmother for the first time when her daughter Takara gave birth to her first calf , a female born May 3 , 2002 , named Kohana .
Takara gave birth a second time , on November 23 , 2005 , to a male named Trua in SeaWorld Orlando .
Takara gave birth to her third calf , a female born January 7 , 2010 , named Sakari .
Kasatka became a great grandmother on October 13 , 2010 , when Kohana gave birth to her first calf Adán .
Kasatka gave birth to her fourth calf and second son on February 14 , 2013 , at 6:33 am after a one - hour labor .
The calf was later named Makani .
Kasatka has shown aggression to humans .
In 1993 Kasatka tried to bite a trainer during a show , and again in 1999 .
On November 30 , 2006 , Kasatka grabbed a trainer and dragged him underwater during their show .
The trainer escaped and was later in good condition despite being underwater for a " brief " amount of time .
Since this incident , Kasatka has been barred from performing waterworks with trainers and might not ever be reintroduced to them .
Kasatka was euthanized August 15 , 2017 after battling a chronic pulmonary infection for many years .
Reason for euthanization was stated as chronic lung disease .
She was euthanized after her health turned for the worst a few days leading up to August 15 .
KEIKO Section::::Keiko .
Keiko ( 1976 – December 12 , 2003 ) was an orca who starred in the first of three Free Willy movies .
Keiko died on December 12 , 2003 , after beaching himself during the night , pneumonia was later determined as the probable cause of death .
Keiko was captured near Iceland in 1979 and sold to the Icelandic aquarium in Hafnarfjörður .
Three years later , he was sold to Marineland of Canada , where he first started performing for the public and developed skin lesions indicative of poor health .
He was then sold to Reino Aventura ( now named Six Flags Mexico ) , an amusement park in Mexico City , in 1985 .
He was the star of the movie Free Willy in 1993 .
The publicity from his role in Free Willy led to an effort by Warner Brothers Studio to find him a better home .
Donations from the studio and Craig McCaw led to the establishment of the Free Willy Keiko Foundation in February 1995 .
With donations from the foundation and millions of school children , the Oregon Coast Aquarium in Newport , Oregon spent over US$ 7 million to construct facilities to return him to health with the hope of returning him to the wild .
He was airlifted by UPS to his new home on January 7 , 1996 , with a length of and weighing .
During his years in Oregon , he gained over a ton in weight .
On September 9 , 1998 , he was flown to Klettsvik Bay in Vestmannaeyjar in Iceland , and gradually reintroduced to the wild , returning to the open sea in July 2002 .
Keiko died on December 12 , 2003 , at the age of 27 .
Following requests from fans of the orca and Free Willy , the Oregon Coast Aquarium held a memorial service for him on February 20 , 2004 .
700 people attended the service , at which the aquarium 's veterinary chaplain said , " Keiko was not one of our kind , but nonetheless was still one of us .
" There is a memorial site for Keiko set up by the locals in Halsa , Norway , where the orca spent the last year of his life .
KENAU Section::::Kenau .
Kenau died in 1991 while pregnant with her third calf , whose father was Kotar .
The calf fetus was male .
Kenau was Kayla 's mother .
KIM ( OUM ) Section::::Kim ( Oum ) .
Kim was captured in November 1976 in Icelandic waters .
He was sickly throughout his captivity .
At one point he became blind .
Several therapies were tried , including ozone therapy and herbal remedies at the last , but to no avail .
He died in Marineland of Antibes on July 24 , 1982 .
A necropsy revealed a lung abscess .
KIM II Section::::Kim II .
Kim II was a male orca who was captured at the age of 2 in October 1982 with Freya , Haida II and Nootka IV in Iceland .
He was then sold to Marineland Antibes with Freya for reproduction .
He sired many calves : Shouka , Inouk , Wikie and Valentin .
Kim II was 6,3 m long and weighted 5 tons .
He was very close to his daughter Shouka
but she was sent to Six Flags , later to SeaWorld San Diego .
Kim II died on November 23 , 2005 , of pneumonia .
KYARA Section::::Kyara .
Kyara was a female orca , that was born at SeaWorld San Antonio on April 19 , 2017 .
Her mother was Takara and her father Kyuquot , with Kyara 's name being a combination of her parents names .
Due to SeaWorld ending its orca breeding program , Kyara was the last orca to be born in its parks .
On July 22 it was announced that she was showing signs of pneumonia .
Because of this , she had been moved to SeaWorld 's animal care hospital for treatment .
She died on July 24 , 2017 .
MOBY DOLL Section::::Moby Doll .
Moby Doll was the second captive orca displayed in a public aquarium exhibit .
The 15-foot ( 4.6 m )
long , 1-ton male was captured in 1964 near East Point , Saturna Island in British Columbia after being harpooned and shot .
He was towed to Vancouver and displayed publicly until he died three months after his capture .
Moby Doll was popular locally and abroad and scientists took advantage of this first opportunity to study an orca and orca sounds up close .
NAMU Section::::Namu .
Namu was only the third orca captured and displayed in an aquarium exhibit , and was the subject of a film that changed some people 's attitudes toward orcas .
In June 1965 , William Lechkobit found a 22-foot ( 6.7 m )
male orca in his floating salmon net that had drifted close to shore near Namu , British Columbia .
The orca was sold for $ 8,000 to Ted Griffin , a Seattle public aquarium owner .
Griffin swam and performed with Namu in the Seattle exhibit and Namu survived one year in captivity before dying in his pen on July 9 , 1966 .
NEOCIA Section::::Neocia .
Neocia was born in October 1992 , a female calf of Nootka and Kandu .
Also known as ' Baby October ' , she was separated from her mother at the age of 3 and kept in a smaller tank at Marineland Canada with three other young orcas .
She was often moved because of her aggressive behavior toward the other orcas in an attempt to dominate them .
Neocia was impregnated by her own father Kandu ; however , this pregnancy miscarried .
Neocia died at the age of 12 after losing her appetite and " not acting normally " .
NEPO Section::::Nepo .
Nepo was captured with several other orcas including Corky on December 11 , 1969 .
He and a capture mate Yaka were sold to a place called Marine World / Africa USA in California .
The two orcas joined another female Kianu who had been at the park since 1968 .
Kianu wanted Nepo all to herself and she would attack Yaka whenever the other female was with Nepo .
Nepo , who was very close to Yaka , protected her from Kianu 's attacks .
It got so bad that Kianu was transferred to a park in Japan .
Nepo and Yaka continued to bond and even starred in the 1977 horror film Orca .
Nepo died from pneumonia on July 10 , 1980 .
Yaka stayed by his side as he took his final breaths .
Even when trainers arrived to take Nepo 's body away , Yaka refused to leave him , and it took the trainers a while to separate the whales .
Nepo was about 15 years old .
NYAR Section::::Nyar .
Nyar was born at SeaWorld Orlando Florida on New Year 's Eve ( December 31 ) 1993 .
She was born to parents Gudrun and Tilikum .
Nyar suffered from many health problems .
Sometimes trainers would have to separate Gudrun and Nyar because the mother would try to drown her daughter .
They had some bonding moments together .
Nyar was not able to perform in shows as she was a very slow learner .
She was even put with her father Tilikum sometimes .
He was very gentle with her .
Nyar died on April 1 , 1996 .
She was 2 years 4 months and 1 day old .
The cause of death was Immune System Failure .
Nyar 's name means " New Year " in Icelandic ( spelled Nýár ) .
ORKY II Section::::Orky II .
Orky II was captured in April 1968 off of Pender Harbor , is well remembered as the father of Orkid and Kayla .
He spent many of his years in captivity at Marineland of the Pacific .
Corky II accompanied him , and the two were thought to be cousins , as they were both from the same pod .
He fathered all seven of Corky II 's unsuccessful calves , too .
Orky was transferred to SeaWorld San Diego California along with Corky II in the year 1986 .
There , he was soon put to the bottom of the dominancy ladder .
Orky was involved in one trainer incident in 1987 , where he accidentally breached on a miscue and landed on a trainer ( John Sillick ) while the trainer was riding Corky II as a stunt .
While in service to Sea World , Orky mated with two of their females , Kandu V and Kenau .
Kandu bore her first successful calf , Orkid , three days before he died on September 26 , 1988 .
She was named in his memory : Orky 's Kid .
About two months later , Kenau also gave birth to her calf , another female who was later named Kayla .
Orky 's death was brought on by acute pneumonia and chronic wasting , which meant he lost a lot of weight before he died .
His dorsal fin flopped completely over to his right rather than the left .
His pectorals were huge and his flukes were curled completely .
His enormous size can be seen in both of his daughters , who have grown up to be quite large females .
Orky 's only living ( captive ) relatives are Orkid and Kayla .
At one time Orky was actually called " Snorky " .
At almost 22 feet long and 11,000 pounds , he was one of the largest whales ever held in any aquarium .
SAMOA Section::::Samoa .
Samoa was a female captured off Iceland in 1983 .
Samoa was reported to have died due to complications of giving birth .
However , her necropsy revealed she had a rare Saksenaea vasiformis fungal infection which likely caused the stillbirth and her death .
On March 14 , 1992 , while held at SeaWorld Texas , Samoa went into premature labour , and died giving birth to a female calf a few hours later .
The calf was stillborn .
It was the first reported death of a SeaWorld orca while giving birth .
The age of Samoa at the time of her death was estimated to be 12–14 .
SHAMU Section::::Shamu .
Captured by Ted Griffin in Puget Sound in 1965 , Shamu was intended to be a companion for the orca Namu in Griffin 's Seattle aquarium .
Shamu was , however , quickly leased and eventually sold to SeaWorld San Diego .
She performed in several SeaWorld shows and eventually died on August 23 , 1971 .
The name Shamu has since been used for many different orcas in SeaWorld shows .
SKANA Section::::Skana .
Skana was one of the first pod of Orcas captured , on February 15 , 1967 , in Yukon Harbor , Washington .
The entire Southern Resident K Pod , at that time 15 members , was captured .
Three died during capture , and five were transferred to the Seattle Aquarium for sale , including Skana , Ramu I and Kandu I.
The others were released .
Skana was believed to be six years old at the time of her capture .
She was sold and transferred to the Vancouver Aquarium on March 10 , 1967 .
She was by herself in Vancouver until the end of 1968 , when the recently captured Hyak II arrived .
She died on October 5 , 1980 , at the approximate age of 19 years , from a mycotic infection .
SPLASH Section::::Splash .
Splash was born in 1989 in Marineland in Canada , transferred to SeaWorld San Diego at the age of 3 and died there in 2005 .
He was a well loved animal . "
He was the one that bonded the best with the trainers , " said veterinarian Reidarson .
Splash was prone to seizures , and at one point had to have the teeth in his lower jaw removed due to a violent seizure injury .
Splash was among the park 's most sickly animals .
" We brought him back from life - threatening illnesses many times , " Reidarson recalled .
In 1994 , Splash smashed face - first into the wall of his tank , ripping a book - sized patch of skin along his jaw that had to be repaired surgically .
Splash died of an infection .
Ex SeaWorld trainer John Hargrove , who worked closely with Splash , suggested that Splash died so young partly due to consuming large quantities of sand , presumably because of the boredom of captivity .
SPOOKY Section::::Spooky .
Spooky was the second calf born to parents Corky II and Orky II at Marineland of the Pacific on Halloween of 1978 ( October 31 ) .
Unlike most orcas , he was born head first .
He earned his name just for the holiday .
Spooky was in good health at first , but it was n't to last .
Due to the circular tank the orcas were kept in , Corky had trouble nursing her son .
Trainers took over and bottle fed Spooky hoping to help him survive .
Spooky died 11 days later on November 10 , 1978 , from pneumonia and colitis .
Spooky 's breed was 100 % Northern Resident orca .
SUMAR Section::::Sumar .
Sumar ( May 14 , 1998 – September 7 , 2010 ) was a male orca born at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida .
His mother was Taima and he was her first calf .
Just six months after birth , an incident happened when , during a show , his mother attacked him , pushing him against the glass , trying to make him fall .
The crowd was evacuated and the show canceled .
The trainers tried to move Taima to another tank and finally separated her from her son .
Since then , the two of them have been always separated and Kalina and Katina became his surrogate mothers until he was transferred to SeaWorld San Diego in California on March 8 , 1999 .
Afterwards , he spent a few months at now - closed SeaWorld Ohio before being transferred back to the San Diego park .
He was considered very gentle with other orcas and trainers .
At the time of his death he was one of three males at the park , and was seen as a possible breeding male in the future ; Nakai , the younger male , is still too young to breed , and the older male Ulises seems to have a low sperm count .
Sumar was approaching full size for a typical bull orca when he died : his dorsal fin was more and more leaning to its left and his flukes were beginning to curl under .
He was about 4.6 m ( 17 feet ) long and weighed around .
He was often used for shows in the park .
The theme of a June 2010 episode of Cupcake Wars was Sumar 's twelfth birthday .
Sumar died at SeaWorld in San Diego , California , on Tuesday , September 7 , 2010 , at the age of 12 .
Trainers noticed that the whale was not feeling well on Monday , September 6 , 2010 , which resulted in veterinarians being notified , blood samples drawn , and antibiotics administered .
Despite measures taken by Sumar 's veterinarian team , Sumar became increasingly ill by Tuesday .
He died shortly before 1:45 PM ( Pacific time ) .
Sumar 's death prompted the canceling of the park 's orca shows for the day .
His death was determined to be as a result of a twisted intestinal tract ( intestinal volvulus ) .
He was set to be the next captive breeding bull orca , after his father Tilikum .
TAIMA
Section::::Taima .
Taima ( pronounced Ty - EE - Ma )
( July 11 , 1989 – June 6 , 2010 ) was a transient / Icelandic hybrid female orca who lived at Sea World Orlando in Florida .
Her name purportedly means crash of thunder in a Native American language .
She was born tail - first around 16:45 EST during a thunderstorm .
Taima was born to mother Gudrun and father Kanduke .
In 1990 , Kanduke died at the age of 20 from St. Louis encephalitis ; Gudrun gave birth to Taima 's half - sister Nyar in 1993 .
Nyar suffered frequent illness and it was reported that Gudrun tried to drown her during several shows .
Trainers believe that this confused Taima , as she witnessed this and thought this was how to raise a calf .
She was later reported to have performed this on her own calves , Sumar , Tekoa , and Malia .
Gudrun died in 1996 from stillbirth complications , and Nyar died from an illness a few months later in April .
On May 14 , 1998 , Taima gave birth to a male calf named Sumar .
They were separated when he was about eight months old because of the aggression between them .
On one occasion while performing , Taima started biting Sumar , and throwing him out of the pool , onto the trainer 's platform .
She then slid out herself and started biting him .
The show was stopped , and Taima was pulled to the other swimming pool .
A few months later Sumar was transferred to SeaWorld San Diego in California .
On November 8 , 2000 , at 3:47 pm , Taima gave birth to a male named Tekoa .
He began feeding overnight and was estimated to be 7 feet ( 2.2 m ) long and weigh .
During the birth , Kalina assisted Taima and helped the calf to the surface for its first breath .
Tekoa was sent to SeaWorld San Antonio in 2004 , and was later sent to Loro Parque in Tenerife in February 2006 , where he remains today .
After Tekoa 's attack , Taima was separated from all other whales except Tilikum , until she gave birth again to her first daughter Malia in 2007 , on March 12 .
"
At birth Malia ( Hawaiian for " calm and peaceful " ) measured about 6 feet and weighed in at around 350 pounds .
Her father is Tilikum .
" Seaworld announced on May 18 , 2010 , that Taima was pregnant again .
Taima died from complications to a stillborn male calf on June 6 , 2010 .
Preliminary indications suggested that her death was caused by placenta previa , a condition in which the placenta is delivered before the calf .
TAKU Section::::Taku .
Taku ( September 9 , 1993 – October 17 , 2007 ) was a male orca , who was born at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida .
After birth , Taku spent most of his time with his mother Katina or Nyar , his younger half - sister .
Three years later , Katina gave birth again to a female , Unna .
On August 25 , 2002 , Katina gave birth to her fifth calf : a male , Ikaika .
Unna was later moved to SeaWorld San Antonio in December 2002 .
Afterwards , Ikaika and Taku bonded to the point where Ikaika swam in mother - calf - position with Taku .
On November 18 , 2006 , Taku was moved to SeaWorld San Antonio whereas Ikaika was moved to Marineland Canada in Ontario .
Takara soon became pregnant .
On November 23 , 2005 , around 21:50 EST ( 4:50 PM ) , Takara went into labor with her second calf .
Her daughter Kohana was at her side .
Thirty - two minutes later around 22:22 EST ( 5:22 PM )
, Takara gave birth to a male calf ( Taku 's son / first calf ) who was later to be named Trua .
Taku sired another calf in 2006 with his mother Katina – Nalani , who was also his sister the first surviving inbred calf .
Taku died unexpectedly on October 17 , 2007 , at the age of 14 and weighing over and at long .
Trainers were notified that Taku had been acting differently the Wednesday before his death .
A NMFS Marine Mammal Inventory Report lists the cause of death as " severe multifocal interstitial pneumonia " ; however , there are also peer - reviewed sources which have reported , based on necropsy results , the cause of death as West Nile virus contracted via a mosquito bite .
TILIKUM Section::::Tilikum .
Tilikum ( sometimes misspelled Tillikum ) was a bull orca involved in three human deaths while he was in captivity , one at Sealand of the Pacific and two at Seaworld Orlando .
He was captured near Iceland in November 1983 at about two years of age .
He was the largest orca in captivity and also the most successful sire in captivity , with 21 offspring , 11 of which are still alive .
While at Sealand of the Pacific , Tilikum sired his first calf when he was about eight or nine years old .
His first son , Kyuquot , was born to Haida II on December 24 , 1991 .
Just a few months prior to the birth of Kyuquot , Tilikum was involved in the first incident involving a death .
Seaworld requested an emergency transfer of Tilikum to their facility .
Tilikum was moved to SeaWorld Orlando , Florida , on January 9 , 1992 .
Sealand of the Pacific closed soon thereafter .
Following his arrival at SeaWorld , Tilikum sired many calves with many different females .
His first calf born in Orlando was to Katina .
Katina gave birth to Taku on September 9 , 1993 .
Taku died on October 17 , 2007 .
Tilikum 's other calves are : Nyar ( born 1993 , died 1996 ) , Unna ( 1996–2015 ) , Sumar ( 1998–2010 ) , Tuar ( 1999 ) , Tekoa ( 2000 ) , Nakai ( 2001 ) , Kohana ( 2002 ) , Ikaika ( 2002 ) ,
Skyla ( 2004 ) , Malia ( 2007 ) , Sakari ( 2010 ) and Makaio ( 2010 ) .
On January 6 , 2017 , SeaWorld announced that Tilikum had died early in the morning .
UNNA Section::::Unna .
Unna was a female orca .
She was born on December 27 , 1996 , at SeaWorld Orlando .
Her parents were Katina ( mother ) and Tilikum .
She was Katina 's fourth calf and Tilikum 's seventh ( fourth successful ) , and was the second calf to be born to the pair .
Unna lived with her mother , father , siblings , and other whales at her birthplace in Orlando for the first six years of her life .
In December 2002 , Unna was transferred to SeaWorld San Antonio .
In late April 2006 , Unna gave birth to a stillborn calf .
Unna recovered well from her stillbirth .
In late Summer 2015 , Unna came down with a strain of fungus known as Candida .
After several months of intense treatment , Unna died on December 21 , 2015 .
from a systemic bacterial infection . .
VIGGA Section::::Vigga .
Vigga ( Little Sweetheart ) was born in 1977 near Iceland , and brought to Marine World Africa USA Park , then located in Redwood City California , in 1980 .
Vigga shared her tank at the park with another female orca , Yaka , who had lost her mate Nepo a few months before Vigga was introduced to the park .
Yaka and Vigga lived together at Marine World until Yaka died in 1997 at age 32 .
She made the move with Yaka to the Park 's new quarters in Vallejo California in 1986 .
Vigga was over 16 feet long and weighed 5,000 pounds .
Vigga died on Monday , August 14 , 2000 , at approximately 8 p.m. WANDA Section::::Wanda .
Wanda ( aka ' The Newport Specimen ' ) was captured by Marineland of the Pacific , now closed , in Newport Beach on November 18 , 1961 .
She was the first killer whale to be captured and displayed in captivity .
She died on November 20 , 1961 , approximately 42 hours after her capture in Newport Harbor ( approximately 36 hours after being placed into Marineland 's tank ) .
WINSTON Section::::Winston .
Winston , originally known as Ramu , was captured near Coupeville , Washington , in 1970 and lived in Windsor Safari park and SeaWorld San Diego .
He died in 1986 .
He was the father of the original Baby Shamu , Kalina .
YAKA Section::::Yaka .
Yaka ( Pronounced : Yah - Kah ) ( 1966–1997 ) , was a Pacific Northwest killer whale .
She died on October 29 , 1997 , after 27 years in captivity .
She was about 31 years old , the third oldest orca in captivity at the time .
The cause of her death was supposedly pneumonia .
She came to Marine World Africa USA located in Redwood City California in December 1969 together with male Nepo after being captured off the coast of British Columbia .
Nepo and Yaka starred in the 1977 horror film Orca .
Nepo died in July 1980 , leaving Yaka alone .
In November 1980 , the Icelandic female killer whale Vigga became her tank mate .
Yaka was 10 years older than Vigga .
They made the move together when the park relocated to Vallejo , California , in 1986 .
Vigga died 3 years after Yaka in August 2000 .
Yaka was a member of the A5 Pod , as is Corky .
Juliet / malyshka
She lives in Moscow dolphinarium and aquarium Russia ( is from Russia ) .
She was found in 2014 .
SEE ALSO * Blackfish * Captive killer whales
* Killer whale attacks on humans
* Keiko , the star of the 1993 movie Free Willy
* SeaWorld * Shamu * Free Willy , a 1993 family film ( 3 sequels )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Orca Spirit : Site dedicated to Orcas
* SeaWorld Florida Family * Pictures of Kayla