TROMBICULIDAE Trombiculidae (; also called berry bugs , harvest mites , red bugs , scrub - itch mites and aoutas ) are a family of mites .
The best known of the Trombiculidae are the chiggers .
The two widely recognized definitions of " chigger " are the scientific ( or taxonomic ) and the common , the latter of which can be found in English and medical dictionaries .
According to most dictionaries , the several species of Trombiculidae that bite their host in their larval stage and cause " intense irritation " or " a wheal , usually with severe itching and dermatitis " , are called chiggers .
The scientific definition seemingly includes many more , but not all species of Trombiculidae .
Trombiculidae live in forests and grasslands and are also found in the vegetation of low , damp areas such as woodlands , berry bushes , orchards , along lakes and streams , and even in drier places where vegetation is low , such as lawns , golf courses , and parks .
They are most numerous in early summer when grass , weeds , and other vegetation are heaviest .
In their larval stage , they attach to various animals , including humans , and feed on skin , often causing itching .
These relatives of ticks are nearly microscopic , measuring 0.4 mm ( 1/60 of an inch ) and have a chrome - orange hue .
There is a marked constriction in the front part of the body in the nymph and adult stages .
The best known species of chigger in North America is the hard - biting Trombicula alfreddugesi of the southeastern United States , humid Midwest and Mexico ; in the UK , the most prevalent chigger , called the " harvest mite " , is Trombicula autumnalis , with distribution through Western Europe to Eastern Asia .
Trombiculid mites go through a lifecycle of egg , larva , nymph , and adult .
The larval mites feed on the skin cells of animals .
The six - legged parasitic larva feeds on a large variety of creatures , including humans , rabbits , toads , box turtles , quail , and even some insects .
After crawling onto their hosts , they inject digestive enzymes into the skin that break down skin cells .
They do not actually " bite " , but instead form a hole in the skin called a stylostome and chew up tiny parts of the inner skin , thus causing severe irritation and swelling .
The severe itching is accompanied by red , pimple - like bumps ( papules ) or hives and skin rash or lesions on a sun - exposed area .
For humans , itching usually occurs after the larvae detach from the skin .
After feeding on their hosts , the larvae drop to the ground and become nymphs , then mature into adults which have eight legs and are harmless to humans .
In the postlarval stage , they are not parasitic and feed on plant material .
The females lay three to eight eggs in a clutch , usually on a leaf or under the roots of a plant , and die by autumn .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Trombiculidae , from Greek ( " to tremble " ) and Latin ' , genitive ' ( " gnat " or " midge " ) , was first described as an independent family by Henry Ellsworth Ewing in 1944 .
Then , when the family was first described , it included two subfamilies , Hemitrombiculinae and Trombiculinae .
Womersley added another , Leeuwenhoekiinae , which at the time contained only Leeuwenhoekia .
Later , he erected the family Leeuwenhoekiidae for the genus and subfamily , having six genera ; they have a pair of submedian setae present on the dorsal plate .
References to chiggers , however , go as far back as sixth - century China , and by 1733 , the first recognition of trombiculid mites in North America was made .
In 1758 , Carl Linnaeus described a single species , Acarus batatas ( now Trombicula batatas ) .
However , most information about chiggers came from problems that arose during and after World War II .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Trombiculid mites are found throughout the world .
In Europe and North America , they tend to be more prevalent in the hot and humid regions .
In the more temperate regions , they are found only during the summer ( in French , harvest mites are called because they are common in August ) .
In the United States , they are found mostly in the southeast , the south , and the Midwest .
They are not present , or barely found , in far northern areas , high mountains , and deserts .
In the British Isles , the species Trombicula autumnalis is called harvest mites , in North America the species Trombicula alfreddugesi , and the species
Trombicula ( eutrombicula ) hirsti which are found in Australia and are commonly called the scrub - itch mite .
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
The length of the mite 's cycle depends on species and environment but normally lasts two to 12 months .
The number of cycles in a year depends on the region .
For example , in a temperate region , there might only be three per year , but in tropical regions the cycle might be continuous all year long .
Adult harvest mites winter in protected places such as slightly below the soil .
Females become active in the spring , and once the ground temperature is regularly above , she lays eggs in vegetation , up to 15 eggs per day .
The eggs are round and are dormant for about six days , after which the nonfeeding prelarvae emerge , with only three pairs of legs .
After about six days , the prelarva grows into its larval stage .
LARVA Section::::Larva .
The larvae , commonly called chiggers , are about in diameter , normally light red in color , and covered in hairs ; they move quickly relative to size .
The larvae congregate in groups on small clods of soil , in matted vegetation , and even on low bushes and plants , where they have more access to prospective hosts .
The larval stage is the only parasitic stage of the mite 's lifecycle .
They are parasites on many animals .
About 30 of the many species in this family , in their larval stage , attach to various animals and feed on skin .
This often causes an intensely itchy , red bump in humans .
Chiggers attach to the host , pierce the skin , inject enzymes into the bite wound that digest cellular contents , and then suck up the digested tissue through a tube formed by hardened skin cells called a stylostome .
They do not burrow into the skin or suck blood , as is commonly assumed .
Itching from a chigger bite may not develop until 24–48 hours after the bite , so the victim may not associate the specific exposure with the bite itself .
The red welt / bump on the skin is not where a chigger laid eggs , as is sometimes believed .
The larva remains attached to a suitable host for three to five days before dropping off to begin its nymphal stage .
They tend to attach where clothing have restrictions , such as belt lines , or behind the knees when wearing jeans .
During the wet season , chiggers are usually found in tall grass and other vegetation .
During dry seasons , chiggers are mostly found underneath brush and shady areas .
Standing still or lying in tall grass gives them more time to climb onto a person .
NYMPH Section::::Nymph .
Once the larva has engorged itself on skin and has fallen off its host , it develops to its nymph stage .
The nymphs are sexually immature , but more closely resemble the adult .
This stage consists of three phases , the protonymph , deutonymph , and tritonymph .
The protonymph and tritonymph morphologies are unusual in species of Trombiculidae .
The protonymph phase combines larval and protonymph characteristics with deutonymph and tritonymph morphology .
The protonymph is an inactive transitional stage .
The active deutonymph develops an additional pair of legs ( for a total of eight ) .
Lastly , it re - enters inactivity during its transitional tritonymph phase before growing to adulthood .
ADULT Section::::Adult .
As deutonymphs and adults , trombiculid mites are independent predators that feed on small arthropods and their eggs , and are also found to eat plant material .
They live in soil , and are often found when digging in yards or gardens or in compost bins .
Recently ( 2018 ) methods based on autofluorescence microscopy were developed to enable identification of trombiculid mites to the species level on the basis of morphological traits without any special preparation .
IMPACT
ON HUMANS TROMBICULOSIS Section::::Impact on humans .
Section::::Trombiculosis .
Trombiculosis , also called trombiculiasis and trombiculidiasis , is the term coined for the rash or infestation caused by trombiculid mite larvae .
HANDLING CHIGGER BITE
Section::::Handling chigger bite .
Because chigger wounds are a complex combination of enzymatic and the resulting mechanical damage , plus allergy and immune responses , plus possible secondary bacterial infection subject to local influences , no one remedy works equally well for most people .
The chiggers ' digestive enzymes in the saliva causes " the insanely itchy welts " .
The itching can be alleviated through use of over - the - counter topical corticosteroids and antihistamines .
According to Mayo Clinic , the chiggers " fall off after a few days , leaving behind red , itchy welts " which normally heal on their own within one to two weeks .
Hot showers or baths also will help reduce itching .
In cases of severe dermatitis or secondary infection associated with chigger bites , a doctor should be consulted .
According to an Ohio State University Extension Fact Sheet : ... After returning from a chigger - infested area , launder the field clothes in soapy , hot water ( 125 ° F . ) ...
As soon as possible , take a good hot bath or shower and soap repeatedly .
The chiggers may be dislodged , but you will still have the stylostomes , causing the severe itch .
Scratching deep to remove stylostomes can cause secondary infections .
For temporary relief of itching , apply ointments of benzocaine , hydrocortisone , calamine lotion , New Skin , After Bite , or others recommended by your pharmacist or medical doctor ...
(The sooner the treatment , the better the results . ) ...
Home remedies to " suffocate " the mite such as , applying clear nail polish , rubbing alcohol , or bleach are of no benefit since the mites do not burrow into the skin .
CHIGGERS
AS DISEASE
VECTORS
Section::::Chiggers as disease vectors .
Although the harvest mite chigger usually do not carry diseases in North American temperate climates , Leptotrombidium deliense is considered a dangerous pest in East Asia and the South Pacific because it often carries Orientia tsutsugamushi , the tiny bacterium that causes scrub typhus , which is known alternatively as the Japanese river disease , scrub disease , or tsutsugamushi .
The mites are infected by the Rickettsia passed down from parent to offspring before eggs are laid in a process called transovarial transmission .
Symptoms of scrub typhus in humans include fever , headache , muscle pain , cough , and gastrointestinal symptoms .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Iowa State University Department of Entomology Insect Information Note
* NIH Medline Plus
* Ohio State University Extension Fact Sheet , Entomology , Chiggers , HYG-2100 - 98
*
Trombicula autumnalis *
Taxonomic information at UniProt Consortium and NCBI