BLACK GARLIC
Black garlic is a type of aged garlic whose browning is attributable to Maillard reaction rather than caramelization , first used as a food ingredient in Asian cuisine .
It is made by heating whole bulbs of garlic ( Allium sativum ) over the course of several weeks , a process that results in black cloves .
The taste is sweet and syrupy with hints of balsamic vinegar or tamarind .
Black garlic 's popularity has spread to the United States as it has become a sought - after ingredient used in high - end cuisine .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In Korea , black garlic was developed as a health product and it is still perceived as such .
It is sometimes added to energy drinks , and in Thailand is claimed to increase the consumer 's longevity .
It is also used to make black garlic chocolate .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Black garlic is made when heads of garlic are aged under specialized conditions of heat and humidity .
Bulbs are kept in a humidity - controlled environment at temperatures that range from for 60 to 90 days .
There are no additives , preservatives , or burning of any kind .
The enzymes that give fresh garlic its sharpness break down .
Those conditions are thought to facilitate the Maillard reaction , the chemical process that produces new flavour compounds responsible for the deep taste of seared meat and fried onions .
The cloves turn black and develop a sticky date - like texture .
Bacterial endophytes capable of fermentation and with a strong ability of heat resistance have been identified in common in garlic and black garlic .
These may have relevance to black garlic production .
CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
In black garlic , the garlic flavour is softened such that it almost or entirely disappears depending on the length of time it is heated .
Additionally , its flavour is dependent on that of the fresh garlic that was used to make it .
Garlic with a higher sugar content produces a milder , more caramel - like flavour , whereas garlic with a low sugar content produces a sharper , somewhat more acidic flavour , similar in character to tomato paste .
Burnt flavours may also be present if the garlic was heated for too long at too high a temperature or not long enough : during heating , the garlic turns black in colour well before the full extent of its sweetness is able to develop .
Black garlic can be eaten alone , on bread , or used in soups , sauces , crushed into a mayonnaise or simply tossed into a vegetable dish .
A vinaigrette can be made with black garlic , sherry vinegar , soy , a neutral oil , and Dijon mustard .
Its softness increases with water content .
Unlike the vegetable from which it is made , white garlic , black garlic has a very subtle and muted flavour that is easily overpowered .
Because of its delicate and muted flavours , a considerably larger amount of black garlic must be used in comparison to white garlic in order to achieve a similar level of intensity .
Additionally , black garlic can not be used in place of white garlic .
If a garlic flavour is desired in addition to the flavour of black garlic , then fresh garlic must be added .
One method to release the subtle flavours of black garlic is to knead a peeled clove between the fingers until its structure is thoroughly broken down and then to dissolve the resulting paste in a small amount of hot water .
This produces a dark brown , coffee - coloured suspension of the fibrous black garlic particles in a solution that carries most of its flavour , acidity , and sugar content .
This liquid may then be added to foods that are otherwise neutral in flavour ( like , for example , mashed potatoes ) to better showcase the flavour of the black garlic .
Likely owing to its harsh and concentrated colour , the potent reputation of fresh garlic , and the association of Maillard reactions with the browning of meat , it is a common misconception that black garlic has a " meaty " flavour .
It does not .
It is commonly eaten on its own by enthusiasts , who sometimes liken the flavour to a savoury , slightly acidic caramel candy or to sweet tamarind fruit .
The most prominent flavour it imparts is sweetness when used in high concentrations and when used in low concentrations , provided that there are no other flavours to compete with that of the black garlic , the flavour and aroma are somewhat similar to those of instant coffee , though without any bitterness .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
It garnered television attention when it was used in battle redfish on Iron Chef America , of season 7 ( on Food Network ) , and in an episode of Top Chef New York ( on Bravo ) , where it was added to a sauce accompanying monkfish .
In the United Kingdom , where it made its TV debut on the BBC 's Something for the Weekend cooking and lifestyle program in February 2009 , farmer Mark Botwright , owner of the South West Garlic Farm , explained that he developed a process for preserving garlic after finding a 4000-year - old Korean recipe for " black garlic . "
In 2011 , it was used on an episode of Food Network 's Chopped Champions .
In September 2011 , it was a mandatory ingredient in the final round of the second episode of Ron Ben - Israel 's Sweet Genius .
It also was mentioned in the animated series Bob 's Burgers in episode " Best Burger " , in which Bob enters a best burger contest , but quickly realizes his main ingredient - black garlic - is missing and sends his kids back to the restaurant to retrieve it in time for its preparation and inclusion in the burger .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS