WILLIAM ( THE X - FILES ) " William " is the sixteenth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X - Files , which originally aired on the Fox network on .
The teleplay of the episode was written by series creator Chris Carter , from a story by former series star David Duchovny , Carter , and executive producer Frank Spotnitz ; the entry was directed by Duchovny .
" William " helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology .
The episode received a Nielsen household rating of 5.8 , being watched by 6.1 million households and 9.3 million viewers upon its initial broadcast .
It received mixed reviews from television critics , many of whom were unhappy with the episode 's conclusion .
The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X - Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) .
In this episode , Doggett finds a strange , disfigured man ( Chris Owens ) in the X - Files office and , on his whim , they test his DNA .
They learn that the man shares DNA with Fox Mulder ( Duchovny ) , and may possibly even be him .
The answers become even more surprising when Scully 's son , baby William , is put on the line .
" William " marked the return of David Duchovny to the series , after his departure following the eighth season finale " Existence " .
The genesis for the episode was a storyline Duchovny had developed during the series ' eighth season ; he originally pitched an idea featuring a mysteriously disfigured person introducing himself to Scully and admitting that he possessed a connection to Mulder .
Chris Owens , whose character Jeffrey Spender had previously been killed off in the sixth season episode " One Son " , was asked to return to the series for the episode .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the teaser , a couple , the Van De Kamps ( Adam Nelson and Shannon Hile ) , adopt Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) infant son , William ( James and Travis Riker ) .
The episode then jumps back a week .
Scully takes William out of her car while an unknown man ( Chris Owens ) watches them .
Later , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) is attacked in the X - Files office by the same man .
After a struggle , Doggett subdues him .
His face is revealed to be horribly scarred .
Later , Scully speaks with the man .
He claims he received his burns due to alien testing and that he knew Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) .
He further elaborates that he was sent to the FBI to retrieve certain files .
Scully suspects the man is lying , but asks to examine his burns to investigate his strange claims .
He notes that they are the result of an injection that failed to transform him into one of the aliens .
The man claims a new conspiracy has formed after the previous one was destroyed ; the new one being hidden within the government and the conspirators involved being alien .
Doggett theorizes that the man is actually Mulder .
Scully takes the man to her house to give him the files he seeks .
Suddenly , William begins to cry , only to be quieted when the scarred man picks him up .
Meanwhile , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) meets with Doggett and the two discuss the idea that the man is actually Mulder .
Skinner points out the inconsistencies in Doggett 's reasoning , but a DNA test is undertaken anyway .
Scully is told by the scarred man that William is part alien and that she is being used to raise the child .
Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) and Doggett tell Scully that the man 's DNA is a match to Mulder 's , but Scully refuses to believe it .
While the three are talking , the scarred man quietly slips into William 's room with a syringe .
Though William 's crying alerts the agents , the scarred man manages to sneak out of the room before they reach William .
Reyes and Scully take the baby to the hospital and Doggett
discovers the man 's syringe .
The doctor reports that William is fine except for an elevated amount of iron in his blood .
In interrogation , Scully confronts the scarred man about his motives .
It is revealed that he is actually Jeffrey Spender , a former FBI agent supposedly killed by The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) three years earlier .
Spender is also Mulder 's half - brother .
Spender admits his actions were a ruse and that the syringe contained magnetite meant to make William normal .
He explains that the aliens need the child in order to successfully invade the world , but now they have lost him .
However , he notes that the conspirators will always pursue the child , despite what he has done .
Spender says that he acted out of his hatred for his father , since the new conspiracy was created by The Smoking Man after the alien rebels burned the original group .
Scully muses over Spender 's words and decides that the only way to truly protect William is to give him up for adoption so that he may have a better life .
The episode then jumps to the Van De Kamps , who tuck in their new son .
William looks at his mobile but he can no longer move it telekinetically , an event which happened in " Nothing Important Happened Today " .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The story for " William " was written by former series co - star David Duchovny , series creator Chris Carter , and executive producer Frank Spotnitz ; the screenplay was written solely by Carter , and the entry was directed by Duchovny .
" William " marked the return of David Duchovny , in some capacity , to the series , after his departure following the eighth season finale " Existence " .
In fact , Duchovny makes a cameo appearance in the episode , appearing as a reflection in Scully 's eye .
The genesis for the episode was a storyline Duchovny had developed during the series ' eighth season .
He had originally pitched an idea featuring a mysteriously disfigured person introducing himself to Scully and admitting that he has a connection to Mulder .
Reportedly , the idea for Scully to give William up for adoption was mandated by Carter and Spotnitz .
Duchovny , Anderson , and executive producer John Shiban were not happy with this turn of events , due to them being parents and feeling that the action was not realistic .
In the end , they " grudgingly consented " .
Three years after Spender had been written out of the series — in the sixth season episode " One Son"—and actor Chris Owens had moved to Toronto , Ontario in Canada , Owens received an unexpected phone call from David Duchovny , who said that The X - Files production crew was filming the series ' finale as well as another episode late in the season , and that he wanted to bring Spender back for these two episodes .
Duchovny reassured Owens that Spender 's survival would be explained away via the plot device of an alien injection but mentioned that the experience would not be fun for Owens , as he would be " under all that shit " ; Owens did not realize what Duchovny meant until he got to the studio and personally saw the makeup for Spender 's disfigured appearance , a sight that shocked Owens .
BROADCAST AND RECEPTION Section::::Broadcast and reception .
" William " originally aired on the Fox network on April 28 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on March 2 , 2003 .
The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 6.1 million households , and 9.3 million viewers .
" William " earned a Nielsen household rating of 5.8 , meaning that roughly 5.8 percent of all television - equipped households , were tuned in to the episode .
It was the fifty - fourth most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending April 28 .
The episode was later included on The X - Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc .
The episode received mixed reviews from television critics .
Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode an A – grade .
Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X - Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five .
The two criticized the idea that Scully would give her child up for adoption solely based on the word of Jeffrey Spender , noting " if she was n't going to give it away for the sake of its own protection after a UFO cult abducted it [ in ' Provenance'/'Providence ' ] ,
then why should she because Jeffrey Spender of all people comes along and informs her that it 's under threat ? "
Shearman and Pearson , however , did praise Chris Owens ' acting , writing that he did a " great job " .
Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , wrote a largely negative review of the episode and derided its plot .
He heavily criticized the idea that Scully would offer William up for adoption .
Kessenich did however praise Duchovny 's directing , noting that " [ he ] did a masterful job of luring me back to this world of The X - Files " .
Aaron Kinney from Salon wrote that the episode " scuttled the entire " baby William subplot .
M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X - Files after 9/11 , praised the decision to conclude the William subplot but called the episode 's conclusion " sappy " .
NOTES
FOOTNOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " William " at XFiles.com * " William " at TV.com