DECLARATIONS OF WAR BY GREAT BRITAIN AND THE UNITED KINGDOM
A declaration of war is a formal declaration issued by a national government indicating that a state of war exists between that nation and another .
In the United Kingdom , only the monarch has the power to declare war and peace , under the royal prerogative .
There have been no declarations of war since the Second World War , though British Armed Forces have taken part in armed conflict on numerous occasions nonetheless .
There has been a long - running debate regarding whether Parliament alone should have the power to declare war and more widely to commit British forces to armed conflict .
This was attempted ( to the limited extent of possible war against Iraq ) in 1999 with the introduction of the Military Action Against Iraq
( Parliamentary Approval ) Bill .
However Queen Elizabeth II , acting upon the advice of her government at the time , refused to grant her consent to allow the bill to be debated in Parliament and so it was dropped
( Queen 's Consent was needed before debate could take place because the bill affected the royal prerogative ) .
The Constitutional Reform and Governance Act 2010 originally included a section that would have required Parliamentary approval for use of the armed forces , but this was dropped from the bill before royal assent .
FORMAL DECLARATIONS OF WAR
BY THE KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
Section::::Formal declarations of war by the Kingdom of Great Britain .
The following table refers to declarations of war from the Act of Union in 1707 until the creation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1801 . !
Initial authorisation !
Declaration !
Conclusion FORMAL DECLARATIONS OF WAR
BY THE UNITED KINGDOM
Section::::Formal declarations of war by the United Kingdom .
The following table refers to declarations of war since the creation of the United Kingdom in 1801 .
In 1927 the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland was renamed the " United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland " . !
Initial authorisation !
Declaration !
Conclusion SEE
ALSO
* Declaration of war
* Undeclared war * List of wars involving Great Britain
* Declaration of war by Canada
* Declaration of war by the United States * Constitution of the United Kingdom NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* War Powers and Treaties :
Limiting Executive Powers ( pub .
October 2007 ( accessed on 2016.10.09 )