NURSE JACKIE
Nurse Jackie is an American medical comedy - drama series .
It premiered on Showtime on June 8 , 2009 .
The show 's seventh and final season premiered on April 12 , 2015 .
The series finale aired on June 28 , 2015 .
The show stars Edie Falco as the title character Jackie Peyton , an emergency department nurse at All Saints ' Hospital in New York City .
For Jackie , " every day is a high wire act of juggling patients , doctors , fellow nurses , and her own indiscretions . "
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
Nurse Jackie was created by Liz Brixius , Linda Wallem , and Evan Dunsky .
Brixius and Wallem served as showrunners for the first four seasons and shared executive producer duties with Caryn Mandabach and John Melfi .
Showtime ordered an initial 12 episodes .
Before the premiere , Brixius told the New York Daily News that " Guys ' stories tend to be about conquests – getting the job , winning the Olympics , whatever .
Women [ 's ] stories are n't as immediately climactic
so they need to play out over the course of three months ...
And every medical show out there has been about doctors .
Doctors are absolutely unable to do what they have to do without nurses .
We want to tell those stories . "
The June 8 , 2009 , series premiere was Showtime 's most successful ever , with 1 million viewers for the premiere and over 350,000 for the repeat broadcast .
Showtime immediately picked up the series for a second season .
Season Three premiered on Showtime on March 28 , 2011 .
On May 23 , 2011 , Showtime ordered a fourth season .
A fifth season was ordered on May 31 , 2012 , and production began in late 2012 .
The season 4 finale aired on June 17 , 2012 .
Season 5 premiered on April 14 , 2013 , with new showrunner and executive producer Clyde Phillips .
On June 6 , 2013 , Showtime renewed the show for a sixth season , which premiered on April 13 , 2014 .
On March 31 , 2014 , Showtime renewed Nurse Jackie for a seventh season , which was announced the following September as being the show 's final season .
It premiered April 12 , 2015 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters .
Main character Jackie Peyton was described by Showtime as a " strong - willed , iconoclastic New York City nurse juggling the frenzied grind of an urban hospital and an equally challenging personal life , " noting that the character had " an occasional weakness for Vicodin , Percocet , and Xanax to get her through the days .
" The main characters included Dr. Eleanor O'Hara ( Eve Best ) , a British doctor and Jackie 's best friend at work ; Zoey Barkow ( Merritt Wever ) , a spunky , but inexperienced , nursing student from a community college , who " is the perfect foil for Jackie 's sharp angles " ; Dr. Fitch Cooper ( Peter Facinelli ) , " a likable ' golden boy ' whose calm façade hides a nervous disposition " ; and Eddie Walzer ( Paul Schulze ) , a pharmacist with whom Jackie was having an affair at the beginning of the series .
Other characters included the officious hospital administrator Mrs. Gloria Akalitus ( Anna Deavere Smith ) , Jackie 's bar owner husband Kevin ( Dominic Fumusa ) , their daughters Grace ( Ruby Jerins ) and Fiona ( Daisy Tahan season 1 — Mackenzie Aladjem seasons 2 through 7 ) , and Thor ( Stephen Wallem ) , Jackie 's kindhearted confidant and the real - life brother of show creator / executive producer Linda Wallem .
MAIN * Edie Falco as Jackie Peyton , RN ; a senior ER nurse * Eve Best as Eleanor O'Hara , MD ; an ER surgeon , later Chief of Emergency Medicine * Merritt Wever as Zoey Barkow , RN ; an ER nurse , later ER charge - nurse * Haaz Sleiman as Mohammed de la Cruz , RN ; an ER nurse * Paul Schulze as Eddie Walzer , PharmD. ; the ER pharmacist * Peter Facinelli as Fitch " Coop " Cooper , MD ; an ER physician * Dominic Fumusa as Kevin Peyton ; Jackie 's husband * Anna Deavere Smith as Gloria Akalitus , RN ; the hospital administrator * Ruby Jerins as Grace Peyton ; Jackie 's elder daughter * Daisy Tahan ( season 1 ) and Mackenzie Aladjem ( season 2–7 ) as Fiona Peyton ; Jackie 's younger daughter * Bobby Cannavale as Miguel Cruz , MD * Morris Chestnut as Ike Prentiss , MD ; a trauma surgeon and the Chief of Emergency Medicine
* Stephen Wallem as Thor Lundgren , RN ; an ER nurse * Betty Gilpin as Carrie Roman , MD ; an ER physician * Adam Ferrara as Frank Verelli ; an NYPD Sergeant RECURRING CAST * Rene Ifran as Officer Ryan ( seasons 1–3 ) * Arjun Gupta as Sam ( seasons 1–4 ) * Lenny Jacobson as Lenny ( seasons 1–4 )
* Michael Buscemi as God ( seasons 1–4 , 7 ) * Jaimie Alexander as Tunie Peyton ( season 3 )
* Gbenga Akinnagbe as Kelly Slater ( seasons 3 - 4 ) * Jake Cannavale as Charlie Cruz ( season 4 )
* Marcy Harriell as Marta ( season 5 )
* Laura Benanti as Mia Peyton ( season 6 )
* Julie White as Antoinette Mills ( season 6 )
* Michael Esper as Gabe ( season 6–7 )
* Tony Shalhoub as Bernard Prince , MD ( season 7 )
* Jeremy Shamos as Johanes Karlsen ( season 7 )
* Mark Feuerstein as Barry Wolfe ( season 7 ) EPISODES RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The premiere of Nurse Jackie was met with generally positive reviews from critics , and received a Metacritic rating of 76 out of 100 .
Entertainment Weekly gave the first episode a B+ , stating " Edie Falco brings a genial forcefulness to Nurse Jackie .
" New York magazine called the Showtime series " smart , acrid , alternately sharp and sentimental " and " the best series yet in the cable channel 's ongoing meditation on the nature of addiction ... and the setting for a truly breakthrough female character . " James Poniewozik from Time magazine ranked Nurse Jackie 's episode " Tiny Bubbles " ( 106 ) as 5th on his Top 10 Episodes of 2009 list .
Variety and Salon struck the primary sour notes , with Variety noting , " The series increasingly feels like all style and limited substance – a star showcase that 's less ' triumphant return ' than ' Nice to have you back , but ... ' " Reviews of subsequent seasons varied .
The second season achieved a Metacritic rating of 75 out of 100 from 16 critics , the third season received 79 out of 100 based on 7 reviews , the fourth received 83 out of 100 out of 9 reviews , the fifth season received a 66 out of 100 based on 10 reviews , and the sixth season received a rating of 64 out of 100 based on 4 reviews .
The seventh and final season did not receive enough ratings to warrant a score .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Soon after Nurse Jackie premiered , the New York State Nurses Association decried the unethical behavior of the title character , and the detrimental impression regarding nurses that such a portrayal could have on the public , stating , " In the first episode , Nurse Jackie is introduced as a substance abuser who trades sex with a pharmacist for prescription drugs ...
She has no qualms about repeatedly violating the nursing Code of Ethics . "
GENRE
Section::::Genre .
On August 29 , 2010 , at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , in her acceptance speech for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series , Falco exclaimed " I 'm not funny ! "
Later , while speaking to the press , she expanded upon her statement and said that she felt her performance was dramatic .
Several articles have since been written addressing this question , with some writers even calling for an overhaul of the Emmy categorization process as well as a " Comedy - Drama / Dramedy " category for the awards .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Golden Globe
Awards * 2011 :
Nomination for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy * 2015 : Nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy ( Edie Falco ) * 2014 : Nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy ( Edie Falco ) * 2011 : Nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy ( Edie Falco ) * 2010 : Nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy ( Edie Falco ) Screen Actors Guild Awards * 2013 : Nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series * 2013 : Nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2012 : Nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2011 : Nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco )
Primetime Emmy Awards * 2015
: Nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2014 : Nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2014 : Won for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half - Hour ) and Animation – " The Lady With The Lamp " * 2013 : Nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2013 : Won for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series ( Merritt Wever ) * 2013 : Nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series ( Bobby Cannavale ) –
" Walk of Shame " * 2013 : Nomination for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series * 2013
: Won for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half - Hour ) and Animation – " Teachable Moments " * 2012 : Nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2012 : Nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series ( Merritt Wever ) * 2012 : Nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series ( Bobby Cannavale ) – " Disneyland Sucks " * 2012 : Nomination for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series * 2012 :
Nomination for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half - Hour ) and Animation –
" Handle Your Scandal " * 2011 : Nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2011 : Nomination for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Comedy Series * 2010 : Won for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Edie Falco ) * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series ( Eli Wallach ) – " Chicken Soup " * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series ( Allen Coulter ) – " Pilot " * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Cinematography for a Half - Hour Series – " Apple Bong " * 2010 : Nomination for Outstanding Main Title Design * 2010
: Won for Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast . !
Country ! !
TV Network(s ) ! !
Date of Premiere ! !
Weekly Schedule HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media . !
rowspan="2"Title !
rowspan="2"Episodes !
colspan="4"Release date !
rowspan="2"Additional !
Region 1 !
Region A !
Region 2 !
Region 4 FOREIGN VERSIONS
* The Netherlands : Charlie : A Dutch remake of Nurse Jackie began production for Dutch TV Network , Nederland 3 .
Starring Halina Reijn , Katja Schuurman , and , the show began airing on March 13 , 2013 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS