TIME IN EUROPE Europe spans seven primary time zones ( from to ) , excluding summer time offsets ( four of them can be seen on the map to the right , with one further - western zone containing the Azores , and two further - eastern zones spanning Georgia , Azerbaijan , eastern territories of European Russia , and the European part of Kazakhstan ) .
Most European countries use summer time and harmonise their summer time adjustments .
See Summer time in Europe for details .
The time zones actually in use in Europe differ significantly from uniform zoning based purely on longitude , as used for example under the nautical time system .
The world could in theory be divided into 24 time zones , each of 15 degrees of longitude .
However , due to geographical and cultural factors it is not practical to divide the world so evenly , and actual time zones may differ significantly from those based purely on longitude .
In Europe , the widespread use of Central European Time ( CET ) causes major variations in some areas from solar time .
Based on solar time , CET would range from 7.5 to 22.5 ° E. However , for example Spain ( almost entirely in the Western hemisphere ) and France ( almost entirely west of 7.5 ° E , as illustrated in the map below )
should theoretically use UTC , as they did before the Second World War .
The general result is a solar noon which is much later than clock noon , and later sunrises and sunsets than should theoretically happen .
The Benelux countries should also theoretically use GMT .
Russia and Belarus observed " permanent summer time " between March 2011 and October 2014 .
Since October 2014 Russia has observed " permanent winter time " .
Iceland can be considered to be on " de facto " permanent summer time because , since 1968 , it uses UTC time all year , despite being located more than 15 ° west of the prime meridian .
It should therefore be located in UTC−1 , but chooses to remain closer to continental European time , resulting in legal times significantly in advance of local solar time ; this is of little practical significance owing to the wide variations in daylight hours in that country .
The European Commission has proposed ending the practice of Summer time in the EU and EFTA countries in 2019 .
However , the decision lies with the EU 's Member States as a group . !
Colour ! !
Legal time vs local mean time !
Colour ! !
Legal time vs local mean time USE Section::::Use .
Of the 28 EU member states : * Ireland , Portugal ( Continental Portugal and Madeira ) and the United Kingdom use Western European Time .
* Finland , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Romania , Bulgaria , Greece and Cyprus use Eastern European Time
* Austria , Belgium , Croatia , Czech Republic , Denmark , France , Germany , Hungary , Italy , Luxembourg , Malta , Netherlands , Poland , Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain
( apart from Canary Islands that observing the Western European Time ) and Sweden use Central European Time .
Azores in Portugal observes the Atlantic / Azores Time ( with Daylight saving time in the summer ) .
Iceland observes the Western European Time .
Norway , Switzerland , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia , Kosovo , Macedonia , Montenegro , San Marino , Vatican City , Andorra , Monaco and Liechtenstein also observe Central European Time .
Moldova , Transnistria , Kaliningrad Oblast ( Kaliningrad Time ) ,
Ukraine ( apart from Crimea ) and Northern Cyprus observe the Eastern European Time .
Belarus , Russia ( western part , including Crimea ) and Turkey use Further - eastern European Time .
Georgia , Armenia , Azerbaijan , South Ossetia , Abkhazia , Nagorno - Karabakh use time .
Kazakhstan use .
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CITES Section::::Differences between cites .
London and others : !
Time of Day City name !
Time of Day City name !
Time of Day City name !
Time of Day City name LIST OF TIME ZONES Section::::List of time zones . !
Time of Day Common name(s ) UTC SummerUTC Users REFERENCES