NCIS :
LOS ANGELES NCIS :
Los Angeles is an American action television series combining elements of the military drama and police procedural genres , which premiered on CBS on September 22 , 2009 , and stars Chris O'Donnell and LL Cool J.
The series follows the exploits of the Los Angeles – based Office of Special Projects ( OSP ) , an elite division of the Naval Criminal Investigative Service that specializes in undercover assignments .
NCIS :
Los Angeles is the first spin - off of the successful series NCIS .
On March 23 , 2017 , CBS renewed the series for a ninth season which premiered on October 1 , 2017 .
Nia Long joined the cast as Shay Mosley for the ninth season after Miguel Ferrer 's death .
On April 18 , 2018 , CBS renewed the series for a tenth season , which premiered on September 30 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
NCIS :
Los Angeles follows Special Agent G. Callen ( Chris O'Donnell ) , a " legend " assigned to the Office of Special Projects ( OSP ) , a fictitious branch of the Naval Criminal Investigative Service ( the real - life NCIS has no offices in Los Angeles ) .
Callen leads an elite team of undercover operatives as they battle enemies both foreign and domestic under the watchful eye of Operational Manager Henrietta " Hetty " Lange ( Linda Hunt ) .
The team is composed of Agent Kensi Blye ( Daniela Ruah ) , a hand - to - hand combat specialist and forensic whiz , Sam Hanna ( LL Cool J ) , a former Navy SEAL and G 's partner , technical analyst ( Barrett Foa ) , and ranking team member Shay Mosley ( Nia Long ) , NCIS Executive Assistant Director for Pacific Operations ( EAD - PAC ) .
Over the course of the series , the team are assisted by allies from both NCIS and its local counterparts , including LAPD liaison officer Marty Deeks ( Eric Christian Olsen ) , Intelligence Analyst Nell Jones ( Renee Felice Smith ) , Operational Psychologist Nate Getz ( Peter Cambor ) , and rookie field agent Dominic Vail ( Adam Jamal Craig ) , all of whom work side - by - side with NCIS Assistant Director Owen Granger ( Miguel Ferrer ) , a laconic agent and skilled bureaucrat .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* G. Callen ( Chris O'Donnell ) ( birthname Grisha Aleksandrovich Nikolaev ) is the Lead Senior Special Agent and undercover operative attached to the NCIS Office of Special Projects .
He speaks several languages fluently , including Russian , German , and French .
Callen is a highly skilled field agent having worked numerous overseas undercover assignments .
Placed in the foster system at a young age , G. did not know his first name but eventually learned about his family , and in turn , himself .
As G. lives somewhat of a nomadic nature , Los Angeles is G 's most stable home .
He is partnered with Sam Hanna .
* ( Peter Cambor ) is an Operational Psychologist originally attached to OSP in order to monitor the team 's emotional well - being .
Valued as both an agent and a doctor , Getz is later drafted to a deep cover operation and subsequently becomes a well - established field agent .
Despite his career change , Getz still returns to Los Angeles when needed ( season 1 ; recurring seasons 2−8 ) .
* Kensi Blye ( Daniela Ruah ) is the daughter of a Marine and , initially , the only female Special Agent attached to OSP .
Her father died at a young age , after which Kensi spent some time living on the streets .
Estranged from her mother , Kensi is a skilled undercover operative and sniper who is not afraid to use her sexuality to get results .
She is engaged to her partner Marty Deeks .
* ( Adam Jamal Craig ) is a probationary agent and a technical specialist who was assigned to OSP straight out of training .
He is partnered with Kensi and seen as a sort of younger brother to the other team members ; NCIS Los Angeles is left devastated when , following a period as a missing person , Dom is assassinated during his own rescue mission ( season 1 ) .
* Sam Hanna ( LL Cool J ) is the team 's Senior Field Agent and G 's partner .
Sam has the most stable home life of the team as he is married with children .
He met his wife on the job and still lives for the thrill of undercover work .
He is a former Navy SEAL , an expert on Middle Eastern culture , and speaks fluent Arabic , and as such he not only provides invaluable insight on cases involving the USMC and USN , but also on cases involving ethnicity .
* ( Linda Hunt ) is a Supervisory Special Agent and the team 's Operational Manager .
As a veteran undercover operative , Hetty has achieved an unbelievable amount during her life , with distinguished work as an overseas intelligence operative during the Cold War .
During her younger years , she took in several orphans ( including Callen and Hunter ) from the streets in order to mold them into undercover operatives .
* ( Barrett Foa ) is the team 's Technical Operator and resident geek .
He is not an undercover operative like his teammates and as such is not firearms trained .
Beale is incredibly comfortable in the OSP much to the chagrin of his teammates who often become annoyed by his quirks such as leaving his surf board by their cars .
He is partnered and close friends with Nell ( season 1 onwards ; recurring season 1 ) .
*
( Eric Christian Olsen ) is a veteran Los Angeles Police Department Detective who worked undercover and was exiled socially within the LAPD .
Deeks is also an experienced attorney at law having worked as a Public Defender in the Los Angeles Criminal Courts prior to joining the LAPD .
After he is selected by Hetty to be the LAPD 's Liaison Officer to NCIS , it becomes clear that her plan is for Deeks to become an Agent .
He has not had the easiest childhood and deflects a great deal using humor .
He is partnered with , and engaged to , Kensi ( season 2 onwards ; recurring season 1 ) .
* ( Renée Felice Smith ) is a Special Agent who acts as the team 's intelligence analyst .
She is just as comfortable outside the office as in it , and it appears that Hetty is grooming her as a replacement .
Jones is a highly capable field operative and extremely skilled firearms expert .
She has the highest IQ of anybody at NCIS .
She is partnered and close friends with Eric ( season 2 onwards ; recurring season 2 ) .
* ( Miguel Ferrer ) is the Assistant Director of NCIS .
He is the team 's link to Washington , and while he is often seen at loggerheads with his subordinates , he no doubt has a great desire to keep them safe .
Unlike other administrators , he is not afraid to accompany the team into the field .
Granger spent many years overseas as a field agent on many hazardous assignments before becoming an administrator .
He is a long time friend and sometimes adversary of Hetty .
Miguel Ferrer 's last appearance as Owen Granger was on the Season 8 episode " Payback " , which aired on February 19 , 2017 ( seasons 5–8 ; recurring seasons 3–4 ) .
*
Shay Mosely ( Nia Long ) is a former Secret Service agent who becomes the NCIS Executive Assistant Director for Pacific Operations ( EAD - PAC )
( seasons 9–10 ) .
RECURRING
* Indira G. Wilson / Aunjanue Ellis as Michelle Hanna aka " Quinn " ( seasons 3–8 ) : * Rocky Carroll as Leon Vance , the Director of NCIS ( seasons 1–3 , 6 ) : * Brian Avers as Mike Renko , an agent attached to NCIS ' Los Angeles satellite office ( seasons 1,3 ) : * Kathleen Rose Perkins as Rose Schwartz , a Los Angeles County Medical Examiner ( seasons 1–4 ) : *
Ronald Auguste as Moe Dusa , a man whom Sam first came into contact with in Sudan ( seasons 1–2 ) :
* Vyto Ruginis as Arkady Kolcheck , a retired Russian operative ( seasons 1–present ) :
* Claire Forlani as Lauren Hunter , an NCIS Operations Manager and SSA ( seasons 2–3 ) : * Christopher Lambert as Marcel Janvier , a serial killer and criminal mastermind ( season 3–5 ) :
* Scott Grimes as Dave Flynn , an NCIS Special Agent ( seasons 4 , 8) : * Erik Palladino as Vostanik Sabatino , a CIA Agent ( seasons 4–5 , 7–8 , 10 ) : * Anslem Richardson as Tahir Khaled , a local warlord in Sudan ( seasons 3 , 7 - 8 ) :
* Matthew Del Negro as Jack Simon ( seasons 5 , 7 ) :
* Bar Paly as Anastasia " Anna " Kolcheck , a freelance NCIS Special Agent ( seasons 6–present ) :
* John M. Jackson as A. J. Chegwidden , a retired Rear Admiral and the former Judge Advocate General of the Navy ( season 8–present ) :
* Andrea Bordeaux as Harley Hidoko , NCIS Special Agent ( season 9 ) :
* Jeff Kober as Harris Keane ( seasons 9–present ) : OTHER * Louise Lombard as ; a former Military Police Lieutenant and the Supervisory Special Agent of OSP , Macy was relieved of her position sometime between the pilot episode and the beginning of season one .
Hetty remarks she was sent to Djibouti in retaliation for insubordination regarding budget , although the truthfulness of this is unknown .
After a short time working with an NCIS satellite division , Macy is found dead in an NCIS episode , murdered as part of a vendetta against Washington Special Agent Leroy Jethro Gibbs .
Lombard was not picked up as a regular in the new series and the character was killed in the NCIS episode " Patriot Down " .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Special Agent G. Callen was initially a CIA operative created by Shane Brennan for a series that was never produced .
After taking over show runner duties previously held by Donald P. Bellisario on NCIS , he used the potential of a spin - off to bring his story to fruition .
Brennan intended for the series to hold a Miami Vice - esque vibe through its two co - leads , Callen and Agent Sam Hanna .
However , the character of Lara Macy was written to serve as a parallel for Gibbs , the lead of the original NCIS team .
Macy was portrayed by Louise Lombard in the backdoor pilot , but she was not featured in the actual spin - off , and Brennan was able to produce the show as he originally envisioned it .
The show was known as NCIS :
Legend
while in production ( in which the spin - off was introduced ) , and other names considered included OSP : Office of Special Projects , NCIS : OSP and NCIS : Undercover .
Filming started in February 2009 , with the characters being introduced in the two - part NCIS episode titled " Legend " , the first part of which aired on April 28 , 2009 .
This episode served as a backdoor pilot for the series , in a manner similar to the way NCIS was introduced by way of a two - part episode of JAG .
EPISODES CROSSOVERS
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Crossovers . !
colspan =
" 2 " width="22 % " Crossover between ... ! !
rowspan =
" 2 " Episode ! !
rowspan = " 2 " width="10 % " Type ! !
rowspan =
" 2 " width="30 % " Actors / actresses crossing over ! !
rowspan =
" 2 " width="10 % " Date aired !
width="11%"Series
A ! !
width="11%"Series
B RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
" Identity " , the series ' first episode , garnered 18.73 million viewers with a 4.4/11 share in the 18- to
49-year - old demographic and therefore won its timeslot .
It was the second most watched show of the week , behind only the original NCIS .
Reviews for the show have been mixed .
It has a score of 59/100 on Metacritic .
According to Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times , " The crime is intriguing and multifaceted , its resolution requiring a nice balance of street smarts and lots of gunfire .
But as with the original " NCIS " , the emphasis is on the characters of the team ...
Los Angeles , meanwhile , looks fabulous , a pleasing mixture of noir and gridlock , and there 's an air of stability that 's comforting in these uncertain times . "
The New York Daily News reviewer , David Hinckley , was more critical of the show saying that although " It all adds up to an hour of decent entertainment , and there 's room for enough character development to give " NCIS : Los Angeles " a personality of its own , ...
a premiere episode should n't feel even a little like something we 've already seen . "
Tom Shales of The Washington Post felt that , " NCIS : Los Angeles gets the job done ...
It 's a procedural that follows strictly the established procedure , but it has likable characters , dislikable bad guys and the occasional flabbergasting shot of L.A. " Robert Bianco of USA Today summarized it as a " serviceable hour that takes the NCIS formula — a light tone and a lot of banter wrapped around a fairly rudimentary investigatory plot — and transfers it to a special , undercover NCIS division in Los Angeles .
Nothing more , but also nothing less . "
The Hollywood Reporter compared the show to The A - Team with " the same lighthearted approach to life - or - death situations .
Maybe the biggest change is that ' NCIS :
L.A. ' achieves its inevitably favorable outcomes with a little more intellect and a little less testosterone .
" IGN stated that although " NCIS : Los Angeles does n't exactly reinvent the police procedural ...
it 's another above - average entry , aided by the fact that the people behind the show know what they 're doing " and ultimately gave the episode a 7.7/10 .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
Seasonal rankings ( based on average total viewers per episode ) of NCIS :
Los Angeles on CBS .
+ Seasonal ratings table !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Season ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Timeslot ( ET2015–16 AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year ! !
Association ! !
Category ! !
Nominee(s ) ! !
Result class="unsortable
" Ref . rowspan="5"2010 People 's Choice Awards Favorite New TV Drama align="center " – rowspan="3"Teen Choice Awards Choice Action Show
align="center " – Choice Actor Action LL Cool J Choice Actress Action Daniela Ruah Golden Globes ( Portugal ) Revelation Daniela Ruah rowspan="3"2011 rowspan="3"Teen Choice Awards Choice Action Show align="center " – rowspan="3 " POTENTIAL SPIN - OFF Section::::Potential spin - off .
On November 5 , 2012 , Deadline Hollywood reported the first news about a spin - off of NCIS :
Los Angeles titled NCIS : Red .
The new characters were introduced during a of NCIS : Los Angeles .
The spin - off was to feature a team of mobile agents , who travel around the country to solve crimes .
This would have been the second successive spin - off in the NCIS franchise .
However , on May 15 , 2013 , CBS confirmed that NCIS : Red was officially passed on and would not be moving forward .
Scott Grimes reprised his potential spinoff role as NCIS Red Agent Dave Flynn during the eighth season of NCIS :
Los Angeles .
HOME VIDEO RELEASES Section::::Home video releases .
The first six seasons have been released on DVD in Regions 1 , 2 and 4 , and Season 1 was released on Blu - ray Disc in Region A.
The first season DVD release includes the two - part pilot episode that aired as part of the sixth season of NCIS , which were also included on the Season 6 DVD of NCIS .
All releases are distributed by Paramount Home Entertainment .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
In Asia , the series airs on AXN .
In the UK the series airs on Sky 1 and on Channel Five .
In the Netherlands the series airs on SBS 6 .
NCIS :
Los Angeles airs on Network Ten , ONE and TVH!TS ( formerly TV1 ) in Australia .
In Portugal the series airs on FOX .
and on M6 in France .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
In August 2016 , Titan Books published NCIS Los Angeles : Extremis , a novel by Jerome Preisler .
Three months later , it was followed by NCIS Los Angeles :
Bolthole , written by Jeff Mariotte .
Both books contain original stories featuring the characters from the show .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS