CHAD –
ROMANIA RELATIONS Chad –
Romania relations were established on 15 July 1969 .
However , neither country has an embassy in the other 's capital , and although an agreement on trade was signed in 1969 , followed by an agreement on economic and technical cooperation in 1971 , , the volume of bilateral trade remained insignificant .
In November 2007 , Romania announced that they would deploy 120 troops to Chad and the Central African Republic in connection with a European Union peacekeeping mission there .
Romania continued to condemn violence in Chad and blamed it on rebel groups .
However , by mid-2008 , Romanian defence minister Teodor Meleșcanu indicated that his country would not send further troops to the mission in Chad , stating that they had reached their limits and did not want involvement in a war theatre .
In December 2008 , Romanian national Marin Cioroianu was arrested in Harghita County , Romania in connection with the July 2007 murder of Brahim Déby , the son of Chadian president Idriss Déby , in a Paris parking garage .
Déby 's attackers had shot arrows at him , tackled him , and attacked him with fire extinguisher foam , leading to death by asphyxiation .
DNA in a glove taken from Cioroianu 's car matched DNA collected at the murder scene .
However , due to Interpol 's French office lacking funds to pay for his extradition to France , Cioroianu remained in custody in Romania .
SIMILARITIES OF FLAGS Section::::Similarities of flags .
The flags of Romania and Chad are identical aside from the blue strip on the left , which is slightly darker in the Chadian flag .
Romania has used the flag since 1866 , which appeared for the first time in its current form in Wallachia , being officially in use in 1848 .
Chad began to use its present flag in 1960 , after it achieved independence from France .
At that time , the Chad and Romanian flags were distinguishable by the latter 's inclusion of the Coat of Arms of the Socialist Republic of Romania at the Romanian flag 's centre .
However , in 1989 , the coat of arms was removed entirely after the revolution which overthrew Nicolae Ceaușescu .
In 2004 , there were unconfirmed media reports that Chad had called on the United Nations to look into the issue , prompting then - Romanian president Ion Iliescu to make a public statement that his country would not give up the flag .
BBC News quoted Iliescu as stating that " The tricolour belongs to us .
We will not give up the tricolour . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Statement about the flag issue from the Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( in Romanian )