THE LAST SONG ( FILM )
The Last Song is a 2010 American coming of age teen romantic drama film developed alongside Nicholas Sparks ' 2009 novel of the same name .
The film was directed by Julie Anne Robinson in her feature film directorial debut and co - written by Sparks and Jeff Van Wie .
The Last Song stars Miley Cyrus , Liam Hemsworth , and Greg Kinnear and follows a troubled teenager as she reconnects with her estranged father and falls in love during a summer in a quiet Southern United States beach town .
Sparks was approached to write both the film 's screenplay and the novel .
Sparks completed the screenplay in January 2009 , prior to the completion of the novel , making The Last Song his first script to be optioned for film .
The setting , originally in North Carolina like the novel , relocated to Georgia after the states had campaigned for months to host production .
Upon beginning production in Tybee Island , Georgia and nearby Savannah , The Last Song became the first movie to be both filmed and set in Tybee Island .
Filming lasted from June 15 to August 18 , 2009 with much of it occurring on the island 's beach and pier .
The Last Song was released by Touchstone Pictures on March 31 , 2010 .
Upon release , the film received a negative response from critics , particularly towards its screenplay , casting , and foolhardy reimagining of Kafka 's Metamorphosis .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
At seventeen , Veronica " Ronnie " Miller ( Miley Cyrus ) remains as rebellious as she was the day her parents divorced and her father moved to Georgia three years prior .
Once a classical piano child prodigy under the tutelage of her father , Steve Miller ( Greg Kinnear ) , Ronnie now ignores the instrument and has not spoken with her father since he left .
While Juilliard School has been interested in her since she was young , Ronnie refuses to attend .
Steve now has the chance to reconnect with his estranged daughter when her mother , Kim Miller ( Kelly Preston ) sends the rebellious teen and her younger brother , Jonah ( Bobby Coleman ) , to spend the summer with him .
Steve , a former Juilliard School professor and concert pianist , lives a quiet life in Wrightsville Beach , the small beach town in Georgia where he grew up , working on a stained glass window for the local church to replace the one the church lost in a fire .
According to the locals , it was Steve who had ( accidentally ) set fire to the church one night .
After arrival , Ronnie becomes miserable , defiant , and defensive toward all those around her , including handsome , popular Will Blakelee ( Liam Hemsworth ) whose introduction involved crashing into her during a volleyball match , and accidentally spilling Ronnie 's strawberry shake on her .
She shrugs him off and meets Blaze , an outcast who lives with her boyfriend Marcus .
While at a beach campfire , Marcus hits on Ronnie and Blaze mistakes this for Ronnie flirting with him .
Angered by this , Blaze later frames Ronnie for shoplifting , causing her arrest .
Later on , Ronnie discovers a Loggerhead Sea Turtle nest at the beach by her house and while protecting it from raccoons , she meets Will again on his volunteer work for the aquarium .
After a night of staying up to defend the turtle eggs from predators with Will , she discovers he is deeper than she expected , and begins to develop feelings for him .
The next day , Will takes Ronnie to where he works to show her the aquarium .
After they leave to the beach , Ashley shows up and tells Ronnie about Will 's past relationships and how taking them to see the aquarium was routine of his , making Ronnie doubtful of her feelings toward him .
Will finds her at the turtle 's nest and they have an argument about his past relationships .
When Ronnie suggests she does not want to be another girl on the list and that they should end their relationship for good , Will embraces her and they kiss passionately , proving his feelings for her as akin to his quoting
she 's " not like the other girls . "
Marcus breaks up with Blaze because he wants Ronnie , which leads him and Will to fight at his sister Megan 's wedding party .
Ronnie soon hears the rumor that her father burned down the church from some locals .
Distraught , she goes to Will and laments about the situation .
Will , knowing that it was actually his friend Scott who while playing around set fire to the church , is overcome by guilt and goes to Steve to apologize .
When Ronnie comes in hearing this , she walks out and Will follows where they have an argument and break up .
Will leaves .
Fall arrives and Jonah returns to New York for the school year .
Ronnie stays behind to take care of their father , who revealed to Ronnie & Jonah during the summer that he is terminally ill .
Leading a slow life , she tries to make up for the time with her father that she 's lost .
She continues work on a composition he had been writing ( titled " For Ronnie " ) , after losing the steadiness of his hands due to his illness .
He dies just as she finishes it .
At his funeral she stands to make a speech but declares that no words could ever be able to show how wonderful her father really was .
Instead , she decides to share with them the song she helped finish .
Before she sits down to play , sunlight shines through the stained glass window .
Ronnie smiles and says " Hi , Daddy , " remembering what she overheard her father tell Jonah earlier in the movie ; that whenever light shines through the window , it 's him .
Blaze and other townsfolk offer Ronnie sympathy and kind words after the funeral outside .
Later on , while talking to the attendants , she runs into Will .
He says that he liked the song she played and that he knows her dad did too
and Ronnie thanks him for coming .
Having decided to attend Juilliard , Ronnie is packing up to return to New York when she sees Will standing outside .
She goes outside to see him and Will apologizes to her for everything that had happened and Ronnie forgives him .
Will surprises Ronnie by revealing that he will be transferring to Columbia in order to be with her and they passionately kiss .
The end credits show Ronnie driving away in her car and smiling to herself .
CAST
* Miley Cyrus as Veronica
" Ronnie " L. Miller , an angry , rebellious 17-year - old forced to spend a summer with her estranged father .
She later falls in love with Will .
* Liam Hemsworth as Will Blakelee , a popular and skilled beach volleyball player , Will aspires to attend a top university and volunteers at the Georgia Aquarium .
He is Ronnie 's love interest .
* Greg Kinnear as Steve Miller , Ronnie and Jonah 's father and former Juilliard School professor and concert pianist who moved to Georgia after his divorce .
During the summer , Steve reconnects with Ronnie through their mutual love of music .
With Jonah 's help , Steve also works to reconstruct the centerpiece of the local church , a stained glass window , after the original was destroyed in a fire .
He later dies of cancer .
* Kelly Preston as Kim Miller , Ronnie and Jonah 's mother who raised her children in New York City after her divorce .
* Bobby Coleman as Jonah Miller , Ronnie 's younger brother sent along with his elder sister to Tybee Island .
* Nick Lashaway as Marcus , Blaze 's abusive boyfriend and the leader of a gang of thugs who hustle money from beach carnival crowds through spectacular fire juggling performances .
* Carly Chaikin as Blaze , a rebel who befriends Ronnie when she is sent to Georgia .
Blaze betrays Ronnie when she frames Ronnie for shoplifting a watch , but they eventually became friends again .
* Adam Barnett as Teddy , a young thug adept at hacky sack and juggling , skills he uses as part of Marcus ' crew to hustle money .
* Nick Searcy as Tom Blakelee , Will 's father .
* Melissa Ordway as Ashley , Will 's snobby ex - girlfriend .
* Carrie Malabre as Cassie , Ashley 's best friend who aids Ashley in antagonizing Ronnie .
* Rhoda Griffis as a Doctor * Lance E. Nichols as Pastor Charlie Harris , the kind , devout Pastor of the local church .
He was Steve 's first piano teacher , parental figure , and best friend while Steve was growing up .
* Hallock Beals as Scott , Will 's best friend who ends up creating trouble between Will and Ronnie .
* Stephanie Leigh Schlund as Megan Blakelee , Will 's elder sister who is engaged to be married .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The Last Song began when Disney executive Jason Reed met with Miley Cyrus to discuss her future career plans .
At the time , Cyrus had been known mainly for starring as a pop star on Disney Channel 's Hannah Montana , a children 's television series that had expanded into a globally successful media franchise .
As the series neared its end , Disney hoped to create a star vehicle to help Cyrus break out of the pop persona she had developed through the franchise and to introduce Cyrus to older audiences .
During her meeting with Reed , Cyrus expressed a desire to film a movie similar to A Walk to Remember , a 2002 film based on a novel by Nicholas Sparks .
A Walk to Remember helped Mandy Moore , then a teen pop star much like Cyrus , launch an acting career .
Disney called Adam Shankman , director of A Walk to Remember , who signed on to produce the potential Cyrus film along with his sister and Offspring Entertainment production company partner , Jennifer Gibgot .
Tish Cyrus , Cyrus ' mother and co - manager , became the film 's executive producer .
Cyrus ' acting representation , United Talent Agency , then contacted Sparks , also a UTA client , to ask if he had plans for a novel appropriate for a film adaptation starring Cyrus .
At the time , Sparks had been wrapping up The Lucky One and beginning to ponder an original plot for his next book .
The author told himself he could " either go younger than 20 or older than 50 " , having recently written about every age in between .
Wary of venturing above 50 again after his best - seller
The Notebook , Sparks had already been leaning toward writing a teenage story when he received a phone call from Gibgot on behalf of the film in August 2008 .
Sparks recalled , " Jennifer asked if I had anything laying around ?
I said no , but funny you should say that … " Sparks returned with a premise by the end of July 2008 .
Once the proposal had been agreed upon by Cyrus , her family , and Offspring Entertainment , Sparks , with the aid of co - screenplay writer Jeff Van Wie , completed the screenplay before starting the book .
Sparks explained that such an arrangement was necessary in order to accommodate filming in summer 2009 , as Disney had scheduled , but that " this is similar to the way it 's gone with movies based on my novels ; it 's just out of order .
" Sparks and Van Wie completed the first draft of the screenplay in December 2008 , the first rewrite later that month , and the second and final rewrite in January 2009 .
Both rewrites took approximately one or two days , and Sparks found them relatively simple .
The finished screenplay was approximately 100 pages long .
While The Last Song is not the first screenplay Sparks has written , it is his first to be optioned for film .
The novel was completed in June 2009 , the same time shooting for the film began , and was published on September 8 , 2009 by Grand Central Publishing .
The plot of the film and novel remained secret throughout development .
Julie Anne Robinson signed on to direct the film in May 2009 , attracted by the emotion present in the story .
The Last Song is Robinson 's first feature film , although she is a veteran of television and theater .
Robinson previously helmed episodes of American series such as Weeds and Grey 's Anatomy and earned a Golden Globe nomination and a BAFTA award for her work on the BBC series Viva Blackpool .
In a June 2009 blog entry , Cyrus said she had " always been a fan of Nicholas Sparks " and that she had been waiting to do a production separate from the Hannah Montana franchise " for a long time " , but had not found the time to do so due to her TV show , music , tours , and .
In order to film The Last Song , Cyrus ' contract for season four of Hannah Montana included an extra long hiatus .
WRITING AND TITLE Section::::Writing and title .
Recognizing the popularity of A Walk to Remember as both a novel and film , Sparks " put all [ his ] thoughts into that , trying to make the story as different from A Walk to Remember as [ he could ] , but try to capture the same feelings .
" Sparks ' experiences as a father and as a high school track and field coach also helped shape the plot , and characters Jonah Miller and Will Blakelee are respectively based on Sparks ' sons Landon and Miles .
Sparks felt Ronnie was the hardest character to write for because he had " never been a 17-year - old , angry teenage girl " .
Ronnie became a composite character inspired by several young women Sparks has known , such as his nieces .
Cyrus herself influenced Ronnie fairly little , although her singing career did inspire the musical elements of the story .
Ronnie plays only the piano and Cyrus only sings a small amount in the film , though she does contribute to its soundtrack .
Disney did not give Sparks limitations on the topics featured in The Last Song , which include underage drinking , infidelity , and terminal illness but Sparks says that Disney desired to work with him in part because " they 've read my novels .
My teenagers … do n't do bad things .
I just do n't write that .
I do n't write about adultery , I do n't write profanity ...
I 'll certainly have love scenes in my novels , but they 're always between consenting adults . "
Still , Sparks acknowledges that elements of the screenplay may have been toned down by the director or the studio after he finished .
As dictated by the Writers Guild of America , Sparks receives full credit for his work although the amount of his original screenplay retained in the film is uncertain .
For example , Sparks says the character of Marcus , leader of the gang of thugs , was likely altered for the film .
The project remained nameless for several months after Sparks ' initial meeting with Disney in July 2008 .
Sparks wrote in a September 2008 online chat that " I have the idea completed , but no title .
That 's common for me though .
Titles come last .
" The film was referred to by the working title " Untitled Miley Cyrus Project " In March 2009 , Variety magazine called " The Last Song " a " tentative " title . CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Cyrus chose the name " Ronnie " for her character in honor of her grandfather , Ron Cyrus , who died in 2006 .
Unknown to many the character had first been named " Kirby " by Sparks and later changed to " Hilary " .
New interviews with Sparks reveal he imagined Cyrus in the role " only a little " during the writing process .
The completion of the screenplay , concerned Sparks that Cyrus would not be able to successfully execute the role : " The first thing I thought when I finished the screenplay was , wow , I hope she can do this , this is a tough role because I 'm bringing you through a whole gamut of emotion and you 're just a 16-year - old girl who 's done the Disney Channel .
Are you able to do this as an actress ? " , After visiting the set and watching Cyrus film , Sparks ' worries abated .
To play the New York teen , Cyrus worked with a dialect coach to lose her Southern accent and learned to play classical piano .
After she completed filming , Cyrus said that in a case of life imitating art , she had matured and " changed a lot " over the course of her summer in Georgia , similar to the way Ronnie does in the film . "
Showing this movie , I feel like I 'm really showing a part of my growth as a person as well .
So I 'm really excited for people to see it . "
In April 2009 , Disney officials chose Rafi Gavron for the part of Will Blakelee , but switched to Australian actor Liam Hemsworth by May.
On May 18 , 2009 , the decision to cast Greg Kinnear as Steve Miller was made final .
Kelly Preston 's part as Kim is the first role she has accepted since the death of her son , Jett Travolta .
After being introduced to Cal Johnson , the film 's stunt coordinator , Adam Barnett landed the role of Teddy in May 2009 due to his pre - developed talent in juggling and hackey sack .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
The Last Song entered post - production following the end of filming on August 18 , 2009 .
Automated dialogue replacement took place in mid - September ; Beals and Chaikin stated they had gone in to record on September 11 and September 18 respectively .
Chaikin said she had worked for five and a half hours .
The director 's cut was presented to the studio on October 1 , 2009 .
The Motion Picture Association of America reviewed the film and issued it a PG rating for " thematic material , some violence , sensuality and mild language " three weeks later .
FILMING MOVE TO GEORGIA Section::::Filming .
Section::::Move to Georgia .
The Last Song had originally been set in Wrightsville Beach and Wilmington in North Carolina .
Though they wished to shoot on location , filmmakers also examined three other states and identified Georgia as the next best filming site .
Georgia 's housing prices were higher , but the state 's filming incentive package refunded 30 % of production costs such as gasoline , pencils , and salaries .
North Carolina 's package refunded 15 % and excluded salaries of over $ 1 million .
Still , Disney remained interested in North Carolina and offered to film there if the state would reduce the amount the company would save in Georgia , approximately $ 1 million , in half .
North Carolina officials searched for ways to accomplish this , including applying unsuccessfully for state and Golden LEAF Foundation grants .
They also introduced legislation to improve the state 's refund to 25 % , which eventually passed on August 27 , 2009 .
Disney decided to work within existing incentive laws and agreed to film in North Carolina as long as the film rights they had bought from Sparks counted as a production cost , thereby saving the company an additional $ 125,000 to $ 225,000 .
Then - North Carolina Governor Bev Perdue set up a press conference on April 1 , 2009 to announce N.C. 's victory .
North Carolina tax collectors refused to consider the film rights , forcing Perdue to cancel the conference at the last second .
" I was hopeful to say that it was coming
and now I do n't know that I 'll get to say that , " Perdue said .
" Nobody knows what 's going to happen [ ... ] I do n't know what figures they got from Georgia , but Georgia wants them badly , and we want them badly , and by Monday [ April 6 , 2009 ] , there 'll be four or five other states that want them badly . "
Johnny Griffin , director of the Wilmington Regional Film Commission , explains : " Disney makes feature films .
They also make television series ; they make individual movies for the Disney Channel .
By losing this one project , in essence , we 've lost all of those opportunities . "
He also notes the loss of jobs and tourism filming would have created .
On April 9 , 2009 , after three months of deliberation , the decision to relocate to Georgia was made final .
To determine the specific town , location scouts scoured the state for an aged , isolated , oceanfront property to use as the Miller family 's home in the film .
After another three months and the discovery of the " Adams Cottage " on the southern tip of Tybee Island , Tybee and neighboring locations became the sites of filming in late March , with the intention of masquerading the area as Wilmington and Wrightsville Beach , North Carolina .
, The locale proved too unique to disguise .
" We had a hard time trying to hide the fact that this was Tybee and Savannah was Savannah , " said Bass Hampton , the film 's location director .
Filmmakers convinced the screenwriters to change the setting of the film and to Tybee Island , thus allowing them to incorporate landmarks such as the Tybee Island Light Station and the Savannah Historic District .
The setting of Sparks ' novel remained in North Carolina .
Though other movies have been filmed in Tybee Island , The Last Song is the first to be both filmed and set in Tybee Island .
With the city 's name plastered on everything from police cars to businesses , Georgia officials predict a lasting effect on the economy .
In addition , The Last Song is estimated to have brought up to 500 summer jobs to Georgia , $ 8 million to local businesses , and $ 17.5 million to state businesses .
SETS Section::::Sets .
Nelson Coates is the production designer for The Last Song , responsible for all visual aspects of the movie .
Coates , who was nominated for an Emmy Award for his work on the Stephen King television miniseries
The Stand , arrived 11 weeks prior to the start of filming to do prep work .
While most of the filming took place on the natural Tybee Island beach or on pre - constructed private property , Coates oversaw the re - painting of the pier and the construction of the carnival and church .
Location scouts had searched the entirety of Georgia for an aged , isolated oceanfront property to use as a home for the Millers for nearly three months before scout Andy Young came across the " Adams Cottage " on the southern end of Tybee Island .
" It was getting down to zero hour , " said Young .
" Often , it 's about the house .
It can be a character itself in the movie .
" The house 's owner , Sam Adams , welcomed filming as " an opportunity to sort of immortalize the house , " in case it is destroyed by storms .
The two - story , six bedroom house was built by Adams ' great - grandfather in 1918 and was made entirely out of hard pine wood with very few painted surfaces .
According to Savannah Morning News reporter Lesley Conn , it " was built in classic rambling beach style [ ... designed ] to allow ocean breezes to sweep through wide , wraparound porches into cool , heart - pine rooms . "
The church set was built over a six - week period in a vacant lot on the corner of 13th Street and Sixth Avenue , near residential homes .
The one - room , building seats approximately 80 people and is estimated to be worth $ 250,000 to $ 350,000 .
Special - effects coordinator Will Purcell subdued concerns about the church burning scene by stating that the building would not actually be set on fire .
The intended menacing effect is " all camera angles .
It is a safe environment for actors to do their work .
" Several techniques were used to simulate the fire , including the use of propane pipes to shoot flames through the church windows .
At the end of filming , Cyrus hoped to fly the church set back to her family 's estate in Tennessee .
Disney agreed to donate the building to the island after Tybee officials lobbied to keep it , with the condition that its connection to The Last Song not be advertised .
The set will be moved to a new location and brought up to code for use as a non - denominational chapel for island weddings ; renovations are expected to cost approximately $ 600,000 .
SHOOTING SCHEDULE
Section::::Shooting schedule .
Cyrus ' busy schedule necessitated that filming take place over the summer .
Sparks noted , " She 's got a fall music tour
and then she 's back filming Hannah Montana in the spring again .
So the only time she had free in her schedule was over the summer . "
Principal photography began on June 15 , 2009 and finished on August 18 , 2009 .
Filming did not take place during weekends .
On the first day of production , Cyrus and Hemsworth filmed a kiss in the ocean .
Other scenes which took place in June included the carnival and volleyball tournament , both of which were filmed on the beach near the Tybee Island pier .
Filming at the pier wrapped up on June 23 , 2009 after shooting the scene in which Kim drops off Ronnie and Jonah to live with Steve .
Scenes of the church fire were shot on July 10 , 2009 .
Filming at the Georgia Tech Savannah campus began on July 16 .
Kinnear finished taping on July 17 , 2009 .
Wedding scenes and a key driving scene were filmed at the Wormsloe Historic Site between July 20 and July 23 for twelve hours each day .
Driving scenes in Isle of Hope , Georgia continued to the 28 .
By July 30 , the movie had returned to Tybee Island for more beach scenes .
Chaikin 's character framed Cyrus ' for stealing a watch on August 6 .
On August 10 , Hemsworth performed an oil change and Cyrus browsed an upscale boutique in downtown Savannah for the movie .
The funeral was filmed from August 11 , 2009 to August 13 , 2009 at the church set in Tybee Island .
On August 15 , further church burning scenes took place .
The wrap party was held on the 16 , and the cast and crew arrived in Atlanta , Georgia the following day to spend the last days of filming at the Georgia Aquarium .
After analyzing the area on the 17th , the movie began shooting in public areas at dawn on the 18th to avoid crowds .
Once the aquarium opened to the public at 10:00 , filming shifted to behind - the - scenes areas .
LOGGERHEAD SEA TURTLES Section::::Loggerhead sea turtles .
Due to the conflicting personalities of his protagonist couple , Sparks faced difficulty in finding a vehicle that would draw Will and Ronnie to spend time together .
" It had to be during the summer , she [ Ronnie ] had to be new in town , and whatever happened had to start in June and end in August .
Because you always want a conclusion , " said Sparks of his requirements .
He mentioned summer camp or a summer job as typical vehicles used in books , but dismissed them as unoriginal and boring . "
So it 's got to be original , it 's got to be interesting , and at the same time it 's got to be universal , that you feel like it could happen to anybody .
" Sparks eventually chose to have Will and Ronnie bond over a loggerhead sea turtle nest , knowing that Loggerhead eggs often hatch in August .
The scene of the hatching nest took place during the first week of August and involved 26 live loggerhead sea turtle hatchlings .
Sea turtle hatchlings have an innate sense to head toward the ocean water as soon as they are born , so scenes of the nest hatching had to be taken swiftly .
Said Mike Dodd of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources , the biologist who supervised the scene , the hatchlings " did all they know how to do : They crawled down to the water and swam off . "
Sparks told an interviewer he suspected filmmakers would digitally add more turtles to the scene .
At the time of filming , the loggerhead sea turtle was listed as a threatened species .
The environmentally friendly theme was an added bonus to Tybee Island , which was then promoting ecotourism .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
" When I Look at You " , song by Miley Cyrus , was originally from her EP
The Time of Our Lives released August 31 , 2009 , but was included on the soundtrack because it fit the movie well .
The song is used in the background of the film 's trailer .
At the launch of his album Cradlesong on June 30 , 2009 , Rob Thomas told the New York Daily News , " My buddy Adam Shankman , who just directed Miley 's movie , called me on the phone the other day and was like , ' You have to write a song for this movie . ' ...
I would definitely write a song for her [ Cyrus ] .
" In the end , however , Thomas was unable to contribute music to The Last Song , citing " scheduling problems " as the reason .
The soundtrack features a track by Casey McPherson , frontman of the band Alpha Rev which signed with Disney 's Hollywood Records in August 2008 .
Variety magazine 's Anthony D'Alessandro notes that the use of soundtracks as " launch pads " for new Disney artists is a common practice .
"
A Different Side of Me " by Allstar Weekend was also included on the soundtrack .
They are a group newly signed to Hollywood Records after winning the N.B.T. Competition through the Disney Channel .
The soundtrack was released in the U.S. on March 23 , 2010 .
Though not featured on soundtrack , Snow Patrol 's 2006 single " Shut Your Eyes " and
Feist 's
" I Feel It All " also appear in the film .
The soundtrack had a major increase in sales in the week of the DVD release .
The soundtrack peaked at # 104 on the Billboard 200 albums chart .
TRACK LISTING
CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Charts ( 2010 ) !
Peakposition Billboard 200 SINGLES
*
" When I Look at You " was released as a single on February 16 , 2010 .
It has peaked at # 16 on the US Hot 100 and # 24 on the Canadian Hot 100 .
*
" I Hope You Find It " is a track from the album .
It received a large amount of digital downloads after the album was made available for online purchase .
It debuted at # 8 on Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart in the week ending April 10 , 2010 and peaked at # 5 a week later before it dropped out in the week ending April 24 , 2010 .
In September 2013 , the song received media attention for being covered by Cher for her 26th studio album Closer to the Truth .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures originally scheduled The Last Song for wide release on January 8 , 2010 , but was delayed from January 8 , 2010 to March 31 , 2010 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Upon the release of the novel on September 8 , Sparks began a book tour reaching around 13 cities and gave several interviews .
During these events , he discussed writing both the novel and the screenplay .
Cyrus and Walt Disney Studios Chairman Dick Cook discussed the film on September 11 , 2009 at the first D23 Expo .
The first clips from the film appeared online on September 11 , 2009 , interspersed within one version of the " When I Look at You " music video .
The film 's first trailer was integrated into Cyrus ' Wonder World Tour and premiered during the tour 's opening night on September 14 , 2009 in Portland , Oregon .
Midway through each concert , the trailer was shown on large video screens surrounding the stage .
After it finished , Cyrus played a white piano and sang "
When I Look at You " while film clips continued to play on the screens behind her .
On November 16 , 2009 , the first three film stills were released via the film 's Facebook page .
The following day , the film 's trailer premiered online .
The film 's premiere was held in Los Angeles on March 25 , 2010 .
Cyrus was originally planned to go to the UK premiere of the film , but due to the April 14 , 2010 eruption of the volcano Eyjafjallajökull that blanketed Europe in volcanic ash and grounded all flights to and from the continent , she was unable to attend .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Last Song was released on DVD and Blu - ray on August 17 , 2010 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Last Song performed well for when it was released for the first time , garnering $ 5,125,103 on approximately 3,300 screens at 2,673 theaters for an average of $ 1,917 per theater .
It has grossed $ 62,950,384 in North America and $ 26,091,272 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 89,041,656 .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 16,007,426 , finishing fourth at the box office behind Clash of the Titans ( $ 61,235,105 )
, Why Did I Get Married Too ?
( $ 29,289,537 ) and How to Train Your Dragon ( $ 29,010,044 ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The Last Song was panned by critics .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , gives the film an average of 4/10 and a rating of 20 % based on 116 reviews .
The critical consensus is summarized : " As shamelessly manipulative as any Nicholas Sparks production , The Last Song is done no favors by its miscast and over matched star , Miley Cyrus . "
Metacritic , which assigns normalized ratings to films , The Last Song holds a " generally unfavorable " score of 33 % based on 27 reviews .
Reviewers were critical of Sparks ' and Van Wie 's screenplay and formulaic storyline .
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle says the screenplay 's faults include several " scenes that make no emotional sense " and claims , " The plot construction is weak .
Incidents do n't flow one into the next . "
When reviewing Cyrus 's performance , critics acknowledged her stage presence , but were frequently critical of her acting abilities .
Jay Stone of The Ottawa Citizen says Cyrus 's portrayal of angry Ronnie " consist[s ] of pouting and sneering [ ...
] Cyrus does n't have a lot of range , but she does have presence . "
Rob Nelson of Variety writes , " Cyrus , alas , has n't yet learned not to act [ ... ]
But she does show off her considerable chops as a pianist and remains reasonably likable throughout . "
A. O. Scott of The New York Times believes that although " her Hannah Montana persona has a certain aggressive charm " , in The Last Song she " play - act[s ] rather than exploring the motives and feelings of her character . "
Roger Ebert gave the film a mixed 2.5/4 .
He praised the acting and directing , but derided the plot and Sparks 's writing .
Kinnear 's performance has been widely praised .
A. O. Scott writes , " it 's nice to see Mr. Kinnear play an entirely sympathetic character for a change [ but ] his slyness and subtlety seem wasted in a project that has no interest in either . "
Michael Phillips of The Chicago Tribune writes , " Reliably honest and affecting , [ Kinnear ] fights off the waves of corn in much the same way that Tibetan monk defied the tsunami in 2012 . "
Glen Whipp of the Associated Press writes , " Kinnear lends the movie a dignity it does n't deserve " .
Stone advises , " I 'd watch out for Liam Hemsworth " .
Stephen Witty of The Star - Ledger commends " newcomer Carly Chaikin [ who ] plays the " bad girl " ...
with an exciting mixture of wildness and vulnerability .
Halfway in , I began wishing desperately that Chaikin was playing the lead . "
Reception for Coleman was mixed ; Jeff Vice of " Deseret News " calls him a " hammy irritant " while Jon Bream of the Star Tribune writes , " The most memorable acting is by Coleman , 12 [ ... who ] gets a lot of great lines and delivers them with aplomb " .
Despite the negative reviews from critics , the movie was well received from fans and audiences with a 66 % fresh score on Rotten Tomatoes and with an average of a 7/10 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
colspan="4
" Teen Choice Awards rowspan="8"2010 !
colspan="4 " Kids ' Choice Awards !
colspan="4 " Golden Raspberry Award !
colspan="4 " Nickelodeon Australian Kids ' Choice Awards 2010 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS