SCOOBY - DOO !
MYSTERY INCORPORATED
Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated ( also known as Mystery Incorporated or Scooby - Doo !
Mystery , Inc. ) is an American animated mystery comedy - drama series ; the series serves as the eleventh incarnation of the Scooby - Doo media franchise created by Hanna - Barbera , as well as the first that was not originally run on Saturday mornings .
The series is produced by Warner Bros. Animation and Cartoon Network UK and premiered in the United States on Cartoon Network on April 5 , 2010 , with the next twelve episodes continuing , and the first episode re - airing , on July 12 , 2010 .
The series concluded on April 5 , 2013 , after two seasons and fifty - two episodes .
Mystery Incorporated returns to the early days of Scooby and the gang , when they are still solving mysteries in their home town , though it makes multiple references to previous incarnations of the franchise .
The series takes a tongue - in - cheek approach to the classic Scooby - Doo formula , with increasingly outlandish technology , skills and scenarios making up each villain 's story , and a different spin on the famous " meddling kids " quote at the end of every episode .
Contrasting sharply with this , however , are two elements that have never been used in a Scooby - Doo series before : a serial format with an ongoing story arc featuring many dark plot elements that are treated with near - total seriousness , and ongoing relationship drama between the characters .
Furthermore , it is also the first series in the franchise to make use of real ghosts and monsters since The 13 Ghosts of Scooby - Doo .
The series pays homage to the horror genre , drawing on many works from film , television and literature in both parodic and serious ways , from horror movie classics like A Nightmare on Elm Street , modern films such as Saw , television series Twin Peaks , and the works of H. P. Lovecraft , alongside the classic monster horror movies shown in previous series .
In particular , in the second season , the central story arc evolves to heavily feature the use of Babylonian mythology , exploring the Anunnaki , the Babylonian and modern pseudo - scientific concepts of Nibiru , and the writings of Zecharia Sitchin .
Other Hanna - Barbera characters occasionally guest - star , including Captain Caveman , Jabberjaw , Speed Buggy , The Funky Phantom , Blue Falcon and Dynomutt , and more .
As was the case with the previous three installments in the franchise , Mystery Incorporated redesigns the main characters , this time into a retro look that returns them to their original 1969 outfits , with some small changes ( such as Velma now wearing bows in her hair ) .
The series is also the animated debut of Matthew Lillard as the voice of Shaggy , after he portrayed the character in two live - action films , Scooby - Doo ( 2002 ) and ( 2004 ) .
Casey Kasem , the original voice of Shaggy , voiced Shaggy 's father in five episodes ; this would be his last voice - acting role before his death .
Linda Cardellini , who played Velma in the live - action movies , voiced Hot Dog Water , a recurring character in the series .
The show also brought back characters seen in previous Scooby - Doo series such as the eco - goth rock band The Hex Girls and Vincent Van Ghoul from The 13 Ghosts of Scooby - Doo , though his character is portrayed as a direct homage to Vincent Price , being a famous horror movie actor rather than an actual warlock .
PLOT SEASON 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Season 1 . Fred Jones ,
Daphne Blake , Velma Dinkley , Shaggy Rogers and Scooby - Doo are a team of teenage mystery solvers who live in the small town of Crystal Cove , the self - proclaimed " Most Hauntedest Place on Earth " .
The allegedly " cursed " town 's long history of strange disappearances and ghost and monster sightings form the basis for its thriving tourist industry ; as such , the adults of the town ( chief among them being Fred 's father Mayor Fred Jones Sr . and Sheriff Bronson Stone ) are not happy that the kids are debunking all the supernatural goings - on that bring in so much revenue as the overwrought schemes of charlatans and criminals .
In addition to the traditional cases they always solve , the team finds itself being nudged into the uncovering of a dark secret that is hidden in the past of Crystal Cove .
Following cryptic hints from a faceless mystery - man known only as " Mr. E. " ( a play on " mystery " ) , the gang unearths the legend of a cursed Conquistador treasure , the secret history of Crystal Cove 's founding Darrow Family , and the mysterious , unsolved disappearance of four mystery - solving youths and their pet bird — the original Mystery Incorporated .
Standing in the way of solving this mystery , however , there are the romantic entanglements pulling the kids apart : Shaggy finds himself unable to put his new romance with Velma ahead of his longtime friendship with Scooby , while Daphne pines for a trap - obsessed Fred , who obliviously struggles to realize that he shares her feelings , too .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The return of the original Mystery Incorporated to Crystal Cove begins a race between the two groups to locate the pieces of the enigmatic planispheric disk , which will point the way to the cursed treasure beneath the town .
As the pieces are gathered , it becomes apparent that these two groups are not the only teams of mystery - solvers that have lived in Crystal Cove : many similar groups , always made up of four humans and an animal , have existed , and the secret behind their centuries - long connection will reveal the truth behind the curse of Crystal Cove .
The fate of both the gang 's friendship and all of reality itself hangs in the balance as extradimensional forces gather in preparation , and the time of Nibiru draws near .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The first season of Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated ran for twenty - six episodes between 2010 and 2011 with an unknown stop to the airing of the episodes after episode thirteen .
The first episode of the season premiered as a sneak peek on April 5 , 2010 , and reaired on July 12 , 2010 on Cartoon Network along with the next twelve episodes in the United States .
The series continued to air on Canada 's Teletoons after episode thirteen .
The remaining thirteen episodes , dubbed as a second season by Cartoon Network , began airing in May 3 , 2011 until July 26 , 2011 .
During the hiatus the first episode of the second season premiered on March 30 , 2012 on Cartoon Network Videos and aired on Boomerang in the UK on June 2 , 2012 with four more episodes premiering until June 6 , 2012 .
The official Warner Brothers website announced that the second season would begin airing on Cartoon Network in May 2012 but was set back to July 30 , 2012 in the United States .
The first fifteen episodes aired on weekdays after July 30 , 2012 , until August 17 , 2012 .
The show went on another hiatus until March 25 , 2013 , when the remaining episodes of season two began to air in the United States and concluded on April 5 , 2013 .
Each episode of the series is called a " chapter " in line with the show 's overarching story , numbered from 1 to 52 across both seasons .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Mindy Cohn – Velma Dinkley
* Grey DeLisle –
Daphne Blake
* Matthew Lillard – Norville " Shaggy " Rogers * Frank Welker –
Scooby - Doo , Fred Jones Jr. RECURRING
* Lewis Black –
Mr. E
* Linda Cardellini – Hot Dog Water ( Marcie Fleach )
* Tia Carrere –
Judy Reeves
* Gary Cole – Mayor Fred Jones Sr .
* Vivica A. Fox – Angel Dynamite ( Cassidy Williams )
* Kate Higgins – Mayor Janet Nettles
* Udo Kier – Professor Pericles *
Tim Matheson –
Brad Chiles
* Patrick Warburton – Sheriff Bronson Stone EPISODIC ONLINE VIDEO GAME Section::::Episodic online video game .
Cartoon Network released an episodic video game on their website called Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated :
Crystal Cove Online , which had a new mystery every week based on the aired episode .
The player takes control of Shaggy and Scooby as they explore Crystal Cove , solving mysteries and helping other citizens with the rest of the gang .
Although there are 52 episodes , CN stopped updating the game at the end of season 1 , making the last mystery " The Freak of Crystal Cove . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Result
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Prior to the volume releases the first episode in the series , " Beware the Beast from Below " was released as a bonus episode in the special features of Scooby - Doo !
Camp Scare on September 14 , 2010 .
" Menace of the Manticore " was also released as a bonus feature on Big Top Scooby - Doo !
on October 9 , 2012 .
Also , " When the Cicada Calls " from Season 1 and " The Devouring " from Season 2 were released on Scooby - Doo ! 13 Spooky Tales : For the Love of Snack !
on January 7 , 2014 .
"
Night on Haunted Mountain " was also released on Scooby - Doo !
13 Spooky Tales : Field of Screams on May 13 , 2014 .
Warner Home Video started releasing episodes to DVD on January 25 , 2011 in the US .
The first three volumes contain four episodes from the series each in order as they aired on Cartoon Network .
The final volume ( named as Crystal Cove Curse ) contains the remaining fourteen episodes from the first season .
The first thirteen episodes of the second season were released to DVD ( which is entitled Danger in the Deep ) on November 13 , 2012 , while the second half of season two ( titled Spooky Stampede ) was released on June 18 , 2013 .
Warner Home Video began releasing volumes for the UK on August 29 , 2011 .
On October 8 , 2013 Warner Home Video released the first season of Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated on a four DVD set in the United States .
On October 7 , 2014 the second season was released in another 4-disc set in the US . !
colspan=2 rowspan=2Season !
rowspan=2Title !
rowspan=2Episode count !
colspan=2Release dates !
rowspan=2Episodes !
Region 1 !
Region 2 REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* at Teletoon ( Canada ) * at Boomerang ( United Kingdom ) * Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated at Tvguide.com
* Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated at Comic Scooby - Doo Scoob - Tacular
* Scooby - Doo !
Mystery Incorporated at IMDb