CHIPPING NORTON RAILWAY
STATION
Chipping Norton railway station served the town of Chipping Norton , Oxfordshire , England .
The station had two platforms and a signal box .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station was opened in 1855 as the terminus of the Chipping Norton Railway , which linked the town to the Oxford , Worcester and Wolverhampton Railway by a junction at .
The line was promoted by William Bliss and its traffic included freight to and from his tweed mill at Chipping Norton .
Goods trains started running to the station in June 1855 and the official opening to passengers took place on 10 August 1855 .
Initially there were three trains each way , but by January 1856 this had increased to six each way , the first and last of which continued along the main line to .
The station comprised a single platform and two - storey building .
No photographs exist , but Bliss Tweed publicity material includes drawings of the station .
A single - road engine shed , water tank and goods shed were also provided .
Following complaints by passengers of the exposed state of the station a wooden overall roof was added .
In 1872 a siding was added to serve the gasworks adjacent to the tweed mill .
In 1860 the OW&WR amalgamated with two other railway companies to form the West Midland Railway .
In 1863 the WMR amalgamated with the GWR and Chipping Norton became part of the Great Western system .
In 1875 work began at Chipping Norton on the building of the Banbury and Cheltenham Direct Railway between Chipping Norton and .
A bridge was built to take the new line under the Worcester Road , although it would be twelve years before the first train passed under it .
Work also started on the Chipping Norton Tunnel .
However , the B&CDR experienced financial difficulties and the building work ceased in 1877 with the tunnel uncompleted .
Construction resumed six years later in 1883 with the line to finally opening on 6 April 1887 .
The GWR operated the services over the new line .
In 1897 the B&CDR was purchased by the GWR .
The old station was no longer required and was demolished , the area it had occupied becoming the new goods yard .
The engine shed remained for many years ; it was closed in 1922 and was demolished by 1947 .
The small weighbridge building survived until the closure of the line , the only original building to do so .
The new station was sited on a curve .
The main station building was on the down side with a small shelter on the up side .
A lattice girder footbridge linked the two platforms .
There were two signal boxes :
Chipping Norton East on the station platform and Chipping Norton West near to the Bliss Tweed Mill .
The West box was abolished in August 1929 and the East Box was renamed Chipping Norton Signal Box .
In 1904 a 6-stall stable was built for the railway 's horses .
It was no longer required for this purpose after 1921 as delivery work had been contracted out .
In 1929 a large door was added in the end wall and the building was used to house GWR motor buses .
In 1948 it continued in use as a garage but for the Zonal Delivery Scheme lorries .
The stable is the only railway building at Chipping Norton to survive to the present day .
There was a dramatic fall in passenger traffic during the 1920s .
30,455 tickets were sold in 1923 but by 1929 this had fallen to 9,951 .
Parcels and goods traffic increased slightly over the same period .
Jenkins , Brown and Parkhouse attribute the fall in passenger traffic to the transfer of railway road transport services to the local bus company .
In 1948 Chipping Norton became a railhead for the Zonal Delivery Scheme .
The goods shed was modified with a series of loading bays constructed enabling goods to be unloaded from wagons straight into lorries for local delivery .
When Britain 's railways were nationalised in 1948 the Banbury and Cheltenham line became part of the Western Region of British Railways .
British Railways withdrew passenger services from the Chipping Norton - Kings Sutton section in 1951 .
In April 1958 a landslide blocked the line between and .
The landslide was never cleared and after this time the only trains running north from Chipping Norton were occasional goods services to Rollright Siding .
The Kingham to Chipping Norton line was listed in The Reshaping of British Railways report , although with an asterisk to indicate that closure had already been decided before compilation of the report .
The final passenger train ran on 1 December 1962 .
BR withdrew freight traffic from the line in 1964 and it was dismantled in 1965 .
ACCIDENTS Section::::Accidents .
In 1907 , a small tank engine ( no . 546 ) and a Toad Brake Van crashed into the West Signal Box .
The Brake Van was severely damaged , and the engine became derailed .
The rails were taken up by the force of the locomotive .
WORLD WAR
TWO
Section::::World War Two .
World War Two saw many children from London being evacuated to small towns and villages in the countryside .
Chipping Norton was one such place , and trains brought children from Acton and Ealing Broadway to places such as Oxford and Chipping Norton .
These trains were some of the longest to have ever used the platforms at the station .
MODERN DAY Section::::Modern day .
The passenger service to Chipping Norton was closed in 1963 as part of the Beeching cuts , but freight traffic continued into the 1970s .
Because of this , the station and infrastructure stayed open and was not demolished for at least another 10 - 15 years .
The site that was once occupied by the station and goods yard is now part of an industrial estate , and only the cattle shed remains .
The tunnel through the hill and bridge for the road still exist , but the tunnel has been closed and has become flooded due to the filling - in of the bridge .
ROUTE
REFERENCES SOURCES