MORNING GLORY ( 2010 FILM )
Morning Glory is a 2010 American comedy film directed by Roger Michell and written by Aline Brosh McKenna .
It stars Rachel McAdams , Harrison Ford and Diane Keaton , with Patrick Wilson , John Pankow and Jeff Goldblum .
The plot revolves around young and devoted morning television producer Becky Fuller ( McAdams ) , who is hired as an executive producer on the long - running morning show DayBreak , at a once - prominent but currently failing station in New York City .
Eager to keep the show on air , she recruits a former news journalist and anchor ( Ford ) who disapproves of co - hosting a show that does not deal with real news stories .
After some delays , the film was released in the United States on November 10 , 2010 , and abroad in 2011 .
This marked the first time that Bad Robot Productions produced a comedy film .
Morning Glory received mixed reviews and had moderate success at the box office , grossing $ 60 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Aspiring news producer Becky Fuller ( Rachel McAdams ) has dreamed since childhood of working for the Today show , but her dedication to her career is off - putting to potential suitors .
After being laid off from her job at the local Good Morning New Jersey , her mother advises her to give up her dream before it becomes an embarrassment .
However , Becky perseveres , sending many different résumés out .
She finally receives a call from IBS , which is looking for a producer on its struggling national morning show , DayBreak .
After a discouraging job interview with Jerry Barnes ( Jeff Goldblum ) , who dismisses both her and DayBreak as also - rans , Becky bumps into one of her heroes , veteran television journalist Mike Pomeroy ( Harrison Ford ) in an elevator .
She is brushed off rudely , but is told by the other passenger that this is just typical of Mike .
Seemingly against his better judgement , Jerry hires Becky to be DayBreak 's executive producer .
On her first day , Becky realizes she has signed on to a show in turmoil , lacking in direction and money .
After meeting the acerbic but long - suffering co - host Colleen Peck ( Diane Keaton ) , who predicts Becky 's demise , she fires the conceited co - host Paul McVee ( Ty Burrell ) , much to the delight of her co - workers .
Becky chooses an unwilling Mike as Colleen 's new co - host .
Mike is under contract to IBS , but has mostly managed to escape being utilized while still getting paid .
Becky finds a clause in his contract by which he is obliged to accept an official job offer or lose his salary , so he is forced to comply .
Becky gets to know Adam Bennett ( Patrick Wilson ) , another IBS producer who had worked with Mike previously .
After initially teaming up to deal with Mike , they begin dating , and he is initially supportive of her dedication to her job .
Mike proves to be hard going , throwing his weight about , trying to sabotage his debut on the show by getting drunk , refusing to banter with Colleen on air , and ensuring he only does serious news stories by making use of a clause in his contract that allows him to refuse certain assignments , like cooking segments , that he considers beneath him .
Ratings continue to drop .
Jerry shows Becky the figures in his office one afternoon .
Becky tells Jerry that Mike is still getting up to speed , which Jerry dismisses .
Jerry proceeds to inform Becky that IBS wants to cancel DayBreak and air game shows and syndicated talk instead .
He further brings Becky down by blaming the perennial ratings slump and the show 's impending demise on her .
Becky asks Jerry not to tell anyone that DayBreak will end its 47-year run in six weeks due to poor staff morale .
After a heated confrontation with Mike , Becky snaps and decides on a radical approach to save the show .
She improves ratings by persuading Ernie ( Matt Malloy ) , the DayBreak weatherman , to do the weather while doing stunts , such as riding a new Six Flags roller coaster .
Colleen also expresses a keen interest in Becky 's campaign to rejuvenate the show , and appears on a number of colorful segments that help the show 's ratings .
Jerry remains unconvinced that Becky can get the ratings up enough to stave off cancellation .
Adam , not realizing what is on the line , teases Becky about how caught up
she is in improving the ratings , but she sees it as a criticism that she has heard from previous men , and walks out .
Mike tells her that he was once the same way , but ended up with no life outside of work .
During a staff meeting , Mike shows interest in doing a story , surprising colleagues .
Becky goes along , but realizes that he is going to the Governor 's summer house instead of the destination she expected .
At this point , the six - week deadline is approaching that Friday .
Fearing embarrassment and not being able to land employment in the future , Becky informs Mike that the show will be replaced with soap operas and game shows if ratings do not increase by the end of the week .
Mike ends up confronting the Governor on charges of racketeering , and breaks the story of his arrest on live television .
This increases DayBreak ratings enough to secure another year for the show .
Due to DayBreak rise in popularity , Becky receives a job interview from Today .
During the interview , DayBreak is on .
Between segments , Colleen tells Mike about the interview , and that his refusal to adapt has driven Becky away .
He goes to the kitchen where food segments are done .
Becky watches in shock as Mike tells the viewers how to make a good frittata .
Becky runs back to the set and decides to remain at DayBreak .
CAST * Rachel McAdams as Becky Fuller , the new executive producer of DayBreak , the fourteenth in eleven years , challenged with improving the show 's ratings .
* Harrison Ford as Mike Pomeroy , a serious news journalist and anchor who has worked in television for over forty years .
He is unhappy at having to co - host a show that does not deal with real news stories .
* Diane Keaton as Colleen Peck , the host of DayBreak for the past eleven years , in which time she has gone through several co - hosts and executive producers .
* Patrick Wilson as Adam Bennett , another producer at IBS , who begins dating Becky .
* John Pankow as Lenny Bergman , the long - term senior producer of the show .
* Jeff Goldblum as Jerry Barnes , a network executive , he tasks Becky with turning the show 's ratings around .
* Matt Malloy as Ernie Appleby , the DayBreak weatherperson .
* Ty Burrell as Paul McVee , the co - host of the show at the beginning of the film .
Becky immediately fires him because of his negative effect on staff morale .
* Patti D'Arbanville as Mrs. Fuller , Becky 's mother .
* Adrian Martinez as IBS Lobby Guard
* Curtis " 50 Cent " Jackson , Lloyd Banks , and Tony Yayo as themselves .
* Chris Matthews , Morley Safer , Jonathan Bennett , Bob Schieffer , and Elaine Kaufman make cameo appearances .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The premise of the film was partially inspired by Neil Simon 's The Sunshine Boys , where Harrison Ford 's role was akin to Clark while Diane Keaton 's role was akin to Lewis and Rachel McAdams ' role was akin to Clark 's nephew Ben .
Screenwriter Aline Brosh McKenna and producer J. J. Abrams " dreamed of having Harrison Ford in the film " from the point of early script development .
Shortly after Abrams cast Harrison Ford as Mike Pomeroy , Roger Michell took over as director .
Despite their long careers in Hollywood , Keaton and Ford had never met prior to Morning Glory .
Harrison Ford explained : " We have been working in the same business , different branches of the business .
She was in the intellectual branch
and I was in the running , jumping and falling down branch .
So , we never had the chance to work together .
But it was a real pleasure to finally get that opportunity . "
Morning Glory marked Keaton 's and McAdams ' second film together .
They previously co - starred in the 2005 comedy drama The Family Stone .
Billed as a starring vehicle for McAdams , she initially felt she was unsuited to the role because " I 'm not funny .
So I said , ' if you need me to be funny , you might want to look somewhere else ' " .
Roger Michell , the film 's director , had a number of dinners with McAdams and persuaded her to join the cast .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's theme song is " Strip Me " by Natasha Bedingfield .
A song called " Same Changes " by The Weepies was recorded exclusively for the film .
David Arnold also composed the film score .
No official soundtrack was released , though the following songs were used in the film : RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film was originally scheduled for release on July 30 , 2010 , in the U.S.
It was then pushed back to November 12 , 2010 .
Finally , Paramount Pictures shifted the release date to November 10 , 2010 .
In its opening five days , Morning Glory earned about $ 12 million at US box offices , which was considered a poor result for a film with major stars like Keaton and Ford .
On Wednesday , November 10 , 2010 , it debuted at number three behind Due Date and Megamind , though the next day it went down to number four when For Colored Girls beat it to number three .
It kept on switching from number five to number four several times until November 19 when it went down to number six .
From November 19-November 24 , it stayed number six until finally going down to number ten .
It stayed in theaters until January 20 , 2011 .
Ultimately , the film earned more than $ 31 million in the United States , and over $ 27 million internationally for a worldwide total of almost $ 59 million .
The press emphasized that it was another box office disappointment for Ford .
With the exception of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , Harrison Ford had not had a hit for a decade .
Steven Zeitchik wrote in the Los Angeles Times : " What 's most disappointing about " Morning Glory " is that , after a decade without a comedy , Ford 's turn in something more spry was supposed to mark a new chapter by getting him back to his crowd - pleasing ways .
But the movie 's disappointing performance adds one more nail in a coffin that 's been enveloping Ford 's career , ' Buried'-style , for years . "
Jeff Bock , a box - office analyst with Exhibitor Relations , told TheWrap : " When Ford wears that iconic hat , he can still crack the box office bullwhip , but outside of Indy it 's become a tougher case . "
BoxOffice.com editor Phil Contrino said : " I 'm not quite ready to write this film off as a disappointment .
I think it 's going to show healthy staying power in the weeks to come .
It 's skewing older , so that means the audience it appeals to does n't feel the need to necessarily rush out during the opening weekend .
It 's a funny movie with plenty of pep , and I think a lot of moviegoers will still discover it .
" McAdams was disappointed that the film failed to find a larger audience , remarking that " I only hear these businesspeople : ' Well , no one was sure who it was for . ' " CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Critical response .
Morning Glory received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 56 % , based on 178 reviews , with an average rating of 6/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " It 's lifted by affable performances from its impeccable cast , and it 's often charming – but Morning Glory is also inconsistent and derivative . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 57 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
One of the main criticisms about Morning Glory was that the film did not provide any substance about television and the media unlike Network ( 1976 ) or Broadcast News ( 1987 ) .
Peter Howell of the Toronto Star wrote : " You 'll think of Broadcast News and Network watching it , and possibly lament how the film ducks the tough issues of media accountability and culpability that those films dealt with decades ago .
( ... ) Are they [ director Roger Michell and screenwriter Aline Brosh McKenna ] trying to say anything meaningful about television and the media ?
If so , they 've failed . "
Stephen Whitty of The Star - Ledger noted that Broadcast News , as opposed to Morning Glory , " was also about something – the conflict between faked telegenic " moments " and hard - news reality ( ... )
And that 's what made it not just a fun film but a classic .
"
He concluded : " It 's a good enough movie .
But it came this close to being great . "
The critics who enjoyed Morning Glory pointed out that the film was funny and entertaining .
James Berardinelli of ReelViews wrote : " Despite the conventional manner in which the story is resolved , Morning Glory generates enough entertainment , good will , and genuine laughs to make it hard to dislike [ ... ]
It fits into a shrinking category : the old - fashioned , not - too - raunchy , character - based comedy .
It 's gentle , unforced and , despite its flaws , likeable .
It does n't blaze new trails or astound with its wit but , more likely than not , you 'll leave the theater with a smile , and that 's certainly worth a recommendation . "
Lou Lumenick of the New York Post said : " This unofficial update on the news - vs.-fluff wars does get in some good shots at the wacky world of morning television ...
It includes more than a few clever lines , and boasts a stellar cast . "
Andrew O'Hehir of Salon described the film as " a brash , lightweight backstage comedy that looks lovely , does n't insult its audience and uses its stars , both young and old , to terrific effect .
"
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote : " The movie 's a pleasant and occasionally hilarious ride , even if there 's a bait - and - switch at its core . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times awarded Morning Glory three - and - a - half stars out of four .
He stated : " Morning Glory is funny entertainment to begin with , and then Rachel McAdams transforms it .
And Harrison Ford transforms himself .
( ... ) This is the kind I like best .
It grows from human nature and is about how people do their jobs and live their lives . "
Most critics stressed that one of the assets of the film was the performances of its all - star cast .
Harrison Ford got strong reviews for his performance in the film .
Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times said : " Ford does n't venture beyond his usual acting range , but within it he creates a character with a reluctantly human inside . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called the film " a tart , terrific comedy that gives Harrison Ford his best and funniest role in years . "
He added : " The iconic Han Solo and Indiana Jones shows real comic chops as Mike Pomeroy . "
According to Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly , " Ford is still a magnetic hunk of gray - granite movie star , and in Morning Glory , he finds a way to trick up his deadly somber , shifting - quicksand delivery into a shrewd and amusing acting style . "
Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News wrote that " Ford is the most casual he 's been since Working Girl , " while Colin Covert of the Minneapolis Star Tribune stated : " Ford 's gravitas and comedic irritability are in perfect balance here . "
Rex Reed of The New York Observer noted : " All of which gives Harrison Ford a role that fits him like a condom .
He gets to be gruff , granite - faced , mean - spirited , rude and pessimistic , never cracking a smile and scowling like a rat just died in the studio 's air - conditioning pipes ...
The cast is perfect ( scowling irascibly like Clifton Webb , Mr. Ford has never been this good ) . "
Several critics also liked McAdams ' performance .
Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times : " Ms. McAdams plays her role exceptionally well : as the young actress on the verge of the big time , who can win the boy , tame the beast , flash her panties and make you smile without making you cringe , she is a natural . "
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times stated : " Though the film 's advertising gives the impression that McAdams is one among equals , the reality is that this is her show .
( ... ) she 's never carried an entire film as completely and as easily as she does here . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times compared Rachel McAdams ' performance to Amy Adams ' Academy Award nominated role in Junebug .
Keaton 's performance was praised as well .
According to ReelViews , " Keaton is so good at her part that one can see her sliding effortlessly into an anchor 's chair on a real morning show . "
Critics said that there was good chemistry between Diane Keaton and Harrison Ford .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone stated : " Ford and Keaton are delicious together . "
For Rex Reed , " Some of the on - camera bitchery between Mr. Ford and Ms. Keaton is laugh - out - loud witty . "
But it was also noted that Keaton was underused in the film .
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades .
Artios Award ( Casting Society of America ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS