FANTASY PRONE PERSONALITY
Fantasy prone personality ( FPP ) is a disposition or personality trait in which a person experiences a lifelong extensive and deep involvement in fantasy .
This disposition is an attempt , at least in part , to better describe " overactive imagination " or " living in a dream world " .
An individual with this trait ( termed a fantasizer ) may have difficulty differentiating between fantasy and reality and may experience hallucinations , as well as self - suggested psychosomatic symptoms .
Closely related psychological constructs include daydreaming , absorption and eidetic memory .
HISTORY Section::::History .
American psychologists Sheryl C. Wilson and Theodore X. Barber first identified FPP in 1981 , said to apply to about 4 % of the population .
Besides identifying this trait , Wilson and Barber reported a number of childhood antecedents that likely laid the foundation for fantasy proneness in later life , such as , " a parent , grandparent , teacher , or friend who encouraged the reading of fairy tales , reinforced the child 's ... fantasies , and treated the child 's dolls and stuffed animals in ways that encouraged the child to believe that they were alive .
" They suggested that this trait was almost synonymous with those who responded dramatically to hypnotic induction , that is , " high hypnotizables . " The first systematic studies were conducted in the 1980s by psychologists Judith Rhue and Steven Jay Lynn .
Later research in the 1990s by Deirdre Barrett at Harvard confirmed most of these characteristics of fantasy prone people , but she also identified another set of highly hypnotizable subjects who had had traumatic childhoods and who identified fantasy time mainly by " spacing out . "
CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES Section::::Characteristic features .
A fantasy prone person is reported to spend a large portion of their time fantasizing , have vividly intense fantasies , have paranormal experiences , and have intense religious experiences .
People with FPP are reported to spend over half of their time awake fantasizing or daydreaming and will often confuse or mix their fantasies with their real memories .
They also report out - of - body experiences .
A paracosm is an extremely detailed and structured fantasy world often created by extreme or compulsive fantasizers .
Wilson and Barber listed numerous characteristics in their pioneer study , which have been clarified and amplified in later studies .
These characteristics include some or many of the following experiences : * excellent hypnotic subject ( most but not all fantasizers ) * * having imaginary friends in childhood
*
* fantasizing often as child *
* having an actual fantasy identity *
* experiencing imagined sensations as real * * having vivid sensory perceptions
*
* receiving sexual satisfaction without physical stimulation .
* Fantasy proneness is measured by the " inventory of childhood memories and imaginings " ( ICMI ) and the " creative experiences questionnaire ( CEQ ) .
DEVELOPMENTAL PATHWAYS Section::::Developmental pathways .
Fantasizers have had a large exposure to fantasy during early childhood .
This over - exposure to childhood fantasy has at least three important causes : ( 1 ) Parents or carers who indulged in their child 's imaginative mental or play environment during childhood .
People with fantasy prone personalities are more likely to have had parents , or close family members that joined the child in believing toys are living creatures .
They also encourage the child who believes they have imaginary companions , read fairytales all through childhood and re - enact the things they have read .
People who , at a young age , were involved in creative fantasy activities like piano , ballet , and drawing are more likely to obtain a fantasy prone personality .
Acting is also a way for children to identify as different people and characters which can make the child prone to fantasy - like dreams as they grow up .
This can cause the person to grow up thinking they have experienced certain things and they can visualize a certain occurrence from the training they obtained while being involved in plays .
People have reported that they believed their dolls and stuffed animals were living creatures and that their parents encouraged them to indulge in their fantasies and daydreams .
For example , one subject in Barrett 's study said her parents ' standard response to her requests for expensive toys was , " You could take this ( household object ) and with a little imagination , it would look just like ( an expensive gift ) .
"
( 2 ) Exposure to abuse , physical or sexual , such that fantasizing provides a coping or escape mechanism .
( 3 ) Exposure to severe loneliness and isolation , such that fantasizing provides a coping or escape mechanism from the boredom .
Regarding psychoanalytic interpretations , Sigmund Freud has stated that " unsatisfied wishes are the driving power behind fantasies , every separate fantasy contains the fulfillment of a wish , and unproves an unsatisfactory reality .
"
This shows childhood abuse and loneliness can result in people creating a fantasy world of happiness in order to fill the void .
RELATED CONSTRUCTS Section::::Related constructs .
Openness to experience is one of the five domains that are used to describe human personality in the Five Factor Model .
Openness involves six facets , or dimensions , including active imagination ( fantasy ) , aesthetic sensitivity , attentiveness to inner feelings , preference for variety , and intellectual curiosity .
Thus , fantasy prone personality correlates with the fantasy facet of the broader personality trait Openness to Experience .
Absorption is a disposition or personality trait in which a person becomes absorbed in his or her mental imagery , particularly fantasy .
The original research on absorption was by American psychologist Auke Tellegen .
Roche reports that fantasy proneness and absorption are highly correlated .
Fantasizers become absorbed within their vivid and realistic mental imagery .
Dissociation is a psychological process involving alterations in personal identity or sense of self .
These alterations can include : a sense that one 's self or the world is unreal ( derealization and depersonalization ) ; a loss of memory ( amnesia ) ; forgetting one 's identity or assuming a new self ( fugue ) ; and fragmentation of identity or self into separate streams of consciousness ( dissociative identity disorder , formerly termed multiple personality disorder ) .
Dissociation is measured most often by the Dissociative Experiences Scale .
Several studies have reported that dissociation and fantasy proneness are highly correlated .
This suggests the possibility that the dissociated selves are merely fantasies , for example , being a coping response to trauma .
However , a lengthy review of the evidence concludes that there is strong empirical support for the hypothesis that dissociation is caused primarily and directly by exposure to trauma , and that fantasy is of secondary importance .
HEALTH AND THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS Section::::Health and theoretical implications .
False pregnancy ( pseudocyesis ) .
A surprisingly high number of female fantasizers – 60 % of the women asked in the Wilson - Barber study – reported that they have had a false pregnancy ( pseudocyesis ) at least once .
They believed that they were pregnant , and they had many of the symptoms .
In addition to amenorrhea ( stoppage of menstruation ) , they typically experienced at least four of the following : breast changes , abdominal enlargement , morning sickness , cravings , and " fetal " movements .
Two of the subjects went for abortions , following which they were told that no fetus had been found .
All of the other false pregnancies terminated quickly when negative results were received from pregnancy tests .
Malapdative daydreaming is a psychological disorder , a fantasy activity that replaces human interaction and interferes with work , relationships and general activities .
Who suffers from this pathology , daydreams or fantasizes excessively , assuming roles and characters in scenarios created to his / her liking .
People who suffer from excessive daydreaming are aware that the scenarios and characters of their fantasies are not real and have the ability to determine what is real , elements that differentiate them from those suffering from schizophrenia .
A 2011 study reports on 90 excessive , compulsive or maladaptive fantasizers who engaged in extensive periods of highly structured immersive imaginative experiences .
They often reported distress stemming from three factors : difficulty in controlling their fantasies that seemed overwhelming ; concern that the fantasies interfered in their personal relationships ; and intense shame and exhaustive efforts to keep this " abnormal " behaviour hidden from others .
The medications escitalopram ( one waking pill ) and amitriptyline ( one every 8 hours ) are used for treatment .
Parapsychology ( paranormal experiences ) .
The pioneer Wilson - Barber study states that fantasy prone personality is a key to understanding reputed paranormal ( parapsychological ) experiences , such as extrasensory perception ( ESP ) .
SEE ALSO * Suggestibility REFERENCES