TEXAS SECESSION MOVEMENTS Texas secession movements principally focus on the secession of Texas during the American Civil War and the activities of organizations that have existed since the 1990s .
The United States Constitution does not address secession of states and the issue was a topic of debate from after the Revolutionary War up until the Civil War , when the Supreme Court ruled , in Texas v. White , that states can not unilaterally secede .
Texas was a sovereign state for nine years prior to the negotiated annexation with the United States , but its sovereignty was not recognized by Mexico , despite the fact that Texas defeated the country in its war of independence , nor did Texas actually control the entirety of its claimed territory .
This history has affected the state 's politics ever since , including its standing in the Confederacy in the Civil War to education and even tourism in the 20th century .
Modern secession efforts have existed in the state at least since the 1990s , focusing first on the Republic of Texas organization founded by Richard Lance McLaren and later on the Texas Nationalist Movement headed by Daniel Miller .
SECESSION IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Secession in the United States .
Discussion about the right of U.S. states to secede from the union began shortly after the American Revolutionary War .
The United States Constitution does not address secession .
Each of the colonies originated by separate grants from the British Crown and had evolved relatively distinct political and cultural institutions prior to national independence .
Craig S. Lerner has written that the Constitution 's Supremacy Clause weighs against a right of secession , but that the [ [ Article Four of the United States ConstitutionRepublican Guarantee Clause ] can be interpreted to indicate that the federal government has no right to keep a state from leaving as long as it maintains a republican form of government .
The question remained open in the decades before the Civil War .
In 1825 , [ [ Alexis de Tocqueville ] ] observed , " If today one of these same states wanted to withdraw its name from the contract , it would be quite difficult to prove that it could not do so .
To combat it , the federal government would have no evident support in either force or right . "
However , [ [ Joseph Story ] ] wrote in 1830 in [ [ Commentaries on the Constitution of the United StatesCommentaries on the Constitution ] ] that the document foreclosed the right of secession .
On the eve of the Civil War , President [ [ Abraham Lincoln ] ] argued that states were not sovereign before the Constitution but instead they were created by it .
Current [ [ U.S. Supreme CourtSupreme Court ] ] precedent , in [ [ Texas v. White ] ] , holds that the states can not secede from the union by an act of the state .
More recently , Supreme Court Justice [ [ Antonin Scalia ] ] stated , " If there was any constitutional issue resolved by the Civil War , it is that there is no right to secede . "
REPUBLIC OF TEXAS ( 19TH CENTURY ) Section::::Republic of Texas ( 19th century ) .
Texas
[ [ Texas Revolutionseceded from Mexico ] ]
in 1836 , spurred on primarily by American settlers in the former Mexican territory against the government of [ [ Antonio López de Santa AnnaSanta Anna ] ] .
After the [ [ Battle of San Jacintofinal engagement at San Jacinto ] ]
in 1836 , there were two different visions of the future of Texas : one as a state of the United States and the other as an independent republic .
[ [ Sam Houston ] ] promoted the first , as he felt that the newly independent country , lacking hard currency and still facing threats from Mexico , could not survive on its own .
The other was promoted by second Texas president [ [ Mirabeau B. Lamar ] ] , who felt that it was Texas 's destiny to be a nation that extended from the [ [ Louisiana ] ] border to the Pacific Ocean .
For this reason , Lamar is considered the father of Texas nationalism .
The Republic under Lamar incurred large - scale debt , and suffered from a poor economy and inadequate defenses , which led to the annexation of Texas into the United States in 1845 .
Since then , the state 's time as an independent nation has been the basis of a lasting sense of national identity .
SECESSION FROM THE US
UNTIL
THE CIVIL WAR Section::::Secession from the US until the Civil War .
The history of Texas in the Civil War has distinctions from the rest of the South , in part because of its history of being independent previously .
Much of Texas 's dissatisfaction was not only tied to opposition to Lincoln and his view of [ [ states ' rights ] ]
( which they also viewed as a transgression of the [ [ Annexation of Texasannexation agreement ] ] ) , but also because they did not feel that Washington had lived up to promises of inclusion into the country as part of annexation .
In 1861 , Sam Houston still strongly supported remaining in the United States primarily for economic and military reasons .
However , those promoting secession used not only elements from U.S. history such as the American Revolution and the Constitution , but also the Texas Revolution and elements from the history of the Republic of Texas .
On 1 February 1861 , a popular referendum voted to secede , making Texas the seventh and last state of the Lower South to do so .
Some wanted to restore the Republic of Texas , but an identity with the Confederacy was embraced .
This led to the replacement of Texas themes for the most part with those of the Confederacy , including religious justification given in sermons , often demanded by petitioners .
The transference to the [ [ Flags of the Confederate States of AmericaStars and Bars ] ] was in the hope of achieving the inclusion perceived by some to be denied by Washington .
However , that shift was never complete .
Clayton E. Jewett wrote in Texas in the Confederacy : An Experiment in Nation Building that its identity remained somewhat separate from the rest of the Confederacy .
James Marten wrote in Texas Divided : Loyalty and Dissent in the Lone Star State , 1856–1874 that it battled between loyalty to the Confederacy and dissent and its ambivalence may have been enough to assure Southern defeat .
During the war , Texas was spared most of the actual fighting , with only [ [ Galveston ] ] seeing any military engagement with Union forces .
However , the war did take a serious toll in the way of chronic shortages , absence of men at home to run the economy , military setbacks and fear of invasion .
Although Lincoln recognized Texas 's history as an independent nation , his definition of the Union meant that Texas forever ceded this to be subject to the Constitution .
FROM THE CIVIL WAR TO THE 1990S Section::::From the Civil War to the 1990s .
After the end of the Civil War , Texans maintained a " rebel " or Confederate identity instead of a completely Texas one as a way of still defying the United States .
After the Civil War , it provided a haven for others in the Confederacy leaving claimed devastation .
From that time to the present , a " Lost Cause " mythology has continued in Texas and other areas of the South .
However , for the most part , overt discussion of the right of states to secede ended , replaced by another mythology based on the indivisibility of the territory .
This did not end Texas 's identity as at least somewhat different from the rest of the United States .
Unlike southern states , Texas began emphasizing its cowboy heritage and connection with the U.S. Southwest , even influencing the rest of the U.S. identity in the 20th century .
For many Texans , the history of the Republic of Texas is considered a time of independence and self - determination often in contrast to interference by the federal government in Washington .
Texas requires a course in the state 's history in the seventh grade where these ideas can also be found .
In the 1990s , Texas began to use the slogan " Texas .
It 's Like a Whole Other Country " especially in domestic ads for tourism , and still can be seen today .
However , public imagination remains split on the visions of Texas as state and nation that Houston and Lamar had in the 19th century .
The two can appear as a conflict between rural and urban Texans but the Lamar vision can be found in the cities as well .
Texas did not join in festivities for the 150th anniversary of the Civil War as it was thought that the commemoration would have reopened old unhealed wounds .
1990S
TO PRESENT REPUBLIC OF TEXAS ORGANIZATION Section::::1990s to present .
Section::::Republic of Texas organization .
There have been efforts to promote Texas secession in the state at least since the 1990s .
At this time , Richard Lance McLaren founded the [ [ Republic of Texas ( group)Republic of Texas organization ] ]
based on his property within the Davis Mountains Resort in [ [ Jeff Davis County , TexasJeff Davis County ] ] , becoming the most active and influential secession group at the time .
Essentially the organization claimed that the United States annexed Texas illegally and considered it to be held captive .
The organization held itself out as an alternative government , based on the principle of very limited powers .
McLaren had both supporters and enemies .
His supporters generally believed that globalization was a threat to constitutional rights and against Christian principles .
Tactics of the group included filing liens against properties , disavowing state and federal authorities , and opening an " embassy " .
McLaren 's legal filings were so numerous that the county clerk gave them a separate cabinet .
Members of the Republic of Texas group listed grievances with the U.S. government , such as accusing the government of a corrupt judicial system , paganism , and of creating illegal treaties and illegitimate agencies .
Members of the group also stated that the U.S. government had set itself above the people and had exercised its global influences unlawfully against the Constitution .
The Republic of Texas members placed a lot of emphasis on the [ [ Waco siegeBranch Davidian incident near Waco ] ]
as an example of all that was wrong with the U.S. government .
In the summer of 1996 , injunctions and other court proceedings against McLaren were well underway .
In July of that year , McLaren held a press conference a block away from the state courthouse in [ [ Austin ] ] stating that he refused to appear because he did not recognize the legitimacy of the court .
McLaren was jailed for a month by a federal judge for failing to show in court .
After his release , McLaren 's rhetoric grew stronger .
In March 1997 , he wrote to the federal government to claim 93 trillion dollars in reparations to Texas for the Civil War .
By this time , the Republic of Texas organization had fractured into three factions .
When two of McLaren 's groups were arrested , McLaren took two hostages and holed up with armed supporters on his property , leading to a standoff with [ [ Texas Department of Public Safety ] ] .
However , the siege ended with McLaren and twelve others giving up without violence .
In November of that year , McLaren was convicted of kidnapping and was sentenced to 99 years in prison .
McLaren was also convicted of federal mail fraud and bank fraud in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas in Dallas .
He is imprisoned at the William P. Clements Unit of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice , near Amarillo , Texas , and is scheduled for release on June 15 , 2041 .
As of 2003 , there were three groups that claimed to be the Republic of Texas with different web sites , but without McLaren named as a leader .
TEXAS NATIONALIST
MOVEMENT Section::::Texas Nationalist Movement .
The Texas Nationalist Movement ( TNM ) , headed by Daniel Miller , evolved from one of the factions of the old Republic of Texas in the late 1990s to early 2000s .
However , the organization has disassociated itself from the Republic of Texas and the tactics of McLaren , instead opting for more political rather than confrontational or violent solution .
The group has county - level groups in most parts of the state .
According to its website , the objective of the Texas Nationalist Movement is " the complete , total and unencumbered political , cultural and economic independence of Texas " .
Unlike its predecessor , TNM claims to work peaceably with the current political system , and to reject use of force to achieve its goals .
TNM is an unincorporated association under the laws of the State of Texas .
The organization focuses on political support and advocacy , and education surrounding the issue of secession .
In January 2013 , members of the TNM rallied at the state capital in Austin to promote the resolution , resulting in one mention of secession by one lawmaker on the opening day of the legislative session .
In May 2016 , the Texas GOP narrowly rejected bringing a resolution for secession to a floor vote at the 2016 Texas Republican Convention .
The Texas Nationalist Movement has received funding to attend the Dialogue of Nations conference from the [ [ RussiaRussian government ] ] through a nonprofit ; Anti - Globalization Movement of Russia .
OTHER DISCUSSIONS OF SECESSION
STARTING IN 2012
Section::::Other discussions of secession starting in 2012 .
The rise of membership in the Texas Nationalist Movement coincided with other secession - related news events not part of that organization .
Governor [ [ Rick Perry ] ]
, at a political rally in 2009 , addressed the possibility of secession .
During the rally , many in the crowd began to chant " secede , secede " , to which Perry remarked , " If Washington continues to thumb their nose at the American people , you know , who knows what might come out of that ?
" Perry subsequently clarified that the comment was tongue in cheek and that he does not support secession .
His remarks sparked controversy and harsh criticism from government officials and pundits , such as Jeff Macke and Joe Weisental .
After Perry 's comments received news coverage , [ [ Rasmussen Reports ] ] found that about 1 in 3 of those it polled believed that Texas has the right to secede from the United States , although only 18 % would support secession and 75 % would oppose secession .
In another poll , 60 % of Texans surveyed opposed becoming an independent nation .
However , 48 % of Texas Republicans surveyed supported it .
The reaction from outside the state was also strongly split , including those who wanted to get rid of Texas .
After the 2012 presidential election , bumper stickers and signs saying " secede " began appearing in Texas .
The election also triggered a wave of petitions on the [
[ We the People ( petitioning system)White House " We the People " website ] ] .
While the Texas petition was not first to appear , it overtook those of the other states with over 125,000 signatures , well above the 25,000 required to trigger a response .
The petition stated that secession would " protect the original ideas and beliefs of our founding fathers which are no longer being reflected by the federal government " and defend Texans from " blatant abuses to their rights " The Texas secession petition was followed by one allowing Austin to secede from Texas and stay part of the union .
The White House issued a 476-word response rejecting the idea .
In June 2016 , when a 52–48 majority in the U.K. [ [ United Kingdom withdrawal from the European Unionvoted to leave ] ]
the European Union ( EU ) using the hashtag # Brexit on social media , there was renewed interest that Texas formalize efforts to secede from the U.S. , using the hashtag # Texit .
OPINION POLLING
COUNTERFACTUAL POLLS
IF HILLARY CLINTON HAD WON
THE [ [ UNITED STATES PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION , 20162016 ELECTION ] ] SEE ALSO
* [ [ Texas Revolution ] ]
* [ [ Brexit ] ]
* [ [ Calexit ] ] –
California secession movements
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Daughters of the Republic Library
* Seceder.com :
Texas secession 's viability
* Slate : The Republic of Texas Article published in 1997 .
* Still true today : ' The Republic of Texas is no more ' - an article by Ralph H. Brock published in the [ [ Houston Chronicle ] ]
in 1997 that debunks Republic of Texas claims
* Texas Nationalist Movement website , not affiliated with Republic of Texas organization TERRORISM KNOWLEDGE BASE PROFILE OF REPUBLIC OF TEXAS
* Republic of Texas ( ROT ) ( archived from the original on 2007 - 09 - 30 ) TEXAS CONVENTION PRO - CONTINUATION OF 1861 * RoT statement to U.S. District Court in Austin * RoT declaration filed with the Swiss Federal Council * RoT cease fire against the state government Section::::External links .
Section::::Texas Convention Pro - Continuation of 1861 .
[ [ Category : Independence movements ] ]
[ [ Category : Politics of Texas ] ]
[ [ Category : Separatism in the United States ] ]