CENTIPEDE BITE
A centipede bite is an injury resulting from the action of a centipede 's forcipules ,
pincer - like appendages that pierce the skin and inject venom into the wound .
Such a wound is not strictly speaking a bite , as the forcipules are a modified first pair of legs rather than true mouthparts .
Clinically , the wound is viewed as a cutaneous condition characterized by paired hemorrhagic marks that form a chevron shape caused by the paired forcipules .
The centipede 's venom causes pain and swelling in the area of the bite , and may cause other reactions throughout the body .
The majority of bites are not life - threatening to humans and present the greatest risk to children and those who develop allergic reactions .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
The history of a centipede bite is fairly straightforward ; the victim typically sees and recognizes the centipede before or soon after being bitten .
Symptoms which are most likely to develop include : * severe pain , which is usually in proportion to the size of the centipede
* swelling and redness .
Possible ' bullseye ' * skin necrosis * swollen , painful lymph nodes in the regions of the bitten limb * headache * palpitations or a racing pulse
* nausea and vomiting
* anxiety * local itching and burning sensations
The wound left by the bite may be accompanied by swelling , redness , and small puncture wounds which may form a circular pattern .
This wound may be susceptible to local ulcerations and necrosis .
A severe bite from a large centipede on a child , senior or person with a weakened heart can cause heart attack if untreated .
This is extremely rare .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Immediate treatment consists of rinsing the bite site in cold water .
If not too painful , ice the bite site .
This constricts the blood vessels so the venom does not spread .
Also recommended is papain , an enzyme that breaks down protein .
Papain can be found in meat tenderizer and papaya .
This deactivates the majority of the centipede venom 's proteins .
Depending on the type of centipede and level of envenomation , this treatment may not degrade the entire venom dose and residual pain will remain .
Individuals who are bitten by centipedes are sometimes given a urine test to check for muscle tissue breakdown and/or an EKG to check for heart and vascular problems .
Reassurance and pain relief is often given in the form of painkillers , such as non - steroidal anti - inflammatory medications , antihistamines and anti - anxiety medications .
In a severe case the affected limb can be elevated and diuretic medications can be administered .
Wound care principles and
sometimes antibiotics are used to keep the wound itself from becoming infected or necrotic .
In Barbados , a folk remedy involves applying a freshly cut onion to the site of the injury .
FAMOUS
CASE(S )
Section::::Famous case(s ) .
Naturalist Jacques - Henri Bernardin de Saint - Pierre reported that his dog died from a centipede bite during travels in Mauritius .
SEE ALSO
* Millipede burn * Skin lesion REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS