PERFUME INTOLERANCE Perfume intolerance or perfume allergy is a condition wherein people exhibit sensitivity or allergic reactions to ingredients in some perfumes and some other fragrances .
This condition is very common and studies show that about 30 % of the general population may suffer from it .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Symptoms depend on each person 's allergies and each perfume 's or fragrance 's ingredients .
Symptoms may include allergic contact dermatitis , asthma attacks , headaches , and others .
The most common allergic reactions to perfume or fragrances added to products is contact dermatitis , though other symptoms may occur , including allergic conjunctivitis .
The diagnosis of the causal allergen is made by patch testing with a mixture of fragrance ingredients , the fragrance mix .
This gives a positive patch - test reaction in about 10 % of tested patients with eczema , and the most recent estimates show that 1.7–4.1 % of the general population are sensitized to ingredients of the fragrance mix .
Two studies show that inhalant - like allergies and sensitivity / intolerances are experienced by a subset of the US population , in the form of asthma and chemical sensitivities .
Results aggregated from both surveys found that 30.5 % of the general population reported scented products on others irritating , 19 % reported adverse health effects from air fresheners , and 10.9 % reported irritation by scented laundry products vented outside .
Household products , such as soaps and detergents , perfume products , cosmetics , and other consumer goods , are estimated to use 2,500 different fragrance ingredients .
Of those , approximately 100 different substances are known to elicit responses in at least some individuals .
An estimated 1.7–4.1 % of the general population shows a contact allergic response to a mix of common perfume ingredients .
The diagnosis is made by patch testing with a mixture of fragrance ingredients , the fragrance mix .
This gives a positive patch - test reaction in about 10 % of tested patients with eczema , and the most recent estimates show that 1.7–4.1 % of the general population are sensitized to ingredients of the fragrance mix .
Although products can be labeled " fragrance - free " , many still contain lesser - known fragrance chemicals that consumers may not recognize .
Cinnamaldehyde ( cinnamic aldehyde ) is a common fragrance allergen .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Elberling J. , Linneberg A. , Dirksen A. , Johansen J. D. , Frølund L. , Madsen F. , et al .
Mucosal symptoms elicited by fragrance products in a population - based sample in relation to atopy and bronchial hyper - reactivity .
Clin .
Exp .
Allergy 2005
* Kumar P. , Caradonna - Graham V. M. , Gupta S. , Cai X. , Rao P. N. , Thompson J. Inhalation challenge effects of perfume scent strips in patients with asthma .
Ann .
Allergy Asthma Immunol .
1995