MUDBOUND Mudbound ( 2008 ) is the debut novel by American author Hillary Jordan .
It has been translated into French , Italian , Serbian , Norwegian , Swedish , and Turkish and has sold more than 250,000 copies worldwide .
The novel took Jordan seven years to write .
She started it while studying for an MFA in Creative Writing from Columbia University .
It was adapted as a 2017 film of the same title .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
In the winter of 1946 , Henry McAllen moves his city - bred wife , Laura , from their comfortable home in Memphis , Tennessee to a remote cotton farm in the Mississippi Delta — a place she finds both foreign and frightening .
While Henry works the land he loves , Laura struggles to raise their two young daughters in a crude shack with no indoor plumbing or electricity , under the eye of her hateful , racist father - in - law .
When it rains , the waters rise up and swallow the bridge to town , stranding the family in a sea of mud .
As the McAllens are being tested in every way , two celebrated soldiers of World War II return home to the Delta .
Jamie McAllen is everything his older brother Henry is not : charming , handsome , and sensitive to Laura 's plight , but also haunted by his memories of combat .
Ronsel Jackson , eldest son of the black tenant farmers who live on the McAllen farm , comes home from fighting the Nazis with the shine of a war hero , only to face far more personal — and dangerous — battles against the ingrained bigotry of his own countrymen .
It is the unlikely friendship of these two brothers - in - arms , and the passions they arouse in others , that drive the novel to its tragic conclusion .
AWARDS
* Won the 2006 Bellwether Prize for fiction , founded by author Barbara Kingsolver and awarded biennially to an unpublished work of fiction that addresses issues of social justice .
* Named as the 2008 ' Fiction book of the Year ' by the NAIBA ( New Atlantic Independent Booksellers Association )
* Won an Alex Award from the American Library Association in 2009 * Long - listed for the 2010 International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award
*
In addition , this was one of twelve New Voices for 2008 chosen by Waterstones UK , ranked as one of the Top Ten Debut Novels of the Decade by Paste Magazine , a Barnes & Noble Discover
Great New Writers pick , a Borders Original Voices selection , a Book Sense pick , a Richard & Judy New Writers Book Of The Month , and one of Indie Next 's top ten reading group suggestions for 2009 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reviews were generally positive :
* The San Antonio Express - News says " Jordan picks at the scabs of racial inequality that will perhaps never fully heal and brings just enough heartbreak to this intimate , universal tale , just enough suspense , to leave us contemplating how the lives and motives of these vivid characters might have been different . "
* Publishers Weekly concludes " Jordan convincingly inhabits each of her narrators , though some descriptive passages can be overly florid , and the denouement is a bit maudlin .
But these are minor blemishes on a superbly rendered depiction of the fury and terror wrought by racism . "
* Emma Hagestadt in The Independent wrote " Adultery and alcoholism , rough justice and racism may be the stock in trade of any number of Southern novels , but Jordan neatly sidesteps pat endings and solutions .
The novel 's alternating narrative voices work well .
Only Ronsel 's wartime flashbacks , which are uneasily shoe - horned into the homespun domestic drama , feel forced .
The flat landscape of the Delta and its sudden electric storms provide a suitably gothic backdrop for the shocking denouement to come .
The winner of Barbara Kingsolver 's Bellwether Prize for a novel " promoting social responsibility " , Hillary Jordan is happily a writer who puts her duty to entertain first " .
* Ron Charles in The Washington Post said Jordan " builds a compelling family tragedy , a confluence of romantic attraction and racial hatred that eventually falls like an avalanche .
Indeed , the last third of the book is downright breathless .
But , unfortunately , all of these narrators lack the essential quality of incompleteness .
They 're burdened with such thorough self - knowledge that the book has no room for dramatic irony .
" What we can not speak , " Jamie thinks toward the end , " we say in silence , " which is odd coming from a character who has already told us everything , including painful things we should have been allowed to infer .
Jordan has plenty of talent to compose an engaging story , and when she tries to do less , she may very well end up doing more . "
SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
Jordan is writing a sequel with the working title FATHERLANDS .
In MUDBOUND , black American GI Ronsel Jackson has a love affair with a white German woman during the American occupation of Bavaria ; when he ships out for home , neither know that she is pregnant .
The new novel centers on their illegitimate son , Franz , who is raised in Germany by his impoverished mother .
As one of the " Mischlingskinder , " mixed - race children who were the products of such controversial unions , he grows up feeling like an outsider who does n't belong .
When he is 7 , his mother is forced to put him into foster care .
At 18 , Franz sets off for America , determined to find the father he never knew .
There , he is caught up in the turmoil of the Civil Rights struggle and forced to navigate a complex tangle of race , history and politics in his search for self - realization .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS