CHARMING ( SONS OF ANARCHY )
Charming is a fictional town in the television series Sons of Anarchy .
APPROXIMATE LOCATION AND FICTIONAL STATISTICS Section::::Approximate location and fictional statistics .
According to a sign on the edge of town , Charming 's population is 14,679 , and the city motto is " Our Name Says It All " .
Charming covers and is located in San Joaquin County , California , in the upper part of the metro triangle , which is bounded by the Bay Area , Stockton , and Sacramento .
Show writer Kurt Sutter has stated that he envisions the town as being located between Lodi and Stockton , which would place it near the real - life Census - designated place of Morada , California .
At other times in the show , Charming is said to be from both Oakland and San Jose , and about from both Stockton and Lodi .
In Season 1 , the show 's official website gave GPS coordinates for Charming that placed it in the middle of an agricultural field along California SR 12 , about west of Interstate 5 , just under 1 mile north of the road .
These coordinates put Charming between Lodi and Rio Vista , California .
The website no longer includes these data .
In the Season 5 episode , " Crucified " ( at 15:58 ) , the side of the Teller - Morrow truck shows a 95206 ZIP Code , which corresponds with Stockton , and a phone number with a 925 area code , which is consistent with eastern Contra Costa and Alameda Counties , but not with San Joaquin County .
The town 's average high temperature in January is 54 ° F ( 12.2 ° C ) , and the average low is 38 ° F ( 3.3 ° C ) .
In July , the average high temperature is 94 ° F ( 34.4 ° C ) , and the average low is 61 ° F ( 16.1 ° C ) .
FICTIONAL HISTORY
Section::::Fictional history .
After the California Gold Rush ( 1848–1855 ) brought an influx of population to the region , lumber and agriculture became prominent industries in the area .
In 1859 , these pioneer settlers decided to establish a town where the ample Redwood country met the fertile Central Valley .
The town was originally named Timberville , but when two railroad land surveyors stopped in the town , one proclaimed it the last " charming " place for a railroad station before the very large , flat central valley .
The other declared he had just named it as such .
After the great San Francisco earthquake of 1906 , the town saw a small influx of settlers who left the Bay Area in search of a simpler , more stable life .
In the post - World War II baby boom , housing developers began to purchase several farmsteads and develop them with roads , utilities , and housing .
Once - rural orchards and ranches became picturesque middle - class neighborhoods and communities .
Some of these neighborhoods include Crestwood , Sellwood , Eastburough , and Buckhead ( known today as Sam Crow 's Corner ) .
Today , one of the most unusual qualities of Charming is that it 's maintained a classic Americana look and structure .
It is also rumored to have E Clampus Vitus activity in the early years , but can neither be confirmed nor denied .
The town is rural and largely working middle class .
Early industries in Charming included a lumber mill , saw mill , orchards , farming , and cattle ranching .
Today , Charming also has an auto manufacturing industry .
Oswald Lumber , Oswald Beef , and Oswald Construction are three of the town 's predominant companies .
Charming has managed to keep out unsightly chains , corporations , and franchises ; nearly all of its businesses are local and independent .
Local businesses include Floyd 's Barber Shop , Hoffman 's Pharmacy , Lumpy 's Family Restaurant , and Teller - Morrow Automotive Repair .
There is one hospital , St. Thomas Hospital .
The Charming Cherry is a cultivar that originated in the region and is noted for the contrast between its sweet skin and somewhat tart flesh .
LAW ENFORCEMENT Section::::Law enforcement .
Charming initially had its own police department headed by 30-year police veteran Chief Wayne Unser .
Chief Unser had close ties with the local Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club Redwood Original ( SAMCRO ) , and was known to be in the Club 's pay and a trusted ally of former President Clay Morrow .
David Hale served as Deputy Chief under Unser until he was killed in the line of duty during the wake for murdered SAMCRO member Half - Sack Epps .
After Unser retired , the San Joaquin County Sheriffs Department took responsibility for law enforcement in Charming , and the Charming Police Department became defunct .
Lieutenant Eli Roosevelt , a 20-year veteran of the San Joaquin County Sheriffs Department , headed the Department 's Charming / Morada Substation until his death in 2013 .
The substation is now being commanded by Lieutenant Althea Jarry .
SONS OF ANARCHY Section::::Sons of Anarchy .
One of the notable biker clubs in Northern California , the Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club , was founded in Charming .
The Club was formed in 1969 by John Teller and Piney Winston following their service in the Vietnam War , with the duo acting as President and Vice President respectively .
The Sons of Anarchy has become one of the most prevalent Clubs worldwide , with charters ranging from the United States to Northern Ireland and beyond .
However , the founding chapter remained in Charming , becoming known as Redwood Original or SAMCRO
( Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club Redwood Original ) .
Soon after the founding of SAMCRO , John and a close friend , Clay Morrow , opened up Teller - Morrow Automotive Repair as a front for the Club 's illegal activities .
After John Teller 's death in 1993 , Clay took over as President of SAMCRO , naming Alexander " Tig " Trager as Sergeant - At - Arms .
Piney remained Vice President until he was diagnosed with emphysema , upon which John 's oldest son Jax Teller became Vice President .
Soon after John Teller 's death in 1993 , Clay married Gemma Teller , Jax 's mother and John 's widow .
Until her death in 2014 , Gemma was considered the queen of Charming for her actions in the community , and was referred as " the gatekeeper " for her knowledge of the town and its inhabitants ' lives and secrets .
After a severe domestic dispute between Gemma and Clay in 2011 , they separated .
Following this , and the revelation that Clay killed both John Teller and Piney Winston , Jax personally stripped Clay of his position as President as well as his membership in the Club .
The Club voted for Clay to " Meet Mr Mayhem " , and Jax executed Clay for his crimes .
Jax became President in December 2011 , and originally intended to name Piney 's son and his childhood friend Opie as Vice President .
Following Opie 's murder , Jax officially named Robert " Bobby " Munson as his Vice President and Filip " Chibs " Telford as Sergeant - At - Arms .
When Bobby stepped down from the position in a dispute over Jax 's leadership of the Club , Chibs was named as Vice President with fellow member Happy Lowman taking over as Sergeant - At - Arms .
Following Jax Teller 's death by suicide in December 2014 , Chibs took over as President , naming Alexander " Tig " Trager as the new Vice President .
Happy Lowman continued to serve as Sergeant - At - Arms .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Charming at Sons of Anarchy