LIFE UNEXPECTED
Life Unexpected is an American teen drama television series that aired for two seasons from 2010 to 2011 .
It was produced by Best Day Ever Productions and Mojo Films in association with CBS Productions and Warner Bros. Television and broadcast by The CW .
Created by Liz Tigelaar , who served as an executive producer with Gary Fleder and Janet Leahy , the series stars Britt Robertson , Shiri Appleby , Kristoffer Polaha , and Kerr Smith .
Set in Portland , the story follows Lux Cassidy , a teenager who was given up at birth and has spent her life in foster care who finds her biological parents , Nate Bazile and Cate Cassidy .
Wishing to become emancipated , Lux is instead given in to their custody .
While Life Unexpected received mostly positive reviews , it struggled in the ratings and was canceled by The CW in 2011 .
The show has since been released on DVD , and it is available on Netflix as well as Amazon Video streaming services .
SERIES
OVERVIEW PLOT Section::::Plot .
Lux Cassidy ( Britt Robertson ) has been through the foster care system for almost her whole life .
Cate Cassidy ( Shiri Appleby ) gave birth to her at 16 but gave her up for adoption after Social Services promised her that the baby would be adopted quickly .
But the baby had heart problems ( ventricular septal defect ) and needed countless surgeries , so she was not a desirable candidate for adoption and ended up in the foster - care system and group homes .
Just before her 16th birthday , Lux petitions a court to become an emancipated minor , but she learns that she must get signatures from her unknown birth parents .
She locates her father , Nate Bazile ( Kristoffer Polaha ) , who operates the Open Bar inside a building his father gave him .
"
Baze " lives like an overgrown frat boy above the bar with two roommates : his childhood best friend Math ( Austin Basis ) , a high - school teacher ; and Jamie ( Reggie Austin ) , who also works at the bar .
However , even when he signs the papers , Baze discovers that he is already bonding with his newfound daughter , and realizes that she has his eyes .
Baze introduces Lux to her mother Cate Cassidy , co - host of the " Morning Madness " drive time show at Portland radio station K-100 and Baze 's former one - night stand from high school .
Lux has been listening to Cate 's voice on the radio for as long as she can remember , so she feels an instant connection to the mom
she 's never met .
Baze takes Lux to meet Cate , who is shocked and saddened to learn that Lux has grown up in foster care instead of the real adoptive home she had been promised her baby would have , and she 's reluctant to commit to her daughter .
Eventually Cate wants to be a part of Lux 's life , and she shows that she really does care .
When a judge decides that Lux is n't ready for emancipation and unexpectedly grants temporary joint custody to Baze and Cate , they agree to try to get past the awkwardness .
Because of her radio - host job and suitable house , Cate is given primary custody of Lux .
Ryan Thomas ( Kerr Smith ) , her radio - broadcast partner and fiancé , also bonds with Lux and is sometimes better able to reach her than her parents , because he 's faced issues similar to hers .
As the series progresses , Baze becomes more responsible and works harder to get the bar and the loft apartment in shape
so it 's fit for Lux to stay with him sometimes ; eventually he sets aside a corner of the loft for her bedroom .
Their close bond is causing slacker - esque Baze to prove that he can come through for Lux and provide support and love .
As for Cate , she constantly disappoints Lux , but she does mean well , and Alice ( Erin Karpluk ) , producer of her radio show , often serves as her much - needed confidante .
Ryan breaks up with Cate , but eventually they reconcile and the engagement is back on .
He also relents a bit towards Baze after the two have drinks and Baze explains that all he is to Cate is Lux 's father .
But by the series ' send , Baze and Ryan are good friends .
Baze 's bar is owned by his father Jack ( Robin Thomas ) , who considers Baze a disappointment , but softens towards him somewhat in later episodes , due to Lux 's entrance in their lives .
Baze himself later buys the bar .
Also seen is Cate 's four - times - divorced mother , who had convinced Cate to give up Lux ; and Baze 's level - headed , understanding mother Ellen ( Susan Hogan ) .
Both love Lux when they meet her , though Ellen seems to have the stronger grandmotherly bond with her .
Lux had been attending Longfellow High , a rough high school in Portland , but Cate enrolls her at Westmonte High , the alma mater of herself , Baze , and Math , and the institution at which Math currently teaches .
At first infuriated , Lux soon adapts and makes friends , among them popular Jones Mager ( Austin Butler ) who is the quarterback like her father was .
Meanwhile , she wonders how friends from her old life might fit into her new one .
Tasha Siviac has been her best friend since she was seven ( they met at Sunnyvale , the foster - care home ) , and Lux hopes to stay in touch with her , her boyfriend Gavin , and
Lux 's own first boyfriend Bug , who has been in trouble with the law ; this might imperil Lux 's new life with Baze and Cate .
Lux 's longtime social worker Fern Redmund is instrumental in helping Cate and Baze get their parental rights reinstated and helping the three become an official family .
Fern thus becomes a family friend .
At various times Baze incurs Cate 's wrath by sleeping with Cate 's younger sister , Lux 's Aunt Abby , a neurotic therapist and yoga practitioner .
Baze also sleeps with Ryan 's sister Paige after a drunk incident in season two .
Lux meets a young man , Eric Daniels , at Baze 's bar ; after she goes on a date with him she discover that he is her new teacher .
The second season deals with this affair , which ends when Eric leaves town when Cate and Baze threaten to call the police if he does n't resign his job and leave Portland ; Cate and Ryan 's new marriage and attempts to conceive ; and Baze 's relationship with coworker Emma Bradshaw who has a son , Sam .
Later Tasha becomes more a part of the family 's life after she strikes out on her own .
Bug and Gavin disappear , Bug having left town after Lux rejected his marriage proposal .
Cate miscarried her child with Ryan because of a condition she developed after having Lux .
Lux being the only child she would ever have created a stronger bond between mother and daughter , and Lux finally realizes that she has a real mom who loves her and wo n't let anything or anyone harm her .
After nearly giving in to desire , Baze breaks up with Emma after learning from Lux that Emma had had an affair with his dad .
It did n't happen when Baze was going out with her , but it meant his dad cheating on his mother , and he decided that he could never be with Emma without thinking of his father .
The show then fast - forwards two years to Lux delivering the commencement speech at her graduation .
It is revealed that Ryan and Julia are together and have a young son from their affair , and that Baze and Cate are finally together as a couple .
Math and Alice are married and expecting .
Jones also kisses Lux , revealing that they end up together , and Tasha is seen happy for them .
At the end , the family and friends take a photo together .
CAST
* Britt Robertson as Lux Cassidy * Megan Charpentier as Young Little Lux Cassidy
* Shiri Appleby as Cate Cassidy
* Kristoffer Polaha as Nathaniel " Baze " Bazile * Kerr Smith as
Ryan Thomas
* Austin Basis as Matthew " Math " Rogers * Ksenia Solo as Natasha " Tash " Siviac * Emma Caulfield as Emma Bradshaw * Arielle Kebbel as Paige * Austin Butler as Jones Mager * Lucia Walters as Fern Redmund
* Erin Karpluk as Alice * Rafi Gavron as Bobby
" Bug " Guthrie * Shaun Sipos as Eric Daniels
* Landon Liboiron as Sam * Reggie Austin as Jamie BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Creator Liz Tigelaar came up with the idea for the show in 2007 and developed it with director Gary Fleder .
Tigelaar and Fleder pitched the show , then titled Light Years , to ABC Studios who accepted it .
They then sold the show to The CW .
In September 2008 , The CW ordered the show to pilot .
After the pilot was ordered , ABC then dropped the show for financial reasons .
The show was then picked up by CBS Television Studios .
The pilot was filmed in January 2009 , being written by Tigelaar and directed by Fleder .
Both also served as executive producers .
The CW announced the series in January 2009 under the working title of Light Years because the main character Lux 's name means Light .
According to Tigelaar , the title " tested way too sci - fi " and it was changed to LUX ( the name of one of the lead characters ) in April .
This was quickly changed again into Life Unexpected , but at The CW Upfronts in May , the series was promoted as Parental Discretion Advised .
That June , the network reverted to the name Life UneXpected , again highlighting the name of the main character in capital letters .
Initial advertising for the series in fall 2009 listed it without the capitalized " X " , which became the final version as it appears now .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
While the show is set in Portland , Oregon , most of the filming was done in Vancouver , British Columbia .
Many external scenes are also filmed in Portland , Oregon .
Including scenes of the many Portland bridges , MAX Lightrail , China Town Arch , Portland 's Amtrak Union Station , and many other Portland locations .
Scenes of Westmonte High are filmed at Sutherland Secondary School in North Vancouver and H. J. Cambie Secondary School in Richmond , British Columbia .
The exterior of Baze 's bar is located on Granville Island and the Ironworks Building in Vancouver .
North Shore Studios , formally Lionsgate , was used as the primary studio for season one while Coast Mountain Film Studios housed the show for the second and final season .
The show premiered on The CW on Monday , January 18 , 2010 .
The 13-episode first season run ended on April 12 , 2010 .
The series was picked up for a second season , for an initial thirteen episode order , which premiered on September 14 , 2010 , airing on Tuesdays at 9/8c following One Tree Hill .
In October 2010 , The CW ordered two additional scripts .
In November 2010 The CW declined to order the back 9 episodes for the show 's second and final season , leaving the season 's episode count at 13 .
Members of the cast campaigned to save the show .
On December 6 , 2010 , series creator , Liz Tigelaar made the TV show 's cancellation official via Twitter .
ONE TREE HILL CROSSOVER Section::::One Tree Hill crossover .
In an attempt to improve Life Unexpected 's ratings by attracting One Tree Hill viewers , The CW aired a crossover event involving both programs on October 12 , 2010 .
Beginning with One Tree Hill installment
" Nobody Taught Us to Quit " ,
Haley James Scott ( Bethany Joy Lenz ) and Mia Catalano ( Kate Voegele ) traveled to Portland ( where Life Unexpected is set ) to perform at the Sugar Magnolia Music Festival hosted by K-100 .
Haley and Cate meet in the crossover and are " surprised to learn that they share a similar back story [ as ] mothers . "
" Music Faced , " the Life Unexpected episode of the crossover , also featured Sarah McLachlan , Ben Lee and Rain Perry whose song " Beautiful Tree " serves as the series ' opening theme .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2010 )
SEASON 2
( 2010–11 ) Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Season 2 ( 2010–11 ) .
The series was renewed by The CW for a second season on May 20 , 2010 .
It was also moved to Tuesday nights at 9:00 p.m. RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The first season of Life Unexpected scored a 69 out of 100 on Metacritic .
The series has garnered mostly positive feedback , with many reviews favorably comparing the show to the critically acclaimed series Gilmore Girls and Everwood .
Maureen Ryan , from the Chicago Tribune , stated that the show " recall[s ] the good things about shows like Gilmore Girls and Everwood , " and similarly , Hank Stuever from The Washington Post called it " a pleasant mix of a little Juno hipitude and a lot of Everwood glow . "
Furthermore , the Chicago Tribune review called Life Unexpected a program " that parents and their older kids could enjoy together without feeling condescended to , " and The Boston Globe 's Matthew Gilbert states that " the show works , in its own hokey , feel - good , alt - soundtrack way . "
Show writer Liz Tigelaar ( who has also worked on Brothers & Sisters , American Dreams , and Once and Again ) , has received much praise .
A review in the Los Angeles Times called Tigelaar 's writing smart and insightful .
Similarly , Randee Dawn , from The Hollywood Reporter stated that Tigelaar " has a delicate , spot - on feel for dialogue . "
The Futon Critic 's Brian Ford Sullivan singled out writer Liz Tigelaar and director Gary Fleder for adeptly exploring Lux 's perceived lack of love in her life .
On a negative note , a review in the Chicago Sun Times by Paige Wiser called the show " somewhat predictable " and
The Post 's Stuever adds that Life Unexpected " burns off its most interesting plot twist [ ... ] in the first 20 minutes . "
RATINGS Section::::Ratings . !
rowspan="2"Season !
rowspan="2"Timeslot ( ET ) !
rowspan="2 " # Ep . !
colspan="3"Original Airing !
rowspan="2"Rank !
rowspan="2"Viewers(in millions ) !
rowspan="2"Network !
Season Premiere !
Season Finale !
TV Season ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Life Unexpected was nominated for " Choice TV Breakout Show " at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In Canada the show premiered on the free - to - air channel CBC Television and on the pay TV channel YTV Canada .
In Europe the show premiered on E4 for the United Kingdom from September 19 , 2010 , on Sixx for Germany from January 4 , 2011 and on RTÉ Two for Ireland from August 2011 .
In Oceania the show premiered on MediaWorks ' C4 for New Zealand from October 2010 and on Network Ten for Australia from November 5 , 2011 .
In India the show premiered on Big CBS Prime from February 2013 .
HOME MEDIA RELEASES Section::::Home media releases .
The two seasons were released together on DVD in Region 1 on April 5 , 2011 .
It was later released in Region 4 in 2012 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS