LEFT 4 DEAD 2 Left 4 Dead 2 is a cooperative first - person shooter video game developed and published by Valve Corporation .
The sequel to Turtle Rock Studios 's Left 4 Dead , the game was released for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 in November 2009 , and for OS X in October 2010 , and for Linux in July 2013 .
Left 4 Dead 2 builds upon cooperatively focused gameplay and Valve 's proprietary Source engine , the same game engine used in the original Left 4 Dead .
Set during the aftermath of an apocalyptic pandemic , Left 4 Dead 2 focuses on four new Survivors , fighting against hordes of zombies , known as the Infected , who develop severe psychosis and act extremely aggressive .
The Survivors must fight their way through five campaigns , interspersed with safe houses that act as checkpoints , with the goal of escape at each campaign 's finale .
The gameplay is procedurally altered by the " AI Director 2.0 " , which monitors the players ' performance and adjusts the scenario to provide a dynamic challenge .
Other new features include new types of special infected and an arsenal of melee weapons .
The game made its world premiere at E3 2009 with a trailer during the Microsoft press event .
Prior to release , it received a combination of positive and negative critical and community reactions .
It attracted an unusually high volume of pre - release controversy about the game 's graphic content .
In response , alterations were made to the cover art and both Australia and Germany refused to rate the unmodified edition at the time of release .
After release however , the game was met with positive reviews by critics .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Like its predecessor , Left 4 Dead 2 is a first - person shooter with a heavy emphasis on cooperative gameplay .
The game presents five new campaigns , each composed of three to five smaller levels .
As in the first game , each campaign is presented in menus and loading screens as a film starring the four Survivors ; and features , upon completing a campaign , a faux credits screen which acts as the final scoreboard for the players and recaps certain performance statistics for the group .
In every campaign , most levels involve the Survivors attempting to reach a safe zone and close the door once they are all safely inside .
However , the final level in each campaign requires the Survivors to call for rescue and either survive a prolonged onslaught until rescue arrives , pass through an especially challenging gauntlet of Infected to reach an escape vehicle , or ( in Dead Center and The Passing ) collect and utilize fuel cans to enable their escape .
Each Survivor can carry one each of five categories of equipment : primary weapons , secondary weapons , throwable weapons , major medical supplies ( which also includes ammunition upgrades ) and minor medical supplies .
Primary weapons are broken down into four tiers based on their availability and attributes .
Tier one weapons ( such as the SMG and Chrome Shotgun ) deal damage relatively slowly and serve as basic offensive weapons .
Tier two weapons ( such as the Assault Rifle and Combat Shotgun ) deal damage faster and often appear in later maps of each chapter .
The two tier three weapons ( Grenade Launcher and M60 ) differ from tier one and two weapons both because of their rarity and because players can not refill their ammunition from ammunition dumps .
They deal damage quickly at the cost of limited ammo .
Tier four weapons are all mounted weapon systems and carry unlimited ammunition .
The mounted weapons deal damage the fastest , but at the cost of overheating after a period of non - stop use .
The mounted weapons are in set positions in maps and have a fixed arc of fire .
They can not be given ammunition upgrades like other weapons and players can not utilize the laser sights attachment with them .
There are three types of secondary weapons available :
melee weapons , small caliber pistols ( that can be dual wielded ) and large caliber pistols .
Although melee weapons cause extra damage to Infected when struck , the Survivors can use any other weapon or item for weaker melee attacks that can push the Infected back .
Players also carry a flashlight with infinite battery life , the use of which enables players to see in the dark ( with the downside of the player gaining the attention of the Infected much faster ) .
They may also carry a single first aid kit , special ammo pack , or a defibrillator in their major medical supply slot ; in addition to either pain pills or an adrenaline shot in their minor medical supply slot .
They may also carry a single throwable weapon — Molotov cocktails to set an area on fire ; pipe bombs to attract any nearby Infected to the flashing light and sound it makes until it explodes ; and jars of Boomer bile , which attracts Common Infected to whatever it hits ( e.g. fires , Special Infected , each other ) .
To enable situational awareness of other Survivors , players are shown the health and status of their fellow survivors .
If a player does not have direct sight of another Survivor ( e.g. a wall is blocking their view of the others ) , they will be shown the Survivor 's highlighted silhouette .
The Survivors are also susceptible to friendly fire , forcing players to exercise caution when shooting or swinging their weapons .
As Survivors take damage , they move more slowly ; if a Survivor 's health drops to zero , they are incapacitated and left to fight off the Infected using a handgun until rescued by another Survivor .
If a Survivor dies , they remain dead until the next level , unless revived by a defibrillator , or , in Campaign or Singleplayer mode , reappear in a " Rescue Closet " to be freed by other Survivors .
Should all Survivors die or be incapacitated , the game will end , at which point the players may restart that chapter or quit the game .
GAME MODES Section::::Game modes .
Left 4 Dead 2 includes 5 regular game modes : * Campaign : up to four human players fight against the Infected to make their way through Campaign stages ; any Survivor not controlled by a human player is controlled by the computer .
* A Singleplayer mode allows players to play without intrusion from human players , working through the Campaign stages with three computer - controlled Survivor allies .
* Versus : up to four other human players take control of various Special Infected to try and prevent the Survivors from completing a stage .
Special Infected are randomly assigned to Infected players ; they can not control the Witch or any Common Infected .
Occasionally , as determined by the AI Director , certain players will become the Tank .
The two teams swap sides once per stage , and are scored based on their stage progress as Survivors .
If both teams make it to the saferoom with all four Survivors , a 25-point tiebreaker is awarded to the team that dealt the most combined damage as Special Infected .
* Survival : a timed challenge where the Survivors are trapped in a section of the campaign maps , and try to survive as long as possible against an unending onslaught of Infected .
* Scavenge : a new 4-on-4 mode that requires the Survivor players to collect and use as many fuel cans scattered about a level to fill up a power generator , while the Infected players attempt to stop them .
Left 4 Dead 2 also features a Realism mode , which can be enabled at any difficulty for either Campaign or Versus .
This mode removes some of the video - game aspects from the gameplay : Survivors can not see each other 's silhouettes , and dead teammates can only be revived with defibrillators and will not respawn later in the level .
Weapons and other items will only glow when the player is within a few feet , forcing the players to search the levels more thoroughly .
Headshots to enemies deal more damage , whereas limb or body shots require more shots .
In addition , the Witch enemy can kill any Survivor she would have normally incapacitated ( on difficulties other than Easy ) .
Designed to force players to work closely together and rely on voice communication , Valve created Realism mode to give players a way " to be challenged as a team " without having to increase the difficulty level of the game .
Finally , in later versions of the game , there is a Mutation option , in which players can select from a menu of 30 variations , some singleplayer , some multiplayer ( and some of the latter cooperative , some versus , or both ) .
Each variation changes one or more major game dynamics , such as : constantly draining health , solo mode with no Survivor allies , death upon incapacitation , only one kind of weapon available , coop that later switches to versus , shooting or targeting constraints , an enemy type with increased power , increased numbers of Special Infected , etc .
One of these modes , named GunBrain , is a weapons stats analyzer .
THE INFECTED Section::::The Infected .
While also referred to as zombies , the Infected are humans who have contracted a mutated strain of an infection , though neither the source nor nature of this " Green Flu " are made clear in the games .
The most numerous Infected encountered by the survivors are the common Infected .
Though individually weak , they can swarm and overwhelm the Survivors , especially when separated from their teammates .
Damage to the infected in Left 4 Dead 2 is portrayed more realistically , with bullets and melee weapons ripping off bits of flesh and , in some cases , limbs .
A new addition to Left 4 Dead 2 is the Uncommon Infected unique to each campaign .
By virtue of location and equipment worn pre - infection , they possess abilities that separate them from the Common Infected .
For example , the Dead Center campaign introduces infected CEDA agents in hazmat suits , making them fireproof ; Dark Carnival includes clowns , whose squeaking shoes attract small hordes of Common Infected ; and The Parish includes infected private security contractors in riot gear , making them bulletproof from the front .
As in the first game , there are special Infected whose mutations grant them special abilities that make them highly dangerous , which act as bosses .
The presence of such Infected nearby is hinted at by sound effects or musical cues unique to each type .
The five Special Infected from the first game return in Left 4 Dead 2 , some with modified behavior and skin models : * The Boomer : an extremely bloated Infected who vomits bile .
The bile attracts a horde of Common Infected on contact with Survivors and also momentarily blinds them .
Upon death , they explode and can also spray bile onto nearby Survivors .
* The Hunter : an agile male Infected that can pounce on and incapacitate Survivors from great distances , tearing at them until the Survivor dies or another Survivor shoves him off / kills him .
*
The Smoker : a male Infected with a long tongue that it uses to ensnare Survivors from a distance , continually choking them .
Upon death , he releases a cloud of smoke that can obscure the Survivors ' vision and cause them to cough , should they come in direct contact with the smoke .
* The Tank : a gigantic , extremely muscular Infected male with the strength to punch Survivors off their feet some distance , as well as toss cars and concrete slabs .
Unless the Survivors work as a team , they will be quickly incapacitated or even killed by the Tank 's inhuman strength .
* The Witch : a crying Infected woman who , when provoked by either damage , loud sounds , light , or proximity of survivors , will attack the provoker and any other Survivors after her provoker is dead .
She can incapacitate or even kill a Survivor in one hit .
Left 4 Dead 2 introduces a variant of the Witch that wanders aimlessly in the open .
Left 4 Dead 2 also introduces three new Special Infected : * The Charger : a male Infected with an enormous right arm , and can charge into the Survivors , capturing and carrying one Survivor away from the others , sending any others in his path flying to the side after a capture and stunning survivors upon hitting an obstacle in a charge .
He may then pummel his captured Survivor into the ground , rendering that Survivor helpless until one of their teammates helps them by killing the charger or stunning it with frag rounds .
* The Spitter : a female Infected that spits out balls of stomach acid that splatter across an area , quickly eroding the Survivors ' health as long as they remain within it .
She also leaves a puddle of goo upon death .
The longer a player loiters in the goo , the faster their health drops .
* The Jockey : a male Infected that jumps onto a Survivor 's back and steers them into other Infected or environmental hazards ( e.g. Spitter goo ) , whilst clawing at the player 's head until the player is incapacitated , killed , or shoved off .
THE AI DIRECTOR 2.0 Section::::The AI Director 2.0 .
As in the first game , an artificial intelligence system called the AI Director drives gameplay by procedurally spawning enemies , weapons and items based on players ' performance during any given campaign .
In Left 4 Dead 2 , the Director has been improved to encourage more participation by players , forcing players through difficult gauntlets to reach safety .
It also has the ability to alter elements of the level , such as placement of walls , level layout , lighting , and weather conditions , making each play session unique .
The Director now rewards players for taking longer or more difficult paths through each episode by providing useful equipment , such as special ammo packs or higher tier weapons , along these riskier paths .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Like its predecessor , Left 4 Dead 2 is set in the aftermath of a worldwide pandemic of an infectious disease known as the " Green Flu " , which rapidly transforms humans into zombie - like creatures and mutated forms that demonstrate extreme aggression towards non - infected ( much like the infected in 28 Days Later ) .
Few humans are immune to the disease , still carrying the infection but showing no symptoms .
The Civil Emergency and Defense Agency ( CEDA ) and the U.S. Military create safe zones to attempt to evacuate as many American survivors as possible .
Left 4 Dead 2 introduces four new Survivors — Coach , Ellis , Nick , and Rochelle , who are immune to the disease and have individual back stories that are provided through character dialogue .
While the game is intended as a continuation of the original , occurring one week after the first game begins , Valve decided to create a new group of Survivors due to the change in location .
Like the first game , the five campaigns in Left 4 Dead 2 are set across a story arc , set in the Southern United States , which starts in Savannah , Georgia , and ends in New Orleans , Louisiana .
The four Survivors have to fight their way through hordes of Infected , using safehouses along the way to rest and recuperate in order to reach extraction points .
CHARACTERS
Section::::Characters .
Left 4 Dead 2 features a new cast of human Survivors , which include : Coach ( voiced by Chad Coleman ) , a portly high - school football coach with a bad knee
( although it does not affect gameplay )
; Nick ( voiced by Hugh Dillon , motion capture by Adam Karst ) , a cold and sarcastic gambler and con artist ; Rochelle ( voiced by Rochelle Aytes ) , a low - level production assistant reporting on the evacuation for a local television station ; and Ellis ( voiced by Eric Ladin ) , a friendly ( and rather talkative ) mechanic who often talks about his friend Keith and their many misadventures .
In addition to the four playable characters , Left 4 Dead 2 also features a supporting character in the form of Virgil ( voiced by Randall Newsome ) , a Cajun boat captain , who appears ( voice only ) in the game 's final three campaigns .
STORY Section::::Story .
The Sacrifice DLC campaign takes place before the main events of Left 4 Dead 2 ; and after the events of The Sacrifice comic .
The original survivors of Left 4 Dead — Bill , Francis , Louis , and Zoey — arrive at the portside town of Rayford , in order to search for a boat that can take them to the Florida Keys .
After finding an adequate sailboat , the Survivors have to manually start up generators in order to lift a bridge for their boat to pass through .
One Survivor ( canonically Bill ) sacrifices himself in order to kick - start a generator once it gives out , so that the others may reach safety .
This is the end of Bill 's story in the Left 4 Dead video game series .
Left 4 Dead 2 opens in Dead Center ( set in Savannah , Georgia ) , where the four Survivors find themselves abandoned on a hotel roof by rescue helicopters .
They decide to head for the local mall , where a second CEDA evacuation point is located .
After a brief encounter with a gun store owner , Whitaker ( voiced by Dayton Callie ) , the Survivors discover that the mall is overrun , with all CEDA agents having become either dead or infected as well .
Ellis helps the group use a stock car to bust out of the mall and travel towards New Orleans , rumored to be the last standing city in America .
The Passing DLC campaign takes place between Dead Center and Dark Carnival , and after the events of The Sacrifice campaign .
The Survivors of L4D2 arrive at the bridge in Rayford , where they meet Francis , Louis , and Zoey .
As they need to cross the bridge to proceed , the Survivors need to find another way across to refill the generator with gas .
After fighting their way through a wedding reception ( complete with a Witch bride ) , the streets , and a historic under - the - river tour , they meet up again with the original Survivors , who help by covering for the group while they fill the generator and lowering the bridge once it 's full .
At the start of the Dark Carnival campaign , the four Survivors find the highway ahead completely blocked by ditched vehicles , and are forced to travel on foot through an abandoned ( but still - operating ) amusement park .
After navigating their way to the park stadium , Coach devises a plan to use a large - scale light show used by a rock band , The Midnight Riders , in order to signal a helicopter pilot for rescue .
After being rescued , they later discover that their pilot has been Infected .
When the pilot starts attacking them , Nick is forced to kill him ( echoing a similar situation in Left 4 Dead ) , causing the chopper to crash into a bayou , the setting for Swamp Fever .
Working their way through the swamps , the group comes across a crashed airplane , dead military paratroopers , and isolated swamp villages which had held out against the Infected but were eventually overrun .
After spending the morning fighting through the swamp , the group arrives at a plantation mansion and make radio contact with Virgil , a Cajun boat captain who can assist them ; however , his boat begins to run low on diesel fuel on the way to New Orleans .
As a tumultuous rainstorm approaches ( the titular Hard Rain of the subsequent campaign ) , the Survivors go ashore at Ducatel , Mississippi ; make their way through an abandoned ( and Witch - infested ) sugarcane mill to a gas station to get diesel fuel , and return to signal Virgil with an improvised " flare " .
In the final campaign , The Parish , Virgil drops the group off at New Orleans , where the military appears to be evacuating civilians across a bridge .
On the way there , the four discover the city overrun with Infected , and that the military is actually leaving the city before it is destroyed by an air strike .
The group manages to reach the bridge , where they make contact with the military .
Judging from their dialogue , the military pilots suspect the Survivors to be " carriers " , similar to the original Survivors of Left 4 Dead .
After securing their rescue helicopter , the Survivors lower and cross the bridge , escaping on the helicopter just as the bridge is destroyed .
While the Survivors ' fate is left unclear after this point , Chet Faliszek , the game 's writer , back in 2009 said that the military is taking survivors to cruise ships in the Caribbean in an attempt to escape the infection .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Development for Left 4 Dead 2 started shortly after the release of the first game — following a short break — building on ideas from the development team to make the next game " bigger and better " .
The game was given the codename " Carnation " to prevent revealing its details before its official announcement ; Valve also considered a new title for the game , Back 4 More , though they eventually dropped it for Left 4 Dead 2 .
Chet Faliszek stated that Left 4 Dead 2s story would explore more of the world of the game , and that Valve had created a full story for the cause and effects of the infection pandemic , including terms that they have used for the AI Director .
Each campaign was purposely designed with a different feel ; however , all five campaigns were mapped out at the same time by the entire team to provide the narrative flow and ensure the uniqueness of each campaign .
The team used a Left 4 Dead dictionary developed to describe level design and flow within the game to provide a common language for developing the levels .
Left 4 Dead 2 contains about 7,800 unique lines of dialogue , a 40 % increase over Left 4 Dead .
The writers designed the characters and selected appropriate voice actors who had natural accents for their lines and allowed the actors freedom to help authenticate the roles .
They would attend recording sessions for the voice actors and allow them to ad - lib their lines for their characters , often getting new ideas for character dialogue to be recorded later , particularly in the case of Ellis ( voiced by Eric Ladin ) and Nick ( Hugh Dillon ) .
Randall Newsome , the voice of the boat captain Virgil , was a local actor from Louisiana who naturally spoke Cajun and helped to embellish the role better than the writers could .
Faliszek wanted to include a " no - nonsense " woman from a Department of Motor Vehicles , but this character did not make the cut .
The developers solicited several bands to include them in the game : Depeche Mode responded eagerly , and allowed Valve to use its music and other imagery in the game , such as on Rochelle 's T - shirt .
In introducing the new Infected , the development team had to consider how the new abilities would mesh with the existing Infected and any changes they had made to them .
One discarded idea for a new Infected included the " Leaker " ;
the creature , when having taken damage , would shoot out spouts of goo at the survivors , and then would be able to self - detonate like the Boomer .
However , this sacrificial act would have given survivors time to escape , and the idea was dropped , though features of the Leaker were built into the Spitter .
In development , the programmers wanted to find a way to provide more variation and visual effects for the players , although they were already strained by memory limitations on the Xbox 360 for Left 4 Dead .
One key development factor was recognizing a way to create greater variation in the appearance of the common infected through a number of modeling and rendering tasks .
Simple changes of the underlying geometry of the model , either the head or the body , with the resulting effects on the texture mapping was one means to create apparent variation .
Another means was created by using different head textures along with various blood and dirt maps , and similarly different wounds applied to the body texture .
A final means to alter the tone of both the skin and the clothing worn by the infected .
As a result , a single infected model could have up to 24,000 variations within the game .
This allowed Valve to effectively only keep two to six common infected core models in memory for each level , leaving only the unique infected for each campaign and the special infected as their own unique models .
As a result , the memory use for the infected dropped by 50 % .
Valve 's programmers also sought how to better represent damage the players did to the infected by showing inflicted wounds in the appropriate location and in a manner based on the weapon used , allowing for the inclusion of more resilient infected creatures in advanced game modes .
They had simulated this in Left 4 Dead by having five possible character models that would result from a fatal attack but felt this could be advanced further .
Already limited by memory concerns on the Xbox 360 that prevented further variations on the core infected models , the team devised a system of using textures with transparencies combined with ellipsoid culling from any infected character model to simulate the wounds , with several graphical process simplifications to avoid taxing the rendering system .
This allowed the team to simulate up to two such wounds on each infected using only 13 % of the memory resources of the based system in Left 4 Dead .
Another visual aspect that the Valve team explored was the rendering of water , particularly in the " Swamp Fever " campaign , which takes place mostly in a large swamp area .
Valve found early play - testers would become confused with the large , tree - covered map , but by adding hints of water movement in the direction they were to go , there was a significant reduction in players becoming lost on the map .
The water maps were created by using the 3D animation tool Houdini against its landscape maps to create realistic water flow patterns as surface maps .
These surface maps were then applied in a " flowing " manner instead of the scrolling manner used in previous games .
These water effects were further expanded upon for Valve 's next game , Portal 2 .
Doug Lombardi , vice - president of marketing for Valve , noted that the SDK released for Left 4 Dead would also be compatible with Left 4 Dead 2 .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
PC and Xbox 360 players who pre - ordered Left 4 Dead 2 through participating retailers gained early access to the game 's demo , which was released on October 27 , 2009 for Xbox Live and October 28 , 2009 for PC players , and an exclusive baseball bat melee weapon to be used in game .
Pre - ordering the PC version of the game through the Steam network also unlocks Bill 's beret from Left 4 Dead for use in the PC version of Team Fortress 2 .
Also , when a person buys the game and starts up Team Fortress 2 , they will get a frying pan as a melee weapon and Ellis ' hat as an in - game hat .
The demo became available for all PC and Xbox Live Gold users on November 4 , 2009 with Xbox Live Silver users gaining access on November 11 , 2009 .
The demo features the first two maps in " The Parish " campaign .
On October 5 , 2009 , Valve announced that Left 4 Dead 2 would be promoted by a $ 25 million advertising campaign , exceeding the $ 10 million that supported Left 4 Dead .
The campaign includes television advertisements during sporting events , on billboards and magazines ; and more aggressive advertising for Europe .
RELEASE AND UPDATES Section::::Release and updates .
Left 4 Dead 2 was released on Steam on November 17 , 2009 .
Retail copies were made available some days after , depending on the country .
In March 2010 , Valve announced that it would be bringing the Steam content platform to Mac OS X computers ; along with it , Steam will be providing native versions of existing Valve games including Left 4 Dead 2 and its predecessor .
The games will support cross - platform play , allowing Mac players to play alongside PC players on the same servers , and will also be part of its Steam Play cross - compatible and Steam Cloud titles , allowing a player who has purchased the game on one platform to download and play it on the other platform for free .
The Mac OS X client was released on October 5 , 2010 .
With the introduction of a Linux client for Steam , Valve has affirmed that Left 4 Dead 2 will be developed for Linux .
The Linux version of Left 4 Dead 2 was released on May 3 , 2013 .
On December 25 , 2013 , Valve released the game for free for new players .
The Christmas update also included a special achievement called " Ghost of Christmas Present , " awarded to veteran players who helped the free holiday players survive in the game 's campaign mode .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
On December 14 , 2009 , Valve announced the first DLC installment for Left 4 Dead 2 , " The Passing " .
Though initially planned to be released sometime in March 2010 , " The Passing " was released on April 22 , 2010 .
The content costs 560 Microsoft Points for the Xbox 360 and is free for PC and Mac users .
The campaign , taking place between the " Dead Center " and " Dark Carnival " campaigns , features the cast of Left 4 Dead 2 meeting with three of the survivors from the original Left 4 Dead .
The new group learns that the fourth original survivor , Bill , sacrificed himself to allow his comrades to continue on safely .
The title " The Passing " can be interpreted in several ways ; to Bill 's passing , the brief passing encounter between the two groups , and of the first group of survivors " passing the torch " to the next .
"
The Passing " contains references to other zombie - themed works , including the games Dead Rising and Plants vs. Zombies , and the movies 28 Days Later , Shaun of the Dead , Dawn of the Dead and its remake .
The add - on also features two new weapons , an M60 machine gun which becomes unusable once depleted of ammo , and a golf club for melee .
A prequel to " The Passing " , titled " The Sacrifice " , was released on October 5 , 2010 , as an add - on for both Left 4 Dead and Left 4 Dead 2 .
This prequel ties up the story of the original game , showing the events leading to the meeting of the two groups of survivors in " The Passing " from the point of the Left 4 Dead characters .
However , players can choose which character will sacrifice themselves for the others to safely continue on and not just the canonical choice of Bill .
Valve also provided the full " No Mercy " campaign from Left 4 Dead as a Left 4 Dead 2 campaign , which is playable with the original Survivors from Left 4 Dead .
Though the maps are nearly identical to their appearance in Left 4 Dead , No Mercy in Left 4 Dead 2 contains all of the enhancements of the sequel , including the new Special Infected , Uncommon Infected , melee weapons , additional guns , and the ability to use the new game modes , including Mutations and Scavenge mode .
An additional community - created downloadable content package , called " Cold Stream " , was released July 24 , 2012 for Xbox 360 and PC .
Valve has announced testing had begun on the Xbox 360 , as well as for all the original Left 4 Dead maps via L4D Blog .
The content is in public beta , available to players for testing and data collection on any issues , with a complete release date on 24 July .
On July 24 it was announced that Valve did not send the downloadable content package to Microsoft .
On August 1 , 2012 , it was announced that Cold Stream would be made available for Xbox 360 on August 3 , at the price point of 560 MSP ( $ 7 ) .
A proposed content package and tie - in for the 2012 horror film The Cabin in the Woods was in the works , but the project dissolved after the film 's original production company , MGM , filed for bankruptcy .
The film 's director , Drew Goddard , commented on what the downloadable content would have included , stating : " The game was gon na be amazing .
You were gon na be able to play in both the upstairs Cabin in the Woods world and the downstairs ' facility ' world with all the monsters .
Believe me ,
I HATE all video games based on movies , they always suck , but porting Cabin into Left For Dead felt like the right fit .
It pains me that it did n't happen .
" Valve did allow the filmmakers to include the Left 4 Dead 2 bosses as monsters to populate some of the scenes in the film despite the failed project .
On April 4 , 2013 a Resident Evil 6 crossover DLC was released for the PC version .
It adds the main characters and two monsters from Left 4 Dead 2 to the PC - exclusive The Mercenaries : No Mercy mode in Resident Evil 6 .
Also three monsters from Resident Evil 6 are added as replacement skins to existing monsters on the PC version of Left 4 Dead 2 .
On August 20 , 2015 , an update for the game Zombie Army Trilogy was released , which imported the eight survivors from both Left 4 Dead games into ZAT .
MUTATIONS Section::::Mutations .
Mutations are modifications on Left 4 Dead 2s game modes , which have been offered every week after " The Passing " 's release ; these game modes alter the conditions of play .
All Mutations are now available through an update , making them selectable in the PC version .
At this time Valve added the " Realism Versus " mutation to the game as a permanent game mode .
All Mutations became available for Xbox 360 users with the release of Cold Stream .
COMMUNITY MODIFICATION
SUPPORT Section::::Community modification support .
Similar to Left 4 Dead and other Source Engine - based games , a number of players have constructed new maps , campaigns , and other variations for Left 4 Dead 2 , supported by Valve through their software development kit for the game .
With the kit , players have found ways to include the original Left 4 Dead campaigns into Left 4 Dead 2 .
Players have also found ways to increase the number of survivors up to 16 , duplicating the graphics for the existing survivor characters as needed .
In August 2010 , Valve announced that it will promote selected community generated maps , one every two weeks , both by blog posts on their official site , and by offering the map on a number of their dedicated servers .
Valve updated the game in January 2013 to include support for Steam Workshop , allowing users to create and share new scenarios , maps , clothing and weapons .
and to create Mutation - like changes that can be applied to existing maps .
A further patch in February 2013 introduced a new scripting system , Expanded Mutation System , that gives programmers more control and options to create new Mutations that can be played across any map or to customize behavior in specific campaigns ; one such user - created Mutation creates an experience similar to the Zombie mode in , allowing players to buy weapons and barricades to fight off waves of zombies .
COMPETITIVE COMMUNITY AND TOURNAMENTS Section::::Competitive community and tournaments .
On the PC , the original competitive modification named " Confogl " , was created by community member ProdigySim .
It is now a playable mutation included in the game .
Confogl is a set of rules for competitive Left 4
Dead 2 versus which standardizes certain elements and changes the distribution of items and weapons .
It tips the scales toward the infected .
Tournaments have been held utilizing the Confogl modification , such as the CEVO tournament .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Left 4 Dead 2 received positive reviews from game journalists , praising the changes made with the new melee weapons and firearms , the new strategies introduced through the new special infected , and the details of the southern locale and individual campaigns compared with the campaigns of the first game .
Ars Technica praised the game 's replayability and the attention put in every detail .
Libération also praised the game , commenting that Valve was one of the last game studios making games geared toward hardcore PC gamers .
IGN considered that the game improved on the first in every way , and that anyone who liked the concepts introduced by the first game should buy the second .
Eurogamer also praised the game , and considered that it was " overflowing with personality " .
Left 4 Dead 2 received the Best Xbox 360 Game award at the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards .
The game has been nominated for the " Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering " , " Outstanding Achievement in Online Game Play " , and " Action Game of the Year " Interactive Achievement Award from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences .
TECHNICAL ISSUES Section::::Technical issues .
The Xbox 360 version of the game was noted at launch for having serious issues with lag and slowdown in online game modes , the majority coming from using the game 's dedicated servers .
According to Valve , these problems were due to an unexpectedly huge number of players online on Xbox LIVE .
It was shortly fixed after release by a server infrastructure change and adding new dedicated servers .
Valve acknowledged problems with the PC version of the game upon launch , including inability to install the game , or users finding it crashed within minutes .
Most users reported successful bug fixes from the patches that followed .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Pre - release sales estimates for Left 4 Dead 2 were positive .
As of July 2009 , Left 4 Dead 2 ranked first in purchase intent out of all upcoming games , with 9 out of 10 polled stating that they would buy the game .
According to Lombardi , pre - orders for the sequel within the month following the announcement were double those for Left 4 Dead at the same time relative to release date .
In a press release on October 5 , 2009 Valve announced that , based on the strength of pre - orders , they expect Left 4 Dead 2 to be the fastest selling product in the company 's history , with the game 's pre - release sales averaging 300 % greater than Left 4 Dead .
In an interview in November 2009 , Chet Faliszek claimed the number of pre - sales of Left 4 Dead 2 were four times that of the original game .
On December 1 , 2009 , Valve reported that more than two million retailed copies of Left 4 Dead 2 were sold in two weeks , which represents " more than double " the sales of the original game 's two week debut .
According to the NPD Group , the Xbox 360 version was the fifth best - selling retail title for consoles in November 2009 , with over 744,000 copies sold .
In February 2010 , Electronic Arts , Left 4 Dead 2 retail distributor , revealed that the game had sold 2.9 million on retail so far while Forbes wrote that more than 4 million copies were sold at stores in 2009 .
Over two weeks in July 2010 , approximately 12,000 owners of were mistakenly banned by Valve's - Anti - Cheat system .
Those affected received a free copy of the game or an extra copy to send as a gift .
On May 10 , 2011 , Doug Lombardi mentioned that each of the Left 4 Dead games had sold three million copies on the Xbox 360 .
In August 2011 , Faliszek said that the series had sold over 11 million in total .
The game was offered free for a day on Steam on Christmas 2013 .
CONTROVERSIES Section::::Controversies .
Left 4 Dead 2 has been a central issue in a number of critical discussions regarding its timing and its graphic and mature content .
John Walker of UK - based gaming website Rock , Paper , Shotgun has theorized that this is due to higher expectations for Valve , given the perception of its status as an industry leader .
BOYCOTT Section::::Boycott .
The weekend following the game 's announcement at the 2009 E3 Convention , some Left 4 Dead players called for a boycott of Left 4 Dead 2 and formed the Steam community group called " L4D2 Boycott ( NO - L4D2 ) " which grew to over 10,000 members by the end of that weekend , and reached more than 37,000 about a month later .
In addition to a lack of further Left 4 Dead content , they were concerned with the characters , visuals , and music shown in the E3 demonstration video , feeling these were inappropriate to the first game 's aesthetics , and that the release of the sequel so soon after the first game would fracture the community .
In response to these complaints , Valve marketer Doug Lombardi stated that the announcement of Left 4 Dead 2 at E3 should not be taken to indicate that Valve would no longer support the first game .
He asked the community to " trust [ them ] a little bit , " and told them that while their team was eager to get new material to players of Left
4 Dead , they determined that a sequel would be the best option for several reasons : the demand for new campaigns , enemies and weapons could not be met as a simple DLC ; both Faliszek and project lead Tom Leonard found that too much of the content relied on each other , making it very difficult to release incremental patches in the same style as Team Fortress 2 ; the development team liked the idea of rolling up the content into a sequel to be released a year after Left 4 Deads release .
Faliszek stated that Newell was skeptical of the idea when the team brought the sequel forward , but still allowed the project to go through .
In September 2009 , Valve flew two of the boycott group 's most prominent members to Valve , in order to playtest Left 4 Dead 2 ; the two felt that the sequel was well done .
This event , through a series of correspondences made in jest , shortly led to Valve 's Gabe Newell and designer Erik Johnson flying to Australia to visit " Joe W - A " , a Left 4 Dead modder .
Newell jokingly reported that Valve was " boycotting " Joe 's new mod for the game when Joe asked when he would be flown to Valve in the same manner as the Left 4 Dead 2 boycotters , but whimsically offered that if Joe was to pay to fly him to the country , he would take a look at it .
Joe was able to raise the required funds , US$ 3000 , through donations through his website , though ultimately Newell paid for the trip himself , with Joe 's collected donations going to the Child 's Play charity .
On October 14 , 2009 , the initiators of the boycott group announced that they had ended their boycott and were shutting down the 40,000-plus group because Valve was retaining their promise of additional content and fixes for Left 4 Dead , such as the recent release of the " Crash Course " campaign .
These gamers also believed that the group itself , losing its purpose , was now being used just to bad - mouth Valve and other players .
In a video interview posted on October 29 , 2009 , Gabe Newell said , " for people who joined the Boycott Group on Steam ...
they 're actually pre - ordering the product at a higher rate than Left 4 Dead 1 owners who were n't in the boycott " .
COVER ART Section::::Cover art .
Valve was forced to alter its original cover art for the game by the ESRB ; the original image depicted the series ' hand with its little finger , ring finger and the thumb torn off , which would thus have the index finger and middle finger remaining .
It was deemed too explicit , but to appease the ESRB , Valve changed the image so that the fingers were merely bent back instead , but the company was still able to include the torn - off thumb in all regions except for Japan and Germany , where it had to be censored .
The cover was further changed for release in the United Kingdom , as the two - finger sign with the back of the hand faced toward the viewer is considered an insult ; the UK cover features the hand facing the opposite direction to avoid this , making it instead the more optimistic gesture for " Victory " , even though it may not have been intended to be made insulting .
RACISM ACCUSATIONS Section::::Racism accusations .
Willie Jefferson of the Houston Chronicle , after seeing initial promotional material for the game , considered that several of the infected " appear to be African - Americans " implying a racist approach to the game , and also noted that " setting the game in a city that was a scene of dead , bloated bodies floating by " some years after the impact of Hurricane Katrina was " a bad call " .
Faliszek , commenting on Jefferson 's claims , considered the supposition to be " utter insanity " , and commented that the infected are a mix of all races , and that the game 's version of New Orleans is " not a brick - for - brick representation " of the city and were not trying to make any statement about it with the game .
A writer for Kotaku considered that Jefferson " seems to me to be picking a fight where none exists .
"
Others noted that the appearance of African - American infected simply reflected the racial diversity of New Orleans .
AUSTRALIAN BAN AND UNBANNING Section::::Australian ban and unbanning .
Left 4 Dead 2 was refused classification in Australia by the Office of Film and Literature Classification ( OFLC ) .
It failed to gain a MA15 + rating , the highest possible rating for video games in Australia at the time of release .
This prevented the sale of the original game within the country .
In its report , the OFLC cited the reason for refusing classification as " realistic , frenetic and unrelenting violence " .
However , a small number of members of the OFLC board believed the game could merit the MA15 + rating which was used to publish the first Left 4 Dead .
It was expected that changes could be made to the game to allow the game to be classified as MA15 + and thus sold in Australia .
Both Lombardi and Newell were " surprised " by the classification refusal .
Valve appealed the OFLC 's decision about a week after being notified of the ruling , comparing the sequel to its predecessor , which had been classified as MA15 + , and the mature ratings the sequel had received from similar rating organizations around the world .
However , as the appeal process , expected to end on October 22 , was close to the planned release date , Valve submitted a modified version of the game for classification addressing the concerns the OFLC has stated .
This version , which no longer contained images of " decapitation , dismemberment , wound detail or piles of dead bodies " , was classified as MA15 + by the OFLC , thus allowing for the game 's release in Australia , though Valve and Electronic Arts still hoped to have their preferred , unmodified version classified by the OFLC for release .
The appeal of the decision to deny classification to the unedited version of the game was conducted by the independent Classification Review Board , and resulted in the previous ruling to deny classification being sustained .
The Classification Review Board cited " insufficient delineation between the depiction of zombie characters and the human figures " as one of the key factors in its classification refusal .
Left 4 Dead 2s classification refusal , as well as for other recent games such as Fallout 3 ( has since been rerated
MA15 +
having the same version as other countries ) and Aliens vs. Predator ( has since appealed and rerated MA15 + uncut ) , has reignited debate over the current prohibition of sale and exhibition of video games for mature audiences .
In mid - December 2009 , the Australian government sought public opinion on the adult classification rating for video games , despite statements by South Australian Attorney General Michael Atkinson believing the issue to only affect a minority of the country 's citizens .
Following Atkinson 's decision to leave the Attorneys General to be replaced by John Rau , who is reportedly in favour of an R18 + rating , Valve have revealed that , should the bill be passed , they plan to release an uncensored version of Left 4 Dead 2 for PC in Australia .
Australian Federal Parliament has passed R18 + classification for video games which came into effect on January 1 , 2013 , and Valve is exploring legal options of resubmitting an R18 + version of Left 4 Dead 2 following this change .
On August 29 , 2014 , the uncensored version was reclassified R18 + , effectively unbanning the game , five years after the original release , with Valve adding in the availability to switch to the uncensored version as DLC for all users running who purchased L4D2 in Australia before it was reclassified .
GERMAN BAN Section::::German ban .
In order to achieve the highest possible rating given by Germany 's Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle ( Freigegeben ab 18 Jahren gemäß § 14 JuSchG , meaning " Restricted for those below the age of 18 " ) , Valve had to heavily censor the game 's violent content similar to the Australian version .
However , the international ( and thus uncensored ) version was indexed by the Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons on December 1 , 2009 in order to prevent sellers from advertising or selling it to minors .
On February 15 , 2010 , the Amtsgericht Tiergarten confiscated all European PC versions for violation of ( representation of violence ) , meaning they may not be sold ; however , it is still legal to import ( with the risk that the game is confiscated by customs ) and own the game .
The court said that the game trivializes violence due to its high killing rate and explicit graphical representation of mutilation .
They also sensed a strong cynical attitude behind the game 's concept .
To make up for the censorship , German players receive exclusive weapons ported from , which include the Heckler & Koch MP5 , Accuracy International AWM , SIG 552 , Steyr Scout and a combat knife .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS