MAIN BUILDING ( UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME )
University of Notre Dame 's Main Administration Building ( known as the Main Building or the " Golden Dome " ) houses various administrative offices , including the Office of the President .
Atop of the building stands the Golden Dome , the most recognizable landmark of the University .
Three buildings were built at the site ; the first was built in 1843 and replaced with a larger one in 1865 , which burned down in 1879 , after which the third and current building was erected .
The building hosts the administrative offices of the University , as well as classrooms , art collections , and exhibition spaces .
The building is listed on the national register of historic places .
HISTORY PREVIOUS MAIN BUILDINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Previous main buildings .
The first main building was started on August 28 , 1843 , shortly after the architect Mr. Marsile arrived on campus on the 24th , and it was complete by the fall of 1844 .
It was a brick building , 4 1/2 story high with a small cupola ( but not yet a dome ) with a bell in it , in French style .
Construction of the second Main Building , which replaced the first , began in 1864 and was completed in 1865 with a cost of $ 35,500 .
The building 's construction incorporated a major part of the previous building ; its roof was removed and several floors were added along with a large mansard roof , and the facade and porch were altered .
It was 160 feet long , 80 feet wide , and 90 feet high ; it was six stories high and had a dome at the top .
The architect was William Thomas from Chicago , and most of the workers who built it were brothers of the Congregation of Holy Cross .
In a publicity stunt to give visibility to the college , Rev. Edward Sorin invited important clerics ( including top - ranking American catholic cleric Bishop Martin John Spalding ) and congressmen to the dedication on May 31 , 1886 .
Classes were taught on the third floor which hosted thirteen large classrooms and professor rooms , the fourth and fifth floors hosted dormitories , while the refectory and study halls were situated on the first floor .
The interior was decorated with 52 stands of medieval armor and a natural history museum , while the exterior featured a Cour d'honneur courtyard and a statue of Sacred Heart by Robert Cassiani , placed in 1893 and modeled after a similar one at Sacré - Cœur in Paris .
FIRE OF 1879 Section::::Fire of 1879 .
The building stood for 14 years before being destroyed by a great fire on April 23 , 1879 .
About eleven in the morning on Wednesday morning , 23 April 1879 , smoke and flames could be seen rising from the roof of the Main Building .
The causes of the fire might be due to repairs on the roof , and the fire might have started due to the dry timber on the roof , although it was not possible to ascertain it .
The fire was first spotted from the minim 's courtyard , and soon early attempts at putting out the fire were made , with lines of people passing buckets of waters towards the roof of the building by steam pressure .
Despite these efforts , the fire had spread to the entire roof and quickly consumed the upper floors .
The South Bend Fire Department was not able to arrive in time to save the main building , because of the long time needed to round up the volunteer firemen and set up the machines .
The supports of the dome burned away and the statue went crashing below in a billow of sparks and flame , and efforts focused on rescuing whatever valuable effects might be carried out of the burning building .
In the zeal to save precious objects students threw many of the valuables from the windows , yet despite the well - intentioned effort , almost all of these were lost in crashing on the ground .
This was especially true for many of the precious books and manuscripts .
The fire consumed the building in three hours .
The building contained most of the school 's educational and administrative activities , refectories , and student and faculty living quarters .
The flames also consumed The Saint Francis Old Men 's Home , the Infirmary , the Minims Hall ( the grade school program ) , and the Music Hall .
The fire fighters from South Bend arrived in time help save the kitchen , steam house , printing office , Presbytery , Washington hall and Sacred Heart Church .
Additionally , the lack of strong winds prevented the fire from spreading to these other buildings .
Many students , nuns and faculty narrowly escaped serious injury or death while they tried to save the Main Building 's contents as parts of the structure came tumbling down around them .
Most of the University library , the scientific equipment , the paintings and sculptures that adorned the hallways , the furnishing and furniture , stueent 's clothes and possession , natural and skeletal collections were lost in the fire .
The loss was estimated at $ 200,000 and only $ 45,000 was recovered from the insurance .
At three o'clock Father William Corby , the University president , met with his wisest assistants and they determined that nothing could be done but close the college for the year .
An hour after he communicated the decision to the students assembled in the church .
Students did not want to leave , but Fr .
Corby made it clear that the University could not provide any accommodations , hence the students were sent home for the semester .
An early graduation ceremony was held for the seniors of all schools .
Corby also promised that " a new Notre Dame " would reopen in the fall with a new Main Building " more accommodating and grandiose " .
Condolences started to pour into the school immediately , many of them published in subsequent issues of the student weekly magazine Scholastic .
Father Edward Sorin , now the superior - general of the Congregation of Holy Cross , had left on a trip to Europe two days prior to the fire .
He immediately returned to campus after the fire to find much of his school in ruins .
Together with Corby , he vowed to the students and faculty to rebuild the school in time for the fall semester .
During the next Sunday 's Mass , Rev. Sorin delivered the homily and said " If it were all gone , I should not give up ! " , which electrified the crowd and provided morale for the reconstruction .
He wrote to the members of the congregation : " By all means we must bring upon these new foundations the richest blessings of Heaven , that the grand edifice we contemplate erecting may remain for ages to come a monument to Catholicism , and a stronghold which no destructive element can ever shake on its basis or bring down again from its majestic stand " .
CURRENT BUILDING Section::::Current building .
University founder Rev. Edward Sorin and the president at the time
Rev. William Corby immediately planned for the rebuilding of the structure that had housed virtually the entire University .
Donations for the rebuilding of the college came from the Congregation , alumni , people of Saint Mary 's College , South Bend , and Chicago ( where Notre Dame students had staged a benefit concert after the Chicago Fire of 1871 ) .
General William Tecumseh Sherman , whose sons had attended Notre Dame , sent army tents and supplies for the emergency and Chicago mayor Carter Harrison Sr .
presided over a fund - raising to benefit the new building .
Maurice Francis Egan published his book Prelude : An Elegent Volume of Poems and donated the royalties to the building fund .
The entire University administration and community engaged in fund raining throughout the summer of 1879 to replace the Main Building .
The University took action by selecting , out of 30 competitors , a new design by Willoughby J. Edbrooke , who drew the new plans by May 10 .
Architect Edbrooke , Brother Charles Borromeo ( Patrick ) Harding , C.S.C , and mathematics professor William Ivers marked off the dimensions of the construction on the day of the groundbreaking ceremony , May 17 , and the first stone for the foundation was laid on the 19th .
Railcars full of bricks arrived continuously to town and were brought to campus in a steady stream of wagons .
By May 31 , twenty - six stonemasons and bricklayers were working with their support crews on the walls of the new building .
The construction required about 300 veteran tradesmen , including 156 skilled stonemasons and bricklayers .
This exceeded the number of experienced workers in the South Bend area , and was also scarce in Chicago because of the rebuilding effort due to the great fire in October 1871 .
Hence , skilled workmen were brought into South Bend from great distances .
The construction was very rapid due to the zeal of workers and volunteers .
By June 21 , the first story was completed , and by June 28 , they completed the second .
The Fourth of July saw the completion of the third .
The building was completed before the fall semester of 1879 .
Fifty - six bricklayers and 4,350,000 bricks were necessary to complete it , and once finished it stood 187 feet tall .
The building also required 300 tons of cut limestone .
The halls were wide and it was considered hygienic , since they had installed a ventilating system unequalled in any public building in America at the time .
The Golden Dome was the last thing to be finished , with the iron framework , the panels and the columns supporting the dome , being added during the summer of 1882 and the dome itself was finished in September .
The statue of Mary atop the dome weighs 4,400 pounds and stands 18 feet 7 inches tall .
It was a gift from the sisters , students , and alumnae of adjacent Saint Mary 's College , Notre Dame 's sister school .
It replicates the pose of the statue of Mary on the Column of the Immaculate Conception in Piazza di Spagna in Rome , erected under Pius IX .
It was designed by Chicago artist Giovanni Meli .
The statue arrived on campus in July 1880 to replace the one that was destroyed in the fire .
The cast - iron statue sat on the rebuilt front porch of the new Main Building for two years while the new dome was completed .
The $ 1 million rebuilding project had left the University in debt .
University founder Rev. Edward Sorin , C.S.C. , wanted to gild the dome in real gold , but the Holy Cross community 's Council of Administration for Notre Dame deemed it too great an extravagance .
The standoff lasted into 1886 , when Father Sorin used his position as superior general of the community to name himself to the committee and asked to be its chairman .
He then refused to come to the meetings so that the other members could not legally conduct its business , even moving to temporary quarters at Saint Mary 's and refusing to return .
When University business halted , the committee relented and Father Sorin got his Golden Dome and statue .
The first project cost $ 2,000 , while the 10th gilding of the dome in 2005 cost $ 300,000 .
ARCHITECTURE
Section::::Architecture .
The building 's style has been described as follows :
Edbrooke called the finished product ' modern Gothic ' ; a later University Architect , Francis Kervick , referred to the Victorian monument as ' an eclectic and somewhat naïve combination of pointed windows , medieval moldings and classical columns . '
Others have dubbed the buildings ' riot of turrets , gables , angles , corners , and oversized dome and rotunda as pure and simple ' modern Sorin ' .
INTERIOR Section::::Interior .
The halls are decorated by portraits of the presidents of the university .
The lower level hosts a gallery dedicated to the Laetare Medal awardees and the Wall of Honor adorned by plaques dedicated to notable people awarded for their service to the University .
The building also houses the Columbus Murals , a group of large paintings by Italian painter and Notre Dame professor Luigi Gregori , depicting the discovery of the New World by Christopher Columbus .
Gregori also painted with figures representing Religion , Philosophy , Science , History , Fame , Poetry and Music .
USAGE AND TRADITIONS Section::::Usage and traditions .
The building is the location of many administrative offices of the university including that of the President , Office of Admissions , and various other offices and services of the University .
Additionally , it has classrooms and meeting rooms .
In campus lore , if a student ascended the front steps of the Main Building before graduation , that student was doomed never to graduate .
This legend stems from traditionalist smoking rituals .
Students were not deemed worthy to climb the steps and smoke with their professors until they received their degrees and were educational equals .
Main building is also used as the venue for " Dome Dances , " which are dances awarded to residence halls who have been given the title of Hall of the Year .
These dances take place on the second floor of main building , underneath the dome itself which makes them a coveted event for students to attend .
GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Notre Dame One hundred years *
Campus Tour * Notre Dame
Archives
* Live Webcam
* Article on the Chicago Tribune * Article on ESPN