MINIATURE PIG Miniature pig ( also micro - pig , teacup pig , etc . ) is a term that is used to refer to small breeds of domestic pig , such as Pot - bellied pigs , Göttingen minipigs , Juliana pigs , Choctaw Hogs , or Kunekune ( and specimens derived by cross - breeding with these ) .
Notable features of most miniature pigs distinguishing them from other pigs may be defined by their possession of small , perked - back ears , a potbelly , sway back , chubby figure , rounded head , short snout , legs , and neck , and a short tail with thick hair at the end .
Typically , most breeds of mini pigs will range from the minimum weight of to .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the 1960s , Chinese pigs that grew to be were sent to zoos in Western cities and were used for medical research in the fields of toxicology , pharmacology , pulmonology , cardiology , aging , and as a source of organs for organ transplantation .
These comparatively smaller pigs were easier to work with than larger pig breeds , which typically reach weights of .
In the mid-1980s , Keith Connell of the Bowmanville Zoo in Ontario imported breeding pot - bellied pigs to Canada , which became the foundation for the pot - bellied pig in North America .
The breed is known for its small stature , sway back , and pronounced potbelly .
Because of custom laws , only their offspring could be sold in the United States .
US zoos were the main target for the piglets , but private owners soon began purchasing them as pets .
Pet pot - bellied pigs started to appear everywhere ; from New York apartment complexes to small suburban residences .
Up to five additional imports were made in the following 10 years .
To track the pedigrees , the Potbellied Pig Registry Service , Inc ( PPRSI ) was created to preserve these bloodlines and establish a breed registry in the United States .
This registry was dissolved in the late 1990s .
Today , most pot - bellied pigs are little to never purebred , as the pure breed is critically endangered .
The Miniature Potbellied Pig Registry Service , Inc ( MPPRSI ) was established in 1993 to provide a registry for those pigs who were pedigreed in the PPRSI and met the breed standard , when fully grown not being more than tall and weighing under .
All of the foundation pigs were dual registered in PPRSI and MPPRSI .
Beginning in the late 1960s at the Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics
( Institut für
Tierzucht und Haustiergenetik )
at the University of Göttingen , Germany , the Göttingen minipig was developed by crossbreeding the Minnesota minipig , the Vietnamese Potbelly Pig and the German Landrace pig .
It is considered the smallest breed of domestic pig in the world .
MEDICAL RESEARCH Section::::Medical research .
Miniature pigs have been used for medical research , including toxicology , pharmacology , experimental surgery , pulmonology , cardiology , xenotransplantation , and aging studies .
Pigs can be useful in studying human disease , and due to their high intelligence , are easy to manage in a laboratory setting .
For example , scientists are working on studying the possibility of utilizing pig hearts for human heart organ transplants , and work has been done to genetically modify the tissues of pigs to be accepted by the human immune system .
AS PETS Section::::As pets .
Miniature pigs are commonly kept as pets .
See Domestic pigs as pets for more information .
Realistic sizes of pigs vary from pig to pig ; genetics drives the growth , along with appropriate nutrition and care .
Domesticated minipigs can vary from 50 lbs .
to 200 lbs .
It may be possible to reduce the risk of ending up with a large pig by looking at the pig 's parents and grandparents if possible .
However , since pigs can breed years before they fully mature , unscrupulous or ignorant breeders may show off parent pigs which are not fully grown themselves , so have not reached their full adult size .
Domesticated pigs are often trained to urinate and defecate in litter boxes .
Typically , pine pellets or pine shreds are used .
Laws may vary on if a pet pig can be kept , depending on the location .
If there are no laws regarding pet pigs , some areas may consider a pig to be exclusively known as livestock ; some towns and cities have ordinances disallowing farm animals within city limits .
However , one can petition city councils and have outdated ordinances amended before a pig is introduced into a household , since many ordinances were put into place before the potbellied - pig was even introduced to the US .
OTHER NOTABLE
REFERENCES Section::::Other notable references .
A Yucatan miniature pig is the unofficial mascot of the Animal Rescue League of Boston .
The world 's smallest wild pig species is the long wild pygmy hog which lives in Assam , India .
It is a critically endangered wild species , not appropriate for domestication .
SEE ALSO
* Wuzhishan pig REFERENCES