THE DEATH AND LIFE OF CHARLIE ST .
CLOUD
The Death and Life of Charlie St. Cloud is a 2004 novel by Ben Sherwood .
It is a fictional fable about an extraordinary experience of a man called Charlie St. Cloud who is resuscitated following a car accident that kills his brother .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Charlie St. Cloud ( age 15 ) and Sam ( 12 ) are two brothers with a love so strong , no force can separate them .
When their mom leaves Charlie to babysit Sam , they decide to go to watch a 1991 Red Sox baseball game in Boston against the New York Yankees with their pet beagle , Oscar .
They " borrow " their neighbor Mrs. Pung 's Ford Country Squire .
On the way there they can not decide which CD to listen to .
As they cross the General Edwards Bridge on the Saugus River , on the way home , Charlie decides to take a look at the moon to see if Sam was right about the moon being larger that night .
Charlie does not see an 18-wheeler truck come and they end up tumbling twice crushing Oscar along the way .
When they are dead , they find themselves close to the cemetery in Marblehead , the town where they live .
Sam is scared and Charlie makes a promise that they will never abandon each other .
However , Charlie gets resuscitated in an ambulance by a religious paramedic , Florio Ferrente and carries on living .
Thirteen years later , Charlie , now 28 , has grown up and is working at the Waterside cemetery .
Every evening at dusk he goes to a nearby forest where he plays with Sam .
Charlie has the gift of seeing ghosts .
This serves him well as an undertaker , as he can talk with ghosts .
In the town lives Tess Carroll , a yachtswoman who wants to make a round the world trip .
A week prior to her departure , she directs her yacht into a storm to test it , not listening to her shipsman Tink Weatherbee , who told her not to go into the storm .
The storm sucks Tess into its grasp and the ship flips , leaving Tess hanging on upside down .
Tess appears at the cemetery where her dad is buried .
While regarding her father 's memorial , she hears a loud clanging noise , which is Charlie scaring away the geese by banging trash can covers together .
She remembers Charlie from high school and wonders if he remembers her .
They both talk and Charlie ends up asking Tess to come over for dinner that night .
Both are not entirely sure of this arrangement for different reasons .
Tess is concerned with the fact that she never really was a true believer in love , and Charlie is worried that this could come in between his promise to him and Sam .
The next day while taking a walk with her dog , Bobo , Tess realizes that people ignore her when Bobo comes off his leash and nobody hears her saying to stop him .
She then looks into the water and realizes that her reflection is not there .
What is more , she can see Sam St. Cloud , the boy who died thirteen years ago .
While at lunch the next day after their date , an officer comes in and states that Tess 's boat , the Querencia , has gone missing and parts of the ship have been found .
Charlie is shocked at the thought that Tess could be dead .
He had heard of " middle ground " where spirits would stay until they were ready to pass over to the next level .
He had seen many come and go quickly and others who liked to stay like his brother .
In the meantime everyone in the town in possession of a boat , including Charlie , explores the harbor in order to look for Tess 's body .
Charlie questions his sanity because the night they shared together was so real and Tess was full of life .
There was no way she could possibly be gone .
Everyone gives up the search , but then Charlie feels that there is one place he has to go .
With Sam 's help he finds Tess 's body .
Tess is transported to a hospital where the doctors stabilize her in a deep coma .
A few months later , Charlie decides to quit his job and move on , bidding a final farewell to Sam , now 25 years old from crossing over .
Charlie is now a paramedic at Engine 2 on Franklin Street .
During his last visit at the hospital Tess wakes up .
Charlie remembers how they met , and Charlie tells her the story of how they met and fell in love at Waterside Cemetery .
The afterword of the novel is narrated by the ghost of Florio Ferrante , the paramedic who saved Charlie 's life .
He reveals that Tess and Charlie fall in love again and eventually marry and have two sons .
It is also said that Charlie and his family will get a new beagle .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
A film adaptation starring Zac Efron , Amanda Crew and Charlie Tahan began production in 2009 .
Kim Basinger played Charlie and Sam 's mother .
The film was produced by Marc Platt and directed by Burr Steers .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Author 's site for the book
* Review on Curledup.com