ALCOHOL LAWS OF AUSTRALIA Alcohol laws of Australia are laws that regulate the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages .
The legal drinking age is 18 throughout Australia .
The minimum age for the purchase of alcoholic products in Australia is 18 .
A licence to both produce and sell alcohol is required .
In most of Australia , an alcoholic beverage is one of greater than 1.15 % alcohol by volume , but Queensland and Victoria it is one of greater than 0.5 % alcohol by volume .
Swan Light , a very low alcohol beer ( 0.9 % ) is considered a soft drink in Western Australia , as would a shandy made with low alcohol beer .
Whereas brewed kambucha tea is considered alcoholic in Victoria .
For this reason most products marketed in Australia will be sold labelled with a statement as to their alcoholic content if above 0.5 % , otherwise a product labelled " brewed " may contain some alcohol .
ALCOHOL DRINKING AGE Section::::Alcohol drinking age . !
State / territory ! !
Current legal drinking age ! !
Year adopted ! !
Previous legal drinking age !
Australian Capital Territory !
New South Wales !
Northern Territory !
Queensland !
South Australia !
Tasmania !
Victoria !
Western Australia ALCOHOL LAWS BY STATE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Section::::Alcohol laws by state .
Section::::Australian Capital Territory .
During Canberra 's early years , alcohol was banned in the Australian Capital Territory , with King O'Malley in 1911 being a sponsor of the unpopular alcohol ban ..
Prohibition was partial , since possession of alcohol purchased outside of the Territory remained legal and the few pubs that had existing licences could continue to operate .
The federal Parliament repealed the laws after residents of the Federal Capital Territory voted for the end of them in a 1928 plebiscite .
NEW SOUTH WALES
Section::::New South Wales .
Alcohol may not be sold in New South Wales without a licence or permit being obtained from the State government .
In NSW , alcohol may not be sold to a person who is under 18 years of age unless accompanied by a guardian ( or spouse ) and for consumption during a meal , and minors must not be on licensed premises ( i.e. premises on which alcohol may be sold or consumed ) unless accompanied by an adult or other limited circumstances .
The designation of restricted area ( 18 + only ) and supervised area ( minors must be accompanied by adults ) must be displayed on the door or window facing outwards .
There are several categories of licences available .
The most common are : * packaged liquor licence , which permit the sale of liquor to customers to take away from retail liquor stores and supermarkets .
They must close at 11 pm at the latest .
* general licence , which permit the sale of liquor to customers for drinking on the premises , and to take away .
These are used by pubs , hotels and taverns .
* BYO permit , which allow customers to bring their own liquor and drink it on the premises .
These are obtained by restaurants and clubs that do not intend to hold a liquor licence , or do not sell and supply liquor themselves .
Other specialised licences are : full club licence , renewable limited club licence , temporary limited licence , renewable limited licence , restricted club licence , pre - retail licence ( for wholesalers , producers , brewers and liquor importers ) , and vigneron 's licence .
Some local councils have passed by - laws prohibiting the consumption of alcohol on streets within their areas , especially the Sydney CBD Entertainment Precinct , which stretches from the Sydney Harbour Bridge , Circular Quay down to the end of George Street .
In other parts of Sydney , many suburbs still have similar ' alcohol - free zones ' , notably the immediate streets near railway stations , all main roads in Hurstville , Bankstown , Chatswood and the City of Willoughby .
Most of these bans last for four years which can be renewed each September of the four - year cycle under council discretion .
Breach of the by - law can result in confiscation and disposal of open bottles of alcohol ; however no fine can be issued .
In a designated area within the Sydney CBD , there is a 1:30 am lockout meaning no patrons can enter bars after that point , and no existing patrons can re - enter after that time , while last drinks are at 3 am .
There are restrictions on what can be served after midnight .
For example , liquor can not be served " neat " .
In NSW , if a minor is caught with alcohol in a public place it can be confiscated and guardians notified of the offence , a maximum fine of $ 20 may occur .
The state does allow a minor to consume alcohol for religious purposes , for example Holy Communion .
New South Wales alcohol laws only allow the following identification as legally accepted proof - of - age in licensed premises :
* current Australian driver licence * A drivers licence issued in any country
other then australia that clearly has the Date of birth in English * current Victorian learner driver permit card
* current passport ( Australian or foreign ) * current NSW proof - of - age card QUEENSLAND Section::::Queensland .
In Queensland , the main legislation is the Liquor Act 1992 , which abolished the Licensing Commission and Court , with decision - making by Chief Executive and appeals to a Tribunal .
There was a reduction of licence types to seven and permits to five .
In 1997 , annual licence fees charged on liquor sales were abolished .
In 2012 , the Queensland Liquor and Gaming Commission was abolished and replaced with a single Commissioner .
It is legal for a person under 18 years to drink alcohol within private premises , with the supervision of a parent / guardian .
It is illegal for a person under the age of 18 years to purchase alcohol , or to have alcohol bought for them in public places , or to attend a licensed venue without parental supervision ( there are some special circumstances ) .
It is illegal for licensed premises to sell alcohol to someone under the age of 18 years alcohol .
Service hours were restricted from 1 July 2016 .
The sale or service of liquor must stop at 2 am state - wide , except in " safe night precincts " where alcohol can be served until 3 am .
In all venues , the sale or service of rapid intoxication drinks must end at midnight .
SOUTH
AUSTRALIA Section::::South Australia .
In South Australia , the main legislation which controls the sale and consumption of alcohol is the Liquor Licensing Act 1997 ( SA ) .
The principal aim of the Act is to minimise the harm associated with the consumption of alcohol in South Australia .
The drinking age was lowered from 21 to 20 in 1968 and by 1971 South Australia had a drinking age of 18 .
Between 1836 and 1839 , liquor licences were granted by the Governor .
On 21 February 1839 , Act No . 1 of 1839 became the first liquor licensing legislation in the Province , including three licenses : * General Publican 's Licence * Wine , Ale , Beer and other Malt Liquors Licence
* Storekeeper 's Licence
In 1869 , a Storekeeper 's Colonial Wine Licence was introduced .
VICTORIA
Section::::Victoria .
Alcohol may not be sold in Victoria without a licence or permit being obtained from the State government .
Licences and permits are issued by the Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation , under the Liquor Control Reform Act 1998 .
In Victoria , alcohol may not be sold to a person who is under 18 years of age unless accompanied by a guardian ( or spouse ) and for consumption during a meal , and minors must not be on licensed premises ( i.e. premises on which alcohol may be sold or consumed ) unless accompanied by an adult or other limited circumstances .
There are several categories of licences available .
The most common are : * packaged liquor licence , which permit the sale of liquor to customers to take away from retail liquor stores and supermarkets .
* general licence , which permit the sale of liquor to customers for drinking on the premises , and to take away .
These are used by pubs , hotels and taverns .
* BYO permit , which allow customers to bring their own liquor and drink it on the premises .
These are obtained by restaurants and clubs that do not intend to hold a liquor licence .
Other specialised licences are : full club licence , renewable limited club licence , temporary limited licence , renewable limited licence , restricted club licence , pre - retail licence ( for wholesalers , producers , brewers and liquor importers ) , and vigneron 's licence .
Until May 2015 , there was a single area in Melbourne , encompassing some or all of Balwyn , Camberwell , Canterbury , Glen Iris , Box Hill , Mont Albert , and Surrey Hills , which had the status of a " dry - area " , where a mandatory vote was required by all local citizens before a liquor licence was granted within the area .
This requirement has now been reduced , with voting now only required for the licensing for hotels , pubs and clubs .
There remains a total of 0 hotels , pubs or clubs in the area .
Some local government councils have passed by - laws prohibiting the consumption of alcohol on designated streets , parks and other areas within their jurisdictions .
In Victoria , if a minor is caught with alcohol in public it can be confiscated and guardians notified of the offence , and a fine may be imposed .
Previously , minors were allowed to drink alcohol if it is given to them by anyone on private property , for example a party .
New laws which came into effect late 2011 , require parental permission to be given to any adult serving alcohol to minors , under a penalty of $ 7,000 .
In Victoria , fully licensed drivers of motor vehicles must have a Blood alcohol content ( BAC ) below 0.05 % .
Learner and probationary licensed drivers must not consume any alcohol before driving ( i.e. the BAC must be zero ) .
Victorian alcohol laws only allow the following identification as legally accepted proof - of - age in licensed premises :
* current Australian driver licence * current Victorian learner driver permit card
* current passport ( Australian or foreign ) * current Keypass identity card .
* current proof - of - age card from any Australian state or territory .
WESTERN AUSTRALIA Section::::Western Australia .
In Western Australia , the sale , supply , and consumption of alcohol is regulated by the Liquor Control Act 1988 and the Liquor Control Regulations 1989 which are administered by the Department of Racing , Gaming and Liquor .
Before 1970 , the drinking age in Western Australia was 21 .
Today , it is illegal for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase , supply , or drink alcohol on licensed or regulated premises , even if they are with their parents or guardian .
The maximum penalty for a minor to consume alcohol on licensed premises is a A$ 2,000 fine .
The law does allow a minor to consume alcohol for religious purposes for example Holy Communion .
It is an offence in Western Australia for persons of any age to drink in public , such as on the street , park , beach , or as a passenger in a hired vehicle without first having obtained a permit from the appropriate local government authority .
Such permits are at the discretion of the local council - some public events have a total ban on alcohol consumption and no permits will be issued .
Western Australian alcohol laws only allow the following identification as legally accepted proof - of - age in licensed premises :
* current Australian driver licence * current Western Australian learner driver permit card
* current passport ( Australian or foreign ) * current Keypass Card * current Western Australian Photo Card , issued by the Department of Transport or a proof - of - age card issued by an Australian state or territory government SEE
ALSO
* Alcohol in Australia
* Driving licence in Australia REFERENCES