PRISON BREAK :
THE FINAL BREAK Prison Break : The Final Break is a 2009 television movie of the Prison Break franchise .
The movie aired May 27 in the United Kingdom on Sky1 .
In the United States and Canada , the movie was first released on DVD and Blu - ray on July 21 , 2009 .
The movie covers the events which occurred in between the downfall of The Company , and the revelation of Michael Scofield 's ( Wentworth Miller ) death .
It details the manipulated arrest and incarceration of Sara Tancredi ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) for the murder of Christina Scofield ( Kathleen Quinlan ) , the final escape plan which Michael devises for Sara , and the details surrounding Michael 's death .
It also reveals the ultimate fate of Gretchen Morgan ( Jodi Lyn O'Keefe ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story starts off with Sara being arrested for the murder of Christina ( Scofield ) Hampton , during her and Michael 's wedding reception .
It is implied that surveillance video was altered by agents loyal to the General ( Jonathan Krantz ) ( Leon Russom ) by removing Christina 's gun to make it look as if Sara shot Christina in cold blood rather than self - defence .
She is held in the Miami - Dade State Penitentiary , where overcrowding necessitates that the female prison and jail inmates are housed in the same building .
Gretchen Morgan watches from a distance , having been imprisoned after the events in " The Sunshine State " .
Sara is attacked as revenge by the Miami - Dade COs for having left the infirmary door unlocked , allowing the " Fox River Eight " to escape and eventual dismissal or suspension of several staff members of Fox River .
Across the yard is the neighboring men 's jail and prison , where Krantz and Theodore " T - Bag " Bagwell ( Robert Knepper ) are being held .
T - Bag continues to help the general , even though the General claims poverty when asked to pay for contraband T - Bag gets him .
The General contacts Gretchen and offers her $ 100,000 to kill Sara .
When Gretchen does not get the job done immediately , it is offered as a bounty for whoever kills Sara .
Sara is quickly poisoned with strychnine , but is given medical treatment in the infirmary that saves her life and pregnancy .
The correctional physician informs her that she will have thirty minutes with her baby when she gives birth before the baby is taken away from her .
His advice is to consider herself to be a surrogate mother to her own fetus so as to avoid crippling depression due to the inevitable separation .
Michael learns of the attacks from Sara 's lawyer , and asks the warden to protect her , which she declines to do .
She also denies Sara visits from anyone except her lawyer .
After learning about the bounty on her head , Michael decides the only way to keep her alive is to break her out .
He once again enlists Lincoln Burrows ( Dominic Purcell ) and Fernando Sucre 's ( Amaury Nolasco ) help .
Lincoln and Sucre scope out the prison , taking measurements and photographs to create a map of the prison .
Gretchen sees Lincoln and Sucre , and demands Sara include her in any escape plan that may be developing .
After analyzing the photographs and plans of the prison , Michael finds a fault in the security system : a blind spot the cameras can not see .
Alexander Mahone ( William Fichtner ) then arrives and offers his aid , although his true intentions are unclear .
He has just been offered reinstatement with the FBI if he finds and reports any evidence incriminating Michael .
Michael develops an escape plan which he relays to Sara using a hidden message in a letter .
While he is out however , FBI Agent Todd Wheatley ( Chris Bruno ) breaks into Michael 's apartment , and sees the plans laid out on table .
When Michael arrives , he points out that while the plans may look incriminating , he was merely looking for weaknesses to report to the prison warden ( Amy Aquino ) in the hopes that she may grant him visitation rights .
Sara 's attorney secures a court order allowing Michael to visit her .
Because the visit is supervised , he subtly asks her if she understood the hidden message , and she indicates she did .
As he is leaving the prison , however , Michael sees the camera system being adjusted to eliminate the blind spot he planned to exploit .
Special Agent Wheatley apparently discovered it while looking at the documents he had seen in Michael 's apartment .
Meanwhile , Sara joins the " Family " of the leader of the prisoners , an inmate who goes by the name of " Daddy " ( Lori Petty ) .
Daddy helps her get work in the motor pool , which makes Wife jealous and other Family members suspicious .
Michael comes up with a new plan to parachute into the prison and rescue Sara .
Lincoln is sent to offer T - Bag $ 5,000 to light a fire and set off the fire alarm at 7:00 the night of the escape .
T - Bag demands $ 100,000 , and suggests they can get it by robbing the General of the money he has to pay the bounty on Sara .
T - Bag did this to settle grudges with the General , including the General 's refusal to pay T - Bag for favors in jail .
T - Bag provides Lincoln with the name and phone number of Joe Daniels , ( Richmond Arquette )
the General 's agent .
Lincoln agrees to steal the money and put it in T - Bag 's account by 7:00 .
Lincoln and Sucre then steal the $ 100,000 from Daniels .
Wanting to get to Sara away from the Family , Gretchen persuades one of the guards to search Daddy 's room .
The guards do so , and take Daddy to solitary confinement after finding drugs in her cell .
Sara is attacked by a fellow Family member ( Alicia Lagano ) but Gretchen comes to her rescue , killing the attacker in the process .
Gretchen again demands
Sara include her in the escape because she wishes to see her daughter , Emily , and give her a gift .
When one of the guards tells Daddy of the death of her family member , and mentions that Sara and Gretchen are thought to be behind her killing , Daddy becomes infuriated .
Following several phone calls with Agent Wheatley in which Mahone divulged Michael 's parachute plot , it appears that Mahone has betrayed Michael .
But Michael continues to trust him , and gives him a piece of paper and a DVD which he asks Mahone to give to Sara in the event of his death .
Michael then visits Sara once more , telling her that the previous escape plan was now impossible .
He cryptically tells her of the new plan , in which she must get to the chapel .
Michael has discovered they can get from the chapel to an administrative building that has an emergency escape tunnel .
Daddy is eventually freed from lockup , and appears to be stalking Sara and Gretchen .
Just before the escape begins , Gretchen distracts a guard , and Sara confronts Daddy .
Sara picks a fight with Daddy and purposely pushes her into a powerful and frightening inmate Skittlez ( Dot Marie Jones ) , who then retaliates by attacking Daddy .
At the same time , Gretchen punches the guard and knocks her to the ground , but gets stabbed in the leg during the altercation .
Sara quickly grabs the guard 's keys , and the two of them hide in the kitchen amidst the chaos .
Michael then begins the escape .
Knowing of the plan thanks to Mahone 's information , agent Wheatley orders all lights shut off , and positions armed officers near Michael 's expected landing site .
When the parachute comes down , it is riddled with bullets .
Upon inspection , Wheatley discovers the parachute is attached to a dummy .
Michael is then seen sneaking out from under Wheatley 's car and running into the prison .
With the escape underway , Gretchen admits to Sara that she can not continue on without help due to her injuries .
Gretchen then asks her to choose , either to leave her behind or help her .
Sara chooses to help Gretchen , however , as they run to the chapel , Gretchen is spotted by guards .
She is asked if she 's alone but Gretchen covers Sara 's presence and stalls the guards .
Though Sara is almost spotted by a guard , she manages to unlock the door and get into the chapel undetected .
The guards are recalled and they take Gretchen .
Sara picks up the necklace that Gretchen made for her daughter , Emily , presumably so she may pass it on to Emily later .
Michael meets Sara in the chapel , and they wait for 7:00 when T - Bag was to start the fire to trip the fire alarm .
We see Sucre racing to a money transfer store to transfer the $ 100,000 , but he gets there after the shop is closed .
When T - Bag finds out that the transfer did not take place by 7:00 as promised , he angrily reveals the plot to the warden , and tells her that he was instructed to set off the fire alarm .
Special Agent Wheatley responds by demanding the fire alarm and other systems that would cover other noises be turned off .
This however , turns out to be part of Michael 's plan , as he assumed that T - Bag would double - cross them .
With the alarms off , he burns through a locked door with a blowtorch .
However , the electronic lock on the next door does not open with the device Michael brought .
He needs to cause a power surge from a fuse panel to unlock the door , so he instructs Sara to leave him behind .
Sara refuses to leave if Michael can not go with her , but he emphasizes that there is no other way , touching her stomach and saying that he will be going with her .
In one final act of sacrifice , Michael causes the surge , and sparks are shown coming from the fuse box .
Sara runs , meeting Lincoln , Sucre , and Mahone just outside the fence .
Stunned , Sara is unable to describe to Lincoln what just happened .
Mahone revealed that he knew of Michael 's plan from a previous discussion and tells Lincoln , " He 's gone .
" They get into the van and drive away , still shocked over Michael 's fate .
Back at the prison , T - Bag is put into solitary confinement for aiding Sara 's escape .
The next day , just before Lincoln and Sara board a boat to escape to the Dominican Republic , Sucre gives Sara the $ 100,000 they stole from the General , apologizing for not being able to wire the money to them the night before as planned .
Mahone gives Sara the paper Michael asked him to deliver , the results of a medical exam revealing that his brain tumor had returned and his condition was terminal .
Mahone also gives the DVD to Lincoln who watches it with Sara while they escape on the boat .
In the video , Michael tells Sara and Lincoln that he would n't have had much time to live because of his tumor , and that he does n't regret his choice .
He asks Lincoln to promise that he will always be there for his child ( which turns out to be a son ) no matter what , and he asks Sara to watch out for Lincoln .
He says that life is wasted on what people want to , but do n't ever , say .
He then says what he wants to say is that he loves them both , very much .
He tells them to make sure his child is told every day how much he is loved and how lucky he is to be free .
The video ends with Michael 's message that they are finally free : CAST
STARRING
* Dominic Purcell as Lincoln Burrows * Wentworth Miller as Michael Scofield * Amaury Nolasco as Fernando Sucre
* Robert Knepper as Theodore " T - Bag " Bagwell * Jodi Lyn O'Keefe as Gretchen Morgan * Sarah Wayne Callies as Sara Tancredi * William Fichtner as Alexander Mahone GUEST STARRING
* Leon Russom as General Jonathan Krantz
* Chris Bruno as FBI Agent Todd Wheatley
*
Barbara Eve Harris as FBI Agent Felicia Lang
* Kim Coates as Richard Sullins
* Lori Petty as " Daddy " * Aisha Hinds as Guard Cowler * David Starzyk as Blue Phillips
*
Amy Aquino as Warden Alice Simms * Dendrie Taylor as Guard
* Richmond Arquette as Attorney Joe Daniels
*
Damien Leake as Detective Marlin * Alicia Lagano as Agatha Warren *
Joseph Will as Doctor * Sufe Bradshaw as Wife
* Dot Marie Jones as Skittlez * Rainbow Borden as Seags * Livia Trivino as Hucks
* Ian Patrick Williams as Bearded man * Peggy Dunne as Guard REFERENCES