CRANKSHAFT POSITION SENSOR
A crank sensor is an electronic device used in an internal combustion engine , both petrol and diesel , to monitor the position or rotational speed of the crankshaft .
This information is used by engine management systems to control the fuel injection or the ignition system timing and other engine parameters .
Before electronic crank sensors were available , the distributor would have to be manually adjusted to a timing mark on petrol engines .
The crank sensor can be used in combination with a similar camshaft position sensor to monitor the relationship between the pistons and valves in the engine , which is particularly important in engines with variable valve timing .
This method is also used to " synchronise " a four stroke engine upon starting , allowing the management system to know when to inject the fuel .
It is also commonly used as the primary source for the measurement of engine speed in revolutions per minute .
Common mounting locations include the main crank pulley , the flywheel , the camshaft or on the crankshaft itself .
This sensor is the 2nd most important sensor in modern - day engines after the camshaft position sensor .
When it fails , there is a probability the engine will not start , or cut out while running .
TYPES OF SENSOR Section::::Types of sensor .
There are three main types of sensor commonly in use .
The Hall Effect sensor , optical sensor , and the inductive sensor .
Hall effect sensors have the advantage over inductive sensors in that they can detect static ( non - changing ) magnetic fields .
Some engines , such as GM 's Premium V family , use crank position sensors which read a reluctor ring integral to the harmonic balancer .
This is a much more accurate method of determining the position of the crankshaft , and allows the computer to determine within a few degrees the exact position of the crankshaft ( and thereby all connected components ) at any given time .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The functional objective for the crankshaft position sensor is to determine the position and/or rotational speed ( RPM ) of the crank .
Engine Control Units use the information transmitted by the sensor to control parameters such as ignition timing and fuel injection timing .
In a diesel the sensor will control the fuel injection .
The sensor output may also be related to other sensor data including the cam position to derive the current combustion cycle , this is very important for the starting of a four stroke engine .
Sometimes , the sensor may become burnt or worn out - or just die of old age at high mileage .
One likely cause of crankshaft position sensor failure is exposure to extreme heat .
Others are vibration causing a wire to fracture or corrosion on the pins of harness connectors .
Many modern crankshaft sensors are sealed units and therefore will not be damaged by water or other fluids .
When it goes wrong , it stops transmitting the signal which contains the vital data for the ignition and other parts in the system .
A bad crank position sensor can worsen the way the engine idles , or the acceleration behaviour .
If the engine is revved up with a bad or faulty sensor , it may cause misfiring , motor vibration or backfires .
Acceleration might be hesitant , and abnormal shaking during engine idle might occur .
In the worst case the car may not start .
The first sign of crankshaft sensor failure , usually , is the refusal of the engine to start when hot but will start again once the engine has cooled .
One detail of some designs is the " three wire " inductive crank sensor whereby the third wire is actually just a co - axial shield around the two main sensor wires to prevent them from picking up stray electrical pulses from elsewhere in the vehicle engine bay .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Another type of crank sensor is used on bicycles to monitor the position of the crankset , usually for the cadence readout of a cyclocomputer .
These are usually reed switches mounted on the bicycle frame with a corresponding magnet attached to one of the pedal crankset arms .
NOTES Section::::Notes .
GMR ( giant magnetoresistance ) technology is also used for Crank , Cam rotor sensing purpose .
Mitsubishi is the first who used this technology in automotive application purpose .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Crankshaft & Camshaft Position Sensors
* Crank Position Sensor