INTERSTATE BRIDGE ( MARINETTE , WISCONSIN – MENOMINEE , MICHIGAN )
The Interstate Bridge between Marinette , Wisconsin and Menominee , Michigan carries U.S. Route 41 ( US 41 ) over the Menominee River .
The current bridge was completed in November 2005 and replaced the previous span built in 1929 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Interstate Bridge was built in 1929 for $ 700,000 ( equivalent to $ in 2019 ) to carry US 41 over the Menominee River at the state line .
This bridge replaced a series of bridges built to connect Marinette , Wisconsin and Menominee , Michigan across the river .
The first bridge was built in 1865 with a second built in 1872 .
A drawbridge was built in 1897 that connected the two communities farther upstream between downtown Marinette and Menominee 's Frenchtown neighborhood near what is now 19th Street .
The first Interstate Bridge replaced the previous bridges .
It was built at an angle across the river , prompting one local resident to describe it as being " built up and down [ the ] river .
"
This bridge served as a vital connection between the two communities across the river .
Residents of Menominee that worked in Marinette would drive as many as four times a day across the bridge in the 1930s and 1940s when families owned a single car .
The Baby Boomer generation used the bridge as part of " cruising the loop " .
The 1929 bridge was in length , consisting of eleven spans .
The construction used of dirt and of steel .
Planning for the span took about five years to hammer out the details between the two states .
Setbacks during construction included flooding of the coffer dams used in the building of the piers that supported the bridge .
The bridge opened in December 1929 , just months after the October 29 stock market crash .
The dedication ceremony for the bridge was held on June 6 , 1930 and included governors Walter J. Kohler , Sr . of Wisconsin and Fred W. Green of Michigan .
The ribbon cutters included Princess Kenoke of the Menominee Tribe .
The bridge was rehabilitated in 1970 in a project that included widening the deck and replacing the guard rails .
Another construction project in 1999 repaired the Michigan side and the slough bridge portion of the Wisconsin side of the bridge ; the project closed the bridge for six months .
RECONSTRUCTION
Section::::Reconstruction .
The Interstate Bridge was replaced on the existing foundations starting on November 1 , 2004 in a joint project between the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) and the Wisconsin Department of Transportation ( WisDOT ) .
The 13-month project was budgeted to cost $ 6.45 million ( equivalent to $ in 2019 ) .
Demolition started in the center of the bridge , sawing the deck into pieces for disposal .
Barges were positioned to catch concrete , preventing it from entering the river .
Coffer dams were installed so the piers could be broken up and removed as well .
This reconstruction was completed ahead of schedule , with the span reopening on November 22 , 2005 .
The project completely replaced the bridge above the water line with wider traffic lanes , new bicycle lanes and wider sidewalks .
Images of wild rice were sculpted into the concrete making up the bridge because " Menominee " in the local Menominee language means " wild rice " .
These sculptures were added in addition to the other decorative elements added to the new bridge including the railings and light poles .
Construction of the Interstate Bridge coincided with a project to replace the span between Marinette and Stephenson Island , which was also built in 1929 , and a refurbishment of US 41 through Marinette .
The new Interstate Bridge was dedicated on December 3 , 2005 in a ribbon - cutting ceremony that replicated the 1930 ceremony on the previous bridge .
Guest speakers included the mayors of both cities , and the Wisconsin secretary of transportation .
Catherine Anderson of Pembine , Wisconsin served as a ribbon cutter while representatives of the local elementary schools held the ribbon .
Anderson was a participant in the 1930 dedication ceremony and led the parade to the center of the bridge in a 1930 Ford .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Interstate Bridge Project photo essay