HAN LUE Han Lue is a fictional character in The Fast and the Furious franchise .
He first appears in as the mentor of Sean Boswell , dying in a collision in the film 's climax .
Han 's status as a member of Dominic Toretto 's crew was shown in the subsequent films Fast & Furious , Fast Five , Fast & Furious 6 and Furious 7 , as well as the short film Los Bandoleros .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The character was said to have been inspired by another character Kang portrayed , Han Hu in Better Luck Tomorrow , directed by Justin Lin .
When Lin was recruited to direct Tokyo Drift , he pitched the idea of adding an Asian character to be the " cool guy " specifically with Han Hu in mind .
Kang was only supposed to appear in a one - off but was brought back in the subsequent prequel films due to positive responses from audiences .
APPEARANCES
THE FAST AND THE FURIOUS : TOKYO DRIFT Section::::Appearances .
Section::::The Fast and the Furious : Tokyo Drift .
Living in Tokyo , Han uses his new - found wealth to start his own garage , as well as purchasing various expensive , modified tuner cars to store in the garage .
Han also keeps himself occupied with various women , with a club attached next door to his garage .
Additionally , he becomes involved with Tokyo 's elite street racers and one of its most prominent drifters .
At some point , he acquired a 2001 Nissan Silvia S15 Spec - S and rebuilt and restored it from the ground up , the car later being referred to by Twinkie as the Mona Lisa of the drift world .
Han also affiliates himself with Takashi , the nephew of Kamata , a Yakuza member , securing profits from various business ventures .
Unbeknownst to either Kamata or Takashi , Han begins stealing money from their operation and does so without either of them noticing for some time .
When Han meets Sean Boswell , Boswell crossed Takashi 's unspoken boundaries by speaking to his girlfriend , Neela .
Han questions why Takashi is still bothering with " high school girls " when Takashi decides to confront Sean .
When Sean accepts Takashi 's challenge to drift , Han gives Sean the keys to his Nissan Silvia , curious to see what Sean is made of .
While Sean loses the race , destroying his car in the process , Han is intrigued by what he saw in Sean for merely challenging Takashi .
The following day , Han meets Sean outside of his school and demands that he get into his car .
Han makes a point to tell Sean that he is in his debt and would be his personal " errand boy " on account of the car that he owes him .
Sean is willing to agree to the terms so long as Han teaches him how to drift .
When Sean falls out of favor with his father , Lieutenant Boswell , Sean comes to live in Han 's garage .
While there , he works on the cars available to him in the garage and Han teaches him how to drift properly .
As Sean improves , Han 's situation is complicated when Takashi becomes more forceful in threatening Sean to stay away from Neela .
Eventually Takashi confronts Han about the money he 's been stealing from his uncle .
Han does not attempt to defend his actions to Takashi .
He merely states that the " side deals " he made while under the protection of Takashi 's word were in the nature of their business .
He goes on to say that Takashi needed him and that he would 've amounted to nothing if it was n't for his help .
When Takashi becomes distracted by the presence of Neela , Han takes his chance and climbs into his car and escapes .
Takashi and his friend , Morimoto pursue him through the streets of Tokyo , but they are unable to catch him .
He protects Sean and Neela from Takashi , allowing them to get ahead of him .
When Han finally reaches the intersection of the road , Han 's car is t - boned by a Mercedes S - Class .
Han 's car is flipped onto its top .
Han , unable to escape the car , is killed in the explosion .
Some time after Han 's death , Sean Boswell meets Dominic Toretto after he requests an audience with him at the parking garage .
Dominic races Sean with the 1970 Plymouth Road Runner he won from Han years before .
LOS BANDOLEROS Section::::Los Bandoleros .
In Los Bandoleros , Han visited Mexico , where he met Dominic " Dom " Toretto and established a relationship .
Han begins " running " with Dominic for unspecified reasons .
Dominic wins 1970 Plymouth Road Runner off of Han in a race .
Han arrives in the Dominican Republic when Dominic Toretto is preparing for a new job regarding the transportation of gas .
He is picked up at the airport by the likes of Cara and Malo , Dominic 's friends .
He is later taken to Rico Santos ' house , where Dominic lives , and they have dinner with the rest of the Santos family .
He takes an immediate attraction to Cara , who shares a mutual attraction for him .
Later , he follows Dominic and Santos to the prison where Tego Leo was being kept before Santos helped him escape .
When Dominic takes to take them to a secluded club to meet the man responsible for the transport of their score , Dominic tells him to drive around the block or wait in the car .
Han instead decides to enter the club where he mingles with Cara and Malo at the bar .
When Cara asked how he met Dominic , Han briefly explained how they first met each other in Mexico .
Malo , realizing that the two were attracted to each other , asked if they wanted a room .
Cara instead gives him her drink
and she and Han leave the bar .
FAST & FURIOUS Section::::Fast & Furious .
Han is seen only in the beginning of Fast & Furious .
He along with Letty Ortiz , Toretto , Tego Leo , Rico Santos , and Cara , are hijacking a fuel tanker in the Dominican Republic .
Han and Cara hijack the first two tankers while Leo and Santos hijack the other two tankers ,
not before the truck driver gives them a little problem after seeing Letty on top of the tanker and notices that the hijacking is going on .
After the hijacking is done , Toretto disbands the crew after suspecting that the police are closing in on Toretto and his gang .
FAST FIVE Section::::Fast Five .
Han is recruited for a heist in the events of Fast Five as a precision driver and a " chameleon " .
During the events of the film , he starts to fall in love with another member of the crew , Gisele Yashar .
At the end of the film , Han and Gisele are seen driving on a highway and are in a relationship .
FAST & FURIOUS 6 Section::::Fast & Furious 6 .
When Han and Gisele arrive in London , they 're given the details of their situation with Owen Shaw and Letty Ortiz by Luke Hobbs .
During their first encounter with Shaw 's team , Han , Brian and Gisele are attacked by the sniper Adolfson , who fires on their cars once they reach Interpol .
Brian , Han and Gisele are pinned down long enough for Vegh , Jah and Klaus to escape .
Brian follows after them , but Gisele runs out into the open to fire on Jan and Klaus 's getaway car .
At the last second , Han is able to pull her out of the way and the two take cover behind a fire hydrant as Adolfson fires on them multiple times before escaping .
During the team 's attempt to stop Owen and his team from hijacking the military convoy , Han and Gisele pursue Denlinger on their motorcycles , a Harley Davidson XR1200 and Ducati Monster .
Gisele is the first to reach Dillinger , hangs on the side of his Land Rover and is nearly crushed on the side of oncoming truck , but Han jumps onto the Land Rover in time to swerve the vehicle out of the way and save her life .
When Mia Toretto is taken prisoner by Shaw , Dominic and the others are forced to let Shaw and Riley Hicks , a double agent working with both Owen and Hobbs , go to ensure her safety .
However , as soon as they 're allowed , they go after the plane Shaw is planning to take off on with Mia .
Gisele and Han are one of two teams designated with the task of keeping the plane on the ground using the harpoons .
During their efforts , Gisele is pulled out of their car by Adolfson .
Han follows after her , climbing onto the top of their car .
Though Gisele is able to fend him off , she is knocked off of Adolfson 's car .
Han is able to save at the last moment .
Gisele , realizing that Adolfson plans to kill Han , let go of Hans arms and allows herself to fall , Han unable to save her .
Before she is killed from the fall , she shoots Adolfson , knocking him off balance .
A devastated Han attacks Adolfson and throws him off of the car and into the turbine of the plane .
After the plane crashes and Dominic survives the car crash in the attempt to escape the burning plane , Mia and Brian are the only ones to approach Han and attempts to comfort him when she realizes what happened to Gisele when she is n't with him .
With their records cleared by the pardons provided by Hobbs , Han and the others return to Los Angeles .
While speaking with Roman Pearce and Tej Parker , Han ultimately decided to go to Tokyo .
In the post - credits scene of Fast & Furious 6 , Han 's death from The Fast and the Furious : Tokyo Drift is shown , and it is revealed that Deckard Shaw , Owen 's brother has driven the car that crashed into his .
FURIOUS 7
Section::::Furious 7 .
Han 's death is seen again in Furious 7 through archival footage from The Fast and the Furious :
Tokyo Drift and Fast & Furious 6 , occurring the same time a bomb package delivered to Dominic 's house goes off .
Han 's death was the reason Dominic appeared in Tokyo at the end of Tokyo Drift - to retrieve his body back to Los Angeles for burial .
After racing with Sean Boswell , Dominic receives several of Han 's personal items , including a photo of Gisele .
The crew attended Han 's funeral in Los Angeles a few days later , with Dominic spying Han 's killer Deckard Shaw watching from a distance , and giving chase , leading to their confrontation .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Han is known for munching on snacks .
As pointed out by Gisele in Fast Five , this is part of his constant need to occupy his hands , as he is a former smoker .
According to director Justin Lin , this is an Easter egg reference to the other chain - smoking Han Hu character in Better Luck Tomorrow .
Following the death of Gisele in Fast & Furious 6 , Han leaves the United States to live in Tokyo , Japan , setting up his appearance in The Fast and the Furious : Tokyo Drift .
Han was initially the only character from Tokyo Drift to appear in the subsequent films , before Sean Boswell 's appearance in Furious 7 .
Both Sung Kang and Justin Lin explain the surname " Seoul - Oh " that Han uses in Fast & Furious 6 and Furious 7 is a fake ID .
As a result , it is largely accepted by the franchise 's fanbase that Han Lue and Han Seoul
- Oh are canonically the same character .
RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Relationships .
In the short film Los Bandoleros and the film
Fast & Furious , he was in a relationship with Cara until they broke up by the time the events of Fast Five takes place .
At the end of the film and all of Fast & Furious 6 he was in a relationship with Gisele Yashar until her death in the runway battle .
CAR LIST Section::::Car list . !
Film !
Car 1994
Mazda RX-7 , with Veilside , body kit
Fast & Furious 1967
Chevrolet C - Series , with a custom tail trailer and truck tires
rowspan=4Fast Five 1970
Ford Maverick 2011 Subaru Impreza WRX STI 2011
Dodge Charger
R / T Police Car 2012
Lexus LFA
rowspan=3""Fast & Furious 6 2005
BMW E60 M52012 Dodge Charger
SRT81994 Mazda RX-7 , with Veilside , body kit
( archival footage )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS