SAURON
Sauron is the title character and main antagonist of J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings .
In the same work , he is identified as the Necromancer , mentioned in Tolkien 's earlier novel The Hobbit .
In Tolkien 's The Silmarillion ( published posthumously by Tolkien 's son Christopher Tolkien ) , he is also described as the chief lieutenant of the first Dark Lord , Morgoth .
Tolkien noted that the Ainur , the " angelic " powers of his constructed myth , " were capable of many degrees of error and failing " , but by far the worst was " the absolute Satanic rebellion and evil of Morgoth and his satellite Sauron " .
BIOGRAPHY
BEFORE CREATION OF THE WORLD Section::::Biography .
Section::::Before creation of the world .
The Ainulindalë , the cosmological myth prefixed to The Silmarillion , explains how the supreme being Eru initiated his creation by bringing into being innumerable spirits , " the offspring of his thought " , who were with him before anything else had been made .
The being later known as Sauron originated among these as an " immortal ( angelic ) spirit " .
In his origin , Sauron therefore perceived the Creator directly .
As Tolkien noted : " Sauron could not , of course , be a ' sincere ' atheist .
Though one of the minor spirits created before the world , he knew Eru , according to his measure . "
In the terminology of Tolkien 's invented language of Quenya , these angelic spirits were called Ainur .
Those who entered the physical world were called Valar , especially the most powerful ones .
The lesser Ainur who entered the world , of whom Sauron was one , were called Maiar .
In Tolkien 's letters , the author noted that Sauron " was of course a ' divine ' person ( in the terms of this mythology ; a lesser member of the race of Valar ) " .
Tolkien noted that he was of a " far higher order " than the Maiar who later came to Middle - earth as the Wizards Gandalf , Radagast , and Saruman .
As created by Eru , the Ainur were all good and uncorrupt , as Elrond stated in The Lord of the Rings : " Nothing is evil in the beginning .
Even Sauron was not so . "
Rebellion originated with the Vala Melkor ( as Morgoth was called before he turned to darkness ) .
According to a story meant as a parable of events beyond Elvish comprehension , Eru let his spirit - children perform a great Music , the Music of the Ainur , developing a theme revealed by Eru himself .
For a while the cosmic choir made wondrous music , but then Melkor tried to increase his own glory by weaving into his song thoughts and ideas that were not in accordance with the original theme . "
Straightway discord arose around him , and many that sang nigh him grew despondent ... but some began to attune their music to his rather than to the thought which they had at first . "
The discord Melkor created would have dire consequences , as this singing was a kind of template for the world : " The evils of the world were not at first in the great Theme , but entered with the discords of Melkor . "
However , " Sauron was not a beginner of discord ; and he probably knew more of the Music than did Melkor , whose mind had always been filled with his own plans and devices .
"
Apparently Sauron was not even one of the spirits that immediately began to attune their music to that of Melkor , since it is noted elsewhere that his fall occurred later ( see below ) .
The cosmic Music now represented the conflict between good and evil .
Finally , Eru abruptly brought the Song of Creation to an end .
To show the spirits , faithful or otherwise , what they had done , Eru gave independent being to the now - marred Music .
This resulted in the manifestation of the material World , Eä , where the drama of good and evil would play out and be resolved .
FIRST AGE
Section::::First Age .
Entering Eä at the beginning of time , the Valar and Maiar tried to build and organize the world according to the will of Eru .
Each Maia was associated with one of the powerful Valar whom they served ; for example , Sauron was prominent among the Maiar who served Aulë the Smith , the great craftsman of the Valar .
As a result , Sauron came to possess great knowledge of the physical substances of the world , forging , and all manner of craftsmanship — emerging as " a great craftsman of the household of Aulë " .
Sauron would always retain the " scientific " knowledge he derived from the great Vala of Craft : " In his beginning he was of the Maiar of Aulë , and he remained mighty in the lore of that people . "
Sauron 's original Elvish name in Valinor was Mairon ( Quenya for " the Admirable " ) , but this name was not used anymore after he joined Melkor .
In Beleriand , he was called in Sindarin Gorthu " Mist of Fear " and Gorthaur " The Cruel " .
However , during the Second Age , Sauron continued to call himself Tar - Mairon ( Quenya " King Excellent , the Admirable King " ) .
SAURON 'S
FALL
Section::::Sauron 's fall .
Melkor opposed the other Valar , who remained faithful to Eru and tried to carry out the Creator 's designs .
Within the larger universe , they eventually focused on developing the world of Arda ( Earth , or the entire solar system ) .
Around this time , Sauron fell victim to Melkor 's corrupting influence : " In the beginning of Arda , Melkor seduced him to his allegiance . "
As for Sauron 's motives , Tolkien noted that " it had been his virtue ( and therefore also the cause of his fall ... ) that he loved order and coordination , and disliked all confusion and wasteful friction " .
Thus , " it was the apparent will and power of Melkor to effect his designs quickly and masterfully that had first attracted Sauron to him " .
For a while , Sauron apparently kept up the pretence that he was a faithful servant of the Valar , all the while feeding Melkor information about their doings .
Thus , when the Valar made Almaren as their first physical abode in the world , " Melkor knew of all that was done ; for even then he had secret friends and spies among the Maiar whom he had converted to his cause , and of these the chief , as after became known , was Sauron . "
Melkor soon destroyed Almaren , and the Valar established a new abode in the Uttermost West : the Blessed Realm of Valinor .
They still did not perceive Sauron 's treachery , for he too became " a being of Valinor " .
At some point , Sauron left the Blessed Realm and went to Middle - earth , the central continent of Arda , where Melkor had established his stronghold .
In one text , Tolkien wrote of Sauron that " in Valinor he had dwelt among the people of the gods , but there Morgoth had drawn him to evil and to his service " .
Sauron deserted his service to the Valar and openly joined their great enemy : "
Because of his admiration of Strength he had become a follower of Morgoth and fell with him down into the depths of evil . "
THE LIEUTENANT OF MORGOTH Section::::The Lieutenant of Morgoth .
After joining his new master in Middle - earth , Sauron proved to be a devoted and capable servant : " While Morgoth still stood , Sauron did not seek his own supremacy , but worked and schemed for another , desiring the triumph of Melkor , whom in the beginning he had adored .
He thus was often able to achieve things , first conceived by Melkor , which his master did not or could not complete in the furious haste of his malice . "
" In all the deeds of Melkor the Morgoth upon Arda , in his vast works and in the deceits of his cunning , Sauron had a part . "
In chapter three of The Silmarillion , Tolkien writes that by the time the Elves awoke in the world , Sauron had become Melkor 's lieutenant and was given command over the newly built stronghold of Angband .
To protect the Elves , the Valar made war on Melkor and captured him , but could not find Sauron .
Thus , " when Melkor was made captive , Sauron escaped and lay hid in Middle - earth ; and it can in this way be understood how the breeding of the Orcs ( no doubt already begun ) went on with increasing speed " .
In the Blessed Realm , Melkor feigned reform , but eventually escaped back to Middle - earth , holding the Silmarils of Fëanor .
By then , Sauron had " secretly repaired Angband for the help of his Master when he returned ; and there the dark places underground were already manned with hosts of the Orcs before Melkor came back at last , as Morgoth the Black Enemy " .
Shortly after the return of Morgoth , the Noldorin Elves also left the Blessed Realm of Valinor in the Uttermost West , against the counsel of the Valar , to wage war on Morgoth , who had stolen the Silmarils .
In that war , Sauron served as Morgoth 's chief lieutenant , surpassing all others in rank , such as Gothmog , the Lord of Balrogs .
Known as Gorthaur the Cruel , Sauron was at that time a master of illusions and shapeshifting ; werewolves and vampires were his servants , chief among them Draugluin , Father of Werewolves , and his vampire herald Thuringwethil .
When Morgoth left Angband to corrupt the newly discovered Men , Sauron directed the war against the Elves .
He conquered the Elvish island of Tol Sirion and its watchtower Minas Tirith , so that it became known as Tol - in - Gaurhoth , the Isle of Werewolves .
Ten years later , Finrod Felagund , the king of Nargothrond and former lord of Tol Sirion , came there with Beren and ten Elves , disguised as Orcs .
However Sauron had them brought before him .
Finrod had a magical battle with Sauron , but was defeated ( in part because of the curse of Fëanor ) .
All 12 were thrown into Sauron 's dungeons and the 10 Elves were devoured by wolves .
Finrod died fighting a wolf to save Beren .
Soon afterwards Lúthien and Huan the Wolfhound arrived , hoping to rescue Beren .
Sauron sent werewolves against them , including their sire Draugluin , but Huan slew them all .
Aware of a prophecy to the effect that Huan would be killed by the greatest wolf ever , Sauron himself assumed a monstrous wolf - like form and attacked him .
But the prophecy actually applied to the still - unborn Carcharoth , and Sauron could not prevail against Huan , despite transforming into a serpent and his own form .
Eventually , Huan had Sauron by the throat .
Lúthien gave Sauron two options : either surrender to her the magical control he had established over Tol - in - Gaurhoth , or have his body destroyed so that his naked ghost would have to endure the scorn of Morgoth .
Sauron yielded , and Huan let him go .
Lúthien destroyed the tower and rescued Beren from the dungeons .
Sauron fled in the form of a huge vampiric bat , and spent some time as a vampire in the woods of Taur - nu - Fuin .
Nothing is told of his subsequent activities in the First Age until the end .
Following the voyage of Eärendil to the Blessed Realm , the Valar finally moved against Morgoth .
In the resulting War of Wrath , the Dark Lord was defeated and cast into the Outer Void beyond the world .
But " Sauron fled from the Great Battle and escaped " .
Chastened , Sauron assumed his fairest form and approached Eönwë , emissary of the Valar , who nevertheless could not pardon a Maia like himself .
Through Eönwë , Manwë as Lord of the Valar " commanded Sauron to come before him for judgement , but [ he ] had left room for repentance and ultimate rehabilitation " .
Although Sauron 's repentance before Eönwë was genuine , if out of fear , he was ashamed to return to Valinor and receive a judgement or sentence due to his long service to Morgoth .
Furthermore , the influence of his former master was still strong , so he escaped and hid in Middle - earth .
SECOND AGE Section::::Second Age .
About 500 years into the Second Age , Sauron reappeared .
" Bereft of his lord ...
[he ] fell into the folly of imitating him " .
" Very slowly , beginning with fair motives : the reorganizing and rehabilitation of Middle - earth , ' neglected by the gods , ' he becomes a reincarnation of Evil , and a thing lusting for Complete Power " , eventually rising to become " master and god of Men " .
As for Sauron 's " fair motives " , Tolkien emphasized that at this time he " was not indeed wholly evil , not unless all ' reformers ' who want to hurry up with ' reconstruction ' and ' reorganization ' are wholly evil , even before pride and the lust to exert their will eat them up " .
" Though the only real good in , or rational motive for , all this ordering and planning and organization was the good of all inhabitants of Arda ( even admitting Sauron 's right to be their supreme lord ) , his ' plans ' , the idea coming from his own isolated mind , became the sole object of his will , and an end , the End , in itself . ...
[ H]is capability of corrupting other minds , and even engaging their service , was a residue from the fact that his original desire for ' order ' had really envisaged the good estate ( especially physical well - being ) of his ' subjects ' . "
THE RINGS OF POWER Section::::The Rings of Power .
As part of a plan to seduce the Elves into his service , Sauron assumed a fair appearance as Annatar , " Lord of Gifts " , befriended the Elven - smiths of Eregion , led by Celebrimbor , and counselled them in arts and magic .
Sauron hinted that he was an emissary of the Valar , specifically of Aulë , whom the Noldor in Exile held in high regard .
Some of the Elves distrusted him , especially Galadriel and Gil - galad , the High King of the Noldor .
The Elves in Eregion , however , did not heed their warnings .
With Sauron 's assistance , the Elven - smiths forged the Rings of Power , which conferred great power upon their bearers .
He then secretly forged the One Ring in the volcanic Mount Doom in Mordor .
This " One Ring to rule them all " had the power to dominate the other Rings and enslave their wearers to Sauron 's will .
The Rings of Power were extremely potent , however ; to create an instrument that could dominate even them , Sauron was forced to transfer a great part of his native power into it .
Yet " while he wore it , his power on earth was actually enhanced " .
Sauron 's plan would have succeeded had the Elves not detected his influence when he put on the One Ring .
It was then
the Elves saw him for who he really was , removed their Rings , and did not use them for as long as Sauron retained the One Ring .
Enraged , Sauron initiated a great war and conquered much of the land west of Anduin .
The Three Rings , however , had been forged by Celebrimbor himself without Sauron 's help .
These rings were saved and remained in the hands of the Elves , specifically Gil - galad , Círdan , and Galadriel .
This began the Dark Years .
Sauron overran Eregion , killed Celebrimbor , leader of the Elven - smiths , and seized the Seven and the Nine Rings of Power that had been previously forged with his assistance .
Sauron besieged Imladris , battled Moria and Lothlórien , and pushed further into Gil - galad 's realm .
The Elves were hard pressed to defend Lindon and the Havens , but in the nick of time the powerful army from Númenor arrived to their aid , defeating Sauron 's forces and driving the remnant back to Mordor .
The Númenóreans were descended from the Three Houses of the Edain who helped the Elves in their war against Morgoth .
They lived on the island of Númenor in the seas between Middle - earth and Valinor , a reward for their service from the Valar , and theirs was the most powerful kingdom of Men at this time .
In Unfinished Tales , " The History of Galadriel and Celeborn " states that Sauron and his bodyguard were all that was left of his original army .
Gil - galad 's power after the War was such that Sauron was unable to move out of Mordor for some time .
RESURGENCE FROM MORDOR Section::::Resurgence from Mordor .
From this time on , Sauron became known as the Dark Lord of Mordor .
Sauron fortified Mordor and completed the Dark Tower of Barad - dûr , already centuries in the building .
He distributed the remaining rings of the Seven and the Nine to lords of Dwarves and Men .
Dwarves proved too resilient to bend to his will , but the Men were enslaved by Sauron as the Nazgûl , his most feared servants .
Well aware of the strength of the Númenóreans after his earlier defeat , Sauron withdrew from the coasts and for a long time avoided directly challenging them , although he managed to use some of the Nine rings to snare three of their great lords .
Sauron regained control over most of the creatures that had served Morgoth in the First Age ( such as Orcs and Trolls ) .
Sauron also gained power over most of the Men in the East and the South , becoming their god - king .
Toward the end of the Second Age , as the Númenóreans withdrew from the coasts after their people were divided by strife over the fear of death , Sauron began assailing their Middle - earth strongholds and assumed the titles of Lord of the Earth and King of Men .
DESTRUCTION OF NÚMENOR Section::::Destruction of Númenor .
Toward the end of the Second Age , Ar - Pharazôn , who would turn out to be the last and most powerful of the Númenórean kings , had just ascended to the throne when he was angered by reports of Sauron 's increasing power .
In a show of force , Ar - Pharazôn led a massive army to Middle - earth to reassert Númenórean dominance .
Sauron , realizing he could not defeat the Númenóreans with military strength , surrendered .
Clad in a beautiful incarnation , he came to Ar - Pharazôn 's camp to swear fealty to the king , and allowed himself to be taken as a prisoner to Númenor .
This was part of his plan to corrupt Númenórean civilization from inside . "
Sauron 's personal ' surrender ' was voluntary and cunning : he got free transport to Númenor . "
When Ar - Pharazôn in his arrogance took Sauron hostage , he failed to realise with whom he was dealing : Sauron " was of course a ' divine ' person ... and thus far too powerful to be controlled in this way .
He steadily got Arpharazôn 's [ sic ] mind under his own control , and in the event corrupted many of the Númenóreans . "
The Akallabêth , the account of the history of Númenor , does not specifically mention the One Ring much , and it has been suggested that Sauron left it at Barad - dûr before he became a hostage of Ar - Pharazôn .
In his letters , however , Tolkien noted that Sauron " naturally had the One Ring , and so very soon dominated the minds and wills of most of the Númenóreans " .
Through the power of the Ring , Sauron soon became an advisor of the king , and he used his influence to undermine the religion of Númenor .
He represented Eru as an invention of the Valar that they used to justify their decrees , and substituted the worship of Melkor , with himself as high priest , for that of Eru .
The worship of Melkor , with human sacrifice , became mandatory in Númenor .
Besides introducing the worship of Melkor , Sauron also helped the people to design greater engines and amass more wealth , and soon the Númenóreans returned to Middle - earth where they cruelly hunted and enslaved the Men there for eventual sacrifice .
While Sauron ruled behind the scenes , Ar - Pharazôn became the mightiest tyrant in the world since Melkor - Morgoth himself .
Ar - Pharazôn , despite his power , eventually became fearful of his approaching death .
Sauron convinced the king that he now had the status to take what was rightfully his , and suggested that the Númenóreans send a great armada upon Aman in order to seize immortality by force from the Valar .
While he led the King to believe that it was actually possible to conquer the Blessed Realm , Sauron knew well that the godlike Valar would utterly defeat any mortal army .
Sauron did expect the Valar to respond by destroying Ar - Pharazôn and his naval might , thus removing Sauron 's greatest obstacle to dominance of Middle - earth .
But the Valar had no direct dominance over the Children of Eru , so in the face of this challenge they laid down their guardianship of the world and appealed to Eru for a solution .
Eru 's divine intervention did indeed bury the king 's armies and drown the armada ; but Númenor itself was swallowed by the sea , and the Blessed Realm was removed from the physical world .
Sauron had not foreseen this , and his body was destroyed in the cataclysm .
Having expended much effort in the corruption of Númenor , he was diminished , particularly as he forever lost the ability to take a fair form .
Yet his spirit rose out of the abyss , and he was able to carry with him the one thing that mattered most .
Wrote Tolkien , " I do not think one need boggle at this spirit carrying off the One Ring , upon which his power of dominating minds now largely depended . "
In " Akallabêth " , Tolkien wrote that Sauron " took up " the Ring after his spirit returned to Middle - earth .
According to " Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age " , Sauron then realized that Gil - galad 's power had grown great during his absence and now spread across the Misty Mountains and Greenwood the Great , drawing nigh to places that Sauron initially thought secure before leaving for Númenór .
WAR AGAINST
THE LAST ALLIANCE Section::::War against the Last Alliance .
Led by Elendil , nine ships carrying the faithful Númenóreans were saved from the Downfall and escaped the cataclysm .
These Númenórean exiles founded the kingdoms of Gondor and Arnor in Middle - earth .
At first they believed that Sauron had perished in the Downfall , but it soon became evident that the Dark Lord had returned to Mordor when Mount Doom erupted .
The Appendices in The Return of the King recount that while Sauron 's power had not yet been fully rebuilt , he had decided to attack the Númenóreans before they could become too strong in their new realms .
Sauron struck first , capturing Minas Ithil and destroying the White Tree , although Isildur managed to escape down the Anduin and seek Elendil , while Anárion defended Osgiliath and for a time drove Sauron 's forces back to the mountains .
In " Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age " and The Fellowship of the Ring , Tolkien wrote that Elendil and his sons forged the Last Alliance of Elves and Men with Gil - galad , as they realized that unless they united , Sauron would destroy them each individually .
A great battle ensued between the Alliance and the Host of Sauron on the battle plain of Dagorlad .
The Alliance emerged victorious and invaded Mordor , laying siege to Barad - dûr for seven years .
Finally , Sauron was forced to emerge from his tower and fight against the Last Alliance himself .
During the final challenge on the slopes of Mount Doom , Sauron was slain by Gil - galad and Elendil , who themselves perished in the act .
When Elendil fell , his sword Narsil broke beneath him .
Isildur , Elendil 's surviving son , took up the hilt - shard of Narsil and cut the One Ring from Sauron 's hand . "
Then Sauron was for that time vanquished , and he forsook his body , and his spirit fled far away and hid in waste places . "
Elrond and Círdan , Gil - galad 's lieutenants , urged Isildur to destroy the Ring by casting it into Mount Doom , but he refused and kept it for his own : " This I will have as weregild for my father 's death , and my brother 's .
Was it not I that dealt the Enemy his death - blow ? "
THIRD AGE
Section::::Third Age .
The traumatic loss of the Ring greatly weakened Sauron ; he spent the first thousand years of the Third Age as a shapeless , dormant evil .
Nonetheless , his servants were involved in several events that gradually weakened the Númenórean exile kingdoms , although it is unclear if Sauron was actively involved in directing them .
A few years after the War of the Last Alliance , Isildur 's army , while marching to Rivendell , was ambushed and overwhelmed by a band of Orcs in what became known as the Disaster of the Gladden Fields .
Isildur put on the Ring and attempted to escape by swimming across Anduin , but the Ring — which had a will of its own and a desire to return to Sauron — slipped from his finger .
He was spotted and killed by Orc archers .
The Ring would remain lost beneath the water for about 2461 years ( from year 2 of the Third Age until Déagol found it in 2463 ) .
THE NECROMANCER OF DOL GULDUR Section::::The Necromancer of Dol Guldur .
Around the year 1050 , a shadow of fear fell on the forest later called Mirkwood .
As would later become known , this was the first sign of Sauron 's remanifestation , but for many years he was not recognized .
He was known ( as in The Hobbit ) as the Necromancer .
He established a stronghold called Dol Guldur , " Hill of Sorcery " , in the southern part of the forest not far from Lórien .
Shortly after the shadow fell upon the forest , the Valar sent five Maiar to oppose this growing power .
They took the form of Wizards , the most prominent being Gandalf and Saruman .
By about 1100 , " the Wise " ( the Wizards and the chief Elves ) became aware that an evil power had made a stronghold at Dol Guldur .
Initially , it was assumed that this was one of the Nazgûl rather than Sauron himself .
About the year 1300 , the Nazgûl did indeed reappear .
In the ensuing centuries , the chief of the Nazgûl , the Witch - king of Angmar , repeatedly attacked the northern realm of Arnor , first in 1409 and finally overrunning and effectively destroying the realm in 1974 .
Though driven from the north in the following year by the Elves and forces from Gondor , the Witch - king retreated to Mordor and gathered the Nazgûl there .
In 2000 , the Nazgûl issued from Mordor to besiege the city of Minas Ithil , in the mountains bordering Mordor .
The city fell in 2002 , and became known as Minas Morgul .
With the city the Nazgûl also captured the palantír of Minas Ithil , one of the seven seeing stones that Elendil 's people had brought with them from Númenor at the eve of the Downfall .
As the power of Dol Guldur grew , the Wise came to suspect that the controlling force behind the Witch - king and the other Nazgûl was indeed their original master , Sauron .
In 2063 , Gandalf went to Dol Guldur and made the first attempt to learn the truth , but Sauron retreated and hid in the East .
It would be almost 400 years before he returned to his stronghold in Mirkwood , and his identity remained undetermined .
Sauron finally reappeared with increased strength in 2460 .
About the same time , the long - lost Ruling Ring was finally recovered from the River Anduin , found by a Stoor Hobbit named Déagol .
Déagol 's friend and relative , Sméagol , coveted the Ring and killed Déagol to get it , and was swiftly corrupted by it .
Banished by his family , Smeagol took the Ring , which he called his " Precious " .
His life unnaturally prolonged by the Ring , he hid in the Misty Mountains for centuries , becoming further corrupted and eventually degenerating into the creature Gollum .
In 2850 , Gandalf made a second attempt to spy out Dol Guldur .
Stealing into the stronghold , he was finally able to confirm the identity of its lord .
He reported this to the White Council of Elves and Wizards , but Saruman , hoping to acquire the One Ring for himself , dissuaded the Council from acting against Sauron .
Eventually , the Wise put forth their might and drove Sauron from Mirkwood in 2941 .
During the White Council 's delay he had , however , prepared his next move , and was willing to abandon Dol Guldur .
Just before Sauron fled Dol Guldur , the hobbit Bilbo Baggins , on an improbable adventure with a party of Dwarves , stumbled across the Ring deep within the Misty Mountains .
After his quest was over , Bilbo brought the Ring back to Hobbiton in the Shire .
Decades later , he passed it on to his heir , Frodo .
By then , Sauron 's power had recovered to the point that he was able to extend his will over Middle - earth .
The Eye of Sauron , as his attention and force of will was perceived , became a symbol of oppression and fear .
Following his expulsion from Dol Guldur , he returned to Mordor in 2942 , openly declared himself nine years later , and started raising Barad - dûr anew .
In preparation for a final war against Men and Elves , he bred armies of monstrous orcs , known as Uruks .
THE WAR OF THE RING Section::::The War of the Ring .
The three volumes of The Lord of the Rings tell the story of Sauron 's last attempt at achieving world dominion , as the Third Age reached its climax in the years 3018 and 3019 .
In The Fellowship of the Ring , Gandalf deduced that the ring that Bilbo had found in Gollum 's cave was indeed Sauron 's lost Master - ring .
He informed Frodo about the true nature of the heirloom Bilbo had left for him , and its terrible potential if Sauron should ever regain it : "
The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to beat down all resistance , break the last defences , and cover all the lands in a second darkness .
He lacks the One Ring ...
So he is seeking it , seeking it , and all his thought is bent on it . "
Gandalf went to Saruman for advice , but discovered that he had been corrupted by his long studies of Sauron .
Using the palantír in the tower of Orthanc , Saruman was now in communication with the Dark Lord and acted as his ally , though he also secretly hoped to take the Ring for himself and use its power to supplant Sauron .
Gandalf was held captive atop Orthanc for a time , but soon escaped with the help of one of the giant Eagles of Manwë .
Having captured and tortured Gollum , Sauron learned that the Ring had been found by a Hobbit named " Baggins " .
Sauron sent the Nazgûl to the Shire , Bilbo 's home , where they found that both Bilbo and Frodo had left .
The Nazgûl pursued and nearly killed Frodo , but they were defeated near Rivendell by the Elf - lord Glorfindel and by Aragorn , Isildur 's heir , whom Gandalf had sent to protect the Hobbits .
In Rivendell , Elrond convened a high council of the peoples of Middle - earth to decide how to handle the crisis .
The council determined that the Ring must be destroyed where it was forged , since it was utterly impervious to any other flame than the volcanic fires at its place of making , Orodruin .
Frodo and Sam joined the Fellowship of the Ring , accepting the council 's mission to cast it into the volcano .
The Fellowship was eventually broken when one of its members , Boromir , tried to take the Ring from Frodo ; in the ensuing chaos , Boromir was killed by Orcs , and Frodo and Sam went out on their own toward Mordor .
In The Two Towers , Saruman used his own army on Sauron 's behalf and invaded Rohan .
Gandalf , Théoden King of Rohan , and the Ents , led by Treebeard , finally defeated Saruman 's forces .
His stronghold at Isengard was overthrown and Saruman left trapped within the Tower of Orthanc .
Thus , one of Sauron 's most powerful allies was neutralized .
During Saruman 's confrontation with Gandalf , the palantír of Orthanc fell into the hands of the Fellowship , and Gandalf handed it over to Aragorn .
In The Return of the King , Aragorn used it to show himself to Sauron ( who still controlled another Seeing Stone , presumably the one captured from Minas Ithil centuries earlier ) .
Aragorn was leading Sauron to think that he now had the Ring and was preparing to turn its power against its maker .
The Dark Lord was troubled by this revelation , and therefore attacked sooner than he had planned by sending an army to overthrow Minas Tirith , capital of Gondor .
( See Battle of the Pelennor Fields . )
Immediately after the huge army left Mordor from the fortress of Minas Morgul , which was formerly Minas Ithil , Frodo and Sam attempted to enter Mordor through the pass of Cirith Ungol in the mountains above .
They had been previously met by Gollum , whom Sauron had earlier released from captivity .
For a while , Gollum had acted as a guide for Frodo and Sam .
However , he finally betrayed them to Shelob – a monstrous , spider - like creature that guarded the pass .
( Sauron is said to have called Shelob his " cat " , sending her the occasional prisoner to be devoured . )
In the end , Sam drove off both Gollum and Shelob , but Frodo had been stung by Shelob and appeared to have died from her venom .
The Orcs found Frodo 's body and stripped him of his gear , but Sam ( thinking his friend dead ) had already secured the Ring .
Frodo regained consciousness and was freed from the orcs by Sam , and the two started the grueling journey across the plains of Mordor towards Mount Doom .
Aragorn marched on the Black Gate of Mordor with 7,000 men , knowing this force was far too small to actually defeat Sauron , but intending to cause a diversion to draw Sauron 's armies away while Frodo and Sam journeyed to Mount Doom .
After a brief encounter with the Mouth of Sauron , the battle was joined and went very poorly for the outnumbered Gondor / Rohan armies .
Now wrongly convinced that Aragorn had the Ring , Sauron apparently reacted just as Gandalf had thought he would : " I will crush him , and what he has taken in his insolence shall be mine again for ever . "
Even as the Captains of the West were about to be utterly defeated by the superior might of Sauron 's grand armies , Frodo reached his goal , entering the fiery interior of Mount Doom .
However , his will failed at the last moment ; unable to resist the growing power of the Ring , he put it on his finger and claimed it for his own .
Sauron was instantly aware of him , and his gaze turned immediately to the Door in the Mountain .
Recalling his remaining Nazgûl from the ongoing battle , he commanded them to hasten to Mount Doom in a desperate attempt to secure the Ring .
It was too late , however : Gollum attacked Frodo , bit the Ring from his finger , then lost his footing and fell with the Ring into the fire .
With " a roar and a great confusion of noise " , the One Ring perished along with all the power Sauron had invested in it .
Tolkien later commented in one of his letters that Gollum 's convenient slip was an immediate intervention by Eru himself : Gollum 's fate was " bound up with that of the ring " , as Gandalf predicted in the Mines of Moria .
At the Ring 's destruction , Sauron 's power evaporated and his form in Middle - earth was destroyed .
His departing spirit towered above Mordor like a black cloud , but was blown away by a powerful wind from the West ( the direction of the Blessed Realm and the Valar ) .
His constructions crumbled , the Nazgûl were consumed in a hail of fire , and his armies , suddenly left with no direction , were easily defeated .
Gandalf had predicted what the destruction of the Ring would mean to Sauron : " If it is destroyed , then he will fall , and his fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising ever again .
For he will lose the best part of the strength that was native to him in his beginning , and all that was made or begun with that power will crumble , and he will be maimed for ever , becoming a mere spirit of malice that gnaws itself in the shadows , but can not again grow or take shape .
And so a great evil of this world will be removed . "
NAMES AND TITLES Section::::Names and titles .
In some of Tolkien 's notes , it is said that Sauron 's original name was ' Mairon or " the admirable " , though this was altered after he was suborned by Melkor .
Despite this , he continued to call himself Mairon the Admirable , or Tar - Mairon " King Excellent " , until after the downfall of Númenor . "
The name Sauron ( from an earlier form Thauron ) originates from the adjective saura " foul , putrid " in Tolkien 's invented language of Quenya , and can be translated as " the Abhorred " or " the Abomination " .
In Sindarin ( another Elf - language created by Tolkien )
he is called Gorthaur , " the Abhorred Dread " or " the Dread Abomination " .
He is also called the Nameless Enemy .
The Dúnedain ( the descendants of the Númenóreans ) call him " Sauron the Deceiver " due to his role in the Downfall of Númenor and the forging of the Rings of Power .
In the Númenórean ( Adûnaic ) tongue he was also known as Zigûr , The Wizard .
His two most common titles , the " Dark Lord of Mordor " and the " Lord of the Rings " , appear only a few times in The Lord of the Rings .
His other titles or variants thereof include " Base Master of Treachery " , " The Great Deceiver " , the " Dark Lord " , the " Dark Power " , " Lord of Barad - dûr " , the " Red Eye " , the " Ring - maker " and the " Sorcerer " .
In the First Age ( as detailed in The Silmarillion ) he was called the " Lord of Werewolves " of Tol - in - Gaurhoth .
In the Second Age he assumed the name Annatar , which means " Lord of Gifts " , and Aulendil , meaning " Friend of Aulë " , as well as Artano , meaning " High - Smith " , with which he assumed a new identity and tricked the Elves into working with him to create the Rings .
In the Third Age he was known for a time as the Necromancer of Dol Guldur because his true identity was still unknown .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
Nowhere does Tolkien provide a detailed description of Sauron 's appearance during any of his incarnations .
According to The Silmarillion , Sauron was initially able to change his appearance at will .
In the beginning he assumed a beautiful form , but after switching his allegiance to Morgoth , he took a sinister shape .
In the First Age , Gorlim was at one point brought into " the dreadful presence of Sauron " , but the only concrete hint about his appearance is a reference to his daunting eyes .
As part of a plan to destroy Huan , Sauron took the form of the greatest werewolf in Middle - earth 's history .
When the plan backfired , he assumed a serpent - like form , and finally changed back " from monster to his own accustomed form " .
The implication is that his " accustomed form " was not , at least , overtly monstrous .
It is understood to have been humanoid .
Sauron took a beautiful appearance once again at the end of the First Age in an effort to charm Eönwë , near the beginning of the Second Age when appearing as Annatar to the Elves , and again near the end of the Second Age when corrupting the men of Númenor .
One version of the story describes , in general terms , the impression Sauron made on the Númenóreans .
He appeared " as a man , or one in man 's shape , but greater than any even of the race of Númenor in stature ...
And it seemed to men that Sauron was great , though they feared the light of his eyes .
To many he appeared fair , to others terrible ; but to some evil . "
Like Morgoth , Sauron eventually lost the ability to change his physical form ( his hröa ) .
After the destruction of his fair form in the fall of Númenor , Sauron was unable to take a pleasing appearance or veil his power again .
Thereafter , at the end of the Second Age and again in the Third , he always took the shape of a terrible dark lord .
His first incarnation after the Downfall of Númenor was extremely hideous , " an image of malice and hatred made visible " .
Isildur recorded that Sauron 's hand " was black , and yet burned like fire ... " .
Gil - galad perished from Sauron 's heat .
In one of his letters Tolkien states that Sauron had a physical form in the Third Age :
TOLKIEN 'S ILLUSTRATION
Section::::Tolkien 's illustration . includes a watercolour illustration of Sauron made by Tolkien himself ( shown at the top of the article ) .
It appears to show a moment in the book occurring immediately after the destruction of the Ring , when the armies of the West saw a towering , dark shape above Mordor , stretching out a threatening arm towards them before the figure dissolved .
Since the illustration refers to a more - or - less visionary moment and is moreover highly sketchy ( a second sketch of Sauron 's arm appears beneath the arm itself ) , the image should not necessarily be pressed too hard for details about Sauron 's appearance .
The head , right arm and upper torso of an apparently humanoid figure are seen .
The arm is black , the rest of the body is grey , except for a red eye .
No other facial features can be made out .
A series of spikes are visible on Sauron 's head , possibly suggesting a crown .
The mountains of Mordor are seen under the outstretched arm , confirming the enormous size of Sauron 's final apparition .
EYE OF SAURON Section::::Eye of Sauron .
Throughout The Lord of the Rings , " the Eye " ( the Red Eye , the Evil Eye , the Lidless Eye , the Great Eye ) is the image most often associated with Sauron .
Sauron 's Orcs bore the symbol of the Eye on their helmets and shields , and referred to him as the " Eye " because he did not allow his name to be written or spoken , according to Aragorn ( a notable exception to this rule was his emissary , the Mouth of Sauron ) .
Also , the Lord of the Nazgûl threatened Éowyn with torture before the " Lidless Eye " at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields .
Frodo had a vision of the Eye in the Mirror of Galadriel :
Later , Tolkien writes as if Frodo and Sam really glimpse the Eye directly .
The mists surrounding Barad - dûr are briefly withdrawn , and :
This raises the question of whether an " Eye " was Sauron 's actual manifestation , or whether he had a body beyond the Eye .
Gollum ( who was tortured by Sauron in person ) tells Frodo that Sauron has , at least , a " Black Hand " with four fingers .
The missing finger was cut off when Isildur took the Ring , and the finger was still missing when Sauron reappeared centuries later .
Tolkien writes in The Silmarillion that " the Eye of Sauron
the Terrible few could endure " even before his body was lost in the War of the Last Alliance .
In the draft text of the climactic moments of The Lord of the Rings , " the Eye " stands for Sauron 's very person , with emotions and thoughts :
Christopher Tolkien comments : " The passage is notable in showing the degree to which my father had come to identify the Eye of Barad - dûr with the mind and will of Sauron , so that he could speak of ' its wrath , its fear , its thought ' .
In the second text ... he shifted from ' its ' to ' his ' as he wrote out the passage anew . "
Most adaptations of the story to visual media depict the Eye as visibly present .
The film adaptations directed by Peter Jackson depict the Eye of Sauron as an all - seeing eye , and his prequel adaptation shows it as an extended aura about Sauron 's spiritual essence , which is a silhouette of his physical form and appears as the eye 's slit pupil .
CONCEPT AND CREATION Section::::Concept and creation .
Since the earliest versions of The Silmarillion legendarium as detailed in the History of Middle - earth series , Sauron underwent many changes .
The prototype or precursor Sauron - figure was a giant monstrous cat , the Prince of Cats .
Called Tevildo , Tifil and Tiberth among other names , this character played the role later taken by Sauron in the earliest version of the story of Beren and Tinúviel in The Book of Lost Tales .
The Prince of Cats was later replaced by Thû , the Necromancer .
The name was then changed to Gorthû , Sûr , and finally to Sauron .
Gorthû , in the form Gorthaur remained in The Silmarillion ; both Thû and Sauron name the character in the Lay of Leithian .
The story of Beren and Lúthien also features the heroic hound Huan and involved the subtext of cats versus dogs in its earliest form .
Later the cats were changed to wolves or werewolves , with the Sauron - figure becoming the Lord of Werewolves .
Prior to the publication of The Silmarillion ( 1977 ) , Sauron 's origins and true identity were unclear to those without full access to Tolkien 's notes .
In early editions of Robert Foster 's The Complete Guide to Middle - earth , Sauron is described as " probably of the Eldar elves " .
Yet there were other critics who essentially hit the mark .
As early as 1967 , W. H. Auden conjectured that Sauron might have been a Vala , long before it became known that Tolkien had indeed described him as " a lesser member of the race of Valar " ( see full quote above ) .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
In film versions of The Lord of the Rings , Sauron has been portrayed as either a humanoid creature ( as in Ralph Bakshi 's 1978 animated version , The Lord of the Rings ) or
a
physical , disembodied Eye ( as in the 1980 animated The Return of the King ) , or both .
This last option is shown in the 2001–2003 film trilogy directed by Peter Jackson , with Sauron voiced by Alan Howard .
Here , Sauron is shown to have a large humanoid form during the forging of the Ring and up to his losing it , then being " limited " to the disembodied Eye form throughout the rest of the storyline .
The 2014 video game presents a related version of this premise .
In the game , he regains his physical form sometime after his defeat at Dol Guldur , losing it once more .
This depiction preserves continuity with Jackson 's film adaptations , at least – if not with Tolkien canon .
Though the 1978 animated film and the 2001 live - action film both contain a prologue featuring the forging of the Rings of Power , the War of the Elves and Sauron goes unmentioned and the films jump straight to the much later War of the Last Alliance .
In both , Sauron does not have the form he wore as " Annatar " when he forges the One Ring , but rather the one reflecting his identity as Dark Lord , and he is defeated by Isildur alone .
In Jackson 's series , Sauron is originally portrayed as a towering " black knight " wielding a huge black mace ( reminiscent of Tolkien 's descriptions as well as conceptual artist John Howe 's illustrations of Morgoth ) ; in this form , he is portrayed by Sala Baker .
While Tolkien never specifically discussed the type of armour , Sauron is shown in spiky plate armour of very high quality : it has very ornate filigree but is also quite functional .
In the DVD commentary , the production team explained their intent was to represent Sauron 's great skill as a craftsman and ring - maker : Sauron was originally a maia spirit in service to the smith - vala Aulë , and thus was very wise in the lore of physical construction .
Sauron may have fallen from his previously angelic state , but a shadow of his great skill in forging and construction remains , even though it has been twisted to making weapons of war .
Thus they chose to depict Sauron as wearing frightening , but very high quality and ornate armour of his own creation .
Sauron 's body disintegrates with explosive force after Isildur cuts off the Ring with the hilt - shard of the sword Narsil .
Sauron 's spiritual essence remained intact as it eventually consolidates into the Eye of Sauron by the time of Barad - dûr 's restoration , stationing himself between the twin horn - like spires above the tower to scan Mordor like a searchlight .
The effect in Mordor is seen as a red beam that moves across the land , forever probing .
It also seems to be visible to Frodo ( and to see him in turn ) any time that he is wearing the Ring .
Pippin has a brief encounter with the Eye , after gazing into the palantír of Orthanc .
In the extended edition of The Return of the King , Sauron 's humanoid form appears when Aragorn looks into the palantír .
When the Ring is destroyed , the Eye of Sauron collapses in on itself , causing a massive shock wave that destroys his entire kingdom .
In earlier versions of Jackson 's script , Sauron does indeed " come forth " at Aragorn 's challenge , and does battle with him :
The extra materials published together with the extended DVD version of the third movie indicate as much .
Scenes of the fight were shot , but later this idea was discarded and was replaced by a scene ( in the extended version ) where Aragorn kills the " Mouth of Sauron " ( a representative of Sauron ) before fighting a Mordor troll .
In fact , the footage of the battle with the troll was the same footage of Aragorn fighting Sauron , with the CGI troll mapped over a painted - out Sauron , as seen in the DVD special features .
In this abandoned scene , when Sauron first emerges from the Black Gate , he appears in his fair and seductive form as " Annatar the Lord of Gifts " , trying to entice Aragorn and the other leaders with offers of peace and dominion .
When they reject him , he reverts to his true form , as seen in the prologue .
Jackson said he removed the scene when he realized it was too much of a departure from the source material and thematically missed the point : the battle was supposed to be a selfless sacrifice by Aragorn and his army , and making it into a duel between Aragorn and Sauron made it more about personal glory .
Sauron appears as The Necromancer ( a figure only incidentally mentioned by Gandalf in the original novel ) and one of the main antagonists in Jackson 's The Hobbit film adaptations where he is portrayed through voice and motion capture by Benedict Cumberbatch .
The Necromancer appears briefly in when Radagast the Brown enters Dol Guldur .
In , Jackson moves Gandalf 's decisive expedition to Dol Guldur forward in time to coincide with the Quest of Erebor .
Sauron appears an amorphous entity of shadowy mist floating around in the ruins before he assumes his semi - physical form , and then manifests the Eye of Sauron while capturing Gandalf .
In , and the extended edition of The Desolation of Smaug , Sauron is shown to have been behind Smaug 's actions as part of a grand scheme to restore the Kingdom of Angmar .
However , the actions of Thorin Oakenshield and company force Sauron to dispatch his Orc army to capture Erebor .
During the third film , as his Orc army is nearing Erebor , Sauron appears before the White Council after they battle the nine Nazgûl and rescue Gandalf from Dol Guldur .
He is rendered formless by Galadriel , who uses Eärendil 's Light to banish him and the Nazgûl back to Mordor .
Sauron appears in merchandise of the Jackson films , including computer and video games .
These include ( where he was voiced by Fred Tatasciore ) , , and .
Sauron also appears as a playable character in the game , voiced by Jon Olson .
Sauron is a playable character in Lego
The Lord of the Rings .
His Necromancer form is playable in Lego The Hobbit .
He is further alluded to in as the Black Hand of Sauron , the aspect of himself that resided within the hand cut off by Isildur during the War of the Last Alliance .
While Sauron was voiced by Steven Blum , the Black Hand of Sauron was voiced by Nolan North .
Sauron returns in the sequel .
Sauron appears as a boss in Lego Dimensions with the voice provided by Steve Blum once again .
He is one the villains serving Lord Vortech , and he takes over Superman 's hometown , Metropolis .
He is stopped by Batman , Gandalf , and Wyldstyle , with Gandalf noting that his power is significantly decreased since he is not in his home realm , and is cleansed of the Locate Keystone .
Similar to the movie , his armour crumbles up when he is defeated .
The only difference is that he crumbles into a cube that is teleported back to Lord Vortech 's lair .
The Lego Batman Movie portrays Sauron in his eye form , voiced by comedian Jemaine Clement .
He appears as one of the villains imprisoned in the Phantom Zone who join with Joker to take over Gotham City .
The Eye of Sauron causes mayhem in the city by spreading lava , and supports the takeover by being able to find anyone anywhere .
He is accidentally destroyed by fire blast from the Kraken from Clash of the Titans when it was trying to shoot down the Batwing .
Joker was devastated at this loss while Kraken sheepishly slips away quoting " Nothing to see here . "
ALLUSIONS IN OTHER WORKS Section::::Allusions in other works .
The Eye of Sauron is mentioned in The Stand , a post - apocalyptic novel written by Stephen King .
The villain Randall Flagg possesses an astral body in the form of an " Eye " akin to the Lidless Eye .
The novel itself was conceived by King as a " fantasy epic like The Lord of the Rings , only with an American setting " .
The idea of Sauron as a sleepless eye that watches and seeks the protagonists also influenced King 's epic fantasy series The Dark Tower ;
its villain , the Crimson King , is a similarly disembodied evil presence whose icon is also an eye .
In the Marvel Comics Universe , the supervillain Sauron , an enemy of the X - Men , names himself after the Tolkien character .
In the comic series Fables , by Bill Willingham , one character is called " The Adversary " , an ambiguous figure of immense evil and power believed to be responsible for much of the misfortune in the Fables ' overall history .
Willingham has stated " The Adversary " , in name and in character , was inspired by Sauron .
SEE ALSO
* Akallabêth * Dagor Bragollach *
" Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age "
* Morgoth * War of the Ring NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sauron at The One Wiki to Rule Them
All * Sauron on IMDb * Sauron at the Encyclopedia of Arda *
Sauron at The Thain 's Book * Sauron at the Ardapedia