WE ARE THE FALLEN
We Are the Fallen is an American - Irish gothic metal band consisting of former American Idol contestant Carly Smithson , Marty O'Brien and former Evanescence members Ben Moody , John LeCompt and Rocky Gray .
The band 's name is an allusion to Evanescence 's 2003 album Fallen .
In a Los Angeles Times interview , co - founder of Evanescence , Ben Moody , said that We Are the Fallen differs from Evanescence in that " everyone is equal " and that it has " more energy than Evanescence could ever muster " .
He also stated , " We can not try to be who we are .
If there is some similarity in sound , it 's because that genre was created by us . "
HISTORY FORMATION Section::::History .
Section::::Formation .
We Are
the Fallen began forming when Moody had discussions with Evanescence band members Gray and LeCompt about the band moving in a different direction than originally planned .
Moody felt something had to change in order to preserve their style of music and left due to " creative differences " with Amy Lee , the band 's co - founder and frontwoman .
Years later when Gray and LeCompt also left the band , Moody reached out to them in attempts to continue where they had left off in 2003 with Fallen , recruiting O'Brien in the process .
The band held auditions looking for a lead singer in New York City and Moody feared that the search for the band 's " soulmate " was going to take a long time due to the exhaustive process .
Moody 's roommate showed him videos online of Smithson performing her rendition of Evanescence 's " Bring Me to Life " which was coincidentally the song all singers used to audition for Moody and the band .
Ben was then introduced to Smithson who was developing a solo album after the tour with American Idol .
Moody and Smithson then discussed what they wanted to do musically
and they discovered their needs were " identical " .
Smithson felt that Idol was for a family audience which was n't " creatively and musically the best " for her at that time .
She also stated that trying to make a solo album was lonely and " now there 's four other people who bring all sorts of different things to the table and musically
it 's like everything I was trying to do ... heavy rock with great melodies . "
" Everything that I was told about Carly was right .
She had a great voice , but she also has an incredibly strong presence , the kind of presence that is big enough to handle what it is this band does , both musically and visually .
Because of that , she was perfect " , Ben Moody said later .
We Are the Fallen officially debuted on June 22 , 2009 with the launch of their official website .
Fans could register their email address at the website to receive a free download of their first single , " Bury Me Alive " .
Only the first 100,000 registrants qualified for the download .
The response to the free download overwhelmed their database and the song was made available via a free stream on their MySpace page while they worked to send the emails to those who qualified .
The band had to confront inevitable comparisons with Evanescence .
" I really do think that the farther we go , the more distinct the two [ bands ] will become from each other ...
We 're so different that I really do n't see it being that much of an issue " , Ben Moody told Kerrang !
magazine in April 2010 .
UNIVERSAL REPUBLIC RECORDS ( TEAR THE WORLD DOWN )
Section::::Universal Republic records ( Tear the World Down ) .
The band originally planned to release two songs for free over the internet every two months and afterward compiling them onto a record with orchestral interludes .
They planned to tour theaters across the U.S. rather than clubs or arenas to focus on " performance elements that go beyond music . "
These plans changed when it was announced that We Are the Fallen signed a record deal with Universal Republic Records on October 28 , 2009 for release of a full - length debut album .
The band then released a remastered version of their original single , " Bury Me Alive " , on February 2 , 2010 , to include an orchestral outro extending the song by a full minute .
The song was available for purchase exclusively online at digital media outlets .
On the same day , the band set up an additional free download for an acoustic version of " Bury Me Alive " at their website .
The video for the song premiered on March 25 , 2010 on AOL 's Noisecreep website .
The song 's popularity grew ; The Vampire Diaries used the song in previews for the television show 's season finale . "
Bury Me Alive " was also featured on " Rumor Has It , " an episode of the television show The Hills .
We Are the Fallen performed a 28-city concert tour in the U.S. with the Finnish rock band HIM finishing in New York on May 9 , 2010 .
Their debut concert was held at King 's College in London , England in front of a 200-person crowd on March 23 , 2010 .
Following their tour with HIM , the band headlined their own 14-city concert tour in the U.S. and Europe .
The band also appeared at the Download Festival at Donington in 2010 .
We Are the Fallen performed at the " Cirque Des Damnés " show at the Avalon Theater in Hollywood , California on January 22 , 2011 .
A DVD and live album from that show was slated for release later in the year .
The band 's debut album , Tear the World Down , was released on May 10 , 2010 in the UK and May 11 , 2010 in the U.S. where it debuted and peaked at number 33 on the Billboard 200 .
Ben Moody revealed in a Facebook posting that the band was dropped by Universal Republic on May 27 , 2011 .
POST - UNIVERSAL REPUBLIC RECORDS Section::::Post - Universal Republic Records .
The band released in January 2012 a digital version of the " Cirque Des Damnés " concert performed the previous year .
They also plan to release two EPs , one with all new music written by the band , and one with cover songs of ' 80s rock songs .
On May 20 , 2012 , guitarist Ben Moody uploaded a video onto his YouTube account .
The video consisted of Ben Moody and lead singer Carly Smithson explaining the future plans for the band .
Ben stated that he has written enough material for one and a half new albums .
He also said that guitarist John LeCompt and drummer Rocky Gray have also been writing music .
Carly said that she has written a " killer hit " that she has yet to preview to the rest of the band .
BAND MEMBERS
* Rocky Gray – drums * John LeCompt –
rhythm guitar
* Ben Moody – lead guitar * Marty O'Brien –
bass guitar * Carly Smithson – vocals
DISCOGRAPHY
STUDIO ALBUMS
Section::::Discography .
Section::::Studio albums .
+ Studio albums by year !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Album ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Year ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Release date ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Label ! scope="col " colspan="5 " Peak positions !
scope="col " USTear the World Down
SINGLES
U.S. Main . !
Album rowspan="2"2010
" Bury Me Alive " rowspan="2 " Tear the World Down
" Tear the World Down " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS