ELF ( MIDDLE - EARTH )
In J. R. R. Tolkien 's legendarium , Elves are one of the races that inhabit a fictional Earth , often called Middle - earth , and set in the remote past .
They appear in The Hobbit and in The Lord of the Rings , but their complex history is described more fully in The Silmarillion .
Tolkien had been writing about Elves long before he published The Hobbit .
DEVELOPMENT BACKGROUND Section::::Development .
Section::::Background .
The modern English word elf derives from the Old English word ælf ( which has cognates in all other Germanic languages ) .
Numerous types of elves appear in Germanic mythology , the West Germanic concept appears to have come to differ from the Scandinavian notion in the early Middle Ages , and Anglo - Saxon concept diverged even further , possibly under Celtic influence .
Tolkien would make it clear in a letter that his Elves differ from those " of the better known lore " , referring to Scandinavian mythology .
By 1915 when Tolkien was writing his first elven poems , the words elf , fairy and gnome had many divergent and contradictory associations .
Tolkien had been gently warned against using the term ' fairy ' , which John Garth supposes may have been due to the word becoming increasingly used to indicate homosexuality , although despite this warning Tolkien continued to use it .
By the late 19th century , the term ' fairy ' had been taken up as a utopian theme , and was used to critique social and religious values , a tradition which Tolkien along with T. H. White are seen to continue .
One of the last of the Victorian Fairy - paintings , The Piper of Dreams by Estella Canziani , sold 250,000 copies and was well known within the trenches of World War I where Tolkien saw active service .
Illustrated posters of Robert Louis Stevenson 's poem Land of Nod had been sent out by a philanthropist to brighten servicemen 's quarters , and Faery was used in other contexts as an image of " Old England " to inspire patriotism .
According to Marjorie Burns , Tolkien eventually chose the term elf over fairy , but still retained some doubts .
In his 1939 essay On Fairy - Stories , Tolkien wrote that " English words such as elf have long been influenced by French ( from which fay and faërie , fairy are derived ) ; but in later times , through their use in translation , fairy and elf have acquired much of the atmosphere of German , Scandinavian , and Celtic tales , and many characteristics of the huldu - fólk , the daoine - sithe , and the tylwyth - teg . "
EARLY WRITINGS
Section::::Early writings .
Traditional Victorian dancing fairies and elves appear in much of Tolkien 's early poetry , and have influence upon his later works in part due to the influence of a production of J. M. Barrie 's Peter Pan in Birmingham in 1910 and his familiarity with the work of Catholic mystic poet , Francis Thompson which Tolkien had acquired in 1914 .
As a philologist , Tolkien 's interest in languages led him to invent several languages of his own as a pastime .
In considering the nature of who might speak these languages , and what stories they might tell , Tolkien again turned to the concept of elves .
THE BOOK OF LOST TALES ( C. 1917–1927 )
Section::::The Book of Lost Tales ( c. 1917–1927 ) .
In his The Book of Lost Tales , Tolkien develops a theme that the diminutive fairy - like race of Elves had once been a great and mighty people , and that as Men took over the world , these Elves had " diminished " themselves .
This theme was influenced especially by the god - like and human - sized Ljósálfar of Norse mythology , and medieval works such as Sir Orfeo , the Welsh Mabinogion , Arthurian romances and the legends of the Tuatha Dé Danann .
Some of the stories Tolkien wrote as elven history have been seen to be directly influenced by Celtic mythology .
For example , " Flight of The Noldoli " is based on the Tuatha Dé Danann and Lebor Gabála Érenn , and their migratory nature comes from early Irish / Celtic history .
John Garth also sees that with the underground enslavement of the Noldoli to Melkor , Tolkien was essentially rewriting Irish myth regarding the Tuatha Dé Danann into a Christian eschatology .
The name Inwe ( in the first draft Ing ) , given by Tolkien to the eldest of the elves and his clan , is similar to the name found in Norse mythology as that of the god Ingwi - Freyr ( and Ingui - Frea in Anglo - Saxon paganism ) , a god who is gifted the elf world Álfheimr .
Terry Gunnell also claims that the relationship between beautiful ships and the Elves is reminiscent of the god Njörðr and the god Freyr 's ship Skíðblaðnir .
He also retains the usage of the French derived term " fairy " for the same creatures .
The larger Elves are also inspired by Tolkien 's personal Catholic theology — as representing the state of Men in Eden who have not yet " fallen " , similar to humans but fairer and wiser , with greater spiritual powers , keener senses , and a closer empathy with nature .
Tolkien wrote of them : " They are made by man in his own image and likeness ; but freed from those limitations which he feels most to press upon him .
They are immortal , and their will is directly effective for the achievement of imagination and desire . "
In The Book of Lost Tales , Tolkien includes both the more serious " medieval " type of elves such as Fëanor and Turgon alongside the frivolous , Jacobean type of elves such as the Solosimpi and Tinúviel .
Alongside the idea of the greater Elves , Tolkien also developed the idea of children visiting Valinor , the island - homeland of the Elves in their sleep .
Elves would also visit children at night and comfort them if they had been chided or were upset .
This theme , linking elves with children 's dreams and nocturnal travelling was largely abandoned in Tolkien 's later writing .
THE HOBBIT ( C. 1930–1937 )
Section::::The Hobbit ( c. 1930–1937 ) .
Along with Book of Lost Tales , Douglas Anderson shows that in The Hobbit , Tolkien again includes both the more serious ' medieval ' type of elves , such as Elrond and the Wood - elf king , and frivolous elves , such as those at Rivendell .
THE QUENTA SILMARILLION ( C. 1937 ) Section::::The Quenta Silmarillion ( c. 1937 ) .
In 1937 , having had his manuscript for The Silmarillion rejected by a publisher who disparaged all the " eye - splitting Celtic names " that Tolkien had given his Elves , Tolkien denied the names had a Celtic origin :
Dimitra Fimi proposes that these comments are a product of his Anglophilia rather than a commentary on the texts themselves or their actual influence on his writing , and cites evidence to this effect in her essay " ' Mad ' Elves and ' elusive beauty ' : some Celtic strands of Tolkien 's mythology " .
THE LORD OF THE RINGS ( C. 1937–1949 )
Section::::The Lord of the Rings ( c. 1937–1949 ) .
Terry Gunnell notes that the titles of the Germanic gods Freyr and Freyja ( Old Norse ' lord ' and ' lady ' ) are also given to Celeborn and Galadriel in the Lord of The Rings .
According to Tom Shippey , the theme of diminishment from semi - divine Elf to diminutive Fairy resurfaces in The Lord of the Rings in the dialogue of Galadriel . "
Yet if you succeed , then our power is diminished , and Lothlórien will fade , and the tides of Time will sweep it away .
We must depart into the West , or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell and cave , slowly to forget and to be forgotten . "
Writing in 1954 , part way through proofreading The Lord of the Rings , Tolkien claimed the Elvish language Sindarin has a character very like British - Welsh " because it seems to fit the rather ' Celtic ' type of legends and stories told of its speakers " .
In the same letter , Tolkien goes on to say that the elves had very little in common with elves or fairies of Europe , and that they really represent men with greater artistic ability , beauty and a longer life span .
Tolkien also notes an Elven bloodline was the only real claim to ' nobility ' that the Men of Middle - earth can have .
Tolkien also wrote that the elves are primarily to blame for many of the ills of Middle - earth in The Lord of the Rings , having independently created the Three Rings in order to stop their domains in mortal - lands from ' fading ' and attempting to prevent inevitable change and new growth .
HISTORY ORIGINS Section::::History .
Section::::Origins .
Originally , in Tolkien 's writings from the 1910s and 1920s , Ingwë , Finwë and Elwë ( their final names ) were the eldest of the Elves .
By 1959 or 1960 , Tolkien wrote a detailed account of the awakening of the Elves , called Cuivienyarna , part of Quendi and Eldar .
Ingwë , Finwë and Elwë now became the first ambassadors and the Kings of the Elves .
This text only saw print in The War of the Jewels , part of the analytical The History of Middle - earth series , in 1994 , but a similar version was included in The Silmarillion in 1977 .
According to the earliest account , the first Elves are awakened by Eru Ilúvatar near the bay of Cuiviénen during the Years of the Trees in the First Age .
They awake under the starlit sky , as the Sun and Moon have yet to be created .
The first Elves to awake are three pairs :
Imin ( " First " ) and his wife Iminyë , Tata ( " Second " ) and Tatië , and Enel ( " Third " ) and Enelyë .
Imin , Tata , and Enel and their wives join up and walk through the forests .
They come across six , nine , and twelve pairs of Elves , and each " patriarch " claims the pairs as his folk in order .
The now sixty Elves dwell by the rivers , and they invent poetry and music in Middle - earth ( the continent ) .
Journeying further , they come across eighteen pairs of Elves watching the stars , whom Tata claims as his .
These are tall and dark - haired , the fathers of most of the Noldor .
The ninety - six Elves now invented many new words .
Continuing their journey , they find twenty - four pairs of Elves , singing without language , and Enel adds them to his people .
These are the ancestors of most of the Lindar or " singers " , later called Teleri .
They find no more Elves ; Imin 's people , the smallest group , are the ancestors of the Vanyar .
All in all the Elves number 144 .
Because all Elves had been found in groups of twelve , twelve becomes their base number and 144 their highest number ( for a long time ) , and none of the later Elvish languages have a common name for a greater number .
They were discovered by the Vala Oromë , who brought the tidings of their awakening to Valinor .
The Silmarillion states that Melkor , the Dark Lord , had already captured some wandering Elves , and twisted and mutilated them until they became the Orcs .
However , Tolkien ultimately became uncomfortable with this Elvish origin , and devised different theories about the origin of Orcs .
SUNDERING
Section::::Sundering .
The Valar decided to summon the Elves to Valinor rather than leaving them dwelling in the place where they were first awakened , near the Cuiviénen lake in the eastern extremity of Middle - earth .
They sent Oromë , who took Ingwë , Finwë and Elwë as ambassadors to Valinor .
Returning to Middle - earth , Ingwë , Finwë and Elwë convinced a large host to take the Great Journey to Valinor .
Not all Elves accepted the summons though , and those who did not became known as the Avari , The Unwilling .
The others were called Eldar , the People of the Stars by Oromë , and they took Ingwë , Finwë and Elwë as their leaders , and became respectively the Vanyar , Noldor and Teleri .
On their journey , some of the Teleri feared the Misty Mountains and dared not cross them .
They turned back and stayed in the vales of the Anduin , and became the Nandor ; these were led by Lenwë .
Oromë led the others over the Misty Mountains and Ered Lindon into Beleriand .
There Elwë became lost , and the Teleri stayed behind looking for him .
The Vanyar and the Noldor moved onto a floating island that was moved by Ulmo to Valinor .
After years , Ulmo returned to Beleriand to seek out the remaining Teleri .
As Elwë had not yet been found , a great part of the Teleri took his brother Olwë as their leader and were ferried to Valinor .
Some Teleri stayed behind though , still looking for Elwë , and others stayed on the shores , being called by Ossë .
They took Círdan as their leader and became the Falathrim .
All Teleri who stayed in Beleriand later became known as the Sindar .
note : Ingwë , Finwë and Elwë are not the same elves as Imin , Tata and Enel EXILE Section::::Exile .
In Valinor , Fëanor , son of Finwë , and the greatest of the Noldor , created the Silmarils in which he stored a part of the light of the Two Trees that were lighting Valinor .
After three ages in the Halls of Mandos , Melkor was released , feigning reform .
He however spread his evil and started to poison the minds of the Elves against the Valar .
Eventually he killed Finwë and stole the Silmarils .
Fëanor then named him Morgoth ( S. The Black Enemy ) .
Fëanor and his seven sons then swore to take the Silmarils back , and led a large army of the Noldor to Beleriand .
WARS OF BELERIAND Section::::Wars of Beleriand .
In Beleriand , Elwë was eventually found , and married Melian the Maia .
He became the overlord of Beleriand , naming himself Thingol ( S. Grey - cloak ) .
After the First Battle of Beleriand , during the first rising of the Moon , the Noldor arrived in Beleriand .
They laid a siege around Morgoth 's fortress of Angband , but were eventually defeated .
Then Eärendil the Mariner , a half - elf from the House of Finwë , sailed to Valinor to ask the Valar for help .
Then the Ban of the Noldor was lifted , and the Valar started the War of Wrath , in which Morgoth was finally overcome .
SECOND AND THIRD AGE Section::::Second and Third Age .
After the War of Wrath , the Valar tried to summon the Elves back to Valinor .
Many complied , but some stayed .
During the Second Age they founded the Realms of Lindon , Eregion and Mirkwood .
Sauron , Morgoth 's former servant , made war upon them , but with the aid of the Númenóreans they defeated him .
During the Second and Third Age , they held some protected realms with the aid of the Rings of Power , but after the War of the Ring they waned further , and most Elves left Middle - earth for Valinor .
Tolkien 's published writings give somewhat contradictory hints as to what happened to the Elves of Middle - earth after the One Ring was destroyed at the end of the Third Age .
After the destruction of the One Ring , the power of the Three Rings of the Elves would also end and the Age of Men would begin .
Elves that remained in Middle - earth were doomed to a slow decline until , in the words of Galadriel , they faded and became a " rustic folk of dell and cave , " and were greatly diminished from their ancient power and nobility .
While the power of the remaining Noldor would be immediately lessened , the " fading " of all Elvenkind was a phenomenon that would play out over hundreds and even thousands of years ; until , in fact , our own times , when occasional glimpses of rustic Elves would fuel our folktales and fantasies .
There are many references in The Lord of the Rings to the continued existence of Elves in Middle - earth during the early years of the Fourth Age .
Elladan and Elrohir , the sons of Elrond , do not accompany their father when the White Ship bearing the Ring - bearer and the chief Noldorin leaders sails from the Grey Havens to Valinor ; they are said to have remained in Lindon for a time .
Celeborn is said ( in Appendix A ) to have added most of southern Mirkwood to the realm of Lórien at the end of the Third Age , but elsewhere Tolkien wrote that Celeborn dwelt for a while in Lindon before at last leaving Middle - earth for Valinor .
Tolkien also wrote that Legolas founded an elf colony in Ithilien during King Elessar 's reign in the Fourth Age , and that the elves there assisted in the rebuilding of Gondor .
They primarily resided in southern Ithilien , along the shores of the Anduin .
After Elessar 's death in 120 F.A. , Legolas built a ship and sailed to Valinor and , eventually , all of the elves in Ithilien followed him .
It is also implied that Elves continued to dwell at the Grey Havens , at least for a certain period .
Tolkien states that Sam Gamgee sailed from the Havens decades after Elrond 's departure , implying that some Elves might have remained in Mithlond at that time .
In " The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen " that is found in Appendix A , Tolkien depicts a Middle - earth where most Elves have already left .
The majority of those who remained lived in Mirkwood , while a much smaller population was in Lindon .
Aragorn speaks of the empty garden of Elrond in Rivendell .
Most strikingly , after Elessar 's voluntary death , Arwen flees to a Lórien that is depicted as wholly abandoned , and gives up her own spirit in its sad and silent confines .
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
As told in The History of Middle - earth and in Tolkien 's Letters , Elves had a different life cycle from Men .
Most of the following information strictly refers only to the Eldar , as found in his essay Laws and Customs among the Eldar , found in Morgoth 's Ring .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Elves are born about one year from their conception .
The day of their conception is celebrated , not the actual birthday itself .
Their minds develop more quickly than their bodies ; by their first year , they can speak , walk and even dance , and their quicker onset of mental maturity makes young Elves seem , to Men , older than they really are .
Physical puberty comes in around their fiftieth to one hundredth year ( by age fifty they reach their adult height ) , and by their first hundred years of life outside the womb all Elves are fully grown .
Elven bodies eventually stop aging physically , while human bodies do not .
SEXUALITY , MARRIAGE , AND PARENTHOOD Section::::Sexuality , marriage , and parenthood .
Elves marry freely and for love early in life .
Monogamy is practiced and adultery is unthinkable ; they marry only once
( Finwë , first High King of the Noldor , was an exception , as he remarried after his first wife died ) .
Spouses can choose each other even long before they are married , thus becoming betrothed .
The betrothal is subject to parental approval unless the parties are of age and intend to marry soon , at which point the betrothal is announced .
They exchange rings and the betrothal lasts at least a year , and is revocable by the return of the rings ; however , it is rarely broken .
After their formal betrothal , the couple appoint a date , at least a year later , for the wedding .
Only the words exchanged by the bride and groom ( including the speaking of the name of Eru Ilúvatar ) and the consummation are required for marriage .
More formally , the couple 's families celebrate the marriage with a feast .
The parties give back their betrothal rings and receive others worn on their index fingers .
The bride 's mother gives the groom a jewel to wear ( Galadriel 's gift of the Elfstone to Aragorn reflects this tradition ; she is grandmother to his betrothed , Arwen , Arwen 's mother Celebrían having left Middle - earth for Valinor after grievous psychological injury after her capture by Orcs and liberation by her sons ) .
The Elves view the sexual act as extremely special and intimate , for it leads to the conception and birth of children .
Extra - marital and premarital sex are unthinkable , adultery is also unheard of and fidelity between spouses is absolute .
Yet separation during pregnancy or during the early years of parenthood ( caused by war , for example ) is so grievous to the couple that they prefer to have children in peaceful times .
Living Elves can not be raped or forced to have sex ; before that they will lose the will to endure and go to Mandos .
Elves have few children , as a rule ( Fëanor and Nerdanel were an exception , conceiving seven sons ) , and there are relatively sizeable intervals between each child ( but see below for notes on Elvish birth rates in Middle - earth versus in Aman ) .
They are soon preoccupied with other pleasures ; their libido wanes
and they focus their interests elsewhere , like the arts .
Nonetheless , they take great delight in the union of love , and they cherish the days of bearing and raising children as the happiest days of their lives .
There seems to only be one known example of extreme marital strife in Tolkien 's mythology , that of Eöl and Aredhel , in which the latter actually left the former without his knowledge , resulting in Eöl ultimately killing her ( albeit he was actually trying to kill their son Maeglin ) .
However , this marriage was far from typical of the Elves .
DAILY LIFE
Section::::Daily life .
The Elves , particularly the Noldor , preoccupy themselves with various things such as smithwork , sculpture , music and other arts , and of course , what to eat .
Males and females can do almost everything equally ; however , the females often specialize in the arts of healing while the males go to war .
This is because they believe that taking life interferes with the ability to preserve life .
However , Elves are not stuck in rigid roles ; females can defend themselves at need as well as males , and many males are skilled healers as well , such as Elrond .
LATER LIFE Section::::Later life .
Eventually , if they do not die in battle or from some other cause , the Elves of Middle - earth grow weary of it and desire to go to Valinor , where the Valar originally sheltered their kind .
Those who wish to leave for the Undying Lands often go by boats provided at the Grey Havens , where Círdan the Shipwright dwells with his folk .
" THE THIRD CYCLE OF LIFE " , AGING , AND FACIAL
HAIR Section::::"The third cycle of life " , aging , and facial hair .
Despite Tolkien 's statements in The Hobbit that Elves ( and Hobbits ) have no beards , Círdan in fact has a beard , which appears to be an anomaly and a simple oversight .
However , Tolkien later devised at least three " cycles of life " for Elves around 1960 ; Círdan had a beard because he was in his third cycle of life .
( Mahtan , Nerdanel 's father , had a beard in his second cycle of life , a rare phenomenon . )
It is unclear what these cycles exactly are , since Tolkien left no notes further explaining this .
Apparently , beards were the only sign of further natural physical ageing beyond maturity .
Nevertheless , Tolkien may have ultimately changed his mind about whether Elves had facial hair .
As Christopher Tolkien states in Unfinished Tales , his father wrote in December 1972 or later that the Elvish strain in Men , such as Aragorn , was " observable in the beardlessness of those who were so descended " , since " it was a characteristic of all Elves to be beardless " .
This would seemingly contradict the information above .
Elves sometimes appear to age under great stress .
Círdan appeared to be aged himself , since he is described as looking old , save for the stars in his eyes ; this may be due to all the sorrows he had seen and lived through since the First Age .
Also , the people of Gwindor of Nargothrond had trouble recognizing him after his time as a prisoner of Morgoth .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Elves are naturally immortal , and remain unwearied with age .
In addition to their immortality , Elves can recover from wounds which would normally kill a mortal Man .
However , Elves can be slain , or die of grief and weariness .
Spirits of dead Elves go to the Halls of Mandos in Valinor .
After a certain period of time and rest that serves as " cleansing " , their spirits are clothed in bodies identical to their old ones .
However , they almost never go back to Middle - earth and remain in Valinor instead .
An exception was Glorfindel in The Lord of the Rings ; as shown in later books , Tolkien decided he was a " reborn " hero from The Silmarillion rather than an individual with the same name .
A rare and more unusual example of an Elf coming back from the Halls of Mandos is found in the tale of Beren and Lúthien , as Lúthien was the other Elf to be sent back to Middle - earth – as a mortal , however .
Tolkien 's Elvish words for " spirit " and " body " were fëa ( plural fëar ) and hröa ( plural hröar ) respectively .
Eventually , their immortal spirits will overwhelm and consume their bodies , rendering them " bodiless " , whether they opt to go to Valinor or remain in Middle - earth .
At the end of the world , all Elves will have become invisible to mortal eyes , except to those to whom they wish to manifest themselves .
Tolkien called the Elves of Middle - earth who had undergone this process " Lingerers " .
The lives of Elves only endure as the world endures .
It is said in the Second Prophecy of Mandos that at the end of time the Elves will join the other Children of Ilúvatar in singing the Second Music of the Ainur .
However it is disputable whether the Prophecy is canon , and the published Silmarillion states that only Men shall participate for certain in the Second Music , and that the ultimate fate of the Elves is unknown .
However , they do not believe that Eru will abandon them to oblivion .
NAMES AND NAMING CONVENTIONS Section::::Names and naming conventions .
In The Lord of the Rings Tolkien pretends to be merely the translator of Bilbo and Frodo 's memoirs , collectively known as the Red Book of Westmarch .
He says that those names and terms in the work ( as well in the earlier The Hobbit ) that appear in English are meant to be his purported translations from the Common Speech .
Tolkien repeatedly expressed his misgivings concerning the name " elf " and its " associations of a kind that I should particularly desire not to be present [ ... ]
e.g. those of Drayton or of A Midsummer Night 's Dream " , for the purpose of translations stating his preference that " the oldest available form of the name to be used , and leave it to acquire its own associations for readers of my tale " .
He wanted to avoid the Victorian notions of " fairies " or mischievous imps associated with the word and was aiming at the more elevated notions of beings " supposed to possess formidable magical powers in early Teutonic mythology " ( OED viz .
the Old English ælf , from Proto - Germanic * albiz ) .
The Elves are also called the " Firstborn " ( Q. Minnónar ) or the " Elder Kindred " ( as opposed to Men , the Secondborn ) as they were " awakened " before Men by Eru Ilúvatar ( the creator ) .
The Elves named themselves Quendi ( " the Speakers " ) , in honour of the fact that , when they were created , they were the only living beings able to speak .
The Dúnedain called them Nimîr ( " the Beautiful " ) , while their usual name in Sindarin was Eledhrim .
In other writings , part of The History of Middle - earth , Tolkien details Elvish naming conventions .
The Quenya word for " name " was essë .
An Elf of Valinor was typically given one name ( ataressë ) at birth by the father .
It usually reflected either the name of the father or mother , indicating the person 's descent , to which later some distinguishing prefix could be added .
As the Elf grew older , they received a second name ( amilessë ) , given by the mother .
This name was extremely important and reflected personality , skills , or fate , sometimes being " prophetic " .
The epessë or the " after - name " is the third type .
It was given later in life , not necessarily by kin , as a title of admiration and honour .
In some circumstances , yet another name was chosen by the Elf themselves , called kilmessë meaning " self - name " .
The " true names " remained the first two , though an Elf could be referred to by any of these .
Mother - names were usually not used by those who did not know the Elf well .
In later history and song any of the four could become the one generally used and recognized .
After their Exile to Middle - earth and adoption of Sindarin as the daily speech , most of the Noldor also chose for themselves a name that fitted the style of that language , translating or altering one of their Quenya names .
A patronymic surname is also used – the father 's name with the suffix " -ion " ( meaning " son " ) or " -iel " ( meaning " daughter " ) added .
Thus , Gildor Inglorion is " Gildor , son of Inglor " .
Several examples include : *
Galadriel is the Sindarin translation of Alatáriel , the Telerin Quenya epessë originally given to her by Celeborn , which means " Maiden Crowned by a Radiant Garland " .
Her father - name is Artanis ( noble woman ) and her mother - name is Nerwen ( man - maiden ) .
* Maedhros , the oldest son of Fëanor , was called Russandol ( copper - top ) by his brothers : He had earned this epessë because of his ruddy hair .
His father - name had been Nelyafinwë ( Finwë the third : Fëanor 's own father - name had been ( Curu ) Finwë ) , and his mother - name Maitimo ( well - shaped one ) .
Maedhros is a rendering into Sindarin of parts of his mother - name and epessë .
*
Finrod is usually referred to as Felagund ( hewer of caves ) , a name the Dwarves had given to him ( originally Felakgundu ) because of his dwellings at Nargothrond .
Finrod adopted the name , and made it a title of honour .
*
Círdan ( Shipwright ) is the epessë of a Telerin Elf who remained in Beleriand , and later Lindon , until the end of the Third Age .
His original name was only rarely remembered in traditions as Nōwē , and he was referred to always as Círdan , a title which had been given to him as Lord of the Falas .
ELVISH LANGUAGES Section::::Elvish languages .
Tolkien created many languages for his Elves .
His interest was primarily philological , and he said his stories grew out of his languages .
Indeed , the languages were the first thing Tolkien ever created for his mythos , starting with what he originally called " Elfin " or " Qenya " .
This was later spelled Quenya ( High - elven ) and , along with Sindarin ( Grey - elven ) , is one of the two most complete of Tolkien 's constructed languages .
In addition to these two Tolkien also created many other ( related ) Elvish languages .
Elves are also credited with creating the Tengwar ( by Fëanor ) and Cirth ( Daeron ) scripts .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The 1977 Rankin Bass animated version of The Hobbit , with character designs by Lester Abrams , features Wood Elves as green - skinned warriors with slightly Austrian - German accents .
High Elves are shown with pointed ears and beards .
In Peter Jackson 's Lord of the Rings film series ( 2001–2003 ) , all of the elves ( including Wood Elves ) are portrayed as fair , graceful , and wise beings with supernatural abilities like enhanced eyesight .
They facially resemble humans with much longer and finer hair and an apparent inner glow .
They also have pointed ears and no facial hair .
In Middle - earth Role Playing ( Iron Crown Enterprises , 1986 ) , three tribes of elves are presented as player character race options , the Silvan , Sindar and Noldor – each receiving statistic bonuses ( ranging from 5 to 15 ) to all attributes apart from Strength , with the Noldor receiving the highest accumulative bonuses of any racial type in the game .
All three tribes are statistically immune to disease ( +100 % chance of resistance ) , and must be given " Presence " as the highest randomly generated statistic .
Elven characters also receive significant skill bonuses with missile weapons ( such as a bow and arrow ) and stealth skills ( such as hiding ) .
All three elven tribes ( Silvan , Noldor , Sindar ) depicted in The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game ( Decipher , Inc. , 2001 ) have varying ( one or two points ) statistic bonuses to Bearing , Perception and Nimbleness , with the Noldor also receiving a bonus to Wits and the Sindar to Vitality , giving both of these the highest accumulative bonuses available to Player Characters .
The system of skills , feats and flaws further outlines racial and cultural characteristics , bonuses being given to the Noldor in Lore and " Resisting the Shadow " , to the Silvan elves for various wood - craft skills , and the Sindar to musical performance .
All elves have the ability to enchant objects , and receive bonuses in any test regarding magic .
In The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game ( Games Workshop , 2001 ) , Elves have similar statistics to similarly armed Men , except for much higher scores for their Fighting and Courage attributes .
On average , Elven wargear ( armour and weapons ) give twice the advantage of weapons made by Men .
SEE ALSO
* List of Middle - earth Elves * Elvish languages ( Middle - earth )
* Falmari * Ilkorin * Moriquendi NOTABLE ELVES Section::::See also .
Section::::Notable Elves .
Some notable Elves include : * Arwen Undómiel great , great granddaughter of Lúthien .
* Beleg most skilled of all Elves in hunting and tracking .
* Celeborn husband of Galadriel .
* Celebrían daughter of Galadriel , wife of Elrond , mother of Elladan , Elrohir and Arwen .
* Celebrimbor maker of the Rings of Power .
* Círdan Lord of the Grey Havens and one of the oldest Elves in Middle - earth at the end of the Third Age .
* Elrond great grandson of Lúthien , Lord of Imladris through the Third Age .
* Elwing wife of Eärendil .
* Fëanor often referred to as the mightiest of the Noldor .
* Fingolfin greatest warrior of all the Children of Ilúvatar .
* Finrod Felagund King of Nargothrond .
* Galadriel greatest of the Noldor save Fëanor .
* Gil - galad High - king of the Noldorin Elves in Exile .
* Glorfindel true savior of Frodo after his close call with morgul blade at Weathertop
* Idril wife of Tuor and mother of Eärendil
* Legolas one of Fellowship of the Ring , later Lord of the Elves of Ithilien
* Lúthien enchantress , fairest of all the Children of Ilúvatar .
* Thingol King of Beleriand , tallest of all the Eldar , father of Lúthien .
* Thranduil king of the woodland Elves of Mirkwood , father of Legolas .
* Turgon king of Gondolin .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS