BATTLEFIELD 3 Battlefield 3 is a first - person shooter video game developed by EA DICE and published by Electronic Arts .
It is a direct sequel to 2005 's Battlefield 2 , and the eleventh installment in the Battlefield franchise .
The game was released in North America on 25 October 2011 and in Europe on 28 October 2011 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 .
EA Mobile also confirmed a port for the iOS platform .
The game sold 5 million copies in its first week of release , and received positive reviews from most game reviewers .
It is the first game in the series that does not support versions of Windows prior to Windows Vista as the game only supports DirectX 10 and 11 .
The PC version is exclusive to EA 's Origin platform , through which PC users also authenticate when connecting to the game .
The game 's sequel , Battlefield 4 , was released on 29 October 2013 .
In Battlefield 3s campaign , players take on the personas of several military roles : a U.S. Marine , an F / A-18F Super Hornet weapon systems officer , an M1A2 Abrams tank operator , and a Spetsnaz GRU operative .
The campaign takes place in various locations , including Iran and New York City ; and follows the stories of Sergeant Henry Blackburn and Dimitri Mayakovsky .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Battlefield 3 features the combined arms battles across single - player , co - operative and multiplayer modes .
It reintroduces several elements absent from the games , including fighter jets , the prone position and 64-player battles on PC .
To accommodate the lower player count on consoles , the ground area is limited for Xbox 360 and PS3 , though fly space remains the same .
During an interview with Game Informer , EA stated that Commander Mode is unlikely to be included , which was met with some criticism on the EA forum .
The game features maps set in Paris , Tehran ( as well as other locations in Iran ) , Sulaymaniyah , New York City , Wake Island , Oman , Kuwait and other parts of the Persian Gulf .
The maps cover urban streets , metropolitan downtown areas , and open landscapes suited to vehicle combat .
Battlefield 3 introduces the " Battlelog " ; a free cross - platform social service with built - in text messaging , voice communications , game statistics , and the ability to join games that friends are already playing ( though both players need to be on the same platform ) .
COOPERATIVE
Section::::Cooperative .
A demo featuring the new co - op mode was featured at Gamescom 2011 .
DICE general manager Karl Magnus Troedsson confirmed that a split screen option will not be available in co - op mode .
Battlefield 3s new Battlelog social network , DICE noted , would be tied to all co - op matches , allowing players to try to beat friends ' scores and to track their performance .
Participating in co - op mode allows the player to collect points that unlock additional content that can be used in multiplayer .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
Battlefield 3s multiplayer matches see players take on one of four roles : Assault , Support , Engineer and Recon .
The Assault class focuses on assault rifles and healing teammates .
The Support class focuses on light machine guns and supplying ammunition .
The Engineer class focuses on supporting and destroying vehicles .
The Recon class focuses on sniping and spotting enemies .
The mechanics of the weapons have been changed to utilize the new engine : compatible weapons may have bipods attached which can then be deployed when in the prone position or near suitable scenery , and provide a significant boost to accuracy and recoil reduction .
Suppressive fire from weapons blurs the vision and reduces the accuracy of those under fire , as well as health regeneration .
The Recon class can put a radio beacon anywhere on the map and all squad members will be able to spawn on the location of the beacon .
Several game modes are present , including Conquest , Rush , Squad Deathmatch , Squad Rush and for the first time since Battlefield 1942 , Team Deathmatch .
However , more game modes are available through the purchase of extra downloadable content packs .
The PC version of Battlefield 3 is by default launched via a web browser from the Battlelog web site .
A server browser is present in console versions of the game , however .
SYNOPSIS SETTING AND CHARACTERS
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Setting and characters .
Battlefield 3s Campaign story is set during the fictional " War of 2014 " and covers events that occur over the span of nine months .
Most of the story takes place in the Iran – Iraq region .
Other locations include the Azerbaijani border ; Paris , France ; and New York City , New York .
Most missions occur as flashbacks on part of the interrogation of Staff Sergeant Henry Blackburn , and do not occur in order of events .
The Campaign puts the player in control of four different player characters .
For most of the story , the player controls SSgt .
Henry " Black " Blackburn ( portrayed by Gideon Emery ) , a member of the U.S. Marine Corps 1st Recon Battalion and main protagonist .
The player also controls Cpl .
Jonathan " Jono " Miller , a M1 Abrams tank operator deployed in Tehran ; Lt . Jennifer " Wedge " Colby Hawkins , an F / A-18F Super Hornet weapon systems officer ; and Dimitri " Dima " Mayakovsky , a Russian GRU operative .
The main antagonist , Solomon , is an overseas asset for the Central Intelligence Agency .
Non - player characters include : Misfit 1 , Blackburn 's squad ( including David Montes , Steve Campo , Christian Matkovic , and Cpt .
Quinton Cole ) ; Dima 's GRU squadmates Vladimir and Kiril ; and CIA Agents Gordon and Whistler , who interrogate Blackburn for much of the Campaign .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On 14 November 2014 , an unidentified Marine jumps onto the roof of a hijacked train in New York City .
Fighting his way through armed men to the engine , he is detained and held at gunpoint by their leader .
Eight hours earlier , the Marine , revealed to be Sgt .
Henry Blackburn , is held in an interrogation room in Hunters Point , where he is questioned by two C.I.A. Agents about a supposed terror plot in New York surrounding a man named Solomon .
Blackburn begins to tell his story of how he first heard of Solomon and the events that led him to his current situation .
On 15 March 2014 , Sgt .
Blackburn 's squad , Misfit 1 - 3 , attempted to find and safely return a US squad investigating an improvised explosive device in Sulaymaniyah , Iraqi Kurdistan , whose last known position was in territory controlled by the PLR ( People 's Liberation & Resistance ) , an Iranian paramilitary insurgent group .
They find the missing squad , which had been ambushed by the PLR ; but before they can escape the city , a massive earthquake wrecks the city .
Blackburn , fellow squadmate Montes , and other survivors fight their way out of the ruins of the city .
On the same day , the PLR stage a coup d'état in Iran , turning it into a military dictatorship , and the US subsequently invades .
Lt .
Hawkins takes part in a raid on enemy fighters over Iran and an air strike over Mehrabad Airport .
In the aftermath of the air strikes , Misfit 1 was sent into Tehran to perform battle damage assessment and apprehend the leader of the PLR , Faruk Al - Bashir .
While investigating an underground bank vault in the target 's suspected location , Blackburn and his team learn that the PLR have acquired Russian suitcase nukes , with two of the three devices missing .
Being overrun , Misfit requests backup from an M1 Abrams column " Anvil 3 " , including Sergeant Miller .
Miller facilitates Misfit 1 's helicopter extraction , but his Abrams tank is disabled and overrun while the crew awaits the arrival of the Quick Reaction Force .
Knocked out and taken prisoner , Miller is promptly executed by Solomon and Al - Bashir , with the event being filmed and posted on the Internet .
Later , Misfit 1 - 3 manages to capture Al - Bashir , who becomes fatally wounded when they cause his escape vehicle to crash .
Realizing that he had been betrayed and used , Al - Bashir reveals some of Solomon 's plan — to detonate the nukes in Paris and New York City — before succumbing to his wounds .
Misfit 1 gets a lead on arms dealer Amir Kaffarov , who was working with Solomon and Al - Bashir .
They attempt to capture Kaffarov from his villa on the Caspian Sea coast , near the Azerbaijani border .
However , they run into a Russian paratrooper battalion , also after Kaffarov , who engage them with airdropped BMP-2s , with Su-25s providing close air support .
In the ensuing chaos , Blackburn 's squadmates , Campo and Matkovic , are killed in an enemy strafing run .
Meanwhile , a Spetsnaz team led by Dima assaults Kaffarov 's villa .
Kaffarov tries to bribe his way out , but Dima beats him up nonetheless .
Blackburn arrives at the villa and finds Dima and a presumed dead Kaffarov .
Dima reveals Solomon 's plot to Blackburn , and requests his cooperation to prevent " a war between [ their ] nations " .
Meanwhile , Misfit 1 's commanding officer Cole arrives , and Blackburn is forced to shoot his superior before he can kill Dima .
Blackburn 's shooting of his commanding officer results in his eight - hour interrogation by the C.I.A. at Hunters Point , Queens .
During Blackburn 's captivity , Dima 's Spetsnaz squad attempts to stop the attack in Paris .
However , Vladimir is impaled and dies , and the nuke explodes , killing 80,000 people .
Meanwhile , the C.I.A. agents do not believe Blackburn 's story , since Solomon is a C.I.A. informant , and there is no concrete proof of his involvement in the terrorist attacks .
They instead believe that Russia is responsible for the attacks , and that Dima has tricked Blackburn .
With no other options , Blackburn and surviving squad member Montes break out of captivity to stop the attack in New York .
Evading police , Blackburn manages to break into the hijacked Long Island Rail Road commuter train from the prologue , which is full of Solomon 's men and explosive charges .
He works his way to the front car , where he is ambushed by Solomon .
When ambushed by Solomon , Blackburn gains the upper hand by obtaining and activating the detonator to the charges , causing the train to crash .
Blackburn pursues Solomon through the sewers and up to street level .
Montes , having obtained a police car , picks up Blackburn and engages Solomon and the PLR in a brief vehicular chase , which ends with both cars crashing in Times Square .
As a bewildered crowd watches on , Solomon shoots Montes , but Blackburn manages to kill Solomon by bludgeoning him to death with a brick in the ensuing brawl and recovers the nuclear bomb .
In the epilogue , it is revealed that Dima had survived the Paris detonation , albeit suffering radiation poisoning from the blast .
He writes about the efforts of both himself and Blackburn to stop Solomon 's plan " to set fire to the world " .
As he finishes , he examines a pistol .
A knock comes from his door , the screen cuts to black , and the last sound is that of the pistol being loaded as Dima presumably prepares to defend himself .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Battlefield 3s lead platform was originally the PC until it was switched to consoles midway through development .
The Xbox 360 version of Battlefield 3 is shipped on two discs due to the disc size limit ; however , the PS3 version ships on one Blu - ray Disc .
Battlefield 3 debuts the new Frostbite 2 engine .
This updated Frostbite engine can realistically portray the destruction of buildings and scenery to a greater extent than previous versions .
Unlike previous iterations , the new version can also support dense urban areas .
Battlefield 3 uses a new type of character animation technology called ANT .
ANT technology is used in EA Sports games , such as FIFA , but for Battlefield 3 is adapted to create a more realistic soldier , with the ability to transition into cover and turn the head before the body , as well as " drag fallen comrades into safety and mount weapons on almost any part of the terrain " .
PLAYSTATION 3 EXCLUSIVE CONTENT Section::::PlayStation 3 exclusive content .
On 6 June 2011 , during Sony 's E3 2011 press conference , Jack Tretton of Sony Computer Entertainment of America announced that the PlayStation 3 version of the game would be bundled with a free copy of Battlefield 1943 , however , at launch , the game was n't included .
EA then said that Battlefield 3 PlayStation 3 owners would receive timed - exclusive DLC for the game instead .
On 20 November 2011 , Law firm Edelson McGuire took EA to court on behalf of disappointed gamers .
The complaint focuses on EA 's communication of the change of plan , second proposal with early DLC that had already been announced .
Shortly after EA was threatened with being taken to court over its failure to deliver the free game as announced at E3 , EA announced they will offer owners of the PlayStation 3 version of Battlefield 3 a free downloadable copy of Battlefield 1943 .
WII U VERSION Section::::Wii U version .
On 7 June 2011 , during Nintendo 's E3 2011 press conference , John Riccitiello of EA games expressed interest in Nintendo 's upcoming system , the Wii U. Patrick Liu , the executive producer of Battlefield 3 , stated that EA DICE currently have no games in development for the Wii U and a port for the console " probably wo n't happen " .
BETA Section::::Beta .
The open beta commenced on 29 September 2011 , for all platforms , and ended on 10 October 2011 .
48 hour early access was granted to players who bought the Tier 1 edition of Medal of Honor or pre - ordered the digital version of Battlefield 3 : Limited Edition through Origin .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A soundtrack album was released on 24 October 2011 , one day before the game was released .
It is available on iTunes and Amazon .
The music was composed by Johan Skugge and Jukka Rintamäki .
EASTER EGGS
Section::::Easter eggs .
Battlefield 3 and its five DLC packs contain numerous Easter eggs .
Hiding in obscure areas of the game are references to other Electronic Arts games and franchises including Mirror 's Edge and Mass Effect .
Some sources suggested other Easter eggs pointed to future Battlefield games or DLC packs .
During the firefight in the mall trying to protect Al - Bashir , the store in which they are defending Al - Bashir has copies of games on the shelf and one game being titled " Frostbite " which references the engine used by Battlefield 3 .
A wall on the multiplayer map " Wake Island " featuring the number 2143 and a futuristic hovercraft on a different map in the End Game DLC have been said to suggest a follow up to 2006 's Battlefield 2142 is in the works .
Several dinosaur Easter eggs — such as a flying pterodactyl on the map " Nebandan Flats " and tyrannosaurus skulls or toy statues on various maps — have led others to believe a dinosaur - related game or DLC would be released in the future .
The idea of a dinosaur - related minigame originated from fan feedback through social media outlets prior to Battlefield 3s release .
Neither of these possible upcoming games has been confirmed by EA .
MARKETING AND RELEASE Section::::Marketing and release .
Battlefield 3 was revealed on 3 February 2011 , by video game magazine Game Informer .
The coverage included information on building the game and interviews with DICE , as well as three trailers : a teaser and the first two parts in a series of gameplay from the level " Fault Line " .
Several other trailers were released showing different aspects of the game , including both single and multiplayer , as well as emphasizing the new engine .
On 16 August 2011 , co - op gameplay and a " Caspian Border Multiplayer Gameplay Trailer " were shown at Gamescom 2011 illustrating the co - op mode and the first footage of air combat , respectively .
Trailer releases gained momentum in the week before the release of the game .
EA released a multiplayer trailer which showed the variety of maps available in multiplayer , with short scenes of actual gameplay .
It also featured shots of a map that is included in the " Back to Karkand " downloadable content ( DLC ) .
EA released a launch trailer , showing off the various missions in the single - player campaign .
EA CEO John Riccitiello stated that Battlefield 3 is aimed at competing with the Call of Duty series .
EA planned on spending over $ 100 million on a marketing campaign for Battlefield 3 .
Electronic Arts stated that Battlefield 3 is a " flat out superior " to Call of Duty .
EA has said it is going on the " offense " in regards to its marketing on Battlefield 3 , saying that it started its campaign early to establish a " beachhead " .
Anyone who had watched a trailer for the upcoming film Act of Valor through the official Battlefield 3 website could receive free downloadable dogtags for use with any version of the game .
For marketing and distribution to Japan , EA worked with Sega 's Japanese branch to distribute the game nationwide .
In January 2017 , the game was made backwards compatible with the Xbox One ( alongside ) and was subsequently added to the EA Access service .
PRE - ORDER PROMOTION Section::::Pre - order promotion .
All pre - orders of the Limited Edition grant free access to the " Back to Karkand " DLC pack , a reference to the " Strike at Karkand " map ( a popular Battlefield 2 map ) , to include four maps brought over from Battlefield 2 , 10 new weapons , 4 new vehicles , 5 new achievements / trophies , and a new addition to the series , " Assignments " .
The maps from the expansion pack will be : Strike at Karkand , Gulf of Oman , Wake Island , and Sharqi Peninsula .
Pre - ordering at selected retailers and Origin included the " Physical Warfare Pack " , granting access to time - based exclusive weapons and items ; including a light machine gun , a sniper rifle accessory , and armor - piercing ammunition .
Also included is launch day access to the DAO-12 semi - automatic shotgun , which other players can unlock through game play .
Pre - order at select retailers also provide the " SPECACT Kit Upgrade " , the " Dog Tag Pack " and Battlefield 3 gear for the player 's console avatar .
Pre - ordering at Origin gave players a shotgun and beret for Battlefield Play4Free , and 48 hour early access to the Battlefield 3 beta .
Originally the " Physical Warfare Pack " was to be exclusive to pre - orders , but fan reaction to this was negative , causing EA to clarify that it would be made available to all players for free later in the year .
On 2 September 2011 , a trailer for the Physical Warfare Pack was released on YouTube showing all the content included within the pack in action in - game .
All the content except the " Back to Karkand " pack was available from day one .
The pack was released on 6 December 2011 for the PlayStation 3 , and a week later for the Xbox 360 and PC .
ONLINE
PASS Section::::Online pass .
To access the game 's online multiplayer mode on consoles , players need to activate an online pass .
New copies of the game include one online pass for the original owner of the game to access the multiplayer ; however , if a player buys a used copy or rents the game , they must purchase an online pass separately , or access a 48-hour trial via the official game site .
When asked why the developers implemented the pass system , game designer Alan Kertz replied , " because servers cost money , and used games do n't make developers any money . "
Some of the online pass codes were invalid from the time of purchase , which EA responded to by telling affected consumers to ask the retailer for a replacement code .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT BACK TO KARKAND Section::::Downloadable content . Section::::Back to Karkand .
The first pack of downloadable content ( DLC ) , " Back to Karkand " , was announced before launch and was released on 13 December 2011 for PC and Xbox 360 , while PlayStation 3 owners received it a week earlier .
It was priced at US$ 15 but was free for all users who purchased the limited edition .
It features four maps remade from Battlefield 2 , three new vehicles and ten new weapons .
CLOSE QUARTERS Section::::Close Quarters .
At GDC 2012 DICE revealed it would release three more DLCs .
The second DLC , " Close Quarters " arrived in June 2012 featuring four new infantry - oriented maps , ten new weapons , HD Destruction , ten new assignments , five unique Dogtags , and a new game mode , Conquest Domination , a Conquest mode adapted for smaller spaces .
ARMORED KILL Section::::Armored Kill .
The third DLC , " Armored Kill " arrived on 4 September 2012 for premium PlayStation 3 users and 11 September for Xbox 360 and PC users .
The DLC was made available for non - premium PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 users on 25 September 2012 .
Armored Kill included new vehicles , specifically tanks , ATVs , and mobile artillery , as well as new vehicle - oriented maps and what is called " the biggest map in Battlefield history " .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
A DLC titled " Aftermath " was revealed in a trailer for Battlefield 3 Premium .
It was released to PlayStation 3 Premium subscribers on 27 November 2012 and to PC and Xbox 360 Premium subscribers on 4 December 2012 .
" Aftermath " was released to non - Premium subscribers on PlayStation 3 on 11 December 2012 , and on PC and Xbox 360 on 18 December 2012 .
A video released by DICE games revealed that there would be a crossbow , with customizable scopes and various bolts before its release .
END GAME Section::::End Game .
The fifth DLC , " End Game " , was released for PlayStation 3 Premium members on 5 March 2013 and to PC and Xbox 360 Premium members on 12 March 2013 , then to non - Premium PlayStation 3 players on 19 March 2013 and to PC and Xbox 360 players on 26 March 2013 .
NOVEL Section::::Novel .
Andy McNab penned a tie - in novel called Battlefield 3 : The Russian , which follows the story of GRU Spetsnaz commando Dmitri " Dima " Mayakovsky and his involvement against the PLR , as well as his connection to the antagonist , Solomon .
McNab also served as the game 's consultant on military tactics .
The novel was released on 25 October 2011 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Battlefield 3 has received mostly positive reviews .
IGN gave it a score of 9.0 out of 10.0 for all platforms , and praised the graphics and multiplayer game .
Even though it criticized the single - player campaign story , and the occasional glitches of the game engine , it still gave the game a mostly positive review , "
Regardless of the narrative missteps or the occasional glitches , Battlefield 3 offers an unforgettable , world - class multiplayer suite that 's sure to excite shooter fans . "
Joystiq awarded the game 4.5 out of 5 stars , stating that the campaign was " tactically linear " and that the A.I. within the game were " murderously un - fun to fight " .
Complaints were also made of the multiplayer aspect , stating that destruction was less than expected : " It 's not , and levels wo n't start out intact and end looking like the surface of the moon the way they often did in that game .
" They did , however , praise the multiplayer experience as " unmatched " , stating that this should be the sole reason to buy the game .
GameSpot gave Battlefield 3 a score of 8.5 out of 10 across all platforms .
They praised the deep multiplayer mode , great variety of vehicles , many well - designed environments , and a great reward system for team play ; however , they criticized the campaign for being " dull and disappointing " and using a " familiar formula " .
The cooperative mode was viewed favorably ; the only criticism on the cooperative missions was that " there are n't more of them to keep you busy " .
Official Xbox Magazine gave the game 9 out of 10 , commending the game for its multiplayer mode , but criticizing the solo campaign .
Similarly , Official Xbox Magazine ( UK ) gave the game 8 out of 10 , applauding its multiplayer gaming and calling it " The most expansive , refined Battlefield multiplayer yet " while also criticizing the single - player experience .
SALES Section::::Sales .
According to EA , Battlefield 3 garnered 3 million pre - orders by the day of its release .
The pre - order total makes it " the biggest first - person shooter launch in EA history " , according to the publisher .
Two days after launch , EA CEO John Riccitiello announced via a conference call to investors that Battlefield 3 has already shipped 10 million units within a week of release , with 3 million of those being pre - orders .
Electronic Arts stated that the title sold 5 million units within the first week of availability , easily becoming its fastest - selling game .
After one month , EA chief financial officer Eric Brown announced Battlefield 3 had sold 8 million copies , and that the publisher has shipped 12 million copies of the game to retailers , 2 million more than it shipped for launch week .
Peter Moore , the high - profile COO of EA , insisted that Battlefield 3 successfully captured a slice of 's market share .
On 29 June 2012 EA revealed that the game has sold 15 million copies .
In Japan , Battlefield 3 had sold around 123,379 copies for the PlayStation 3 and 27,723 copies for the Xbox 360 when it was released .
In the first week , the game had sold 18,792 copies for the PlayStation 3 for a total of 142,171 copies .
The PlayStation 3 version later sold 8,094 copies for a total of 150,265 copies .
OTHER RESPONSES Section::::Other responses .
A scene in which the player is prompted to kill a rat that is attacking their character was criticized by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) .
In a press release issued by the organization 's German office , it claimed that the game " treats animals in a sadistic manner " .
The release also went further on to say that the scene can have " a brutalising effect on the young male target audience " .
The reproduction of various scenes in Battlefield 3 are highly accurate of their real - life counterparts such as the Grand Bazaar .
Iran has reacted to the scenes set within Iran by banning the sale of the game .
As the game had not been officially released in the country , the authorities were strictly enforcing the prevention of the distribution of pirated copies of the game .
This comes after Iranian gamers had protested the release of the game and called for an apology .
AWARDS
* Best Shooter , 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award * Best Multiplayer Game , 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award * Best Xbox 360 Shooter , Best of 2011 IGN Award & 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award * Best Xbox 360 Multiplayer Game , Best of 2011 IGN Award & 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award
* Best PS3 Shooter , 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award * Best PS3 Multiplayer Game , Best of 2011 IGN Award & 2011
IGN People 's Choice Award * Best PC Shooter , Best of 2011 IGN Award & 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award * Best PC Multiplayer Game , Best of 2011 IGN Award & 2011 IGN People 's Choice Award
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS