HISTORY OF FOX NEWS
The Fox News Channel ( FNC ) is an American basic cable and satellite news television channel that was founded by media mogul Rupert Murdoch in 1996 .
Murdoch appointed Roger Ailes as permanent CEO of the news operation .
FNC ( along with MSNBC ) was created as an alternative to CNN .
In January 2002 , the ratings of the channel surpassed top - rated CNN to become the # 1 news cable channel .
The network has since maintained its # 1 cable rating , with increasing viewership and international access helping it become a subject of controversy .
THROUGH
SECOND TERM OF BILL CLINTON ( 1996–2000 )
Section::::Through second term of Bill Clinton ( 1996–2000 ) .
The channel was created by Australian - born American media mogul Rupert Murdoch , who hired Roger Ailes as its founding CEO .
The channel was launched on October 7 , 1996 to 17 million cable subscribers .
Prior to founding Fox News , Murdoch had gained significant experience in the 24-hour news business when News Corporation 's BSkyB subsidiary started Europe 's first 24-hour news channel , Sky News , in the United Kingdom in 1989 .
With the success of his fourth network efforts in the United States , experience gained from Sky News , and turnaround of 20th Century Fox , Murdoch announced on January 31 , 1996 , that his company would be launching a 24-hour news channel to air on both cable and satellite systems as part of a News Corp. " worldwide platform " for Fox programming , reasoning that " The appetite for news – particularly news that explains to people how it affects them – is expanding enormously . "
In February 1996 , after former NBC executive and Republican political strategist Roger Ailes left America 's Talking ( now MSNBC ) , Murdoch called him to start the Fox News Channel .
Ailes worked individuals through five months of 14-hour workdays and several weeks of rehearsal shows before launch , on October 7 , 1996 .
At launch , only 10 million households were able to watch Fox News , with none in the major media markets of New York City and Los Angeles .
According to published reports , many media reviewers had to watch the first day 's programming at Fox News ' studios because it was not readily available .
The rolling news coverage during the day consisted of 20-minute single topic shows like Fox on Crime or Fox on Politics surrounded by news headlines .
Interviews had various facts at the bottom of the screen about the topic or the guest .
In the 2000 presidential election , Fox News , which was available in 56 million homes nationwide , saw a staggering 440 % increase in viewers , the biggest gain among the three cable news television networks .
THE EDGE Section::::The Edge .
Hosted by Paula Zahn , The Edge was one of the original programs on the network , focusing on talk between the host and newsmakers , like other programs on the network at the time .
During the program 's later years , John Gibson became host when the network discovered Zahn was in the midst of contract negotiations with CNN .
The show was cancelled in 2002 .
THE O'REILLY FACTOR Section::::The O'Reilly Factor .
On October 7 , 1996 , The O'Reilly Report aired its first episode , hosted by Bill O'Reilly .
It was later renamed because of a suggestion by a friend .
The O'Reilly Factor , unlike many other Fox News programs , is pre - recorded , or " live - to - tape , " except when covering breaking news or special events .
Some guests are interviewed before the " live - to - tape " period and are slotted in the program as appropriate .
O'Reilly 's producers have said that video editing takes place only when an interview exceeds the available length in a program , of which the total is 43 minutes ( for an hour - long slot , once commercials and news breaks are added ) , though some critics have suggested that interviews are sometimes edited after taping to suit O'Reilly 's agenda .
O'Reilly and his producers discuss potential topics twice a week .
A producer will research the story and book guests for O'Reilly , and an information packet will be produced with possible angles for O'Reilly to explore .
The producers will often " pre - interview " the guest so that they know what potential points he or she might make .
For each show , O'Reilly , with the assistance of his staff , will produce a script with the words for the " Talking Points Memo " and " Most Ridiculous Item of the Day " segments , and points of discussion and questions for the guests that will appear on the program .
On February 2 , 2009 , the show began airing in high definition and moved to the previous set used by the Fox Report .
YOUR WORLD WITH NEIL CAVUTO Section::::Your World with Neil Cavuto .
Debuting as the Cavuto Business Report on the network 's launch in 1996 , Your World with Neil Cavuto has become a very popular show , hosted by fiscal conservative reporter and commentator Neil Cavuto .
The program covers the latest business news stories of the day , in addition to giving analysis on how the stock market moved through the day .
It also covers political stories , such as how political actions may affect the markets , in addition to analysis of the markets by a group of analysts from one of the Cost of Freedom business block programs .
Closing the program , the show has a commentary segment called " Common Sense , " in which Neil gives his point of view on a news story of the day .
The program is broadcast live weekdays at 4 p.m. ET .
HANNITY & COLMES Section::::Hannity & Colmes .
Hannity & Colmes was an American television show on Fox News Channel , hosted by Sean Hannity and Alan Colmes , who respectively presented a conservative and liberal perspective .
The series premiered in October 1996 , and the final episode aired on January 9 , 2009 .
It was the precursor to the current Hannity series , which currently airs in the same timeslot .
FOX MAGAZINE Section::::Fox Magazine .
Fox Magazine was launched in 1997 as a weekly newsmagazine on the Fox News Channel .
Hosted by Laurie Dhue , the program was a weekly in - depth look into some of the previous week 's stories , in addition to special series produced by the program itself , such as its constant series about Nashville .
Included in the programming were a recap of the previous week 's commentaries from a number of the network 's commentators .
The program would come to an end on September 11 , 2005 , with Dhue leaving the network to work on Geraldo at Large .
FOX & FRIENDS Section::::Fox & Friends .
Fox & Friends is a morning news show that debuted in 1998 .
It is currently hosted by Ainsley Earhardt , Steve Doocy , and Brian Kilmeade during the week .
Weekends are hosted by Abby H , Clayton Morris and Tucker Carlson .
DRUDGE Section::::Drudge .
Drudge was a television series on Fox News Channel that was hosted by Matt Drudge .
Drudge left the show in 1999 after network executives refused to let him show a picture of Samuel Armas .
THROUGH FIRST TERM OF GEORGE W. BUSH ( 2001–2004 )
Section::::Through first term of George W. Bush ( 2001–2004 ) .
Following Al Gore 's loss in the 2000 election , many critics have said that Fox News was against their campaign .
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott was clearly a fan of Fox News Channel .
Some Democrats say Fox was " an avowed enemy of the Gore campaign , " as Al Gore spokesman Mark Fabiani told The New York Times .
Such comments reinforce the perception of Rupert Murdoch 's network as a conservative bastion – an image that Fox News President Roger Ailes insists is not the case .
One reason for Fox 's right - leaning reputation early on was its prime - time talk lineup .
As even some network insiders acknowledge , the chat consistently tilts to the conservative side .
When George W. Bush took office , there was a change in the West Wing ; television sets that were almost always tuned to CNN during the Clinton years were now on Fox News Channel , whose political talk shows are dominated by conservative commentators .
And after eight years of feeling frozen out , reporters from news outlets with conservative programming are winning a much friendlier reception from Bush and his aides .
The shift started on the campaign trail .
Bush 's audiences occasionally booed CNN reporter Candy Crowley and held up signs slamming the " Clinton News Network .
" Sometimes they cheered Carl Cameron of Fox News .
" It was flattering and unsettling .
It suggested a perception that I would often disabuse people of . "
Fox News reporters warmly received on the campaign trail are getting more access to top aides .
It 's part of a strategy to get more coverage – and more positive coverage – by spending time with right - leaning and outside - the - Washington - beltway journalists .
In the Clinton White House , press secretaries were sometimes dismissive of reporters from conservative newspapers and stations – or they ignored them .
THROUGH SECOND TERM OF GEORGE W. BUSH ( 2005 - 2009 ) THROUGH THE BARACK OBAMA ADMINISTRATION ( 2009 - 2017 ) OBAMA ADMINISTRATION CONFLICT WITH FOX NEWS
THROUGH FIRST TERM OF DONALD TRUMP ( 2017-PRESENT ) SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SCANDALS
ROGER
AILES
RESIGNATION FIRING OF BILL O'REILLY REFERENCES