WIZARD ( MIDDLE - EARTH )
In the fiction of J. R. R. Tolkien , the Wizards of Middle - earth are a group of beings outwardly resembling Men but possessing much greater physical and mental power .
They are also called the Istari ( Quenya for " Wise Ones " ) by the Elves .
The Sindarin word is Ithryn ( sing .
Ithron ) .
They were sent by the Valar to assist the people of Middle - earth to contest Sauron .
The wizards of Middle - earth were Maiar : spirits of the same order as the Valar , but lesser in power .
The first three of these five wizards were known in the Mannish tongues of the Lord of the Rings series as Saruman " man of skill " ( Rohirric )
, Gandalf " elf of the staff " ( northern Men ) , and Radagast " tender of beasts " ( possibly Westron ) .
Tolkien never provided non - Elvish names for the other two ; one tradition gives their names in Valinor as Alatar and Pallando , and another as Morinehtar and Rómestámo in Middle - earth .
Each wizard in the series had robes of a characteristic colour : white for Saruman ( the chief and the most powerful of the five ) , grey for Gandalf , brown for Radagast , and sea - blue for Alatar and Pallando ( known consequently as the Blue Wizards or " Ithryn Luin " ) .
Gandalf and Saruman both play important roles in The Lord of the Rings , while Radagast appears only briefly .
Alatar and Pallando do not feature in the story , as they are said to have journeyed far into the east after their arrival in Middle - earth .
Tolkien gives multiple names for all of them .
In Quenya , Saruman was Curumo ( " skillful one " ) ; Gandalf was Olórin ( " dreaming " or " dreamer " ) ; and Radagast was Aiwendil ( " friend of birds " ) .
The Quenya names Morinehtar ( " darkness - slayer " ) and Rómestámo ( " east - helper " ) are given for Alatar and Pallando , though it is not clear which name goes with which
wizard .
Other names are noted in individual articles .
As the Istari were Maiar , each one served a Vala in some way .
Saruman was the servant and helper of Aulë , and so learned much in the art of craftsmanship , mechanics , and metal - working , as was seen in the later Third Age .
Gandalf was the servant of Manwë or Varda , but was a lover of the Gardens of Lórien , and so knew much of the hopes and dreams of Men and Elves .
Radagast , servant of Yavanna , loved the things of nature , both Kelvar and Olvar .
As each of these Istari learned from their Vala , so they acted in Middle - earth .
INTERNAL HISTORY
ARRIVAL
Section::::Internal history .
Section::::Arrival .
They came to Middle - earth around the year 1000 of the Third Age , when the forest of ' Greenwood the Great ' fell under shadow and became known as Mirkwood .
The wizards already appeared old when they entered Middle - earth .
They were " clothed " in the bodies of old Men , as the Valar wished them to guide the inhabitants of Middle - earth by persuasion and encouragement , not by force or fear .
They were forbidden to dominate the free peoples of Middle - earth or to match Sauron 's power with power .
However , they aged very slowly and were in fact immortal .
Physically they were " real " Men , and felt all the urges , pleasures and fears of flesh and blood .
Therefore , in spite of their specific and unambiguous goal , the Wizards were capable of human feelings ; Gandalf , for example , felt great affection for the Hobbits .
They could also feel negative human emotions such as greed , jealousy , and lust for power .
It is hinted in the essay in Unfinished Tales that the Blue Wizards may have fallen prey to these temptations , though information published in The Peoples of Middle - earth seems to contradict this version of their history .
Although immortal , their physical bodies could be destroyed by violence – thus Gandalf truly died in the fight with Durin 's Bane , beyond the power of the Valar to resurrect him ; Eru Ilúvatar intervened to send Gandalf back .
Similarly , Saruman was killed when his throat was cut by his servant in The Return of the King .
The Istari also carried staves , which seem to aid their magic .
When Saruman is defeated at Isengard , Gandalf casts him from the White Council and breaks his staff .
Even after his staff is broken , however , Saruman retains persuasive power over the heart and will of men .
Similarly , when Gandalf 's staff is broken at the Bridge of Khazad - dûm he is still able to slay the Balrog , showing that a wizard 's strength was not entirely dependent on his staff .
PURPOSE Section::::Purpose .
Though the Valar intervened only rarely in Middle - earth , they sent the wizards as emissaries from Valinor because they had not forsaken the Men and Elves of Middle - earth .
In imposing the prohibition against using force to compel the Children of Eru , the Valar sought with the wizards to avoid repeating an ancient error .
They had tried direct intervention in the destiny of the Elves in the Years of the Trees by leading the Eldar into the West , but this resulted in many bloody wars and confrontations .
In the struggle against the Dark Lord , they hoped instead to help Men achieve their own destiny .
Thus Gandalf and the other wizards were meant to use their great wisdom to persuade Men to courses of action which would achieve Men 's own goals , rather than trying to dominate them , hence their power was ultimately restricted .
Saruman failed in this when he tried to set himself up as a commander in opposition to Sauron , but Gandalf remained faithful to his charge .
The wizards landed at the Grey Havens in the North - west of Middle - earth , for the Valar felt that Arnor and Gondor , remnants of Elendil 's old kingdom , had the greatest hope of mounting resistance against Sauron .
Few of Middle - earth 's inhabitants knew who the wizards really were ; the wizards did not share their identities and purposes widely .
Most thought they were Elves or wise Men ; the name Gandalf , meaning " Wand - elf " , reflects the belief that he was an Elf .
Saruman originally was the most powerful of the five and was head of the White Council .
In he took over the defence of Isengard with the consent of the Steward of Gondor , who gave him the key to Orthanc .
Saruman was learned in the lore of the Rings of Power , and gradually became corrupted by desire for the Rings and by Sauron 's direct influence through the palantír of Orthanc .
Eventually he took the title " Saruman of Many Colours " and took robes to match .
He assisted Sauron in the War of the Ring , biding time to secure the One Ring for himself , in order to supplant Sauron , but his plans and forces were thwarted by the power of the Ents .
Gandalf broke his staff and cast him from the White Council .
However , Saruman later invaded the hobbit lands of the Shire , ruling as a petty lord , but was eventually overthrown again by the hobbits .
He was finally murdered by his servant Gríma Wormtongue .
LATER EVENTS Section::::Later events .
During the War of the Ring , it was Gandalf who led the Free Peoples to victory over Sauron .
He also became " Gandalf the White " , and defeated the traitorous Saruman .
After the destruction of Sauron 's forces in front of the Black Gate at the mountainous borders of Mordor , Gandalf left Middle - earth and went over the Sea to Aman , along with the Ring - bearers and many of the Elves .
In the course of The Lord of the Rings , it is never made clear what exactly Gandalf and Saruman are .
Treebeard tells Merry and Pippin that the wizards appeared after the Great Ships came over the Sea ( ca . , according to Appendix B , some 2,000 years before the time of The Lord of the Rings ) , but little else is revealed in the narrative .
Riding with Pippin to Minas Tirith at the end of Book III , Gandalf ponders the ability of the palantíri to see into the past , and recalls events in Valinor from the Years of the Trees — though whether from his own memory is not clear .
Later in Minas Tirith , Pippin wonders what Gandalf really is , and realizes that this is the first time in his life that he has done so .
The essay given in Unfinished Tales was originally begun in order to be included in the appendices of The Lord of the Rings , but was not completed in time .
A more explanatory passage on the nature of the wizards is found at the end of The Silmarillion .
OTHER WIZARDS
Section::::Other wizards .
In the Second Age , at least a thousand years before the Wizards described above , the Númenóreans referred to Sauron as Zigûr , which means ' wizard ' in their Adûnaic language .
ADAPTATIONS FILM Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Film .
In Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit film trilogies , three of the Istari are featured as characters : Saruman ( portrayed by Christopher Lee ) , Gandalf ( played by Ian McKellen ) , and Radagast ( portrayed by Sylvester McCoy ) .
Gandalf mentions the two Blue Wizards in , but comments that he can not recall their names ; this is a reference to the fact that they went unnamed in both The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings .
In The Hobbit films , it is Radagast who first discovers the presence of the Necromancer at Dol Guldur , and alerts Gandalf who in turn informs the White Council , including Saruman .
Gandalf is quick to deduce the Necromancer 's true identity , but Saruman is reluctant to accept that Sauron could have returned .
At the behest of Galadriel , Gandalf and Radagast meet at the tomb of the Nine Kings of Men , and then travel to Dol Guldur .
Radagast is then sent to take word to the White Council while Gandalf enters Dol Guldur alone , where he confronts and is captured by Sauron .
The White Council arrived in force to rescue him , with Saruman , Elrond , and Galadriel confronting the evil there while Radagast took Gandalf to safety .
Saruman later forbade pursuit of Sauron , feeling that their foe would never be able to rise again , while Gandalf and Radagast later took part in The Battle of the Five Armies .
As in the novels , Saruman later joined forces with Sauron , though he retained his white robes and was not shown to be seeking the One Ring for his own use .
He and Gandalf are the only wizards featured or mentioned in the Lord of the Rings films , and for the most part go through the same experiences as in the novels .
However , as seen in the extended edition of The Return of the King , Saruman is killed by Wormtongue atop Orthanc rather than in The Shire .
The films place a greater emphasis on the connection between the Wizards ' powers being manifested through their staffs : Gandalf and Saruman are visibly seen employing their staffs in their battle inside Orthanc , and Gandalf is rendered helpless when Saruman takes his staff from him .
In a departure from the books , Gandalf 's staff is shattered during his confrontation with the Witch - king .
SEE ALSO
* Vala * Maia REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS