GREY 'S ANATOMY ( SEASON 6 )
The sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , commenced airing on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on September 24 , 2009 , and concluded on May 20 , 2010 .
The season was produced by ABC Studios , in association with Shondaland Production Company and The Mark Gordon Company ; the showrunner being Shonda Rhimes .
Actors Ellen Pompeo , Sandra Oh , Katherine Heigl , and Justin Chambers reprised their roles as surgical residents Meredith Grey , Cristina Yang , Izzie Stevens , and Alex Karev , respectively .
Heigl was released from her contract in the middle of the season , while T.R. Knight did not appear as George O'Malley , because Knight was released from his contract at the conclusion of season five .
Main cast members Patrick Dempsey , Chandra Wilson , James Pickens , Jr. , Sara Ramirez , Eric Dane , Chyler Leigh , and Kevin McKidd also returned , while previous recurring star Jessica Capshaw was promoted to a series regular , and Kim Raver was given star billing after the commencement of the season .
The season follows the story of surgical interns , residents and their competent mentors , as they experience the difficulties of the competitive careers they have chosen .
It is set in the surgical wing of the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , located in Seattle , Washington .
A major storyline of the season is the characters adapting to change , as their beloved co - worker Stevens departed following the breakdown of her marriage , O'Malley died in the season premiere — following his being dragged by a bus , and new cardiothoracic surgeon
Teddy Altman is given employment at the hospital .
Further storylines include Shepherd being promoted to chief of surgery , Seattle Grace Hospital merging with the neighboring Mercy West — introducing several new doctors , and several physicians lives being placed into danger — when a grieving deceased patient 's husband embarks on a shooting spree at the hospital , seeking revenge for his wife 's death .
The series ended its sixth season with 13.26 million viewers , ranking # 17 in terms of ratings , the lowest the series had ever ranked up to then .
The season received mixed critical feedback , with the season 's premiere and finale given heavier critical acclaim , in contrast to the middle .
The season was one of the least acclaimed in terms of awards and nominations , being the show 's only season not to warrant a Primetime Emmy nomination .
Despite the negative aspects of ratings and awards , the season managed to receive a spot on Movieline top ten list .
Buena Vista released the season onto a DVD box - set , being made available to regions 1 and 2 .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The sixth season had thirteen roles receiving star billing , with twelve of them returning from the previous season , one of whom previously in a recurring guest capacity .
The regulars portray the surgeons from the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital as new rivalries and romantic relationships begin to develop after the hospital 's merger with Mercy West .
Meredith Grey , a surgical resident and the protagonist of the series , is portrayed by Ellen Pompeo .
Fellow residents Cristina Yang , Izzie Stevens and Alex Karev are portrayed by Sandra Oh , Katherine Heigl and Justin Chambers , respectively .
Attending general surgeon Miranda Bailey was portrayed by Chandra Wilson whose main storylines throughout the season focus on her divorce and the development of new romantic relationships .
Seattle Grace Hospital 's Chief of Surgery and general surgeon Richard Webber was portrayed by James Pickens , Jr. , who returns to alcoholism after being sober for twenty years .
Sara Ramirez acted as bisexual orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres , Eric Dane played womanizer plastic surgeon Mark Sloan , Chyler Leigh portrayed Meredith 's half - sister and second - year surgical resident Lexie Grey ,
Kevin McKidd appeared as trauma surgeon Owen Hunt , while Patrick Dempsey acted as chief of neurosurgery Derek Shepherd .
After having previously appeared in a multi - episode arc in a guest star capacity in the show 's fifth season , Jessica Capshaw began receiving star billing in the season 's premiere episode in the role of attending pediatric surgeon Arizona Robbins , love interest to Callie Torres .
The ninth episode of the season marked the introduction of the new chief of cardiothoracic surgery Teddy Altman , portrayed by Kim Raver , whose mysterious romantic past with Owen Hunt develops into one of the season 's main stories .
Starting with the nineteenth episode of the season , Raver began receiving star billing .
The sixth season introduces several new recurring characters who start to develop progressive and expansive storylines throughout the season .
Mercy West surgical residents Reed Adamson , Charles Percy , April Kepner and Jackson Avery were portrayed by Nora Zehetner , Robert Baker , Sarah Drew and Jesse Williams , respectively .
Jason George portrayed Miranda Bailey 's love interest , anesthesiologist Ben Warren .
Thatcher Grey ( Jeff Perry ) and Sloan Riley ( Leven Rambin ) have been part of the season 's main story arcs , while numerous episodic characters have made guest appearances : Demi Lovato as Hayley , Sara Gilbert as Kim Allen , Marion Ross as Betty , Mandy Moore as Mary Portman , Ryan Devlin as Bill Portman , Nick Purcell as Doug , Michael O'Neill as Gary Clark , Danielle Panabaker as Kelsey , Adrienne Barbeau as Jodie Crawley , Héctor Elizondo as Mr. Torres , Amy Madigan as Dr. Wyatt , and Missi Pyle as Jasmine .
Former series regular Kate Walsh returned to the series as a special guest star , portraying neonatal surgeon and obstetrician - gynecologist Addison Montgomery .
MAIN CAST
* Ellen Pompeo as Dr. Meredith Grey *
Sandra Oh as Dr. Cristina Yang * Katherine Heigl as Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Until Episode 18 )
* Justin Chambers as Dr. Alex Karev * Chandra Wilson as Dr. Miranda Bailey
* James Pickens Jr. as Dr. Richard Webber
* Sara Ramirez as Dr. Callie Torres
* Eric Dane as Dr. Mark Sloan
* Chyler Leigh as Dr. Lexie Grey
* Kevin McKidd as Dr. Owen Hunt
* Jessica Capshaw as Dr. Arizona Robbins
* Kim Raver as Dr. Teddy Altman ( From Episode 19 ) * Patrick Dempsey as Dr. Derek Shepherd PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The season was produced by Touchstone Television ABC Studios , The Mark Gordon Company , Shondaland and was distributed by Buena Vista International ,
Inc ..
The executive producers were creator Shonda Rhimes , Betsy Beers , Mark Gordon , Krista Vernoff , Rob Corn , Mark Wilding , Joan Rater and James D. Parriott .
The regular directors were Shonda Rhimes , Krista Vernoff , Stacy McKee , William Harper , Debora Cahn , Allan Heinberg and Peter Nowalk .
At the conclusion of season five , T.R. Knight was released from his contract , following a disagreement with Rhimes .
When asked to make a ' flashback ' appearance in season six , Knight declined .
Heigl 's appearances in the season were sporadic , seeing Stevens depart and return twice .
Although she was scheduled to appear in the final five episodes of the season , Heigl requested that she be released from her contract 18 months early , and made her final appearance on January 21 , 2010 .
Heigl explained that she wanted to spend more time with her family , and did not think it would be respectful to Grey 's Anatomy viewers to have Izzie return and depart yet again .
The season 's two - hour opener showed the doctors of Seattle Grace Hospital , grieving the loss of their deceased friend , O'Malley .
The special 's writer , Vernoff , commented : " It 's heartbreaking .
I fell in love with George , like many of you did , in season one . "
The ninth episode of the season , " New History " , saw the arrival of Altman , which ended up forming a love triangle between her , Hunt , and Yang .
Raver commented on this : " She was in Iraq with Owen .
She 's a cardiac surgeon .
She 's really good at what she does .
There 'll be some interesting stuff between Teddy , Cristina , and Owen .
" The episode 's writer , Heinberg , offered his insight :
" I Like You
So Much Better
When You 're Naked " saw the departure of Stevens , following the breakdown of her marriage with Karev .
Series ' writer Joan Rater commented on this : " Izzie getting the clean scan back gives Alex the freedom to leave .
Because he never would have left her when she was sick , he 's a good guy .
And I 'm not saying that Alex ever consciously thought , I ca n't leave her while she 's sick , but now that she 's not , now that she seems like she 's going to get better , it just comes to him .
He deserves more .
He 's a good guy and he deserves more .
But loving Izzie showed him that he can be good , is good .
So it was a little gift .
And when he tells Izzie he 's done , he 's not bitter or angry , he 's just done .
" The writing of the two - part season six finale , caused struggle to Rhimes .
She elaborated on this : RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Grey 's Anatomy sixth season opened up to 17.04 million viewers with a 6.7/17 Nielsen rating / share in the 18–49 demographic .
Although the rating was a 1 % decrease from season five 's opener , it managed to rank first for its time - slot and the entire night , in terms of both ratings and viewership , and served as the season 's most viewed episode .
" Sympathy for the Parents " was the season 's least viewed episode , and up to that point , the series ' as well , garnering only 9.87 million viewers .
The season 's finale garnered 16.13 million viewers , and received a 6.2/18 rating , ranking first for its time - slot and the entire night , in terms of both ratings and viewership .
Although the finale was a success for the night , it was a 1 % decrease from season five 's finale , but served as the season 's second most viewed episode .
Overall , the season ranked at # 17 for the year , and had an average of 13.26 million viewers , a 5 % decrease from the previous season 's ranking .
The season received mixed reviews among television critics .
Speaking of the premiere , Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV noted that the special foreshadowed a " very dark " season , adding : " The talk between George 's mom and one of the surgeons [ Torres ] proved to be one of the more heart - breaking scenes in an episode that in itself is heartbreaking enough . "
In contrast , Kelly West of TV Blend was critical of the premiere , writing : " I do n't think based on the first episode that we can say that Grey 's is headed in a new direction , nor do I think the writers are making much of an effort to bring the series back to the greatness that was its earlier seasons .
That said , this is Grey 's Anatomy and with that comes the usual drama , sex , love and whacky medical mysteries thrown in the mix to keep things moving .
If that 's what you 're looking for , I think you 'll enjoy the season premiere just fine . "
Capshaw 's performance this season was praised , with The TV Addict calling her " immensely likeable " .
Although " Sympathy for the Parents " was the least viewed episode , TV Fanatic called the episode " touching " , praising Chambers ' performance .
TV Fanatic 's reaction to the season was fairly mixed , with Steve Marsi saying that Grey 's Anatomy was facing an identity crisis after viewing " Give Peace a Chance " .
He said that : " Still popular but lacking its past magic , it 's trying to decide what to become .
All we can say is that if it becomes what we saw 12 hours ago , we are all for it .
Last week saw the doctors plunging into ER - style chaos with 12 different doctors giving 12 different accounts of one case .
Last night , we saw something else equally unusual . "
He praised Patrick Dempsey 's performance , saying : " Again , it was a single case that took up the entire hour , but instead of 12 doctors ' version of events , the focus was largely on just one , and the best one : Dr. Derek Shepherd .
Patrick Dempsey 's McDreamy character may be eye candy , but he 's got substance .
Last night 's episode proved that in spades , and was one of the series ' best in some time . "
The season 's finale Death And All His Friends was highly praised .
Marsi gave the episode five stars , and expressed that it may have been the best episode of the series , adding : " The writing and acting were absolutely stellar , and may lead to many Emmy nominations , but even more impressively , despite a killing spree , it remained distinctly Grey 's .
Some of the back - and - forths between the characters were truly memorable , and some of the developments so heartbreaking that we do n't even know where to begin now .
Seriously , the Season 6 finale left us laying awake afterward thinking about everything , a feeling we have n't had from Grey 's in years and rarely achieved by any program . "
John Kubicek of BuddyTV also noted that the finale was the best episode , adding : " [ It was ] two of the best hours of television all year .
It was certainly the best Grey 's Anatomy has ever been , which is saying a lot since I 'd written the show off for the past few years .
No show does a big traumatic event like Grey 's Anatomy , and the shooter gave the show license for heightened drama with five major characters being shot over the two hours .
It was emotional , expertly paced and had me in tears for most of the finale . "
Entertainment Weekly wrote , " At any rate , now you can at least see where it all began .
And while you 're still pondering how Grey 's can still be so damn good sometimes , " The season was one of the least acclaimed of the series , in terms of awards and nominations .
Despite not being nominated for a Primetime Emmy , the show received two Creative Arts Emmy Awards : Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup For A Series , Miniseries , Movie Or A Special for " How Insensitive " and Outstanding Makeup For A Single - Camera Series ( Non - Prosthetic ) for " Suicide is Painless " .
The season also received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series at the GLAAD Media Awards .
Wilson was awarded the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Directing in a Dramatic Series for her directing in " Give Peace a Chance " .
The season also ranked at # 10 on Movieline top ten list .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The number in the " No . in series " column refers to the episode 's number within the overall series , whereas the number in the " No . in season " column refers to the episode 's number within this particular season . "
U.S. viewers in millions " refers to the number of Americans in millions who watched the episodes live .
The sixth season 's episodes are altogether 1032 minutes in length .
RATINGS LIVE + SD RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
Section::::Live + SD ratings . !
No . inseries !
No .
inseason !
Episode !
Air date !
Time slot ( EST ) !
Rating / Share DVD RELEASE *
24 Episodes ( 1 extended )
* 6-Disc Set * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround )
* Audio Commentaries *
Dissecting Grey 's Anatomy - Unaired Scenes *
In Stitches : Season Six Outtakes
* Chandra wilson : Anatomy of A Talent
* Seattle Grace : On Call- 6 Webisodes REFERENCES Section::::References .
Specific General