REMEMBER ME ( 2010 FILM ) Remember Me is a 2010 American romantic coming - of - age drama film directed by Allen Coulter , and screenplay by Will Fetters .
It stars Robert Pattinson , Emilie de Ravin , Chris Cooper , Lena Olin and Pierce Brosnan .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In New York City in 1991 , Alyssa " Ally " Craig is waiting with her mother for the subway , when they are mugged by two young men , who shoot her mother after boarding the train .
Ten years later , Ally is a student at New York University , and lives with her father , Neil , a New York Police Department detective .
Tyler Hawkins audits classes at NYU , and works at the university bookstore .
He has a strained relationship with his businessman father , Charles , because his older brother , Michael , committed suicide years before .
Charles ignores his youngest child , Caroline , of whom Tyler is protective .
One night , with his roommate , Aidan , Tyler gets involved in somebody else 's fight , and is arrested by Neil .
Aidan calls Charles to bail Tyler out , but he does not stick around to have a conversation with his father .
Aidan sees Neil dropping Ally off , realizing that she is his daughter .
He approaches Tyler with the idea to get back at the detective by persuading him to sleep with and dump Ally .
Tyler and Ally go to dinner , kiss at the end of the night , and continue seeing one another .
While at Tyler 's apartment , Aidan convinces the pair to go to a party , after which Ally is very drunk , and ends up throwing up .
She passes out before Tyler can get her to tell him Neil 's phone number .
The following day , she and her father argue .
Neil slaps her , and Ally flees to Tyler 's apartment .
Caroline , a budding artist , is featured in an art show , and Tyler asks his father to attend the show .
When he fails to show up , Tyler confronts him in a board room filled with people , which causes his father 's frustration to boil over .
Neil 's partner recognizes Tyler with Ally on a train , so Neil breaks into Tyler 's apartment , and confronts him .
Tyler provokes Neil by confessing to Aidan 's plan and his initial reason for meeting Ally , which forces Tyler to confess to Ally .
She leaves and returns home .
Aidan visits Ally at her father 's home to explain that he is to blame , and Tyler is in love with her .
Caroline is bullied by classmates at a birthday party where they cut her hair off .
Ally and Aidan visit Tyler 's mother 's apartment , where Caroline is sobbing .
Tyler accompanies his sister back to school , and when her classmates tease her for her new haircut , Tyler turns violent , and ends up in jail .
Charles is impressed that Tyler stood up for his sister , and they connect .
Charles asks Tyler to meet with the lawyers at his office .
Tyler spends the night with Ally , and they reveal they love each other after making love .
Charles takes Caroline to school .
He calls Tyler to let him know this , and explains that he will be late .
Tyler is happy that his father is spending time with Caroline .
He tells Charles that he will wait in his office .
He looks on Charles 's computer , featuring a slideshow of pictures with Tyler , Michael , and Caroline when they were younger .
After Charles drops Caroline off at school , she sits in her classroom , where the teacher writes the date on the blackboard as September 11 , 2001 .
Tyler looks out the window of his father 's office , which is revealed to be located on the 101st floor of the North Tower of the World Trade Center .
Once the terrorist attacks begin , the rest of the family , Aidan and Ally , look at the towers before the camera pans over the rubble , showing Tyler 's diary .
In a voice - over of his diary , Tyler reveals to Michael that he loves him , and he forgives him for killing himself .
Tyler is buried next to Michael .
Some time later , Caroline and Charles seem to have a healthy father - daughter relationship .
Aidan , who has since gotten a tattoo of Tyler 's name on his arm , is working hard in school , and Ally gets on the subway at the same spot where her mother was killed .
CAST
* Robert Pattinson as Tyler Keats Hawkins * Emilie de Ravin as Alyssa " Ally " Craig * Chris Cooper as Neil Craig , Ally 's father .
* Lena Olin as Diane Hirsch , Tyler and Caroline 's mother .
* Pierce Brosnan as Charles Hawkins , Tyler and Caroline 's father .
* Martha Plimpton as Helen Craig , Ally 's mother .
* Ruby Jerins as Caroline Hawkins , Tyler 's younger sister .
* Gregory Jbara as Les Hirsch , Diane 's new partner * Tate Ellington as Aidan Hall , Tyler 's roommate and best friend * Kate Burton as Janine , Charles ' secretary and assistant * Peyton List as Samantha * Chris McKinney as Leo * Meghan Markle as Megan PREMIERE Section::::Premiere .
The film premiered on March 1 , 2010 , at the Paris Theatre in New York City , and received its wide release on March 12 , 2010 .
It is rated 12A in the UK and PG-13 in the United States .
HOME RELEASE Section::::Home release .
Summit Entertainment announced the DVD and Blu - ray release of June 22 , 2010 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a " Rotten " rating of 27 % based on 108 reviews .
The site 's consensus states , " Its leads are likeable , but Remember Me suffers from an overly script and a borderline offensive final twist .
"
Metacritic gives it a score of 40 out of 100 , based on reviews from 29 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Todd McCarthy gave the film a mixed review in Variety , writing " The modestly scaled film delivers some moving and affecting moments amid a preponderance of scenes of frequently annoying people behaving badly . "
Andrea Gronvall gave a similar assessment in The Chicago Reader , writing " Allen Coulter directed this morose and sluggish drama , which gets more mileage from Pattinson 's anguished profile than from Will Fetters 's thunderously overwritten screenplay . "
Derek Malcolm wrote in This Is London , " Decently shot and directed as it is , it lacks any real flame . "
Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review , stating the " scenes between Pattinson and de Ravin exude genuine charm .
" Honeycutt goes on to say that the score and cinematography brought " notable sparkle to this heartfelt drama . " Roger Ebert generally liked the film , giving it three out of four stars and characterizing it as a " well - made movie .
I cared about the characters .
I felt for them .
Liberate them from the plot 's destiny , which is an anvil around their necks , and you might have something " but goes on to say it " tries to borrow profound meaning , but succeeds only in upstaging itself so overwhelmingly that its characters become irrelevant " .
Jake Coyle of The Associated Press did not favor the film and said the " most pleasing thing about [ the film ] is its boldness .
It may be affected , but [ it ] is at least aiming for an intriguing character study — a positive sign in the young career of Pattinson " whom he says steps away from " Twilight , apparently in search of his Five Easy Pieces or Rebel Without a Cause . "
Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a D+ , calling it a " shameless contraption of ridiculously sad things befalling attractive people .
"
Schwarzbaum was also critical of Pattinson 's acting and the script .
Wesley Morris of the Boston Globe gave the film a half star out of four , commenting that the film " crassly repurposes tragedy to excuse its cliches .
"
Other critics also found the movie 's invocation of the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center offensive and exploitative , such as Lisa Kennedy of the Denver Post : " The finale manages to be tasteful and exploitative at the same time .
It touts forgiveness while being mildly infuriating .
Such is the danger of borrowing from the enormous to merely entertain .
If that .
Forgettable should be the last thing a movie touching on the events of 9/11 should be .
Yet ' Remember Me ' is just that . "
Elizabeth Wetizman of The New York Daily News also denounced the film 's ending , writing , " There 's no shame in exploring tragedy through art .
But exploiting it to make your very ordinary movie feel more important ?
That 's another story . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Remember Me opened in fifth place , behind Alice in Wonderland , Green Zone , She 's Out of My League , and Shutter Island .
It grossed $ 8,089,139 in its first weekend .
As of July 6 , Remember Me accumulated a total of $ 56,032,889 at the box office .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Ceremony !
Award !
Result rowspan="4"2010
rowspan="2"Teen Choice
Awards
Choice Movie :
Drama Choice Movie Actor : Drama – Robert Pattinson rowspan="1"Nickelodeon Australian Kids ' Choice Awards Favorite Movie Star – Robert Pattinson rowspan="1"Golden Raspberry Awards
Worst Actor – Robert Pattinson SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The official Remember Me soundtrack was released on March 9 , 2010 .
A score soundtrack was also released which was composed by Marcelo Zarvos .
The movie consisted of 26 credited songs , while the soundtrack 14 of them , including songs by Sigur Rós , The Beta Band , Ani Difranco , Supergrass and National Skyline .
A Pakistani song , Saason ki Mala Peh Simroon by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was also heard in the movie when Tyler takes Alley on their first date at Gandhi Restaurant .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS