STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT Stakeholder engagement is the process by which an organization involves people who may be affected by the decisions it makes or can influence the implementation of its decisions .
They may support or oppose the decisions , be influential in the organization or within the community in which it operates , hold relevant official positions or be affected in the long term .
Stakeholder engagement is a key part of corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) and achieving the triple bottom line .
Companies engage their stakeholders in dialogue to find out what social and environmental issues matter most to them about their performance in order to improve decision - making and accountability .
An engaging stakeholder is a requirement of the Global Reporting Initiative , a network - based organization with sustainability reporting framework that is widely used around the world .
The International Organisation for Standardization ( ISO ) requires stakeholder engagement for all their new standards .
Involving stakeholders in decision - making processes is not confined to corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) processes .
It 's a tool used by mature private and public sector organizations , especially when they want to develop understanding and agrees to solutions on complex issues or issues of concern .
An underlying principle of stakeholder engagement is that stakeholders have the chance to influence the decision - making process .
This differentiates stakeholder engagement from communications processes that seek to issue a message or influence groups to agree with a decision that is already made .
The UK organization
The Environment Council developed the Principles of Authentic Engagement .
These are intended to provide a framework for genuine stakeholder engagement .
Jeffrey ( 2009 ) in " Stakeholder Engagement :
A Roadmap to meaningful engagement " describes seven core values for the practices of gaining meaningful participation of which
perhaps the three most critical are : * Stakeholders should have a say in decisions about actions that could affect their lives or essential environment for life .
*
Stakeholder participation includes the promise that stakeholder 's contribution will influence the decision .
*
Stakeholder participation seeks input from participants in designing how they participate .
The practitioners in stakeholder engagement are often businesses , non - governmental organizations ( NGOs ) , labor organizations , trade and industry organizations , governments , and financial institutions .
COMPONENTS Section::::Components .
Partnerships , in the context of corporate social responsibility interactions , are people and organizations from some combination of public , business and civil constituencies who engage in common societal aims through combining their resources and competencies , sharing both risks and benefits .
Agreeing on the rules of engagement is integral to the process .
It is important for everyone to understand each party 's role .
Buy - in is essential for success in stakeholder engagement .
Every party must have a stake in the process and have participating members have decision - making power .
Every party must be committed to the process by ensuring action based on the decisions made through the engagement .
No decisions should be already made before commencing stakeholder engagement on the issue .
It is integral that the dialogue has legitimacy in influencing the decision .
BENEFITS Section::::Benefits .
Stakeholder engagement provides opportunities to further align business practices with societal needs and expectations , helping to drive long - term sustainability and shareholder value .
Stakeholder engagement is intended to help the practitioners fully realise the benefits of stakeholder engagement in their organization , to compete in an increasingly complex and ever - changing business environment , while at the same time bringing about systemic change towards sustainable development .
Stakeholder perceptions
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Library of Stakeholder Engagement articles on TriplePundit * Future 500 * Boreal - is.com * AA1000 Stakeholder Engagement Standard ( AA1000SES )