CAR ALLOWANCE REBATE SYSTEM
The Car Allowance Rebate System ( CARS ) , colloquially known as " cash for clunkers " , was a $ 3 billion U.S. federal scrappage program intended to provide economic incentives to U.S. residents to purchase a new , more fuel - efficient vehicle when trading in a less fuel - efficient vehicle .
The program was promoted as providing stimulus to the economy by boosting auto sales , while putting safer , cleaner , and more fuel - efficient vehicles on the roadways .
The program officially started on July 1 , 2009 , processing of claims began July 24 , and the program ended on August 24 , 2009 , as the appropriated funds were exhausted .
The deadline for dealers to submit applications was August 25 .
According to estimates of the Department of Transportation , the initial $ 1 billion appropriated for the system was exhausted by July 30 , 2009 , well before the anticipated end date of November 1 , 2009 , due to very high demand .
In response , Congress approved an additional $ 2 billion .
A study by University of Delaware researchers concluded that for each vehicle trade , the program had a net cost of approximately $ 2,000 , with total costs outweighing all benefits by $ 1.4 billion .
A 2017 study in the American Economic Journal found that the program , intended to increase consumer spending , reduced total new vehicle spending by $ 5 billion .
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY
Section::::Legislative history .
Economist Alan Blinder helped popularize the idea of a scrappage program , and the moniker " cash for clunkers " , with his July 2008 op - ed piece in The New York Times .
Blinder argued that a cash - for - clunkers program would have a tripartite purpose of helping the environment , stimulating the economy , and reducing economic inequality .
A number of organizations advised Congress in developing the program including ACEEE , CAP Action Fund and SmartTransportation.org .
Jack Hidary of Smart Transportation and Bracken Hendricks of the Center for American Progress co - wrote a paper which was distributed to Congressional offices in November 2008 describing the multiple benefits of a cash - for - clunkers program .
The House approved the creation of a cash - for - clunkers program with the 298 to 119 passage of the CARS Act ( " Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Act " , H.R. 1550 ) .
The House bill , sponsored by Rep. Betty Sutton ( D - Ohio ) , allowed consumers to trade in vehicles with a combined fuel economy of 18 or less for new , more efficient vehicles .
In the Senate , Debbie Stabenow ( D - Michigan ) , and Sam Brownback ( R - Kansas ) sponsored a bill very similar to the House 's .
An alternative bill proposed by Dianne Feinstein ( D - California ) , Susan Collins ( R - Maine ) , and Charles Schumer ( D - New York ) would have had a greater focus on increasing fuel economy .
Proponents argued that the alternative bill would lead to 32 % more efficiency improvements than the House - Stabenow - Brownback version of the program .
The alternative bill would have required that the trade - in vehicle have a fuel economy rating of or less and offered a three - tiered voucher system ranging from $ 2,500 for a new car that is more efficient than a trade - in to $ 4,500 for one that is more efficient .
Mileage improvement requirements would be less for light and heavy duty trucks .
Pre-1999 work trucks would be eligible for the $ 2,500 voucher regardless of mileage improvements .
The alternative bill also gave a $ 1,000 voucher for the purchase of a more efficient used car ; the House bill completely excluded used vehicles .
In the Senate , the cash - for - clunkers legislation was inserted into a larger war supplemental funding bill .
Dissenting Senators raised a point of order under Rule 28 , which prohibits insertion of provisions not previously passed by either house into conference reports .
The rule was overridden with 60 votes , despite some senators , including Sam Brownback , being uncomfortable with a last - minute change that called for the bill 's funding to come from " deficit spending " rather than from the stimulus package that was originally agreed upon .
The larger funding bill passed by a vote of 91–5 in the Senate .
The Supplemental Appropriations Act , 2009 was signed into law with the Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Program ( C.A.R.S. ) as Title XIII .
The program received an initial allocation of $ 1 billion ( out of the $ 4 billion estimated cost ) funded by the U.S. government and the program time length was July 1 – November 1 .
It was implemented by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) which had 30 days from the approval of the bill to post all program details online .
In response to the U.S. Department of Transportation estimate that the $ 1 billion appropriated for the system was almost exhausted by July 30 , 2009 , due to very high demand , Congress approved an additional $ 2 billion for the program with the explicit support of the Obama Administration .
On July 31 , 2009 , the House of Representatives approved the extra $ 2 billion for the program , and the Senate approved the extension on August 6 , defeating all six amendments presented .
President Barack Obama signed the bill into law on August 7 , and the appropriation was exhausted by August 24 , 2009 .
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
* Vehicle must be less than 25 years old on the trade - in date .
* Only the purchase or 5 year minimum lease of new vehicles qualify .
*
Generally , trade - in vehicles must get a weighted combined average rating of 18 or fewer miles per gallon ( some very large pickup trucks and cargo vans have different requirements ) .
* Trade - in vehicles must be registered and insured continuously for the full year preceding the trade - in .
* Trade - in vehicles must be in driveable condition .
*
The program requires the scrapping of the eligible trade - in vehicle and that the dealer disclose to the customer an estimate of the scrap value of the trade - in .
The scrap value , however minimal , will be in addition to the rebate , and not in place of the rebate .
*
The new car bought under the plan must have a suggested retail price of no more than $ 45,000 , and for passenger automobiles , the new vehicle must have a combined fuel economy value of at least .
LAST - MINUTE CAR INELIGIBILITY Section::::Eligibility criteria .
Section::::Last - minute car ineligibility .
According to USA Today , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency CREDIT Section::::Credit .
Depending on the type of car purchased and " the difference in fuel economy between the purchased vehicle and the trade - in vehicle " , the amount of the credit given in the form of vouchers to eligible customers is either $ 3,500 or $ 4,500 .
New car dealers will be able to reduce the purchase price by the amount of the voucher for which that the customer is eligible .
ENGINE DISABLEMENT AND SCRAPPAGE CRITERIA
Section::::Engine disablement and scrappage criteria .
To ensure that vehicles traded - in under " cash for clunkers " will not be resold by dealers , the program outlines a procedure for destructively disabling the engine ( and thus also precluding the possibility that any mechanical engine components might be salvaged to be used in the repair of any other vehicles )
: The motor oil is drained and replaced with a sodium silicate solution , then the engine is started and run until the solution , becoming glass - like when heated , causes engine internals to abrade and ultimately seize .
In addition , the salvage or scrap facility which acquires the vehicle can not sell the engine , cylinder heads or a " rolling chassis " from the scrap vehicle .
The salvage or scrap facility can sell any other component ( including the transmission and axles ) from the scrap vehicle separately and may dismantle and warehouse the parts .
The " hull " of the vehicle must be crushed within 180 days .
Cut off or unbolt front end assemblies may be saved and sold at a later date , as well as the " top and back " of pickup cabs .
The outlined procedure says that running the engine at 2,000 RPM " should disable the engine within a few minutes " ; if not , then allow the engine to cool off before repeating the procedure .
Hazards associated with the intentional overheating and destruction of the engine include rupturing radiator and hot water / steam , motor oil ejection , toxic fumes , and fire .
By completely disabling the engine , the CARS program avoids recycling schemes such as the one discovered in Germany , where authorities found that an estimated 50,000 scrapped vehicles have been exported to Africa and Eastern Europe , where newer , safer cars of the type being destroyed in the West are prohibitively expensive , In contrast with the U.S. program , the German program only requires dealers to drop off the scrapped vehicles at junkyards , thus allowing the illegal exports .
Auto recyclers and dismantlers have criticized the program due to requirements that the engine is to be disabled to prevent re - use of the car .
To auto recyclers , a car 's engine is considered to be the most valuable part of a junked car .
Some recyclers have refused to participate in the program as well due to the limited profit potential of junking a car brought in under CARS .
NATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE
TITLE
INFORMATION SYSTEM Section::::National Motor Vehicle Title Information System .
After Hurricane Katrina , vehicles that were declared as total losses in one state were transferred to other states and resold to unsuspecting consumers with clean titles .
To avoid clunkers declared under the CARS program that could also find their way back onto the used - car market through surreptitious means , the federal government set up the National Motor Vehicle Title Information System ( NMVTIS ) to track totaled vehicles and prevent their resale .
By October 2009 , 28 state motor - vehicle agencies participated or contributed to NMVTIS , and 11 others were working toward participation .
All states were required to be fully participating by January 1 , 2010 .
The CARS program required that recyclers report the Vehicle Identification Numbers ( VINs ) and the status of clunker to the NMVTIS within seven days of acquiring the vehicle .
The searchable database ( for a fee ) contains information on vehicles from insurance companies , junkyards , and salvage yards .
PROGRAM RESULTS Section::::Program results .
Auto Observer said there was one major technological glitch in the program . "
Government officials said the public site for customers and the site for dealer sign - ups were on the same server , which became overloaded .
The site was taken down [ the night of July 24 , 2009 ]
while the two functions supposedly were separated and put on two different servers " , Auto Observer reported .
Dealers also had difficulty getting paperwork processed .
Given the uncertainty of being paid , dealers decided to wait on destroying the old cars .
By July 29 , $ 150 million of the $ 1 billion had already gone to new purchases .
Dealers have had a higher volume of potential customers , partly because of other incentives offered by the manufacturers and the sellers .
Some dealers believed the increase was only temporary .
However , many people who visited car dealers found out their cars were not eligible , but they bought cars anyway .
A lot of people who were able to participate were buying anyway , but their trade - in value jumped significantly .
According to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , the cars purchased had higher gas mileage than what the bill required .
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration reported 23,000 participating dealers .
Stabenow said 40,000 cars had been sold and another 200,000 sales had yet to be completed .
Sutton chief of staff Nichole Francis Reynolds said , " The program has spent $ 150 million and has another $ 800 million to $ 850 million in ( pending ) obligations . ...
This is one of those programs you can really see working " .
Rep. Candice Miller ( R - Mich . ) said , " It has exceeded everyone 's expectations " .
Miller and Sutton wanted to spend a total of $ 4 billion on the program .
Bailey Wood , legislative director of the National Auto Dealers Association , said , " Obviously the program has been an immense success in stimulating automotive sales " .
On July 30 , Wood announced the suspension of the program .
White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs denied this was happening , saying the administration is " evaluating all options " .
Dealers that have been aggressively advertising the program can not simply stop the ads , so there were concerns about whether the program would continue .
According to estimates of the Department of Transportation , the $ 1 billion appropriated for the system was exhausted by July 30 , 2009 , well before the anticipated end date of November 1 , 2009 , due to very high demand .
The House of Representatives appropriated another $ 2 billion to the program on July 31 , with the Senate adding its approval a week later .
President Barack Obama signed the bill into law on August 7 , and government officials expect that the additional funds will be exhausted by Labor Day .
Former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan said on ABC 's This Week that the success of the program resulted from waiting for the economy to improve .
He said , " If ... the clunker program had been put in place six months ago , it would have probably been a dud " .
Greenspan did not believe the program had stimulated the economy .
On August 3 , the DoT reported from a sample of 120,000 rebate applications already processed , that " the average gas mileage of cars being bought was 28.3 miles per gallon , for SUVs 21.9 miles per gallon , and for trucks , 16.3 miles per gallon , all significantly higher than required to get a rebate " .
Senator Susan M. Collins said that " vehicles being purchased under the program would go an average of 9.6 more miles per gallon than those being turned in , which she said was a 61 percent improvement " .
The DoT also reported that " Ford , G.M. and Chrysler supplied 47 percent of the new vehicles , slightly more than their overall share of the market , which is 45 percent " .
Detroit 's Big Three automakers said the demand peak that occurred in the final week of July left their inventories of unsold vehicles at the lowest levels in many years , but such windfall could hurt sales of some popular models in August .
Ford sales went up in the United States for the first time since 2007 , while GM and Chrysler at least improved by slowing their decline .
After the first week of the program , the Department of Transportation reported that the average fuel efficiency of trade - ins was , compared to for the new cars purchased to replace them , translating to a 61 % fuel efficiency improvement .
The DoT also commented that the program participants were downsizing , rather than making one - for - one replacements , and turning in their old trucks and SUVs for new small sedans , as 83 % of the trade - ins were trucks , and 60 % of new purchases were cars .
, the top trade - in was the Ford Explorer 4WD and the top selling car was the Ford Focus .
However , according to an analysis carried out by Edmunds based on a sample of transactions between July 24 to July 31 ( the first week of the program ) , the Ford Escape crossover SUV was the actual best seller while the Ford Focus ranked in second place , when the tallying is done grouping different versions of the same vehicle together .
As of August 21 , the Department of Transportation reported that the downsizing trend continued , with the Toyota Corolla ranking as the top seller after four weeks of the program , followed by the Honda Civic , and the Ford Focus , and the Ford Explorer 4WD continued as the top trade - in .
According to USDoT , at the end of the program Toyota accounted for 19.4 % of sales , followed by General Motors with 17.6 % , Ford with 14.4 % , Honda with 13.0 % , and NissanU.S. DoTFord F-150 pickup 2WD7 Chevrolet Blazer 4WD 2
Honda Civic24 - 42 7 Toyota Prius 46 3 Jeep Grand Cherokee 4WD 8 Chevrolet C 1500 pickup 2WD 3 Toyota Camry 23 - 34 8 Honda Accord
N /
A 4 Ford Explorer 2WD 9 Ford F-150 pickup 4WD 4 Ford Focus 27 - 289
Honda Fit 29 - 31 5 Dodge Caravan / Grand Caravan 10 Ford Windstar minivan 5 Hyundai Elantra 26 - 28 10 Ford Escape
According to data submitted to CARS , as of Sept. 9 , 2009Toyota Corolla6
Chevrolet Silverado pickup 2 Honda Civic7
Nissan Versa 3
Toyota Camry 8 Ford F-150 pickup 4 Ford Focus 9 Honda Accord 5 Hyundai Elantra 10
Nissan Altima RECEPTION ECONOMIC EFFECTS
*
In a study published after the program ended , Burton A. Abrams and George R. Parsons , professors at the University of Delaware , concluded that for each vehicle trade , the program had a net cost of approximately $ 2,000 .
* A September 2010 open access Social Science Research Network study concluded that the program simply pulled purchases from the future : it produced a short - lived effect ( 360,000 additional cars sold in two months ) , but that the effect was almost completely reversed in the seven following months due to fewer cars sold , and found no evidence of effect on employment , house prices , or household default rates in cities with higher exposure .
*
An article in The Economist argued that the program is the kind of policy required to avoid the liquidity trap in times of economic depression , as defined by John Maynard Keynes .
The article states that : Section::::Reception .
Section::::Economic effects .
the boost in demand that the rebates have brought about is exactly the sort of stimulus that is urgently needed to escape what John Maynard Keynes called a " liquidity trap " .
According to his theory , consumers may become so worried about the economy that they cling to as much liquid wealth as possible , cutting their spending sharply and thereby triggering precisely the slump they feared .
Moreover , as stimulus policies go , cash - for - clunkers looks to be unusually effective .
Admittedly , that is not an especially demanding measure , given that Keynes favoured , if need be , burying money in bottles for people to dig up and spend .
Cash - for - clunkers has many benefits beyond simply getting more money passing through the hands of consumers and into aggregate demand .
* John Irons , research and policy director for the Economic Policy Institute , said that in improving the economy , " in terms of bang for the buck , this is up there pretty high up there " .
* Jacksonville State University economist and Ludwig von Mises Institute scholar Christopher Westley said that the program " sticks it " to the poor and lower - middle classes by raising the price of the remaining cars in the secondary market , as well as by raising the general price level resulting from the monetary inflation required to finance it .
Westley called CARS the " I Hate the Poor Act of 2009 " .
*
Despite Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood 's claims that the program would benefit scrapyards , auto recyclers and scrapyards lamented the cost of transporting and removing toxic waste ( such as motor oil , coolant , refrigerants , gasoline , unrecoverable plastics , and other items ) from the car before processing , which can amount to $ 700–1,200 per car .
Some recyclers refuse to participate in the program due to this .
*
Early reports showed that the program , though promoted as bolstering Detroit 's embattled carmakers , have actually increased market share for Japanese and Korean automakers .
According to data published by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration , Americans have used the scrappage incentives to buy more vehicles from Toyota than any of the three Detroit carmakers .
Only Ford did not drop in market share after the program was introduced .
*
According to an Edmunds.com study released October 28 , the program actually cost Americans nearly $ 20,000 more per car than the maximum rebate .
Only 125,000 of the 690,000 purchases would not have been made without the incentives , the company said , and with $ 3 billion spent , that works out to $ 24,000 per car .
However , the White House disputes this claim on the grounds that Edmunds relies on two faulty assumptions : it assumes " that the market for cars that did n't qualify for cash for clunkers was completely unaffected by this program " and " ignores the beneficial impact that the program will have on 4th Quarter GDP because automakers have ramped up their production to rebuild their depleted inventories . "
* A study published by the Center for Business and Economic Research at Ball State University estimated the actual CARS - induced automobile sales increase as roughly 685,000 for July and August 2009 .
The author used an econometric model of monthly automobile sales , treating the CARS period of July and August in two different ways to account for the inconsistent time periods in each .
Noting several concerns with the legislation , this author noted that : " one criticism of the program – that cash for clunkers actually led to few additional automobiles sold – does not survive the scrutiny of empirics ...
the program must be viewed as a success " CHARITIES Section::::Charities .
Charitable organizations bemoaned the program , noting the lack of repairable cars for charity purposes , and a source of revenue to fund programs .
A collection of charities , under the umbrella of Pete Palmer 's Vehicle Donation Processing Center , reported a 7.5 % decline in car donations in the month the Car Allowance Rebate System debuted .
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS
Section::::Environmental effects .
Critics argued that people trading in cars would use such funds to mostly buy trucks , with a minimal benefit on gas mileage .
However , the average fuel economy of a clunker was 15.8 mpg , compared to 25.4 mpg for the car that replaced it — a 61 % improvement ( 37 % improvement if using gallons per 1,000 miles ) .
New federal data analyzed by The Associated Press finds that the single most common swap , at an occurrence rate of more than 8,200 times , involved Ford F-150 pickup owners .
The fuel economy for the new trucks ranges from 15 to 17 miles per gallon , which equates to a mere 1 to 3 mpg improvement over the clunkers .
The Associated Press , in using Edmunds data , noted that many not - so - green cars have also been bought under CARS , notably SUVs , Trucks , Luxury , and Crossover vehicles .
Some buyers have been noted to have bought the Cadillac SRX , while other vehicles such as the Hummer H3 T , Lexus RX 350 , Lincoln MKX , and BMW X3 are qualified under the program , despite being rated under 20 mpg , some considerably less than the average 25.3 mpg for cars purchased under CARS .
The models also fall under the $ 45,000 threshold outlined in CARS .
Declan McCullagh , from CBSNews.com , argued that " as fuel efficiency has increased since the early 1980s , cars get driven more .
Plus , there 's the environmental cost of building the new vehicles in the first place " .
William Chameides , dean of the Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke University , argued that between 3 and 12 tons of carbon dioxide are emitted for each new car , due to such factors as shipping the car and the electricity consumed in manufacturing it .
In addition , in order to offset the carbon footprint of the new car from a clunker ( using the ratio of 18 mpg for the " clunker " and the minimum 22 mpg for a qualifying vehicle ) , the average driver would need to drive the car about five and a half years ; with trucks , the figure jumps to eight or nine years of typical driving .
Harvard economics professor Edward Glaeser argues that subsidizing fuel - efficient vehicles encourages more driving , as the marginal cost per mile driven is less , which causes total fuel consumption to decrease less than expected .
He proposes that a more effective policy would be to raise taxes on carbon dioxide emissions .
Bruce Belzowski , a scientist at the University of Michigan 's Transportation Research Institute , notes that the number of vehicles involved in the CARS program ( ~250 thousand ) is a small fraction of the number of vehicles currently on U.S. roads ( ~260 million ) and thus is not expected to have an appreciable effect on pollution savings .
A study by researchers at the University of Michigan evaluated the effects of the program on the average fuel economy considering a baseline without the existence of the program , since there was already a trend for buying vehicles with higher fuel economy due to the high gasoline prices of 2007 and 2008 , and the economic crisis of 2008fuel economywithout the programeconomywith the programin fuel economydue to the program(change in mpg ) align =
leftJuly 2009 21.55 22.110.6 align =
leftAugust 2009
21.67
22.390.7 RATIONALE FOR REMOVING THE MOST INEFFICIENT VEHICLES Section::::Rationale for removing the most inefficient vehicles .
Saving one gallon of gasoline per 100 miles saves 20 pounds of carbon dioxide , which is approximately one ton of carbon dioxide every 10,000 miles of driving .
An improvement from 14 mpg to 25 mpg saves 3 gallons of gas per 100 miles , or 3 tons of carbon dioxide in 10,000 miles of driving .
The replacement of older vehicles also reduces other non - greenhouse pollutants .
" Gas consumption " calculators that translate " miles per gallon " to a measure of " gallons per mile " can help car buyers see the gas savings from their trade ins .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration spokesman Eric Bolton pointed out the newer cars purchased under the program are also " considerably safer than the old clunkers they are replacing " .
SCRAP VALUE
Section::::Scrap value .
Part of the Car Allowance Rebate System bill made buyers eligible for the scrap value of the car along with the rebate , with the dealers taking in $ 50 of the value and to share the rest of the value to the buyer .
While some dealers and Car Dealer Associations have argued that buyers were not entitled to the scrap value of the car , advocacy groups and State Attorney 's General argued that the law made the issue clear that buyers were entitled to the scrap value of the car .
Some dealers have claimed that they did pass on the scrap value of the car to buyers .
EXOTIC CARS CRUSHED UNDER THE PROGRAM Section::::Exotic cars crushed under the program .
Jalopnik reviewed the lists published by the NHTSA and found numerous cars crushed under the program that had book values far exceeding the rebates offered by the government .
Among some of the cars whose book value was worth more than government rebates included models ranging from the GMC Typhoon to
the Bentley Continental R. However , a further review noted that many cars that were thought of as being crushed under the program were improperly recorded and/or swapped for other car models or trims .
Some exotic / collectible vehicles were scrapped under the program included a Maserati Biturbo with 18,140 miles , a GMC Syclone , which was removed from scrappage in the program by a group of car enthusiasts a GMC Typhoon , An Isuzu Vehicross , a La Forza SUV , a TVR 280i , and various Ford Mustang , Ford Taurus SHO , Chevrolet Camaro , and Chevrolet Corvette models , among other cars .
ENDING THE PROGRAM Section::::Ending the program .
On August 20 , 2009 , Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood announced that the program would end at 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time on Monday , August 24 .
After the announcement , several dealers decided to stop participating in the program after Saturday , August 22 , due to the difficulties in processing their reimbursements through the government web site where the paperwork must be filed .
Secretary Ray LaHood also commented that " it [ had ] been a thrill to be part of the best economic news story in America " , in a news conference regarding the announcement on August 20 .
As of early August 25 , the DoT reported 665,000 dealer transactions corresponding to $ 2.77 billion in rebates .
In October 2011 , former Obama administration economic advisor Austan Goolsbee stated that , " the administration misjudged how quickly the country could recover from the economic damage of the 2008 economic collapse " and now knowing that it has " proved a longer , tougher ride than we thought at the time " , he would not have created this short - run program to stimulate the economy , but " he supports the overall stimulus program , which he claims warded off a depression . "
SEE ALSO
* Parable of the broken window
* Scrappage program * Transport and the environment REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS