QUALITY SAVE
Quality Save is a chain of discount stores operating in northern England .
The head office / store for Quality Save is in Swinton .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Quality Save was founded in 1974 by Bob Rudkin .
He started off with an indoor market stall in Walkden and a small shop in Farnworth .
The company opened more outlets over time .
In 2010 , stores began playing a clip every fifteen minutes reminding customers of their " Star Buy " deals , their cheap prices in comparison to pound stores , and the company 's alcohol policy .
These clips end with the company 's name and their slogan : " Quality Save .
Quality Brands – Quality Prices " .
In 2012 , Quality Save closed an outlet in Barnsley to open a much bigger one a few feet down the road .
They also closed a temporary unit in Urmston , and opened a new one in the Eden Square Shopping Centre .
In 2015 , the Middleton branch of Quality Save was closed , and a superstore was launched in the ex Tesco unit next door .
It was then confirmed that their biggest ever superstore would open in the beginning of 2017 in Walkden , the town where the company was first founded on a market stall .
In February 2017 , the biggest ever Quality Save store was opened in Walkden Town Retail Park .
This store is over 20,000 cubic feet and is now one of two Quality Save stores based in Walkden .
STORES Section::::Stores .
Quality Save has a total of 23 stores .
They can usually be found in major shopping streets and shopping centres .
Stores range from small to medium outlets .
Quality Save 's largest store is in the Stretford Mall .
They acquired some of the former Woolworths outlets .
Although the official slogan for the company is " Quality Brands – Quality Prices " , the Quality Save stores carrying old signs display the Home Bargains slogan : " Top Brands – Bottom Prices " .
LOGO Section::::Logo .
Stores have a red and sky blue logo .
They used to have a logo more similar to that of Home Bargains , later changed to avoid confusion between the two companies .
Many Quality Save stores , however , retain the old logo .
HOME BARGAINS Section::::Home Bargains .
They are supplied for by
TJ Morris Ltd. Because of this , Quality Save is often confused with Home Bargains .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Quality Save Home Page