SAN TAN VALLEY , ARIZONA San Tan Valley is a census - designated place in northern Pinal County , Arizona .
It is a bedroom community located in the Phoenix metropolitan area 's southeastern suburbs .
As of the census of 2010 , the population of San Tan Valley was 81,321 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
San Tan Valley derives its name from the nearby San Tan Mountains .
Previously referred to as San Tan Heights , San Tan Foothills , Greater San Tan and simply the San Tan Area , the community lacked any official name and residents used nearby Queen Creek for their mailing addresses .
To coincide with the addition of a new ZIP code for the community on July 1 , 2009 , the United States Postal Service was petitioned to provide the area with a new name .
As part of the initial request , " Bella Vista " name was submitted to the postal service , but some local residents opposed the suggested name .
In response , the Greater San Tan Area Coalition organized a non - binding vote from June 16 – 22 , offering residents the opportunity to vote on a name for the community .
On June 23 , 2009 , a room full of people , including the current Pinal County Supervisor , counted the votes and San Tan Valley became the new name of the area .
The area , which had consisted primarily of undeveloped desert and agriculture prior to 2000 , experienced considerable growth in the early part of the decade .
As early as 2004 , attempts to incorporate the area were underway .
An initial attempt , which proposed a name of simply " San Tan " for the area , was blocked by the neighboring town of Florence after rural residents there expressed concern that allowing incorporation would accelerate the urbanization of the area .
A subsequent effort in 2005 failed to gain traction .
Following the renaming of the area in 2009 , a renewed effort at incorporation sought to put the issue to a vote in 2010 , this time with the support of Pinal County .
The Town Council of Florence unanimously rejected a resolution that would have approved San Tan Valley 's proposed boundaries over concerns of their allotment of state shared revenue .
History of the name " San Tan "
The words " San Tan " have a rich Native American background and originates from the Tohono O'odham ( Papago ) for the Spanish words " Santa Ana " or in English , Saint Anne .
The word was used to name a mountain range that sits in north eastern Pinal County , soaring up to a 3010 foot elevation .
It is home to a 10,000 acre park with hiking trails , native american petroglyphs and diverse geology .
Because the mountain range sits also on southern border of Maricopa county , many people in both Pinal and southern Maricopa counties identify with SanTan area and word .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
San Tan Valley is located at ( 33.170462 , -111.572170 ) .
San Tan Valley is located in the unincorporated area between the towns of Queen Creek to the north and west , Apache Junction to the north , and Florence to the south .
The area is also bound by the San Tan Mountains Regional Park on the west and the Gila River Indian Community on the southwest .
The area consists largely of master planned communities , such as Johnson Ranch , Ironwood Crossing , Pecan Creek , Morning Sun Farms , San Tan Heights , Skyline Ranch , Copper Basin and Circle Cross Ranch .
Situated east of the San Tan Mountains , the community is located in the Sonoran Desert .
As such , it experiences the hot , arid summers and moderate winters that typify the area .
http://www .
SanTanValley.com DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
In 2010 San Tan Valley had a population of 81,321 .
The racial and ethnic composition of the population was 66.2 % non - Hispanic white , 23.4 % Hispanic or Latino , 5.0 % black or African American , 2.1 % Asian , 1.2 % Native American , 0.3 % Pacific Islander , and 0.2 % non - Hispanic reporting some other race .
Additional census data can be found here : https://www.santanvalley.com/san-tan-valley-area-information/census-2010-san-tan-valley EDUCATION Section::::Education .
San Tan Valley is serviced by the following school districts .
Each district has its own high school located within San Tan Valley :
* Florence Unified School District ( Poston Butte High School / San Tan Foothills High School//Florence High School )
* J. O. Combs Unified School District ( Combs High School )
* American Leadership Academy ( ALA Ironwood High School ) EMERGENCY SERVICES Section::::Emergency services .
Pinal County Sheriff 's Office Rural Metro Fire IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In Sons of Anarchy S4 / E4 , " Una Venta " , Huff orders the SAMTAZ charter to help SAMCRO shake the van tailing them by taking the crew down the Vesper Trail , ( which is in the San Tan Valley ) , and then blowing up a grease truck to close the section of road separating the Sons and their tail .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Google Map of San Tan Valley , Arizona
*
SanTanValley.com * SanTanEvents.com