HONOUR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER
" Honour thy father and thy mother " is one of the Ten Commandments in the Hebrew Bible .
The commandment is generally regarded in Protestant and Jewish sources as the fifth in both the list in Exodus 20:1–21 , and in Deuteronomy ( Dvarim ) 5:1–23 .
Catholics count this as the fourth .
These commandments were enforced as law in many jurisdictions , and are still considered enforceable law by some .
Exodus 20 , 1 describes the Ten Commandments as being spoken by God , inscribed on two stone tablets by the finger of God , broken by Moses , and rewritten on replacement stones by the Lord .
HEBREW BIBLE Section::::Hebrew Bible .
In the Torah , keeping this commandment was associated with individual benefit and with the ability of the nation of Israel to remain in the land to which God was leading them .
Dishonouring parents by striking or cursing them was punishable by death
and so the clause " so that you may live long " could be interpreted as " so that you are not put to death " .
In the Talmud , the commandment to honour one 's human parents is compared to honoring God .
According to the prophet Malachi , God makes the analogy himself : JUDAISM Section::::Judaism .
The commandment to honour one 's human parents is compared to honouring God , for human owes his existence to his father and his mother .
The Talmud says that since there are three partners in the creation of a person ( God and two parents ) , honour showed to parents is the same as honour shown to God .
It also compares a number of similarly constructed passages from the Torah and concludes that honour toward parents and honour toward God are intentionally equated : Because honouring parents is part of honouring God , the mitzvah does not depend on the worthiness of the parent:"Even if his father is wicked and a sinner , he must fear and revere him ...
A convert to Judaism must not curse or despise his non - Jewish father . "
( Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 143:13,25 )
It also requires honour to one 's stepparents or an older sibling who is raising one , and one 's teachers , though one has a greater obligation to honor a parent than a grandparent .
The commandment is repeated eight times throughout the bible .
HISTORICAL BELIEFS Section::::Historical beliefs .
Keeping this commandment was associated by the Israelites with the ability of the nation of Israel to remain in the land to which God was leading them .
According to the Torah , striking or cursing one 's father or mother was punishable by immediate death .
In Deuteronomy , a procedure is described for parents to bring a persistently disobedient son to the city elders for death by stoning .
Honouring one 's parents is also described in the Torah as an analogue to honouring God .
According to the prophet Jeremiah , God refers to himself as Father to Israel , and according to the prophet Isaiah , God refers to Israel as his sons and daughters .
According to the prophet Malachi , God calls for similar honour .
According to Jeremiah , God blessed the descendants of Rechab for obeying their forefather 's command to not drink wine and uses the family as a counterexample to Israel 's failure to obey his command to not worship other gods : PRECEDENCE Section::::Precedence .
According to the Mishneh Torah this commandment requires one to honour both of one 's parents equally ; there is no greater weight given to either the father or the mother .
While in some parts of scripture , father is stated first , in others , mother comes first .
This shows that the honour due to each is equal .
While Jewish teaching holds that a married woman must honour her husband , there are also guidelines for how she may continue to honour her parents : REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements .
The commandment requires one to obey one 's parents when the command given by a parent is reasonable and permissible under Jewish law .
For example , if a parent asks a child to bring him / her water , he / she must obey .
Because honouring God is above all mitzvot , if a parent asks a child to break a law of the Torah , s / he must refuse to obey .
A child is not required to obey if a parent says that s / he must marry a particular person , or must not marry a person s /
he wishes to marry , provided the marriage is permissible by Jewish law .
A child who is travelling has an obligation to communicate with his / her parents to let them know s /
he is safe in order to prevent them from worrying .
A child must continue to honour his / her parent after their deaths .
This can be done by reciting kaddish for 11 months and on the yarzeit ( anniversary of the parent 's death ) , and by donating charity in the memory of the parent .
The study of Torah is also considered to be reverence toward a parent , for it shows that a parent raised a worthy child .
A child must never put a parent to shame , or speak arrogantly to a parent .
A person who is told to do something by his / her mother for which his father does not like the result is not permitted to tell his / her father that his / her mother said to do that .
This is because this could lead to his / her father cursing his / her mother .
A child is not permitted to interrupt or contradict a parent , or to disturb a parent 's sleep .
NEW TESTAMENT Section::::New Testament .
In the gospels , Jesus affirmed the importance of honouring one 's father and mother ( Matthew 15:1–9 , Matthew 19:17–19 , Mark 10:17–19 , Luke 18:18–21 )
Paul quotes the commandment in his letter to the church in Ephesus :
In his letters to the Romans and Timothy , Paul describes disobedience to parents as a serious sin ( Romans 1:29–31 , 2 Timothy 3:2 ) .
The words of Jesus and the teaching of Paul indicate that adult children remain obligated to honour their parents by providing for material needs .
In the gospels , Jesus is portrayed as angry with some people who avoided materially providing for their parents by claiming the money they would have used was given to God ( Matthew 15:3–8 , Mark 7:9–12 .
In these passages , Jesus quotes Isaiah 29:13 )
According to the Gospel of John , when Jesus was on the cross , he provided for his natural mother by giving the Apostle John the charge to care for her , which John accepted .
According to the gospel of Matthew , the obligation to honour one 's parents is bounded by one 's obligation to God : " Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me . "
( Matthew 10:37 ESV )
Such boundaries , and the primacy of the first commandment itself , lead scholars to conclude that honouring one 's parents does not include breaking God 's law ( i.e. , committing a sin ) at the behest of a parent .
Paul 's instructions to Timothy regarding the physical care of widows include the following : CHRISTIAN CATHOLICISM Section::::Christian .
Section::::Catholicism .
The import of honouring father and mother is based on the divine origin of the parental role :
According to the teachings of the Catholic Church , the commandment to honour father and mother reveals God 's desired order of charity – first God , then parents , then others .
Keeping the commandment to honour father and mother brings both spiritual and temporal rewards of peace and prosperity , while failure to honor parents harms the individual as well as society .
The pervasive societal effect of obedience or disobedience to this command is attributed to the status of the family as the fundamental building block of society :
The Gospel of Luke notes that , as a child , Jesus was obedient to his earthly parents .
For a child in the home , the commandment to honour parents is comprehensive , excluding immoral actions .
Grown children , while not obligated to obedience in the same way , should continue to afford respect for parental wishes , advice and teaching .
" Filial respect is shown by true docility and obedience . '
My son , keep your father 's commandment , and forsake not your mother 's teaching . ...
When you walk , they will lead you ; when you lie down , they will watch over you ... ' " ( Proverbs 6:20–22 )
The Church teaches that adult children have a duty to honour their parents by providing " material and moral support in old age and in times of illness , loneliness , or distress " .
This honour should be based on the son or daughter 's gratitude for the life , love and effort given by the parents and motivated by the desire to pay them back in some measure .
The principle of the commandment is extended to the duty to honour others in direct authority , such as teachers , and employers .
The commandment to honour father and mother also forms a basis for charity to others when each person is seen , ultimately , as " a son or daughter of the One who wants to be called ' our Father ' .
" Thus , charitable actions are viewed as extensions of the honour owed to the heavenly Father .
ORTHODOX CHURCH Section::::Orthodox Church .
Father Seraphim Stephens sees " Honor " defined as " Love and Respect " , and notes that this commandment is positioned between those that address one 's obligations to God and those that relate to how one treats others .
" It clearly lays the foundation of our relationship to God and to all other people . "
Richard D. Andrews points out that , " Every time we do something good , just , pure , holy , we bring honor to our parents . "
PROTESTANTISM Section::::Protestantism .
John Calvin describes the sacred origin of the role of human father ( which thus demands honour ) .
The analogy between the honour of parents and the honour of God himself is further strengthened by this understanding that earthly fatherhood is derived from God 's Fatherhood .
Thus the duty to honour does not depend on whether the parent is particularly worthy .
However , Calvin acknowledges that some fathers are outright wicked and emphasizes there is no excuse for sin in the name of honouring a parent , calling the notion " absurd " .
The commentary of John Wesley on the commandment to honour father and mother is consistent with the interpretation in the Catechism of the Catholic Church .
He summarizes the actions that express honour as follows : 1 .
An inward esteem of them , outwardly expressed , 2 .
Obedience to their lawful commands ( Ephesians 6:1–3 ) , 3 .
Submission to their rebukes , instructions and corrections , 4 .
Acting with consideration of parental advice , direction and consent , 5 .
Giving comfort and providing for physical needs of aged parents .
Like the Catechism , Wesley also teaches that the commandment includes honouring others in legitimate secular authority .
He also encourages people toward honour of those in spiritual leadership with the question , " Have ye all obeyed them that watch over your souls , and esteemed them highly in love for their work 's sake ? "
This question is reminiscent of Paul 's statements to the church in Galatia and to Timothy .
Matthew Henry explains that the commandment to honour father and mother applies not only to biological parents but also to those who fulfill the role of mother or father .
He uses the example of Esther honouring her guardian and cousin Mordecai :
The commandment itself encourages obedience " so that you may enjoy long life and that it may go well with you " .
Henry , Wesley and Calvin affirm the applicability of this promise for all who keep the commandment , though each notes that for the New Testament Christian , the promise may be fulfilled as earthly rewards and/or heavenly rewards , as God sees fit in his wisdom and love for the individual .
In his commentary , Calvin notes the harsh consequences required in Exodus and Leviticus for specific failures to keep the commandment .
Those who struck or cursed a parent were to be sentenced to death .
Persistently disobedient sons were to be brought before the city elders and stoned by the whole community if the parents ' testimony was judged to be accurate .
Calvin writes that God knew capital punishment for these offences would seem harsh and be difficult to pronounce , even for those responsible for adjudicating the situation .
This is why , he argues , the text specifically places responsibility for the consequences on the offender .
The severity of the sentence emphasized the importance of removing such behaviour from the community and deterring others who might imitate it .
Although Calvin refers mostly to fathers in his commentary on the commandment to honour father and mother , he writes near the beginning that the commandment mentions both parents on purpose .
As described above , Proverbs supports the value of guidance from both father and mother , and Paul specified that children should provide for their own widowed mothers and grandmothers , " which is pleasing to God . "
Just as " honor " involves offering profound respect , the opposite of honoring someone is to trivialize him , as if of no importance .
Respect is not something based solely on personal or professional qualifications , but also on the position that God has given that person .
In 1 Samuel 26 David spares Saul 's life , even at the risk of losing his own , submitting to the authority God had placed over him as anointed king .
REWARDS FOR COMPLIANCE Section::::Rewards for compliance .
This commandment is distinct from the others in that a promise is attached to it : " ... so that you may live long in the land the Lord your God is giving you . "
Deuteronomy 5:16 amplifies this : " ... that your days may be prolonged , and that it may be well with you , in the land which the Lord your God is giving you . "
CONSEQUENCES OF DISOBEDIENCE Section::::Consequences of disobedience .
As with most terms of the covenant between God and Israel , there are consequences for disobedience as well as rewards for obedience : SEE
ALSO
* Biblical law in Christianity * Filial piety
* Pietas REFERENCES FURTHER READING * U.S. Catholic Church .
Catechism of the Catholic Church , 2003 , Doubleday Religion , ( accessed 1 September 2009 )
EXTERNAL
LINKS * A compilation of Jewish theology regarding the commandment to honor father and mother