FARRELL 'S ICE CREAM PARLOUR
Farrell 's Ice Cream Parlour is an American ice cream parlor chain founded in Portland , Oregon , in 1963 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Farrell 's Ice Cream Parlour was started at NW 21st Avenue in Portland , Oregon , by Bob Farrell and Ken McCarthy in 1963 .
Farrell 's became known for their offer of a free ice cream sundae to children on their birthday .
The parlors have an early 1900s theme , with employees wearing period dress and straw boater hats , and each location features a player piano .
In 1972 , the Farrell 's chain was purchased by the Marriott Corporation .
By 1975 , there were 120 Farrell 's nationwide .
Thereafter , sales dropped and most of the parlors were sold off in the 1980s .
In 1982 , Marriott sold the chain to a group of private investors .
By 1990 , almost all Farrell 's locations had closed .
One of the last original Farrell 's locations in Portland , located near the Lloyd Center mall , closed in 2001 .
At the time of its closing , it was privately owned and known as The Original Portland Ice Cream Parlor .
The final original location closed in 2006 in Eugene , Oregon .
At the time , it was operating under the name of Pearl Street Ice Cream Parlour .
In 2008 , after a years - long legal battle over rights to the brand , Parlour Enterprises of Lake Forest , California , was confirmed as the owner and operator of Farrell 's properties on the U.S. mainland .
The company established a franchise model with original founder Bob Farrell as an advisor .
They promptly opened seven Farrell 's locations in California , including the Mountasia Family Fun Center in Santa Clarita ; Rancho Cucamonga ( defunct ) ; downtown Brea ; Riverside ( opened January 2013 , defunct in July 2017 ) ; Sacramento ( opened August 2013 , defunct 3 years later , now an Old Spaghetti Factory restaurant ) ; and Buena Park ( opened February 2014 ; renovated February to August 2017 ) .
A Mission Viejo location went out of business in January 2016 .
There has also been discussion of an eventual return to Portland , Oregon .
There were eight Farrell 's locations in Hawaii .
The last Farrell 's in the state was operated by E Noa Corporation at Pearlridge shopping center in Aiea , Hawaii .
After 10 years in service , it closed it 's doors at the end of their lease in October 2016 .
As of April 2016 , the Farrell 's inside Mountasia Family Fun Center has been re - branded and named Lickity Split by Farrell 's , featuring over - the - counter dining and a streamlined menu .
In August 2016 , Farrell 's was featured on CNBC 's series The Profit , where Marcus Lemonis made a deal with the current owners and stakeholders of the Farrell 's brand , three locations stayed open with a last push to bring back the iconic restaurant and ice cream parlour .
Also in August 2016 , the Sacramento and Rancho Cucamonga locations closed .
By Super Bowl Sunday 2017 , Buena Park also closed , but reopened in mid - August when the renovations were completed .
The Riverside location closed in late July 2017 .
This leaves Brea and Buena Park as the only remaining restaurants .
Lemonis owns and operates along with Sweet Pete 's Candy the Farrell 's brand and the Buena Park California location .
MENU Section::::Menu .
The menu is printed as a tabloid - style newspaper .
It features appetizers , sandwiches , burgers , and dozens of different sundaes , as well as malts , shakes , sodas , and floats .
Unusual offerings include a glass of soda water for 2 cents , and the traditional free sundae for customers celebrating a birthday .
Some of the sundaes are huge and intended for a group to share .
The largest , the " Zoo " sundae , is delivered with great fanfare by multiple employees carrying it wildly around the restaurant on a stretcher accompanied by the sound of ambulance sirens .
One of the more amusing highlights of their original menu was a " Low - Calorie Diet " recipe sheet you could theoretically " adopt " to if you ate too much ice cream .
A bowl of " Bees Knees and Mosquito Knuckles " were among the " impossible - to - eat " dishes that were featured in the joke - menu .
SACRAMENTO LOCATION
TRAGEDY Section::::Sacramento location tragedy .
On September 24 , 1972 , a privately owned Canadair Sabre jet ( a variant of the F-86 Sabre ) piloted by Richard Bingham failed to take off while leaving the Golden West Sport Aviation Air Show at Sacramento , California 's Executive Airport .
It went off the end of the runway and crashed into the ice cream parlour ; 22 people were killed and 28 injured .
IN THE NEWS Section::::In the news .
On April 9 , 1982 , a small private plane crashed into the road and burst into flames in front of the Farrell 's location in Torrance , California .
The pilot and his two passengers were killed but no one on the ground was harmed .
In 1983 , the Selective Service purchased Farrell 's " Birthday Club " data and mailed warnings to young men telling them to register for the draft before their 18th birthday .
Farrell 's blamed the situation on an unauthorized sale by a list broker , and the government announced they would stop using the list .
In April 2014 , an out - of - control automobile ran into a line of patrons waiting outside the Buena Park , California , location of Farrell 's .
One person was killed and six others were injured .
On August 23 , 2016 , the television show The Profit featured Farrell 's Ice Cream Parlours , and frankly discussed the financial health of the company and their locations , as part of a reality television show .
An investment was proposed as part of a turn - around for the company and as a result , Marcus Lemonis became the majority shareholder of the Farrell 's franchise .
He later took over ownership of the Buena Park location .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Brea site