TWO - POINT CONVERSION
In American and Canadian football , a two - point conversion or two - point convert is a play a team attempts instead of kicking a one - point conversion immediately after it scores a touchdown .
In a two - point conversion attempt , the team that just scored must run a play from scrimmage close to the opponent 's goal line ( 5-yard line in amateur Canadian , 3-yard line in professional Canadian , 3-yard line in amateur American , 2-yard line in professional American ; in professional American football , there is a small dash to denote the line of scrimmage for a two - point conversion ; it was the previous line of scrimmage for a point after kick until 2014 ) and advance the ball across the goal line in the same manner as if they were scoring a touchdown .
If the team succeeds , it earns two additional points on top of the six points for the touchdown , for a total of eight points .
If the team fails , no additional points are scored .
In either case , if any time remains in the half , the team proceeds to a kickoff .
Various sources estimate the success rate of a two - point conversion to be between 40 % and 55 % , significantly lower than that of the extra point , though if the higher value is to be believed , a higher expected value is achieved through the two - point conversion than the extra point .
ADOPTION OF RULE Section::::Adoption of rule .
The two - point conversion rule has been used in college football and more recently in Canadian amateur football and the Canadian Football League situations in college football , the two - point conversion is the mandatory method of scoring after a touchdown beginning with the third overtime , and in the CFL it is mandatory at any point in overtime .
The American Football League ( AFL ) used the two - point conversion during its ten - season existence from 1960 to 1969 .
After the NFL merged with the AFL , the rule did not immediately carry over to the merged league , though they experimented in 1968 with a compromise rule ( see below ) .
The NFL adopted the two - point conversion rule in , 25 years after the merger .
Tom Tupa scored the first two - point conversion in NFL history , running in a faked extra point attempt for the Cleveland Browns in a game against the Cincinnati Bengals in the first week of the 1994 season .
He scored a total of three such conversions that season , earning him the nickname " Two Point Tupa " .
That same season , the first successful two - point conversion in Super Bowl history came during Super Bowl XXIX when San Diego Charger Mark Seay caught a pass thrown by Stan Humphries .
The NFL 's developmental league , NFL Europe ( and its former entity , the World League of American Football ) , adopted the two - point conversion rule for its entire existence from 1991 through 2007 .
Six - man football reverses the extra point and the two - point conversion : because there is no offensive line in that game variant , making kick protection more difficult , plays from scrimmage are worth one point but successful kicks are worth two .
It is also reversed in many high school football and youth football leagues , since there are not often skilled kickers at that level .
A variant of this , especially at the youth level , is to allow one point for a running conversion , two points for a passing conversion , and two points for a successful kick .
The Arena Football League has recognized the two - point conversion for its entire existence ( in both its original 1987–2008 incarnation and its ongoing revival ) , allowing for either a play from scrimmage or a drop kick to be worth two points .
( The additional extra point for a drop kick is unique to arena football . )
In 1968 , leading up to the AFL - NFL merger , the leagues developed a radical " compromise " rule that would reconcile the fact that the NFL did not recognize the two - point conversion but the AFL did : the relatively easy extra point kick would be eliminated and only a play from scrimmage would score one point called a " Pressure Point " .
The rule would be used for the interleague matchups for that preseason , and would not be tried again .
Both the World Football League and the XFL revived this concept , making it a point not to institute a two - point conversion rule so as to eliminate the easy kick .
What would constitute a two - point conversion in other leagues only counted one point in the AFL - NFL games , WFL , or XFL .
The WFL called it the " Action Point " , used after touchdowns which the WFL counted as seven points .
However , the XFL later added a rule in the playoffs that allowed the scoring team to score two ( or even three ) points by successfully executing a play from a point farther from the opponent 's end zone ( two points if the team could score from the five - yard line and three points if they could score from the ten - yard line ) .
During the summer of 2014 , the conversion by place kick was under review by the NFL .
This new format would award seven points for a touchdown without an extra point attempt , eight points with a successful conversion by running or passing , and six points with an unsuccessful attempt .
This new format was proposed because of the almost certain probability of making a conversion by place kick ( 1,260 out of 1,265 for the 2013 season ) .
This proposal was never considered at the league owners ' meeting in spring 2014 ; instead , the league used the first two weeks of its preseason for an experiment that moved extra point attempts back to the 20-yard line with the condition that if a team opted to attempt a two - point conversion instead , the line of scrimmage on the try would remain at the 2-yard line .
The league adopted a slightly modified version of this rule starting with the 2015 season , with the line of scrimmage for extra - point kick attempts at the 15-yard line instead of the 20 ; that same year , the CFL also moved back its line of scrimmage for converts to the 25-yard line ( while moving the scrimmage line for a two - point convert ahead two yards to the 3-yard line ) , thus making the length for an extra - point attempt the same length in both the NFL and CFL ( taking into account the NFL positioning their goalposts on the end line , and the CFL 's on the goal line ) .
DEFENSIVE TWO - POINT CONVERSION
Section::::Defensive two - point conversion .
In American college , professional , and Canadian football ( as well as , for a significant period of time , the Arena Football League , where missed extra points are rebounded back into the field of play ) , a conversion attempt where the defense gains possession of the ball can be returned by the defense to the other end zone to give the defensive team two points .
The team that scored the touchdown then kicks off as normal .
This is rare because of the infrequent use of the two - point conversion and the rarity of blocked conversion kicks , combined with the difficulty of returning the ball the full length of the field .
It has proven the winning margin in some games .
Only once has a player scored two defensive two - point conversions in a game :
Tony Holmes of the Texas Longhorns in a 1998 Big 12 Conference game against the Iowa State Cyclones on October 3 .
On May 19 , 2015 , the NFL owners adopted a proposal to permit a defensive two - point conversion for the season .
On May 20 , 2016 , the owners adopted a proposal called the 2 point fair play rule .
This prevents a defense from getting a turnover during a 2 point conversion and then purposefully committing a " free " penalty to increase a chance at a 2 point return .
If the defense is able to gain a takeaway and then commits a penalty , the opposing coach will have the option to accept the penalty and skip the kickoff .
It has not yet been used in the NFL , but a similar rule has been used on two occasions in the CFL .
Stephone Anthony of the New Orleans Saints became the first NFL player to score a defensive two - point conversion ; he returned a blocked extra point kick from Graham Gano of the Carolina Panthers on December 6 , 2015 .
On December 4 , , Eric Berry of the Kansas City Chiefs became the first NFL player to return an interception for a defensive two - point conversion ; it was thrown by quarterback Matt Ryan of the Atlanta Falcons .
The NCAA has allowed defensive two - point conversions in college football since the 1988 season .
High schools that follow the rules of the National Federation of State High School Associations ( all U.S. high schools except those in Texas and Massachusetts , which use NCAA rules instead ) do not allow defensive runbacks of recovered conversion attempts , and any recovery of the ball by the defense during the try is immediately blown dead and ruled merely as " no good . " CONVERSION SAFETY Section::::Conversion safety .
Rules in high school , college and professional football dictate that when a safety occurs during a two - point conversion or point - after kick ( officially known in the rulebooks as a try ) , it is worth one point .
It can be scored by the offense in college and professional football ( following an NFL rule change in 2015 )
if the defense obtains possession of a live ball in the field of play , propels the ball ( by carrying it or fumbling it ) into its own end zone , and then is downed there with the defense in possession of the ball .
This event has only occurred twice in NCAA Division I history .
Before 2015 , the only scenario in which a one - point safety could have been scored in the NFL would have involved the defense kicking or batting a loose ball out the back of the end zone without taking possession of it .
A conversion safety could be earned by the defense if the offense retreated with the ball all the way back into its own end zone ; most plausibly this would involve a fumble at some point during the play .
Two potential scenarios include an errant snap or a fumble that is bobbled repeatedly until the offensive team recovers the ball in , or bats the ball through , its own end zone ( similar situations have been documented in regular play from scrimmage and are more likely in arena football with its much shorter , narrower and bounded field of play ) , or , in the college and professional game , a defender attempting a defensive two - point conversion , fumbling the ball and having the offensive team recover in their own end zone .
Although such a conversion safety has never been scored by the defense , this rule provides the only way in American football that a team could finish the game with a score of one point .
( Canadian football allows another one - point play called the single or rouge ) .
The high school football rulebook acknowledges the conversion safety , awarding one point for it , but also immediately ends a play if the opposing team gains possession of the ball , a rule similar to the one the NFL used before 2015 .
Thus , any situation that requires the defense to gain possession of the ball could not result in a conversion safety in games where that rulebook is used .
CHOICE OF ONE-
OR TWO - POINT ATTEMPT Section::::Choice of one- or two - point attempt .
The coaches ' choice of whether to attempt a one- or two - conversion depends on the game 's current score , the amount of time remaining , and their assessment of their team 's chance of success .
Analysis of historical data finds that the two - point conversion is successful about half the time , whereas one - point kicks are almost always successful .
Therefore the expected value of both options is roughly similar , with the critical factor being whether the chance of a successful two - point conversion is more or less than half that of a successful kick .
However , the mathematics regarding maximizing a team 's chances of winning are more complicated .
For example , late in a game , a team that is one point up after a touchdown would gain little benefit from a one - point attempt , because regardless of success , the team would still lose if the opposition later scored a field goal .
In such a situation , the two - point conversion would be the better option .
If successful , an opposition field goal would then only tie the game .
A more complicated scenario is when a team is trailing by eight points .
The team could choose to go for two , because , if successful , the team could then kick an extra point following the next score to secure a win .
On the other hand , if the two - point conversion fails , the team still has a chance to succeed on the next two - point conversion to get to fourteen .
Mathematically , therefore , the minimum probability of converting a two - point try either on the first attempt ( securing a win ) or the second ( securing a tie in regulation time ) must be higher than the maximum probability of missing both ( securing a loss ) .
This occurs when the probability of missing both is 0.618 × 0.618 , or 38.2 % .
As long as the probability of converting any individual two - point attempt is higher than 38.2 % percent , it is optimal to adopt this strategy .
Notably , Texas Longhorns coach Darrell Royal successfully used this strategy to defeat Arkansas in 1969 's Game of the Century .
An analysis can be done for all situations , resulting in a table that can be consulted when a decision is needed .
A chart made by UCLA offensive coordinator Dick Vermeil in the early 1970s is one of the most well - known .
In practice , two - point conversion attempts are rare , being done only after less than 1-in-10 touchdowns in the NFL .
This proportion rose after the one - point kick was moved back to the 15-yard line , increasing the difficulty of scoring the single extra point .
ARENA AND OTHER INDOOR FOOTBALL Section::::Arena and other indoor football .
In indoor versions of the sport , a two - point conversion is scored after a touchdown by running a play from scrimmage from the two - yard line in which the ball carrier succeeds in crossing the goal line while in possession of the ball , or the receiver makes a valid reception in the end zone or crosses the goal line in possession of the ball after having caught it in the field of play .
In Arena football only , a successful drop kicked conversion also counts as a two - point conversion .
REFERENCES