FIND
MY IPHONE Find My iPhone ( also known as Find apple on the SpringBoard , and also known specifically for other devices as Find
My iPad , Find My iPod touch , or Find My Mac ) is an app and service provided by Apple Inc. that allows remote location tracking of iOS devices , Mac computers , Apple Watch , and AirPods . , the service currently is available for iOS 5 or later and OS X 10.7.5 " Lion " or later through iCloud .
The service itself is integrated into iOS and macOS , while enabled devices can be tracked using either an iOS app or the iCloud website .
On iOS 8 and older , the tracking app can be downloaded from the App Store free of charge .
Starting in iOS 9 , the app was bundled with the operating system .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Find My iPhone was released initially as an app in June 2010 for users of MobileMe .
In November 2010 with iOS 4.2 , Find My iPhone was available for free for such devices .
With the release of iCloud in October 2011 , the service became free for all iCloud users .
Also , the service was made available as " Find My Mac " for Mac computers running OS X 10.7.2 " Lion " or later using iCloud .
VERSION HISTORY Section::::Version history . ! scope="col " Versionnumber ! scope="col "
Datereleased ! scope="col " Changes !
scope="row " data - sort - value="100 " 1.0 !
scope="row " data - sort - value="101 " 1.0.1 ! scope="row " data - sort - value="110 " 1.1 !
scope="row " data - sort - value="120 " 1.2 *
If device was offline when the user attempt to locate it , an email will be sent when it comes online and is located .
* Ability to remove a device that is offline !
scope="row " data - sort - value="121 "
1.2.1 !
scope="row " data - sort - value="130 " 1.3
* iCloud support
* Find My MacBook * Ability to request an email when a device is located that was previously offline !
scope="row " data - sort - value="140 " 1.4 ! scope="row " data - sort - value="200 " 2.0 * Lost Mode for iOS 6 or later * Battery charge indicator
* Forever login for iOS 6 or later !
scope="row " data - sort - value="201 " 2.0.1
* Driving directions to the device 's location for iOS 6 or later
* Several buttons ( " Play Sound " , " Lost Mode " , and " Erase Device " ) were moved to a separate screen from the map view !
scope="row " data - sort - value="202 " 2.0.2 !
scope="row " data - sort - value="203 " 2.0.3 ! scope="row " data - sort - value="300 " 3.0 ! scope="row " data - sort - value="400 " 4.0 FEATURES Section::::Features .
Find My iPhone allows users to locate their iOS devices using either the iOS app or icloud.com on a computer .
In addition to locating a device , the service provides three key features : * Play Sound – Makes the device play a sound at maximum volume , makes flashing on screen even if it is muted .
This feature is useful if the device has been mislaid .
* Lost Mode ( iOS 6 or later ) – Flags the device as lost or stolen , allowing the user to lock it with a passcode .
If the device is an iPhone and someone finds the device , they can call the user directly on the device .
* Erase iPhone – Completely erases all content and settings .
This is useful if the device contains sensitive information , but the device can not be located after this action is performed .
Starting with iOS 7 or later , after the erase is complete , the message can still be displayed and the device will be activation locked .
This makes it hard for someone to use or sell the device should the owner of the device misplace it .
An Apple ID Password will be required before turning off Find My iPhone , signing out of iCloud , erasing the device , or reactivating a device after a remote wipe .
The update with iOS 6 added the ability to check the device 's battery level .
Since the release of iOS 7 users have complained about the link between GPS , WiFi , and the App itself .
Some handset owners have noted the App enables and disables itself when passing between cellular protocol bandwidths .
REQUIREMENTS Section::::Requirements . , the service is supported on iPhone , iPad , iPod Touch , and Mac computers running OS X 10.7.5 " Lion " or later .
In addition to a compatible device , a free iCloud account is required to use Find My iPhone .
Users also can track their Find
My iPhone enabled devices through iCloud.com on Windows , but can not use it the other way around to track their PC .
INCIDENTS
*
In November 2011 , police in Los Angeles , California were able to find an armed robbery suspect by using Find My iPhone on the victim 's stolen iPhone .
*
In September 2012 , two suspects were arrested in Atlanta , Georgia for robbing five women at gunpoint .
Police were able to locate the suspects by using Find My iPhone to find one of the stolen iPhones .
*
Since early 2011 , some Sprint users who used the app to find their lost device were sent to a 59-year - old man 's house in Las Vegas , Nevada .
Multiple people insisted that he had their device and the police were called multiple times .
The man eventually had to put up a sign by his door saying that he had " no lost cell phones " .
*
On 16 January 2015 , a Langley , British Columbia woman had her iMac stolen during a break - in at her home .
Nearly a month later , she received a notification on her phone then contacted police who found and arrested two men just as they were attempting to escape out a back door .
*
In November 2016 , the husband of Sherri Papini located her cell phone and ear buds on a street corner , where she was kidnapped .
SEE ALSO
* Find My Friends * iCloud
* MobileMe REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS