FRANCE AND THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR
The Second French Empire remained officially neutral throughout the American Civil War and never recognized the Confederate States of America .
The United States of America warned that recognition would mean war .
France was reluctant to act without British collaboration , and the British rejected intervention .
Emperor Napoleon III realized that a war with the US without allies " would spell disaster " for France .
However , the textile industry needed cotton , and Napoleon had imperial ambitions in Mexico , which could be greatly aided by the Confederacy .
At the same time , other French political leaders , such as Foreign Minister Édouard Thouvenel , supported the United States .
PUBLIC OPINION
Section::::Public opinion .
The 22 political newspapers in Paris reflected the range of French public opinion .
Their position on the war was determined by their political values regarding democracy , Napoleon III , and their prediction of the ultimate outcome .
Issues such as slavery ; the Trent affair , which involved Britain ; and the economic impact on the French cotton industry did not influence the editors .
Their positions on the war determined their responses to such issues .
The Confederacy was supported by the conservative supporters of Napoleon III , Bourbon legitimists , and Roman Catholic interests .
The Union had the support of republicans and Orléanists ( those who wanted a descendant of Louis Philippe on the throne ) .
Between 1861 and 1865 , the Union blockade cut off most cotton supplies to French textile mills , causing the famine du coton ( cotton famine ) .
Mills in Alsace , Nord - Pas - de - Calais , and Normandy saw prices of cotton double by 1862 and were forced to lay off many workers .
As a result , many French industrialists and politicians wished for a quick Confederate victory .
GOVERNMENT POLICY Section::::Government policy .
The French government considered the American war a relatively minor issue while France was engaged in multiple diplomatic endeavors in Europe and around the world .
Emperor Napoleon III was interested in Central America for trade and plans of a transoceanic canal .
He knew that the US strongly opposed and the Confederacy tolerated his plan to create a new empire in Mexico , where his troops landed in December 1861 .
William L. Dayton , the American minister to France , met the French Foreign Minister , Édouard Thouvenel , who was pro - Union and was influential in dampening Napoleon 's initial inclination towards diplomatic recognition of Confederate independence .
However , Thouvenel resigned from office in 1862 .
The possibility of war with the US opened up the risk of a war with Prussia like the one in 1870 .
The Confederate delegate in Paris , John Slidell , was not officially received .
However , he made offers to Napoleon III that in exchange for French recognition of the Confederate States and naval help sent to break the blockade , the Confederacy would sell raw cotton to France .
Count Walewski and Eugène Rouher agreed with him , but British disapproval and especially the Union capture of New Orleans in spring 1862 led French diplomacy to oppose the plan .
In 1864 , Napoleon III sent his confidant , the Philadelphian Thomas W. Evans , as an unofficial diplomat to Lincoln and US Secretary of State William H. Seward .
Evans convinced Napoleon that Southern defeat was impending .
Slidell succeeded in negotiating a loan of $ 15,000,000 from Frédéric Émile d'Erlanger and other French capitalists .
The money was used to buy ironclad warships as well as military supplies that came in by blockade runners .
WARSHIPS Section::::Warships .
In keeping with its official neutrality , the French government blocked the sale of the ironclad CSS Stonewall prior to delivery to the Confederacy in February 1864 and resold the ship to the Royal Danish Navy , renamed the Stærkodder ( after the mythical hero Starkad ) .
The ship left Bordeaux on its shakedown cruise with a Danish crew in June 1864 .
However , the Danes refused to accept the ship because of price disagreements with the shipbuilder , L'Arman .
L'Arman subsequently secretly resold the ship by January 1865 to the Confederacy while it was still at sea .
France regained normal diplomatic relations with the US in 1866 , and withdrew its troops from Mexico because of the increasing financial drain ; Napoleon III 's puppet emperor there was subsequently defeated and executed .
SEE ALSO
* American Civil War
* United Kingdom in the American Civil War * Presidency of Abraham Lincoln
* Second French Empire
* Trent Affair
* French intervention in Mexico
* Foreign enlistment in the American Civil War
REFERENCES
FOOTNOTES
FURTHER READING *
Blackburn , George M. " Paris Newspapers and the American Civil War , " Illinois Historical Journal ( 1991 )
84#3
pp 177–193 .
online
* Blackburn , George M. French Newspaper Opinion on the American Civil War ( 1997 ) .
* Blumenthal , Henry .
A Reappraisal of Franco - American Relations , 1830 - 1871 ( 1959 )
* Blumenthal , Henry .
France and the United States : Their Diplomatic Relations ( 1970 )
* Case , Lynn M. , and Warren E. Spencer .
The United States and France : Civil War Diplomacy ( 1970 ) ; the standard scholarly study .
* Doyle , Don H.
The cause of all nations : An international history of the American civil war ( Basic Books , 2014 ) .
* Hanna , Alfred Jackson , and Kathryn Abbey Hanna .
Napoleon III and Mexico :
American triumph over monarchy ( 1971 ) .
*
Hardy , William E. "
South of the border : Ulysses S. Grant and the French intervention . "
Civil War History 54#1 ( 2008 ) : 63 - 86 .
* John , Rachel St. " The Unpredictable America of William Gwin : Expansion , Secession , and the Unstable Borders of Nineteenth - Century North America .
"
The Journal of the Civil War Era 6.1 ( 2016 ) : 56 - 84 .
online
* Jones , Howard .
Blue & Gray Diplomacy : A History of Union and Confederate Foreign Relations ( 2010 ) .
online
* Jordan , Donaldson , and Edwin J. Pratt .
Europe and the American Civil War
( 2nd ed . 1969 ) .
chap .
13
* Owsley , Frank L. King Cotton Diplomacy :
Foreign Relations of the Confederate States of America ( 1931 ) , chap .
9 .
* Peraino , Kevin .
" Lincoln vs. Napoleon " in Peraino , Lincoln in the World : The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power ( 2013 ) pp 224–95 .
* Pinkney , David H. " France and the Civil War , " in Harold Hyman , ed .
Heard Round the World ( 1969 )
* Sainlaude , Stève .
The French Government and the Civil War , 1861 - 1865 .
The diplomatic action ( 2011 ) * Sainlaude , Stève .
France and the Confederacy , 1861 - 1865 ( 2011 )
* Sears , Louis Martin . "
A Confederate Diplomat at the Court of Napoleon III , " American Historical Review ( 1921 )
26#2 pp .
255–281 in JSTOR on Slidell .
* Wahlstrom , Todd W.
The Southern Exodus to Mexico : Migration Across the Borderlands
After the American Civil War ( U of Nebraska Press , 2015 ) .
* West , W. Reed .
Contemporary French Opinion on the American Civil War ( 1924 ) .