APE ESCAPE ( VIDEO GAME )
Ape Escape is a platform video game , developed by SCE Japan Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment .
It was released for the PlayStation in May 1999 in North America , and June 1999 in Japan .
The first in the Ape Escape series , the game tells the story of an ape named Specter who gains enhanced intelligence and a malevolent streak through the use of an experimental helmet .
Specter produces an army of apes , which he sends through time in an attempt to rewrite history .
Spike , the player character , sets out to capture the apes with the aid of special gadgets .
Ape Escape is played from a third - person perspective .
Players use a variety of gadgets to pursue and capture the apes , traversing across several environments .
The game 's controls are heavily centred around the analog sticks , being the first game to require the use of the PlayStation 's DualShock .
Development of Ape Escape lasted over two years , and was generally focused on adapting to the use of the controller , which was a significant challenge for the development team .
Ape Escape was met with critical acclaim from critics , with praise particularly directed at the innovative use of the dual analog controls , as well as the graphics and music ; the voice acting received minor criticism .
The game is widely considered to be one of the greatest on the PlayStation console , and received several re - releases .
The game also spawned numerous sequels and spin - offs , beginning with Ape Escape 2 in 2001 .
A remake , Ape Escape : On the Loose , was released for the PlayStation Portable in 2005 to mixed reviews .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Ape Escape is a platform game that is viewed from a third - person perspective .
Players traverse several different environments to advance through the game .
For most of the game , players control Spike — a boy tasked with pursuing and capturing the apes across time , preventing them from rewriting history .
Players use various gadgets to pursue and capture the apes , such as the Stun Club , used as an offensive measure against enemies , and the Time Net , used to capture apes and transport them to present day .
More gadgets become available as players progress through the game .
Players also control vehicles throughout the game , including a rubber raft , which allows travel over water , and the water net , which assists in traversing underwater .
The game 's controls are heavily centered around the analog sticks : the left stick is used to move players , while the right stick manipulates the various gadgets .
The apes are equipped with helmets , which feature a siren representing their alarm level : blue means relaxed , and unaware of the player characters ' presence ; yellow is alert ; and red indicates fully alarmed , resulting in attempting to escape or becoming hostile .
An ape 's personality can also be determined by the colour of shorts : yellow is standard , light blue means timid , and red represents aggressive .
Some apes are equipped with weaponry , allowing them to attack players , or binoculars that allow them to identify players from long distances .
Players are required to capture a specific amount of apes to clear a level ; remaining apes can be captured upon revisiting the level .
Should players take damage , they lose a life .
Players can recharge their health by collecting cookies .
Throughout the game , players can gather Specter Coins , which can be found in hidden locations in each stage .
Collecting enough Specter Coins unlocks three bonus mini - games : Ski Kidz Racing , a skiing game in which players race against opponents ; Galaxy Monkey , a shoot
'em up where players fight against aliens ; and Specter Boxing , a boxing game where players dodge and punch using the analog sticks .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story begins when Specter , a white - haired monkey who is well - known at his home in a monkey - themed amusement park , puts on an experimental Peak Point Helmet created by a Professor , which increases his intelligence beyond that of a regular monkey , but also twists his mind , turning him evil .
Imbued with this new power , Specter gives Pipo Helmets to all the monkeys in the park and sets them loose , having them take over the local laboratory where the Professor and his assistant Natalie ( Katie / Natsumi ) are currently building a time machine .
As Spike ( Kakeru ) and his best friend Jake ( Buzz / Hiroki ) arrive at the laboratory , they find themselves transported by Specter , along with all the other monkeys , to the various reaches of time .
Realizing that leaving the monkeys to their own devices could rewrite history in disastrous ways , the Professor tasks Spike with finding all of the monkeys scattered across time and sending them back to the present .
Spike must also face off against Specter , who has not only built himself an advanced Peak Point Helmet further increasing his own intelligence , but has also brainwashed Jake to his side .
After a lengthy series of captures and battles in segments of history ranging from the age of the dinosaurs , medieval times and present day , Spike is eventually able to capture all of the apes .
Spike chases Specter to his deranged theme park , where he is holding a recently captured Professor , Natalie , and his friend Jake .
Spike frees Jake of his mind control , and releases both the professor and Natalie , and goes on to find Specter in an alternative universe he calls the " Peak Point Matrix " .
Spike defeats Specter after a final battle , and he is captured and sent back to the zoo .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The development of Ape Escape lasted approximately two - and - a - half years .
Shortly after the development team began conceiving the design and concept for Ape Escape , they attended a meeting regarding the development of the DualShock .
Intrigued by the potential of the controller , the team implemented its use in Ape Escape , making it the first video game to require the use of the DualShock for gameplay .
Conceptualizing the controls for the controller 's analog sticks was the greatest challenge for the team , and the controls underwent great testing prior to finalization .
The game 's music was composed by Soichi Terada .
After a game director listened to Terada 's track " Sumo Jungle " , he was given the opportunity to compose the music for Ape Escape .
The music changes in - game depending on the situation and level ; for example , should players act stealthily , the music alters slightly to give a mellow atmosphere .
Music from the game was included in Ape Escape Originape Soundtracks , published on November 18 , 2011 by Terada 's label Far East Recording .
The gameplay sound effects were designed by Masaaki Kaneko , while the sound effects in the cutscenes were provided by Masatoshi Mizumachi .
The English voice acting was recorded at Dubey Tunes Studios in San Francisco , California , with Sara Holihan and Hunter A. Pipes III serving as voice - over director and producer , respectively .
Ape Escape was officially announced in the April 1999 issue of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine .
A playable demonstration was integrated into the Jampack Summer ' 99 compilation CD released by PlayStation Underground .
A second playable demonstration was included on a promotional compilation disc released by Pizza Hut on November 14 , 1999 .
Promotions for the game were held on Cartoon Network during Sony 's winter holiday marketing campaign of 1999 .
A remake of the game , titled Ape Escape : On the Loose , was announced on May 11 , 2004 , during Sony 's press conference at the Electronic Entertainment Expo .
It was released as a launch title for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) on March 24 , 2005 .
The remake features altered controls , due to the lack of a right analog stick on the PSP , as well as some slightly different graphics and mini - games .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Ape Escape received critical acclaim .
Metacritic calculated an average score of 90 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 19 reviews .
Japanese publication Famitsu awarded the game 32 out of 40 , based on four reviews .
Reviewers praised the game 's use of analog controls , as well as its graphics and music , with minor criticism directed towards the voice acting .
Reviewers praised the gameplay , and the game 's use of analog controls .
Johnny Liu of Game Revolution wrote that the innovative controls were one of the game 's standout features .
GameSpot 's Peter Bartholow declared the controls " beautifully executed " , praising the ease of use .
Doug Perry of IGN felt that , while the controls are initially difficult , using the analog sticks became " new and refreshing " .
Scott Alan Marriott of AllGame similarly noted the initial difficulty of the controls , but found it easier upon continued play , particularly praising the raft controls .
Edge credited the game 's distinct stages and original weapons , concluding that Ape Escape " offers enough novelty to make it worth serious consideration for anyone tired of the many me - too platformers . "
The graphics were met with generally positive comments .
GameSpot 's Bartholow praised the visuals , naming the game " a sight to behold " and commending the use of colour and detail .
IGN 's Perry wrote that the textures " are n't terribly stunning " , and found the character design " rather fundamental " , but felt that the game 's lighting and camera blended to create " a fantastic and gratifying effect " .
Game Revolution 's Liu named the graphics " good , but not the best " , noting frame rate slowdown .
Marriott of AllGame similarly mentioned pop - up issues and other glitches , but ultimately commended the graphics , noting the " distinct Japanese style " .
The game 's audio was commended by many reviews .
AllGame 's Marriott praised the appropriateness of the music to the game 's setting .
GameSpot 's Bartholow echoed similar remarks , applauding the interactivity of the soundtrack .
Liu of Game Revolution felt that the music improves as the game progresses , similarly commending its use with gameplay .
IGN 's Perry described the soundtrack as " a weird concoction of J - pop and techno - synth " , and noted that the " poppy tunes " were catchier than the " techno tunes " .
Conversely , particular criticism was directed at the voice acting in the game ; GameSpot 's Bartholow described it as " uniformly atrocious " , while IGN 's Perry referred to Spike 's voice as " nothing special " .
The game 's other sound effects , such as the ape noises , were met with positive reactions .
PLAYSTATION PORTABLE
VERSION
Section::::PlayStation Portable version .
Ape Escape : On the Loose , the game 's remake for PlayStation Portable , was met with mixed reviews .
Metacritic calculated a score of 66 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " , based on 35 critics .
Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot lamented the loss of the " finely tuned control " of the original , but felt that the game " still has considerable charm " .
GameSpy 's David Chapman felt that , despite the noticeable flaws of the game , particularly the controls , it still remains " a lot of fun to play " .
Juan Castro of IGN praised the game 's use of colour , noting its enhancement on the PlayStation Portable screen .
Castro also warned that " fans of the series will probably miss the second analog stick " , but felt that the gadgets mapped to the PSP 's face buttons would suffice .
1UP 's Jeremy Parish criticised the porting of the game for being outdated , declaring it " a game that was better in another time , on another system , ported simply for cynical convenience " .
Parish felt that On the Loose served " to blemish the PSP 's reputation ... as a dumping ground for warmed over 32-bit offerings far beyond their sell - by date " .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Ape Escape is considered one of the most significant titles on the PlayStation console .
Doug Perry of IGN declared it " the best 3D platform game on the PlayStation " , and GameSpot 's Peter Bartholow named it " one of the best 3D platformers to date " .
Scott Alan Marriott of AllGame described the game as " one of the most enjoyable 3D platform games " on the PlayStation .
IGN included Ape Escape in an article documenting the greatest PlayStation 3D platform games , and later named it the eighth greatest game on the console .
In March 2004 , Official UK PlayStation Magazine named it the ninth greatest game of all time .
Game Informer ranked it 100 on its list of best games in 2001 , praising its gameplay and innovation .
Ape Escape spawned a series of games , including sequels and spin - offs .
A direct sequel , Ape Escape 2 , was released for the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) in July 2001 , followed by Ape Escape 3 for PS2 in July 2005 .
Several spin - off titles were released exclusively in Japan :
Pipo Saru 2001 in July 2001 and Saru !
Get You !
Million Monkeys in July 2006 for the PS2 , followed by
Saru Get
You : Pip Saru Racer in December 2006 and Saru !
Get You !
SaruSaru Big Mission in July 2007 for the PSP .
Another spin - off , Ape Quest , was also released worldwide for PSP in January 2008 .
A series of party games has also been released : in July 2004 and in August 2004 for PS2 , as well as Ape Academy 2 for PSP in December 2005 , and PlayStation Move
Ape Escape for the PlayStation 3 in December 2010 .
The character of Spike is available as a playable character in PlayStation All - Stars Battle Royale ( 2012 ) , and an ape costume is available as a downloadable outfit in some of the LittleBigPlanet games ( 2008–12 ) .
A mini - game featuring an ape from Ape Escape is included in ( 2004 ) .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes
Footnotes Sources