SOUTH INDIAN BANK
South Indian Bank Limited ( SIB )
( BSE : 532218 , NSE : SOUTHBANK ) is a major private sector bank headquartered at Thrissur in Kerala , India .
South Indian Bank has 852 branches , 4 service branches,56 ext.counters and 20 Regional Offices spread across more than 27 states and 3 union territories in India .
It has set up 1334 ATMs and 42 Bulk Note Acceptor / Cash Deposit Machines all over India .
MILESTONES
* First among the private sector banks in Kerala to become a scheduled bank in 1946 .
* First bank in the private sector in India to open a Currency Chest in April 1992 .
*
First private sector bank to open a NRI branch in Jhumritalaiya November 1992 .
* First bank in the private sector to start an Industrial Finance Branch in March 1993 .
*
First among the private sector banks in Kerala to open an overseas branch in June 1993 .
* Bank in Kerala to develop an in - house , fully integrated branch automation software .
* First Kerala based bank to implement Core Banking System .
* 8th largest branch network among private sector banks in India .
HISTORY Section::::History .
South Indian Bank was registered as a private Limited Company under the companies Act of 1913 and commenced business on 29 - 01 - 1929 at Round South , Thrissur .
The South Indian Bank Ltd. , was formed by a group of 44 enterprising men of Thrissur who contributed Rs.500/ - each to the initial paid up capital of Rs.22,000/ - .
Their main objective was to serve the merchant community of Thrissur by freeing them from the clutches of the money lenders who charged exorbitant rates of interest .
The bank received very good support from the public at large .
Initially the growth was slow but steady .
The number of branches opened each year testified its stability and popularity .
It was included in the second schedule of the Reserve Bank of India and became a scheduled Bank on 07 - 08 - 1946 .
SIB was the first scheduled Bank in the private sector in Kerala to get the license under section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act 1949 from RBI on 17 - 06 - 1957 .
NEW LOOK Section::::New look .
South Indian Bank unveiled the new corporate logo .
FINANCIAL INCLUSION & FINANCIAL
LITERACY CENTRES Section::::Financial inclusion & Financial Literacy Centres .
Till date , the bank has covered more than 100 villages and 15 urban centres under Financial Inclusion and opened more than 10 exclusive FLC Centres in the bank premises , which spreads across the states of Kerala , Tamil Nadu , Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh .
South Indian Bank has appointed direct Business Correspondents in the allotted villages and are supervised by a team of officers in the FIP Cell - Head Office .
Recently South Indian Bank has introduced " KIOSK Banking Model " as Financial Inclusion Initiative in association with Akshaya e - centres in the state of Kerala through the software service provider - M / s Tata Consultancy services ..
Kiosk is a kind of banking model , where people living in unbanked or under banked areas can avail basic banking facilities from a nearby common service centre / BC Office without visiting a regular bank branch .Basic
banking needs of the public like opening of account , deposit and withdrawal of cash etc .
is possible from these common service centre / BC Office .
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
*
Mr. Salim Gangadharan , Part Time Chairman
* Mr. V.G Mathew - Managing Director & CEO
*
Mr .
Mohan E. Alapatt - Director
* Mr. M George Korah - Director
* Dr .
John Joseph - Director
*
Mr .
Francis Alapatt - Director
*
Mr. Achal Kumar Gupta - Director *
Mr. Cheryan Varkey - Director * Smt .
Ranjana Salgaocar - Director REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official web site
* Interview of Dr. V.A Joseph , Former Managing Director & CEO , South Indian Bank