HOMOGENEOUS AND HETEROGENEOUS
MIXTURES
A homogeneous mixture is a solid , liquid , or gaseous mixture that has the same proportions of its components throughout any given sample .
Conversely , a heterogeneous mixture has components whose proportions vary throughout the sample .
" Homogeneous " and " heterogeneous " are not absolute terms but depend on context and the size of the sample .
In chemistry , a homogeneous suspension of material means that when dividing the volume in half , the same amount of material is suspended in both halves of the substance ; however , it might be possible to see the particles under a microscope .
An example of a homogeneous mixture is air .
In physical chemistry and materials science this refers to substances and mixtures which are in a single phase .
This is in contrast to a substance that is heterogeneous .
HOMOGENEOUS MIXTURE
SOLUTION Section::::Homogeneous mixture .
Section::::Solution .
A solution has been a special type of homogeneous mixture .
Solutions are homogeneous because the ratio of solute to solvent remains the same throughout the solution even if homogenized with multiple sources , and stable because the solute will not settle out after any period of time , and it can not be removed by a filter or by centrifuge .
This type of mixture is very stable , i.e. , its particles do not settle , or separate .
As a homogeneous mixture , a solution has one phase ( liquid ) although the solute and solvent can vary : for example , salt water .
GASES Section::::Gases .
Air can be more specifically described as a gaseous solution ( oxygen and other gases dissolved in the major component , nitrogen ) .
Since interactions between molecules play almost no role , dilute gases form rather trivial solutions .
In part of the literature , they are not even classified as solutions .
In gas intermolecular space is greatest and intermolecular force of attraction is least .
SOLIDS Section::::Solids .
In chemistry , a mixture is a substance containing two or more elements or compounds that are not covalently bound to each other and which retain their own chemical and physical identities ; – a substance which has two or more constituent physical substances .
Mixtures , in the broader sense , are two or more substances physically in the same place , but these are not chemically combined , and therefore ratios are not necessarily considered .
METRICS Section::::Metrics .
Homogeneous mixtures have the same proportions of the various components throughout a given sample ( or multiple samples of different proportion ) , creating a consistent mixture .
However , two homogeneous mixtures of the same pair of substances may differ widely from each other and can be homogenized to make a constant .
Homogeneous mixtures always have the same composition .
Mixtures can be characterized by being separable by mechanical means e.g. heat , filtration , gravitational sorting , etc .
During the sampling of heterogeneous mixtures of particles , the variance of the sampling error is generally non - zero .
Gy 's sampling theory quantitatively defines the heterogeneity of a particle as : where HOMOGENIZATION SEE ALSO
* Chemical substance
REFERENCES Section::::References .
l90 - 8i