IMPAIRED DRIVING IN CANADA Impaired driving is the term used in Canada to describe the criminal offence of operating or having care or control of a motor vehicle while the person 's ability to operate the motor vehicle is impaired by alcohol or a drug .
Impaired driving is punishable under multiple offences in the Criminal Code , with greater penalties depending on the harm caused by the impaired driving .
It can also result in various types of driver 's licence suspensions .
There is a related , parallel offence of driving with a blood alcohol level which exceeds eighty milligrams of alcohol in one hundred millilitres of blood ( .08 ) .
The penalties are identical for impaired driving and driving with a BAC greater than .08 .
The Criminal Code gives the police a number of powers to assist in the enforcement of the offences , and there are a number of presumptions that assist in the prosecution of the offences .
HISTORY Section::::History .
One of the first reported criminal cases regarding drinking and driving in Canada was an Alberta decision in 1920 called R. v. Nickle .
In that case , the appeal court found that the act of driving while intoxicated was an unlawful act that could support a manslaughter conviction .
In 1921 , the Parliament of Canada first created a summary conviction offence for drinking and driving , called " driving while intoxicated " .
At the time , the courts interpreted intoxication to mean substantial inebriation , and more than just being under the influence of alcohol .
The minimum penalty for the first offence was seven days in jail .
The minimum penalty for the second offence was one month in jail .
The minimum penalty for a third offence was three months in jail .
In 1925 , Parliament amended the Criminal Code to include a new offence of driving while intoxicated by a narcotic .
The offences were also amended to include " care or control " of a motor vehicle , not just driving .
( See below . )
In 1930 , Parliament changed the offence to a hybrid offence , giving the Crown the option to proceed with the more serious indictable offence procedure .
Difficulties arose regarding how to prove someone was in care or control of a motor vehicle , and what the test should be .
In 1947 , Parliament amended the Criminal Code again , adding a presumption of care or control when a person was found sitting in the driver 's seat of a motor vehicle .
This did not answer all of the problems regarding the test ( i.e. when a person is not found in the driver 's seat of a motor vehicle ) .
Many of the court 's answers to those questions remain in conflict today .
In 1951 , Parliament re - worded the law , making it an offence to operate or have care or control of a motor vehicle while the driver 's ability to operate the motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol or other drugs .
The breathalyzer was made into a practical police tool by Robert Frank Borkenstein in 1952 , which allowed for the police to measure a person 's blood alcohol concentration .
The first Canadian test of the breathalyzer was in Ontario in 1954 .
By 1962 , police were using the breathalyzer for " mass testing " .
However , the test was voluntary , and could only be used as confirmatory evidence .
In 1969 ( fifteen years after the introduction of the breathalyzer into Canada ) , Parliament created an offence of driving while " over 80 " ( over 80 milligrams of alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood ) .
In 1976 , Parliament made the penalty the same as driving while impaired , created the offence of refusing to provide a breath sample ( with the same penalties ) , and created laws allowing the police to use roadside screening devices .
Both offences are now set out in the same section of the Criminal Code , section 253 .
After 1976 , there were additional changes to the minimum penalties , and the introduction of new offences ( impaired driving causing bodily harm and impaired driving causing death ) .
By 2008 , drinking and driving cases made up 12 per cent of all criminal charges , making it the largest single offence group .
In 2008 , it was estimated that 53,000 drinking and driving cases are heard every year in Canada .
The conviction rate was 73 per cent , which exceeded the rate for all criminal convictions by 13 per cent .
Notwithstanding the higher rate of conviction , drinking and driving cases are more likely to go to trial than any other criminal offence , and are often fought on both technical issues and alleged police violations of section 8 , section 9 , and section 10(b ) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .
2008 also saw the most recent amendments by Parliament to the law on drinking and driving .
The Tackling Violent Crime Act came into force on July 2 , 2008 .
The changes included adding new evidentiary restrictions on defendants trying to raise " evidence to the contrary " regarding the presumption of a person 's blood alcohol concentration , created mandatory standard field sobriety tests that can be requested by a police officer , created additional means to allow police officers to test for the possible presence of drugs in a driver 's body , increased the minimum sentences to their current level ( $ 1000 fine for the first offence , 30 days in jail for the second offence , and 120 days in jail for the third offence ) , and created new offences for " over 80 " causing death or bodily harm and refusing to provide a sample where operation caused death or bodily harm .
TESTING FOR ALCOHOL AND DRUGS
APPROVED INSTRUMENT DEMANDS Section::::Testing for alcohol and drugs .
Section::::Approved instrument demands .
If a police officer has reasonable grounds that a person has committed an offence under section 253 within the past three hours due to alcohol , they can demand that a person provide suitable breath samples into an approved instrument .
The results of those samples may be introduced as evidence at a later trial .
If it is later determined that the officer did not have reasonable grounds , then the taking of the breath samples violated the protection against unreasonable searches and seizures under section 8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the person can apply to have them excluded as evidence under section 24(2 ) of the Charter .
Police officers can obtain reasonable grounds from observations they make and information they receive , including the results of the other demands listed below .
These breath samples are typically taken at a police station by a qualified technician , after a person has been arrested .
BLOOD SAMPLES Section::::Blood samples .
If a person is unable to give breath samples ( usually due to injuries suffered from a traffic collision ) , a police officer can make a demand for blood samples , under the direction of a medical doctor , and performed by the same doctor or a nurse .
APPROVED SCREENING DEVICE DEMANDS
Section::::Approved screening device demands .
If a police officer has a reasonable suspicion that a person has alcohol in his or her body , and that he or she has been operating or has had care or control of a vehicle within the past three hours , the police officer can demand that person provide a suitable sample into an approved screening device .
These devices are usually calibrated to display fail if a person has a BAC above 0.1 percent , warn or caution if a person has a BAC between 0.05 and 0.1 percent , and a numerical value if the person has a BAC below 0.05 percent .
These breath samples are typically taken at the roadside by an investigating police officer .
Typical observations supporting a reasonable suspicion is if a driver has an odour of an alcoholic beverage on their breath , or if they admit they had a drink .
FIELD SOBRIETY TESTS Section::::Field sobriety tests .
If a police officer has a reasonable suspicion that a person has alcohol or drugs in their body , and that they have been operating or have had care or control of a vehicle within the past three hours , they can demand that that person perform physical coordination tests , referred to as Standardized Field Sobriety Tests ( SFSTs ) .
SFSTs are requested in order to allow the officer to establish " reasonable grounds " for making an approved instrument demand , by establishing that there is reasonable and probable cause which lies at the point where " point where credibly - based probability replaces suspicion " .
" Reasonable grounds " is necessary to sustain the use of evidence obtained from the approved instrument demand , blood demand , or drug evaluation demand , and thereby support a conviction based on that demand .
Commentary varies on whether a suspect can refuse taking SFSTs in Canada .
Some sources , especially official ones , indicate that the SFSTs are mandatory , whereas other sources are silent on FST testing ..
Canada Criminal Code § 254(2)(a ) provides that , " If a peace officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that a person has alcohol or a drug in their body and that the person has , within the preceding three hours , operated a motor vehicle ...
the peace officer may , by demand , require the person ... to perform forthwith physical coordination tests " .
The assertion regarding mandatory compliance with an SFST demand is based on " failure to comply with a demand " , as an offence under § 254(5 ) of the Criminal Code , but it is unclear whether § 254(5 ) applies to refusal of SFSTs ( provided the suspect agrees to take an approved instrument chemical test ) .
There are some reports that refusal to submit to an SFST can result in the same penalties as impaired driving .
Nevertheless , it is unclear whether there has ever been a prosecution under this interpretation of " failure to comply with a demand " as applied to SFSTs .
Canada Criminal Code § 254(1 ) and ( 5 ) addresses this , but only with respect to chemical testing ( breath , blood , etc . )
Of note , it is generally advised to comply with a demand to submit to the approved instrument chemical test .
A legal challenge to sufficiency of " reasonable grounds " to submit to the approved instrument demand , blood demand , or drug evaluation demand , is typically addressed in court , under the Exclusionary Rule .
DRUG EVALUATIONS Section::::Drug evaluations .
If a police officer has reasonable grounds that a person has committed an offence under § 253 within the past three hours due to drugs or a combination of drugs and alcohol , they can demand that the person submit to an evaluation by an evaluating officer to determine if the person is impaired by drugs or a combination of drugs and alcohol .
If the evaluating officer has reasonable grounds that the person is impaired by alcohol , they can make an approved instrument demand .
If the evaluating officer has reasonable grounds that the person is impaired by drugs or a combination of drugs and alcohol , they can make a demand for blood or urine samples .
Fatigue toxins and effects due to illness have been held to be drugs for the purposes of the statute .
REFUSING TO COMPLY Section::::Refusing to comply .
If any of the above demands are lawfully made , it is a criminal offence to fail or refuse to comply with them , unless the person can show they had a reasonable excuse .
The penalties are identical to the penalties for other drinking and driving offences .
PROVING BLOOD ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION
Section::::Proving blood alcohol concentration .
When a person gives a breath sample into an approved instrument by a qualified technician , a determination still needs to be made of what the person 's BAC was at the time of the offence .
That requires evidence of two things : * The person 's BAC at the time of giving the breath samples , and * Based on the person 's BAC at the time of giving the breath samples , the person 's BAC at the time of the offence .
PRESUMPTION OF ACCURACY Section::::Presumption of accuracy .
To work out the person 's BAC at the time of giving the breath samples , the prosecutor can rely on a Certificate of a Qualified Technician , which states what the results were of the analysis of the breath samples , and is evidence of its contents .
This is commonly referred to as the presumption of accuracy .
It is still open for the defence to call evidence showing why the results are not accurate , leaving it for the court to weigh the evidence .
If there is no Certificate , or the Certificate is flawed , the prosecutor can always call the qualified technician to give evidence about the accuracy of the results .
The prosecutor may still call the qualified technician if there is a Certificate in order to counter the defence 's evidence .
Typically , the Certificate will round the BAC results down to a hundredth of a percentage ( e.g. 0.116 percent is truncated to 0.11 percent ) .
PRESUMPTION OF IDENTITY Section::::Presumption of identity .
To work out the person 's BAC at the time of the offence , the prosecutor generally needs to show the following : * The breath samples were taken as soon as practicable , * The first breath sample was taken within two hours of the offence , and * A second breath sample was taken 15 minutes or more after the first sample .
If the three criteria are met , then the lower of the two results is presumed to be the person 's BAC at the time of the offence .
This is commonly referred to as the presumption of identity .
The presumption can be rebutted two ways , depending on whether the defence is challenging the accuracy of the results .
If defence is challenging the accuracy of the results , they need call evidence that shows : * the approved instrument was malfunctioning or not being operated properly , * the malfunction or improper operation resulted in a reading of a BAC in excess of 0.08 percent , and * the person 's BAC would not have been in excess of 0.08 at the time of the offence .
The last criteria is typically met by calling reliable evidence of how much the person had to drink prior to the offence , and expert evidence of what their BAC would have been at the time of the offence as a result of the drinking evidence .
If defence is not challenging the accuracy of the results , they only need to call evidence on the last criteria , and have the expert give evidence why it would not be inconsistent with the breath sample readings .
( This is typically called the " bolus drinking " scenario , primarily in Canadian jurisprudence . )
If the prosecutor is unable to rely on the presumption of identity ( usually because the first reading was taken outside of the two hours ) , they can still " read - back " the readings by calling their own expert evidence .
SENTENCING
Section::::Sentencing .
A person convicted for any drinking and driving offence ( which includes a refuse to comply offence ) faces an automatic Canada - wide driving prohibition , and either a fine or jail sentence and the possibility of probation .
The minimum sentences are : *
For a first offence , a $ 1000 fine and a 12-month driving prohibition ,
*
For a second offence , 30 days of jail and a 24-month driving prohibition , and * For a third or subsequent offence , 120 days of jail and a 36-month driving prohibition .
Drinking and driving offences are prior offences for refuse to comply offences , and vice versa .
If no one is hurt or killed , and the prosecutor is proceeding by summary conviction , the maximum sentence is 18 months of jail .
If no one is hurt or killed , and the prosecutor is proceeding by indictment , the maximum sentence is 5 years of jail .
If another person suffers bodily harm because of the offence , the maximum sentence is 10 years in jail .
If another person is killed because of the offence , the maximum sentence is a life sentence .
If a person is convicted of both impaired operation / care or control and operation / care or control with a BAC in excess of 0.08 percent , the defendant can only be sentenced for one of the offences ( the prosecutor chooses which one ) .
The same does not apply if a person is also convicted of a refuse to comply offence .
A province is allowed to set up special ignition interlock device programs specifically to limit criminal driving prohibitions .
Not all provinces have such specific programs , but if they do , and a person is enrolled in one , then they can drive during their prohibition period with an interlock device , beginning as follows : * For a first offence , 3 months after the day of sentence , *
For a second offence , 6 months after the day of sentence , and * For a third offence or subsequent offence , 12 months after the day of sentence .
Driving otherwise while on a driving prohibition is a criminal offence .
DRIVING PROHIBITIONS VS .
SUSPENSIONS Section::::Driving Prohibitions vs. Suspensions .
Canada is a federal state , and responsibility for road safety with respect to drunk driving falls on both Parliament and the provincial legislatures .
Typically after an impaired driving offence is committed , the accused will be subject to both a prohibition imposed under federal law ( criminal law ) and a driver 's licence suspension under provincial law .
It is important to note that while Parliament may prohibit an accused from driving , in the absence of provincial legislation , this does not affect the validity of the driver 's licence of the accused .
Nonetheless the accused may be charged with driving while prohibited under criminal law despite possessing a valid driver 's licence .
Often the provincial suspensions are more severe than the criminal prohibition .
For instance many jurisdictions require the accused to complete a remedial program and participate in the ignition interlock program , failing which will result in an indefinite suspension until the conditions are met .
Also an accused may be suspended from driving for medical reasons if a physician reports that the accused has a serious alcohol problem likely to result in an unacceptable risk to the public should the accused operate a motor vehicle .
The Criminal Code provides that an accused may be prosecuted for either driving while prohibited or driving while disqualified .
The former refers to driving in contravention of a criminal court order of prohibition while the latter refers to driving while suspended under provincial legislation relating to a suspension for an impaired driving offence .
ADMINISTRATIVE DRIVER 'S LICENCE SUSPENSIONS
Section::::Administrative driver 's licence suspensions .
Administrative licence suspensions are separate from the driving prohibitions that are ordered as part of a criminal sentence .
While drinking and driving are criminal offences , which is the jurisdiction of the Canadian Parliament , the provinces have jurisdiction to regulate their roads and highways ( see Canadian federalism ) .
Therefore , the provinces have the ability to administratively suspend a person 's driver 's licence separately from any criminal proceedings .
Licence suspensions can occur in three ways : 1 ) having a high BAC , but not enough to commit a criminal offence , 2 ) a police officer having reasonable grounds that a drinking and driving offence has occurred , and 3 ) being found guilty of a drinking and driving offence .
Driving with a suspended licence can result in being charged with either criminal or provincial offences .
HIGH BLOOD ALCOHOL
CONCENTRATION Section::::High
blood alcohol concentration .
When a person blows into an approved screening device , they might not register a BAC high enough for a fail , but they will still register a significantly high BAC .
The provinces deal with that situation in different ways .
There may also be different type of suspensions for novice drivers who are not allowed any BAC above zero .
* Alberta - Length : 24 hours
; Reason : a police officer reasonably suspects the person 's ability to operate a vehicle is impaired by alcohol or drug , but does not charge them with a criminal offence .
While the 24 hour suspension remains on the books , drivers may also receive a 3-day non - criminal suspension and other penalties should their blood alcohol concentration test 0.05 or over ( warning ) , but not above the criminal 0.08 ( failure ) .
New drivers will receive a 30-day non - criminal suspension for a blood alcohol concentration of greater than zero .
* British Columbia - Length : 12 hours ; Reason : BAC over zero when a licence restriction is in place .
Length :
3–30 days depending on prior offences ; Reason : BAC over 0.05 percent .
* Manitoba , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia - Length : 24 hours ; Reason : BAC over 0.05 percent .
* Newfoundland and Labrador - Length : 24 hours for the first and second suspension , 2 months for the third suspension , 4 months for the fourth suspension , 6 months for the fifth or subsequent suspension ; Reason : BAC over 0.05 percent .
* Ontario - Length : 3 days for the first suspension , 7 days for the second suspension , 30 days for the third or subsequent suspension ; Reason : BAC over 0.05 percent .
*
Prince Edward Island - Length : 24 hours for the first suspension , 30 days for a second suspension within 2 years , 90 days for the third suspension within 2 years ; Reason : BAC over 0.05 percent .
* Quebec does not suspend a person 's licence if their BAC is below 0.08 percent ( except for novice drivers ) .
* Saskatchewan - Length : 24 hours for the first suspension , 24 hours & 15 days for the second suspension , 24 hours & 90 days for the third or subsequent suspension ; Reason : BAC over 0.04 percent .
* Northwest Territories and Nunavut - Length : 24 hours for the first suspension , 30 days for a subsequent suspension ; Reason : BAC over 0.05 percent .
* Yukon - Length : 24 hours
; Reason : a police officer has reasonable grounds the driver is impaired .
COMMITTING AN OFFENCE Section::::Committing an offence .
If an officer has reasonable grounds to believe a person has committed a drinking and driving offence , besides being allowed to arrest the person , the provinces will suspend the person 's driver 's licence for a period of time .
The same suspensions apply if the person refuses to comply with a breath demand .
* Alberta - 90 days generally ; 6 months if bodily harm or death is caused .
* British Columbia , Manitoba , New Brunswick , Newfoundland and Labrador , Nova Scotia , Ontario , Prince Edward Island , Quebec , Saskatchewan , Northwest Territories , Nunavut , Yukon - 90 days .
FOUND GUILTY OF AN OFFENCE
Section::::Found guilty of an offence .
Provinces will suspend a person 's driver 's licence for a lengthy period of time if they have been found guilty of a drinking and driving offence , and will usually require various types of programs to be completed before or after a licence is reinstated .
When programs are required to be completed , the driver is also required to pay the cost .
* Alberta -
1 year for the first offence , 3 years for a second offence , 5 years for the third or subsequent offence .
A rehabilitative course may be required .
* British Columbia - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , indefinitely for the third or subsequent offence .
A rehabilitative program , which may include an interlock device program , must be completed .
* Manitoba - 1 year for the first offence ( 2 years for refusing to comply and no other offences ) , 5 years for the second offence ( 7 years for refusing to comply and no other offences ) , 10 years for the third offence , life for the fourth or subsequent offence ; If the offence was committed while there was a passenger in the car 16 years old or younger , or caused death or bodily harm , 5 years for the first offence , 10 years for the second offence , life for the third or subsequent offence .
If it is a subsequent offence , or if it had a passenger in the car 16 years old or younger , or death or bodily harm was caused , an interlock device will be required .
* New Brunswick - 1 year .
A drinking driving course is required .
* Newfoundland and Labrador - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , 5 years for the third offence , life for the fourth or subsequent offence ; 10 years if bodily harm or death was caused .
Rehabilitative programs , interlock programs , and alcohol / drug screenings may be required .
* Nova Scotia - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , indefinitely for the third or subsequent offence .
For the second and subsequent offences , a driver must have an interview with Drug Dependency Services .
* Ontario - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , and indefinitely for the third or subsequent offence .
They may have to complete a remedial program before have their licence re - issued .
The driver will need to have an interlock device for a prescribed period of time .
*
Prince Edward Island - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , 5 years for the third or subsequent offence .
A rehabilitation program may be required .
* Quebec - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , 5 years for the third or subsequent offence .
If the licence suspension is longer than the driving prohibition , a driver may be able to drive after the prohibition is completed with an interlock device .
A rehabilitative course is required .
* Saskatchewan - 1 for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , 5 years for the third or subsequent offence .
* Northwest Territories and Nunavut - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , 5 years for the third offence , indefinite for the fourth or subsequent offence .
If death is caused , the period is indefinite .
A number of rehabilitative programs may be required .
* Yukon - 1 year for the first offence , 3 years for the second offence , indefinitely for the third or subsequent offence .
SEE ALSO
* Driving under the influence * MADD Canada REFERENCES