MONEY BURNING Money burning or burning money is the purposeful act of destroying money .
In the prototypical example , banknotes are destroyed by literally setting them on fire .
Burning money decreases the wealth of the owner without directly enriching any particular party .
However , according to the quantity theory of money , because it reduces the supply of money it increases by the same amount the collective wealth of everyone else who owns said money . Money is usually burned to communicate a message , either for artistic effect , as a form of protest , or as a signal .
In some games , a player can sometimes benefit from the ability to burn money ( battle of the sexes ) .
Burning money is illegal in some jurisdictions .
MACROECONOMIC EFFECT
Section::::Macroeconomic effect .
For the purposes of macroeconomics , burning money is equivalent to removing the money from circulation , and locking it away forever ; the salient feature is that no one may ever use the money again .
Burning money shrinks the money supply , and is therefore a special case of contractionary monetary policy that can be implemented by anyone .
In the usual case , the central bank withdraws money from circulation by selling government bonds or foreign currency .
The difference with money burning is that the central bank does not have to exchange any assets of value for the money burnt .
Money burning is thus equivalent to gifting the money back to the central bank ( or other money issuing authority ) .
If the economy is at full employment equilibrium , shrinking the money supply causes deflation ( or decreases the rate of inflation ) , increasing the real value of the money left in circulation .
Assuming that the burned money is paper money with negligible intrinsic value , no real goods are destroyed , so the overall wealth of the world is unaffected .
Instead , all surviving money slightly increases in value ; everyone gains wealth in proportion to the amount of money they already hold .
Economist Steven Landsburg proposes in The Armchair Economist that burning one 's fortune ( in paper money ) is a form of philanthropy more egalitarian than deeding it to the United States Treasury .
In 1920 , Thomas Nixon Carver wrote that dumping money into the sea is better for society than spending it wastefully , as the latter wastes the labor that it hires .
OPPOSITES Section::::Opposites .
Central banks routinely collect and destroy worn - out coins and banknotes in exchange for new ones .
This does not affect the money supply , and is done to maintain a healthy population of usable currency .
The practice raises an interesting possibility .
If an individual can steal the money before it is incinerated , the effect is the opposite of burning money ; the thief is enriched at the expense of the rest of society .
One such incident at the Bank of England inspired the 2001 TV movie Hot Money and the 2008 film Mad Money .
Another , more common near - opposite is the creation of counterfeit money .
Undetected counterfeit money harms the rest of society by decreasing the value of existing money – one of the reasons why attempting to pass it is illegal in most jurisdictions and is aggressively investigated .
Another way to analyze the cost of forgery is to consider the effects of a central bank 's monetary policy .
Taking the United States as an example , if the Federal Reserve decides that the monetary base should be a given amount , then every $ 100 bill forged is a bill the Fed can not print and use to buy Treasury bonds .
The interest earnings ( after expenses ) on those bonds is turned over to the US Treasury , so any lost interest must be made up by U.S. taxpayers , who therefore bear the cost of counterfeiting .
RATIONALES Section::::Rationales .
Behaviorally speaking , burning money is usually seen as a purely negative act .
An individual who compulsively destroys money may be showing signs of mental illness , in which case some legal systems consider a mental health professional justified in restraining him or her to prevent the financial harm .
The cognitive impact of burning money can even be a useful motivational tool : patients who suffer from nail biting may be trained to burn a dollar bill every time they engage in the habit .
One study found this form of suppression training by self - punishment to be effective compared to control groups , although not as effective as substitution training .
On the other hand , there are some situations where burning money might not be so unreasonable .
It is said that the ancient Greek philosopher Aristippus was once on a ship at sea when he was threatened by pirates ; he took out his money , counted it , and dropped it into the sea , commenting , " Better for the money to perish because of Aristippus than vice versa .
" Cicero would later cite this episode as an example of a circumstance that must be considered in its full context : " ... it is a useless act to throw money into the sea ; but not with the design which Aristippus had when he did so . " Since around 2015 the UK has experienced a surge of interest in money burning .
This has been noted in both the book ' The Mysterium ' and in a ' Kindred Spirit ' article that is reprinted in International Times .
There is also a UK based magazine ' Burning Issue ' that claims to be " for money burners and other destroyers of currency " .
An annual Mass Burn Event - where people are invited to burn money - is held at the Cockpit Theatre in London every autumn .
SYMBOLISM Section::::Symbolism .
Publicly burning money can be an act of protest or a kind of artistic statement .
Often the point is to emphasize money 's intrinsic worthlessness .
In 1984 , Serge Gainsbourg burned a 500 French franc note on television to protest against heavy taxation .
On 23 August 1994 , the K Foundation ( an art duo consisting of Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty ) burned one million pounds sterling in cash on the Scottish island of Jura .
This money represented the bulk of the K Foundation 's funds , earned by Drummond and Cauty as The KLF , one of the United Kingdom 's most successful pop groups of the early 1990s .
The duo have never fully explained their motivations for the burning .
In the 1995 film Dead Presidents , the title sequence directed by Kyle Cooper features close shots of burning U.S. bills ; it took two days of shooting and experimenting with the paper to get the effect right .
In the early 18th century , New York City courts would publicly burn the counterfeit bills they gathered , to show that they were both dangerous and worthless .
In traditional Chinese ancestor veneration , imitation money in the form of joss paper are ceremonially burned , with the aspiration that the dead may use the money to finance a more comfortable afterlife .
In 2010 , the spokesperson for the Swedish Feminist Initiative , Gudrun Schyman , burned SEK 100,000 during a speech about the inequality in wages for men and women .
GAME THEORY Section::::Game theory .
In game theory , a threat to burn money can affect the strategies of the players involved ; a classic example is the situation described as ' battle of the sexes ' , where the ability to burn money allows the player to achieve the desired equilibrium without actually having to burn money .
FOR COMMODITY VALUE Section::::For commodity value .
Fiat money can sometimes be destroyed by converting it into commodity form , rather than completely forfeiting the value of the money .
Sometimes , currency intended for use as fiat money becomes more valuable as a commodity , usually when inflation causes its face value to fall below its intrinsic value .
For example , in India in 2007 , Rupee coins disappeared from the market when their face value dropped below the value of the stainless steel from which they were made .
Similarly , in 1965 , the US government had to switch from silver to copper - nickel clad quarter coins because the silver value of the coins had exceeded their face value and were being melted down by individuals for profit .
At the peak of inflation in the Weimar Republic , people burned banknotes for warmth , as their face value had fallen below their value as fuel .
The same occurred to 5-franc coins of Switzerland , which up to the year 1969 were minted using a silver alloy .
LEGALITY AUSTRALIA Section::::Legality .
Section::::Australia .
Section 16 of the Crimes ( Currency ) Act 1981 prohibits deliberate damage and destruction of money or Australian without a relevant legal permit .
The law covers both current Australian money and historical coins and notes .
Breaking this law can lead to detention or a fine .
According to this law , even writing words on a banknote can be punished .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
In Brazil , whether it is illegal for a person to burn his or her own money is a controversial topic .
It is not mentioned explicitly in Brazilian law .
John Sidney Figueiredo Filho , the head of the central bank , has affirmed that " when money is inside the Central Bank , then it is the property of the National Treasury .
When it leaves , it is not . "
But the chief of police Jefferson Botelho Pereira has concluded that " whoever rips money is committing a crime against the property of the Union " .
The production of paper money by the State Bank is under the exclusive authority of the Central Bank , and is issued by the Brazilian Union .
By that reasoning , the paper on which the money is printed is the property of the State , and its intrinsic value belongs to the person .
Articles 98 and 99 of the New Brazilian Civil Code give " money " its own definition .
This is because a banknote can not become a common good , if the owner himself decides to keep it in his possession indefinitely .
This makes money different from other state assets such as rivers , seas , streets , roads and piazzas , which are all immobile .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
The Currency Act states that " no person shall melt down , break up or use otherwise than as currency any coin that is legal tender in Canada . "
Similarly , Section 456 of The Criminal Code of Canada says : " Every one who ( a ) defaces a current coin , or ( b ) utters a current coin that has been defaced , is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction . "
However neither the Currency Act nor Criminal Code mention paper currency .
It therefore remains legal to completely destroy paper currency .
EURO ZONE Section::::Euro Zone .
According to the European Commission 's Recommendation dated 22 March 2010 , " Member states must not prohibit or punish the complete destruction of small quantities of Euro coins or notes when this happens in private .
However they must prohibit the unauthorised destruction of large amounts of Euro coins or notes . "
Also , " Member states must not encourage the mutilation of Euro notes or coins for artistic purposes , but they are required to tolerate it .
Mutilated coins or notes should be considered unfit for circulation . "
The European Union defines " falsifying or fraudulently altering money in any way " as a crime .
Also , according to the EU ruling 1210/2010 , " all money that is unfit for circulation must be delivered to the relevant national authority " .
EU countries must remove the currency from circulation and reimburse the holder " , no matter what the country of issue .
The European Central Bank has established that " Member states may refuse to reimburse Euro money that has been deliberately rendered unfit for circulation , or where it has been caused by a process that would predictably have led to the money becoming unfit .
The exception to this is money collected for charitable purposes , such as coins thrown into a fountain " .
The ECB legal department also states " the ECB will refuse to replace money that has been stamped for advertising purposes " .
The European Union provides an obligation at the community level to retire " neutralized " notes from circulation , or those rendered unfit for security systems .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
Section 28 of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989 makes it an offence to wilfully deface , disfigure , or mutilate any bank note in New Zealand .
The penalty is a fine of up to NZD 1000.00 .
TAIWAN Section::::Taiwan .
Intentionally damaging coins or notes , and rendering them unusable , is fined up to 5 times the nominal value of such coins or notes .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
In Turkey , defacement or destruction of banknotes can be punished with fines or with prison sentences .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The Currency and Bank Notes Act 1928 is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to banknotes .
Among other things , it makes it a criminal offence to deface
a banknote ( but not to destroy one ) .
Under Section 10 of the Coinage Act ( 1971 )
" No person shall , except under the authority of a licence granted by the Treasury , melt down or break up any metal coin which is for the time being current in the United Kingdom or which , having been current there , has at any time after 16th May 1969 ceased to be so . " .
As the process of creating elongated coins does not require them to be melted nor broken up , however , Section 10 does not apply and coin elongation is legal within the UK with penny press machines .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , burning banknotes is prohibited under , which includes " any other thing " that renders a note " unfit to be reissued " .
In an amicus brief for Atwater v. City of Lago Vista , Solicitor General Seth Waxman writes that arresting an individual who removes the corner dollar values " may expose a counterfeiting operation " .
It is unclear if the statute has ever been applied in response to the complete destruction of a bill .
Certainly people have publicly burned small amounts of money for political protests that were picked up by the media — Living Things at South by Southwest , Larry Kudlow on The Call , both in 2009 — without apparent consequence .
The question of legality has been compared to the much more politically charged issue of flag desecration .
It can be argued that the desecration of the flag is comparable to the desecration of a photograph of Legal Tender ( provided it was modified as to not violate counterfeiting laws ) .
In 1989 , in a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on the Flag Protection Act , former U.S. Attorney General William Barr testified that any regulation protecting something purely for its symbolic value would be struck down as unconstitutional .
The Senate report recommending passage of the Act argued that Barr 's theory would render
18 U.S.C. § 333 unconstitutional as well .
In a dissent in Smith v. Goguen , Justice Rehnquist counted 18 U.S.C. § 333 in a group of statutes in which the Government protects its interest in some private property which is " not a traditional property interest " .
On the other hand , the Government 's interest in protecting circulating currency might not be purely symbolic ; it costs the Bureau of Engraving and Printing approximately 5 cents to replace a note .
Legal Tender , a 1996 telerobotic art installment by Ken Goldberg , Eric Paulos , Judith Donath , and Mark Pauline , was an experiment to see if the law could instill a sense of physical risk in online interactions .
After participants were advised that 18 U.S.C. § 333 threatened them with up to six months in jail , they were given the option of remotely defacing small portions of a pair of " purportedly authentic " $ 100 bills over the web .
A crime may be occurring — but " only if the bills are real , the web site is authentic , and the experiment actually performed . "
In fact , one bill was real and the other counterfeit .
Almost all of the participants reported that they believed the experiment and the bills to be faked .
The destruction of money is also bound by the same laws that govern the destruction of other personal property .
In particular , one can not empower the executor of one 's estate to burn one 's money after one dies .
SEE ALSO
* Crop burning * K Foundation Burn a Million Quid REFERENCES FURTHER READING