ROBOT ( LOST IN SPACE )
The Class M-3 Model B-9 General Utility Non - Theorizing Environmental Control Robot , known simply as the Robot , is a fictional character in the television series Lost in Space .
His full designation was only occasionally mentioned on the show .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although a machine endowed with superhuman strength and futuristic weaponry , he often displayed human characteristics , such as laughter , sadness , and mockery , as well as singing and playing the guitar .
With his major role often being to protect the youngest member of the crew , the Robot 's catchphrases were " It does not compute " and " Danger , Will Robinson ! " , accompanied by flailing his arms .
The Robot was performed by Bob May in a prop costume built by Bob Stewart .
The voice was primarily dubbed by Dick Tufeld , who was also the series ' narrator , and Jorge Arvizu for the Spanish dubbing .
The Robot was designed by Robert Kinoshita , who also designed Forbidden Planet 's Robby the Robot .
Robby appears in Lost in Space episode # 20
" War of the Robots " and in episode # 60 " Condemned of Space " .
The Robot did not appear in the unaired pilot episode , but was added to the series once it had been greenlit .
Initially , the bellows - covered legs were articulated , and were moved separately by the actor inside .
However , the metal edges inside the suit cut actor Bob May 's legs , so changes were made .
The legs were bolted together , and the robot was pulled along by a wire instead of walking as it had done before .
A new lower section was constructed with the legs cut off at the knee .
This was filmed either in close - up or behind something to obscure the actor 's feet protruding out the bottom ; this version of the suit was informally referred to by the cast and crew as " the Bermuda shorts . "
FEATURES AND ABILITIES Section::::Features and abilities .
Robot consisted , from top down , of
* A glass bubble sensor unit with moving antennae ; * * A fluted , translucent ring collar ( actually an arrangement of shaped ribs , through which performer Bob May could see ) ; * * A cylindrical , rotating trunk section with extending bellows arms that terminated in red mechanical claws .
The trunk section had controls , indicators , a small sliding translucent door through which data tapes , similar to punched tape , could be accessed ( " The Hungry Sea " ) , a removable power pack and a signature chest light that illuminated in synchrony with the Robot 's speech ( May had a key inside the suit that he would tap in time with his speech to illuminate the light , resulting in some scenes where one of the claws can be seen moving in time with the light ) ; *
* Bellows legs that were understood to move with some agility but which , due to real - world practical limitations , were rarely seen on camera to move separately ; and * * Trapezoidal continuous track units at the bottom of each leg .
These normally paired as a single locomotive device , but they also could function as individual feet .
The leg and tractor sections apparently could be readily detached , allowing the Robot to be positioned in the rear of the Chariot ATV , although the actual disconnect operation was depicted only once .
*
According to the series * The Robot possessed powerful computers that allowed him to make complex calculations and to deduce many facts ; *
*
He had a variety of sensors that detected numerous phenomena and dangers ; *
*
He was programmed with extensive knowledge on many subjects , including how to operate the Jupiter 2 spaceship ; * * His construction allowed him to function in extreme environments and in the vacuum of space ; *
*
He was extremely strong , giving him utility both in performing difficult labor and in fighting when necessary .
Moreover , his claws could fire laser beams and , most frequently , a powerful " electro - force " that was similar to arcing electricity .
*
In one first season episode , Dr. Smith was seen to remove the robot 's programming tapes , which resemble a small reel of magnetic tape , from a hatch below the robot 's chest panel .
AFTER LOST IN SPACE
Section::::After Lost In Space .
Two versions of the robot were used during Lost in Space filming – a " hero robot " costume worn by Bob May , and a static , " stunt robot " prop that was used for distant or hazardous shots .
Both versions fell into disrepair after the series , but these have since been discovered and restored .
The " hero " is privately owned by TV and film producer Kevin Burns , who commissioned a replica in the early 1990s for touring and conventions .
The " stunt robot " is in storage at the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame in Seattle , Washington .
Like Robby the Robot , the B-9 Robot prop costume was re - used on at least one other show .
On the Saturday morning children 's show Mystery Island , it was modified to make the primary character " P.O.P.S. "
There it had different domes , different color scheme , and an added rectangular skirt of gold - colored tubes , covering the rubber bellows legs and base .
Full - size replicas of the robot are available commercially .
Other versions have been built by hobbyists around the world , who have built at least 15 detailed full - size replicas of the Robot .
In the 2018 Netflix series , the Robot is an alien AI which bears only a few resemblances with earlier versions , such as his famous line and loyalty to Will .
REFERENCES