AGE OF CONSENT REFORM IN CANADA Age of consent law in Canada refers to cultural and legal discussions in Canada regarding the age of consent , which was raised from 14 to 16 in May 2008 as part of the Tackling Violent Crime Act .
This applies to all forms of sexual activity .
In June 2006 , the Canadian government proposed a bill to raise the age of consent from 14 to 16 , while creating a close - in - age exemption for sex between 14–15 year olds and partners less than 5 years older , and keeping an existing close - in - age clause for sex between 12–13 year olds and partners less than 2 years older .
The initiative also maintains a temporary exception for already existing marriages of 14 and 15 year olds , but forbids new marriages like these in the future .
PREVIOUS 1890
LAW Section::::Previous 1890 law .
In 1890 , the age of consent was raised from 12 to 14 .
BATTLE
AGAINST INTERNET
PREDATORS Section::::Battle against Internet predators .
Former Toronto police officer Paul Gillespie said the bill would give police " more tools " in the battle against Internet predators .
The intention of the bill is to target " sexual predators " and pimps .
Other groups that supported the increase in the age of consent were the National Council of Women of Canada ( NCWC ) , the Canada Family Action Coalition ( CFAC ) , Canadian Crime Victim Foundation ( CCVF ) , Beyond Borders Inc. and Canadians Addressing Sexual Exploitation ( CASE ) .
CASE OF DALE ERIC BECKHAM Section::::Case of Dale Eric Beckham .
One of the motivators for the reform of these laws in Canada was the case of Dale Eric Beckham .
In March 2005 , Beckham , then 31 years old , travelled from his home in Woodlands , Texas to Ottawa , Ontario to meet with a 14-year - old boy he had met over the internet .
The boy 's parents , after observing him sneaking away in the middle of the night into a taxi , alerted the police who tracked the cab to a downtown hotel .
Police found Beckham and the boy unclothed in a hotel room , where they were engaged in sexual activity ; it was later determined that the two had also engaged in sexual intercourse the previous night .
Police also discovered hundreds of pornographic images of children on a laptop computer that Beckham had brought with him from Texas .
Beckham was arrested and held without bail .
In Beckham 's home state of Texas , the age of consent is 17 and violators can face prison terms of up to 10–20 years .
In Canada , sexual activity with children as young as 14 ( until May 2008 ) was legal as long as it was consensual and the adult is not in a position of authority or dependency .
The boy , who reportedly suffered from social anxiety disorder and had shown signs of being suicidal , insisted during interviews with the police that the sex with Beckham was consensual .
Consequently , the only crime Beckham could be prosecuted for in Canada was a relatively minor offense of possession of child pornography .
In November 2005 , Beckham pleaded guilty and was sentenced to the time already served .
He was then ordered deported back to the United States .
After being notified of his arrest in Canada , Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) agents searched Beckham 's home in Woodlands , Texas where they discovered a massive quantity of child pornography on his computer , with some depicting children less than 12 years old engaged in sexual acts with adults .
After returning to the United States , Beckham was immediately arrested and held without bond .
In July 2007 , Beckham pleaded guilty to a federal charge of transporting child pornography to Canada , although his lawyer argued ( unsuccessfully ) that Beckham 's behaviour was the result of diminished capacity .
In November 2007 , Beckham was sentenced to 17 years in prison , to be followed by lifetime supervision .
This case raised concerns that child molesters , not just in Canada but also from abroad , were taking advantage of Canada 's low age of consent to sexually exploit vulnerable children while escaping criminal prosecution .
CRITICISMS
LGBT RIGHTS ACTIVISTS Section::::Criticisms .
Section::::LGBT rights activists .
These activists also criticized the bill , because it does not address the issue of equality , maintaining the present Canadian age of consent for anal sex outside of marriage at 18 .
Hillary Cook , spokeswoman for gay rights group Egale Canada believes the bill is " an attempt to score partisan points " .
ATTORNEY GENERAL SUIT Section::::Attorney General suit .
In March 2009 a lawsuit was brought against the Attorney General of Canada alleging the Age of Sexual Consent increase
was a direct violation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms within the Constitution of Canada .
ORGANIZATIONS
CANADIAN AIDS SOCIETY Section::::Organizations .
Section::::Canadian AIDS Society .
The Canadian AIDS Society has stated that " increasing the age of consent could result in young people being more secretive about their sexual practices and not seeking out the information they need .
This will place youth at an increased risk of contracting HIV and other sexually transmitted infections . "
CANADIAN CHILDREN 'S
RIGHTS COUNCIL
Section::::Canadian Children 's Rights Council .
They referenced an article in The Globe and Mail which highlighted the opinions of Martha Mackinnon ( Justice for Children and Youth , executive director ) who had expressed concern this would decrease the pursuit of condoms .
CANADIAN FEDERATION FOR SEXUAL HEALTH Section::::Canadian Federation for Sexual Health .
This proposal has received criticism from different organizations and individuals .
Andrea Cohen of the pro - choice Canadian Federation for Sexual Health ( formerly International Planned Parenthood Federation ) said the organization believes the legislation does nothing to keep youth from harm .
She talked on CTV News Channel 's " Mike Duffy
Live " where she stated : " What it will do is infringe upon the rights of youth in terms of their ability to make decisions on their own sexuality " .
Later ( in 2007 )
her organization issued an official position statement .
CHILD WELFARE LEAGUE OF CANADA Section::::Child Welfare League of Canada .
Peter Dudding , Executive Director of the Child Welfare League of Canada , criticized the bill 's effect of removing judicial discretion in cases involving 14- and 15-year - olds : " When we deal with arbitrary cut - offs , we lose the flexibility to apply the law in a much more specific and individualized kind of way . "
REFERENCES
SEE ALSO
* Age of consent * Age of consent reform