TRIPLE CROWN TROPHY
The Triple Crown Trophy is a silver trophy awarded to the winner of the United States Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing .
The Triple Crown trophy has come to represent the pinnacle achievement in horseracing .
Commissioned in 1950 by the Thoroughbred Racing Association , artisans at the world - famous Cartier Jewelry Company were charged with creating not just a trophy , but a true work of art .
The result was a three - sided vase , each face equally representing the three jewels of the crown , intending to capture the spirit of horseracing 's most sought after , and rarest , honor .
The three sides are engraved with specific information from each of the three races ; the Kentucky Derby , the Preakness Stakes and the Belmont Stakes .
Upon completion of the first trophy it was awarded to the 1948 Triple Crown Winner Citation .
Each year thereafter , retroactive trophies were presented to the first eight winners of the Triple Crown in reverse order until all of the previous winners or their heirs were awarded .
Today the Triple Crown Trophy is a permanent trophy awarded to the winner with information pertaining to each race engraved on corresponding sides .
When not on tour during the live running of the royal trio of races , the trophy is on public display at the Kentucky Derby Museum in Louisville , Kentucky .
In addition to the Triple Crown Trophy , winners of the Kentucky Derby are given the Kentucky Derby Trophy , a solid gold trophy worth in excess of $ 90,000 ; winners of the Preakness Stakes are presented the Woodlawn Vase in a national TV ceremony and given a solid silver replica worth in excess of $ 30,000 for permanent possession ; winners of the Belmont Stakes are presented the August Belmont Trophy and given a silver tray for their permanent possession .
Only five colts have been awarded all four trophies in the same year :
Secretariat ( 1973 ) , Seattle Slew ( 1977 ) ,
Affirmed ( 1978 ) , American Pharoah ( 2015 ) , and Justify ( 2018 ) .
TRIPLE CROWN TROPHY WINNERS Section::::Triple Crown Trophy winners .
!
width="65px "
Year Crown won !
Winner 's name !
width="65px "
Year Trophy awarded 2018 2018 REFERENCES