TOSLINK TOSLINK ( from Toshiba Link ) is a standardized optical fiber connector system .
Also known generically as an " optical audio cable " or just " optical cable " , its most common use is in consumer audio equipment ( via a " digital optical " socket ) , where it carries a digital audio stream from components such as CD and DVD players , DAT recorders , computers , and modern video game consoles , to an AV receiver that can decode two channels of uncompressed lossless PCM audio or surround sound such as Dolby Digital or DTS Surround System .
Unlike HDMI , TOSLINK does not have the bandwidth to carry the lossless versions of Dolby TrueHD , DTS - HD Master Audio , or more than two channels of PCM audio .
Although TOSLINK supports several different media formats and physical standards , digital audio connections using the rectangular EIAJ / JEITA RC-5720 ( also CP-1201 and JIS
C5974 - 1993 F05 )
connector are by far the most common .
The optical signal is a red light with a peak wavelength of Depending on the type of modulated signal being carried , other optical wavelengths may be present .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Toshiba originally created TOSLINK to connect their CD players to the receivers they manufactured , for PCM audio streams .
The software layer is based on the " Sony Philips Digital Interconnect Format " ( S / PDIF ) , while the hardware layer utilizes a fiber optic transmission system , rather than the electrical ( copper ) hardware layer of S / PDIF .
TOSLINK was soon adopted by manufacturers of most CD players .
It can often be found on video source ( DVD and Blu - ray players , cable boxes and game consoles ) to connect the digital audio stream to Dolby Digital / DTS decoders .
The name is a registered trademark of Toshiba , created from TOShiba - LINK .
Variations of the name , such as TOSlink , TosLink , and Tos - link , are also seen , while the official generic name for the standard is EIAJ optical .
ADAT Lightpipe or simply ADAT Optical uses an optical transmission system similar to TOSLINK , and is used in the professional music / audio industry .
While the ADAT Lightpipe format uses the same JIS F05 connectors as TOSLINK , the ADAT Lightpipe data format is not compatible with S / PDIF .
PROPERTIES AND ISSUES Section::::Properties and issues .
Due to their high attenuation of light , the effective range of plastic optical cables is limited to .
They can temporarily fail or be permanently damaged if tightly bent .
Although less commonly available and more expensive than plastic optical fiber ( POF ) cables , glass or silica
optical fibers have lower losses and can extend the range of the TOSLINK system .
Optical cables are not susceptible to electrical problems such as ground loops and RF interference .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Several types of fiber can be used for TOSLINK : inexpensive plastic optical fiber , higher - quality multistrand plastic optical fibers , or quartz glass optical fibers , depending on the desired bandwidth and application .
TOSLINK cables are usually limited to in length , with a technical maximum of for reliable transmission without the use of a signal booster or a repeater .
However , it is very common for interfaces on newer consumer electronics ( satellite receivers and PCs with optical outputs ) to easily run over on even low - cost TOSLINK cables .
TOSLINK transmitters operate at a nominal optical wavelength of MINI - TOSLINK Section::::Mini - TOSLINK .
Mini - TOSLINK is a standardized optical fiber connector smaller than the standard square TOSLINK connector commonly used in larger consumer audio equipment .
The plug is almost the same size and shape as the ubiquitous stereo minijack .
Adapters are available to connect a full - size TOSLINK plug to a mini - TOSLINK socket .
Combined jack and mini - TOSLINK sockets exist which can accept a jack or a mini - TOSLINK plug ; mini - TOSLINK plugs are made longer than electrical jack plugs so that the latter are too short to touch and damage the LED of combined connectors .
Many laptop computer and portable digital audio equipment models , such as the Google Chromecast Audio device and Apple AirPort Express and iPod Hi - Fi , use these connectors that allow for the insertion of analog ( electrical ) headphone output or microphone input or mini - TOSLINK digital ( optical ) output .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* TOSLINK Interconnect History & Basics