THE MAGICIANS ( GROSSMAN NOVEL )
The Magicians is a new adult fantasy novel by the American author Lev Grossman , published in 2009 by Viking Press .
It tells the story of Quentin Coldwater , a young man who discovers and attends a secret college of magic in New York .
The novel received critical acclaim , and was followed by The Magician King in 2011 and 2014 's The Magician 's Land .
The novels have been adapted as a television series that currently airs on Syfy .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Quentin Coldwater is a high school student from Brooklyn who , along with best friends James and Julia , attends an advanced school .
He loves a series of books called " Fillory and Further , " which involve the children of the Chatwin family discovering a Narnia - esque land called Fillory .
On the day of his Princeton interview , he instead is examined for entrance to Brakebills College for Magical Pedagogy , the only school for magic in North America .
He , along with 19 others , are accepted to the university and he moves there at once .
Julia fails her entrance test to Brakebills and is not admitted .
As per protocol , Julia 's memory is wiped to prevent her from remembering magic 's existence or the school itself .
Despite this , a portion of Julia 's memory remains intact and she is unable to return to her normal life – though Quentin will not discover this until years later .
After beginning his studies at Brakebills , it soon becomes apparent to Quentin that magic is incredibly difficult and tedious to learn , as each spell must be varied in dozens of ways , depending on factors such as the phase of the moon and the closest body of water .
The curriculum involves learning many old and lost languages , and seemingly endless hand positions .
Despite this , Quentin and his classmates Penny and Alice are able to move up a year by compressing their first year of studies .
One day during class , an otherworldly horror referred to as " the Beast " enters Brakebills and eats a student before the rest of the faculty are able to drive it away .
Third year students are assigned a Discipline .
Though Quentin can not be assigned one , he and Alice are sorted into the Physical magic group .
The Physical Kids also include Eliot , Josh , and Janet , who are a year above them .
During the spring semester of their fourth year , they are all sent to Brakebills South in Antarctica , where Quentin and Alice are turned into foxes , and fall in love .
Upon graduation , Quentin and the other Physical Kids spend their days and nights in hedonistic pursuits .
While still looking for a purpose , his erstwhile classmate Penny arrives with news about travel between worlds and Quentin discovers that Fillory is real .
The group finds magical wonders in Fillory , but they eventually discover The Beast , who is revealed to be Martin Chatwin , the lost eldest child in " The Wandering Dunes " , who has sacrificed his humanity in order to stay in the magical world forever .
After a brutal fight , Alice sacrifices herself to kill Martin , Penny loses both of his hands and chooses to remain in an empty city between the worlds , and a gravely injured Quentin is left in the care of a group of centaurs while the others fear that he will never awaken from his coma .
Upon awakening many months later , Quentin becomes depressed and disillusioned , especially when Jane , the youngest Chatwin , reveals herself to have been pulling the strings throughout her siblings ' and Quentin 's stories .
By using a magical time - traveling device , she finally succeeded in killing Martin by leading Quentin and his friends to the confrontation .
Back on Earth , Quentin takes a high - paying non - magical job where he spends his time playing video games .
One day , Eliot and Janet show up with Julia , who has learned magic , to return as Kings and Queens to Fillory .
MAJOR CHARACTERS * Quentin Makepeace Coldwater –
A high school student strongly attached to a series of children 's books about a magical land called Fillory , Quentin discovers and attends a college of magic before discovering Fillory is real and traveling there .
* Alice Quinn – A talented and natural magician whom Quentin meets while attending Brakebills .
She is initially extremely reserved , but opens up when she is placed with Quentin in the Physical Magic group .
She and Quentin eventually develop a relationship .
* Eliot Waugh – A talented magician , and close friend of Quentin 's .
He is two years older than Quentin and Alice , and in the same year as Josh and Janet .
* Josh Hoberman – The overweight jokester - slacker of the Physical Magic group , Josh offers much of the novel 's comic relief .
* Janet – Another student in the Physical Magic group .
Janet is portrayed as both deeply insecure and surprisingly strong .
She is called " Janet Way " by another student in the first book , but " Janet Pluchinsky " by Dean Fogg in the second .
* Penny ( William ) – A student who enters Brakebills with Alice and Quentin .
He proves the existence of Fillory and finds passage to it .
* Julia Wicker – A brilliant and driven self - taught magician .
After failing the entrance exam at Brakebills , she learns magic through the gritty underground scene .
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
Grossman has publicly discussed his literary influences and has referred to T.H. White as his " literary mentor " , particularly to the influence that The Once and Future King has had on his work .
The novel and its sequels are also greatly indebted to C.S. Lewis ' The Chronicles of Narnia .
Other literary influences include Harry Potter , A Wizard of Earthsea , Jonathan Strange and Mr. Norrell ,
Watchmen , Larry Niven 's Warlock stories , and Fritz Leiber 's Fafhrd and Gray Mouser stories , while the film Highlander helped influence the feel of the novel 's world .
He had originally wanted to provide a direct connection to Lewis ' novels and include The Wood between the Worlds , however his publishing house 's lawyers objected .
He consequently replaced its appearance with the similarly themed Neitherlands instead .
Grossman has stated that the plot itself began as a dream about a beast invading a magical classroom .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The review by The A.V. Club gave the novel an " A " , calling it " the best urban fantasy in years , a sad dream of what it means to want something badly and never fully reach it . "
The New York Times review said the book " could crudely be labeled a Harry Potter for adults " , injecting " mature themes " into fantasy literature .
The Magicians won the 2010 Alex Award , given to ten adult books that are appealing to young adults , and its author won the 2011 John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer .
TV ADAPTATION Section::::TV adaptation .
In 2011 , Fox optioned but eventually declined to order a television adaptation of The Magicians .
In July 2014 , Syfy greenlit the production of a pilot episode , and ordered a 12-episode first season which aired in January 2016 .
The series was renewed for a second season consisting of 13 episodes , which aired in 2017 .
The Syfy series is written by John McNamara and Sera Gamble , and produced by Michael London and Janice Williams .
The pilot episode was directed by Mike Cahill , and the cast includes Jason Ralph as Quentin , Olivia Taylor Dudley as Alice , Hale Appleman as Eliot , Summer Bishil as Margo Hanson ( renamed from Janet in the novel ) , Arjun Gupta as Penny , Stella Maeve as Julia , and Rick Worthy as Henry Fogg .
The series ages the characters up to graduate school students and compresses the Brakebills degree to three years .
Most of the events detailed in the novel , the Antarctic trip for instance , appear to happen in Quentin 's first year at Brakebills with years in the novel being roughly condensed into semesters in the TV show .
Jane Chatwin is involved earlier and more heavily , and Quentin is more formally diagnosed with depression .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Grossman 's A Brief Guide to the Hidden Allusions in The Magicians