T. REX ( BAND ) T. Rex were an English rock band , formed in 1967 by singer - songwriter and guitarist Marc Bolan .
The band was initially called Tyrannosaurus Rex , and released four psychedelic folk albums under this name .
In 1969 , Bolan began to shift from the band 's early acoustic sound to an electric one .
The following year , he shortened their name to T. Rex .
The 1970 release of the single " Ride a White Swan " marked the culmination of this development , and the group soon became a commercial success as part of the emerging glam rock scene .
From 1970 until 1973 , T. Rex encountered a popularity in the UK comparable to that of the Beatles , with a run of eleven singles in the UK top ten .
One of the most prominent acts in British popular culture , they scored four UK number one hits , " Hot Love " , " Get It On " , " Telegram Sam " and " Metal Guru " .
The band 's 1971 album Electric Warrior received critical acclaim as a pioneering glam rock album .
It reached number 1 in the UK .
The 1972 follow - up , The Slider , entered the top 20 in the US .
Following the release of " 20th Century Boy " in 1973 , which reached number three in the UK , T. Rex began to experience less commercial success but continued recording one album per year .
In 1977 , Bolan died in a car crash several months after the release of the band 's final studio album Dandy in the Underworld .
Since then , T. Rex have continued to exert a vast influence on a variety of subsequent artists .
HISTORY FORMATION AND PSYCHEDELIC
FOLK Section::::History .
Section::::Formation and psychedelic folk .
Marc Bolan founded Tyrannosaurus Rex in July 1967 , following a handful of failed solo singles and a brief career as lead guitarist in psych - rock band John 's Children .
After a solitary disastrous performance as a four - piece electric rock band on 22 July at the Electric Garden in London 's Covent Garden alongside drummer Steve Porter plus two older musicians : guitarist Ben Cartland and an unknown bassist , the group immediately broke up .
Subsequently , Bolan retained the services of Porter , who switched to percussion under the name Steve Peregrin Took , and the two began performing acoustic material as a duo with a repertoire of folk - influenced Bolan - penned songs with an eastern flavour , an obvious homage to Indian musician Ravi Shankar .
The combination of Bolan 's acoustic guitar and distinctive vocal style with Took 's bongos and assorted percussion — which often included children 's instruments such as the Pixiphone — earned them a devoted following in the thriving hippy underground scene .
BBC Radio One Disc jockey John Peel championed the band early in their recording career .
Peel later appeared on record with them , reading stories written by Bolan .
Another key collaborator was producer Tony Visconti , who went on to produce the band 's albums well into their second , glam rock phase .
During 1968–1969 , Tyrannosaurus Rex had become a modest success on radio and on record , and they released three albums , the third of which , Unicorn , came within striking distance of the UK Top 10 Albums .
While Bolan 's early solo material was rock and roll - influenced pop music , by now he was writing dramatic and baroque songs with lush melodies and surreal lyrics filled with Greek and Persian mythology as well as poetic creations of his own .
The band became regulars on Peel Sessions on BBC radio , and toured Britain 's student union halls .
By 1969 there was a rift developing between the two - halves of Tyrannosaurus Rex .
Bolan and his girlfriend
June Child were living a quiet life , Bolan working on his book of poetry entitled The Warlock of Love and concentrating on his songs and performance skills .
Took , however , had fully embraced the anti - commercial , drug - taking ethos of the UK Underground scene centred around Ladbroke Grove .
Took was also attracted to anarchic elements such as Mick Farren / Deviants and members of the Pink Fairies Rock ' n ' Roll and Drinking Club .
Took also began writing his own songs , and wanted the duo to perform them , but Bolan strongly disapproved of his bandmate 's efforts , rejecting them for the duo 's putative fourth album , in production in Spring / Summer 1969 .
In response to Bolan 's rebuff , Took contributed two songs as well as vocals and percussion to Twink 's Think Pink album .
Bolan 's relationship with Took ended after this , although they were contractually obliged to go through with a US tour which was doomed before it began .
Poorly promoted and planned , the acoustic duo were overshadowed by the loud electric acts they were billed with .
To counter this , Took drew from the shock rock style of Iggy Pop ; Took explained , " I took my shirt off in the Sunset Strip where we were playing and whipped myself till everybody shut up .
With a belt , y'know , a bit of blood and the whole of Los Angeles shuts up . '
What 's going on , man , there 's some nutter attacking himself on stage . '
I mean , Iggy Stooge had the same basic approach . "
As soon as he returned to the UK , Bolan replaced Took with percussionist Mickey Finn .
and they completed the fourth album , released in early 1970 as A Beard of Stars , the final album under the Tyrannosaurus Rex moniker .
Meanwhile , after helping found the Pink Fairies and appearing on Mick Farren 's solo album Mona – The Carnivorous Circus , Took would spend the 1970s working mostly on his own material , either solo or fronting bands such as Shagrat ( 1970–1971 ) and Steve Took 's Horns ( 1977–1978 ) .
Unlike Took , Finn had no songwriting aspirations ; Tony Visconti commented he was not as talented as Took : " Mickey was n't as inventive as Steve .
Mickey 's backing vocals were n't strong , so Marc would double - track them with his own voice for reinforcement " .
GLAM ROCK AND COMMERCIAL
SUCCESS
Section::::Glam rock and commercial success .
As well as progressively shorter titles , Tyrannosaurus Rex 's albums began to show higher production values , more accessible songwriting from Bolan , and experimentation with electric guitars and a true rock sound .
A breakthrough had been " King of the Rumbling Spires " ( recorded with Took and released in summer 1969 shortly prior to his departure ) , which used a full rock band setup , and the electric sound had been further explored on A Beard of Stars .
The group 's next album , T. Rex , continued the process of simplification by shortening the name , and completed the move to electric guitars .
Visconti supposedly got fed up with writing the name out in full on studio charts and tapes and began to abbreviate it ; when Bolan first noticed he was angry but later claimed the idea was his .
The new sound was more pop - oriented , and the first single , " Ride a White Swan " released in October 1970 made the Top 10 in the UK by late November and reached number two in January 1971 .
In early 1971 , T. Rex reached the top 20 of the UK Albums Chart .
" Ride a White Swan " was quickly followed by a second single , " Hot Love " , which reached the top spot on the UK charts , and remained there for six weeks .
A full band , which featured bassist Steve Currie and drummer Bill Legend , was formed to tour to growing audiences , as teenagers began replacing the hippies of old .
After Chelita Secunda added two spots of glitter under Bolan 's eyes before an appearance on Top of the Pops , the ensuing performance would often be viewed as the birth of glam rock .
After Bolan 's display , glam rock would gain popularity in the UK and Europe during 1971–72 .
T. Rex 's move to electric guitars coincided with Bolan 's more overtly sexual lyrical style and image .
The group 's new image and sound outraged some of Bolan 's older hippie fans , who branded him a " sell - out " .
Some of the lyrical content of Tyrannosaurus Rex remained , but the poetic , surrealistic lyrics were now interspersed with sensuous grooves , orgiastic moans and innuendo .
In September 1971 , T. Rex released their second album Electric Warrior , which featured Currie and Legend .
Often considered to be their best album , the chart - topping Electric Warrior brought much commercial success to the group ; publicist BP Fallon coined the term " T. Rextasy " as a parallel to Beatlemania to describe the group 's popularity .
The album included T. Rex 's best - known song , " Get It On " , which hit number one in the UK .
In January 1972 it became a top ten hit in the US , where the song was retitled " Bang a Gong ( Get It On ) " to distinguish it from a 1971 song by the group Chase .
Along with several Sweet hits , " Get It On " was among the few British glam rock songs that were successful in the US .
However , the album still recalled Bolan 's acoustic roots with ballads such as " Cosmic Dancer " and the stark " Girl " .
Soon after , Bolan left Fly Records ; after his contract had lapsed , the label released the album track " Jeepster " as a single without his permission .
Bolan went to EMI , where he was given his own record label in the UK — T. Rex Records , the " T. Rex Wax Co. " .
On 18 March 1972 , T. Rex played two shows at the Empire Pool , Wembley , which were filmed by Ringo Starr and his crew for Apple Films .
A large part of the second show was included on Bolan 's own rock film Born to Boogie , while bits and pieces of the first show can be seen throughout the film 's end - credits .
Along with T. Rex and Starr , Born to Boogie also features Elton John , who jammed with the friends to create rocking studio versions of " Children of the Revolution " and " Tutti Frutti " ; Elton John had appeared on TV with Bolan before , miming the piano part of " Get it On " on the 1971 Christmas edition of Top of the Pops .
T. Rex 's third album
The Slider was released in July 1972 .
The band 's most successful album in the US , The Slider was not as successful as its predecessor in the UK , where it peaked at number four .
During spring / summer 1972 , Bolan 's old label Fly released the chart - topping compilation album Bolan Boogie , a collection of singles , B - sides and LP tracks , which affected The Sliders sales .
Two singles from The Slider , " Telegram Sam " and " Metal Guru " , became number one hits in the UK .
Born to Boogie premiered at the Oscar One cinema in London , in December 1972 .
The film received negative reviews from critics , while it was loved by fans .
TRANSITION , DECLINE AND RESURGENCE Section::::Transition , decline and resurgence .
Tanx would mark the end of the classic T. Rex line - up .
An eclectic album containing several melancholy ballads and rich production , Tanx showcased the T. Rex sound bolstered by extra instrumental embellishments such as Mellotron and saxophone . "
The Street and Babe Shadow " was funkier while the last song " Left Hand Luke and the Beggar Boys " was seen by critics as a nod to gospel with several female backing singers .
Released two months later in March 1973 , " 20th Century Boy " was another important success , peaking at number 3 in the UK Singles chart but was not included in the album .
It marked the end of the golden era in which T. Rex scored 11 singles in a row in the UK top ten .
During the recording T. Rex members began to quit , starting with Bill Legend in November .
Zinc Alloy and the Hidden Riders of Tomorrow was released on 1 February 1974 , and reached number 12 in the UK .
The album harkened back to the Tyrannosaurus Rex days with long song - titles and lyrical complexity , but was not a critical success .
T. Rex by now had an extended line - up which included second guitarist Jack Green and BJ Cole on pedal steel .
Soon after the album 's release , Bolan split with producer Tony Visconti , then in December 1974 , Mickey Finn also left the band .
A single , " Zip Gun Boogie " , appeared in late 1974 credited as a Marc Bolan solo effort ( though still on the T. Rex label ) .
It flopped , however , only reaching UK No . 41 , and the T. Rex band identity was quickly re - established .
The T. Rex album Bolan 's Zip Gun ( 1975 ) was self - produced by Bolan who , in addition to writing the songs , gave his music a harder , more futuristic sheen .
The final song recorded with Visconti , " Till Dawn " , was re - recorded for Bolan 's Zip Gun with Bolan at the controls .
Bolan 's own productions were not well received in the music press .
An amalgam of Zinc Alloy and Zip Gun was released in the US as Light of Love .
Rolling Stone magazine gave it one star out of five , while the British press slammed T. Rex for copying Bowie 's The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars , even though Marc had spoken of releasing work under the pseudonym " Zinc Alloy " during the mid-1960s .
Always a fantasist with an alleged Napoleon complex , during this time Bolan became increasingly isolated , while high tax rates in the UK drove him into exile in Monte Carlo and the US .
No longer a vegetarian , Bolan put on weight due to consumption of hamburgers and alcohol , and was ridiculed in the music press .
T. Rex 's penultimate album , Futuristic Dragon ( 1976 ) , featured a schizophrenic production style that veered from Wall of Sound - style songs to nostalgic nods to the old T. Rex boogie machine .
It only managed to reach number 50 , but the album was better received by the critics and featured the singles " New York City " ( number 15 in the UK ) and " Dreamy Lady " ( number 30 ) .
To promote the album , T. Rex toured the UK , and performed on television shows such as Top of the Pops , Supersonic and Get It Together .
In the summer of 1976 , T. Rex released two more singles , " I Love to Boogie " ( which charted at number 13 ) and " Laser Love " , which made number 42 .
In early 1977 Dandy in the Underworld was released to critical acclaim .
Bolan had slimmed down and regained his elfin looks , and the songs too had a stripped - down , streamlined sound .
A spring UK tour with punk band
The Damned on support garnered positive reviews .
As Bolan was enjoying a new surge in popularity , he talked about performing again with Finn and Took , as well as reuniting with producer Tony Visconti .
BOLAN 'S DEATH AND DISBANDMENT Section::::Bolan 's death and disbandment .
Marc Bolan and his girlfriend Gloria Jones spent the evening of 15 September 1977 drinking at the Speakeasy and then dining at Morton 's club on Berkeley Square , in Mayfair , Central London .
While driving home early in the morning of 16 September , Jones crashed Bolan 's purple Mini 1275GT into a tree ( now the site of Bolan 's Rock Shrine ) , after failing to negotiate a small humpback bridge near Gipsy Lane on Queens Ride , Barnes , southwest London , a few miles from his home at 142 Upper Richmond Road West in East Sheen .
While Jones was severely injured , Bolan was killed in the crash , two weeks before his 30th birthday .
Bolan 's death ended the band .
Steve Peregrin Took died from asphyxiation from a cocktail cherry after his throat was numbed from his use of morphine and magic mushrooms in 1980 , Steve Currie also died in a car crash , in 1981 ; Mickey Finn succumbed to illness in 2003 .
Peter ' Dino ' Dines died of a heart attack in 2004 .
INFLUENCE AND LEGACY Section::::Influence and legacy .
T. Rex vastly influenced several genres over several decades including glam rock , the punk movement , post - punk , indie pop , britpop and alternative rock .
They were cited by acts such as New York Dolls , Kate Bush , Siouxsie and the Banshees , Joy Division , the Smiths , the Pixies and Tricky .
Sylvain Sylvain of the New York Dolls said that when forming his band with Billy Murcia and Johnny Thunders : " [ they]'d
all sit on the bed with these cheap guitars and do Marc Bolan songs , as well as some blues and instrumentals " .
Sparks were inspired at their beginnings by Tyrannosaurus Rex , pre - T. Rex .
Joey Ramone of the Ramones said about Bolan : " I get into people who are unique and innovative and have colour .
That 's why I love Marc Bolan .
There was something so mystical about him , his singing voice , his manner .
His songs really move ya , they 're so moving and dark . "
Siouxsie and the Banshees released a cover version of " 20th Century Boy " early in their career in 1979 .
Joy Division 's Bernard Sumner was marked by the sound of the guitar of early T. Rex ; his musical journey began at a poppy level with " Ride a White Swan " .
The Slits ' guitarist Viv Albertine was fascinated by Bolan 's guitar playing :
" It was [ ... ]
the first time I ever listened to a guitar part .
Because back then girls did n't really listen to guitar parts , it was a guy 's thing .
And guitars were really macho things then and I could n't bear
say ,
Hendrix 's guitar playing , it was too in your face and too threateningly sexual , whereas Marc Bolan 's guitar playing was kind of cartoony .
And I could sing the parts .
They were n't virtuoso , they were funny , they were humourous [ sic ] guitar parts . "
Smiths ' composer and guitarist
Johnny Marr stated : " T. Rex was pure pop " .
" The influence of T. Rex is very profound on certain songs of the Smiths like " Panic " and " Shoplifters of the World Unite " .
Lead singer Morrissey also admired Bolan .
While writing " Panic " he was inspired by " Metal Guru " and wanted to sing in the same style .
He did n't stop singing it in an attempt to modify the words of " Panic " to fit the exact rhythm of " Metal Guru " .
Marr later stated : " He also exhorted me to use the same guitar break so that the two songs are the same ! "
Marr rated Bolan in his ten favourite guitarists .
Prefab Sprout 's Paddy McAloon cited " Ride a White Swan " as " the song that vindicated my love of pop " .
R.E.M. covered live " 20th Century Boy " early in their career in 1984 .
The Pixies 's lead guitarist Joey Santiago cited Electric Warrior in his 13 defining records , as did the Jam 's Paul Weller .
Santiago said : " Bolan took the blues and made it a lot more palatable " .
Kate Bush listened to Bolan during her teenage years and then mentioned his name in the lyrics of the song "
Blow Away ( for Bill ) " .
Tricky cited Bolan as " totally unique and ahead of his time " .
When talking about his favourite albums , PJ Harvey 's collaborator John Parish said that T. Rex " is the place to start " , adding that " this band and that album [ Electric Warrior ] " was what got me into music in the first place " .
When he saw T. Rex on Top of the Pops playing " Jeepster " , he felt : " that 's my kind of music [ ... ]
The thing I related to as 12 year old I still go back to and uses as one of my main touchstones when I 'm making records " .
Parish explained , " I 've been listening to T - Rex pretty consistently since 1971 " .
Oasis " borrowed " the distinct guitar riff from " Get It On " on their single " Cigarettes & Alcohol " .
Oasis 's guitarist , Noel Gallagher , has cited T. Rex as a strong influence .
The early acoustic material was influential in helping to bring about progressive rock and 21st century folk music - influenced singers as Devendra Banhart .
T. Rex are referenced in several popular songs , including David Bowie 's " All the Young Dudes " ( which he wrote for Mott the Hoople in 1972 ) , the Ramones ' " Do You Remember Rock ' n ' Roll Radio ?
" , the Who 's " You Better You Bet " ,
B A Robertson 's " Kool in the Kaftan " , R.E.M. 's " The Wake - Up Bomb " , and My Chemical Romance 's " Vampire Money " .
The music of T. Rex features in the soundtracks of various movies , including Velvet Goldmine , Death Proof , Billy Elliot , the Bank Job , Dallas Buyers Club , and Baby Driver .
The sleeve of The Slider album can be seen in the Lindsay Anderson movie O Lucky Man ! , and in Tim Burton 's Dark Shadows .
In Miha Mazzini 's novel King of the Rattling Spirits , the narrator starts remembering his childhood when he sees T. Rex record " King of Rumbling Spires " in the record store and realizes he has mistakenly remembered the title as " King of the Rattling Spirits " .
DISCOGRAPHY Section::::Discography .
As Tyrannosaurus Rex *
My People Were Fair and Had Sky in Their Hair ...
But Now They 're Content to Wear Stars on Their Brows ( 1968 ) * ( 1968 )
* Unicorn ( 1969 ) * A Beard of Stars ( 1970 )
As T. Rex * T. Rex ( 1970 ) * Electric Warrior ( 1971 )
* The Slider ( 1972 )
* Tanx ( 1973 )
* Zinc Alloy and the Hidden Riders of Tomorrow ( 1974 )
* Bolan 's Zip Gun ( 1975 )
* Futuristic Dragon ( 1976 )
* Dandy in the Underworld ( 1977 ) MEMBERS
* Marc Bolan – lead / rhythm guitar , lead vocals , keyboards * Ben Cartland - guitar * unknown - bass * Steve Peregrin Took – percussion , backing vocals , drums , bass * Mickey Finn – percussion , backing vocals also drums and bass
* Steve Currie – bass * Bill Legend – drums * Gloria Jones – keyboards , vocals
* Jack Green – lead guitar * Dino Dines – keyboards
* Paul Fenton - drums also percussion * Davey Lutton –
drums also percussion * Miller Anderson – lead guitar * Herbie Flowers – bass * Tony Newman – drums , percussion TIMELINE
REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Bolan , Marc .
The Warlock of Love .
Lupus books .
1969
* McLenehan , Cliff .
Marc Bolan : 1947–1977
A Chronology .
Helter Skelter Publishing .
2002 .
* Paytress , Mark .
Bolan :
The Rise and Fall of a 20th Century Superstar .
Omnibus Press .
2003 .
* Paytress , Mark . "
Marc Bolan : T. Rextasy " .
Mojo .
May 2005 .
* Ewens , Carl .
Born to Boogie :
The Songwriting of Marc Bolan .
Aureus Publishing .
2007 .
* Roland , Paul .
Cosmic Dancer :
The Life & Music Of Marc Bolan .
Tomahawk Press .
2012 .
* Jones , Lesley - Ann .
Ride a White Swan :
The Lives and Death of Marc Bolan .
Hodder 2013 EXTERNAL LINKS
* TAG 's Marc Bolan & T - Rex web site – Legal Guardians of Marc Bolan 's Rock Shrine * The Marc Bolan Fan Group