AMERICAN BULLY
The American Bully is a recently formed companion dog breed , originally recognized by the American Bully Kennel Club ( ABKC ) .
It has been recognized by the United Kennel Club ( UKC ) since July 15 , 2013 .
It is a small to large breed which has been divided into four categories ; Pocket , Standard , Classic and XL .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Founded in the United States between 1980 and 1990 , the American Bully was produced using a foundation of American Staffordshire Terriers and American Pit Bull Terriers bred to several bulldog - type breeds .
It was created with the purpose of being a family companion dog .
While some of the founding kennels , namely Razor 's Edge owner Dave Wilson , affirmed that they used only the two first aforementioned breeds to produce the desired dogs , it is consensus that at least five other breeds were used to attain the more " bully " physical traits desired .
These are assumed to be the American Bulldog , English Bulldog , Olde English Bulldogge , Staffordshire Bull Terrier and French Bulldog .
According to ABKC the initial desire for this breed was to produce a dog with a lower drive and more of the " bully " traits than the American Staffordshire Terrier .
Mass and heavy bone was prioritized to ensure such a look , and due to this many of the dogs shown today display the wide front for which they were originally bred .
The breed was first recognized by its breed club , the American Bully Kennel Club , in 2004 .
This registry first acted as a means to document pedigrees and show the breed against its written standard .
During the early years of the breed , a wide spectrum of dogs were shown , many displaying physical traits of the other introduced breeds ; these were penalized heavily by the registry , forcing owners and breeders of such dogs to create new means to show their style of dog without being rejected .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Within the ABKC , the four varieties are separated by height without specification of weight .
All these varieties are expected to follow the same standard with minor alterations .
All dogs are classified and shown as Standard until they reach a year of age , at which point they are separated into the varieties and shown against their own type .
CLASSIC Section::::Classic .
The original American Bully style is the Classic ; these dogs do not display the exaggerated features often found in the other varieties , and arguably display clearer ABKC American Pit Bull Terrier / American Staffordshire Terrier lineage .
The Classic is a lighter frame dog than the Standard but falls within the same height range ; male dogs must be while females must be .
Although lighter framed , classic dogs should not be confused with dogs that lack breed .
type.http://www.theabkcdogs.org/ STANDARD Section::::Standard .
The American Bully should give the impression of great strength for its size .
It is a compact and medium / large size dog with a muscular body and blocky head .
The American Bully should have the appearance of heavy bone structure with a bulky build and look .
The American Bully is a companion breed exhibiting confidence , a zest for life , along with an exuberant willingness to please and bond with their family , thus making the American Bully an excellent family companion .
Despite the American Bully 's fierce and powerful appearance their demeanor is gentle .
They are great with kids , and extremely friendly with strangers , other dogs , and other animals .
Human or dog aggression , extreme shyness , or viciousness is very uncharacteristic of the American Bully and is highly undesirable .
POCKET
Section::::Pocket .
POCKET BULLY
This is an amendment to the basic standard which a Pocket Bully is determined by its adult height .
Males under 17 inches ( 43 cm ) and no less than 14 inches ( 36 cm ) at the withers .
Females under 16 inches ( 40 cm ) and no less than 13 inches ( 33 cm ) at the withers .
Important to note that Pocket Bully variety is simply shorter than the Standard American Bully .
Pocket Bully dogs share the same build , body type , and breed type as the Standard American Bully , and are not to be penalized for exhibiting heavily muscled , massive , bulky body type .
XL Section::::XL .
This is an amendment to the basic standard which a XL Bully is determined by its adult height .
Males over 20 inches ( 51 cm ) - 23 inches ( 57 cm ) at the withers .
Females over 19 inches ( 48 cm ) – 22 inches ( 54 cm ) at the withers .
Important to note that the XL Bully variety is simply taller than the Standard American Bully .
XL Bully dogs share the same build , body type , and breed type as the Standard American Bully , and are expected to carry a heavily muscled , massive , bulky body type .
UNOFFICIAL TYPES Section::::Unofficial types .
Outside of the breed standard dogs shorter or taller than named , and , more exaggerated dogs have been bred under the American Bully name .
Smaller dogs are sometimes called " Micro " and larger ones are called " XXL " , but neither are recognized by the kennel clubs as legitimate varieties .
Previously a fifth category was accepted , Extreme , however as the breed is intended to be an exaggerated breed the ABKC removed the category for show purposes .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
The American Bully is a highly adaptable breed , often acting as a laid back companion dog in the home while showing a zest for life and energy while outside .
Many dogs , despite acting as lap dogs in the home , do well in sports such as weight pull and flirt pole .
Despite excelling in such sports and public misconception , dog and human aggression is discouraged in the breed .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Health problems vary within the breed , and span the entire spectrum ; with some varieties being plagued by problems , and others being well documented for health and quality .
Testing is not as common place in the breed as in older breeds ; though hip and elbow scoring are the most frequently conducted .
Cherry eye , ectropion and entropion are often seen affecting the eyes ; while Brachycephalic Respiratory Syndrome can be seen in the shorter muzzled dogs .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* American Bully Kennel Club * United Kennel Club - American Bully Standard REFERENCES