HOBBIT DAY
Hobbit Day is a name used for September 22 in reference to its being the birthday of the hobbits Bilbo and Frodo Baggins , two fictional characters in J. R. R. Tolkien 's popular set of books The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings .
Bilbo was born in the year of 2890 and Frodo in the year of 2968 in the Third Age ( 1290 and 1368 respectively in Shire - Reckoning . )
Tolkien Week is the week containing Hobbit Day .
OBSERVANCE Section::::Observance .
The American Tolkien Society first proclaimed Hobbit Day and Tolkien Week in 1978 , and defines them as this :
" Tolkien Week is observed as the calendar week containing September 22 , which is always observed as Hobbit Day " , but acknowledges that Hobbit Day pre - dates their designation .
Due to the discrepancies between the Shire calendar and the Gregorian calendar there is some debate about when to celebrate Hobbit Day , since the actual birthday would be between September 12 and 14 the Gregorian calendar , as explained in the appendices of The Lord of the Rings .
CELEBRATION Section::::Celebration .
The Fellowship of the Ring opened with a celebration of Bilbo 's birthday .
It was a large party with food , fireworks , dancing and much merriment .
Some Tolkien fans celebrate by having parties and feasts emulating the hobbit 's parties .
Other fans celebrate by simply going barefooted in honor of the hobbits , who do n't wear shoes .
Some schools and libraries use this as an opportunity to pique interest in Tolkien 's work by putting up displays and hosting events .
According to The Lord of the Rings appendices , " There is no record of the Shire - folk commemorating either March 25 or September 22 ; but in the Westfarthing , especially in the country round Hobbiton Hill , there grew a custom of making holiday and dancing in the Party Field , when weather permitted , on April 6 .
"
In Gondor , however , " in honour of Frodo Yavannie 30 , which corresponded to the former September 22 , his birthday , was made a festival , and the leap - year was provided for by doubling this feast , called Cormare or Ringday . "
RELATED OBSERVANCE Section::::Related observance .
Another related day celebrated by fans is March 25 .
This is celebrated as the Fall of Sauron .
As of 2003 that day is known as Tolkien Reading Day , an event to encourage the use of Tolkien 's works in education and library reading groups .
SEE ALSO
* Tolkien fandom
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Calendars of Imladris , Gondor and the Shire ... Essay about how Tolkien 's calendars correspond to the Gregorian calendar .