ROSS - ON - WYE RAILWAY STATION
Ross - on - Wye railway station is a former junction railway station on the Hereford , Ross and Gloucester Railway constructed just to the north of the Herefordshire town of Ross - on - Wye .
It was the terminus of the Ross and Monmouth Railway which joined the Hereford , Ross and Gloucester Railway just south of the station .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The station was opened on 1 June 1855 by the Hereford , Ross and Gloucester Railway four years after line had received parliamentary consent to be constructed .
On 29 July 1862 the line was amalgamated with the Great Western Railway and in 1869 the line was converted from broad gauge to standard gauge in a five - day period .
In 1873 the Ross and Monmouth Railway to Monmouth via Lydbrook was opened and it terminated at the station .
The station then passed on to the Western Region of British Railways on nationalisation in 1948 .
A line from Ross - on - Wye to Tewkesbury was authorised by parliament in 1856 but was never built .
The lines to Ross closed in stages .
On the Ross and Monmouth Railway passenger services were withdrawn and the section from Lydbrook Junction to Monmouth Troy was closed on 5 January 1959 .
The remaining section remained open until 1 November 1965 for freight traffic only .
The Hereford , Ross and Gloucester Railway closed to passengers on 2 November 1964 and the line south to the junction at Grange Court closed on 1 November 1965 .
The line going north to Rotherwas Junction and Hereford Station closed when passenger service were withdrawn in 1964 .
The brick built station building has been demolished and the site redeveloped into an industrial estate .
The brick goods and engine sheds still stand .
The Severn Valley Railway station at Kidderminster Town is based on the design for Ross - on - Wye even down to the decorative cast roof crestings ; the patterns for which were derived from measurement of segments of the original ones .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Station on 1952 OS Map * Photographs of the station site today * Local history site about the railway in Ross