TOAD ( NINTENDO )
While Toad is the name of an individual , it also refers to an entire species ( much like Yoshi , Birdo and Kirby from the Kirby series ) .
However , in Japan , the species name is sometimes called , literally " Mushroom People " ( which is an alternate name used in earlier localizations , along with " Mushroom Retainers " ) .
In other words , Toad ( Kinopio ) is a member of the Toads ( Kinokos / Mushroom People ) .
In Mario franchise , there are also some other individual Toad characters ( e.g. , Toadette , Toadsworth and Toadbert ) .
The most prominent trait of a Toad is its large head that resembles a mushroom in shape and color - historically speculated as them wearing a mushroom hat , but eventually ruled out by Japanese video game designer Yoshiaki Koizumi .
Another common point of most Toads is their traditional vest .
The Toads usually play assisting roles in the Mario franchise and its action games , such as Toadsworth introduced in Super Mario Sunshine and the Toad Brigade association in Super Mario Galaxy .
Despite this , Toads also play the role as heroes in some games .
Such a case included the 2 Toads ( yellow and blue ) who were featured as playable characters along with Mario and Luigi in New Super Mario Bros. Wii .
The 2 Toads ( yellow and blue ) return as playable characters later on in
New Super Mario Bros. U as well as New Super Luigi U. Toad himself ( in a blue palette in reference to his original sprite from Super Mario Bros. 2 ) returns as one of the playable characters in Super Mario 3D World .
The Wii U title Captain Toad :
Treasure Tracker cast Captain Toad into the spotlight ; thus , marking it as the first game in 20 years since Wario 's Woods to have a Toad as the main star as well as the first title to have Toad as the titular character .
CONCEPT AND CREATION Section::::Concept and creation .
Toad and the mushroom people were first seen in the game Super Mario Bros. where the species was revealed to comprise the majority of the population of the Mushroom Kingdom .
Toad 's design was made directly from the power up the Super Mushroom , as well as the game 's general association with mushrooms .
Shigeru Miyamoto , the creator of the Mario franchise , reasons that Toad 's creation was that of being a character that has a simplistic design ; yet , still appears cute and lovely and pleasing to everybody .
In the game , the peaceful Toads of the Mushroom Kingdom had been turned into various objects such as bricks and pipes by the evil King Bowser ; however , some of Princess Toadstool 's loyal servants , known as the " Mushroom Retainers , " were simply kidnapped .
During the development of New Super Mario Bros. Wii , the developers at Nintendo decided between four characters to be playable in the game :
Princess Peach , Toad , Wario and Waluigi ( all suggestions made by fans ) .
Two Toads ( yellow and blue ) were eventually included as playable characters in New Super Mario Bros. Wii due to their physical similarity to Mario and Luigi .
Toad 's English name appears to have been inspired by the word " toadstool " , a word used to describe mushrooms including those featuring umbrella - like cap - and - stem form characteristics which Toad 's design portrays along with the character 's general resemblance to a mushroom .
Toad 's Japanese name " Kinopio " appears to be a mixture of the Japanese word for mushroom ( " kinoko " ) and the Japanese name for the character Pinocchio ( " Pinokio " ) which both roughly blend together to form the meaning of " a real mushroom boy " ( as evidenced through Pinocchio 's desire to become a real boy in his own tale ) .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Though Toad has been seen wearing a mushroom hat on his head in the non - canon Mario cartoons , it has been confirmed by Super Mario Odyssey producer Yoshiaki Koizumi that since the creation of the character in 1985 the mushroom cap was intended to be part of his head .
Toad bears a similar appearance to the rest of his species with his large mushroom caps and clothes .
He is very small in size , and has no legs visible , with just his typical brown shoes showing .
Unlike other Toads , he features five red spots on his mushroom cap and wears a blue and yellow vest ; however , his coloration will change if he gets a fire flower , as his cap 's colors will be reversed while his clothes turn red .
A yellow outline was added to his vest in the recent Mario games , starting with Super Mario Sunshine .
Sometimes , Toad appears with a red vest , though he is most often seen with his blue vest .
In the Mario cartoons , Toad has on occasion removed his non - canon mushroom cap , revealing three strands of hair .
Toad is also seen with pants of a white color that resemble the base of a mushroom or toadstool stalk .
At most times , Toad is portrayed as a rather cowardly character , but the fact that he actually knows about his cowardice makes him one of the more innocent and humbler characters in the series .
Despite his fears , Toad is usually one of the few people who tries his best to support Mario when he is on his adventures , from providing items to actually adventuring alongside the hero on his quest .
Despite the fact that Toad is usually seen as a cheerful character , he can get extremely distressed when a major event occurs , such as the kidnapping of the princess .
He has been mentioned to being a hard working Toad with a strong loyalty to his Princess and friends .
In many games , such as Super Mario 64 , Toad is helpful to Mario and his crew on their search for Peach , despite the fact Toad is portrayed as quite a shy character .
In Luigi 's Mansion , he is seen crying in certain places because he cares so much about Mario getting kidnapped by ghosts , he was sent to the mansion to look for Mario in commands of Princess Peach .
He was extremely loyal because he was scared and feared that he could get captured too .
In , five colored Toads are trapped in paintings by King Boo .
ABILITIES Section::::Abilities .
Through the various games that Toad is playable in , he has been shown with different unique abilities that differ from the other characters in the series .
In Super Mario Bros. 2 , the game describes him as being the strongest and fastest character in the game with 5 out of 5 stars each , but with a weak jumping ability , rated at 2 stars .
In Wario 's Woods , Toad has the unique ability to run up walls and make strong kicks .
Toad is once again given superhuman strength in the game , as he is able to lift and throw enemies around ; however , these abilities have not been seen since this game .
In New Super Mario Bros. Wii , Toad shares many of the moves and abilities of Mario and Luigi , such as the ground pound and wall jumping as represented by the yellow and blue Toads .
Toad has access to Mario 's power ups , but unlike the other games Toad has starred in , this game gives him all - round stats similar to those of
the Mario Bros. In Super Mario 3D World , Toad is again the fastest playable character ; however , his weakness includes his weaker jumps in comparison to the other playable characters .
In the Super Smash Bros. series , Toad is shown to emit spores like a real mushroom whenever he is attacked , as shown when Peach uses her standard special move .
However , this has never been seen in the main Mario series games .
Toad exhibits a similar technique in Mario Sports Mix where he is capable of using the spores to cause mushrooms to sprout from the ground , and his special move is also based on this skill .
He is also capable of using these emitted spores as a shield against various attacks in this game .
APPEARANCES Section::::Appearances .
Toad and his race of mushroom people made their debut appearance in Super Mario Bros. where they play a minimal role in the game .
They appear at the end of every stage as the Mushroom Retainers ( who serve the princess ) once Mario or Luigi defeats Bowser , rewarding the heroes with the message : " Thank you Mario !
But our princess is in another castle ! " , and in the they maintain this role .
In the American Super Mario Bros. 2 , Toad got his first individual appearance and was given a bigger role as one of the four playable characters .
In Super Mario Bros. 3 , Toad appears in the Toad houses where he provides items and extra lives for Mario to take on his journey .
Toad , however , is the main protagonist of Wario 's Woods , where he is trying to prevent Wario from taking over the woods .
Eventually with the help of Birdo and a fairy named Wanda , Toad fights Wario and in the end saves the woods from the clutches of the evil antagonist , restoring peace to the area .
The 3D Mario games introduced Toad 's role as a helper who would provide assistance to Mario if he needed it , thus making him one of Mario 's major allies .
In Super Mario 64 , Toad explains the backstory to Mario , as well as telling him what he has to do to proceed in the game .
In the game 's remake Super Mario 64 DS , Toad appears with the same role ; however , he is given character - specific remarks ( such as mistaking Luigi for Mario in green clothes or thinking that Wario would betray the rest of the group ) .
In Luigi 's Mansion , Toad appears in various parts of the mansion as a save point .
Different colored Toads appear in Super Mario Sunshine as Peach 's attendants .
In Super Mario Galaxy , Toads appear at the beginning of the game as some of the citizens of Toad Town .
Later on , a group of Toads appear as the Toad Brigade led by new character , Captain Toad , the captain of the brigade , who attempt to help Mario or Luigi retrieve the Power Stars .
Toad himself appears in the intro of the game , where he is holding hands with Toadette as the two look at the night sky .
Captain Toad makes a reappearance in the sequel , Super Mario Galaxy 2 , once again as the same cowardly character as before ..
Like in the first game , he and his brigade would attempt to help Mario retrieve the Power Stars in order to save Princess Peach .
In New Super Mario Bros. Wii and U , there are 2 playable Toads ( multi - player only ) , one blue and one yellow recolor .
The blue Toad has a similar appearance similar with the original Toad and even shares the same voices as Toad in
New Super Mario Bros. Wii ( the yellow Toad has a higher pitched voice ) .
Red spotted Toads are n't playable , they play an extra role including the host of Toad houses , and being strewn throughout different levels that Mario must bring to the finish to save .
In 2011 , Toad plays a role in the 3DS title Super Mario 3D Land in which he , upon his rescue at the end of World One , assists Mario throughout the rest of the adventure through the availability of Toad Houses , where he provides items and uncovering secrets for Mario in the various levels .
Toad also appears as a prominent character in New Super Mario Bros. 2 where he runs the Toad Houses once again to assist both Mario and Luigi throughout the game .
In Super Mario 3D World , both the Toad character ( head colored blue ) , and Captain Toad returning from Super Mario Galaxy ' are playable but only the former appears in the major game , while Captain Toad , playable for the first time , has his own levels " The Adventures of Captain Toad " separate from the main playable characters .
In " The Adventures of Captain Toad " , Captain Toad must collect five Green Stars without jumping , and two hits will result in a lost in life , but he can use his headlight to destroy any ghosts in his levels .
The Toad runs the fastest but jumps the lowest and falls faster .
Captain Toad later starred in a year after Super Mario 3D World was released .
In , Toad and 4 others ( yellow , blue , green and purple ) act as assistants to Professor E. Gadd , who had sent them to investigate the mansions before Luigi had arrived .
Throughout the game , Luigi meets up with the Toads , who help him uncover secrets in the mansions .
Throughout the Mario RPG series , Toad is featured as more of a minor character due to the large amounts of generic toads which appear in the games who seem to replace his role as a helper .
Regardless , in the times he does appear , Toad is once again a minor character who just gives a backstory to Mario and the others .
In Super Mario RPG , Toad appears as a major NPC character who teaches Mario about the different skills to use in battles in the beginning as the duo heads to the Mushroom Kingdom ( though Toad had to be saved by Mario along the way as he is kidnapped frequently by enemies ) .
Toad appears more throughout the game , for example as part of Mario 's nightmare .
Toad appears as a playable character in for a short time when the player is exploring around Mario and Luigi 's house .
In Super Princess Peach , Toad is kidnapped earlier in the game along with Mario and Luigi by the Hammer Bros ..
However , Toad appears as a playable character in two of the minigames in the game .
Toad appears in Super Paper Mario in 3 aspects of the game .
He appears in the intro , telling Mario and Luigi that Princess Peach has been kidnapped , and later appears in the Arcade mini - game Mansion Patrol .
Additionally , Toad is one of the 256 Catch Cards in the game .
In , a mysterious infection called " The Blorbs " causes the Toads to inflate to many times their normal size and roll around uncontrollably .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
Toad has appeared in many of the various Mario spin - off games .
In the Mario Kart series , of which he has appeared in every installment , Toad is usually featured as a lightweight driver with good acceleration to compensate for his speed .
His partner Toadette was created for and together they shared a special item , the Super Mushroom , which allowed them to take multiple boosts for a short while .
The item reappears in later Mario Kart games , but is renamed the Golden Mushroom .
Toadette , who has appeared in other spin - off games since her first appearance , was stated to be Toad 's sister in an official Prima strategy guide for Mario Kart Wii ( though this relationship between Toad and Toadette has yet to be confirmed by Nintendo itself ) .
He appears in his own tournament for Mario Kart Wii , where the player goes through Mushroom Gorge backwards using Toad as their character .
Toad even receives his own tracks throughout the installments such as his own circuit ( named after himself ) in Mario Kart 7 .
He appears in every Mario Party game ; however , it is only from Mario Party 5 and on that he is playable ( excluding Mario Party Advance ) , as he was a host for the earlier games in the series , and even a damsel in distress character for Mario Party 2 after several Baby Bowsers abduct him .
Toad appears in the various Mario sports games .
In Mario Superstar Baseball , Toad appears as a team member whose chemistry refers to his background ; for example , he has good chemistry with Princess Peach and Toadette but bad chemistry with Wario .
Toad also appears in the sequel , Mario Super Sluggers , again as a team member along with other differently colored toads .
He also appears as a team member with good techniques in Mario Strikers and he also appears in its sequel Mario Strikers Charged with the same role .
His sidekick role is retained in , where he accompanies either Mario or Luigi to help get back the musical keys from the villains of the game .
Mini Toads ( toy versions of Toad ) are included as playable characters throughout the Mario vs. Donkey Kong series , starting with .
Mini Toads make a returning appearance
the in 2010 release of as playable characters who assist Mario on his journey to rescue his friend Pauline from the clutches of Donkey Kong .
Toad makes appearances in Super Mario Maker .
A Mystery Mushroom costume based on Toad can be unlocked , and Toad appears at the end of the 10-Mario challenge and the easy mode of the 100-Mario challenge , saying that Princess Peach has been taken to another castle ( kind of like what happened in Super Mario Bros. ) .
Another Mystery Mushroom costume based on Captain Toad from was also made available through an update .
In Super Mario Run , Toad is one of six playable characters and it can be unlocked by connecting a My Nintendo account .
In addition , he is the referee of Toad Rally if players use Toadette .
In Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Games he is a referee along with Cream the Rabbit , a Lakitu , and other Mario and Sonic characters .
In its sequel , Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Winter Games , Toad appears in the adventure mode and as well as a host .
In Mario & Sonic at the London 2012 Olympic Games , Toad resumes his role as one of the main hosts ; however , he plays a much larger role as a main protagonist within the story mode in the 3DS version of the game .
He appears in Super Smash Bros. Melee and Super Smash Bros. Brawl as a sticker , trophy , and a counter - attack for Princess Peach .
In Kirby Super Star and Ultra , Toad appears as an audience member in the Megaton Punch minigame along with Mario , Luigi and Birdo .
He also appears in Dedede Stadium along with Mario , Luigi , Wario and Peach .
Toad appears as a main protagonist in the Game & Watch masterpieces in the Game & Watch Gallery series as well .
Toad appears as one of the 11 Mario series characters that are playable in the Japan only game , Itadaki Street DS which was developed by Square - Enix .
Toad is also playable in the international release of the Wii sequel Fortune Street .
Toad had also appeared as a playable character in the Japanese sattellaview game Mario Excite Bike .
Toad makes a playable appearance in the Nintendo Wii game Mario Sports Mix , and is classified as a speedy character in this game .
APPEARANCES IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::Appearances in other media .
Toad appeared in the animated series
The Super Mario Bros. Super Show !
produced by DIC Entertainment in 1989 .
Although he usually tagged along with Mario and Luigi in cases where King Koopa had kidnapped Princess Peach , he sometimes got captured as well .
Toad 's role in the show was to be the sidekick to the Mario Bros. ( as Luigi was a major character rather than a sidekick ) .
He remained on the show when it spun off into The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3 , allowing them to live in his house .
During the show he got alternate forms such as The Toad Warrior , Fire Toad and even Baby Toad ; however , these forms of Toad have not made an appearance outside of the show .
Due to his absence in the Super Mario World game , Toad did not make an appearance in the TV show of Super Mario World with Yoshi and Oogtar ( the latter having the same voice actor as Toad ) instead taking his place .
Toad appeared in the Super Mario Bros. comic books published by Valiant as well .
In these comics , Toad often followed Mario on his adventures , seemingly replacing Luigi as the hero 's sidekick .
He was a regular companion for King Toadstool , and even indulged in the King 's activities .
Played by Mojo Nixon , Toad appeared as a street musician in the non - canon Super Mario Bros. film .
In the film , Toad is arrested for singing a song that badmouths Koopa , who punishes him by having him turned into a Goomba .
Despite this , the Goomba - fied Toad ( portrayed by John Fifer ) still manages to help Princess Daisy escape and distract the other Goombas by playing his harmonica .
PROMOTION AND RECEPTION Section::::Promotion and reception .
As a character who appears frequently in the series , Toad is considered to be one of the major Mario franchise characters .
He has appeared in much of the Mario merchandise in products ranging from toys to plushies and keychains , and is featured in Nintendo 's board games such as being on the protagonist side in a Mario themed chess set and being a purchasable character in a Nintendo - themed monopoly game .
In , Toad 's hat is available after getting 3000 points in Tom Nook 's Point Tracking system .
The American Club Nintendo website currently offers a special reward featuring Toad and some other major Mario characters in a folder set reward named as the " Toad & Friends Set with Bookmarks " .
The quote repeated by the Toads in Super Mario Bros. , " Thank you Mario !
But our princess is in another castle ! " , was ranked one of the most repeated video game quotes .
Toad makes a cameo appearance in the Wii U version of Scribblenauts Unlimited as a guest character from Nintendo 's Super Mario series .
A costume of Toad is also one of the exclusive Nintendo character costumes available to be equipped to various characters in the Wii U version of Tekken Tag Tournament 2 .
Toad ranked in the seventh slot on GameDaily 's top 10 Nintendo characters that deserve their own games list ; the site explained that he has a strong appeal that Nintendo has yet to tap into .
Toad is listed in The Most Neglected Mario Bros. Characters list as a character whom Nintendo has ignored for quite a while due to his lack of starring roles in more recent games .
IGN editor Matt Casamassina criticized Nintendo for including the two generic Toads over more notable characters ( including the red - spotted Toad himself ) in the Mario series for New Super Mario Bros. Wii , arguing that the developers were being lazy to not include other characters because the Toads were easier to make .
IGN also listed Toad as one of the top ten characters needing a spin - off .
In an Oricon poll conducted in Japan from 2008 , Toad was voted as the eighth most popular video game character in Japan .
Another poll ( of over 1000 votes ) conducted in Japan by NintendoWorldReport in concern to Japan 's favorite Mario Kart racers listed Toad as the second most favorite Mario Kart racer in the country ( only being beaten by Yoshi ) .
Toad has been credited for being one of the celebrated characters in the twenty - fifth anniversary of the Super Mario Bros. games .
MTV , when commenting on the wackiness of Super Mario 2 ( Super Mario Bros. 2 ) , called Toad " so awesome " .
UGO.com listed Toad on their list of " The Cutest Video Game Characters , " stating " Once you get over his misleading name , you 'll find Toad to be quite the adorable mushroom . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS