QUINN FABRAY
In the second season , she forms a bond with newcomer Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , and later romances her first boyfriend Finn , reigniting her animosity with club co - captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) .
In the third season , Quinn intends to get full custody of her daughter , Beth , and her attempts to prove Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel)—the adoptive mother of Beth — an unfit mother fail ; eventually , she realizes that Shelby is Beth 's true mother .
Quinn subsequently receives a college acceptance letter from Yale , and while driving to Finn and Rachel 's wedding , her car is struck by a truck and she suffers a spinal injury that requires her to use a wheelchair for many weeks .
She is eventually able to walk again .
Quinn was developed by Glee creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan .
The last character to be cast , initial responses to her were positive , though they soured during season one as the pregnancy storyline continued .
Songs performed by Agron as Quinn have been released as singles , available for download , and also feature on the show 's soundtrack albums .
The role saw Agron nominated for the Teen Choice Award for " Breakout Female Star " in 2009 , and a Screen Actors Guild award that same year .
She was initially described by Agron as Rachel 's enemy , and " terrible , the meanest girl " .
STORYLINES
SEASON 1
Section::::Storylines .
Section::::Season 1 .
Quinn is introduced as the leader of the cheerleading squad at William McKinley High School , the " Cheerios " , coached by Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) .
She comes from a conservative Christian family , and is president of the celibacy club .
When her teenage boyfriend Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) joins the glee club , New Directions , Quinn worries about his interaction with the group 's star , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) , and joins New Directions herself along with her fellow Cheerios Santana ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) .
Sue then enlists the three of them to help her destroy the glee club from the inside .
Upon discovering her pregnancy , Quinn convinces Finn that he is the father , despite the fact that they never actually had a sexual encounter .
Quinn claims that due to his premature ejaculation problem , and during their time in a hot - tub , Finn had ejaculated in the tub and Quinn had received the sperm .
The real father is Finn 's best friend Puck ( Mark Salling ) , who offers to support Quinn and the baby , but is rejected for his irresponsibility .
Quinn decides to have the baby adopted , and agrees to give it to Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , the wife of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , who is faking a pregnancy .
When news of her pregnancy is revealed to the school , Quinn is cut from the cheerleading squad and her popularity declines .
Her parents evict her , and Quinn moves in with Finn and his mother .
She begins to reconsider having the baby adopted , and gives Puck a chance to prove himself , but he is not reliable
so she returns to her plan of giving the baby to Terri .
Quinn blackmails Sue into letting her rejoin the Cheerios , but ultimately decides against it , preferring to remain with the glee club , where she feels accepted .
Finn learns the truth about the baby 's paternity from Rachel , and breaks up with Quinn .
Puck again offers to support her , but she turns him down and tells him that she wants to handle the pregnancy by herself .
She moves in with Puck 's family , but after forming a friendship with fellow New Directions member Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) , Quinn lives with her family instead .
She gives birth to a daughter , named Beth by Puck , who is adopted by Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) , coach of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline and Rachel 's biological mother .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
At the beginning of the new school year , Quinn is reinstated as head cheerleader .
She begins dating new glee club member Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , and later accepts a promise ring from him .
When Sue forces Quinn , Santana and Brittany to choose between cheerleading and the glee club , all three initially go with the Cheerios to retain their popularity , but are later convinced by Finn to defect to New Directions .
Quinn cheats on Sam with Finn , and Sam dumps Quinn after she lies to him about her time with Finn .
She and Finn reunite , and Quinn starts campaigning for junior prom king and queen elections .
Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , Puck 's new girlfriend and one of Quinn 's rivals for prom queen , discovers that before transferring to McKinley High , Quinn was known by her first name , Lucy .
She was overweight and unpopular , and after slimming down and having rhinoplasty , reinvented herself as Quinn , using her middle name .
At prom , Finn is thrown out for fighting with Rachel 's date Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) .
Quinn is not named prom queen , and blames Rachel for her loss .
She slaps her , but immediately regrets it and apologizes .
Finn later breaks up with Quinn when he realizes he has a deeper connection with Rachel .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
At the start of her senior year , Quinn has completely reinvented herself and refuses to rejoin either the Cheerios or New Directions , although when New Directions performs " You Ca n't Stop The Beat " in the auditorium Quinn can be seen watching them with a conflicted look on her face .
Shelby lets Puck see Beth , but rejects Quinn 's desire to do likewise due to Quinn 's bad - girl attitude , appearance and behavior .
After seeing a picture of a happy Beth and Puck , Quinn resumes her normal appearance , and Will and the New Directions welcome her back into the club , but Quinn reveals to Puck she is only pretending to behave in order to take Beth back from Shelby , and intends to pursue full custody .
After Puck tells Shelby of Quinn 's true intentions , Shelby informs Quinn that she does not want her in Beth 's life .
Quinn later reveals a desire to have a second baby with Puck .
Puck refuses , and tries to comfort her ; he offers to share an important secret if she promises not to tell anyone , which ultimately results in Quinn planning to get Shelby fired for sleeping with a student , Puck .
Quinn decides not to reveal Shelby 's secret for Beth 's sake .
Quinn advises Rachel to refuse Finn 's marriage proposal and leave her past behind .
Quinn has done so , and she has been accepted at Yale .
Quinn asks to allow her to rejoin the Cheerios , but Sue refuses .
However , following Regionals , she changes her mind .
Quinn also changes her mind about Finn and Rachel 's marriage and supports it .
Rachel is reluctant to start the subsequent wedding without Quinn , and texts Quinn .
Quinn is responding to Rachel 's text when a truck crashes into the driver 's side of her car .
Quinn 's car accident has left her in a wheelchair , suffering from a severely compressed spine .
By " Prom - asaurus " she is able to stand and to walk a few steps in the sessions .
When Quinn is nominated for prom queen , Finn agrees to campaign with her , but is outraged when he discovers that she has been hiding the fact that she can now stand for the sympathy vote .
When Quinn and Santana count the votes , they discover that Finn has won and so has Quinn .
Quinn realizes that the victory means nothing .
She and Santana falsely report the prom queen results as a write - in victory for Rachel .
Her recovery is rapid enough to allow her to dance in the " Nationals " competition episode , which New Directions wins .
Quinn helps Puck study for the test he needs to pass in order to graduate .
She tells him that with all they went through , they are bonded for life , and she kisses him .
Emboldened , Puck passes his test .
Later , Quinn returns her cheerleading uniform to Sue , and the two have a tearful farewell .
SEASON 4
Section::::Season 4 .
Quinn returns to Lima for Thanksgiving in the eighth episode of the season , and helps to mentor the new members of New Directions as they prepare for Sectionals competition .
Quinn is partnered with Kitty Wilde ( Becca Tobin ) .
Kitty convinces Quinn , whom she idolizes , that Jake Puckerman ( Jacob Artist ) , Puck 's half brother , is pressuring Marley into having sex with him .
Quinn becomes hostile towards Jake , Santana confronts Quinn about having discovered that Kitty has given Marley laxatives in order to further Marley 's bulimia .
Quinn , who is dating one of her teachers at Yale , accuses Santana of being jealous of her and projecting her hostility in their surrogates , leading to a fight before Quinn storms out of the choir room .
Quinn travels to New York to give Rachel helpful advice over whether or not to do a nude scene in a short film in " Naked " .
Quinn returns to Lima for Will and Emma 's wedding in " I Do " , and evidently single again , vents her frustrations about men .
She and Santana get drunk at the wedding reception and sleep together , which they agree was a fun one - time , and then two time , experimentation for Quinn .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
Quinn returns to Lima with a new boyfriend , Biff , for the special 100th episode .
Puck is jealous of their relationship , because he still loves her .
Quinn is lying to him because she does not want him to know about her past yet .
Puck convinces her to tell Biff the truth , which she does .
Biff reacts wrongly and insults her , which causes a fight between Puck and Biff .
They later break - up .
Puck and Quinn talk about Finn and their relationship , and she realizes that she still loves him .
They later start a relationship again , which is later confirmed in the next episode .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Quinn along with the New Directions alumni return in the episode
" Homecoming " to help Rachel and Kurt rebuild the New Directions .
Quinn , Santana , and Brittany attempt to recruit new members by performing in Cheerios Alumni outfits , but only recruit twins Mason and Madison when former Glee new member , Kitty , who was the only member not to be transferred as Sue saw her as a star player , announced she would n't return because of the way Artie treated her and everyone else when he left .
Puck is still her boyfriend .
She appears in " Jagged Little Tapestry " along with Tina to help Becky convince her new boyfriend that she is in every club of the school .
Quinn , Tina , Sue , and Coach Roz get a huge surprise when they find out that Becky 's boyfriend , Darrell , does not have Down syndrome like Becky does .
They all get a big lesson when they confront him and realize that a person with Down syndrome should be treated like everyone else .
Despite being Santana and Brittany 's best friend , she is notably absent during their wedding in " A Wedding " .
She is mentioned several times during the Pilot 's parallel episode " 2009 " , as Finn 's cheerleader girlfriend .
She is later seen during Do n't Stop Believin ' watching the performance with Sue and Santana .
She returns in the last minutes of the series finale
" Dreams Come True " performing backing vocals for I Lived with the rest of the Glee Cast for the re - dedication of the Auditorium .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
Quinn is portrayed by actress Dianna Agron .
In casting Glee , series creator Ryan Murphy sought out actors who could identify with the rush of starring in theatrical roles .
Instead of using traditional network casting calls , he spent three months on Broadway looking for unknown actors .
Agron was the last primary actor to be cast , having won the role only days before the pilot began filming .
Agron auditioned for Glee coming from a background in dancing and acting .
She has been taking dance classes since the age of three , appeared in many music theatre productions and has appeared in television roles for Skidmarks , , and Heroes .
Agron said in a 2009 interview pertaining to her casting session : " I nearly bailed on my audition for the show .
I was so nervous " .
With her wholesome good looks , Agron certainly looked the part , but the producers wondered if she appeared too innocent .
Agron said in an interview : " They told me to come back with straight hair and to dress sexier .
Later that week , I started work . "
Agron auditioned with Frank Sinatra 's " Fly Me to the Moon " .
The Glee producers said " we really lucked out in finding Agron to play Quinn " .
In December 2010 , Ryan Murphy announced that the cast of Glee would be replaced at the end of the third season to coincide with their graduation .
Murphy said : " Every year we 're going to populate a new group .
There 's nothing more depressing than a high schooler with a bald spot . "
He also revealed that some of the original cast will leave as early as 2012 : " I think you have to be true to the fact that here is a group of people who come and go in these teachers ' lives . "
Although four graduating seniors were confirmed in January 2012 as returning in the fourth season — Rachel , Finn , Kurt and Santana — there had been no announcement regarding Quinn or any other seniors as of the end of February 2012 .
As of May 2012 , Murphy stated that all graduating seniors will come back for season 4 but , not all will be doing " all 22 episodes " .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
Quinn is described by Agron as Rachel Berry 's ( Lea Michele ) enemy , and " terrible , the meanest girl " .
Agron said that her favorite part of Quinn is that " she 's smart .
But she 's also human , and through her tough exterior , she 's often a little girl lost .
" Interviewmagazine.com 's Lauren Waterman has described her as being " lovable , but occasionally a manipulative deposed queen bee . "
Agron commented : " Yes , there is a stereotype with these characters and it would n't be fair if [ those stereotypes ] did n't exist a little bit .
But [ co - creator ]
Ryan Murphy has a way of taking everything and turning it upside down .
That 's the great thing about this show and these characters : nobody is one note , which is amazing .
" Quinn was originally conceived as the antagonistic queen bee head cheerleader , a departure from Agron 's actual high school experience .
Agron said in an interview with HitFix : " I definitely was n't cool in high school .
I really was n't .
I did belong to many of the clubs and was in leadership on yearbook and did the musical theater route , so I had friends in all areas , but I certainly did not know what to wear , did not know how to do my hair , all those things . "
She added : " I think that it shows that regardless of who you are and what group you belong to , that there are so many emotions behind each person in high school .
Sometimes with teens , writers or directors , anybody , short - changes them and makes them be simple , simple individuals , you 're either the jock or the popular kid or the nerd .
They do n't show those shades .
Everybody has those shades to them .
This show , it really expands upon vulnerability and excitement and anger all the experiences that you probably actually go through in high school . "
Quinn 's role as head cheerleader is central to understanding her character .
Agron said that she had never had any prior cheer experience before the Pilot .
" If I had been [ a cheerleader ] , I would 've ended up on crutches , " she told Emmy magazine .
In an interview with HitFix she said , " I have new respect for the craft , because I slightly hurt myself during the pilot , coming down from one of the stunts .
It 's better now .
I did n't tear something in my knee , but I strained it .
Knees are very sensitive , I 've learned .
It 's crazy , because I 've been dancing since I was three on my toes and all these things .
And you should never say this , but I 've never injured myself ever .
I 'd seen gnarly injuries with dance and all these things .
You should n't say that , though , because every day is an opportunity to fall , hurt yourself , so that was my experience . "
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Quinn has received positive reviews from critics .
The role saw Agron nominated for the Teen Choice Award for " Female Breakout Star " in 2009 .
She and the other cast members were awarded the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2010 , and nominated in the same category the following year .
The character 's accidental pregnancy storyline received mixed reviews from critics .
Tim Stack for Entertainment Weekly deemed it " a good dramatic twist " , but hoped that it would not be a long - lasting storyline .
Reviews of her storyline became increasingly negative , though Agron was praised for her dramatic acting during the confrontation scene with Quinn 's parents in " Ballad " .
Gerrick D. Kennedy , writing for the Los Angeles Times , was critical of the ongoing pregnancy plot in the episode " Hairography " , and noted that he cringed whenever Quinn appeared on screen .
Conversely , Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle enjoyed Quinn in the episode , and wrote : " I love that she can keep her Mean Girls edge while being heartbreakingly sad or as joyful as she was singing
" Papa Do n't Preach " .
Reviewing the episode " Journey to Regionals " , Entertainment Weekly 's Darren Franich called Quinn 's birthing scenes — interspersed with Vocal Adrenaline performing Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody"—both " brilliant " and " terrible " .
He wrote , "
If nothing else , it was definitely the most visually arresting way to represent the birthing process I 've ever seen outside of The Miracle of Life .
But I kind of liked it .
Somewhere , Freddie Mercury is nodding proudly , and saying , ' World , I forgive you for
We Will Rock You . ' "
Brett Berk , writing for Vanity Fair , was positive about the scripting of the Quinn character in the second season premiere , now that the pregnancy storyline was over , and was happy to see the return of " evil Quinn " .
Joel Kelly of TV Squad criticized the decision to pair Quinn with Finn again in the Valentine 's Day oriented episode .
He saw it as a regression of the characters , and commented : " Yes , it feels like Glee Classic , because the series started with the two of them together .
But both of them have changed — Quinn more so than Finn — and having them dating again seems like they 're going back to the days when Quinn was the icy lead Cheerio and Finn
was the nice but dumb star quarterback . "
Quinn 's season three reinvention attracted mixed reviews .
Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter listed her change as a highlight of the episode , and hoped to see more of her new attitude .
The Atlantic Kevin Fallon called it " the most interesting thing Quinn has done since giving birth to a baby to the soundtrack of ' Bohemian Rhapsody ' " , but VanDerWerff suggested the development hinged on the fact the producers no longer knew how to utilize Agron .
She was ranked No . 13 in AfterEllen.com 's Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters .
MUSICAL PERFORMANCES
Section::::Musical performances .
Several songs performed by Agron as Quinn have been released as singles , available for digital download , also featured on the show 's soundtrack albums .
Agron made her musical debut at the end of the episode " Showmance " where she performed Dionne Warwick 's " I Say a Little Prayer " .
Quinn 's next solo was in the episode " Throwdown " , where she performed The Supremes '
" You Keep Me Hangin ' On " .
The song was released on .
Flandez deemed the cover of " Keep Holding On " , the ensemble performance on the episode , an " emotionally satisfying showstopper " , however was critical of Quinn 's cover of " You Keep Me Hangin ' On " , which he called " thin and jarring " .
Aly Semigran of MTV observed that Quinn spontaneously bursting into song brought Glee " dangerously close to High School Musical territory " .
Agron later performed a solo in the episode
" Hairography " singing Madonna 's " Papa Do n't Preach " after her father learns she is pregnant .
This performance by Agron was released as a single .
She performed a rendition of James Brown 's " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " in the episode " Funk " .
CNN 's Lisa Respers France was " slightly disturbed " by Quinn 's " weird " performance of " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " using pregnant teenagers as backing dancers .
In season two , Quinn performs " Lucky " with Sam Evans in the episode " Duets " , which was named by some critics as " the most impressive number of the evening " ; others called it " absolutely fantastic " with particular praise for Agron , who was said to be often overlooked . "
Lucky " debuted at number twenty - seven on the Billboard Hot 100 ; it was at number seventeen on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 .
Quinn 's duet performance with Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) of the mash - up
" I Feel Pretty / Unpretty " was the highest charted single featured in the episode " Born This Way " , debuting at number twenty - two on the Billboard Hot 100 .
It also peaked at number thirteen on the Digital 100 charts and sold 112,000 digital downloads in the United States in its first week of release .
It was the highest charting Glee single on the Billboard charts since " Loser Like Me " , which debuted at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and sold over 210,000 downloads in its first week .
In season three , Quinn sings her first solo number since the first season , " Never Can Say Goodbye " by The Jackson 5 , which received mostly positive reviews .
Jen Chaney of The Washington Post gave the song a and said it " worked much better than every track that preceded it " because it adapted the song to the show " instead of trying to out - Jackson Jackson " .
Entertainment Weekly Joseph Brannigan Lynch called it " a nice summation of her character 's journey , but not vocally impressive enough to justify listening to outside of the episode " and gave it a " B " .
Crystal Bell of HuffPost TV described it as a " blah performance " , but Kate Stanhope of TV Guide said it was " sweet and reflective " .
Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone wrote that it was " a tune well - suited for Quinn 's sultry voice and the flipped meaning she gives the lyrics " , and TVLine Michael Slezak had a similar take : he gave it an " A " and called it a " remarkably lovely fit " for her voice .
SEE ALSO
* List of Glee characters
*
Dianna Agron filmography
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Quinn Fabray at Fox.com