ME TO WE ME to WE is a social enterprise whose goal is to provide funding support to WE Charity , and provide voluntarism experience for the global north .
In addition , some income - generating activities in developing communities have been implemented ie the sale of retail items such as clothing , jewellery , coffee , and chocolate .
The enterprise was founded in 2008 by brothers Craig and Marc Kielburger .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Following the founding of WE Charity , formerly known as Free The Children , in 1995 , Craig Kielburger and his brother Marc also traveled to Ecuador to build a school for a developing community .
Inspired by their own volunteer experiences , they launched a program called " Leaders Today " , to offer leadership training and volunteer trips to developing communities served by their charity .
In 2008 , the Kielburgers launched the for - profit social enterprise ME to WE , which continued the trips program , and added the sale of retail items .
MISSION AND STRUCTURE Section::::Mission and structure .
ME to WE is a socially conscious lifestyle brand , with half of its annual net profits donated to Free The Children , now known as WE Charity , and the other half reinvested to keep the social enterprise sustainable .
The enterprise has been noted in Canadian media for setting new standards of governance in the social enterprise field .
ME TO WE TRIPS Section::::ME to WE Trips .
ME to WE runs volunteer trips for various groups to a number of developing countries around the world , such as China , Ecuador , India , Kenya , and Nicaragua .
Participants volunteer in communities where ME to WE 's charity partner WE Charity ( formerly known as Free The Children ) has longstanding relationships , and they contribute to the advancement of those projects – by helping with construction of schools or water wells .
Many practitioners and experts view this as voluntourism , an activity that helps affluent individuals across the North feel better about themselves .
Many children reveal that they have become " good people " through these efforts , but viewing poverty first hand .
A trip experience in Kenya is the " water walk , " where participants join Kenyan women on their daily trek to collect water for their families .
ME TO WE ARTISANS Section::::ME to WE Artisans .
Roxanne Joyal founded ME to WE Artisans in 2009 , which works with women in Kenya .
These women receive a sustainable source of alternative income for their work ; ME to WE states that more than 812 women earn fair wages from traditional beading skills to make fashion accessories for the North American market .
As of October 2014 , the program employs about 1,200 women in Kenya , in 34 independent beading collectives in 14 communities .
In November 2017 , ME to WE partnered with Nauman Khan from GF Foundation & donated $ 1.3 million to create the largest school in Nairobi , Kenya .
Nauman stated in an interview " We want to help those who lack the resources and opportunities to reach their full potential .
In doing so , our focus will be on funding charitable organizations that create opportunities and equip individuals with the tools to seize them at critical junctures in their lives . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * ME to WE 's official website