PITRU PAKSHA
Pitru Paksha ( ) , also spelt as Pitri paksha , Pitr Paksha ( literally " fortnight of the ancestors " ) is a 16–lunar day period in Hindu calendar when Hindus pay homage to their ancestor ( Pitrs ) , especially through food offerings .
The period is also known as Pitru Pakshya , Pitri Pokkho , Sola Shraddha/ Sorha Shraddha in Nepali ( " sixteen shraddhas " ) , Kanagat , Jitiya , Mahalaya Paksha and Apara paksha .
Pitru Paksha is considered by Hindus to be inauspicious , given the death rite performed during the ceremony , known as Shraddha or Tarpan .
In southern and western India , it falls in the 2nd paksha ( fortnight ) Hindu lunar month of Bhadrapada ( September ) and follows the fortnight immediately after the Ganesh festival .
It begins on the Pratipada ( first day of the fortnight ) ending with the no moon day known as Sarvapitri amavasya , Pitru Amavasya , Peddala Amavasya , Mahalaya amavasya or simply Mahalaya .
Most years , the autumnal equinox falls within this period , i.e. the Sun transitions from the northern to the southern hemisphere during this period .
In North India and Nepal , and cultures following the purnimanta calendar or the solar calendar , this period may correspond to the waning fortnight of the luni - solar month Ashvin , instead of Bhadrapada .
LEGEND Section::::Legend .
According to Hinduism , the souls of three preceding generations of one 's ancestor reside in Pitru – loka , a realm between heaven and earth .
This realm is governed by Yama , the god of death , who takes the soul of a dying man from earth to Pitru – loka .
When a person of the next generation dies , the first generation shifts to heaven and unites with God , so Shraddha offerings are not given .
Thus , only the three generations in Pitru – loka are given Shraddha rites , in which Yama plays a significant role .
According to the sacred Hindu epics , at the beginning of Pitru Paksha , the sun enters the zodiac sign of Virgo ( Kanya ) .
Coinciding with this moment , it is believed that the spirits leave Pitru – loka and reside in their descendants ' homes for a month until the sun enters the next zodiac — Scorpio ( Vrichchhika)—and there is a full moon .
Hindus are expected to propitiate the ancestors in the first half , during the dark fortnight .
When the legendary donor Karna died in the epic Mahabharata war , his soul transcended to heaven , where he was offered gold and jewels as food .
However , Karna needed real food to eat and asked Indra , the lord of heaven , the reason for serving gold as food .
Indra told Karna that he had donated gold all his life , but had never donated food to his ancestors in Shraddha .
Karna said that since he was unaware of his ancestors , he never donated anything in their memory .
To make amends , Karna was permitted to return to earth for a 15–day period , so that he could perform Shraddha and donate food and water in their memory .
This period is now known as Pitru Paksha .
In some legends , Yama replaces Indra .
SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Significance .
The performance of Shraddha by a son during Pitru Paksha is regarded as compulsory by Hindus , to ensure that the soul of the ancestor goes to heaven .
In this context , the scripture Garuda Purana says , " there is no salvation for a man without a son " .
The scriptures preach that a householder should propitiate ancestors ( Pitris ) , along with the gods ( devas ) , ghosts ( bhutas ) and guests .
The scripture Markandeya Purana says that if the ancestors are content with the shraddhas , they will bestow health , wealth , knowledge and longevity , and ultimately heaven and salvation ( moksha ) upon the performer .
The performance of Sarvapitri amavasya rites can also compensate a forgotten or neglected annual Shraddha ceremony , which should ideally coincide with the death anniversary of the deceased .
According to Sharma , the ceremony is central to the concept of lineages .
Shraddha involves oblations to three preceding generations — by reciting their names — as well as to the mythical lineage ancestor ( gotra ) .
A person thus gets to know the names of six generations ( three preceding generation , his own and two succeeding generations — his sons and grandsons ) in his life , reaffirming lineage ties .
Anthropologist Usha Menon of Drexel University presents a similar idea — that Pitru Paksha emphasises the fact that the ancestors and the current generation and their next unborn generation are connected by blood ties .
The current generation repays their debt to the ancestors in the Pitru Paksha .
This debt is considered of utmost importance along with a person 's debt to his gurus and his parents .
RULES OF SHRADDHA
WHEN AND WHERE Section::::Rules of Shraddha .
Section::::When and where .
The shraddha is performed on the specific lunar day during the Pitru Paksha , when the ancestor — usually a parent or paternal grandparent — died .
There are exceptions to the lunar day rule ; special days are allotted for people who died in a particular manner or had a certain status in life .
Chautha Bharani and Bharani Panchami , the fourth and fifth lunar day respectively , are allocated for people deceased in the past year .
Avidhava navami ( " Unwidowed ninth " ) , the ninth lunar day , is for married women who died before their husband .
Widowers invite Brahmin women as guests for their wife 's shraddha .
The twelfth lunar day is for children and ascetics who had renounced the worldly pleasures .
The fourteenth day is known as Ghata chaturdashi or Ghayala chaturdashi , and is reserved for those people killed by arms , in war or suffered a violent death .
Sarvapitri amavasya ( all ancestors ' new moon day ) is intended for all ancestors , irrespective of the lunar day they died .
It is the most important day of the Pitru Paksha .
Those who have forgotten to perform shraddha can do so on this day .
A shraddha ritual performed on this day is considered as fruitful as one conducted in the holy city of Gaya , which is seen as a special place to perform the rite , and hosts a fair during the Pitru Paksha period .
In Bengal , Mahalaya ( Bengali : মহালয়া ) marks the beginning of Durga Puja festivities .
Mahalaya is the day when the goddess Durga is believed to have descended to Earth .
Bengali people traditionally wake up early in the morning on Mahalaya to recite hymns from the Devi Mahatmya ( Chandi ) scripture .
Offerings to the ancestors are made in homes and at puja mandaps ( temporary shrines ) .
Matamaha ( " Mother 's father " ) or Dauhitra ( " Daughter 's son " ) also marks the first day of the month of Ashvin and beginning of the bright fortnight .
It is assigned for the grandson of the deceased maternal grandfather .
The ritual is also held on the death anniversary of the ancestor .
The shraddha is performed only at noon , usually on the bank of a river or lake or at one 's own house .
Families may also make a pilgrimage to places like Varanasi and Gaya to perform Shraddha .
An annual Pitri Paksha Mela at Gaya on the banks of River Falgu .
Pilgrims from all corners of the country visit Gaya for offering Pinda to their Ancestors .
According to Bihar Tourism Department estimates , some 5,00,000 to 75,00,000 pilgrims arrive in the Gaya city during the Pitri Paksha Mela every year .
WHO AND FOR WHOM Section::::Who and for whom .
It is essential that Shraddha be performed by the son — usually the eldest — or male relative of the paternal branch of the family , limited to the preceding three generations .
However , on Sarvapitri amavasya or matamaha , the daughter 's son can offer Shraddha for the maternal side of his family if a male heir is absent in his mother 's family .
Some castes only perform the shraddha for one generation .
Prior to performing the rite , the male should have experienced a sacred thread ceremony .
Since the ceremony is considered inauspicious due to its association with death , the royal family of Kutch , the king or heirs of the throne are prohibited from conducting Shraddha .
FOOD
Section::::Food .
The food offerings made to the ancestors are usually cooked in silver or copper vessels and typically placed on a banana leaf or cups made of dried leaves .
The food must include Kheer ( a type of sweet rice and milk ) , lapsi ( a sweet porridge made of wheat grains ) , rice , dal ( lentils ) , the vegetable of spring bean ( guar ) and a yellow gourd ( pumpkin ) .
RITES OF SHRADDHA Section::::Rites of Shraddha .
The male who performs the shraddha should take a purifying bath beforehand and is expected to wear a dhoti .
He wears a ring of darbha grass .
Then the ancestors are invoked to reside in the ring .
The shraddha is usually performed bare - chested , as the position of the sacred thread worn by him needs to be changed multiple times during the ceremony .
The shraddha involves pinda - daan , which is an offering to the ancestors of pindas ( cooked rice and barley flour balls mixed with ghee and black sesame seeds ) , accompanying the release of water from the hand .
It is followed by the worship of Vishnu ( in form of the darbha grass , a gold image , or Shaligram stone ) and Yama .
The food offering is then made , cooked especially for the ceremony on the roof .
The offering is considered to be accepted if a crow arrives and devours the food ; the bird is believed to be a messenger from Yama or the spirit of the ancestors .
A cow and a dog are also fed , and Brahmin priests are also offered food .
Once the ancestors ( crow ) and Brahmins have eaten , the family members can begin lunch .
OTHER PRACTICES
Section::::Other practices .
Some families also conduct ritual recitals of scriptures such the Bhagavata Purana and the Bhagavad Gita .
Others may be charitable and present gifts to the priests or pay them to recite prayers for the ancestor 's well - being .
SEE ALSO
* Hindu genealogy registers at Haridwar REFERENCES