ELENA GILBERT Elena Salvatore ( née Gilbert ) is a fictional character and protagonist from the television series The Vampire Diaries .
In The Vampire Diaries , set in the fictional town of Mystic Falls , she is portrayed by Nina Dobrev .
In the books , Elena was blonde , popular , selfish and a " mean girl " .
However the show 's producers , Julie Plec and Kevin Williamson , felt that it was n't the direction they wanted to go with their heroine in The Vampire Diaries television series .
Instead , she became a nicer , relatable and more of " the girl next door " type , until her life gets flipped upside down when she meets the Salvatores .
In April 2015 , Nina Dobrev announced that she would be departing the series after the sixth season finale .
Much of Elena 's story revolves around her relationships with vampires Stefan Salvatore and his older brother , Damon .
It is revealed that Elena is a Petrova Doppelgänger , which is thus responsible for her being identical to her ancestor , Katherine Pierce ( née Katerina Petrova ) .
This also has the implication of making her a supernatural creature .
Dobrev portrayed the " conniving " Katherine as well , who is opposite of Elena .
The actress stated that it has been a challenge distinguishing the two , and enjoys playing them both .
In the television series 's fourth season , Elena becomes a vampire and deals with the struggles that come with her change .
She took the cure and became human again towards the end of the sixth season .
In the finale of the sixth season , Kai linked Elena to Bonnie 's life by magic .
Elena will only wake up when Bonnie dies in around 60 years .
She was locked inside the Salvatore tomb , then relocated to a warehouse in Brooklyn , New York in the seventh season , then back to Mystic Falls .
In late 2016 , when it was announced that the eighth season would be the final season , Dobrev was in talks about returning to the television series to reprise her role in the final episode .
After much speculation .
Dobrev 's return was confirmed on January 26 , 2017 , via an Instagram post .
Dobrev appeared in the final episode of the show as both Elena and her evil doppelgänger Katherine Pierce .
CASTING AND PORTRAYAL Section::::Casting and portrayal .
On March 9 , 2009 , it was announced that Bulgarian - born Canadian actress Nina Dobrev , known for her portrayal of on , had joined the cast of The Vampire Diaries as Elena .
She was the second cast member to be announced following Steven R. McQueen , who plays Elena 's brother Jeremy Gilbert .
Steve West Cinema Blend said the vampire brothers ' battle over Elena will wreak havoc on the entire town . " .
Executive producer Kevin Williamson recalled Dobrev auditioning while having the flu , which he described as the " worst audition ever " , and they " did n't even look at her a second time " .
Dobrev went back home to Canada , yet , still wanting the part , she submitted a videotape audition , which saw her cast as Elena Gilbert .
Dobrev said that after reading the script , she was drawn to Elena because she was " this average girl who was damaged in many ways " .
Initially , she believed that she would be playing the " bad girl " Elena from the books , but the show wanted to go in a different direction for the character .
After researching , Dobrev discovered she would also play Elena 's 534-year - old vampire doppelgänger Katherine Pierce whose characteristics are the " complete opposite " .
Dobrev described this as " one of the rarest , coolest opportunities in television , to play two people on the same medium " .
She had confessed that she enjoys playing Katherine more than Elena .
Dobrev stated that she changes her appearance to distinguish Elena from her doppelgänger , Katherine ; " Changing my hair helps me transform , " she told Glamour .
Additionally , she said " I think I have one of the coolest characters on the show
— I get to play two completely different people on opposite sides of the spectrum
and I just have so much fun doing it " .
Dobrev felt that her biggest challenge on The Vampire Diaries was distinguishing Katherine and Elena , and found it " interesting " to create a whole new character .
In the novels , Katherine originated from Germany .
However , in the television series , she is Bulgarian , as is Dobrev , who can speak the language fluently .
Dobrev said , " The writers heard me speaking Bulgarian to my mom on the phone while I was on set one day .
One thing led to the other and voila " .
DEVELOPMENT CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Characterization .
In the books , Elena is considered " one of the popular girls " at her high school and always gets " anything she wants " .
Executive producer of the television show , Julie Plec , said the Elena from the books was " really kind of selfish " .
In The Vampire Diaries , Elena 's " selfishness " in the books as a human was never explored , because it " did n't ever feel like a characteristic " the show wanted for their heroine .
Plec said " We kind of abandoned that queen - bee popular complex that in a lot of ways defined early Elena in the books " , while feeling that Elena 's actual flaw is her " deep , deep connection to other people " .
In the books , Elena had blonde hair , but has brown hair in the television show .
Describing Elena from the books , Dobrev said she is " one of those mean girls that gets what she wants , popular . . .
and she 's blonde and blue eyed " .
Williamson told her that " the angle we wanted to go for was the relatable , nice , girl next door , who the audience roots for " .
Katherine , on the other hand , is penned as a " conniving , narcissistic , bitch " .
Describing Elena years later , Dobrev said she evolved from a " younger , naive , sad , young girl " to a " strong woman " .
ROMANCES Section::::Romances .
Before The Vampire Diaries , Elena dated Matt Donovan ( Zach Roerig ) , who was unable to move past his feelings for her initially after their break - up .
Elena began dating Stefan Salvatore ( Paul Wesley ) , and later discovered he was a vampire .
As the episodes progressed , she developed a connection with Stefan 's adventurous brother Damon Salvatore ( Ian Somerhalder ) , who consumes human blood , unlike Stefan , who has an animal blood diet .
Speaking about the different qualities Stefan and Damon bring to Elena , Dobrev said they have " different qualities that are very appealing " , which combined make " the perfect man " .
She said " Stefan is committed and sweet and protective and loving , and Damon is spontaneous and crazy and fun and exciting " .
After Elena became a vampire , she became sired to Damon and they slept together .
According to Plec during an interview with TVLine , Elena " really believes what she feels is 100 percent genuine and real " , and the couple " wants to be together and realizes that they should n't , yet really wants to .
So what do they do ?
" Stefan became heartbroken , feeling angry and betrayed , and lashed out at Damon and Elena .
In the season 4 finale , an unsired Elena confirms that she is in love with Damon , and the two kiss passionately .
At the end of season 6 , the two plan to become human , get married , and have children together , but their dream is abruptly compromised by Kai , who puts Elena into a magical coma .
Damon remains entirely devoted to Elena throughout the remaining two seasons as Elena sleeps peacefully .
In the season 8 finale , she is revealed to be happily married to Damon .
TRANSITION Section::::Transition .
Executive producers Julie Plec and Kevin Williamson agreed that in the book series , Elena was turned into a vampire too early , which was around page 200 of The Awakening .
Elena 's transition into a vampire was planned for two years .
Plec said : " That felt obviously too soon , and rushed , and we did n't want to make a show about a teenage girl who instantly becomes a vampire .
But we always knew that her journey would take her there eventually " .
At the second season 's conclusion , Elena was nearly turned into a vampire .
Dobrev was happy that she was n't , because she felt " it would have been too soon " , and also did n't think it was something Elena
or she wanted .
In the show 's third season , Elena has a brain hemorrhage which was initially thought to be a concussion , and begins to die .
In what was described by the International Business Times as " the moment Vampire Diaries fans have been waiting for " , Elena had to choose whether to be driven to Damon or Stefan to say goodbye to .
At the time , Klaus was killed , meaning all vampires sprouting from his bloodline also die , which includes Damon and Stefan .
She picks to say goodbye to Stefan .
However , all these vampires end up surviving when Klaus never really dies .
To save her , Doctor Merideth Fell ( Torrey DeVitto ) fed Elena Damon 's blood .
Rebekah Mikaelson kills Elena on Wickery Bridge , unaware of the vampire blood in her system .
She woke up as a vampire at the end of the season .
The Hollywood Reporter interviewed Plec , and described her transition as " monumental changes " which would have Elena in for a " wild ride " .
Plec said Elena becoming a vampire is " an awakening of a person who is about to go through a lot of changes " , and " she is going to evolve as a person and her relationships are going to evolve accordingly " .
While Stefan was afraid she would hurt someone , Damon thought it was inevitable and wanted to " rip the band - aid off " .
Plec felt that " She 's , unfortunately , not getting the same advice from the two people she values most in the world .
It 's going to make it more difficult for her " , while describing the situation as " a whole new Elena and it 's a whole new day .
It 's a different dynamic between the three of them especially " .
TELEVISION SERIES BACKSTORY Section::::Television series .
Section::::Backstory .
Elena Gilbert is born on June 22 , 1992 in Mystic Falls , Virginia to John Gilbert ( David Anders ) and Isobel Flemming ( Mia Kirshner ) while they were still in highschool .
With the help of John 's brother Grayson , Isobel and John flee town days later , leaving Grayson and his wife Miranda to adopt Elena as their own .
A doctor , Grayson fakes a birth certificate so that it appeared Elena was his daughter with Miranda .
The next year , Miranda and Grayson had a child of their own , Jeremy Gilbert .
Elena dates her childhood friend Matt Donovan , who was her first love .
On 23 May 2009 , Elena is picked up by her mother and father after getting in a fight with Matt while attending the party .
The three of them later end up in a car accident , with their car driving off a bridge .
Stefan Salvatore finds them , and saves Elena , but it was too late to save Grayson and Miranda , who died .
It remained unknown for months who saved Elena , and it was considered a miracle that she lived .
Her relationship with Matt ended when they broke up .
STORYLINE
SEASON 1
Section::::Storyline .
Section::::Season 1 . Elena , still empty after losing her parents , begins to fit back into school .
She meets a mysterious new student named Stefan Salvatore .
They connect instantly , and begin dating .
She meets his older and malevolent brother , Damon .
After researching , Elena realizes Stefan was alive in 1953 .
It is later revealed that he is a 162-year - old vampire .
Damon also begins falling for Elena .
Elena finds a picture of a woman named Katherine Pierce who looks exactly like her .
Stefan reveals that it is the woman who made him and Damon feud 145 years ago , and the person who turned them into vampires .
He also told her that he is the person that saved her the night of her parents death .
At the end of season one , Elena discovers that Grayson and Miranda were n't her biological parents , and that a woman named Isobel and her uncle John , who she grew up hating , were .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
In season two , she learns that she is a Petrova doppelgänger , having an appearance just like Katherine Pierce , which means that she has to be sacrificed to release Klaus ' werewolf side .
The sacrifice later happens , but Elena is saved , because John sacrificed himself for her after being put under a spell by Bonnie .
However , her aunt Jenna is turned into a vampire and , as part of the sacrifice , is killed by Klaus , leaving Elena without a guardian .
In the season two finale , while Damon is dying due to a werewolf bite , she forgives him for forcing her to drink his blood and kisses him with the thought that it might be Damon 's last day , however Damon gets cured by drinking Klaus ' blood .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
In season three , Elena does everything in her power to make Stefan get his humanity back , which was turned off by Klaus as payment for saving Damon from a werewolf bite in the latter part of season two .
Meanwhile , she grows closer to Damon while working together on saving Stefan and trying to defeat Klaus , eventually even sharing a kiss .
She later admits to Stefan that she has feelings for Damon as well but that she never stopped loving Stefan .
While in Denver together , Elena kisses Damon , later telling him that she does n't know how she feels about him .
It is eventually revealed that Elena met Damon the night of her parent 's death , though he compelled her to forget .
She eventually chooses Stefan in the season finale but before she can tell him , Elena drowns while having vampire blood in her system .
During the last moments of season three , she awakens as a vampire in transition .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
In season four , Elena is faced with the tough decision of whether to die or to feed on human blood so she can fully transition into a vampire .
Elena , after realizing Stefan 's desperation to keep her alive , decides to complete her transition .
Her relationship with Stefan ends , allowing her to begin a proper romance with Damon .
Although , it is later revealed there is a sire bond between them .
Sometime later whilst searching for the cure for vampirism , Jeremy is fed to the immortal Silas by Katherine .
As a result , Damon used the sire bond to convince her to turn off her humanity , due to her incredible grief over losing her brother and the last remaining member of her family .
Elena became ruthless without her emotions , going on killing sprees and being very hateful towards her friends .
Towards the end of season four , Damon kills Matt in front of Elena to trigger her grief .
After revealing that Matt had the Gilbert Ring on , Elena 's humanity was switched on and her emotions were focused on hate towards Katherine for killing Jeremy .
Season four ended with Bonnie as a ghost after bringing Jeremy back to life and Elena fed Katherine the cure for vampirism in a moment of desperation as she was about to be killed .
Elena had chosen Damon as the Salvatore that she loved .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
In season five , Elena starts at Whitmore College and is happy after spending the summer with Damon .
There she realises that Silas has taken Stefan 's place and that Stefan is in that safe in a river constantly drowning .
She and Damon then find the safe , only to find a dead body there meaning that someone opened the safe and Stefan is a Ripper again .
However , Qetsiyah had fried Stefan 's brain causing him to suffer amnesia .
While trying to bring him back , they almost kiss meaning that she still feels something for him .
Qetsiyah soon brings back Stefan 's memories and says that Elena and Stefan were always meant to be as the Universe had to unite the doppelgängers of Silas and Amara .
This leaves Damon and Elena questioning their relationship .
Later on she is kidnapped and experimented on by Wes Maxfield , and she learns that her father also used to experiment on vampires .
Later , when Katherine is about to die as a result of all of her years catching up with her as a result of having the cure in her system , Katherine uses a spell and possesses Elena , a fact that her friends were initially unable to deduce .
But once they did , they trapped Katherine and left her with no escape .
Stefan stabbed her with the traveller dagger , but ghost Katherine reveals to Bonnie , shortly before trying to cross into the Other Side , that she had injected Dr. Maxfield 's enhanced ripper / werewolf virus into Elena 's body , infecting Elena .
The gang is eventually able to find an antidote .
She unfortunately loses trust in Damon , partly because he killed her friend Aaron , so they break up , but realise they can not survive being apart and get back together .
Once Markos and his traveller army begin to take over Mystic Falls , setting an anti - magic barrier around the town , the gang comes up with a plan to take out the travellers by killing them all at the same time , overpowering the anchor to the Other Side AKA Bonnie and creating a possible way out of the now - collapsing Other Side .
Elena and Damon drive into the gas - filled Mystic Grill with most of the travellers in it , blowing it up and killing most of the people in it , including Elena and Damon .
She wakes up as a ghost and finds her body , sending her to Bonnie , where she passes to the Other Side , and she and many others are able to pass back to the land of the living afterwards .
But the spell that allows this is broken before Damon passes back through , and as Bonnie is the anchor , she is a part of the Other Side and shall therefore disappear along with it .
This leaves the gang mourning the loss of Damon and Bonnie in the season finale .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
In season six , Elena starts back at Whitmore , and is unable to set foot in her hometown .
She is also unable to recover from Damon 's death and starts lurking the borders of Mystic Falls in order to grab civilians , drink their blood , then compel them to forget , but as spirit magic no longer works in Mystic Falls , any of her victims who cross into the town remember the ordeal , putting her identity as a vampire at risk when one of her victims , Sarah , comes to town .
Elena begs Alaric to compel her to forget that she ever loved Damon , which Alaric is able to do , due to him being an Enhanced Original , with the ability to compel other vampires .
She eventually wears him down and asks her friends to never remind her once the compulsion had been done .
After a number of failed attempts , Alaric successfully compels her to forget her love for Damon .
She however leaves Alaric with some of her reminders of Damon , should she ever need them again .
She is told of her former feelings for Damon soon afterwards , but decides to stay the way she is , as she does n't want to go back to being unhappy again .
She starts to date her classmate , Liam .
Once Damon comes back to life , Alaric tries to convince Elena to allow him to undo the compulsion , a decision she is reluctant to make .
She eventually decides to have him undo it , but Alaric goes back to being human again after crossing into Mystic Falls , causing him to lose his vampire status ( he only stayed alive because his once fatal human injuries were healed ) , meaning he will not be able to do so .
She is then left to finally come face - to - face with Damon and see if she 'll still feel the same way about him .
They eventually rekindle their relationship , Elena takes the cure that Bonnie gave Damon .
At Alaric 's wedding Kai ruins their wedding and casts a sleeping spell on Elena , linking her life to Bonnie 's .
She makes a sacrifice to let Bonnie live out her life until it is her turn .
She bids goodbye to her friends and loved ones before parting ways but knows that she will see Damon , Stefan and Caroline again one day .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
Elena does n't make an appearance but is heard calling Damon 's name when he visits the Armory vault .
It was a way of Sybil , the Siren , luring him into a trap .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
In the final episode , Elena makes an appearance .
When a weakened Bonnie dies from the sounding bell , she meets Elena in a dream - like forest .
Elena hugs her and wonders if she really has died .
Enzo appears and says it is n't her time and takes Bonnie back to the world of the living .
When Bonnie wakes up , it was Stefan who resuscitated her .
Elena , asleep , is then taken to the Mystic Falls High School by Katherine and places her in the boiler room .
Stefan tries to rescue Elena , but Katherine had Kai spell the boiler room , so that Elena ca n't be taken out of the room .
After Bonnie had deflected the hellfire back into the bell , Bonnie passes out .
Elena wakes up and wanders the school .
Stefan meets up with her .
It looks like Bonnie has died , but in fact Elena is still sleeping and Stefan 's ghost came to visit her in her dream .
He had taken the place of killing Katherine instead of Damon , since Damon is human after Stefan gave him the cure .
He came to say goodbye .
After a tearful hug and saying goodbye , Stefan goes into afterlife .
Elena finally wakes up because Bonnie has broken the spell over her .
Elena reunites with Damon and the rest of the gang .
Elena gives Caroline the message Stefan whispered into her ear , saying he did hear her voice message and will love her forever .
In the epilogue , Elena continued to study at medical school .
After finishing her education , she went back to Mystic Falls and lived together with Damon , happily married for a long time .
After living out her life , she crosses over to the afterlife where she finally reunites with her parents , Aunt Jenna and Uncle John .
POST - SEASON 8 Section::::Post - Season 8 .
The second - last episode of The Originals , ' The Tale of Two Wolves ' , features Elijah and Hope Mikaelson visiting Mystic Falls , and the window of a doctor 's office reads ' Elena Salvatore , M.D. ' , showing that Elena got her own medical practice .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Elena has received mainly positive reviews .
Steve West of the Cinema Blend compared the story of The Vampire Diaries and the character of Elena to the popular vampire franchise , Twilight , and its protagonist Bella Swan .
West said " Clearly Elena is way hotter than Bella , she has two immortal vampires fighting over her " .
After she transitioned into a vampire , Carina Adly MacKenzie of Zap2it hoped that the " fierce " and " ripper " side of Elena would emerge when " someone messes with the people she loves " .
McKenzie noted that when a person becomes a vampire , " their strongest personality traits are heightened " , and hoped that would n't see Elena 's " compassion and selflessness " double into " helping old ladies with their groceries and nursing injured animals back to health " .
Robyn Ross of TV Guide also hoped that after Elena " has had a taste for blood " , she would lose control .
Prior to her becoming a vampire , Ross thought she was less fun and " slightly boring " , and wanted Elena to follow her instinct and " stop protecting everyone 's feelings " .
Elena 's romances with Stefan and Damon have become a popular craze with viewers , who have nicknamed them " Stelena " and " Delena " .
Andy Swift of the website HollywoodLife praised Elena 's relationship with Damon , which was a combination of real love and a sired bond , hoping they would live " happily ever after " .
Vlada Gelman of TVLine , however , felt that their romance was " over in a rather mature way for a young love triangle " and questioned whether Elena was " ready to jump into a relationship with Damon right away " while Stefan was still in the picture .
MERCHANDISING Section::::Merchandising .
Tonner Doll Company , Inc. created dolls for Elena and Katherine along with Stefan and Damon , from 1864 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS