LUCILLE BALL Lucille Désirée Ball ( August 6 , 1911 – April 26 , 1989 ) was an American actress , comedian , model , entertainment studio executive , and producer .
She was the star of the self - produced sitcoms I Love Lucy , The Lucy Show , Here 's Lucy , and Life with Lucy , as well as comedy television specials aired under the title The Lucy - Desi Comedy Hour .
Ball 's career began in 1929 when she landed work as a model .
Shortly thereafter , she began her performing career on Broadway using the stage names Diane Belmont and Dianne Belmont .
She later appeared in several minor film roles in the 1930s and 1940s as a contract player for RKO Radio Pictures , being cast as a chorus girl or in similar roles .
During this time , she met Cuban bandleader Desi Arnaz , and the two eloped in November 1940 .
In the 1950s , Ball ventured into television .
In 1951 , she and Arnaz created the sitcom I Love Lucy , a series that became one of the most beloved programs in television history .
The same year , Ball gave birth to their first child , Lucie Arnaz , followed by Desi Arnaz Jr. in 1953 .
Ball and Arnaz divorced in May 1960 , and she married comedian Gary Morton in 1961 .
Following the end of I Love Lucy , Ball would go on to appear in a Broadway musical , Wildcat , for a year from 1960 to 1961 , although the show received lukewarm reviews and had to be shut down permanently when Ball became ill for a brief time .
After Wildcat , Ball reunited with I Love Lucy co - star Vivian Vance for the aforementioned Lucy Show , which Vance departed in 1965 but which was to continue for three years with longtime friend of Ball 's Gale Gordon who already had a recurring role on the program .
In 1962 , Ball became the first woman to run a major television studio , Desilu Productions , which produced many popular television series , including and .
Ball did not back away from acting completely .
She appeared in film and television roles for the rest of her career until her death in April 1989 from an abdominal aortic dissection at the age of 77 .
In 1985 , Ball took on a dramatic role in a television film , Stone Pillow .
The next year she starred in Life with Lucy , which was , unlike her other sitcoms , not well - received ; the show was cancelled after three months .
Ball was nominated for 13 Primetime Emmy Awards , winning four times .
In 1977 , Ball was among the first recipients of the Women in Film Crystal Award .
She was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 1979 , inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1984 , the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Kennedy Center Honors in 1986 , and the Governors Award from the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences in 1989 .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Born at 69 Stewart Avenue , Jamestown , New York , Lucille Désirée Ball was the daughter of Henry Durrell Ball ( 1887–1915 ) and Désirée " DeDe " Evelyn Ball ( née Hunt ; 1892–1977 ) .
Her family lived in Wyandotte , Michigan for a time .
She sometimes later claimed that she had been born in Butte , Montana where her grandparents had lived .
A number of magazines reported inaccurately that she had decided that Montana was a more romantic place to be born than New York and repeated a fantasy of a " western childhood " .
However her father had moved the family to Anaconda , Montana for his work , where they lived briefly , among other places .
Her family belonged to the Baptist church .
Her ancestors were mostly English , but a few were Scottish , French , and Irish .
Some were among the earliest settlers in the Thirteen Colonies , including Elder John Crandall of Westerly , Rhode Island , and Edmund Rice , an early emigrant from England to the Massachusetts Bay Colony .
When Lucille was three years old , her 27-year - old father died of typhoid fever .
Henry Ball was a lineman for Bell Telephone Company and was frequently transferred .
The family had moved from Jamestown to Anaconda , Montana , and later to Trenton , New Jersey .
Her father contracted typhoid and died in February 1915 while DeDe Ball was pregnant with her second child , Frederick .
Lucille Ball recalled little from the day her father died , but remembered a bird getting trapped in the house .
From that day forward , she suffered from ornithophobia .
After Ball 's father died , her mother returned to New York .
Ball and her brother , Fred Henry Ball ( 1915–2007 ) , were raised by their mother and maternal grandparents in Celoron , New York , a summer resort village on Lake Chautauqua , 2.5 miles west of downtown Jamestown .
Lucy loved Celoron Park , one of the best amusement areas in the United States at that time .
Its boardwalk had a ramp to the lake that served as a children 's slide , the Pier Ballroom , a roller - coaster , a bandstand , and a stage where vaudeville concerts and regular theatrical shows were presented which made Celoron Park a popular resort .
Four years after Henry Ball 's death , DeDe Ball married Edward Peterson .
While her mother and stepfather looked for work in another city , Peterson 's parents cared for her and her brother .
Ball 's stepgrandparents were a puritanical Swedish couple who banished all mirrors from the house except one over the bathroom sink .
When the young Ball was caught admiring herself in it , she was severely chastised for being vain .
This period of time affected Ball so deeply that , in later life , she claimed that it lasted seven or eight years .
Peterson was a Shriner .
When his organization needed female entertainers for the chorus line of their next show , he encouraged his 12-year - old stepdaughter to audition .
While Ball was onstage , she realized performing was a great way to gain praise and recognition .
Her appetite for recognition was awakened at an early age .
In 1927 , her family suffered misfortune .
Their house and furnishings were lost to settle a financial legal judgment after a neighborhood boy was accidentally shot and paralyzed by someone target shooting in their yard under the supervision of Ball 's grandfather .
The family subsequently moved into a small apartment in Jamestown .
CAREER
EARLY CAREER
Section::::Career .
Section::::Early career .
In 1925 , Ball , then only 14 , started dating Johnny DeVita , a 21-year - old local hoodlum .
DeDe was unhappy with the relationship , but unable to influence her daughter to end it .
She expected the romance to burn out after a few weeks , but that did not happen .
After about a year , DeDe tried to separate them by exploiting Lucille 's desire to be in show business .
Despite the family 's meager finances , she arranged for Lucille to attend the John Murray Anderson School for the Dramatic Arts , in New York City , where Bette Davis was a fellow student .
Ball later said about that time in her life , " All I learned in drama school was how to be frightened .
"
Ball 's instructors felt she would not be successful in the entertainment business , and were not afraid to say this to her face .
In the face of this harsh criticism , Ball was determined to prove her teachers wrong and returned to New York City in 1928 .
That same year , she began working for Hattie Carnegie as an in - house model .
Carnegie ordered Ball to dye her then - brown hair blonde , and Ball complied .
Of this time in her life , Ball said , " Hattie taught me how to slouch properly in a $ 1,000 hand - sewn sequin dress and how to wear a $ 40,000 sable coat as casually as rabbit . "
Ball 's career was thriving when she became ill with rheumatoid arthritis and was unable to work for two years .
In 1932 , she moved back to New York City to resume her pursuit of an acting career and supported herself again by working for Carnegie and as the Chesterfield cigarette girl .
Using the name Diane ( sometimes spelled Dianne )
Belmont , she started getting chorus work on Broadway , but it was not lasting .
Ball was hired – but then quickly fired – by theatre impresario Earl Carroll , from his Vanities , and by Florenz Ziegfeld , from a touring company of Rio Rita .
HOLLYWOOD
Section::::Hollywood .
After an uncredited stint as a Goldwyn Girl in Roman Scandals ( 1933 ) , starring Eddie Cantor and Gloria Stuart , Ball moved permanently to Hollywood to appear in films .
She had many small movie roles in the 1930s as a contract player for RKO Radio Pictures , including a two - reel comedy short with the Three Stooges ( Three Little Pigskins , 1934 ) and a movie with the Marx Brothers ( Room Service , 1938 ) .
She also appeared as one of the featured models in the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers film Roberta ( 1935 ) , as the flower girl in Top Hat ( 1935 ) , and in a brief supporting role at the beginning of Follow the Fleet ( 1936 ) , another Astaire - Rogers film .
Ball and Ginger Rogers , who were distant maternal cousins , played aspiring actresses in the film Stage Door ( 1937 ) .
In 1936 , she landed the role she hoped would lead her to Broadway , in the Bartlett Cormack play Hey Diddle Diddle , a comedy set in a duplex apartment in Hollywood .
The play premiered in Princeton , New Jersey , on January 21 , 1937 , with Ball playing the part of Julie Tucker , " one of three roommates coping with neurotic directors , confused executives , and grasping stars , who interfere with the girls ' ability to get ahead " .
The play received good reviews , but problems existed , chiefly with its star , Conway Tearle , who was in poor health .
Cormack wanted to replace him , but the producer , Anne Nichols , said the fault lay with the character and insisted that the part needed to be reshaped and rewritten .
The two were unable to agree on a solution .
The play was scheduled to open on Broadway at the Vanderbilt Theatre , but closed after one week in Washington , DC , when Tearle suddenly became gravely ill .
Ball later auditioned for the role of Scarlett O'Hara for Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) , but Vivien Leigh got the part , winning an Academy Award for Best Actress for her role .
Ball signed with Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer in the 1940s , but never achieved major stardom there .
She was known in Hollywood circles as " Queen of the B's"—a title previously held by Fay Wray — starring in a number of B - movies , such as Five Came Back ( 1939 ) .
Like many budding actresses , Ball picked up radio work to supplement her income and gain exposure .
In 1937 , she appeared regularly on The Phil Baker Show .
When its run ended in 1938 , Ball joined the cast of The Wonder Show starring Jack Haley ( best remembered as the Tin Woodman in The Wizard of Oz , 1939 ) .
There began her 50-year professional relationship with the show 's announcer , Gale Gordon .
The Wonder Show lasted one season , with the final episode airing on April 7 , 1939 .
MGM producer Arthur Freed purchased the Broadway hit musical play
DuBarry Was a Lady ( 1943 ) especially for Ann Sothern , but when she turned down the part , that plum role went to Ball , Sothern 's real - life best friend .
In 1946 , Ball starred in Lover Come Back .
In 1947 , she appeared in the murder mystery Lured as Sandra Carpenter , a taxi dancer in London .
I LOVE LUCY AND DESI Section::::I
Love Lucy and Desi .
In 1948 , Ball was cast as Liz Cooper ( at first " Cugat " ; this was changed because listeners were getting the characters confused with a real - life bandleader , Xavier Cugat ) , a wacky wife , in My Favorite Husband , an audio program for CBS Radio .
The show was successful , and CBS asked her to develop it for television .
She agreed , but insisted on working with her real - life husband , Cuban bandleader Desi Arnaz .
CBS executives were reluctant , thinking the public would not accept an All - American redhead and a Cuban as a couple .
CBS was initially unimpressed with the pilot episode , produced by the couple 's Desilu Productions company .
The pair went on the road with a vaudeville act , in which Lucy played the zany housewife , wanting to get into Arnaz 's show .
Given the great success of the tour , CBS put I
Love Lucy into their lineup .
I Love Lucy
was not only a star vehicle for Lucille Ball , but also a potential means for her to salvage her marriage to Arnaz .
Their relationship had become badly strained , in part because of their hectic performing schedules , which often kept them apart , but mostly due to Desi 's attraction to other women .
Along the way , Ball created a television dynasty and achieved several firsts .
She was the first woman to head a TV production company : Desilu , which she had formed with Arnaz .
After their divorce , she bought out his share and became a very actively engaged studio head .
Desilu and I Love Lucy pioneered a number of methods still in use in TV production today , such as filming before a live studio audience with a number of cameras , and distinct sets , adjacent to each other .
During this time , Ball taught a 32-week comedy workshop at the Brandeis - Bardin Institute .
She was quoted as saying , " You can not teach someone comedy ; either they have it
or they do n't . "
During the run of I Love Lucy , Ball and Arnaz wanted to remain in their Los Angeles home , but time - zone logistics made that difficult .
Since prime time in L.A. was too late at night on the East Coast to air a major network series , filming in California would have meant giving most of the TV audience an inferior kinescope picture — and , at least , a day later .
Sponsor Philip Morris did not want to show day - old kinescopes to major East Coast markets , nor did they want to pay the extra cost that filming , processing , and editing would require .
So , the company pressured Ball and Arnaz to relocate to New York City .
The couple offered to take a pay cut to finance filming , on the condition that Desilu would retain the rights of each episode once it aired .
CBS agreed to relinquish the post - first - broadcast rights to Desilu , not realizing they were giving up a valuable and enduring asset .
In 1957 , CBS bought back the rights for $ 1,000,000 ( $ in today 's terms ) , providing Ball and Arnaz 's down payment for the purchase of the former RKO Pictures studios , which they turned into Desilu Studios .
I Love
Lucy dominated U.S. ratings for most of its run .
( An attempt was also made , with the same cast and writers , to adapt the show for radio .
The pilot adapted the famous " Breaking the Lease " episode , in which the Ricardos and Mertzes argue , and the Ricardos threaten to move , but find themselves stuck in a firm lease .
The resulting radio audition disc has survived , but never aired . )
A scene in which Lucy and Ricky practice the tango , in the episode
" Lucy Does The Tango " , evoked the longest recorded studio audience laugh in the history of the show — so long that the sound editor had to cut that section of the soundtrack in half .
During the show 's production breaks , Lucy and Desi starred together in two feature films :
The Long , Long Trailer ( 1954 ) and Forever , Darling ( 1956 ) .
After I Love Lucy ended its run in 1957 , the main cast continued to appear in occasional hour - long specials under the title The Lucy – Desi Comedy Hour until 1960 .
Desilu produced several other popular shows , such as The Untouchables , , and .
The studio was eventually sold in 1967 for $ 17,000,000 ( $ in today 's terms ) and merged into Paramount Pictures .
ACTIVITIES 1960–1977 Section::::Activities 1960–1977 .
The 1960 Broadway musical Wildcat ended its run early when Ball became too ill to continue in the show .
The show was the source of the song she made famous , " Hey , Look Me Over " ,
which she performed with Paula Stewart on The Ed Sullivan Show .
Ball hosted a CBS Radio talk show entitled Let 's Talk to Lucy in 1964–65 .
She also made a few more movies including Yours , Mine , and Ours ( 1968 ) , and the musical Mame ( 1974 ) , and two more successful long - running sitcoms for CBS : The Lucy Show ( 1962–68 ) , which costarred Vivian Vance and Gale Gordon , and Here 's Lucy ( 1968–74 ) , which also featured Gordon , as well as Lucy 's real - life children , Lucie Arnaz and Desi Arnaz ,
Jr. She appeared on the Dick Cavett show in 1974 and spoke of her history and life with Arnaz .
Ball 's close friends in the business included
perennial co - star Vivian Vance and film stars Judy Garland , Ann Sothern , and Ginger Rogers , and comedic television performers Jack Benny , Barbara Pepper , Mary Wickes and Mary Jane Croft ; all except Garland appeared at least once on her various series .
Former Broadway co - stars Keith Andes and Paula Stewart also appeared at least once on her later sitcoms , as did Joan Blondell , Rich Little and Ann - Margret .
Ball mentored actress and singer Carole Cook , and befriended Barbara Eden , when Eden appeared on an episode of I Love Lucy .
In 1966 , Ball became a friend and mentor to Carol Burnett .
She guested on Burnett 's highly successful CBS - TV special Carol + 2 and the younger performer reciprocated by appearing on The Lucy Show .
It was rumored that Ball offered Burnett a chance to star on her own sitcom , but in truth Burnett was offered ( and declined )
" Here 's Agnes " by CBS executives .
She instead chose to create her own variety show due to a stipulation that was on an existing contract she had with CBS .
The two women remained close friends until Ball 's death in 1989 .
Ball sent flowers every year on Burnett 's birthday .
When Burnett awoke on the day of her 56th birthday in 1989 , she discovered via the morning news that Lucille Ball had died .
Later that afternoon , flowers arrived at Burnett 's house with a note reading , " Happy Birthday , Kid .
Love , Lucy . "
Ball was originally considered by Frank Sinatra for the role of Mrs. Iselin in the Cold War thriller
The Manchurian Candidate .
Director / producer John Frankenheimer , however , had worked with Angela Lansbury in a mother role in All Fall Down and insisted on having her for the part .
Ball was the lead actress in a number of comedy television specials to about 1980 , including Lucy Calls the President which featured Vivian Vance , Gale Gordon and Mary Jane Croft , and Lucy Moves to NBC , a special depicting a fictionalization of her move to the NBC television network .
1980S
Section::::1980s .
During the mid-1980s , Ball attempted to resurrect her television career .
In 1982 , she hosted a two - part Three 's Company retrospective , showing clips from the show 's first five seasons , summarizing memorable plotlines , and commenting on her love of the show .
A 1985 dramatic made - for - TV film about an elderly homeless woman , Stone Pillow , received mixed reviews .
Her 1986 sitcom comeback Life with Lucy , costarring her longtime foil Gale Gordon and co - produced by Ball , Gary Morton , and prolific producer /
former actor Aaron Spelling was cancelled less than two months into its run by ABC .
In February 1988 , Ball was named the Hasty Pudding Woman of the Year .
In May 1988 , Ball was hospitalized after suffering a mild heart attack .
Her last public appearance , just one month before her death , was at the 1989 Academy Awards telecast in which she and fellow presenter Bob Hope were given a standing ovation .
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON UN - AMERICAN ACTIVITIES Section::::Testimony before the House Committee on Un - American Activities .
When Ball registered to vote in 1936 , she listed her party affiliation as Communist .
( She was registered as a Communist in 1938 as well . )
To sponsor the Communist Party 's 1936 candidate for the California State Assembly 's 57th District , Ball signed a certificate stating , " I am registered as affiliated with the Communist Party .
"
The same year , she was appointed to the State Central Committee of the Communist Party of California , according to records of the California Secretary of State .
In 1937 , Hollywood writer Rena Vale , a self - identified former Communist , attended a Communist Party new members ' class at Ball 's home , according to Vale 's testimony before the United States House of Representatives ' Special House Un - American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) , on July 22 , 1940 .
Two years later , Vale affirmed this testimony in a sworn deposition :
In a 1944 British Pathé newsreel , titled Fund Raising for Roosevelt , Ball was featured prominently among several stage and film stars at events in support of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's fundraising campaign for the March of Dimes .
She stated that in the 1952 US Presidential Election , she voted for Republican Dwight Eisenhower .
On September 4 , 1953 , Ball met privately with HUAC investigator William A. Wheeler in Hollywood and gave him sealed testimony .
She stated that she had registered to vote as a Communist " or intended to vote the Communist Party ticket " in 1936 at her socialist grandfather 's insistence .
She stated she " at no time intended to vote as a Communist " , Immediately before the filming of episode 68 ( " The Girls Go Into Business " ) of I Love Lucy , Desi Arnaz , instead of his usual audience warm - up , told the audience about Lucy and her grandfather .
Reusing the line he had first given to Hedda Hopper in an interview , he quipped : " The only thing red about Lucy is her hair , and even that is not legitimate . "
PERSONAL LIFE MARRIAGE , CHILDREN , AND DIVORCE Section::::Personal life .
Section::::Marriage , children , and divorce .
In 1940 , Ball met Cuban - born bandleader Desi Arnaz while filming the Rodgers and Hart stage hit Too Many Girls .
When they met again on the second day , the two connected immediately and eloped the same year .
Although Arnaz was drafted into the Army in 1942 , he ended up being classified for limited service due to a knee injury .
As a result , Arnaz stayed in Los Angeles , organizing and performing USO shows for wounded GIs being brought back from the Pacific .
Ball filed for divorce in 1944 , going so far as obtaining an interlocutory decree ; however , she and Arnaz reconciled , which precluded the entry of a final decree .
On July 17 , 1951 , one month before her 40th birthday , Ball gave birth to daughter Lucie Désirée Arnaz .
A year and a half later , Ball gave birth to her second child , Desiderio Alberto Arnaz IV , known as Desi Arnaz ,
Jr. Before he was born
, I Love Lucy was a solid ratings hit , and Ball and Arnaz wrote the pregnancy into the show .
( Ball 's necessary and planned caesarean section in real life was scheduled for the same date that her television character gave birth . )
Several demands were made by CBS , insisting that a pregnant woman could not be shown on television , nor could the word " pregnant " be spoken on - air .
After approval from several religious figures the network allowed the pregnancy storyline , but insisted that the word " expecting " be used instead of " pregnant " .
( Arnaz garnered laughs when he deliberately mispronounced it as " ' spectin ' " . )
The episode 's official title was " Lucy Is Enceinte " , borrowing the French word for pregnant ; however , episode titles never appeared on the show .
The episode aired on the evening of January 19 , 1953 , with 44 million viewers watching Lucy Ricardo welcome little Ricky , while in real life Ball delivered her second child , Desi Jr. , that same day in Los Angeles .
The birth made the cover of the first issue of TV Guide for the week of April 3–9 , 1953 .
In October 1956 , Ball , Arnaz , Vance , and William Frawley all appeared on a Bob Hope special on NBC , including a spoof of I Love Lucy , the only time all four stars were together on a color telecast .
By the end of the 1950s , Desilu had become a large company , causing a good deal of stress for both Ball and Arnaz .
On March 3 , 1960 , a day after Desi 's 43rd birthday ( and one day after the filming of Lucy and Desi 's last episode together ) , Ball filed papers in Santa Monica Superior Court , claiming married life with Desi was " a nightmare " and nothing at all as it appeared on I Love Lucy .
On May 4 , 1960 , just two months after filming that episode ( the final episode of The Lucy - Desi Comedy Hour ) , the couple divorced .
Until his death in 1986 , however , Arnaz and Ball remained friends and often spoke very fondly of each other .
Her real - life divorce indirectly found its way into her later television series , as she was always cast as an unmarried woman .
The following year , Ball starred in the Broadway musical Wildcat , which co - starred Keith Andes and Paula Stewart .
It marked the beginning of a 30-year friendship between Lucy and Stewart , who introduced Lucy to second husband , Gary Morton , a Borscht Belt comic who was 13 years her junior .
According to Ball , Morton claimed he had never seen an episode of I Love Lucy due to his hectic work schedule .
Ball immediately installed Morton in her production company , teaching him the television business and eventually promoting him to producer .
Morton played occasional bit parts on Ball 's various series .
Ball was outspoken against the relationship her son had with actress Patty Duke .
Later , commenting on when her son dated Liza Minnelli , she was quoted as saying , " I miss Liza , but you can not domesticate Liza . "
ILLNESS AND DEATH Section::::Illness and death .
On April 18 , 1989 , Ball was at her home in Beverly Hills when she complained of chest pains .
An ambulance was called and she was rushed to the emergency room of Cedars - Sinai Medical Center .
She was diagnosed with dissecting aortic aneurysm and underwent heart surgery for nearly eight hours , including the transplant of a new aorta .
The surgery appeared to have been successful , and Ball began recovering very quickly , even walking around her room with little assistance .
She received a flurry of get - well wishes from Hollywood , and across the street from Cedars - Sinai Medical Center , the Hard Rock Café erected a sign reading " Hard Rock Loves Lucy " .
However , shortly after dawn on April 26 , Ball awoke with severe back pains and soon lost consciousness .
Attempts to revive her failed and her death was officially pronounced at 5:47 a.m. PDT .
Doctors determined that Ball had succumbed to an abdominal aortic aneurysm and subsequent rupture , and that it was not directly related to her upper aneurysm and surgery the previous week .
Cigarette smokers are known to have increased risk of abdominal aneurysm .
Ball had been a heavy smoker most of her life .
She was 77 years old .
Her body was cremated and the ashes were initially interred in Forest Lawn – Hollywood Hills Cemetery in Los Angeles .
However , in 2002 , her children moved her remains to the Hunt family plot at Lake View Cemetery in Jamestown , New York , where her parents , Henry and Desirée ( Hunt ) Ball , and her grandparents are buried .
RECOGNITION AND LEGACY Section::::Recognition and legacy .
On February 8 , 1960 , Ball was awarded two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame : one at 6436 Hollywood Boulevard for contributions to motion pictures , and one at 6100 Hollywood Boulevard for television .
Ball received many prestigious awards throughout her career , including some posthumously such as the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George H. W. Bush on July 6 , 1989 , and The Women 's International Center 's ' Living Legacy Award ' .
A Lucille Ball - Desi Arnaz Center museum is in Lucy 's hometown of Jamestown , New York .
The Little Theatre was renamed the Lucille Ball Little Theatre in her honor .
Ball was among Time magazine 's " 100 Most Important People of the Century " .
On June 7 , 1990 , Universal Studios Florida opened a walk - through attraction dedicated to Ball , Lucy – A Tribute , which featured clips of shows , as well as various pieces of trivia about her , along with items owned by or associated with Lucille , and an interactive quiz for guests .
The attraction was permanently closed on August 17 , 2015 .
On August 6 , 2001 , which would have been her 90th birthday , the United States Postal Service honored her with a commemorative postage stamp as part of its Legends of Hollywood series .
Ball appeared on the cover of TV Guide more than any other person ; she appeared on 39 covers , including the first cover in 1953 with her baby son , Desi Arnaz ,
Jr. TV Guide voted Lucille Ball as the ' Greatest TV Star of All Time ' and it later commemorated the 50th anniversary of I Love Lucy with eight collector covers celebrating memorable scenes from the show .
In another instance it named I Love Lucy the second - best television program in American history , after Seinfeld .
Due to her support for the Women 's Movement , Ball was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame in 2001 .
The Friars Club named a room in its New York clubhouse for Lucille Ball ( the Lucille Ball Room ) .
She was posthumously awarded the ' Legacy of Laughter ' award at the fifth Annual TV Land Awards in 2007 .
In November 2007 , Lucille Ball was chosen as number two on a list of the ' 50 Greatest TV Icons ' ; a public poll , however , chose her as number one .
On August 6 , 2011 , which would have been her 100th birthday , Google honored Ball with an interactive doodle on their homepage , which displayed six classic moments from I Love Lucy .
On the same day , a total of 915 Ball look - alikes converged on Jamestown to celebrate the birthday and set a new world record for such a gathering .
Since 2009 , a statue of Ball has been on display in Celoron , New York .
Residents deemed that statue " scary " and not accurate , earning it the nickname " Scary Lucy " .
On August 1 , 2016 , it was announced that a new statue of Ball would replace it .
The new statue replaced the old one on August 6 , 2016 .
However , since the old statue became a local tourist attraction after receiving media attention , it was placed 75 yards from its original location so visitors could visit both statues .
In 2015 , it was announced that Ball would be played by Cate Blanchett in an untitled biographical film , to be written by Aaron Sorkin .
Ball was portrayed by Gillian Anderson , as her character Lucy Ricardo , in the American Gods episode " The Secret of Spoons " ( 2017 ) .
Ball was portrayed by Sarah Drew in I
Love Lucy
: A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Sitcom , a comedy about how Ball and her husband battled to get their sitcom on the air .
It had its world premiere in Los Angeles on July 12 , 2018 , co - starring Oscar Nuñez as Desi Arnaz , and Seamus Dever as I Love Lucy creator - producer - head writer Jess Oppenheimer .
The play , written by Jess Oppenheimer 's son , Gregg Oppenheimer , was recorded in front of a live audience for nationwide public radio broadcast and online distribution .
FILMOGRAPHY AND TELEVISION WORK
RADIO APPEARANCES
Section::::Radio appearances . !
Year ! !
Program ! !
Episode / source
1948–51
My Favorite Husband 7/5/48
–
3/24/51 SEE ALSO REFERENCES CITATIONS –
BOOKS
*
This autobiography covers Ball 's life up to 1964 .
It was discovered by her children in 1989 ( ) FURTHER READING
* Karol , Michael ( 2003 ) .
Lucy in Print ; * Karol , Michael ( 2005 ) .
The Comic DNA of Lucille Ball : Interpreting the Icon ; * McClay , Michael ( 1995 ) .
I Love Lucy : The Complete Picture History of the Most Popular TV Show Ever ; ( hardcover ) * Pugh Davis , Madelyn ; with Carroll Jr. , Bob ( 2005 ) .
Laughing With Lucy : My Life With America 's Leading Lady of Comedy ; * Sheridan , James & Barry Monush ( 2011 ) .
Lucille Ball FAQ : Everything Left to Know About America 's Favorite Redhead ; * Young , Jordan R. ( 1999 ) .
The Laugh Crafters : Comedy Writing in Radio & TV 's Golden Age .
Beverly Hills :
Past Times Publishing ; EXTERNAL LINKS * Lucille Ball at the Museum of Broadcast Communications * Lucille Ball at Encyclopædia Britannica
* Lucille Ball at Biography.com
* FBI Records : The Vault – Lucille Ball at vault.fbi.gov
* Norwood , Arlisha . "
Lucille Ball " , National Women 's History Museum .
2017 .