ASHLEY HOMESTORE
Ashley HomeStore is an American furniture store chain that sells Ashley Furniture products .
Opened in 1997 , the chain comprises over 800 locations worldwide .
The chain has both corporate and independently owned and operated furniture stores .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first Ashley HomeStore opened in Anchorage , Alaska in 1997 .
Since then , the company has become the # 1 home furniture retailer in North America .
They have stores located throughout the United States , Canada , Mexico , Central America , Japan , Kazakhstan and Singapore .
Though many Ashley HomeStores are independently owned and operated , all of the furniture sold is manufactured by Ashley .
The 100th HomeStore store opened in 2003 , the 200th in 2005 .
It became the fastest - growing furniture chain and top selling furniture brand worldwide in 2006 and open its 300th store in 2007 .
At the time when Jennifer Convertibles filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in July 2010 , Ashley was listed as having a $ 1.4 million claim against Jennifer .
When Jennifer emerged from bankruptcy in February 2011 , they controlled six Ashley Homestores in the New York City area .
In February 2014 , Ashley HomeStore opened its 500th HomeStore in Longview , Texas .
As of November 2017 there are over 750 Ashley HomeStore locations across the globe .
In April 2015 , Ashley HomeStore made its first incursion in South America by opening its first store in Santiago , Chile .
ASHLEY FURNITURE INDUSTRIES Section::::Ashley Furniture Industries .
The parent company of Ashley HomeStore , Ashley Furniture Industries , headquartered in Arcadia , Wisconsin , is the world 's largest home furniture manufacturer .
Owned by father and son team , Ron and Todd R. Wanek , the company manufactures and distributes home furnishings throughout the globe .
The company employs more than 18,000 .
In 2013 , the company built a 3.8 million square foot manufacturing and distribution complex in Advance , North Carolina .
CHARITY Section::::Charity .
Ashley Homestore has raised over $ 6 million for St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital .
The company hosts the annual Midwest Ashley for the Arts , whose proceeds go towards children 's charities , school and other different humanitarian initiatives .
Most Ashley Homestore locations also support the Hope to Dream foundation which donates mattresses to kids aged 6 - 16 that do not have one .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * USA Website
* Canada Website