AHOY ( GREETING ) Ahoy ( ) ( ) is a signal word used to call to a ship or boat , stemming from the Middle English cry , ' Hoy ! ' .
The word had fallen into obsolescence before rising from obscurity as the sport of sailing rose in popularity . '
Ahoy ' can also be used as a greeting , a warning , or a farewell .
The word can be found with similar pronunciation and writing in several other languages .
In Indonesian , another greeting Ahiy is also used besides Ahoy .
In Slovak and Czech also , ahoj is a common , colloquial greeting , while ' Hoi ' is used in Modern Dutch and Swiss German , and ' oi ' in Modern Portuguese , as an informal greeting equivalent to the English ' hi ' or ' hey ' . '
Ohøj ' is used in Danish almost identically to the aforementioned usages .
It stems from the sea - faring world , used as an interjection to catch the attention of other crew members , and as a general greeting .
It can sometimes also be found on land spoken as a general greeting , again , especially in a maritime context .
Alexander Graham Bell originally suggested ' ahoy - hoy ' be adopted as the standard greeting
when answering a telephone , before ' hello ' ( suggested by Thomas Edison ) became common .
EARLY FORMS AND DEVELOPMENT " A , HOY , HOAY " Section::::Early forms and development .
Section::::"a , hoy , hoay " .
Ahoy is a combination of the call ' hoy ' plus the sound ' a ' , presumably added to draw more attention to the cry . '
Hoy ! '
was a common call in England to drive cattle .
The earliest known example is from William Langland , in whose 1393 epic poem , Piers the Ploughman , the word first appears in Middle English : ' And holpen to erie þis half acre with ' hoy ! troly !
lolly ! ' , which roughly translates to " And helped to plow this half acre with ' hoy ! troly !
lolly ! ' " .
Seamen used the word " hoy " in the form of " hoay " .
The Scottish poet William Falconer , author of a nautical dictionary , wrote 1769 :
" If the master intends to give any order to the people in the main - top , he calls , Main - top , hoay !
To which they answer , Holloa ! " , Two other dictionaries from 1805 list Falconers call as " hoay " and answer " holloa " .
" Ahoy " does not appear .
Functionally related with " hoy " is a group of similar sounding calls and greetings in the Germanic languages : Middle and Modern English " hey " and " hi " , German , Dutch , Danish and Norwegian hei , in Sweden hej , and the Dutch greeting hoi .
In Old Russian " " was a standard greeting which is still present in Russian folk fairy tales .
In Czech and Slovak , ' Ahoj ' ( ) is a commonly used as an informal greeting , comparable to " Hello " .
It was borrowed from English and became popular among people engaged in water sports .
It gained wide currency by the 1930s .
AHIU , Â HUI Section::::ahiu , â hui .
Two discoveries in Middle High German literature reveal interjections similar to ahoi .
Their forms show no links to the middle English form hoy and their meanings offer little connection to the call used to establish contact .
In around 1290 Heinrich von Freiberg used the form ahiu twice in his adaptation of Tristan as a greeting : " ahiu , Parmenois Tristan ! " , alongside " ahiu , wie schône sie het sich ûz gefêgetieret " , English : " ahiu , how prettily she has dressed ! " .
Ahiu has the same meaning as the interjections ahiv , ahiw and hiu , which occur in this text as well .
As part of a group of words consisting of ahî , ay and ahei , which express pain , desire and admiration , ahiu can be found before exclamative or optative sentences and in emphatic greetings .
Between 1331 and 1341 , in his work Kronike von Pruzinlant , Nikolaus von Jeroschin inserted the expression " â hui !
sô wêr ich hôchgemût / sô ich
ir stirne sêhe blôz " .
Ahui , together with aheia , ahi and ahu , belongs to a group of words that express incommensurable joy , esteem and similar positive attitudes .
DISTRIBUTION AND USE GENERAL INFORMATION Section::::Distribution and use .
Section::::General information .
Seamen had been using ahoy long before the first recorded use in print in well - known seafaring songs or Shanties .
There is a lack of research into handwritten letters and records from seamen .
Therefore , printed works concerning the use of the " Ahoy"-word family have only restricted significance regarding the temporal and geographical distribution .
" Ahoy " represents the original English form and its first maritime use was recorded in 1751 as a new word in nautical language .
The first evidence for the German word " ahoi " is found in 1828 .
Ahoy is widely used in the Northern and Baltic Maritime World .
It expresses semantically a change in distance or presupposes it .
In most languages it can be used as an interjection , whilst in others it takes the form of a verb ( e. g. English - " to ahoy " , German - " ahoi sagen " ) or a Noun ( e. g. Swedish - " ohoj " , German - " das Ahoi " )
It is not known how the word spread in harbour towns or on ships with an international crew , especially as similar sounding interjections in a neighbouring language may have either interfered with or promoted the adoption .
In spoken German both ways of addressing people work , so either the command or the addressee can come first , e. g. " ' Pfeil , ahoi !
" oder " Ahoi , Pfeil " !
"
although in written German there is no Comma between the two words .
In other languages this is variable .
ENGLISH FIRST EXAMPLES Section::::English .
Section::::First examples .
The exclamation " Ho !
the house a hoy ! " , pronounced by a seaman in Tobias Smollets
The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle ( 1751 ) , is the first example of the expression ahoy in the English language .
One early example of the expression can be found in William Falconer 's Dictionary of the Marine ( 1780 ) :
" The usual expression is , Hoa , the ship ahoay ! " .
In the first edition of this dictionary ( 1769 )
the expression was still in its previous form hoay .
In the 1780s ahoy was already used on the stage in London to create a sea - faring atmosphere .
In this way it reached a very wide audience .
In the comedy The Walloons , brought to the stage in 1782 by the playwright Richard Cumberland , the expression was used to catch someone 's attention :
" Ahoy !
you Bumboat , bring yourself this way " .
The work was published posthumously in 1813 .
In another early documented source , as well , ahoy was similarly used to catch someone 's attention .
The expression ahoy was probably first heard in public in 1789 in the lyrics of a Sea Shanty , a worksong sung by able seamen , when the English composer Charles Dibdin ( 1745 - 1814 ) performed his musical The Oddities in London .
This work also contains the song Ben Backstay , about a boatswain .
The song goes : " And none as he so merrily / Could pipe all hands ahoy " .
The lyrics were not published until 1826 .
CONSOLIDATION Section::::Consolidation .
In the 1799 edition of Samuel Johnson´s dictionary the word " ahoy " ( pronounced ə´hɔi ) is still missing , but in the 1824 edition it was said " to be almost as important as holla " , supported by a quotation from Cumberland in 1813 .
The first entry in this popular reference book can be seen as an acceptance of " ahoy " into the English language .
In the first half of the 19th century the word already began to find its way into many neighbouring languages .
A speculation from 1835 about the origin of the French word oyez , which means " hört ! "
in German , implies an early philological engagement with the word .
It had already appeared in a metaphorical context before , when in the American trade town of Philadelphia a preacher started to build a church for sailors in 1819 .
According to his memoirs , sailors used to greet him with " Ship ahoi " and to ask where he was going .
The preacher used to answer back :
" To the New Jerusalem harbour " .
We sail under the admiral Jesus , a good captain .
We need men : " As the sailors said right before they were taken on :
" Now we come in and listen to your conditions " THE VARIANT " OHOY " Section::::The variant " ohoy " .
The variant ohoy was used early on as a synonym for ahoy .
In one anecdote , printed in 1791 , it appears as the ironic greeting of a captain to his boatman who is dressed up like a Romney Marsh Sheep when he entered the stage : " Ohoa , the boatswain , the Romney , Ohoy ! "
The " boatswain answered " Holloa " and disappeared .
The Scottish poet Thomas Campbell published a satirical poem in 1821 , in which a rider shouted : " Murderer , stop , ohoy , oh " .
In 1836 the Scottish novelist Allan Cunningham wrote : " Ohoy , Johnnie Martin !
Ohoy , Tom Dempster !
be busy my " merry lads , and take me on board " .
The form " ohoy " has been adopted by several Nordic languages .
Their dictionaries give the English ohoy as a single source word , usually before ahoy sometimes afterwards .
GERMAN , DIFFUSION RESEARCH Section::::German , diffusion .
Section::::Research .
The term remained widely unknown to German readers until 1840s , since the translators of popular maritime literature of the time avoided it .
1843 saw the first German translation of the word å - hoj to " hiaho " from a Swedish novel .
The earliest documentation of the term in German language appears not in non - fictional maritime texts but the nautical prose .
In the beginning , the circumstances point to uncertainties regarding the usage of the word .
Since the late 1820s , the words ahoy and ahoi marked with the coda -i , a feature demonstrating Germanization of ahoy , can be found in the German translation of English novels and fictions .
Around the same time , the term was used by authors in original German texts on rare occasions .
Ahoi became an established term around 1950 as it was used in the works of widely - read authors from the 1940s onward .
The term rarely appeared in dictionaries in the 19th century .
It is not included in the " Urduden " dictionary published in 1880 .
The Grimm brothers ' Dictionary of German ( Deutsches Wörterbuch ) did not recognize the word at the time ; it did not appear in the first volume , published in 1852 , with entries up to the keyword " allverein " .
The DWB 's second edition published in 1998 , documents the earliest uses of the term as occurring in 1846 and 1848 .
In addition , the original index cards for the dictionary , which are kept in the Berlin - Brandenburg Academy of Sciences , do not contain any earlier entries .
The standard work " Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache " by Friedrich Kluge lists ahoi as a separate entry since the 1999 edition .
The automatic search for appropriate keywords in digitalized books on the internet and in offline - databanks does only lead to a few useful results .
German light fiction was printed so badly in the first half of the 19th century that even today good recognition software still produces a great number of errors , so that records are not found .
Research in original catalogues is still necessary for a systematic search .
EARLY EVIDENCE IN TRANSLATION
Section::::Early evidence in translation .
The earliest creditable use of the word ahoi dates back to 1828 .
In 1827 the American story - teller James Fenimore Cooper published his pirate story The Red Rover .
The following year der
rothe Freibeuter was released in Frankfurt
am Main .
The translator Karl Meurer did not translate all of the words .
The command " All hands make sail , ahoy ! " was translated as " Alle zu Hauf !
Die Segel hißt ! " , but later on in the novel ahoy was translated as aho , which could have been a moment of inattention .
However , Meurer translated the phrase " All hands to mischief , ahoy ! " , as a signalled approval of amusement on board and so became " Alle zu Hauf !
zu Possen , ahoi ! " .
Meurer also translated the phrase " Good humour , ahoy ! "
with " Bei den Possen gehalten , ahoi ! "
In 1830 Cooper used the word ahoy five times in a story whose title was the same as the name of the ship Water Witch ( German " Wassernixe " ) .
A translation by Gottfried Friedenberg was released in the same year and he chose ahoi four times .
Friedenberg missed out the first occurrence of the word ahoy .
It is possible that in 1830 the German word was relatively new .
In later editions this mistake was corrected .
Friedrich Knickerbocker , who published the second translation in 1831 , overlooked or rewrote ahoy
also incorrectly as " Holüber ! "
The " Wer da " , or
" Who 's there ? " , the phrase he introduced once was not new .
In 1824 and 1827 the German editions of Cooper 's story The Pilot were released , in which ahoi was translated with similar expressions , such as " Wer da ! " , " Wer da ?
" , " heda " or " He !
He ! "
.
Not until 1842 in
der Lotse ( English , the pilot ) ahoy became the standard interjection due to Eduard Mauch 's translation , however this contained four ahoys and one ahoi .
In 1835 and 1836 the anonymous translator of the two - volume story Trelawney 's Abentheuer in Ostindien , which was published by sailor and later author Edward John Trelawny in 1832 , who kept ahoy as a loanword .
In 1837 the novel Lykkens Yndling / Das Glückskind was released in Danish by the author Carl Bernhard , who had also translated it into German .
Bernhard was the pseudonym of the Danish novelist Andreas Nikolai de Saint - Aubain .
This is probably the earliest import from a Scandinavian language and gave us the phrase " Ahoi , en Sejler " " meaning " Ahoi , ein Segler ! "
( English - ahoy , sailor ! ) .
EARLY EVIDENCE IN GERMAN SOURCE TEXTS
Section::::Early evidence in German source texts .
The expression ahoy is documented in a German source text from 1829 .
In her short story Die Armenierin , the Saxon writer Charlotte Eleonore Wilhelmine von Gersdorff inserted this word several times in a specialist context , both as an invocation and to express encouragement .
The author also worked as a translator from English .
The Austrian writer Charles Sealsfield first used the word ahoy in its original form .
Sealsfield , who was also known by his real name Carl Anton Postl , lived temporarily in New Orleans , where he had many contacts with sailors .
In his novel Morton oder die große Tour , which was published for the first time in Zürich in 1835 , a big crowd of excited people in Piccadilly Circus in London is summoned with the exclamation " Gare !
Gare !
take care !
Hallo ho !
A hoy ! " .
The same exclamation is still to be found in the following editions of 1844 and 1846 .
In the footnotes to a reprint , the word Gare was appropriately corrected to Care , but wrongly used in the text in all three editions .
The English form is correctly given , in two words , which was very common at that time .
In Sealsfield 's novel Pflanzerleben ( Zürich , 1836 ) , the word is used before uttering an order :
" Ahoi !
Ahoi !
( ... ) Hört ihr nicht ?
die Pferde dem Herrn Grafen abnehmen .
" , that is " Ahoi !
Ahoi !
( ... ) Do n't you hear ?
Take the Count 's horses . "
An English translation of the book appeared in the United States in 1844 , in which the word ahoi is kept in its German form .
Also in his last novel , Süden und Norden ( 1843 ) , Sealsfield again used the English spelling , in two words : " Sail a hoy – an ennemys sail ! "
The translation in a footnote to that page reads : " Kapitän , ein fremdes ( feindliches ) Segel . "
In one of Ernst Willkomm stories from 1838 , Jan , one of the characters in the story shouts " Ship Ahoy " as loud as a thunder from the cliffs of Heligoland .
This was misprinted as " ship ahni " by the German newspaper Zeitung für die
elegante
Welt ( English : A Newspaper For the Elegant World ) , in which Willkomm 's Lootsenerzählungen ( English : Pilot Stories ) first appeared .
The misspelling was corrected when the story was published in a book in 1842.With its meaning apparently unknown to the publisher , the word reappeared in the same German newspaper in a narrative called Johann Pol .
An Image of life in the west indies by an anonymous author in 1838 .
The said narrative depicts sailors from all around the world chanting " Ahoi , oi " while loading the ship .
The 1844 Politik an einer Wirthstafel by Friedrich Giehne uses the words ' Waitress , Ahoy ' in an expression addressed towards a waitress by a character .
The story was published in a book which included mostly reissues of materials printed between 1836 and 1843 .
However , there was no mention of when the said story was first published or whether or not it was actually a reprint .
What is interesting is that the word " ahoy " was used on and off the ship .
One such example of an off sea usage can be found in Smollet 's novel The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle in 1751 in which commodore Trunnion utters " Ho , the house , Ahoy ! " .
It is likely however , that Giehne might have borrowed the term from Smollet as he could have read an 1840 translation of Smollet 's work by Georg Nikolaus Bärmann from English to German .
In 1844 , The German author Heinrich Smidt used the term " Ahoy " in parts of a pre - print version of his novel titled Michael de Ruiter .
Pictures of Holland 's Marine which was published in 1846 in the Magazine for the Literature from Abroad of which he was the editor .
The term was also used in another one of his narratives in 1844 titled Hexen - Bootsmann .
There is no trace of " ahoy " in the recently digitized versions of Smidt 's works originally published between 1837 and 1842 , however , the term has a continuous presence in all of his works since 1844 until his last novel which was published in 1866 .
Therefore , it is likely that Smidt added the word to his vocabulary sometime in 1843 .
Friedrich Gerstäcker was one of the most successful and popular German authors of adventure novels in the 19th century .
As was the case with Smidt who started using Ahoy in 1844 , Gerstäcker , who translated a lot from the English , also suddenly used the term in 1847 .
" Ahoi – ho – ahoi !
meine braven Burschen " ( English : " Ahoi – ho – ahoi !
My well behaved fellows " ) , is what he writes in the Mississippi pictures .
In 1848 the sentence : " Boot ahoi !
schrie da plötzlich der gebundene Steuermann "
( English : Ship ahoi !
shouted the helmsman suddenly " ) , appeared in Gerstäcker 's novel Flusspiraten des Mississippi ( English : The Mississippi River Pirates ) .
THE USE OF AHOI IN GERMAN MARITIME CONTEXT Section::::The use of ahoi in German .
Section::::Maritime context .
For Wilhelm Heine , a world traveller , the cry was " common " in 1859 .
But Heine was on a voyage with sailors from the United States , who were already using the common English form .
For Germans in Livland on the Baltic Sea
the use of ahoi was explained in a dictionary from 1864 :
" ahoi [ ... ] .
disyllabic , and with stress on the second syllable .
" In the 19th century it was " all in all rather seldom " used in Germany .
About 1910 it was a " modern imitation " of the English ahoy , which later became an uncommon cry .
In non - maritime fields ahoi is also used to say goodbye .
In literature , many writers used ahoi in a mostly maritime context :
* Paul Heyse ( 1900 ) :
"
Er sah mit übermütig herausforderndem Blick zu den drohenden Wolken empor und ließ ein helles Ahoi !
ertönen . " . "
* Carl Sternheim ( 1909 ) als Mitteilung an die Crew : " Eine Stimme vom Mast : Land ahoi ! "
* Anna Seghers ( 1928 ) : " Ein paar Burschen von vorn liefen auf eine Höhe , schrien Ahoi , winkten mit den Armen . "
* Hans Fallada ( 1934 ) als
Warnruf :
" Ahoi !
Ahoi !
Mann über Bord ! "
* Friedrich Dürrenmatt ( 1951 ) : " Ahoi !
Die Segel gelichtet [ sic ! ] , weg ,
zu anderen Küsten , zu anderen Bräuten ! "
* Günter Grass ( 1959 ) : " Warum aber Matzerath winkte und solch einen
Blödsinn wie ' Schiff ahoi ! '
brüllte , blieb mir schleierhaft .
Denn der verstand als gebürtiger Rheinländer überhaupt nichts von der Marine " .
* Hermann Kant ( 1972 ) : " Da ging dieser Mensch aus dem Haus , sagte ahoi , Franziska , küßte einen auf die Nase , alles wie immer … " * Ulrich Plenzdorf ( 1973 ) : " Ahoi !
Hast auch schon besser gehustet , no ?
"
The word created a maritime atmosphere in many songs which were composed after the period of the Tall ships , but without the traditional meaning of ahoi .
In 1934 the song Wir lagen vor Madagaskar was composed with the first line of the chorus " Ahoi Kameraden " .
This can be seen as a sailors ' song .
The Pop song Schön ist die
Liebe
i m Hafen with the final line of the chorus
" Auch nicht mit Fürsten und
Grafen / Tauschen wir Jungens , ahoi ! " is based on a waltz , which was also composed in 1934 .
The Edelweiss Pirates probably adopted ahoi from Czech teenagers and used it as a greeting even after the group was banned in 1933 .
WATERSPORT Section::::Watersport .
People who sail as a hobby adopted ahoi from those who sail as a living .
From 1884 to 1887 the publication Ahoi !
initially appeared as Zeitschrift für deutsche Segler ( Magazine for German sailors ) , later as Zeitschrift für den Wassersport ( Magazine for Watersport ) .
In 1892 the Berlin sailing club Ahoi was founded .
There 's evidence of ahoi as a " sailor 's call " in the area of Lake Constance in the 1920s .
With the watersport 's increasing popularity it came back into existence in the 1960s .
Since then ahoi is also used as a formal greeting to officials on board , e.g. " Käptn ahoi ! " , or without an additional element .
The use is considered by professionals unseamenlike and you should completely avoid the cry ( " ahoi ! " ) .
Its use is severely marked down on board and can destroy the whole level of newly formed , hard - earned trust .
This already dying word has been revamped by lyricists once more .
A rubber dinghy shipyard distributed from 1964 to 1992 their customer magazine Wiking ahoi ( Viking ahoy ) .
CARNIVAL Section::::Carnival .
Ahoi , alongside helau and alaaf , is a word used to make a fool of somebody during the Carnival period .
After sailors , stevedores and inland fishermen adopted the expression from the coast , it was made popular by the Carnival societies .
During the parades , the crews of the Ships of fools greet the people on the roadside with Ahoi ! , and they return the same greeting .
It was also traditionally used in the former territory of the Palatinate , in Mannheim as " Monnem ahoi " or " Mannem ahoi ! "
and in Ludwigshafen , but also in bordering areas like northern Baden Altlußheim , as well as in southern Thuringian Wasungen , as " Woesinge ahoi ! " .
The Carnival society Milka , foundend in 1908 in Upper Swabian Ravensburg , shouts the greeting " Milka - ahoi ! " .
During the Backfischfest of the fishermen 's guild in Worms , the greeting " ahoi " is employed as well .
Also newer Carnival groups , for example one northern German association , and a new group in Cologne , refer to this call .
MILITARY Section::::Military .
In the German and Austrian Marines , before World War I , the boats which approached a warship lain at anchor were called using the expression " Boot ahoi ! "
, in order to find out who was on board .
The answers from the warships depended on the most senior person on board :
" Standarte ! " was the reply if the boat was approaching with a royal on board ; " Flagge ! "
with an Admiral ; " Ja , ja ! "
with an Officer and " Nein , nein !
"
without any official .
It worked in a similar way with " boat ahoy " in the U.S. Navy , where the procedure was established for the first time in 1893 , and in the Royal Navy .
In the German Navy the greeting " Ahoi " is no longer used .
In its place the Northern German term " Moin " is used .
Amongst the German warships between 1815 and 1945 only one motorboat of the Kriegsmarine was called Ahoi .
It was adopted in 1940 , so it probably already had that name , and it drove on the Kaiser - Wilhelm Canal .
In June 1945 the former owner , J. Pieper & Co. , took possession of it again .
The catapult ship Bussard , on duty in 1942 , was sold in 1947 as USA spoils of war to the Belgian shipping company Heygen in Ghent , and renamed Ahoy .
From 1940 to 1943 the Phänomen - Werke Gustav Hiller company manufactured 125cc motor scooters for the German Wehrmacht in Zittau , under the name Phänomen Ahoi .
" Nebel - ahoi ! " is used by the ABC - Abwehrtruppe , a defence division of the Bundeswehr , and it belongs officially to the military tradition of the army .
The expression originated among the Nebeltruppe , a Wehrmacht brigade group from 1935 , whose job it was to create a chemical fog over a battlefield before destroying the target areas with mass fire .
The expression originated in a moment of euphoria , after the fog successfully covered its target .
CANDY Section::::Candy .
Ahoj is the name of a Sherbet brand developed in Stuttgart in 1925 .
Named after the term ahoi it has been advertised with the picture of a sailor and a flag since 1930 .
At this point there was a fashion for Sailor Suits for children .
In the USA term is used for the popular cookie brand Chips Ahoy !
produced by Nabisco , a pun on the term " ships ahoy ! " .
CATTLE DRIVE Section::::Cattle drive .
In one particular case Åhoi is used as an instruction to the cattle to slow down .
It was found before World War I in the Ore Mountains and it was used in the same way as eha and oha , ooha(a ) .
It is possible that this is a combination of two interjections , as in Middle English , though eha might come from the typical Ore Mountain form eh " ein , inne " , as ee halten "
an- , ein-
, innehalten " .
The new standard dictionary for this language area lacks an entry for åhoi , ahoi or oho .
In a valley in the Slovenian Triglav area shepherds use the call Ohoi !
to communicate over long distances , according to a report from 1838 .
DUTCH THEORIES OF ORIGIN Section::::Dutch .
Section::::Theories of Origin .
If the origin of ahoi is rooted in Dutch , then hoy originates from hoie , which is the name of a sailorboat that today is known as a Hoie or Heude .
This common type of boat was used to transport passengers and cargo along the coast of the North Sea and across the English Channel .
In a letter from 1495 " an Hoye of Dorderyght " from the Dutch trading town Dordrecht is mentioned .
Then , two years later the term " an hoye of Andwarpe " appears in documents belonging the English King Henry VII .
In his travel accounts from 1624 John Smith , who tended to exaggerate , counts an enormous number of sails in the region between Vlissingen and the Sea of IJsselin : "
Holland and Zeeland hath twenty thousand saile of Ships and Hoies . "
However , there is a lack of direct evidence that links the origin of ahoi to the particle a and the noun hoie .
In Dutch linguistics the call is thought to be an adaption from English .
This is indicated by the amount of evidence found in English and the lack thereof in Dutch , as well as criticism of the idea that in the Early Modern Period a word could be formed from a simple expression for a ship .
The relation of ahoi and hoi , which is a common form of address in Dutch , is unclear .
Hoi , which had been proven to be an exclamation of joy as early as 1552 , could also be a short form of ahoi or ahoi could be an extension of hoi .
Most likely hoi belongs to a group of calls such as hó and hé and is not closely related to ahoi at all .
SOURCES
Section::::Sources .
Aho(o)i , ahoy and ehoi are rather uncommon in Dutch and are not included in numerous specialist dictionaries .
This could be due to the prevalence of the similar and shorter exclamation hoi .
The sources for earlier uses of the term are lacking , because ahoi did not get its own lemma in the Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal ( WNT ) , even though this comprehensive dictionary includes interjections .
In addition later editions of the WNT from recent decades lack this entry .
The earliest entries of forms of ahoi in the WNT can be found around 1900 .
The author Tine van Berken wrote " A - hoi !
A - hoi !
riep Beer onvermoeid , de hand trechters gewijze aan de mond " , which roughly translates as " A - hoi !
A - hoi !
called Beer relentlessly ...
" , in a book for girls that was published in 1897 .
In 1908 author George Frans Haspels wrote " met donderend ahoei " , " with thundering ahoy " , referring to the forces of a storm that hit the coast .
Here the meaning was extended to refer to noise .
If Haspel was alluding to the sound of the wind , the spelling ahoei , which is pronounced [ a ˈhuːi ] , contains an onomatopoeic element .
In the 1950s ahoi was considered outdated .
However , the expression was still generally known .
Evidence for the use of ahoy in Friesian are lacking in comprehensive dictionaries of that language .
AHOY IN ROTTERDAM Section::::Ahoy in Rotterdam .
Ahoy also refers to the short form of the Ahoy Rotterdam , a big conference center in the Netherlands .
It originally consisted of only one hall that was used for the exhibition Rotterdam Ahoy !
in the 1950s .
The exhibition was held as part of the reconstruction of the city after the war and was originally called Ahoy ' , the additional accent is intended to remind the reader of the exclamation mark in the name of the exhibition .
In 1968 it was moved to the district of Charlois and developed into an extensive complex of buildings over the years .
Charlois is the place of origin of the Tamboer-
en Trompetterkorps Ahoy , the Tambour- and Trumpetcorps Ahoy , founded in 1955 .
We do not know whether it was called this because the term ahoy expressed the sense of reconstruction in Rotterdam at the time and was already outdated in a maritime context .
The marching band first performed on the Koninginnedag ( Queens ' Day ) in 1956 and became more popularly known because of their innovative formations , their previously uncommon antiphonal singing and faster marching music .
In 1962 they won first prize at the Wereld Muziek Concours in Kerkrade and later played at the Sanremo Music Festival .
The group split up in 2003 because of a lack of successors .
The Show - Musikkorps Ahoy - Hamburg was founded in Hamburg in 1975 .
SCANDINAVIAN
LANGUAGES FORMS Section::::Scandinavian languages .
Section::::Forms .
Scandinavian languages have adopted derivatives of the English form ahoy and ohoy in various different spellings .
In Danish it is ahoj and ohoj , also ohjø , aahøj oder ohej , in Norwegian ohoi , in Swedish ohoj and å - hoj .
In Icelandic ohoj can be combined with the English word ship ; which takes the form Sjipp og hoj ( Ship ahoy ) .
This is also used in Norwegian , as Skip ohoi .
EARLY EVIDENCE
Section::::Early evidence .
In 1837 the Danish novelist Andreas Nikolai de Saint - Aubain , who published under the pseudonym Carl Bernhard , used the phrase " ' Ahoi , en Sejler ! '
raabte Matrosen fra Mærset " .
In the same year Saint - Aubin 's German translation " ' Ahoi , ein Segler ! ' , rief der Matrose vom Mers " , is an example of early evidence in the German - speaking world .
The Swedish author Emilie Flygare - Carlén wrote in 1842 : " Örnungen reddes till en ny färd på den klarnade böljan ; manskabet skrek sitt muntra ' å - hoj ! '
"
The German translator of 1843 avoided the use of å - hoj and formulated it as such : " The young eagle was prepared for a new journey through the clear waves ; the crew let out its cheerful shout of Hiaho . "
In the English translation of 1844 it was however , " The crew of the young Eagle [ … ] shouted their cheerful ahoys . "
In 1846 Flygare - Carlén wrote " Båt , ohoj – hvarifrån , hvathän ? " , English " Ship , ahoy - where from , where to ? "
But in English - Danish dictionaries from 1863 , ahoy is given as " Hey ! Holla ! "
und " holla !
heida ! "
FINNISH Section::::Finnish .
In Finnish , a language which does not belong to the Germanic Language Family , the interjection is derived from the Swedish ohoj and becomes ohoi .
In a German - Finnish dictionary ahoi ( German ) is written as hoi ( Finnish ) .
A translation from the English ahoy into the related language of Estonian is called ahoi .
CZECH AND SLOVAK THEORIES OF ORIGIN Section::::Czech and Slovak .
Section::::Theories of origin .
In the landlocked Czechoslovakia , created from Bohemia , Moravia , part of Silesia and Slovakia in 1918 and then in 1992 split into two independent countries of the Czech Republic and Slovakia , ahoj ( pronounced [ aɦɔj ] , ) is an everyday greeting .
The following explanations are the reason why ahoj is used in this part of Central Europe :
* Czech sailors had brought it with them from Hamburg .
The haulage company ČSPLO , in German Tschechoslowakische Elbe / Oder - Schifffahrt operated in the lot of Moldauhafen in Hamburg .
which had been leased to Czechoslovakia in 1929 , as a hub for freighters , which included the barracks ship Praha .
*
When Czech sailors ' shore leave ended at the Czech industrial harbours of Vltava and the upper part of Labe , as a way of saying goodbye , Czech prostitutes from bars in the harbour warned their customers of their occupational disease syphilis with the wordplay " A hoj !
Kdo nehojil , tomu upad " - "
And heal ( hoj , pronounced ɦɔj , is an imperativ of the verb hojit - to heal , cure ) .
So in English it means literally " Cure it , as whoever does not cure it , he will have his member fallen off . "
* Czechoslovak Merchant Navy sailors with their high sea ships had brought the word with them when they went home for summer .
* After having travelled to America in the 18th century the evangelical Moravian Church , which originated in Bohemia and Moravia , passed on this nautical knowledge , even the shout , to those from their former homeland .
The international call which is sometimes accredited to a Bohemian sailor in the 17th century has since been proven to be wrong .
NAZDAR , AHOJ , ČAU Section::::nazdar , ahoj , čau .
The spread of ahoj mainly dates back to the 1920s , when Czech adolescents and students populised canoeing on the South Moravian and Bohemian rivers .
The canoers formed a type of movement called Wandervogel , some called themselves trampové , Tramps , or skauti , Scouts .
As early as the 1930s Czech linguists believed the skauti as the carriers and distributors of the word ahoj .
These groups formed a romantic opposition against the nationalistic Czech middle - class * .
The Sokol movement with its preference for traditional gymnastics did not fit the adolenscent 's spirit of optimism and progress , which cultivated an internationally and trendily * perceived sport with its own greeting .
They positioned their form of ahoj from sailors , which possibly coming from the lower parts of Germany , against Sokol 's nazdar , English for hail .
Nazdar was used in general across the Czech and Czechoslovak society , but within a few decades , the modern - day ahoj replaced this old - fashioned expression .
The Czech and Slovak ironic love of language contributed to the distribution of ahoj .
In Slovakia ahoj - derivates are used in variety of different scenarios , such as the diminutive " ahojček " , as a toast " ahojka " , to a greater extent the plural - form " ahojte " , as well as the grammatically correct we - form " ahojme sa " .
In Czech as well as in Slovak ahoj is being slowly replaced by the modern - day form " čau " , which comes from the Italian greeting ciao .
This has been perceived to be the case since the Czechoslovak government allowed the Italian films to be shown in the 1960s .
USAGE IN YOUTH CULTURE Section::::Usage in youth culture .
The daily newspaper České slovo ( English - Czech Word ) , which belongs to the publishing company Melantrich in Prague , called a humorous supplement Ahoj na neděli ( English - Ahoy on Sunday ) , which appeared between 1933 and 1943 .
It was distributed on every Friday , " in order to provide the tramps in time with their weekend lecture . "
From 1969 until 1997 the leisure supplement Ahoj na sobotu ( English - Ahoy on Saturday ) appeared in České slovo 's successor Svobodné slovo ( English - Free Word ) .
Ahoj is the official name of a district in Nové Mesto which is a part of the Slovak capital city Bratislava .
Adolescents met there before the Second World War , when the region was barely built .
The car manufacturer Skoda called its prototype for a city car Škoda Ahoj !
in 2001 .
TEASING USAGE IN THERESIENSTADT
Section::::Teasing usage in Theresienstadt .
In Theresienstadt concentration camp
Czech - speaking Jews called jokingly non - believing inmates , who had assimilated to the Czech society , Ahojista , ( English - " ahoy - ers " ) .
A Jewish , Czech , who had assimilated and posed opportunistically as a Zionist for the camp 's Jewish administration centre , was called Šahojista , which was composed of the greetings Schalom and Ahoj .
Acronyms When Czechoslovakia , called the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia , was occupied by Germany
in the 1930s ahoj could be understood as an acronym for the watchword " Adolfa Hitlera oběsíme jistě " , English -
" We 'll hang Adolf Hitler for sure .
" Under the communist government ahoj developed into an acronym in the Slovak part of the country .
Since the struggle between the Church and the State from 1950 it was used as an acronym to console people in hardship
Aj hriešnych ochraňuje ježiš , English Jesus also protects the sinners , or for the Latin ad honorem jesu , English
For the glory of Jesus .
Demonstratively catholic adolescents use it amongst themselves .
Even priests used it to address the congregation from the pulpit .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
A recent resurgence in the popularity of the term has resulted from its use by The Simpsons character Montgomery Burns , who often answers the telephone with the greeting of " Ahoy - hoy . "
The use of the now - defunct ahoy - hoy , instead of the standard " hello " , is a running joke referring to Mr. Burns ' very advanced age .
Lyrics to " Solid Potato Salad " performed by the Ross Sisters in the Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer Technicolor musical film " Broadway Rhythm " in 1944 include the words " Hoy hoy "
Czechoslovak cartoon character Mole also often used the greeting ahoj , popularizing it amongst children in Hungary , Poland , Russia , Belarus , East and West Germany , Austria , Finland , Sweden , Norway , Denmark , the Netherlands , France , Spain , China , Japan , and India from the 1960s to the early 2000s .
In the TV series
The Big Bang Theory season 5 episode 08 , Sheldon answers the phone saying Ahoy after he explains to his roommate that Alexander Graham Bell proposed answering that way .
Australian radio duo Hamish and Andy use " ahoy " as the preferred telephonic greeting on their daily radio show .
After learning of Alexander Graham Bell 's wish for the word to be used over the phone , the pair implemented the policy on their show .
Listeners are encouraged to greet the duo with " ahoy " when they ring the show .
REFERENCES
* Dietmar Bratz : " Ahoi !
Ein Wort geht um die Welt , " in : ders . :
" Tampen , Pütz und Wanten .
Seemansprache .
"
Wiesbaden 2014 , , S. 301 - 319 , hier S. 304 z. B. " OED " s. v. ahoy
Svenska Akademien : " Ordbok över svenska språket .
"
Bd . 18 , Lund 1949 ,
s. v. ohoj ' ' Duden .
Das große Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache in zehn Bänden . ' '
Mannheim 1999 , , s. v. ahoi see quote in the retrospective language