TOLL - FREE TELEPHONE NUMBERS IN THE NORTH AMERICAN NUMBERING PLAN
In the United States of America , Canada , and other countries participating in the North American Numbering Plan , a toll - free telephone number has one of the area codes 800 , 833 , 844 , 855 , 866 , 877 , and 888 .
Area code 822 is expected to be used in the future , followed by 880 through 887 , then 889 .
However , 811 is reserved as a three - digit number for various other purposes .
In addition , 899 is reserved as a member of the series x9x for future numbering plan expansion .
Calls to these numbers are free to the caller if dialed from land - line phones , but may incur mobile airtime charges for cellular phones .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Most of the United States and all of Canada uses a flat - rate structure for local calls , which incur no per - call cost to residential subscribers .
As regulators in North America had long allowed long - distance calling to be priced artificially high in return for artificially low rates for local service , subscribers tended to make toll calls rarely and to keep them deliberately brief .
Some businesses , eager to sell their products to buyers outside the local calling area , were willing to accept collect calls or installed special services , such as Zenith number service , where they paid the cost of receiving telephone enquiries .
Initially , all of these calls had to be completed by the switchboard operator .
The first automated toll - free numbers were assigned with area code 800 , created as inbound Wide Area Telephone Service ( InWATS ) in 1966 ( U.S. intrastate ) and 1967 ( interstate ) .
These terminated on special fixed - rate trunks which would accept calls from a specified calling area with either no limit or a specific maximum number of hours per month .
The billing of calls was not itemized and the expensive fixed - rate line was only within financial reach of large corporations and government agencies .
Typically , a service provider offered a variety of zones , each costing more than the smaller ones , but adding progressively larger areas from which calls would be accepted for a customer .
In the early 1980s , Bell Labs received a patent for what became AT&T 's " Advanced 800 Service " , a computer - controlled system where any toll - free number could point to any destination number , such as to a small business local number instead of a special InWATS line , and an itemized bill generated only for the calls the business actually received .
By breaking the link between the number 's exchange prefix and geographic location , this system opened opportunities for vanity number advertising – an advantage in media like commercial radio where numbers need to be memorable .
The toll - free long distance market was opened to competition after 1986 and a RespOrg system instituted in 1993 to provide toll - free number portability between rival carriers using the SMS/800 database .
Open competition also brought an end to the pattern of long distance subsidizing local service , bringing per - minute charges down to levels where any business could afford to take orders using an 800-number .
Originally , 800-services were isolated between the US and Canada , but in 1984 , an agreement between carriers in the two countries allowed the numbers in each country to be accessible to the other ; providers of 800 service were able to add zones to cover the expanded areas able to be offered .
The arrival of Advanced 800 Service meant that numbers originally limited for use in Canada became available to American customers , and vice versa .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
The original 800-code operated for over thirty years before its 7.8 million possible numbers were depleted , but new toll - free area codes are being depleted at an increasing rate both by more widespread use of the numbers by voice - over - IP , pocket pagers , residential , and small business use , and widespread abuse by RespOrgs and subscribers who stockpile the numbers for use in misdial marketing , response tracking for individual advertisements ( each ad from each client gets a different freephone number ) or sale , lease or shared use .
Brokering numbers for sale is illegal , but renting a number or part of a number circumvents these regulations as FCC enforcement is sporadic to minimal .
Some geographic area codes are similar to the toll - free codes , e.g. , 801 , 818 , 860 .
Such similarities have been exploited by fraudsters in international locations that can be direct - dialed with what appear at first glance to be domestic area codes , including 809 , 829 , and 849 , which are official prefixes for the Dominican Republic and 876 which is the area code for Jamaica .
Toll - free numbers are also sometimes confused with 900-numbers , for which the telephone company bills the callers at rates far in excess of long - distance service rates for services such as recorded information or live chat .
These toll - free numbers can normally be called from any phone in Canada or the U.S. , though the owner ( and sometimes the provider ) can put restrictions on their use .
Sometimes they accept calls only from either Canada or the U.S. , or even only from certain states or provinces .
Some are not accessible from pay phones .
Calls from pay phones assess the toll - free owner an additional fee in the U.S. as mandated by the FCC .
Although toll - free numbers are not accessible internationally , many phone services actually call through the U.S. , and in this case the toll - free numbers become available .
Examples of these services are the MCI Worldphone international calling card and any US - based Internet telephone gateway .
However , many calling card services charge their own fee when their toll - free numbers are used to make calls or when their toll - free numbers are used from pay phones .
From many countries ( such as the UK ) , US toll - free numbers can be dialed , but the caller first gets a recorded announcement that the call is not free ; in fact , on many carriers , the cost of calling a ' toll - free ' number can be higher than that of calling a normal number .
US toll - free numbers could at one time be accessed from certain other countries ( such as Mexico ) on a paid basis by replacing the 800 by 880 , 888 by 881 , and 877 by 882 .
Thus , to reach 1 - 800-xxx - yyyy from a country outside its toll - free coverage area , 1 - 880-xxx - yyyy could be dialed .
This is no longer true ; area codes 880 , 881 and 882 have since been reclaimed for future use .
In addition , US toll - free numbers may be accessed free of charge regardless of the caller 's location by some IP telephone services .
OPERATOR HANDLING Section::::Operator handling .
In the United States , both interexchange carriers ( IXCs ) such as Sprint , AT&T Inc. , and Verizon , and Local Exchange Carriers ( LECs ) such as Verizon and AT&T offer toll - free services .
The way that a toll - free number is handled depends on whether it is a domestic or an interexchange call .
Most countries are divided into regions called exchanges , and within each exchange a local telephone company handles all phone services .
Intraexchange calls , which do not leave the individual region , would be managed by the individual local telephone company .
Calls that cross U.S. LATA boundaries – or originate in one country and terminate in another – are referred to as interexchange calls .
The format of the toll - free number is called a non - geographic number , in contrast to telephone numbers associated with households which are geographic .
( Since the advent of cell phones and voice over IP , households can have any area code in the U.S. — it is still geographic in the sense that calls from that area code are considered local , but the recipient can be physically anywhere ) .
In the latter case , it is possible to determine an approximate location of the caller from the area code ( e.g. New York or London ) .
In contrast , toll - free numbers could be physically located anywhere in the world .
When a toll - free number is dialed , the phone company must determine where the actual physical destination is .
This is achieved using the intelligent network capabilities embedded into the network .
In the simplest case , the toll - free number is translated into a regular geographic number .
This number is then routed by the telephone exchange in the normal way .
More complicated cases may apply special routing rules in addition such as Time of Day routing .
Toll - free numbers are normally specific to each country .
Canadian numbers are an exception as they are drawn from the same SMS/800 pool as other North American Numbering Plan countries ; the +800 Universal International Freephone Number is an exception as these work from multiple country codes .
The arbitrary distinctions between Local Exchange Carrier / Interexchange carrier , intrastate / interstate and the LATA structure are artificial U.S. regulatory constructs which do not have direct parallels in Canada or any other nation .
ROUTING IN THE U.S.
Section::::Routing in the U.S ..
The IXCs generally handle traffic crossing local access and transport area ( LATA ) boundaries .
A LATA is a geographical area within the U.S. that delineates boundaries of the LEC .
LECs can provide local transport within LATAs .
When a customer decides to use toll - free service , they assign a Responsible Organization ( RespOrg ) to own and maintain that number .
The RespOrg can be either the IXC that is going to deliver the majority of the toll - free services or an independent RespOrg .
When a toll - free number is dialed , each digit is analyzed and processed by the LEC .
The toll - free call is identified as such by the service switching point ( SSP ) .
The SSP is responsible for sending call information to the service control point ( SCP ) , routing the request through at least one signal transfer point ( STP ) in the Signalling System 7 ( SS7 ) network .
SS7 is a digital out - of - band method of transmitting signalling ( call control ) information in the Public Switched Telephone Network ( PSTN ) .
The SS7 network is a packet - switched network carrying signaling data ( setup and tear down of the call and services ) separate from the circuit - switched bearer network ( the payload of the telephone call ) in the AIN services network .
The SSP asks the SCP where to send the call .
The LEC will determine to which IXC that number is assigned , based on the customer 's choice .
Toll - free numbers can be shared among IXCs .
A customer may do this for disaster recovery
or so they can negotiate a better price .
For example , a customer may assign 50 % of their traffic to Sprint and 50 % to AT&T.
Once the LEC determines to which IXC to send the call , it is sent to the IXCs point of presence ( POP ) .
The IXCs SCP must now determine where to send the call .
Once the final determination of where the call is supposed to go is completed , the call is then routed to the subscriber 's trunk lines .
In a call center or contact center environment , the call is then typically answered by a telephone system known as an automatic call distributor ( ACD ) or private branch exchange ( PBX ) .
The subsequent routing of the call may be done in many ways , ranging from simple to complex depending on the needs of the owner of the toll - free number .
Some of the available options are : * Time - of - Day ( TOD ) Routing .
An example of using TOD routing would be a company with a call center on the east coast and a call center on the west coast .
TOD routing would enable Follow the Sun routing .
The east coast center opens first and calls are sent to that destination earlier in the day .
As the time changes across the country , expanded coverage would be offered by the call center in the west .
* Day of Week ( DOW ) or Day of Year ( DOY ) Routing .
Depending on the day of the week and business practices , not all call centers operate 24x7 .
Some centers may be closed for weekends or holidays .
DOW routing allows alternate routing for calls that arrive on specific days .
DOY routing allows for alternate routing on fixed holidays ( example December 25 ) .
* Area Code or Exchange Routing .
Toll - free traffic may also be routed depending upon the location of the caller .
For instance , if a company has call centers in the north and in the south , they may express a preference to have their southern callers speak with people in the southern call centers .
Companies may also wish to take advantage of the difference in interstate rates versus intrastate rates .
For example , the cost of a telephone call across multiple states may be less expensive than a call within a state , and as a result , the ability to route a call originating in Michigan to a call center outside Michigan can save a company substantial amounts of money .
* Least - Cost Routing is a variant of area code / exchange routing in which an independent RespOrg sends calls via different carriers based on which is least expensive for any given origination point .
The RespOrg is not the carrier .
A Canadian carrier could be used for Canadian calls and a U.S. carrier for American calls ; a user with many inbound local voice over IP numbers in multiple cities could convert toll - free calls on one main toll - free number to local calls in each city where it has a point of presence .
* Percentage Allocation Routing .
If a company has multiple call centers , the company can choose to route calls across a number of call centers on a percentage basis .
For example , an airline with ten call centers may choose to allocate 10 % of all incoming traffic to each center .
* All - Trunks - Busy Routing .
If at a given time a company 's trunk facilities can no longer handle the incoming traffic , an alternate destination may be chosen .
This assists companies handling unexpected call volumes or during crisis times .
* Ring No Answer Routing .
Some carriers have the ability to pull a call back into the network if the call is not answered .
This provides for contingency routing for calls that ring and are not answered at the final destination .
* Emergency or Disaster Routing .
Companies usually have some type of disaster plan to deal with both natural ( e.g. floods , fires and earthquakes ) and man - made ( e.g. bomb threats ) emergencies .
IXCs can provide alternate destinations should any of these situations occur .
* Take Back and Transfer / Transfer Connect / Agent Redirect .
If a company uses an ACD to facilitate the transfer , the ACD will remain in the call as long as the parties are on the phone .
The drawback is that this uses up trunk capacity on the ACD ( or VRU ) .
This is called by a number of names including hair - pinning or tromboning .
IXCs have the capability to allow a company to answer a call , provide a level of service , and then transfer the call to another location .
These IXC features provide a level of transferring that is different from what is available via the ACD .
There is usually a feature charge associated with this offering .
All of the above routing features are sometimes referred to as static routing features .
These routes are put in place and are not usually changed .
If changes are required , a customer usually has several options to make changes .
A customer can call the IXC or an independent RespOrg directly via a special toll - free number to make changes , or a customer may be able to make changes through direct access to the network via a dedicated terminal provided by the IXC .
ASSIGNMENT OF NANP
TOLL - FREE TELEPHONE NUMBERS
Section::::Assignment of NANP toll - free telephone numbers .
Toll - free telephone numbers in the NANP are regulated by the Code of Federal Regulations ( CFR )
Part 52 Section 101 .
RespOrgs assign the numbers in the SMS/800 database .
SMS/800 , Inc. administers this database as the Number Administration and Service Center , as a subcontractor for the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) .
The SMS/800 database and RespOrg structure are used in the U.S. and Canada .
A few specific exchanges remain reserved or are assigned to specific North American Numbering Plan countries which do not draw numbers from the SMS/800 pool : * Some 800-xxx prefixes are reserved for the following areas : * 800 - 389 for the Bahamas * 800 - 534 for Barbados * 800 - 623 for Bermuda * 800 - 415 , 800 - 751 , and 800 - 907 for the Dominican Republic * 800 - 271 for Trinidad * 800 - 855 is reserved for services for deaf or hearing - impaired users ; these TTY - related numbers , operated by individual telephone companies , are assigned directly by the North American Numbering Plan Administrator ( NANPA )
* Several other prefixes , including 800 - 484 , 800 - 703 , 800 - 744 , and 800 - 904 are reserved by the FCC .
* 1-NPA-911 is forbidden as 9 - 1 - 1 is an emergency telephone number .
( This is less restrictive than the rules prohibiting all three - digit N-1 - 1 codes as exchanges in all geographic area codes . )
* 1-NPA-555 is reserved in every toll - free area code ( except 1–800 ) for future information or directory assistance applications REFERENCES