HOUSE OF NIGHT House of Night is a series of young adult vampire - themed fantasy novels by American author P. C. Cast and her daughter Kristin Cast .
It follows the adventures of Zoey Redbird , a fifteen - year - old girl who has just become a " fledgling vampyre " and is required to attend the House of Night boarding school in Tulsa , Oklahoma .
Books in the series have been on the New York Times Best Seller list for 63 weeks and have sold over seven million copies in North America , and more than ten million books worldwide , in 39 countries .
NOVELS HOUSE OF NIGHT
* Marked ( May 2007 ) -
* * Betrayed ( October 2007 ) -
* * Chosen ( March 2008 ) -
* * Untamed ( September 2008 ) -
* * Hunted ( March 2009 ) -
* * Tempted ( October 2009 ) -
* * Burned ( April 2010 ) -
* * Awakened ( January 2011 ) -
* * Destined ( October 2011 ) -
* * Hidden ( October 2012 ) -
* * Revealed ( October 2013 ) -
* * Redeemed ( October 2014 ) - * HOUSE OF NIGHT :
OTHER WORLD
* Loved ( October 2017 ) -
* * Lost ( July 2018 ) - * * Forgotten
* * Found * NOVELLAS * Dragon 's Oath ( July 2011 ) -
* Lenobia 's Vow ( January 2012 ) -
* Neferet 's Curse ( February 2013 ) -
* Kalona 's Fall ( July 2014 ) - OTHER RELATED BOOKS
*
The Fledgling Handbook 101 ( October 2010 ) -
* The Nyx in the House of Night : Mythology , Folklore ( June 2011 ) - BenBella Books , Inc. - * House of Night : Legacy ( July 2012 ) -
Dark Horse Comics - * Wisdom of the House of Night Oracle
Cards : A 50-Card Deck and Guidebook ( October 2012 ) -
Ten
Speed Press - THE VAMPYRE
WORLD Section::::The Vampyre World .
Instead of vampire , the authors use the variant spelling vampyre throughout the book series .
This convention is also applied to the words vampyric and vampyrism .
In the fictional world of House of Night , a small percentage of the world 's teenagers are changed into vampires when adolescent hormones trigger a strand of what is otherwise junk DNA .
The change from human to vampyre takes four years , during which time the adolescents , known as " fledglings , " must attend one of the " House of Night " boarding schools .
While there , they are required to take the Vampyre Sociology 101 course to learn the dangers they face .
If a fledgling is not in constant proximity to adult vampyres , the fledgling will die ; so the fledglings rarely leave the school .
About one in ten fledglings die anyway , since their bodies can not tolerate the Change .
For those who survive , there 's a big reward : in the words of one of the authors , " Vampires are like Superman .
They 're super - gorgeous .
They 're super - talented .
They 're super - men . "
Vampyres are physically stronger than most adult humans , with accelerated reflexes , enhanced dexterity , life of more than five centuries , as well as heightened senses such as night vision .
Only vampyres and fledglings that have blue tattoos are not destroyed by sunlight , as in many vampire novels , but it is painful to them , so classes at the House of Night are held at night .
Fledglings are marked by a sapphire blue crescent - shaped outline on their foreheads ; when they become full - fledged vampires , this mark becomes solid and they receive more ' tattoos ' which extend over their cheeks ( these usually represent some personality aspect ; for instance , Zoey 's equestrian teacher , Lenobia , has tattoos that look like horses . )
Zoey is the only fledgling to receive a filled - in mark and tattoos .
As she defeats evil , her tattoos extend over her shoulders , down to her lower back , around her waist , down her arms and palms , and across her chest .
Older fledglings and adult vampires need to drink small quantities of human blood , but House of Night vampires do not attack humans to get it , instead getting it from blood banks .
The taking of blood is pleasurable for both human and vampire , comparable to ( and better than ) sex and a drug rush , and may lead to a strong emotional bond , called " Imprinting " between the two .
When an imprint is broken , either through death , Imprinting of another , or mystical means , it causes major anguish between the vampire and human .
Like with Zoey and Heath .
Zoey and her friends also face the usual teenage issues .
Zoey keeps some secrets from her friends and gets in trouble with them , forcing her to consider the nature of friendship .
Kristin Cast said that these moral dilemmas were included because " those are issues teenagers deal with ...
We 're not afraid to discuss things that are actually happening . "
As with many contemporary vampire novels , exploration of human nature and social commentary forms a subtext .
and Tsi Sgili are taken from real Cherokee legends .
Outside in the human world , the " People of Faith " is a fictional Protestant religion that is highly intolerant of anything else but their own beliefs .
( In an interview , P.C. Cast said that she modeled the People of Faith on the worst fanatics of all religions , not just Protestantism . )
Catholicism also plays an important role in the later novels , with the fledglings joining forces with Catholic nuns against Kalona .
The religious ambiance gives House of Night a strong moral perspective as it is often enforced that Nyx gives vampyres and humans free will .
This theme takes special prominence in Tempted , where Zoey discovers that , although she is the reincarnation of a woman created to love Kalona , she has the power to choose whether she will follow her previous incarnation 's path or reject it .
One of the characters dies because Zoey makes the wrong choice .
Also , in Burned , a Manichaen view of the Universe is presented , in which Good battles Evil : forces of Light combat forces of Darkness and characters must choose which side to be on .
Also , the black and white bull are presented .
In Awakened , the theme of love is presented , in which love must battle Darkness , and life is really only , always , about love .
THE BULLS Section::::The Bulls .
As noted above , a black bull , known as Light , and a white bull , Darkness , are introduced in Burned .
The bulls were not accepted into vampyre society because this was too masculine , and vampyre society is heavily matriarchal .
Their counterintuitive colorings are said to signify that each possesses something that the other wants .
The bulls often take a price , or a debt , from those who ask them for favors .
When Stevie Rae accidentally calls the white bull forth , he answers her question , giving Stark passage to the Otherworld .
In return , he drinks from her .
When Stevie Rae calls the black bull forth to get rid of the white bull , the black bull makes her swear an oath that she will have a connection to Rephaim .
It is noted by Aphrodite that if the white bull kills the black bull , the world will fall .
The white bull has intervened many times in the series , always helping Neferet in her plans .
He becomes her Consort , but his true plan is to destroy , and consume , the black bull .
He will use anyone to do that , and destroy anyone as well .
THE SETTING Section::::The setting .
The series is set in Tulsa , in a small and reclusive part of Midtown .
The House of Night campus is in the real life campus of Cascia Hall , and the climactic scene of the first book in the series takes place in the extensive gardens of the Philbrook Museum .
Zoey sometimes sneaks off - campus to the elegant shops of nearby Utica Square , and several important confrontations take place in Utica Square 's Starbucks coffee shop .
Some of the novels ' most dramatic scenes take place in a catacomb - like network of tunnels under downtown Tulsa built by bootleggers during Prohibition ; though a few such tunnels do indeed exist , and can be visited , they are far less extensive than the tunnels described by Cast .
The abandoned Art Deco train depot where the tunnels begin , however , is real and is slated to become a concert hall .
The location of Aphrodite 's parents ' mansion , South 27th Place , is a real street , though the mansion itself is fictional .
Though Aphrodite 's father , Mr. LaFont , the very rich and old mayor of Tulsa , has a name similar to the former , very rich , mayor of Tulsa Bill LaFortune , his character is very different , and the author has stressed that her fictional mayor is indeed fictional .
The Benedictine convent to which Zoey and her friends flee .
is real ; it is called St. Joseph Monastery .
And the devastating ice storm through which they flee was based on a real ice storm that hit Tulsa in December 2007 .
The climactic scene in Tempted takes place far from Tulsa , on San Clemente Island near Venice , which in real life called Isola di San Clemente and is part of the small island around Venice .
The church at which the Vampyre High Council meets was built in 1131 .
Much of Burned takes place on the Inner Hebrides island of Skye , in the palace of Sgiach , the Vampyre queen .
According to Scottish tradition , Sgiach ( usually spelled Sgathach ) was a princess many centuries ago who ran the best warrior training school in Scotland .
Princess Sgathach lived in Dunscaith Castle , which is today a ruin .
( Seoras Wallace , the doughty Scottish historian who provided P.C. Cast with a background on Scottish mythology , became her boyfriend , and the Burned character of Sgiach 's consort is modelled on him . )
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The following lists a number of the characters in House of Night .
* Zoey Redbird : the main protagonist of the series .
She has an affinity for all five elements ( air , fire , water , earth and spirit ) , and is the only High Priestess to have ever been given that magnitude of power by the Goddess Nyx .
Zoey is also the youngest High Priestess in vampyre history .
* Neferet : Main antagonist and former High Priestess , now immortal Consort of Darkness and witch Queen of the Tsi Sgili .
Neferet is initially introduced as a kind , loving mentor to Zoey , but is gradually revealed to be on the side of Darkness .
*
Aphrodite LaFont : Former " hag from hell " and Zoey 's enemy in the first book .
An Oracle and Prophetess , she gradually grows to trust Zoey and the rest of the nerd herd .
* Stevie Rae Johnson :
Zoey 's best friend , and the first red vampyre High Priestess in history .
She also has an affinity for earth , and is Rephaim 's girlfriend later in the series .
* Erin Bates : A fledgling and member of the nerd herd with an affinity for water before she left to be with the evil red fledgling Dallas .
Her body eventually rejects the Change and she dies .
* Shaunee Cole : A fledgling and member of the nerd herd with an affinity for fire .
Girlfriend of Erik Night in Redeemed .
* Damien Maslin :
A fledgling , member of the nerd herd with an affinity for air and Jack 's boyfriend .
* Heath Luck :
Zoey 's human " almost boyfriend " , who ca n't seem to stay away despite her best efforts .
Their Imprint breaks twice : once when Zoey Imprints with Loren Blake , and again when Heath is killed by Kalona .
Part of Heath 's soul later returns in Aurox , the Vessel created by Neferet .
* Nyx : The Goddess of the vampyres and former love of Kalona .
Erebus is her Consort .
* Erik Night : A former fledgling and Zoey 's ex - boyfriend , now the vampyre Tracker for Tulsa 's House of Night .
Erik has a talent for acting , and once won an international House of Night monologue competition .
He and Shaunee later start seeing each other .
* Kalona : Erebus 's brother and the fallen immortal Guardian of Nyx .
Father of Rephaim and the Raven Mockers .
He was once a glorious winged immortal of Nyx as well as her warrior and lover , but he grew jealous of his brother and was eventually deceived by Darkness , and was thus cast from the Otherworld by Nyx , an act that broke her heart .
His wings turned black after this , reflecting the taint of Darkness in his soul .
* Darius : A Son of Erebus tasked with guarding Zoey .
He later becomes Aphrodite 's Warrior .
* Loren Blake : The vampyre Poet Laureate and a professor at the House of Night , he flirts with Zoey and later Imprints with her , but is revealed to be Neferet 's lover and puppet .
Neferet kills him in Chosen when he begins to show real concern for Zoey .
* Kramisha : A red fledgling with a gift for poetry who is named Zoey 's Poet Laureate .
* Dragon Lankford : Anastasia 's husband , the fencing instructor .
* Anastasia Lankford :
Dragon 's wife , the Spells and Rituals professor .
* Sylvia Redbird :
Zoey 's grandmother , a Cherokee Wise Woman .
She owns a lavender farm and is often on hand to give Zoey advice and reassurance in the fight against Darkness .
* James Stark : A red vampyre who becomes Zoey 's Warrior and Guardian and also has an affinity for archery
( he ca n't miss what he aims at ) .
* Jack Twist :
Damien 's boyfriend and a member of the nerd herd , who has an unofficial affinity for technology .
In Awakened , Neferet , needing a sacrifice for the white bull , chose Jack because he refused to revoke Nyx in favor of evil , and killed him , making it seem like an accident .
*
Rephaim : Kalona 's eldest and favorite Raven Mocker son .
Later he becomes Stevie Rae 's boyfriend and in Awakened he gets a normal body , but because of the mistakes he made in the past , is he only normal by night .
By day he is a raven .
* Shaylin Ruede : A blind girl who is the first fledgling to be Marked red .
When Erik Marks her , she is gifted with an affinity for True Sight , and later for water .
* Nisroc : Kalona 's second eldest son and second most evolved , took care of his brothers while Kalona and Rephaim were away .
ADAPTATIONS FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Film adaptation .
In November 2011 , it was announced that the film rights to House of Night had been acquired by producer Samuel Hadida 's production company , Davis Films and will be distributed by Lionsgate .
P.C. Cast also said through her live stream chat that she confirmed for five movies .
Currently , an outline of the screenplay has been written .
The authors , Kristen and P.C. Cast , have been unable to get in contact with the producer therefore there are no known future plans for the movies as of now .
COMIC BOOK ADAPTATION Section::::Comic book adaptation .
P.C. Cast announced on her website that a graphic book adaptation of the House of Night series , titled House of Night : Legacy , would be published in monthly issues by Dark Horse Comics starting the November 9 , 2011 .
The comic book spanned five issues , each relating to a different element .
The action takes place between Marked and Betrayed concerning Zoey 's struggle to become a good leader for the Dark Daughters .
To help her learn , Nyx places five tests in her way , each dealing with a story from The Fledgling Handbook 101 .
The drawings were be done by Joëlle Jones , cover by Jenny Frison .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The series has received generally good reviews , reaching 5th in the New York Times Children 's Bestsellers list .
ACCOLADES
* Romantic Times Reviewers ' Choice Award for Marked ( Young Adult Novel )
* Romantic Times Reviewers ' Choice Award for Tempted ( Best Young Adult Paranormal / Fantasy Novel )
* Goodreads Choice Award for Burned ( Favorite Book , Young Adult Fantasy , Favorite Heroine )
* A nomination for Teen Read Award for Best series in 2010 .
Section::::Accolades .
The sixth novel in the series , Tempted , went on sale in October , 2009 with a first printing of a million copies , entered the USA Today bestseller list that week at # 1 .
In January , 2010 , Gezeichnet , a German translation of Marked , reached the # 1 spot on the Der Spiegel bestseller list .
The seventh novel , Burned , was released on April 27 , 2010 , and like Tempted , entered the USA Today bestseller list at # 1 .
Awakened , released in January , 2011 , also entered the list at # 1 .
BANS AND CHALLENGES Section::::Bans and challenges .
In 2009 Henderson Junior High School in Stephenville , Texas , banned the entire series from its libraries , including the books that had yet to be written for " sexual content and nudity " .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official website NOTES