UNDERTOW ( WATER WAVES )
In physical oceanography , undertow is the under - current which is moving offshore when waves are approaching the shore .
Undertow is a necessary and universal feature for almost any large body of water : it is a return flow compensating for the onshore - directed average transport of water by the waves in the zone above the wave troughs .
The undertow 's flow velocities are generally strongest in the surf zone , where the water is shallow and the waves are high due to shoaling .
In popular usage , the word " undertow " is often misapplied to rip currents .
An undertow occurs everywhere underneath shore - approaching waves , whereas rip currents are localized narrow offshore currents occurring at certain locations along the coast .
Unlike undertow , rip currents are strong at the surface .
OCEANOGRAPHY Section::::Oceanography .
An " undertow " is a steady , offshore - directed compensation flow , which occurs below waves near the shore .
Physically , nearshore , the wave - induced mass flux between wave crest and trough is onshore directed .
This mass transport is localized in the upper part of the water column , i.e. above the wave troughs .
To compensate for the amount of water being transported towards the shore , a second - order ( i.e. proportional to the wave height squared ) , offshore - directed mean current takes place in the lower section of the water column .
This flow – the undertow – affects the nearshore waves everywhere , unlike rip currents localized at certain positions along the shore .
The term undertow is used in scientific coastal oceanography papers .
The distribution of flow velocities in the undertow over the water column is important as it strongly influences the on- or offshore transport of sediment .
Outside the surf zone there is a near - bed onshore - directed sediment transport induced by Stokes drift and skewed - asymmetric wave transport .
In the surf zone , strong undertow generates a near - bed offshore sediment transport .
These antagonistic flows may lead to sand bar formation where the flows converge near the wave breaking point , or in the wave breaking zone .
SEAWARD MASS FLUX Section::::Seaward mass flux .
An exact relation for the mass flux of a nonlinear periodic wave on an inviscid fluid layer was established by Levi - Civita in 1924 .
In a frame of reference according to Stokes ' first definition of wave celerity , the mass flux formula_1 of the wave is related to the wave 's kinetic energy density formula_2 ( integrated over depth and thereafter averaged over wavelength ) and phase speed formula_3 through : Similarly , Longuet Higgins showed in 1975 that – for the common situation of zero mass flux towards the shore ( i.e. Stokes ' second definition of wave celerity ) – normal - incident periodic waves produce a depth- and time - averaged undertow velocity : with formula_6 the mean water depth and formula_7 the fluid density .
The positive flow direction of formula_8 is in the wave propagation direction .
For small - amplitude waves , there is equipartition of kinetic ( formula_2 ) and potential energy ( formula_10 ) : with formula_12 the total energy density of the wave , integrated over depth and averaged over horizontal space .
Since in general the potential energy formula_10 is much easier to measure than the kinetic energy , the wave energy is approximately formula_14 ( with formula_15 the wave height ) .
So For irregular waves the required wave height is
the root - mean - square wave height formula_17 with formula_18 the standard deviation of the free - surface elevation .
The potential energy is formula_19 and formula_20
The distribution of the undertow velocity over the water depth is a topic of ongoing research .
CONFUSION WITH RIP CURRENTS Section::::Confusion with rip currents .
In contrast to undertow , rip currents are responsible for the great majority of drownings close to beaches .
When a swimmer enters a rip current , it starts to carry them offshore .
The swimmer can exit the rip current by swimming at right angles to the flow , parallel to the shore , or by simply treading water or floating .
However , drowning may occur when swimmers exhaust themselves by trying unsuccessfully to swim directly against the flow .
On the United States Lifesaving Association website it is noted that some uses of the word " undertow " are incorrect : SEE ALSO REFERENCES NOTES OTHER EXTERNAL LINKS