BURLESQUE ( 2010 AMERICAN FILM )
Burlesque is a 2010 American backstage musical film written and directed by Steven Antin and starring Cher and Christina Aguilera along with Eric Dane , Cam Gigandet , Julianne Hough , Alan Cumming , Peter Gallagher , Kristen Bell , Stanley Tucci , Diana Agron , and Tyne Stecklein .
The film was released on November 24 , 2010 in North America .
Cher and Aguilera contributed to the soundtrack album , with Aguilera contributing eight out of the 10 songs and Cher taking the remaining two .
The album was released in the USA on November 22 , 2010 and received two nominations at the 54th Grammy Awards .
The song " You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " , penned by Diane Warren and sung by Cher , won the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song in 2011 , while the film was nominated for the Golden Globe Award in the Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy category .
The film has grossed about $ 90 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ali Rose ( Aguilera ) moves to Los Angeles after she quits her bar job when her boss refuses to pay her .
Once in L.A. , she tries and fails at every audition she does until one night , she finds herself unknowingly in a burlesque club when she hears the music on the street .
She finds Tess ( Cher ) and the dancers performing " Welcome to Burlesque " and decides to pursue a career on stage once she meets Jack ( Gigandet ) at the club 's bar .
Jack refers her to Tess for an audition , but she is instantly rejected and ushered out by Sean ( Tucci ) .
Instead of leaving , Ali begins serving customers at the club as a waitress , while Jack asks Tess to give Ali a chance .
When Georgia ( Hough ) becomes pregnant , auditions are held to replace her .
Ali begins her audition when everyone leaves , and after performing " Wagon Wheel Watusi " , persuades Tess to allow her to become one of the club 's dancers , much to the annoyance of Nikki ( Bell ) , the lead performer who is always late and caught drinking before numbers .
One day Ali has to replace Nikki on stage because Nikki is too drunk to perform .
Nikki sabotages the performance by turning off the music that the dancers usually lip sync to , but before the curtain is dropped down , Ali impresses everyone with her amazing singing skills .
Tess immediately decides to have Ali become the main star of a whole new show at the club .
It becomes increasingly popular and Ali enjoys her newfound stardom while Nikki fumes in the background .
Despite the club 's growing success , Tess is still unable to pay the bank the money that she owes .
One night after the club closes , Tess , worried with the club 's economic prospects , sings " You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " .
A very jealous Nikki shows up drunk and picks a fight with Tess , calling Ali a " slut with mutant lungs " and feels that Tess has rejected their long - term friendship for Ali .
Tess , who has grown frustrated with Nikki , questions her gratitude for the help she has received from her during her many drunken binges .
Angered , Nikki quits on the spot ( before falsely claiming that she slept with Vince after his and Tess 's honeymoon ) , and the altercation ends when Tess angrily retaliates by smashing the passenger side window on Nikki 's convertible with a crowbar .
Meanwhile , Ali and Jack become romantically attracted to each other .
However , Jack is unable to act on his growing feelings for Ali due to his engagement to his girlfriend , who is away in New York City for work as an actress ; Jack is encouraged by Sean to end the engagement as Ali is a better person than his shallow fiancée .
Marcus begins to become increasingly infatuated with Ali , who begins to spend time with him , making Jack jealous .
At Georgia 's wedding , Jack appears to call off his engagement and becomes drunk .
That night , Ali and Jack sleep together , but the following morning Jack 's fiancé , Natalie ( Agron )
, unexpectedly returns from her play and finds the two in bed together , angrily insisting that she and Jack never broke up .
Jack denies this , and while trying to fix things , he asks Ali to leave .
Feeling heartbroken and betrayed , Ali runs to Sean for support , and learns that Sean is gay , due to his having spent the night with Georgia 's wedding DJ the night before .
While making coffee , Ali receives a call from Marcus , and Sean prompts her to go with Marcus after his phone call , while Sean and Mark ( the DJ ) go on a date .
While spending time with Marcus , Ali learns about " air rights " , which refers to the empty space above a building and what can be done with it .
Ali breaks things off with Marcus after she sees his plans to build a skyscraper on the property the club is on ; Marcus protests this , asking why this suddenly makes him " the bad guy " , to which Ali replies , " It does n't , Marcus .
It just makes you the wrong guy " .
Ali tells Tess about the predicament , and together they inform the owner of the new million - dollar condos across the street ; fearing the loss of business that would result from the obstruction of his prospective tenants ' view , he purchases the air rights to the club 's property .
The resulting money is enough for Tess to buy out Vince 's share ( as they are divorced and he wanted out of the club ) , pay off the bank , and re - fashion the club to her own vision .
She also makes up with Nikki , who tells Tess that she claimed she slept with Vince just to hurt her , and rehires her at the club after Nikki tells her she wants to " come home " .
Ali reunites with Jack after he tells her that it 's over with Natalie for good
; Natalie was in denial , having cared more about her job than her relationship with Jack .
After she finally earns Nikki 's respect , Ali performs " Show Me
How You Burlesque " , written by Jack ( who refused to allow Ali to listen or see his music throughout the movie due to
it not being " ready " ) with all of the dancers on stage , much to the crowds ' delight .
CAST Section::::Cast .
colspan=3
* Christina Aguilera as Alice Marilyn
" Ali " Rose * Cher as Tess Scali
* Cam Gigandet as Jack Miller * Kristen Bell as Nikki * Stanley Tucci as Sean * Eric Dane as Marcus Gerber
* Alan Cumming as Alexis
* Julianne Hough as Georgia
* Peter Gallagher as Vincent " Vince " Scali
* Dianna Agron as Natalie * Glynn Turman as Harold Saint
* David Walton as Mark the DJ * Terrence J as Dave * Chelsea Traille as Coco * Tyne Stecklein as Jesse * Michael Landes as Greg * Tanee McCall as Scarlett * Blair Redford as James / Bumper Band Member
* James Brolin as Mr. Anderson
* Stephen Lee as Dwight PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Burlesque started shooting on November 9 , 2009 and ended on March 3 , 2010 .
Director Steven Antin wrote the original screenplay .
Diablo Cody ( Juno ) revised it uncredited .
It was later further revised by Susannah Grant , also uncredited .
Burlesque is Screen Gems ' most expensive film , with the exception of the Resident Evil films , with costs of $ 55 million .
MUSIC MUSICAL NUMBERS *
" Something 's Got a Hold on Me ( Christina Aguilera ) " – Ali and the Burlesque Lounge Troupe
* * " My Drag ( Deva Dragon & Squirrel Nut Zippers ) " – The Burlesque Lounge Troupe
*
* " Welcome to Burlesque Tango " – The Band * * " Welcome to Burlesque ( Cher ) " – Tess and the Burlesque Lounge Troupe
* * " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend ( Swing Cats Remix ) ( Marilyn Monroe ) " – Nikki , Georgia and the Burlesque Lounge Troupe
* * " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend ( outro by Christina Aguilera ) "
– Ali
* * " Long John Blues ( Kristen Bell ) " – Nikki * *
" Nasty Naughty Boy ( Christina Aguilera / instrumental version ) " – Ali * * " Wagon Wheel Watusi ( Elmer Bernstein ) " – Ali * * " Ray of Light ( Madonna ) " – The Burlesque Lounge Troupe *
*
" That 's Life ( Alan Cumming ) " –
Alexis ( DVD Blu - ray Special Feature )
*
* " Tough Lover ( Etta James ) " – The Burlesque Lounge Troupe * *
" Tough Lover ( Christina Aguilera ) " – Ali * *
" I Am a Good Girl ( Christina Aguilera ) " –
Ali
*
* " A Guy
What Takes His Time ( Christina Aguilera ) "
– Ali * * " Express ( Christina Aguilera ) " – Ali and the Burlesque Lounge Troupe
* * " Jungle Berlin ( instrumental ) " – Alexis and The Contortionists * * " You Have n't Seen the Last of Me ( Cher ) " –
Tess *
* " Bound To You ( Christina Aguilera ) " –
Ali
*
*
" Show Me
How You Burlesque ( Christina Aguilera ) " – Ali and the Burlesque Lounge Troupe * SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music . Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack album features ten tracks : eight performed by Aguilera including " Express " ; and two performed by Cher which are her first original recordings in 7 years .
The soundtrack includes a mix of original and cover songs .
Both the ballads from the soundtrack – " Bound to You " performed by Aguilera and " You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " performed by Cher – were nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song .
Cher 's " You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " , which was written by Diane Warren , won the award .
In the United States , the soundtrack was certified Gold by the RIAA for shipments of 500,000 copies in October 2011 .
RELEASE MARKETING
Section::::Release .
Section::::Marketing .
The theatrical trailer was attached to screenings of Step Up 3D and Easy A.
The first TV spot premiered during the season 2 premiere of Fox 's Glee on September 21 , 2010 .
A third TV spot also aired the following day during Dancing with the Stars , later followed by another during MTV 's Jersey Shore .
Several teasers have been released for promotional purposes including the Etta James 's " Something 's Got a Hold on Me " .
This was then followed by the track "
But I Am a Good Girl " which was released in November 2010 .
Aguilera performed " Bound to You " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and gave an interview and performance on Conan .
Aguilera also gave an interview to show host Chelsea Handler to discuss the film and other subjects .
On November 19 , 2010 , Aguilera also gave a television interview to Ellen DeGeneres .
She then performed a track from the soundtrack , the Etta James track "
Something 's Got a Hold on Me " .
Aguilera performed " Express " at the American Music Awards of 2010 and " Show Me
How You Burlesque " at the Dancing with the Stars finale .
She also performed " Express " on the final of the seventh series of The X Factor which received criticism and complaints for the raunchy content .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The DVD and Blu - ray were released in North America on March 1 , 2011 .
A Blu - ray / DVD combo has been released as well .
The DVD and Blu - ray sales exceed one million units and have grossed $ 20,563,918 in the United States alone ; and , , it is the 19th highest selling movie of the year .
In all , the DVD has sold over 1.4 million units in the United States .
Overall , it has grossed over $ 30,053,366 on video sales ( DVD and Blu - ray sales ) in United States alone .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Burlesque received mixed reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 36 % , based on 152 reviews , with an average rating of 4.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Campy and clichéd , Burlesque wastes its talented cast ( including a better - than - expected Christina Aguilera ) on a movie that wavers uncertainly between bad and so bad
it 's good .
"
On Metacritic , the film holds a score of 47 out of 100 , based on 38 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune said , " The choicest dialogue in Burlesque provokes the sort of laughter that other , intentionally funny films only dream of generating . "
Mick LeSalle from San Francisco Chronicle gave the movie a full score and praised Aguilera 's acting , calling her " jaw - droppingly good in several numbers " and said , " Aguilera knows how to listen to her fellow actors , to react and be spontaneous , and it makes all the difference " .
Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter called Burlesque " a refreshing throwback to movie musicals that celebrates its stars while indulging in sexy fun " and also praised Aguilera 's acting and singing .
Lou Lumenick of the New York Post said , " Aguilera can dance like nobody 's business , but her acting debut is n't going to keep Anne Hathaway awake at night . "
Stanley Tucci 's performance received praise from Entertainment Weekly and Empire thought the dance numbers were thrilling .
Time Out labelled the drama " perfunctory " while Roger Ebert said that " Burlesque shows Cher and Christina Aguilera being all that they can be , and that 's more than enough . "
Variety observed that the film " wants to be Cabaret , but lacks the edge and historical context to pull it off . "
The New York Times said that the story line " had already gathered dust by the time [ of ] the 1933 musical 42nd Street " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Burlesque was released on Wednesday , November 24 , 2010 , the day before Thanksgiving in the United States ; on its opening day , it came in third to Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and Tangled .
On Thursday , November 25 , 2010 , it dropped down to fourth place in the box office behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows : Part 1 , Tangled and Unstoppable and went down to fifth on Friday , November 26 , 2010 .
On Sunday , November 28 , 2010 , it went back up to third place behind Tangled and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows : Part 1 .
It stayed in the top five until December 10 , 2010 , when it fell to sixth behind , The Tourist , Tangled , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows : Part 1 and Unstoppable .
By the Christmas weekend , it was number 15 at the box office .
The week after Thanksgiving , Burlesque experienced a substantial decrease on ticket sales , earning $ 9.65 million ( $ 6.1 million for the weekend ) , for a total of $ 26.98 million for its first twelve days .
, it had grossed $ 39.4 million in North America , and , , $ 50.15 million in foreign countries , for a total of $ 90 million worldwide .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Burlesque was the film featured on the first episode of the podcast How Did This Get Made ?
on the Earwolf Network .
The podcast , hosted by Paul Scheer , June Diane Raphael and Jason Mantzoukas , discusses and dissects " bad movies " .
The Burlesque episode also became a reunion of cast members from the television show
The League , as Nick Kroll joined Scheer and Mantzoukas on commentary .
The group lamented the film 's PG-13 rating , believing it held the story back from exploring darker themes .
Mantzoukas also noted , " Showgirls is the better version , the ' grown up ' version of this movie . "
AWARDS NewNowNext Awards
Best
Future Feature Houston Film Critics Society Awards 2010
Best Original Song rowspan=3"You Have n't Seen the Last of Me "
Satellite Awards
Best Original Song
Best Original Song
St. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association Awards 2010
Best Music Critics ' Choice Awards
Best Song
" You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " Best Motion Picture –
Musical or Comedy rowspan=2Best Original Song
" You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " " Bound to You "
Golden Raspberry Awards
Worst Supporting Actress
Cher GALECA Dorian Awards
Campy Film Of The Year
Golden Reel Awards
Best Sound Editing : Music in a Musical Feature Costume Designers Guild Awards Excellence In Contemporary Film Burlesque GLAAD Media Awards Outstanding Film – Wide Release
ALMA Awards Favorite Film Leading Actress – Comedy or Musical Christina Aguilera World Soundtrack Awards
Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film
" You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " Japan Gold Disc Awards 2012
Best Song Written for Visual Media
" You Have n't Seen the Last of Me " Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media
Burlesque : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack SEE ALSO
* Burlesque REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS