AN ECHO IN THE BONE An Echo in the Bone is the seventh book in the Outlander series of novels by Diana Gabaldon .
Centered on time travelling 20th century doctor Claire Randall and her 18th century Scottish Highlander warrior husband Jamie Fraser , the books contain elements of historical fiction , romance , adventure and science fiction / fantasy .
First published and released in the United States on September 22 , 2009 , the novel continues the adventures of Claire and Jamie in the 18th century , as well as their daughter , Brianna MacKenzie and her husband , Roger MacKenzie , who returned to the 20th century at the end of the previous book , A Breath of Snow and Ashes .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
In the 20th century at Lallybroch , Brianna , Roger , Jem , and Mandy are reading letters from Claire and Jamie from the past , one of which mentions hidden gold , with a location known only to Jem .
William Buccleigh , Roger 's Scottish ancestor , accidentally appears in their time .
Given his date of death on the family record , Brianna and Roger know he is unlikely to make it safely back .
Rob Cameron , one of Brianna 's coworkers , kidnaps Jem , and appears that he has taken Jem into the past , and Roger and William travel through time to find them ; but Rob appears at Brianna 's home and orders her to tell Jem to disclose the location of the gold .
Jem is locked underground at the dam where Brianna and Rob work , finds an electric train , and starts an escape ; his fate is unseen .
In the past , Lord William Ellesmere ( actually Jamie 's son but raised as Lord John Grey 's stepson ) is involved in the American Revolution as a Redcoat , but is repeatedly embarrassed until the battle of Saratoga , wherein he distinguishes himself .
Arch and Murdina Bug go after the gold on Fraser 's Ridge , during a confused confrontation Mrs. Bug shoots Jamie when he tells her to stop , and Ian shoots her .
Ian feels guilty for killing Mrs. Bug ; Arch vows to take his revenge when Ian has ' someone worth losing ' .
Claire , Jamie , and Ian leave their mountain home for Scotland to see Jenny , Ian , and their children , and also to recover Jamie 's printing press .
Before they can leave America , they become involved in the Revolutionary war ; Jamie accidentally shoots the hat off William 's head at Saratoga .
A kinsman of Jamie 's on the British side , Simon Fraser of Balnain , is killed , and Jamie and Claire are asked to take his body back to Scotland .
Before they leave a stranger tries to blackmail Jamie , but Ian kills him .
Claire , Jamie and Ian leave for Scotland to bury Jamie 's relative and Ian leaves his dog Rollo with a Quaker woman named Rachel Hunter .
Jamie , Claire , and Ian reach Scotland , where Ian the elder , husband to Jamie 's sister Jenny , and Jamie 's best childhood friend , is dying of consumption when they arrive .
Ian and Jenny are ecstatic that young Ian has returned ; but Jenny is hostile to Claire who is unable to cure Ian .
Jamie apologizes to Laoghaire ( his second wife ) for their separation .
Laoghaire 's daughter ( and Jamie 's adopted daughter )
Joan requires Laoghaire to marry her lover , a crippled servant , so that she ( Joan ) can become a nun .
A letter from Laoghaire 's daughter Marsali reveals that her son Henri - Christian is very ill .
In this missive Marsali beseeches Claire 's help in treating her son , Henri - Christian .
Claire agrees to return to America to treat Henri - Christian stipulating that Laoghaire marry her lover , stop taking alimony from Jamie , and help Joan become a nun .
Claire saves Henri - Christian 's life , with the help of Lord John , and saves Lord John 's injured nephew Henry .
Lord John 's niece Dottie has come to America as well , in love with Rachel 's brother , a Quaker physician Denzell Hunter .
Claire receives a letter from Jamie that Ian has died and Jenny has decided to leave Lallybroch .
Word later arrives that Jamie has been lost at sea ; and Claire is about to be arrested for being a spy , when Lord John insists on marrying Claire for her protection , as well as for the protection of Fergus , Marsali , and their children .
Arch tries to kill Rachel , but Ian fights him , until William kills Arch .
Jamie returns alive , with Redcoats after him , and pretends to take Lord John hostage and flees ; but William realizes that Jamie is his father , flies into a rage , and storms out .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Claire Elizabeth Beauchamp Randall Fraser - Main female character around whom the series revolves .
Nurse / Physician .
Born in 1918 and married in the 20th century to professor / historian Frank Randall , Claire falls through the standing stones at Craigh na Dun in Scotland at Beltane ( 1 May ) while on a second honeymoon with Frank in 1946 , and finds herself in the 18th century Scotland Highlands in 1743 .
She is forced to marry James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser ( Jamie ) , whom she eventually falls in love with .
Mother of Faith ( stillborn , 18th century ) and Brianna , foster mother of Fergus , and mother - in - law to Marsali .
Returned through the stones to 20th century in 1746 to protect hers and Jamie 's unborn child ( who is then born in Boston in the 20th century ) .
Twenty years later , after Frank Randall has died , Claire discovers ( through Roger 's research ) that Jamie probably did n't die at Culloden , and she returns through the standing stones to 1766 to search for him .
James Alexander Malcolm MacKenzie Fraser - Laird of Lallybroch ( Scotland ) and Fraser 's Ridge , North Carolina .
Former inmate of Ardsmuir Prison .
Eighteenth century husband of Claire , whom he affectionately calls " Sassenach " .
Father of Faith ( stillborn - mother : Claire ) ,
Brianna ( mother : Claire ) and William Ransom ( mother : Geneva Dunsany ) , stepfather to Marsali and Joan ( mother : ex - wife Laoghaire ) , foster father to Fergus .
Lord John William Grey
- Retired veteran of the Rising of 1745 and Seven Years ' War .
The former governor of Ardsmuir Prison .
Jamie and Claire 's long - time friend .
Stepfather of William Ransom , brother to Harold Grey , Duke of Pardloe , and uncle to Benjamin , Henry , Adam , and Dorothea Grey .
Lt .
Lord William Ransom -
The 9th Earl of Ellsmere , stepson of Lord John Grey , and the illegitimate son of James Fraser and Geneva Dunsany .
Cousin to the children of Hal Grey , Duke of Pardloe , as well as the children of Jenny and Ian Murray .
Ian Murray ( Jr. )
- Jenny and Ian Murray 's son , Jamie 's nephew , and Fergus ' , Brianna 's and William 's cousin .
Adopted into the Mohawk , but returned to the Ridge with Rollo , his half - wolf dog .
Brianna Ellen Fraser MacKenzie - Jamie and Claire 's daughter born in 20th century Boston and raised by Claire and Frank Randall .
Arrives in the 18th century in 1769 .
She marries Roger and they have two children : a son , Jeremiah , known as " Jemmy " and a daughter , Amanda Claire MacKenzie ( Mandy ) .
Returned to the 20th century at the end of A Breath of Snow and Ashes due to baby Amanda 's heart condition .
Roger MacKenzie Wakefield - One - time Oxford professor and historian , folksinger , minister and Gaelic teacher .
Twentieth century descendant of Geillis Duncan and Dougal MacKenzie , Great - nephew and adopted son of Rev. Reginald Wakefield ( Outlander ) , and Jamie and Claire 's son - in - law .
Arrives in the 18th century in 1769 .
Married to Brianna and father of Jemmy and Mandy .
At the end of A Breath of Snow and Ashes , takes his family back to the 20th century to get medical help for baby Amanda 's heart condition .
The family then moves to live at present - day Lallybroch , the Fraser family home .
Jeremiah Alexander Ian Fraser MacKenzie - Roger and Brianna 's son , born in 18th century colonial North Carolina , who like his parents , granny Claire and sister Amanda , can time travel .
Fergus Claudel Fraser - Printer , one - time French pickpocket and spy .
Jamie and Claire 's foster son .
First appears in Dragonfly in Amber .
Married to Marsali .
Marsali Fraser - Laoghaire 's daughter , Jamie 's stepdaughter and daughter - in - law , and Claire 's daughter - in - law .
First appears in Voyager .
Married to Fergus and mother to Germain , Joan , Félicite and Henri - Christian .
Henri - Christian Fraser - Fergus and Marsali 's youngest son , a little person .
Janet " Jenny " Fraser Murray - The one time Lady of Lallybroch , 18th century , married to Ian Murray Sr .
Older sister of James Fraser and mother of Jamie , Maggie , Katherine , Michael , Janet , and Ian .
Ian Murray , Sr - Jamie Fraser 's childhood / lifetime best friend .
Married to Janet " Jenny " Fraser , Jamie 's beloved older sister .
Tom Christie - A former inmate of Ardsmuir Prison .
Malva 's and Allan 's father .
In love with Claire .
Arrives at the Ridge at the end of Fiery Cross .
Denys Randall - Isaacs - The son of Alex Randall , adopted son of Jonathan " Black Jack " Randall , and ancestor of Frank Randall , Claire Fraser 's 20th century husband .
Perseverance " Percy " Wainwright Beauchamp - English spy married into a French noble family .
One - time lover ( and later , stepbrother ) of Lord John Grey .
Dr. Denzell Hunter - Quaker physician serving in the Revolutionary American Army .
Rachel Hunter - Quaker nurse assisting her brother serving in the revolutionary American Army .
Love interest of Ian Murray Jr. For both Ian Murrays , Senior / Junior are not used in - character , but rather Old / Young , variants thereof , or the similar Gaelic words Mor / Og . REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS