WOLVES IN GREAT BRITAIN
Wolves were once present in Great Britain .
Early writing from Roman and later Saxon chronicles indicate that wolves appear to have been extraordinarily numerous on the island .
Unlike other British animals , wolves were unaffected by island dwarfism , with certain skeletal remains indicating that they may have grown as large as Arctic wolves .
The species was exterminated from Britain through a combination of deforestation and active hunting through bounty systems .
PAST PRESENCE AND EXTINCTION ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::Past presence and extinction .
Section::::England and Wales .
Certain historians write that in 950 , King Athelstan imposed an annual tribute of 300 wolf skins on Welsh king Hywel Dda , while William of Malmesbury states that Athelstan requested gold and silver , and that it was his nephew Edgar the Peaceful who gave up that fine and instead demanded a tribute of wolf skins on King Constantine of Wales .
Wolves at that time were especially numerous in the districts bordering Wales , which were heavily forested .
This imposition was maintained until the Norman conquest of England .
At the time , several criminals , rather than being put to death , would be ordered to provide a certain number of wolf tongues annually .
The monk Galfrid , whilst writing about the miracles of St. Cuthbert seven centuries earlier , observed that wolves were so numerous in Northumbria , that it was virtually impossible for even the richest flock - masters to protect their sheep , despite employing many men for the job .
The Anglo - Saxon Chronicle states that the month of January was known as " Wolf monath " , as this was the first full month of wolf hunting by the nobility .
Officially , this hunting season would end on 25 March ; thus it encompassed the cubbing season , when wolves were at their most vulnerable , and their fur was of greater quality .
The Norman kings ( reigning from 1066 to 1154 ) employed servants as wolf hunters and many held lands granted on condition that they fulfilled this duty .
William the Conqueror granted the lordship of Riddesdale in Northumberland to Robert de Umfraville on condition that he defend that land from enemies and wolves .
There were no restrictions on or penalties for the hunting of wolves , except in royal game reserves , under the reasoning that the temptation for a commoner to shoot a deer there would be too great .
English wolves were more often trapped than hunted .
Indeed , the Wolfhunt family , who resided in Peak forest in the 13th century , would march into the forest in March and December , and place pitch in the areas wolves frequented .
At that time of year , wolves would have had greater difficulty in smelling the pitch than at others .
During the dry summers , they would enter the forest to destroy cubs .
Gerald of Wales wrote of how wolves in Holywell ate the corpses resulting from Henry II 's punitive expedition to Wales in 1165 .
King John gave a premium of 10 shillings for the capture of two wolves .
King Edward I , who reigned from 1272 to 1307 , ordered the total extermination of all wolves in his kingdom and personally employed one Peter Corbet , with instructions to destroy wolves in the counties of Gloucestershire , Herefordshire , Worcestershire , Shropshire and Staffordshire – areas near to and including some of the Welsh Marches , where wolves were more common than in the southern areas of England .
In the forty - third year of Edward III 's rule , a Thomas Engaine held lands in Pytchley in the county of Northampton , on the condition that he find special hunting dogs to kill wolves in the counties of Northampton , Rutland , Oxford , Essex and Buckingham .
In the eleventh year of Henry VI 's reign ( 1433 ) , a Sir Robert Plumpton held a bovate of land called " Wolf hunt land " in Nottingham , by service of winding a horn and chasing or frightening the wolves in Sherwood Forest .
The wolf is generally thought to have become extinct in England during the reign of Henry VII ( 1485–1509 ) , or at least very rare .
By this time , wolves had become limited to the Lancashire forests of Blackburnshire and Bowland , the wilder parts of the Derbyshire Peak District , and the Yorkshire Wolds .
Indeed , wolf bounties were still maintained in the East Riding until the early 19th century .
SCOTLAND
Section::::Scotland .
In Scotland , during the reign of James VI , wolves were considered such a threat to travellers that special houses called spittals were erected on the highways for protection .
In Sutherland , wolves dug up graves so frequently that the inhabitants of Eddrachillis resorted to burying their dead on the island of Handa , Scotland .
Island burial was a practice also adopted on Tanera Mòr and on Inishail , while in Atholl , coffins were made wolf - proof by building them out of five flagstones .
Wolves likely became extinct in the Scottish Lowlands during the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries , when immense tracts of forest were cleared .
James I passed a law in 1427 requiring three wolf hunts a year between 25 April and 1 August , coinciding with the wolf 's cubbing season .
Scottish wolf populations reached a peak during the second half of the 16th century .
Mary , Queen of Scots is known to have hunted wolves in the forest of Atholl in 1563 .
The wolves later caused such damage to the cattle herds of Sutherland that in 1577 , James VI made it compulsory to hunt wolves three times a year .
Stories of the killing of the alleged last wolf of Scotland vary .
Official records indicate that the last Scottish wolf was killed by Sir Ewen Cameron in 1680 in Killiecrankie ( Perthshire ) , but there are reports that wolves survived in Scotland up until the 18th century , and a tale even exists of one being seen as late as 1888 .
FOLKLORE AND LITERATURE Section::::Folklore and literature .
In the Welsh tale of Gelert , Llywelyn the Great , Prince of Gwynedd , killed his faithful dog Gelert after finding him covered in blood which he presumed belonged to his baby son .
Only later does he discover that his son is still alive , and that the blood belonged to a wolf which Gelert killed in defence of the young prince .
In Welsh mythology , both St. Ciwa the " Wolf Girl " and Bairre ( an ancestor of Amergin Glúingel ) are said to have been suckled by wolves .
Scottish folklore tells of how an old man in Morayshire named MacQueen of Findhorn killed the last wolf in 1743 .
FOSSIL FINDS Section::::Fossil finds .
Wolf remains in the Kirkdale Cave were noted to be scanty when compared with the prominence of cave hyena bones .
Cuvier later pointed out that the number of wolf bones in Kirkdale was even lower than originally thought , as a lot of teeth first referred to as belonging to wolves turned out to be those of juvenile hyenas .
The few positively identified wolf remains were thought to have been transported to the cave system by hyenas for consumption .
William Buckland , in his Reliquiae Diluvianae , wrote that he only found one molar tooth which could be positively identified as being that of a wolf , while other bone fragments were indistinguishable from those of domestic dogs .
In the Paviland limestone caves of the Gower Peninsula in south Wales , the jaw , a heel bone and several metatarsals were found of a large canid , though it was impossible to definitively prove that they belonged to a wolf rather than a large dog .
In a series of caves discovered in a quarry in Oreston , Plymouth , a Mr. Whidbey found several bones and teeth of a species of canis indistinguishable from modern wolves .
Richard Owen examined a jaw bone excavated from Oreston , which he remarked was from a subadult animal with evidence of having been enlarged by exotosis and ulceration , probably due to a fight with another wolf .
The other bones showed evidence of having been gnawed by small animals , and many were further damaged by workmen in their efforts to extricate them from the clay .
Unlike those of the Kirkdale wolves , the Oreston remains showed no evidence of having been gnawed on by hyenas .
An almost entire skull with missing teeth was discovered in Kents Cavern by a Mr. Mac Enery .
The skull was exactly equal in size to that of an Arctic wolf , the only notable differences being that the sectorial molar was slightly larger and the lower border of the jaw was more convex .
It was positively identified as being that of a wolf by its low and contracted forehead .
PROPOSED REINTRODUCTION TO SCOTLAND AND ENGLAND
Section::::Proposed reintroduction to Scotland and England .
In 1999 , Dr. Martyn Gorman , senior lecturer in zoology at Aberdeen University and vice chairman of the UK Mammal Society , called for a reintroduction of wolves to the Scottish Highlands and English countryside in order to deal with the then 350,000 red deer damaging young trees in commercial forests .
Scottish National Heritage considered re - establishing carefully controlled colonies of wolves , but shelved the idea following an outcry from sheep farmers .
In 2002 , Paul van Vlissingen , a wealthy landowner at Letterewe , Achnasheen , Ross - shire , in the western Highlands , proposed the reintroduction of both wolves and lynxes to Scotland and England , stating that current deer - culling methods were inadequate , and that wolves would boost the Scottish tourist industry .
In 2007 , British and Norwegian researchers who included experts from the Imperial College London said that wolf reintroduction into the Scottish Highlands and English countryside would aid in the re - establishment of plants and birds currently hampered by the deer population .
Their study also assessed people 's attitudes towards the idea of releasing wolves into the wild .
While the public were generally positive , people living in rural areas were more sensitive , though they were open to the idea provided they would be reimbursed for livestock losses .
Richard Morley , of the Wolves and Humans Foundation ( formerly The Wolf Society of Great Britain ) , forecast in 2007 that public support for wolf reintroduction would grow over the next 15 years , though he criticised previous talks as being too " simple or romantic " .
He stated that although wolves would be good for tourism , farmers and crofters had serious concerns about the effect wolves could have on their livestock , particularly sheep , that had to be acknowledged .
Although the prospect of reintroducing wolves and other large carnivores in the Highlands of Scotland remains highly controversial , there are some who are already making plans for reintroductions .
Paul Lister is the laird of Alladale Estate in the Caledonian Forest of North Scotland , and he has plans to reintroduce large carnivores into his wildlife reserve , such as wolves , lynx , and bears .
Many of the arguments against this kind of reintroduction are due to the potential impacts these animals could have on farming , but Lister argues that this would not be a problem in Alladale as there is very little farming in the area that could be affected .
This type of reintroduction could be beneficial for the economy and ecology of the UK , just as it has in the U.S.
In 1995 , wolves were reintroduced into Yellowstone National Park . , which transformed the ecology of the area , allowing forests to regenerate and biodiversity to increase .
Wolf related tourism also brings $ 35.5 million annually to Wyoming ..
SEE ALSO
* Wolves in Ireland REFERENCES