CRAZY HEART Crazy Heart is a 2009 American drama film , written and directed by Scott Cooper and based on the 1987 novel of the same name by Thomas Cobb .
The film centers around a down - and - out country music singer - songwriter ( Jeff Bridges ) who tries to turn his life around after beginning a relationship with a young journalist ( Maggie Gyllenhaal ) .
Other supporting roles are played by Colin Farrell , Robert Duvall , and child actor Jack Nation .
Bridges , Farrell , and Duvall also sing in the film .
The novel on which the film was based was inspired by country singer Hank Thompson .
Bridges earned the 2009 Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in the film .
Filming took place during 2008 in New Mexico ( Albuquerque , Española , Galisteo , Santa Fe ) , in Houston , Texas , and in Los Angeles , California .
Original music for the film was composed by T Bone Burnett , Stephen Bruton , Ryan Bingham and others .
Bingham and Burnett received the 2009 Academy Award for Best Original Song for co - writing " The Weary Kind " , which Bingham also performed .
The film was produced for $ 7 million by Country Music Television , and was originally acquired by Paramount Vantage for a direct - to - video release , but was later purchased for theatrical distribution by Fox Searchlight Pictures .
It opened in limited release in the U.S. on December 16 , 2009 .
From its meager budget it amassed domestic earnings of $ 39.5 million plus $ 7.9 international for worldwide total of $ 47.4 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Otis " Bad " Blake ( Jeff Bridges ) is a 57-year - old alcoholic singer - songwriter who was once a country music star .
He now earns a modest living by singing and playing his guitar in small town bars across the southwestern United States .
Having a history of failed marriages ( four that he admits to , although a reference is made to a fifth he does not discuss )
Blake is without a family .
He has a son , aged 28 , with whom he has not had contact in 24 years .
He is mostly on the road performing , staying in cheap motels and travelling alone in his 1978 Suburban .
The film opens with his arrival at a bowling alley for a show .
Enter Jean Craddock ( Maggie Gyllenhaal ) , a young journalist after a story , divorced and with a four - year - old son , Buddy ( Jack Nation ) .
She interviews Blake one evening after his gig , and then as they become close , Jean visits again ostensibly to gather more material , and the two enter into a relationship .
Jean and her son become a catalyst for Blake beginning to get his life back on track .
In doing so , he lets himself be pushed into renewing a professional relationship with Tommy Sweet ( Colin Farrell ) , a popular and successful country music star he once mentored , and plays as the opening act at one of Tommy 's concerts , despite his initial balking and wounded pride at being the opening act to his former student .
He asks Tommy to record an album with him , but Tommy says his record company insists on a couple more solo albums before a duet project can be recorded .
He instead suggests that Blake concentrate on writing new songs that Tommy can record solo , telling him he writes better songs than anyone else .
Blake 's drinking soon gets out of control and he ends up running off the road while driving drunk .
In the hospital , the doctor informs him that although he only sustained a broken ankle from the crash , he is slowly killing himself , and must stop drinking and smoking and lose 25 pounds if he wants to live more than a few more years .
Blake 's relationship with Jean makes him start to rethink his life .
He calls up his son to make amends , only to have his son tell him that his mother , Bad 's ex - wife , has died .
His relationship with Jean starts to look up , with her visiting him with her son Buddy .
After a situation where Blake loses Buddy briefly at a shopping mall while drinking at a bar , Jean breaks up with him .
After losing Jean and her son , who were becoming his only family , Blake resolves to quit drinking .
After going through a treatment program at a rehab center , and with support from his Alcoholics Anonymous group and his old friend Wayne ( Robert Duvall ) , Blake finally manages to get sober .
Having cleaned up his act , he tries to reunite with Jean , but she tells him that the best thing he can do for her and Buddy is to leave them alone .
After losing Jean , Blake finishes writing a song that he thinks is his best ever , " The Weary Kind " , and sells it to Tommy .
Sixteen months later , Tommy plays " The Weary Kind " to an appreciative audience while Blake watches backstage , as his manager presents him with another of the large royalty checks for the song .
As Blake is leaving , Jean approaches him , saying she has come to the show as writer for a large music publication .
As they catch up , Blake sees an engagement ring on Jean 's finger and tells her that she deserves a good man .
He offers her the money from the royalty check for Buddy to have on his 18th birthday , which Jean initially refuses but eventually accepts after Blake says the song would not exist without them .
Jean asks if Blake would like to see Buddy again , but Blake declines saying it might be too unsettling for the boy .
The film ends with Jean asking Blake for another interview , after which they walk away happily , chatting with each other .
CAST
* Jeff Bridges as Otis " Bad " Blake * Maggie Gyllenhaal as Jean Craddock
* Colin Farrell as Tommy Sweet
* Robert Duvall as Wayne Kramer
* Paul Herman as Jack Greene * Jack Nation as Buddy , Jean 's son * Ryan Bingham as Tony of Tony and the Renegades , backup group at
bowling alley
* Rick Dial as Wesley Barnes , Jean 's uncle , Santa Fe piano player PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT OF ORIGINAL NOVEL
Section::::Production .
Section::::Development of original novel .
The New York Times said the novel , written by Thomas Cobb , " also functions as a shrewd and funny running critique of contemporary country music . "
Cobb based the character " Bad " Blake on country music entertainer Hank Thompson , Ramblin ' Jack Elliott and Cobb 's doctoral advisor in graduate school , Donald Barthelme ; Cobb studied with Barthelme in a creative writing class in the University of Houston in the 1980s .
When Cobb struggled between using an " upbeat " ending and a " downbeat " ending , Barthelme suggested that Cobb use the " downbeat " ending .
The nickname " Bad " came from a sentence that popped into Cobb 's mind , " Bad 's got the sweats again . "
" Blake " came from W. Glenn Blake , and a friend from graduate school , and some people Cobb knew in Tucson , Arizona .
The book , which was out of print since its original publication , went into print again when the film was released .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
The process of creating a film adaptation took many years because the concept was optioned , but was never produced into an actual adaptation until director Scott Cooper produced the film .
Cobb assumed that the film would use a more upbeat ending , because the Hollywood film industry often prefers " things that are generally positive " .
According to Cobb , he had nothing to do with the making of the film .
The shooting of a sequence depicting the novel 's ending - in which Bad falls off the wagon and dies of a heart attack - occurred ; Cooper wanted to use it as the ending , but he did not get final authority to do so .
A sequence of Bad Blake visiting his son in Los Angeles was also cut from the final film .
Bridges initially passed on the role when he was first offered it .
He explained to Vanity Fair that although he liked the script , he realized that the songs would make or break it and at the time the film had no musical attachments .
A year later he talked with T Bone Burnett , who was approached to work on the film 's soundtrack ; together they both agreed to work on the film , and Bridges joined the project .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The album entitled Crazy Heart :
Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released in 2009 to accompany the film .
The 23-track album contains many songs written by Burnett , Bruton , and Bingham , but also some by John Goodwin , Bob Neuwirth , Sam Hopkins , Gary Nicholson , Townes Van Zandt , Sam Philips , Greg Brown , Billy Joe Shaver , and Eddy Shaver
The songs are performed by various artists including actors Bridges , Farrell , and Duvall , as well as singers Bingham ( who sings the theme song " The Weary Kind " and plays Tony in the film ) , Buck Owens , The Louvin Brothers , Lightnin ' Hopkins , Waylon Jennings , Townes Van Zandt , and Sam Philips .
At the 82nd Grammy Awards , the theme song " The Weary Kind " by Ryan Bingham won for Best Song Written For Motion Picture , Television Or Other Visual Media and the soundtrack also won for Best Compilation Soundtrack Album For Motion Picture , Television Or Other Visual Media .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 91 % of critics have given the film a positive review based on 199 reviews , with an average score of 7.4/10 .
Critics mainly praised the performance of Jeff Bridges as Bad Blake , with many claiming he elevated the film above its seemingly conventional story and languid pace .
Tom Long from Detroit News writes , " It 's a bit too easy , a bit too familiar , and maybe even a bit too much fun .
But the easy magic Bridges brings to the screen makes it all work .
"
The Toronto Star 's Linda Barnard attests that " some goodwill evaporates in the final reel , when a few false endings lead to a choice that 's not the best one for Crazy Heart , but the generosity of Bridges ' performance puts us in a forgiving mood . "
Jeff Bridges ' performance earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor , as well as Best Actor prizes from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association , Broadcast Film Critics Association , Golden Globe Awards , Screen Actors Guild and the Independent Spirit Awards .
Bridges also received nominations from the Chicago Film Critics Association , London Critics Circle , Online Film Critics Society and the Satellite Awards .
Gyllenhaal was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance .
The song " The Weary Kind " earned Ryan Bingham and T Bone Burnett the 2009 Academy Award for Best Original Song and a Golden Globe .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Nominated work !
Result
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on April 20 , 2010 , on DVD and Blu - ray .
The single - disc DVDs special features included six deleted scenes , while the Blu - ray 2-disc set contained eight deleted scenes ( including one in which Bad reunites with his son ) , plus two alternative music cuts and a short documentary in which the stars discuss " What Brought Them to Crazy Heart " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Crazy Heart script