ADDRESS
FRAUD Address fraud is a type of fraud in which the perpetrator uses an inaccurate or fictitious address in order to gain money or some other benefit or service to which
s / he is not legally entitled , to commit some form of theft , or to hide one 's location from authorities .
The crime may involve stating one 's address as a place where s / he never lived , or continuing to use a previous address where one no longer lives as one 's own .
Laws pertaining to these types of crimes vary by location .
One form of address fraud involves using one 's old address as a current address to receive mail .
It is committing by deliberately failing to report an address change and using the old address on legal documents .
Another involves the representation of a communal mail box as one 's own address where one resides in order to take advantage of benefits available to those residing in its location .
MOTIVES FOR ADDRESS FRAUD Section::::Motives for address fraud .
The crime is often associated with identity theft , taking place in about one - third of identity theft cases .
Address fraud has been committed by parents attempting to get their children into a public school in a jurisdiction other than where they live .
Public school systems generally require their students to live in the municipality by which they are operated , and giving this false information in order to attend the schools constitutes this crime .
Address fraud has also been used by those voting in a jurisdiction other than their own .
A notable example is that of Ann Coulter , who was investigated for voting in the wrong precinct .
Some drivers commit forms of address fraud in order to take advantage of lenient laws in a jurisdiction where they do not really live .
For example , one may not qualify for a driver 's license in his own state , but may qualify in another .
Most states require obtaining their driver 's license within a certain time period — for example , 60 days in Illinois — of establishing residency .
Not having a local ( state ) license is itself an additional offense in the event of a traffic violation in one 's home state .
Some wealthy people will set up their official address at a low rent location in a low tax jurisdiction to avoid paying taxes at a higher rate in the jurisdiction where they actually live .
They will continue to be present most of the time in the place where they really wish to live but not pay taxes there .
People with bench warrants will also use an old address instead of their current address incase the authorities try to locate them .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Truth About Fraud Dead Link REFERENCES