ERIN HANNON Kelly Erin Hannon ( born May 1 , 1986 ) is a fictional character from the U.S. comedy television series The Office .
She is the office receptionist for the Scranton branch of the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company , Inc. , a position previously held by Pam Beesly before she quit to go work for the Michael Scott Paper Company .
Erin is portrayed by Ellie Kemper .
She is an original character , although her closest equivalent in the British version of the series would be Mel the receptionist , who appears briefly in The Office Christmas specials , as Dawn Tinsley 's replacement .
BIOGRAPHY Section::::Biography .
Erin Hannon is the receptionist hired to replace Pam Beesly ( after Kevin 's brief stint in the job ) in " Dream Team " .
She first appears in " Michael Scott Paper Company " , and is referred to by her middle name , Erin , to distinguish her from Kelly Kapoor .
Although at times rather intellectually challenged , with her cheerful , silly demeanor , and childlike naïveté , Erin is usually the most consistently nice , optimistic Dunder - Mifflin employee .
Contrasting with her predecessor , Pam , she not only loves being a receptionist but admires her coworkers including Michael Scott and Dwight Schrute .
In a deleted scene from " Niagara " , she admits she was born four months prematurely and could not eat hard foods until she turned 6 .
"
St. Patrick 's Day " reveals further that she was sick and in the hospital between the ages of 3 and 6 .
She grew up in foster families and has said that when she was younger " my hair was my room " , i.e. , the place she hid from stress and trauma .
In " WUPHF.com " , she said all of her peers were getting their drivers licenses eight years ago which would give her a birth year of approximately 1986 .
It is hinted that Erin was brought up in a very religious Christian household , as seen in " Nepotism " , when Michael argues with the staff about nepotism and defends it by saying the Person God sent to help Earth was His Son , Jesus Christ , which Erin claims
is a " really tight argument " , and another example is in " Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager " , when she is shocked to learn Gabe is an atheist , and is even more shocked when he states there might be a God , but he does not believe it is just some " guy with a long white beard . "
She is seen repeatedly following Dwight 's insane directions .
Dwight and Andy both admit to being attracted to Erin , as does Ryan .
Erin seems to have a fun - loving and bubbly personality similar to Kelly Kapoor , although Erin is much more naïve .
She admires Kelly 's casual Friday outfit , commenting that she looks like J. Lo , and the two restart Michael 's Cafe Disco after he shuts it down .
The two also ride to Pam and Jim 's wedding together with Andy , both listening to their iPods in the backseat .
In " Counseling " , she took the term " disposable camera " literally as she throws a disposable camera away after taking the last picture , commenting that she thinks disposable cameras are wasteful and you never get to see the pictures .
Erin also tells Michael she used to work at a Taco Bell Express but could not keep up when they turned it into a regular Taco Bell .
In a deleted scene from " Mafia " , Meredith tells Erin that the office will always like Pam better than her , saddening Erin as she does not like conflicts .
She also accidentally ruins Pam 's painting of the office building while trying to clean it .
Later when asking Kelly to help her fix the painting , we find out Erin has a seizure condition — because Kelly demands her medical alert bracelet as payment for her services .
Erin may have attended Keystone College , as a pennant for the school can be seen at her desk in " The Boat " and in " Pool Party " .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
After Kevin fails miserably as Pam 's replacement , Charles Miner hires Erin as the new receptionist , whose first name is Kelly but the office decided to call her by her middle name , Erin , to avoid confusion with Kelly Kapoor .
She becomes good friends with Kelly and in " Cafe Disco " , they help to generate interest in Michael 's " Cafe Disco .
" Erin greatly admires her predecessor , calling her " a living legend " to DeAngelo Vickers , and often asks her advice on various aspects of the job .
However , Pam is at first somewhat impatient with Erin 's enthusiasm for a job she never took seriously and often dismisses her requests for approval by saying " it looks great . "
Initially , Dwight and Andy compete for her attention , but Dwight withdraws in acknowledgment of his new friendship with Andy .
For the remainder of the season , Andy awkwardly flirts with Erin .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
In " Koi Pond " , Erin is shown to be self - conscious about being an orphan , and is attracted to Andy , whom she calls " the coolest guy I 've ever met .
" She also does not know who Marlon Brando is , mistaking a reference to him for Marlon Wayans .
In " Murder " , Andy asks her out on a real date while they are playing characters as a part of the Belles , Bourbon , and Bullets .
Erin accepts , but then is disappointed when Andy tells her later there was no real date .
It was " just a part of the game " , though both wanted to go out .
Andy later begs to get Erin as his Secret Santa .
He gives her gifts based on " The 12 Days of Christmas " .
Unfortunately the first four gifts are all birds resulting in harm to herself , geese swarming her car and an incident where her cat ate one of the turtle doves .
She asks her secret Santa to please stop .
When asked if it is him Andy brushes it off , but later Michael reveals him and he is somewhat surprised to see her legitimately angry at him .
At the end of the day , Andy has twelve drummers appear at the last part of the song .
Despite the fiasco of the earlier gifts , Erin easily forgives him and is seen enjoying the drummers and smiling warmly .
Erin finally earns Michael 's respect in " Scott 's Tots " when she points out the benefit of the promise Michael could not fulfill to a group of underprivileged high school students .
She eventually figures out Michael 's idiosyncratic habits ( such as having ants on a log served every day at 2:30 and being spun around in his desk chair until he is dizzy ) and , unlike Pam , gladly accommodates them , she seems disappointed when Jim Halpert declines to continue them during his brief tenure as branch manager .
She also tells Michael that she would like to be an accountant someday , even though she is bad at math .
After Andy 's massive effort for Erin 's Secret Santa gift , Andy thinks that the " ball is in Erin 's court " , while Erin assumes that after Andy 's last spectacular display involving a band drumline that he will surely be the one to ask .
Andy , in " Sabre " , then awkwardly confronts Erin about her weekend plans , revealing that she has none .
Andy exits with exasperation , hoping that his " hint " would be sufficient for her to ask .
Later , in " Manager and Salesman " , Andy gives everyone in the office a card for Valentine 's Day to mask his affection for Erin .
Kelly takes this card to heart and believes Andy is in love with her .
Andy makes it clear that he does not love Kelly , and Erin begins to realize Andy really does have feelings for her .
In " The Delivery " , Erin shows a knowledge of horse racing history as she names the Triple Crown winners to distract Pam before she goes to the hospital .
Erin later has lunch with Kevin after Michael lied and told Kevin that Erin liked him .
Erin feels sorry for Kevin because Michael told her Kevin had the heart of an actual elephant .
Erin later confronts Michael and tells him that she likes Andy .
Andy 's response is to snoop behind plants and spy on Kevin and Erin .
Later in the same episode , Andy gives Erin a fax which asks her on a date .
After getting confrontational about it , Andy admits that he wanted to take Erin on a date , which she happily accepts .
In " St. Patrick 's Day " , Erin and Andy are set to go on their first date , but Erin gets very sick , prompting Jo Bennett to tell her to go home .
Andy decides to see Erin anyway by showing up at her house .
The two enjoy watching TV together until Erin 's foster brother Reed comes into the room and steals Andy 's spot on the couch next to Erin .
Reed behaves with Erin in a way that makes Andy uncomfortable , but when Andy gets ready to leave , Erin kisses him on the cheek .
In " New Leads " , after Michael distributes the sales leads to rest of the staff , Erin hides Andy 's leads .
The Hot & Cold game she plays with him in the reception area turns into an uncomfortable situation where Andy almost fondles Erin 's chest .
At the end of episode , Erin offers a cold Andy her jacket in a landfill where they share their first kiss .
In " Happy Hour " , Erin and Andy tell the crew that they are trying to keep their relationship a secret because of Andy 's aversion to drama .
This continues as they go to the Happy Hour with the other members of the Office .
After several uncomfortable situations in which they continue to try to keep the secret and a rather animated argument in a photobooth , Andy declares to the entire building that he has been on " two dates with Erin Hannon and they went well and there will probably be more .
"
They tell the crew that they found more drama trying to keep it a secret .
In " Secretary 's Day " , Andy plans the perfect Secretary 's Day for Erin , including a lunch with Michael .
During the lunch , Michael reveals Andy 's prior year - long engagement with Angela , a fact which was previously concealed from Erin .
When Erin speaks with Pam at her desk , a Keystone College pennant is visible .
At the end of the episode , Erin informs Andy that she needs some time alone from him .
Feeling bad over the whole affair , Michael smooths things over a bit with Erin and has a talk with her .
And in " Whistleblower " , while the characters have not resumed dating yet , Erin does express concern when Andy tells her he is afraid for his safety ( because of the fire - catching printers , though he does not directly tell her about them ) and she agrees to distribute the " demonstration video " he made with Darryl if anything happens to him .
Erin warmly pats Andy on the leg and tells him she thinks he did the right thing , after he is outed for leaking the printer story to a local paper and everyone else in the office shuns him .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
In " Nepotism " , Erin reveals that Gabe asked her out over the summer .
She only accepted because Gabe was her boss but eventually the two began seriously dating , much to Andy 's chagrin .
Her relationship with Gabe has been presented as boring and lame , as highlighted by her unsuccessful efforts to defeat him at online Scrabble and avoid watching his favored horror films in " The Seminar " , his long - winded Valentine 's Day surprise for her that consists mostly of her bonding with Andy and getting a hand - kiss gesture in " PDA " , and letting the staff know she and Gabe were late to work because he fell in the shower and had to be rescued by the fire department in " Todd Packer " .
In " Andy 's Play " , Andy is performing in a local production of .
He pressures the entire office to go , but really just wants to get Erin to attend , in order to spend time with her and win her back from Gabe .
Andy is delighted that Erin is coming without Gabe , however ultimately his plan backfires when she agrees to babysit Cecilia so Jim and Pam can attend .
Ultimately Erin shows up to the play and the two spend time together , however Erin leaves to spend time with Gabe leaving Andy despondent .
In " Sex Ed " , the Office believes Michael has herpes , and Andy uses the situation to host a Sex Ed class in the office .
The class is in actuality an attempt by Andy to figure out if Gabe and Erin are having sex .
Upset after realizing the two are possibly having sex , Andy throws a tantrum and storms off .
Gabe admonishes Andy later , explaining he only asked Erin out after Andy gave him his blessing .
In " Christening " , Erin expresses admiration over Michael 's spontaneous decision to go down to Mexico to help build a school for local children .
In an effort to impress Erin , Andy goes along with Michael .
After Michael and Andy start having cold feet and get off the bus , Erin picks them up and laughs with them about it .
In " Viewing Party " , Erin and Gabe are hosting a Glee viewing party at Gabe 's apartment .
Andy desperately attempts to get Erin 's attention during the party , however ultimately ends up getting sick and is comforted by Gabe .
Meanwhile , Erin attempts to get Michael to bond with Gabe , however Michael 's insecurities over Gabe 's position cause him to sabotage the party .
After Erin confronts Michael over his hostile feelings for Gabe , Michael angrily questions why she needs his approval as he is not her father .
Erin is silent and Michael has an insightful moment , realizing Erin admires him and views him as a father figure .
The two share a joke as they pointedly make fun of their developing father - daughter relationship .
As he leaves the party , Michael warns Gabe that he will , both figuratively and literally , kill Gabe if he breaks Erin 's heart .
In " WUPHF.com " , Erin is annoyed with Ryan 's abuse of company property to fuel his own social networking company , WUPHF.com .
In " Classy Christmas " , Erin assists Michael in preparing for when Holly returns to Scranton .
However , when she meets Holly for the first time , she is disappointed with her appearance after Michael spoke so highly of her .
She admits in a talking head that she does not see why Michael is attracted to Holly , and when Holly tries to reason with Michael after he admits being upset with her , Erin shoos her away in defending Michael .
She then tries to shoo Holly 's boyfriend A.J. away when he arrives to surprise Holly .
Erin remains unkind to Holly in " Ultimatum " but finally warms to her when she sees the passionate kiss between Michael and Holly that came at the end of " The Search " .
In " Michael 's Last Dundies " , Erin starts avoiding Gabe at work because she does not feel attracted to him anymore .
Erin reveals how she feels to Pam and Jim , with Pam encouraging her to tell Gabe to avoid leading him on .
She then breaks up with Gabe while accepting her Dundie in front of everyone at a packed restaurant .
Gabe tells everyone he is upset with Erin but tries to joke it off , only to reveal he is genuinely upset and leaves the award show .
Later she joins the rest of the office in serenading a teary - eyed Michael with a song .
During " Goodbye , Michael " , a distraught Gabe is tenacious in trying to win Erin back , even following her into the women 's bathroom .
Erin later has a heart - to - heart conversation with Michael about her love life , and admits that she might be in love with Andy .
Michael dismisses both Gabe and Andy and advises Erin that the right guy will come along and she will know it .
Michael then tells her that he is just a phone call away in Colorado if she needs advice , and kisses her on the head before walking away .
At the end of " The Inner Circle " , when Deangelo escapes the hospital and returns to the office , Jim asks Erin to call 911 .
She asks who should she say is calling , causing Jim to give her a deadpan look while flatly saying her name .
In " Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager " , Erin and Andy are shown hanging out together again .
However , after Gabe invites Andy to go to the conference room to speak in private , Gabe breaks down , and Andy promises he will not date Erin again .
Later , at reception , Gabe confesses his love to Erin again , but it does not win her back .
In a talking - head interview , Erin says she is taking a break from dating , and she admits that while Gabe was a great guy with many wonderful qualities , " it was a challenge being touched by him " .
When Dwight accidentally fires the gun right by Andy , causing him temporary hearing loss , Erin is the most worried about him , and tries to accompany him to the hospital , but is stopped by Gabe , who , as an excuse , says that she needs to stay for her receptionist duties .
When Andy comes back from the hospital , he and Erin hang out in the kitchen , only for Gabe to confront Andy with the promise , but Andy stands up for himself and embarrasses Gabe by describing Gabe 's crying fit to Erin .
When asked whether or not he wants to date Erin , he does not give a straight answer , and eventually claims that it is between him and his diary .
In " Search Committee " , Erin and Phyllis await the results of a DNA test to see if Erin is the daughter previously given up by Phyllis in high school .
After some advice from Phyllis , Erin tells Andy in front of the entire Office that she still has feelings for him .
Andy denies her , later stating to the camera that he is still hurt from being dumped in favor of Gabe .
Phyllis finds out the results are negative , but holds off telling Erin and continues to show maternal affection toward her .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
In Season 8 , Erin is on Robert 's loser side of the list .
She helps Andy out with his challenges of being manager and is the only one to congratulate him on his new job .
In " Lotto " , she helps out in the warehouse and suggests easier ways to move the boxes .
In " Spooked " , Erin is in charge of the Halloween party , but is forced to make it more adult when co - workers think the decorations are childish .
She also finds out that Andy is in a relationship with someone .
During " Christmas Wishes " , Erin finally meets Jessica , Andy 's girlfriend .
Erin tells her that she is welcome to the office and the party , but later on Robert California talks Erin into being an " adult woman and a free spirit " and having a drink .
But this does not just stop at one , Erin tells Andy that she has had " a thousand " .
Later that night , she tells Andy that she wants Jessica dead and that was her Christmas wish , which shows she still has feelings for Andy .
She later gets a ride home from Robert , who tells her to take some aspirin and get some rest .
Later on , Erin remains hopeful that Andy will end things with Jessica and reunite with her ( and it becomes clear Andy still has feelings for her ) but she later decides that this is not going to happen .
As a result , when she ends up assigned to the team joining Dwight on the Sabre Store project in Tallahassee , she tells the camera that she is never returning to Scranton .
In " Test the Store " Erin meets an elderly woman , Irene ( Georgia Engel ) , and she becomes her live in maid .
In " Get the Girl " , Andy goes to Florida , to try to win her back .
Erin initially wants to stay , but the two get back together and travel back to Scranton to find Nelly Bertram in Andy 's office .
Andy then gets fired and Erin supports him For the rest of the season , Erin is seen supporting Andy in his attempts to move on , and eventually reclaim , his job at Dunder Mifflin .
SEASON 9
Section::::Season 9 .
Erin is excited to have Andy back from his Outward Bound program , but is surprised to see a more confident and cocky Andy .
A new love interest for her is introduced in the new guy Pete .
In the episode " The Boat " , Erin and Pete go out for drinks .
There are multiple other instances in the beginning of season 9 in which Pete and Erin bond while Andy is on his boat trip .
In the episode " Customer Loyalty " , Erin seems to miss Pete when they are split up by Nellie .
Erin decides to break up with Andy prior to his return , but when he returns she can not find the confidence to break up .
After telling Pete and giving him a kiss , she runs back up to Andy 's office and breaks up with him .
By the time he decides to quit his job and seek fame and fortune , though , Erin feels kinder towards him and gives him sound advice before being greatly moved by his farewell rendition of " I Will Remember " .
In " Finale " , she is reunited with her birth parents , who had seen the documentary and showed up at a Q&A forum with the office members .
It is indicated that she is still dating Pete , as they are shown dancing at Dwight and Angela 's wedding .
BEHIND
THE SCENES
Section::::Behind the scenes .
Starting in the fifth season of NBC 's The Office , Kemper was cast in a supporting role as the Dunder Mifflin office receptionist Erin Hannon .
Kemper described herself as a " huge fan " of the show and was thrilled to be cast .
In May 2009 , The Office screenwriter Jennifer Celotta described Kemper as a " fun addition " to the show .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critics and fans have commented on Kemper 's addition to the show , mostly positive .
Joshua Ostroff of Eye Weekly described Erin as one of the best new television characters of the 2008–2009 season and said , " Erin 's high - grade adorability , up - for - anything attitude and sheer niceness is unlike anyone else in the office , adding a welcome new wrinkle for next season . "
Andy Shaw of TV Fodder said she " adds some freshness to the cast " and Josh McAuliffe of The Times - Tribune in Scranton , Pennsylvania , said he liked Erin 's " cheerful , appealingly goofy personality " .
Her performance was notably praised during the show 's eighth season , where she was the highlight of the season for many critics .
Myles McNutt noted that " regardless of how down I was on this or any other episode , Ellie Kemper really has been tremendous all season . "
In addition , Kemper 's performance in the episodes " Spooked , " " Christmas Wishes , " " Pool Party , " and " Special Project , " in particular , were praised by critics .
REFERENCES