ALCOHOL LAW Alcohol laws are laws in relation to the manufacture , use , influence and sale of alcohol ( also known formally as ethanol ) or alcoholic beverages that contains ethanol .
The United States defines an alcoholic beverage as , " any beverage in liquid form which contains not less than one - half of one percent of alcohol by volume " , but this definition varies internationally .
These laws can restrict those who can produce alcohol , those who can buy it , where one can buy it , or even prohibit the use and sale of alcohol entirely .
TEMPERANCE MOVEMENT ALCOHOL LAW
BY COUNTRY
* Alaska * Germany * Hong Kong
* India * United Kingdom
* Ireland PROHIBITION OUTRIGHT PROHIBITION OF ALCOHOL Section::::Prohibition .
Section::::Outright prohibition of alcohol .
Some countries forbid alcoholic beverages or have forbidden them in the past .
People trying to get around prohibition turn to smuggling of alcohol – known as bootlegging or rum - running – or make moonshine , a distilled beverage in an unlicensed still .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Canada imposed prohibition at the beginning of the 20th century , but repealed it in the 1920s .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India , manufacture , sale or consumption of alcohol is prohibited in the states of Bihar , Gujarat , Manipur and Nagaland , as well as the union territory of Lakshadweep .
Prohibition has become controversial in Gujarat , following a July 2009 episode in which widespread poisoning resulted from alcohol that had been sold illegally .
All Indian states observe dry days on major religious festivals / occasions depending on the popularity of the festival in that region .
Dry Days are specific days when the sale of alcohol is banned , although consumption is permitted .
Dry days are also observed on voting days .
Dry Days are fixed by the respective state government .
National holidays such as Republic Day ( 26 January ) , Independence Day ( 15 August ) and Gandhi Jayanthi ( 2 October ) are usually dry days throughout India .
NORDIC
COUNTRIES Section::::Nordic countries .
Two Nordic countries ( Finland and Norway ) had a period of alcohol prohibition in the early 20th century .
In Sweden , prohibition was heavily discussed , but never introduced , replaced by strict rationing and later by more lax regulation , which included allowing alcohol to be sold on Saturdays .
Following the end of prohibition , government alcohol monopolies were established with detailed restrictions and high taxes .
Some of these restrictions have since been lifted .
For example , supermarkets in Finland were allowed to sell only fermented beverages with an alcohol content up to 4.7 % ABV , but Alko , the government monopoly , is allowed to sell wine and spirits .
The alcohol law in Finland was changed in 2018 , allowing grocery stores to sell beverages with an alcohol content up to 5.5 % ABV .
This is also the case with the Norwegian Vinmonopolet and the Swedish Systembolaget ( though in Sweden the limit for allowed ABV in supermarkets is 3.5 % .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , there was an attempt from 1919 to 1933 to eliminate the drinking of alcoholic beverages by means of a national prohibition of their manufacture and sale .
This period became known as the Prohibition era .
During this time , the 18th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States made the manufacture , sale , and transportation of alcoholic beverages illegal throughout the United States .
Prohibition led to the unintended consequence of causing widespread disrespect for the law , as many people procured alcoholic beverages from illegal sources .
In this way , a lucrative business was created for illegal producers and sellers of alcohol , which led to the development of organized crime .
As a result , Prohibition became extremely unpopular , which ultimately led to the repeal of the 18th Amendment in 1933 via the adoption of the 21st Amendment to the Constitution .
Prior to national Prohibition , beginning in the late 19th century , many states and localities had enacted Prohibition within their jurisdictions .
After the repeal of the 18th Amendment , some localities ( known as dry counties ) continued to ban the sale of alcohol .
MAJORITY - MUSLIM
COUNTRIES Section::::Majority - Muslim countries .
Some majority - Muslim countries , such as Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , Sudan , Pakistan , Iran and Libya prohibit the production , sale , and consumption of alcoholic beverages because they are forbidden by Islam .
DRUNK DRIVING LAWS
Section::::Drunk driving laws .
Most countries have drunk driving laws which limit how much alcohol a person can consume before driving a car on a road .
The permitted blood alcohol content threshold ranges from 0.0 % to 0.08 % .
Punishments for violation include fines , temporary or permanent loss of driver 's license , and imprisonment .
Some jurisdictions have similar prohibitions for drunk sailing , drunk bicycling , and even drunk rollerblading .
In many places in the United States , it is also illegal to have an open container of an alcoholic beverage in the passenger compartment of a vehicle .
PROHIBITION OF DRINKING ALCOHOL
IN PUBLIC PLACES
AMERICAS
BARBADOS Section::::Prohibition of drinking alcohol in public places .
Section::::Americas .
Section::::Barbados .
Barbados maintains 16 years of age as when person is legally able to consume alcohol in public .
Although being disorderly while intoxicated is illegal and the Royal Police Force can be asked to evict drunken individuals from public establishments .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
It is legal and usually socially acceptable to drink alcohol in public areas .
CHILE Section::::Chile .
It is illegal to drink alcohol in any public place or unlicensed facilities .
The law may or may not be enforced , depending on the location , time of the day and the behaviour of the offender .
Penalties may include the confiscation or destruction of the liquor , fines or arrest .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Drinking alcohol in public places , such as streets and parks , is against the law in most of the United States , though there is no specific federal law that forbids the consumption of alcohol in public .
Moreover , even when a state ( such as Nevada , Louisiana , and Missouri ) has no such ban , the vast majority of its cities and counties do have it .
Some cities allow it in a specified area such as on the Las Vegas Strip in Las Vegas , Nevada , or during public festivals .
Four notable exceptions are New Orleans , Louisiana , and Butte , Montana which allow public consumption of alcoholic beverages anywhere in the city .
ASIA PAKISTAN Section::::Asia .
Section::::Pakistan .
After its independence in 1947 , Pakistani law was fairly liberal regarding liquor laws .
Major cities had a culture of drinking , and alcohol was readily available until the 1970s when prohibition was introduced for Muslim citizens .
Since then , Pakistan 's majority Muslim population has been unable to legally buy alcohol , and advertising for alcoholic beverages has been outlawed .
However it remains widely available in urban Pakistan through bootleggers and also through the diplomatic staff of some minor countries .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
From 1 April 2015 , public drinking is banned from 10:30 p.m. to 7 a.m. daily .
Additional restrictions on public drinking are applied to Geylang and Little India where they had declared as Liquor Control Zones .
The additional restrictions for Geylang and Little India are from 7 a.m. on Saturdays to 7 a.m. on Mondays and from 7 p.m. on eves of public holidays to 7 a.m. on the day after the public holiday .
Retailers within the Liquor Control Zones are not allowed to sell takeaway liquor from 10:30 p.m. to 7 a.m. on weekdays ( except on the eve of Public Holidays and Public Holidays ) and from 7 p.m. to 7 a.m. on weekends , eve of Public Holidays and Public Holidays .
Retailers outside the Liquor Control Zones are not allowed to sell takeaway liquor from 10:30 p.m. to 7 a.m. daily .
EUROPE
RESTRICTIONS BY COUNTRY
Section::::Europe .
Section::::Restrictions by country .
According to data from the World Health Organization , drinking in public is regulated in the European countries for which data was provided as follows :
* Educational buildings : * ban : Cyprus , Czehia , Finland , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Poland , Romania , Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain
* partial restriction : Belgium , Estonia , France , Ireland , Italy , Malta , Netherlands , Sweden , UK
* voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Bulgaria , Denmark , Germany
* no restrictions : Greece , UK * Government offices :
* ban : Cyprus , Czech Republic , Finland , Hungary , Latvia , Poland , Romania , Slovakia , Slovenia
* partial restriction :
France , Lithuania , Malta , Netherlands , Portugal , Spain * voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Denmark , Germany , Ireland , Italy , Sweden * no restrictions : Estonia , Greece , Luxembourg , UK * Healthcare establishments : * ban : Cyprus , Czech Republic , Finland , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Portugal , Romania , Slovenia ,
* partial restriction : Belgium , France , Italy , Netherlands , Spain * voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Bulgaria , Germany , Ireland , Luxembourg , Poland , Sweden
* no restrictions : Denmark , Greece , UK * Leisure events :
* ban : * partial restriction : Cyprus , Czech Republic , Finland , France , Ireland , Portugal , Romania
* voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Germany , Latvia , Poland , Slovakia , Sweden ,
* no restrictions : Denmark , Estonia , Greece , Hungary , Luxembourg , Slovenia , Spain , UK
* Parks and streets :
* ban : Estonia , Lithuania , Poland , Romania
* partial restriction : Cyprus , Czech Republic , Finland , France , Ireland , Italy , Malta , Netherlands , Portugal , Slovakia , Spain , UK
* voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Germany , Latvia , Slovenia , Sweden
* no restrictions : Greece , Hungary , Luxembourg * Public transport :
* ban : Cyprus , Finland , France , Greece , Romania , Slovakia ,
* partial restriction : Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Hungary , Ireland , Lithuania , Malta , Netherlands , Poland , Portugal , Sweden , UK
* voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Germany ,
* no restrictions : Italy , Luxembourg , Slovenia , Spain
* Places of worship :
* ban : Cyprus , Finland , Romania
* partial restriction :
France , Portugal * voluntary / self restricted : Belgium , Bulgaria , Czech Republic , Hungary , Ireland , Latvia , Malta , Sweden
* no restrictions : Austria , Denmark , Estonia , Germany , Greece , Italy , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Netherland , Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain , UK
* Sporting events :
* ban : Romania , Slovenia , Spain * partial restriction : Cyprus , Czech Republic , Finland , France , Greece , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Lithuania , Malta , Netherland , UK
* voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , german , Latvia , Slovakia , Sweden
* no restrictions : Denmark , Estonia , Luxembourg
* Workplaces : * ban : Czech Republic , Finland , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Romania , Slovakia , Slovenia ,
* partial restriction : Cyprus , France , Italy , Malta , Portugal , Spain
* voluntary / self restricted : Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Denmark , Germany , Ireland , Netherlands , Sweden , UK
* no restrictions : Estonia , Greece , Luxembourg Legend : ban =
the consumption of alcohol is prohibited by law , violation may result in punishment .
partial restriction =
in some states , regions , municipalities or cities the consumption of alcohol is prohibited by law ; or the consumption is restricted at certain places but not generally prohibited .
voluntary / self - restricted = the consumption of alcohol is not prohibited by law , but ( some ) establishments may have own regulations prohibiting or regulating the consumption of alcohol voluntary .
no restrictions = the consumption of alcohol is legal .
LEGAL DRINKING AGE Section::::Legal drinking age .
Most countries have prescribed a legal drinking age which prohibits the purchase of alcohol by minors .
Most countries also prohibit the consumption of alcohol to minors .
Some countries have a tiered structure that limits the sale of stronger alcoholic drinks to older adults ( typically based on the percentage of ABV )
Other restrictions that some countries impose is based on the place in which alcohol is consumed , such as in the home , in a restaurant , or in a bar .
The age at which these restrictions come to an end varies significantly from country to country , as does the degree to which it is enforced , which can also vary within a country .
AMERICAS CANADA Section::::Americas .
Section::::Canada .
Under the Constitution of Canada , responsibility for enacting laws and regulations regarding the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in Canada is the sole responsibility of the ten provinces .
Canada 's three territories have also been granted similar autonomy over these matters under the provisions of federal legislation .
Most provinces of Canada enacted prohibition of alcohol sales , consumption and distribution between the years of 1910 and 1920 .
After prohibition was ended , most provinces had a minimum drinking age of 21 years , while in the early 70s the age limit was lowered to either 18 or 19 years of age .
Later a few provinces and territories raised their age limit from 18 to 19 in the late 1970s and early 1980s .
* Alberta :
* Alcohol legalized in 1924 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 18 in 1970 .
* British Columbia :
* Alcohol legalized in 1921 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 19 in 1970 .
*
Manitoba :
* Alcohol legalized in 1921 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 18 in 1970 .
* Newfoundland and Labrador :
* Alcohol legalized in 1924 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 19 in 1972 .
* New Brunswick :
* Alcohol legalized in 1927 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 19 in 1972 .
* Northwest Territories :
* Alcohol legalized in 1891 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 19 in 1970 .
* Nova Scotia :
* Alcohol legalized in 1929 -
Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 19 in 1971 .
* Ontario :
* Alcohol legalized in 1923 -
Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 18 in 1971 .
* Minimum legal drinking age raised to 19 in 1979 .
* Prince Edward Island :
* Alcohol legalized in 1948 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 18 in 1970 .
* Minimum legal drinking age raised to 19 in 1987 .
* Québec : * Alcohol legalized in 1929 -
Minimum legal drinking age set at 20 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 18 in 1972 .
* Saskatchewan : * Alcohol legalized in 1925 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 18 in 1970 .
* Minimum legal drinking age raised to 19 in 1976 .
* Yukon : * Alcohol legalized in 1920 - Minimum legal drinking age set at 21 .
* Minimum legal drinking age lowered to 19 in 1972 .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The legal age for buying and possessing ( but not necessarily for drinking ) has been 21 years in every state since shortly after the passage of the National Minimum Drinking Age Act in 1984 , which tied federal highway funds to states ' maintaining a minimum drinking age of 21 .
Despite a rekindled national debate in 2008 on the established drinking age ( initiated by several university presidents ) , a Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll found in September 2008 that 76 % of New Jerseyans supported leaving the legal drinking age at 21 years .
No significant differences emerged when considering gender , political affiliation , or region .
However , parents of younger children were more likely to support keeping the age at 21 ( 83 % ) than parents of college - age students ( 67 % ) .
Seventeen states ( Arkansas , California , Connecticut , Florida , Kentucky , Maryland , Massachusetts , Mississippi , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New Mexico , New York , Oklahoma , Rhode Island , South Carolina , and Wyoming ) and the District of Columbia have laws against possession of alcohol by minors , but they do not prohibit its consumption by minors .
Fourteen states ( Alaska , Colorado , Delaware , Illinois , Louisiana , Maine , Minnesota , Missouri , Montana , Ohio , Oregon , Texas , Wisconsin , and Virginia ) specifically permit minors to drink alcohol given to them by their parents or by someone entrusted by their parents .
Many states also permit the drinking of alcohol under the age of 21 for religious or health reasons .
Puerto Rico , a territory of the United States , has maintained a drinking age of 18 .
United States customs laws stipulate that no person under the age of 21 may bring any type or quantity of alcohol into the country .
EUROPE
TAXATION AND REGULATION OF PRODUCTION Section::::Taxation and regulation of production .
Alcoholic beverages are subject to excise taxes .
Additionally , they fall under different jurisdiction than other consumables in many countries , with highly specific regulations and licensing on alcohol content , methods of production , and retail and restaurant sales .
Alcohol tax is an excise tax , and while a demerit tax , is a significant source of revenue for governments .
The U.S. government collected 5.8 billion in 2009 .
In history , the Whiskey Rebellion was caused by the introduction of an alcohol tax to fund the newly formed U.S. federal government .
In most countries , the commercial production of alcoholic beverages requires a license from the government , which then levies a tax upon these beverages .
In many countries , alcoholic beverages may be produced in the home for personal use without a license or tax .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
Home production of wine and beer is not regulated .
Home distillation of spirits is legal but not common because it is subject to the same tax as spirits sold commercially .
Danish alcohol taxes are significantly lower than in Sweden and Norway , but higher than those of most other European countries .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , the HM Revenue and Customs issues distilling licenses , but people may produce beer and wine for personal consumption without a license .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The production of distilled beverages is regulated and taxed .
The Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms , and Explosives and the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau ( formerly a single organization called the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco and Firearms ) enforce federal laws and regulations related to alcohol .
All packaging of alcoholic products must contain a health warning from the Surgeon General .
In most of the American states , individuals may produce wine and beer for personal consumption ( but not for sale ) in amounts [ usually ] of up to 100 gallons per adult per year , but no more than 200 gallons per household per year .
The illegal ( i.e. , unlicensed ) production of liquor in the United States is commonly referred to as " moonshining . "
Illegally produced liquor ( popularly called " white lightning " ) is not aged and contains a high percentage of alcohol .
RESTRICTIONS ON SALE AND POSSESSION Section::::Restrictions on sale and possession .
Alcoholic drinks are available only from licensed shops in many countries , and in some countries , strong alcoholic drinks are sold only by a government - operated alcohol monopoly .
NORDIC
COUNTRIES Section::::Nordic countries .
In each of the Nordic countries , except Denmark , the government has a monopoly on the sale of liquor .
The state - run vendor is called Systembolaget in Sweden , Vinmonopolet in Norway , Alko in Finland , Vínbúð in Iceland , and Rúsdrekkasøla Landsins in the Faroe Islands .
The first such monopoly was in Falun in the 19th century .
The governments of these countries claim that the purpose of these monopolies is to reduce the consumption of alcohol .
These monopolies have had success in the past , but since joining the European Union it has been difficult to curb the importation of liquor , legal or illegal , from other EU countries .
That has made the monopolies less effective in reducing excessive drinking .
There is an ongoing debate over whether to retain these state - run monopolies .
NORWAY Section::::Norway .
In Norway , beers with an alcohol content of 4.74 % by volume or less can be legally sold in grocery stores .
Stronger beers , wines , and spirits can only be bought at government monopoly vendors .
All alcoholic beverages can be bought at licensed bars and restaurants , but they must be consumed on the premises .
At the local grocery store , alcohol can only be bought before 8 p.m. ( 6 p.m. on Saturdays , municipalities can set stricter regulations ) .
And the government monopoly vendors close at 6 p.m. Monday – Friday and 3 p.m. on Saturdays .
On Sundays , no alcohol can be bought , except in bars .
Norway levies some of the heaviest taxes in the world on alcoholic beverages , particularly on spirits .
These taxes are levied on top of a 25 % VAT on all goods and services .
For example , 700 mL of Absolut Vodka currently retails at 300 + NOK .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
In Sweden , beer with a low alcohol content ( called folköl , 2.25 % to 3.5 % alcohol by weight ) can be sold in regular stores to anyone aged 18 or over , but beverages with a high alcohol content can only be sold by government - run vendors to people aged 20 or older , or by licensed facilities such as restaurants and bars , where the age limit is 18 .
Alcoholic drinks bought at these licensed facilities must be consumed on the premises ; nor is it allowed to bring and consume your own alcoholic beverages bought elsewhere .
NORTH AMERICA
CANADA Section::::North America .
Section::::Canada .
In most Canadian provinces , there is a very tightly held government monopoly on the sale of alcohol .
Two examples of this are the Liquor Control Board of Ontario , and the Liquor Distribution Branch of British Columbia .
Government control and supervision of the sale of alcohol was a compromise devised in the 1920s between " drys " and " wets " for the purpose of ending Prohibition in Canada .
Some provinces have moved away from government monopoly .
In Alberta , privately owned liquor stores exist , and in Quebec a limited number of wines and liquors can be purchased at dépanneurs and grocery stores .
Canada has some of the highest excise taxes on alcohol in the world .
These taxes are a source of income for governments and are also meant to discourage drinking .
( See Taxation in Canada . )
The province of Quebec has the lowest overall prices of alcohol in Canada .
Restrictions on the sale of alcohol vary from province to province .
In Alberta , changes introduced in 2008 included a ban on " happy hour , " minimum prices , and a limit on the number of drinks a person can buy in a bar or pub at one time after 1 a.m. UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , the sale of alcoholic beverages is controlled by the individual states , by the counties or parishes within each state , and by local jurisdictions .
In many states , alcohol can only be sold by staff qualified to serve responsibly through alcohol server training .
A county that prohibits the sale of alcohol is known as a dry county .
In some states , liquor sales are prohibited on Sunday by a blue law .
The places where alcohol may be sold or possessed , like all other alcohol restrictions , vary from state to state .
Some states , like Louisiana , Missouri , and Connecticut , have very permissive alcohol laws , whereas other states , like Kansas and Oklahoma , have very strict alcohol laws .
Many states require that liquor may be sold only in liquor stores .
In Nevada , Missouri , and Louisiana , state law does not specify the locations where alcohol may be sold .
In 18 alcoholic beverage control states , the state has a monopoly on the sale of liquor .
For example , in most of North Carolina , beer and wine may be purchased in retail stores , but distilled spirits are only available at state ABC ( Alcohol Beverage Control ) stores .
In Maryland , distilled spirits are available in liquor stores except in Montgomery County , where they are sold only by the county .
Most states follow a three - tier system in which producers can not sell directly to retailers , but must instead sell to distributors , who in turn sell to retailers .
Exceptions often exist for brewpubs ( pubs which brew their own beer ) and wineries , which are allowed to sell their products directly to consumers .
Most states also do not allow open containers of alcohol inside moving vehicles .
The federal Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century of 1999 mandates that , if a state does not prohibit open containers of alcohol inside moving vehicles , then a percentage of its federal highway funds will be transferred instead to alcohol education programs each year .
As of December 2011 , only one state ( Mississippi ) allows drivers to consume alcohol while driving ( below the 0.08 % limit ) , and only five states ( Arkansas , Delaware , Mississippi , Missouri , and West Virginia ) allow passengers to consume alcohol while the vehicle is in motion .
Five U.S. states limit alcohol sales in grocery stores and gas stations to beer at or below 3.2 % alcohol : Colorado , Kansas , Minnesota , Oklahoma , and Utah .
In these states , stronger beverage sales are restricted to liquor stores .
In Oklahoma , liquor stores may not refrigerate any beverage containing more than 3.2 % alcohol .
Missouri also has provisions for 3.2 % beer , but its permissive alcohol laws ( when compared to other states ) make this type of beer a rarity .
Pennsylvania is starting to allow grocery stores and gas stations to sell alcohol .
Wines and spirits are still sold at locations called " state stores " , but wine kiosks are starting to be put in at grocery stores .
The kiosks are connected to a database in Harrisburg , and purchasers must present valid ID , signature , and look into a camera for facial identification to purchase wine .
Only after all of these measures are passed is the individual allowed to obtain one bottle of wine from the " vending machine " .
The kiosks are only open during the same hours as the state - run liquor stores and are not open on Sundays .
SEE ALSO
* Wine law
*
Alcohol exclusion laws *
Alcohol advertising *
Drunk driving law by country
* Public intoxication
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS