KUNG FU PANDA :
LEGENDS OF AWESOMENESS
Kung Fu Panda :
Legends of Awesomeness is an American computer - animated television series spun off from the Kung Fu Panda films .
It takes place after the first film , showing Po 's training to becoming a successful Dragon Warrior , where the second film is , according to the series ' executive producer Peter Hastings , " not unlike a very long , super - deluxe 3-D version of one of our episodes " .
The series was originally set to air on Nickelodeon in 2010 , but it was pushed back to 2011 instead .
The series premiered with a special preview on September 19 , 2011 , and began airing regularly on November 7 .
Three seasons were produced .
Airing ceased in the United States partway through season 3 .
Before finishing up in the United States , all the episodes aired already in other countries , for example on German Nicktoons in Germany from 2014–2015 and then on YTV in Canada from 2015–2016 .
In 2016 American Nicktoons in the United States began running ads announcing the airing of new episodes ; it was subsequently revealed that five of the ten unaired episodes would play from February 15 through February 19 .
As a result , the final episode aired on June 29 , 2016 .
Since the series ' cancellation , Nicktoons has continued to air reruns .
Besides Lucy Liu and James Hong , who reprise their film roles as Viper and Mr. Ping , the cast features new voice actors for the characters of Po ( Mick Wingert ) , Master Shifu ( Fred Tatasciore ) , Tigress ( Kari Wahlgren ) , Crane ( Amir Talai ) , Monkey ( James Sie ) , and Mantis ( Max Koch ) .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Po and the Furious Five defend the Valley of Peace from villains of different kinds .
All the while , Po makes mistakes , learns lessons , learns more about the history of kung fu , and meets other famous kung fu Masters .
EPISODES VOICE CAST
* Mick Wingert as Po
* Fred Tatasciore as Shifu * Kari Wahlgren as Tigress * Lucy Liu as Viper * Amir Talai as Crane * James Sie as Monkey * Max Koch as Mantis
* James Hong as Mr. Ping DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The show 's musical score is done by the Track Team , most Chinese musical instruments including erhu , zhonghu , gaohu , bawu , hulusi , xiao , dizi , guqin , sanxian , suona , guanzi , xunetc .
by well - known multi - instrumentalist Hong Wang .
In addition , Sifu Kisu was the martial arts consultant for the show as he was on the series .
MEDIA Section::::Media .
Kung Fu Panda : Legends of Awesomeness also took part in Nickelodeon 's revamp to their cartoon season on TV .
As an early promotion , Po was featured in a Nickelodeon bumper with all the characters of the shows set to premiere ( or were renewed ) in 2011 .
On July 23 , an exclusive sneak peek of the show was shown at the 2011 San Diego Comic - Con , with producers and members of the voice cast present at the panel .
A sneak peek episode was released for the DVD / Blu - ray release for Kung Fu Panda 2 on December 13 , 2011 .
In addition , two sneak preview episodes aired ( one on September 19 , 2011 and another on October 21 , 2011 ) before the official premiere of the show .
In June 2018 , it was announced that the series will stream on Hulu .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Mary McNamara of Los Angeles Times called Kung Fu Panda :
Legends of Awesomeness " a show that wo n't drive every adult in earshot absolutely crazy .
And these days , that 's saying something . "
Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club said that the show " rips out the elements that made the original film such a surprise , leaving behind a derivative , cliché - laden children 's show that recycles moral platitudes adequately but is otherwise indistinguishable from countless other programs " and " is n't a show that 's aiming to be cutting edge or original , just mildly entertaining , which it is ...
This is n't going to harm any kids , but it 's not going to impress them either .
"
Despite the mixed reviews , the show has received four Emmy Awards and nominated for four Annie Awards .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result rowspan="10"2012
Best Television Production Children rowspan="5 " Character Animation in a Television Production Michael Franceschi Directing in a Television Production Gabe Swarr Editing in a Television Production Hugo Morales , Davrick Waltjen , Adam Arnold ,
Otto Ferrene Outstanding Sound Editing – Animation Joe Pizzulo , Paulette Lifton , James Lifton , Benjamin Wynn , Jeremy Zuckerman , Rob McIntryre , Anna Adams , Jason Stiff , Molly Minus , Matt Hall , Andrew Ing , Roberto Dominguez Alegria , Aran Tanchum , Chris Gresham and Lawrence Reyes rowspan="4 " Outstanding Sound Mixing – Animation Justin Brinsfield , Matt Corey and Thomas J. Maydeck Outstanding Casting for an Animated Series or Special Sarah Noonan and Meredith Layne Outstanding Individual in Animation Joel Fajnor
rowspan="12"2013 rowspan="4"Annie Awards
Storyboarding in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production Ryan Kramer , Paul Linsley , Kenji Ono , Le Tang , Alice Herring , Mike Mullen , Aaron Hammersley ( for " Enter the Dragon " ) rowspan="2 " Writing in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production Doug Langdale ( for " Kung Fu Day Care " )
rowspan="2 " Editorial in an Animated Television or other Broadcast Venue Production Hugo Morales , Adam Arnold , Davrick Waltjen , Otto Ferrene ( for " Monkey in the Middle " )
Hugo Morales , Adam Arnold , Davrick Waltjen , Otto Ferrene ( for " Enter the Dragon " )
rowspan="7 " Daytime Emmy Awards Outstanding Children 's Animated Program Peter Hastings , Bret Haaland , Randy Dormans , Gabe Swarr , Andrew Huebner Outstanding Directing in an Animated Program Gabe Swarr , Michael Mullen , Lane Lueras , Juan Meza - Leon , Peter Hastings rowspan="2 " Outstanding Individual in Animation Joel Fajnor ( for " Kung Fu Day Care " )
Bill
Dely ( for " Kung Shoes " ) Outstanding Writing in Animation Peter Hastings , Doug Langdale , Gene Grillo , Paul Rugg , Kevin Seccia , Scot Kreamer Outstanding Sound Editing – Animation Joe Pizzulo , Gary Falcone , Jeremy Zukerman , Benjamin Wynn , Rob McIntyre , Anna Adams , Marc Schmidt , Andrew Ing , Jeseey Drake , Roberto Dominguez Alegira , Cynthia Merrill Outstanding Sound Mixing – Animation Justin Brinsfield , Thomas J Maydeck ,
Rob McIntyre Primetime Emmy Awards
rowspan=8 2014 rowspan=3 Annie Awards Best Animated TV / Broadcast Production For Children 's Audience rowspan="5 " Daytime Emmy Award rowspan=2 2015 rowspan="2 " Daytime Emmy Award rowspan="2 " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media . !
colspan=2 rowspan=2Season !
rowspan=2Episodes !
Release dates !
Region 1 NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS