13 REASONS
WHY
13 Reasons Why ( stylized onscreen as TH1RTEEN
R3ASONS
WHY ) is an American teen drama web television series developed for Netflix by Brian Yorkey , based on the 2007 novel Thirteen Reasons Why by Jay Asher .
The series revolves around seventeen - year - old high school student , Clay Jensen , and his deceased friend Hannah Baker , who has killed herself after having to face a culture of gossip and sexual assault at her high school and a lack of support from her friends and her school .
A box of cassette tapes recorded by Hannah in the lead up to her suicide detail thirteen reasons why she ended her life .
The series is produced by July Moon Productions , Kicked to the Curb Productions , Anonymous Content and Paramount Television , with Yorkey and Diana Son serving as showrunners .
Dylan Minnette stars as Clay , while Katherine Langford plays Hannah .
Christian Navarro , Alisha Boe , Brandon Flynn , Justin Prentice , Miles Heizer , Ross Butler , Devin Druid , Amy Hargreaves , Derek Luke , Kate Walsh , and Brian d'Arcy
James also star .
A film from Universal Pictures based on Thirteen Reasons Why began development in February 2011 , with Selena Gomez set to star as Hannah , before being shelved in favor of a television series and Netflix ordering the show straight to series in October 2015 , with Gomez instead serving as an executive producer .
The first season was released on Netflix on March 31 , 2017 .
It received positive reviews from critics and audiences , who praised its subject matter and acting , particularly the performances of Minnette and Langford .
For her performance , Langford received a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress in a Drama Series .
However , its graphic depiction of issues such as suicide and rape , along with other mature content prompted concerns from mental health professionals .
In response , Netflix added a warning card and from March 2018 , a video that plays at the start of each season warning viewers about its themes .
In May 2017 , Netflix renewed 13 Reasons Why for a second season ; filming began the next month and concluded that December .
The second season was released on May 18 , 2018 , and received negative reviews from critics and mixed reviews from audiences .
A third season was ordered in June 2018 and is set to be released in 2019 .
Critical and audience reaction to the series has been divided , with the program generating controversy between audiences and industry reviewers .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
In season one , seventeen year old Clay Jensen returns home from school one day to find a mysterious box on his porch .
Inside he discovers seven cassette tapes recorded by Hannah Baker , his deceased classmate and unrequited love , who killed herself two weeks earlier .
On the tapes , Hannah unfolds an intensely emotional audio diary , detailing why she decided to end her life .
It appears each person who receives this package of old - style tapes is fundamentally related to why she killed herself .
Clay is not the first to receive the tapes , but there is implied detail as to how he should pass the tapes on after hearing them .
There appears to be an order to distribution of the tapes , with an additional copy held by an overseer should the plan go awry .
Each tape recording refers to a different person involved in Hannah 's life contributing to a reason for her suicide .
The tapes refer to both friends and enemies .
In season two , months after Hannah 's suicide , Clay and the other people mentioned on the tapes , as well as close friends and Hannah 's family members , become embroiled in a civil legal battle between Hannah 's parents and Liberty High School .
Alleging negligence on the part of the school , Hannah 's mother pursues her perception of justice , while her reluctance to settle pre - trial and her personal circumstances eventually break up her marriage with Hannah 's father .
The story unfolds with narratives illustrating Hannah 's story told by those who present in court at trial .
Clay , who perceives himself as Hannah 's failed protector , embarks on an investigation using whatever evidence he can find in an effort to impact on the civil case between Hannah 's parents and the school .
Clay also endeavors to expose the corrupted culture of the High School and its favor of wealthy , sports savvy male students over the average student , which especially compromises the integrity of young girls such as Hannah .
Throughout season two , Clay appears to be communicating with the ghost of Hannah as a plot narrative device .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Dylan Minnette as Clay Jensen , a close friend of Hannah who becomes obsessed with finding out what happened to her .
* Katherine Langford as Hannah Baker , a teenager whose suicide and recorded audio cassettes spark the events of the series .
( seasons 1–2 )
* Christian Navarro as Tony Padilla , Clay 's best friend at Liberty High who tries to help him deal with Hannah 's death .
* Alisha Boe as Jessica Davis , a student who starts attending Liberty High at the same time as Hannah .
* Brandon Flynn as Justin Foley , a student at Liberty High who comes from an abusive family and is in a relationship with Jessica .
* Justin Prentice as Bryce Walker , a student from a rich family and the captain of the football team at Liberty High .
* Miles Heizer as Alex Standall , a student at Liberty High , the ex - boyfriend of Jessica and a former friend of Hannah .
* Ross Butler as Zach Dempsey , a cowardly but kindhearted friend of Justin and Bryce at Liberty High .
* Devin Druid as Tyler Down , a bullied student at Liberty High and an avid photographer .
* Amy Hargreaves as Lainie Jensen , Clay 's attorney mother .
* Derek Luke as Kevin Porter , a guidance counselor at Liberty High .
* Kate Walsh as Olivia Baker , Hannah 's mother , who is determined to uncover the truth about the events leading to her daughter 's suicide .
*
Brian d'Arcy James as Andy Baker , Hannah 's father and Olivia 's husband .
( season 2 ; recurring season 1 ) * Timothy Granaderos as Montgomery de la Cruz , a bully who is a student at Liberty High .
In season 2 , he secretly terrorizes a number of individuals testifying at Hannah Baker 's trial .
( season 3 ; recurring seasons 1–2 )
* Brenda Strong as Nora Walker , Bryce 's mother .
( season 3 ; recurring season 2 ) RECURRING INTRODUCED IN SEASON ONE * Josh Hamilton as Matt Jensen , Clay 's father , a psychologist .
* Michele Selene Ang as Courtney Crimsen , a closeted student at Liberty High who is responsible for spreading rumors about Hannah to protect the secret of her own sexual orientation .
In season 2 , she comes out on the stand during the trial of Hannah Baker , confessing her actions against Hannah that landed her on the tapes .
* Steven Silver as Marcus Cole , the self - centered student body president at Liberty High , who is responsible for humiliating and attempting to sexually assault Hannah on a date .
In season 2 , he is suspended from school after lying on the stand during the trial and following the leaked release of the tapes soon after .
* Ajiona Alexus as Sheri Holland , a student and cheerleader at Liberty High who forms a bond with Clay but is also on the tapes when her actions result in Jeff 's accidental death .
* Tommy Dorfman as Ryan Shaver , a student at Liberty High who betrayed Hannah 's trust .
* Sosie Bacon as Skye Miller , an estranged friend of Clay .
In the second season , Skye and Clay date for while before she leaves for a " fresh start " , following another self - harm incident which resulted in her bipolar disorder diagnosis .
* Brandon Larracuente as Jeff Atkins , a student at Liberty High and friend of Clay , who died in a tragic car accident .
* Steven Weber as Gary Bolan , the principal at Liberty High .
* Keiko Agena as Pam Bradley , the Communications teacher at Liberty High .
* Mark Pellegrino as Deputy Bill Standall , Alex 's father , a police officer .
* Joseph C. Phillips as Greg Davis , Jessica 's father , a member of the Air Force .
* Cindy Cheung as Karen Dempsey , Zach 's mother .
* Henry Zaga as Brad , Tony 's boyfriend .
In season 2 , it is revealed that the couple broke up sometime between the events of season 1 and 2 .
* Giorgia Whigham as Kat , a friend of Hannah and her former next - door neighbor .
* Robert Gant as Todd Crimsen , one of Courtney 's fathers .
* Wilson Cruz as Dennis Vasquez , the lawyer representing Hannah 's parents at the end of season 1 and during season 2 .
INTRODUCED IN SEASON
TWO
* Jake Weber as Barry Walker , Bryce 's father .
* Meredith Monroe as Carolyn Standall , Alex 's mother .
* R.J. Brown as Caleb , Tony 's boxing trainer and boyfriend .
* Anne Winters as Chlöe Rice , a smart , clueless , popular girl at Liberty High and the new head cheerleader who is also Bryce 's girlfriend .
At the end of season 2 , it is revealed that she is pregnant .
* Bryce Cass as Cyrus , an edgy , cynical mischief maker who serves as an unexpected champion of the downtrodden .
He befriends Tyler and the two together embark on smear campaigns against bullies .
* Chelsea Alden as Mackenzie , Cyrus ' sister , an artsy and witty girl who is not afraid to speak her mind .
In season 2 , she briefly develops a relationship with Tyler , though the latter breaks it up .
* Allison Miller as Sonya Struhl , a smart and ambitious young litigator , who defends the school during the Hannah Baker trial .
* Brandon Butler as Scott Reed , a student at Liberty High who is on the baseball team .
* Samantha Logan as Nina Jones , a well - respected track star who befriends Jessica over shared sexual assault pasts .
* Kelli O'Hara as Jackie , a passionate advocate for victims of bullying .
* Ben Lawson as Rick Wlodimierz , the baseball coach at Liberty High , who supports and protects his players .
EPISODES
SEASON 1 ( 2017 )
SEASON 2 ( 2018 )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Universal Studios purchased film rights to the novel on February 8 , 2011 , with Selena Gomez cast to play Hannah Baker .
On October 29 , 2015 , it was announced that Netflix would be making a television adaptation of the book with Gomez instead serving as an executive producer .
Tom McCarthy was hired to direct the first two episodes .
The series is produced by Anonymous Content and Paramount Television with Gomez , McCarthy , Joy Gorman , Michael Sugar , Steve Golin , Mandy Teefey , and Kristel Laiblin serving as executive producers .
Filming for the show took place in the Northern Californian towns of Vallejo , Benicia , San Rafael , Crockett and Sebastopol during the summer of 2016 .
The 13-episode first season and the special were released on Netflix on March 31 , 2017 .
Therapy dogs were present on set for the actors because of the intense and emotional content of the series .
On May 7 , 2017 , it was announced that Netflix had renewed the series for a second season .
Filming for the second season began on June 12 , 2017 , but was briefly halted in October in response to the then - ongoing Northern California wildfires happening around the areas where the series was being filmed .
Production on the second season wrapped in December 2017 .
The second season was released on May 18 , 2018 .
On June 6 , 2018 , Netflix renewed the series for a third season , which is set to be released in 2019 .
RECEPTION AUDIENCE VIEWERSHIP Section::::Reception .
Section::::Audience viewership .
The marketing analytics firm Jumpshot determined the first season was the second - most viewed Netflix season in the first 30 days after it premiered , garnering 48 % of the viewers that the second season of Daredevil received , which was the most viewed season according to Jumpshot .
The series also showed an 18 % increase in week - over - week viewership from week one to week two .
Jumpshot , which " analyzes click - stream data from an online panel of more than 100 million consumers " , looked at the viewing behavior and activity of the company 's U.S. members , factoring in the relative number of U.S. Netflix viewers who watched at least one episode of the season .
CRITICAL RESPONSE SEASON 1 Section::::Critical response .
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season has received positive reviews from critics , with much of the praise for the show being aimed at its acting , directing , story , visuals , improvements upon its source material , and mature approach to dark and adult subject matter .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 80 % approval rating with an average rating of 7.2/10 , based on 51 reviews .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " 13 Reasons Why complements its bestselling source material with a gripping look at adolescent grief whose narrative maturity belies its YA milieu .
"
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 17 critics , indicating generally favorable reviews .
Jesse Schedeen of IGN praised 13 Reasons Why , giving it a 9.2 out of 10 , " Amazing " , stating that the show is " a very powerful and hard - hitting series " and " ranks among the best high school dramas of the 21st century " .
Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe gave a glowing review for the show , saying , " The drama is sensitive , consistently engaging , and , most importantly , unblinking . "
Maureen Ryan of Variety asserts that the show " is undoubtedly sincere , but it 's also , in many important ways , creatively successful " and called it " simply essential viewing " .
Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly gave the entire season a score of B+ , calling the show " a frank , authentically affecting portrait of what it feels like to be young , lost and too fragile for the world " .
Daniel Feinberg of The Hollywood Reporter also praised the show , calling it " an honorably mature piece of young - adult adaptation " , and citing its performances , direction , relevance and maturity as some of the show 's strongest points .
The acting , particularly Katherine Langford as Hannah and Dylan Minnette as Clay , was frequently mentioned and widely lauded in several reviews .
Schedeen of IGN praised the cast , particularly Minnette and Langford , stating : " Langford shines in the lead role ... [ and ] embodies that optimism and that profound sadness [ of Hannah 's ] as well .
Minnette 's Clay is , by design , a much more stoic and reserved character ... and does a fine job in what 's often a difficult role . "
Gilbert of The Boston Globe praised the chemistry of Langford and Minnette , saying that " watching these two young actors together is pure pleasure " , while Schedeen of IGN also agreed , saying that they are " often at their best together , channeling just the right sort of warm but awkward chemistry you 'd expect from two teens who ca n't quite admit to their feelings for one another " .
Feinberg of The Hollywood Reporter also praises both actors : "
Langford 's heartbreaking openness makes you root for a fate you know is n't possible .
The actress ' performance is full of dynamic range , setting it against Minnette 's often more complicated task in differentiating between moods that mostly go from uncomfortable to gloomy to red - eyed , hygiene - starved despair . "
Ryan of Variety also gave praise to not only the two leads , but also the supporting cast of actors , particularly Kate Walsh 's performance as Hannah 's mother , which Ryan describes as " career - best work " .
Positive mentions from various critics , such as Ryan , Feinberg and Schedeen , were also given to the supporting cast of actors ( most particularly Alisha Boe , Miles Heizer and Christian Navarro 's respective performances of Jessica , Alex and Tony ) .
Liz Shannon Miller of Indiewire , who enjoyed the show and gave it a positive score of B+ , gave praise to the racial , gender and complex diversity of its supporting cast of teens .
Another aspect frequently mentioned within reviews was the show 's mature and emotional approach to its dark and adult subject matter .
This was favorably reviewed by critics , such as Miller of Indiewire , particularly her statement that " the adult edges to this story ring with honesty and truth .
"
Miller , and Feinberg of The Hollywood Reporter , also stated that the show can be difficult to watch at times , while Schedeen of IGN states that it is " an often depressing and even uncomfortable show to watch ... a pretty emotionally draining experience , particularly towards the end as the pieces really start to fall into place . "
Numerous critics also praised several other aspects of the show .
Feinberg highlighted the show 's directors , saying : " A Sundance - friendly gallery of directors including Tom McCarthy , Gregg Araki and Carl Franklin keeps the performances grounded and the extremes from feeling exploitative " , while Gilbert of The Boston Globe praised the storytelling : " The storytelling techniques are powerful ... [ as it ] builds on the world established in the previous hour , as we continually encounter new facets of Hannah 's life and new characters .
The background on the show keeps getting deeper , richer . "
Conversely , the series has also received criticism over its portrayal of teen angst .
Mike Hale of The New York Times wrote a critical review , writing , " the show does n't make [ Hannah 's ] downward progress convincing .
It too often feels artificial , like a very long public service announcement . "
He also criticized the plot device that has Clay listening to the tapes one by one instead of all in one sitting like the other teens did , which Hale felt was unbelievable : " It makes no sense as anything but a plot device , and you 'll find yourself , like Clay 's antagonists , yelling at him to listen to the rest of tapes already . "
Writing for The Guardian , Rebecca Nicholson praised some aspects of the show , including the performances from Minnette and Walsh , but was troubled by much of the plot , writing , " a storyline that suggests the love of a sweet boy might have sorted all this out added to an uneasy feeling that stayed with me " .
Nicholson was skeptical that the show would appeal to older viewers , unlike other series set in high school such as Freaks and Geeks and My So - Called Life : " It lacks the crossover wit of its forebears ...
It 's too tied up in conveying the message that terrible behaviour can have horrible consequences to deal in any subtleties or shades of feeling .
It 's largely one - note – and that note is horrifying . '
It has to get better , ' implores one student towards the end , but given its fairly open ending , an apparent season two setup , it does not seem as if there 's much chance of that happening . "
Washington Post television critic Hank Stuever wrote a negative review , finding 13 Reasons Why " contrived " and implausible : " There are 13 episodes lasting 13 super - sullen hours – a passive - aggressive , implausibly meandering , poorly written and awkwardly acted effort that is mainly about miscommunication , delivering no more wisdom or insight about depression , bullying and suicide than one of those old ABC Afterschool Specials people now mock for being so corny . "
He also wrote that he found Hannah 's suicide tapes " a protracted example of the teenager who fantasizes how everyone will react when she 's gone .
The story ... strikes me as remarkably , even dangerously , naive in its understanding of suicide , up to and including a gruesome , penultimate scene of Hannah opening her wrists in a bathtub . "
David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the series a tepid review , saying that it was plagued by character inconsistencies , particularly Hannah .
He praised Langford 's " stunning performance " but noted , " There are times when we simply do n't believe the characters , when what they do or say is n't consistent with who we 've been led to believe they are ...
At times , [ Hannah ] is self - possessed and indifferent at best to the behavior of the popular kids .
At other times , though , relatively minor misperceived slights seem to send her into an emotional tailspin .
No doubt , teenagers embody a constant whirl of conflicting emotions , but the script pushes the bounds of credibility here and there . "
He noted that overall , the series worked : " The structure is gimmicky and the characters inconsistent , but there are still at least 13 Reasons Why the series is worthy . "
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season received largely mixed to negative reviews from critics , with criticism aimed at the poor execution of its topics ; many declared it unnecessary .
Rotten Tomatoes reports an approval rating of 27 % with an average rating of 5.5/10 , based on 25 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus states , " By deviating from its source material , 13 Reasons Why can better explore its tenderly crafted characters ; unfortunately , in the process , it loses track of what made the show so gripping in the first place .
"
On Metacritic the season has an average score of 49 out of 100 , based on 16 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Catherine Pearson from DigitalSpy wrote a negative review , calling the season " even more problematic " than the first .
She ends the review saying that , " Unrelenting depression seems to shroud the season , briefly lifted only to collapse back down as the show 's thirteenth episode , once again , delivers a deeply disturbing scene of suffering . "
Jordan Davidson from The Mighty wrote that he " felt sick " after watching the final episode of the season .
A scene in which the character Tyler is attacked and sexually assaulted during the finale also caused controversy from fans and critics of the series , with some describing it as " unnecessary " and " traumatizing " .
The series ' showrunner has defended the scene , saying that it was included in an attempt to " [ tell ] truthful stories about things that young people go through in as unflinching a way as we can " .
SOCIAL IMPACT Section::::Social impact .
The series has generated controversy over its portrayal of suicide and self - harm , prompting Netflix to add strong advisory warnings prior to the first , twelfth , and thirteenth episodes .
School psychologists and educators expressed concern about the series .
The superintendent of Palm Beach County , Florida schools reportedly told parents that their schools had seen an increase in suicidal and self - harming behavior from students , and that some of those students " have articulated associations of their at - risk behavior to the 13 Reasons Why Netflix series " .
The Australian youth mental health service for 12–25 year - olds , Headspace , issued a warning in late April 2017 over the graphic content featured in the series , due to the increased number of calls to the service following the show 's release in the country .
Netflix however , demonstrably complied with the Australian viewer ratings system , by branding the series as " MA15 + " when streamed via its own interface .
They accompanied its presentation with additional warnings and viewer advice , and ensured that counselling referrals were included and not easily skipped at the conclusion of each episode , even including an Australian accent in the voice over for those referrals every fifth episode .
In response to the graphic nature of the show and New Zealand 's high youth suicide rate , which was the highest among the 34 OECD countries during 2009 to 2012 , the Office of Film & Literature Classification in the country created a new rating , " RP18 " , allowing individuals aged 18 and over to watch the series alone and those below having to watch it with supervision from a parent or guardian .
In April 2017 , the National Association of School Psychologists ( NASP ) in the United States released a statement regarding the series , saying : " Research shows that exposure to another person 's suicide , or to graphic or sensationalized accounts of death , can be one of the many risk factors that youth struggling with mental health conditions cite as a reason they contemplate or attempt suicide .
"
NASP sent a letter to school mental health professionals across the country about the series , reportedly a first for NASP in response to a television show .
The following month , the United States Society of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology ( SCCAP ) released a statement also noting how strongly the show may serve as a trigger for self - injury among vulnerable youth .
They lamented the depiction of mental health professionals as ineffective for youth who have experienced trauma and may have been considering suicide .
The statement implored Netflix to add a tag following each episode with mental health resources , and a reminder that depression and suicide can be effectively treated by a qualified mental health professional , such as a clinical child psychologist , using evidence - based practice .
Similarly , clinical psychologists such as Daniel J. Reidenberg and Erika Martinez , as well as mental health advocate MollyKate Cline of Teen Vogue magazine , have expressed concerns regarding the risk of suicide contagion .
However , Eric Beeson , a counselor at The Family Institute at Northwestern University noted that " it 's unlikely that one show alone could trigger someone to attempt suicide .
"
Mental health professionals have also criticized the series ' depiction of suicide itself , much of which violates widely promulgated recommendations for reporting on actual suicides or not depicting them in fiction , in order to not encourage copycat suicides .
The season finale , which depicts Hannah 's suicide in graphic detail , has been particularly criticized in this regard .
Nic Sheff , a writer for the show , has defended it as intended to dispel the myth that suicides " quietly drift off " , and recalled how he himself was deterred from a suicide attempt by recalling a survivor 's account of how painful and horrifying it was .
The NASP statement also criticized the show 's suggestion that bullying alone led Hannah to take her life , noting that while it may be a contributing factor , suicidal ideations far more often result from the bullied person having a treatable mental illness without adequate coping mechanisms .
Alex Moen , a school counselor in Minneapolis , took issue with the show 's entire plotline as " ... essentially a fantasy of what someone who is considering suicide might have — that once you commit suicide , you can still communicate with your loved ones , and people will suddenly realize everything that you were going through and the depth of your pain ...
That the cute , sensitive boy will fall in love with you and seek justice for you , and you 'll be able to orchestrate it , and in so doing kind of still be able to live . "
Other counselors criticized the depiction of Hannah 's attempt to reach out to Mr. Porter as dangerously misleading , since not only does he miss obvious signs of her suicidal ideations , but says he can not report her sexual assault to the police without her identifying the assailant .
School counselors are often portrayed as ineffective or clueless in popular culture , Moen says , but Porter 's behavior in the series goes beyond that , to being unethical and possibly illegal .
" It 's ridiculous !
Counselors are not police .
We do n't have to launch an investigation .
We bring whatever information we do have to the police " , she told Slate .
In May 2017 , the Canadian Mental Health Association ( CMHA ) along with the Centre for Suicide Prevention ( CSP ) released a statement with similar concerns to the ones raised by NASP .
CMHA believed that the series may glamorize suicide , and that some content may lead to distress in viewers , particularly in younger viewers .
Furthermore , the portrayal of Hannah 's suicide does not follow the media guidelines as set out by the Canadian Association for Suicide Prevention ( CASP ) and the American Association of Suicidology .
CMHA and CASP did praise the show for raising awareness about " ...
this preventable health concern , " adding that , " Raising awareness needs to be done in a safe and responsible manner .
A large and growing body of Canadian and international research has found clear links between increases in suicide rates and harmful media portrayals of suicide .
"
Ways in which the portrayals of suicide may cause harm , according to CMHA and CASP , include the following : " They may simplify suicide , such as , by suggesting that bullying alone is the cause ; they may make suicide seem romantic , such as , by putting it in the context of a Hollywood plot line ; they may portray suicide as a logical or viable option ; they may display graphic representations of suicide which may be harmful to viewers , especially young ones ; and/or they may advance the false notion that suicides are a way to teach others a lesson . "
One study found the release of 13 Reasons Why corresponded with between 900,000 and 1,500,000 more suicide - related searches in the United States , including a 26 % increase in searches for " how to commit suicide , " an 18 % increase for " commit suicide , " and a 9 % increase for " how to kill yourself .
"
A review , however , found that it is unclear if searching for information about suicide on the Internet relates to the risk of suicide .
ACCOLADES
BEYOND THE REASONS
Section::::Beyond the Reasons .
With the release of the first season of the series , Netflix also released 13 Reasons Why : Beyond the Reasons , an aftershow documentary television film .
The 29-minute documentary featured cast and crew of the series , and mental health professionals discussing their experiences working on the show and dealing with difficult issues , including bullying , depression and sexual assault .
A second Beyond the Reasons special was released with the second season of the series .
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * 13 Reasons Why on Netflix * – support resources organized by episode and topic , curated by and SCCAP