SECTIONALS
" Sectionals " is the thirteenth episode of the American television series Glee .
It premiered on the Fox network on December 9 , 2009 .
The episode was written and directed by series co - creator Brad Falchuk , and serves as the mid - season finale for the show 's first season .
" Sectionals " sees the glee club win the sectionals round of competition , advancing on to regionals .
Glee club member Finn ( Cory Monteith ) discovers he is not the father of his girlfriend
Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) baby .
Football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) plans his wedding with Emma ( Jayma Mays ) on the same day as the sectionals competition .
Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is unable to take the students to sectionals and Emma offers to take them .
The episode sees the return of Eve and Michael Hitchcock as rival glee club directors Grace Hitchens and Dalton Rumba .
The episode features covers of six songs , studio recordings of four of which were released as singles , available for digital download , and are also included on the album .
" Sectionals " was watched by 8.127 million U.S. viewers , and received mostly positive reviews from critics .
The episode 's musical performances attracted praise , as did the development of Will and Emma 's relationship , though Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly suggested it may have been preferable to leave their romance unresolved .
James Poniewozik of Time felt that by concluding the pregnancy storyline in " Sectionals " , Glee was able to " clear the decks for a second half of the season as the confident show it now is " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
As a result of a technicality in the show choir competition rules , glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) is not allowed to accompany New Directions to sectionals .
Guidance counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) postpones her own wedding by a few hours so that she can take the club in his place , although her fiancé , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , feels she is choosing Will over him .
Most of the glee club has learned that Puck ( Mark Salling ) , not Finn ( Cory Monteith ) , is the father of Quinn 's baby .
They hide this fact from Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , believing that she will tell Finn .
Emma takes over as faculty advisor of the club as they start working on their set list for sectionals .
With two group songs selected , Rachel says that she 'll sing the solo ballad ; Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) strenuously objects to this , and sings "
And I Am Telling You
I 'm Not Going " to wild applause .
Rachel agrees that Mercedes deserves to sing the solo and the two hug .
Meanwhile , Rachel has deduced that Puck impregnated Quinn and tells Finn ; he attacks Puck and confronts Quinn , who tearfully admits the truth .
Angered by their betrayal , Finn quits the club on the eve of sectionals , and has to be replaced by school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) .
New Directions arrive at the event to discover their competitors have received an advance copy of their set list , and are performing all three of their chosen songs .
Emma calls Will , who convinces Finn to help his New Directions teammates .
Will finds Finn in the locker room , and talks to him about how special he is and that the club needs him .
Emma confronts rival choir directors Grace Hitchens ( Eve ) and Dalton Rumba ( Michael Hitchcock ) , while New Directions chooses new performance pieces for their set list at the last minute .
Rachel asks Mercedes to perform another ballad , but Mercedes insists , with the rest of the club agreeing , that Rachel is the best choice to perform " on the fly " .
They also decide to include " Somebody to Love " as their closer , but are stuck for a third piece until Finn arrives with new sheet music for the group , ready to perform with them .
Rachel gives a solo performance of " Do n't Rain on My Parade " , receiving a standing ovation after finishing .
The group then performs " You Ca n't Always Get What You Want " by the Rolling Stones , to the applause and cheers of the audience .
After their performance , Grace attempts to confess her duplicity to the judges , but they have already unanimously decided that New Directions has won the competition .
Having previously discovered that his wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) was faking her pregnancy , Will tells her he no longer feels the same way he did when they first fell in love .
He later attends Ken and Emma 's delayed wedding , only to find that Ken has ended the relationship as a result of Emma 's feelings for Will .
She announces her intention to leave McKinley High School , explaining that it will be too painful for her to carry on working with Will and Ken .
Back at school , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) suspends cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester
( Jane Lynch ) for leaking the glee club 's set list , and has Will reinstated as the director of New Directions .
The glee club members show Will their trophy and perform
" My Life Would Suck Without You " for him .
The dance moves in the finale are a combination of the dances from other songs that have been performed so far .
As Emma prepares to leave the school , Will chases after her and stops her with a kiss .
Both are happy , but uncertain of what will happen next .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Glee was originally commissioned by Fox for a thirteen episode run , culminating with " Sectionals " .
On September 21 , 2009 , the network announced an extension of the first season , ordering a further nine episodes .
" Sectionals " therefore serves as the mid - season finale , with the remainder of the season airing from April 13 , 2010 .
Events in " Sectionals " are influenced by the season 's eleventh episode " Hairography " , in which cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester gave New Directions ' competition set - list to their rival glee clubs .
Morrison explained that the clubs perform New Directions ' songs first , making it appear that they are copying them , so New Directions " have to do this impromptu thing and fly by the seat of [ their ] pants .
"
Morrison has called " Sectionals " " the best episode " of the series .
" Sectionals " was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk .
Recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club members Brittany ( Heather Morris ) , Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr. ) and Matt Rutherford ( Dijon Talton ) , football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) and local news anchor Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) .
Anna Camp and Patricia Forte guest star as sectionals judges Candace Dykstra and Donna Landries , Peter Choi is the Emcee , and Thomasina Gross plays Perfect Engleberger , a member of the Jane Addams Academy glee club .
" Sectionals " also sees the return of Eve and Michael Hitchcock as rival glee club directors Grace Hitchens and Dalton Rumba .
Eve was offered the role of Grace after Whitney Houston declined to appear .
The episode features cover versions of " Do n't Rain on My Parade " by Barbra Streisand , " You Ca n't Always Get What You Want " by The Rolling Stones , " My Life Would Suck Without You " by Kelly Clarkson , " And I Am Telling You
I 'm Not Going " from Dreamgirls , " Do n't Stop Believin ' by Journey and " Proud Mary " by Creedence Clearwater Revival .
Studio recordings of "
And I Am Telling You
I 'm Not Going " , " Do n't Rain on My Parade " , "
You Ca n't Always Get What You Want " and " My Life Would Suck Without You " were released as singles in December 2009 , available for download .
They are also included on the album . "
And I Am Telling You
I 'm Not Going " charted at number 85 in Canada and 94 in the US , while " Do n't Rain on My Parade " charted at number 59 in Canada and 53 in the US .
" You Ca n't Always Get What You Want " charted at number 51 in Canada and 71 in the US , and " My Life Would Suck Without You " charted at number 66 in Australia , 40 in Canada and 51 in the US .
Jenna Ushkowitz named " You Ca n't Always Get What You Want " one of her favorite songs on the album , deeming the original " a classic " and the Glee cover " emotional " as one of the final songs of the original run of episodes .
The performance of " My Life Would Suck Without You " showcased choreography from numerous performances from earlier episodes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The episode was watched by 8.127 million US viewers .
It was the show 's highest - rated episode ever with teenagers , and its season high in the 18 - 49 demographic , with a rating / share of 3.7/9 .
In Canada , it was the tenth most watched show for the week of broadcast , attaining 1.64 million viewers .
" Sectionals " received mostly positive reviews from critics .
TV Guide Natalie Abrams felt it ended the beginning of the season on a " high note " , while Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal commented : " You could n't have asked for a better cliffhanger of a fall finale " .
IGN 's Eric Goldman rated the episode 9/10 , calling it " very satisfying " , and Gerrick Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times commended it as " fine television . "
James Poniewozik of Time wrote : " I 'm not sure I expected or wanted a feel - good ending out of the first half of Glee .
But what we got from " Sectionals " left me feeling very good about where the show is going this spring .
"
In contrast , Alan Sepinwall of The Star - Ledger , felt that the episode brought too many storylines to a head at once , " not allowing all to have as much impact as they might have had the big developments been spaced out " .
Sepinwall commented , however , that the acting and especially singing performances were " uniformly strong . "
Musical performances in the episode attracted praise .
Aly Semigran of MTV called Riley 's rendition of " And I Am Telling You
I 'm Not Going " " goose bump - inducing " , while Goldman commended : " Riley absolutely killed it as Mercedes belted out that song " .
In contrast , Poniewozik wrote that it was the one song choice he did n't like , feeling that it is overused , thus diminishing its impact .
Abrams deemed Rachel 's solo performance at sectionals " amazing " , and Flandez recommended : " Watch it again if you ever want to take back three minutes of your life that you 've wasted on something else . "
Pardue called the group performance of " You Ca n't Always Get What You Want
" " energetic [ ... ] casual [ ... ] and very Glee " , but felt it " would have been nice " to feature different singers .
Dan Snierson for Entertainment Weekly similarly noted that he would have preferred " more vocal interplay between all group members " .
In December 2012 , TV Guide named the rendition of " Do n't Rain on My Parade " one of Glee best performances , commenting : " Glee has done Broadway many times , but rarely better than this . "
Critics also commented positively on the development of Will and Emma 's relationship , with Abrams noting that she had been waiting for them to kiss since the pilot episode , and Goldman deeming their coming together " very hard to not feel good about " .
Snierson , however , wrote that although there was satisfaction in the episode ending on the kiss , it may have been " more intriguing " to conclude with Will finding Emma 's office empty , questioning whether it was too soon for the two of them to begin a relationship .
The end of Quinn 's pregnancy secret was also well received .
Poniewozik wrote that the pregnancy storyline had felt as though " the early Glee was n't confident that people would be interested in it without these over - the - top soap opera twists . "
He noted that in concluding the pregnancy deception in " Sectionals " , Glee : " seemed to clear the decks for a second half of the season as the confident show it now is . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Sectionals " at Fox.com * " Sectionals " at TV.com