TEARS OF A TIGER Tears of a Tiger is a young adult novel written by Sharon M Draper .
It was first published by Atheneum in 1994 , and later on February 1 , 1996 by Simon Pulse , and is the first book of the Hazelwood High Trilogy .
It depicts the story of a seventeen - year - old African American boy named Andrew " Andy " Jackson , who feels deeply guilty for inadvertently causing his best friend Robert " Rob " Washington 's death through drunk driving .
The story is told through multiple different formats such as journal entries , first person narratives , and newspaper articles .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot Summary .
Seventeen year old Andy Jackson just won a basketball game at Hazelwood High School , and he and his friends Robbie Washington , Tyrone Mills , and B.J. Carson decide to ride home in Andy 's Jeep until Andy , Rob and Tyrone decide that they were going to celebrate by drinking while Andy was behind the wheel .
However , Andy accidentally crashed his car into a wall , and Rob was sitting in the passenger 's seat with his feet on the dashboard .
So when the car crashed , his feet went through the windshield , pinning him in between the wall and crashed Jeep .
And when Andy and B.J. tried to get Robbie out of the car , it explodes , sending them flying off of the car roof and Rob burns to death while screaming for Andy , B.J. and Tyrone to save him .
After getting out of the hospital , Andy went to court and got his license and car taken away .
He felt like Rob 's death was his fault
and he did n't know how to move on with his life .
Coach Ripley , the basketball coach , gave him some advice and he took Rob 's place as team captain .
Andy started talking to a psychologist named Dr. Carrothers , and he pretended to be fine , when he really was depressed and ashamed about Rob .
It was hard to talk to his friends and parents about his feelings .
His grades were getting worse , and he even ran out of English class when they were talking about suicide and death in Shakespeare 's Macbeth .
While staying home to watch his 6-year - old brother , Monty , Andy had a nightmare about Rob blaming him for his death .
He always enjoyed talking to Monty .
In the chapter " Lions and Tigers and Dinosaurs " , Monty asks Andy if tigers cry .
What Monty is saying is a metaphor .
He 's really asking Andy if he cries .
This chapter is crucial because it shows that Monty is very quick to pick up on Andy 's emotions and how his older brother is feeling .
The only person who really understood Andy was his girlfriend , Keisha Montgomery , who 'd been helping Andy through his mental recovery following Rob 's death .
Keisha notices little by little that Andy 's depression is a lot worse than he 's leading on , but decides not to tell anyone .
When his emotions become too much for her to handle , she breaks up with him , with the last thing she ever says about him to her friend Rhonda is " No , I hope I never see him again . "
On the same day , Andy skips school and stays home and decides to use his dad 's hunting rifle to commit suicide in order to get rid of all the pain and guilt .
His mother , Monty , and Rhonda all see his body in his room with the gun in his hand and his blood everywhere .
His friends are really upset and write letters to him , wishing he 'd had asked for help instead of ending his life without saying goodbye .
Tyrone said he 'd never forget the night Rob died , Gerald was angry that Andy did n't have courage , Rhonda wanted to know if Andy was thinking about his family , and Keisha hated that he was dead , and hoped he 'd go to heaven .
Instead of writing a letter , B.J. prays for Andy , hoping he 'll go to Heaven too , no matter how stupid he acted .
He said that Andy was afraid of death .
In the last chapter entitled " The Tears of a Tiger " , Andy 's mom drives Monty to Andy 's gravesite .
While sitting there , Monty talks about how it was selfish of Andy to leave before his 7th birthday , before he could teach Monty to talk to girls , and before he could teach Monty how to play basketball .
Monty told him that he 'd always love Andy and would always miss him .
CHARACTERS * Andrew " Andy ' Jackson - the protagonist who feels deeply guilty for killing his best friend Rob , and commits suicide at the end of the story
* Robert Orlando " Rob " Washington - Andy 's best friend who gets killed in the car accident , which affects Andy and his friends
* Tyrone Mills- one of Andy and Rob 's friends on the basketball team , who was drinking with them the night Rob got killed
* B.J. Carson-
another one of Andy 's friends who was in the car when Rob dies .
He prays for Rob and Andy when they die .
* Coach Ripley- the basketball coach who talks to Andy about his feelings
* Dr Carrothers-
the psychologist who Andy talked to about his problems * Keisha Montgomery-
Andy 's girlfriend who cared a lot about Andy 's feelings , but got tired of it afterwards and they broke up .
She misses Andy when he commits suicide .
* Monty-
Andy 's six - year - old brother who he enjoys talking to .
He 's upset when Andy dies .
* Gerald Nickelby-
another one of Andy 's friends on the basketball team .
He 's angry over Andy 's suicide
* Rhonda Jeffries-
Tyrone 's girlfriend and Keisha 's best friend , who 's upset about Rob 's death , and sees Andy 's body .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sharon Draper official website