LOVE BRACELET ( CARTIER )
The Love Bracelet ( styled L⊝Ve , with the horizontal line inside the letter " O " alluding to the bracelet 's locking mechanism ) is a piece of jewelry designed in 1969 by Aldo Cipullo for Cartier SA .
Early versions of the Love Bracelet featured gold plating while more recent designs are created from solid gold .
Prices for the bracelets differ depending on the item 's materials and some can exceed $ 35,000 .
As of 2015 the Love Bracelet is still in production and Cartier has expanded the line to include products based on the original bracelet 's design , including cufflinks , rings , earrings , necklaces , and watches .
In 2006 the line was considered to be the " most successful collection in Cartier 's history . "
The bracelet has received some criticism over its design , which some have compared to medieval chastity belts .
Love Bracelets have also posed issues with airline security personnel and a Transportation Security Administration agent stated in 2015 that the bracelets were " the biggest problem item " due to the need for airline passengers to remove all metal items when passing through Airport security metal detectors and because a tool is needed to remove the bracelets .
In the 1990s Cartier filed a lawsuit against multiple jewelry stores in Manhattan and Puerto Rico , alleging that the stores were selling counterfeit Love Bracelets .
THE LOCKING MECHANISM Section::::The locking mechanism .
Unlike traditional bracelets , which are either wide enough to slip them over the hand onto the wrist or can readily be opened in order to put them on , the Love bracelet is designed to be opened only by using a special screwdriver that is supplied with every bracelet .
The screwdriver is also available in the form of a necklace , allowing the bracelet to be " locked " onto one person , while the " key " is kept around the neck of another , as a symbol for their commitment to their relationship .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
Cartier has offered the Love bracelet in 18k yellow
gold , 18k " pink " ( rose ) gold , 18k white gold , and in platinum .
Some bracelets are offered with diamonds in place of or in rotation with the screw - motif .
Ceramic details and special colored precious gems have been offered as well .
Pave diamond versions were made available in 2009 .
Cuff versions that do not close or lock are also available .
In June 2006 , Cartier introduced the Love charity bracelet , a version consisting of a silk cord and a golden ring bearing the word LOVE .
Cartier donates $ 150 from the sale of each bracelet to a variety of charities , each backed by a celebrity .
The 2009 version of the charity bracelet was promoted by actress Eva Mendes .
SEE ALSO
* chastity belt
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Cartier Love Collection , Cartier 's showcase website for the Love brand 2016 .