ALCOHOL LAWS OF WISCONSIN
The alcohol laws of Wisconsin consist of both statewide statutes and local ordinances governing the sale of alcohol .
HISTORY Section::::History .
When Wisconsin became a state , settlers from the eastern United States ( known as Yankees ) took issue with the consumption of alcohol by German immigrants on Sunday , as well as the prevalence of alcoholism .
The Wisconsin legislature passed a law in 1849 that made liquor sellers liable for the costs incurred by local governments in supporting alcoholics .
Ten years later , the state prohibited liquor sales on Sundays .
In 1872 , alcohol regulation reached new heights in the state with the passage of the Graham Law .
This legislation prohibited drunkenness and the sale of alcohol to minors , and required all liquor sellers to post a $ 2,000 bond ( more than $ 30,000 in 2007 U.S. dollars ) .
German - Americans fought the new law in the courts and at the ballot box .
Although they lost challenges in the courts , they were able to elect a legislature friendlier to alcohol consumption .
In 1874 , the new lawmakers passed less restrictive laws that lowered the bond to $ 500 , allowed Sunday liquor sales , and created certain safe havens for liquor sellers to escape liability for alcoholics .
Alcohol consumption was banned in Wisconsin during Prohibition ( 1920 - 1933 ) .
But even before Prohibition ended , Wisconsin created work - arounds .
In 1926 , voters approved a referendum allowing the manufacture of beer , if not its consumption .
The state repealed its law enforcing Prohibition in 1929 .
Wisconsin Senator John J. Blaine sponsored the Act that later became the Twenty - first Amendment to the United States Constitution , ending Prohibition .
The state was the second to ratify the amendment on April 25 , 1933 .
RETAIL SALE OF ALCOHOL
Section::::Retail sale of alcohol .
State law prohibits retail sale of liquor and wine between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. , and beer between midnight and 6:00 a.m.
State law allows local municipalities to further restrict retail sales of alcohol , or ban the issuance of retail liquor licenses altogether .
Local ordinances often prohibit retail beer sale after 9:00 p.m. At least two municipalities in Wisconsin prohibited the retail sale of alcohol until recently : the city of Sparta , and the village of Ephraim .
In the April 1 , 2014 Wisconsin spring election , voters in Sparta narrowly passed a referendum to allow the sale of beer and wine in groceries and convenience stores .
The ban on the sale of liquor within the city remains in effect .
In the April 5 , 2016 , voters in Ephraim passed a referendum to allow the sale of beer and wine in restaurants and businesses .
BEVERAGE SALE OF ALCOHOL Section::::Beverage sale of alcohol .
State law requires that bars be closed between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday .
Exceptions are made on New Year 's Eve , when no closing is required , and for changes in Daylight Saving Time .
State law does not permit municipalities to further restrict when bars must be closed .
Municipalities may elect , however , to prohibit the issuance of liquor licenses , making the municipality effectively dry .
DRINKING AGE
Section::::Drinking age .
The drinking age in Wisconsin is 21 .
Those under the legal drinking age may be served , possess , or consume alcohol if they are with a parent , legal guardian , or spouse who is of legal drinking age .
Those age 18 - 20 may also be served , possess or consume alcohol if they are with a parent , legal guardian , or spouse who is of legal drinking age .
Those age 18 to 20 may also possess ( but not consume ) alcohol as part of their employment .
The 1983 Wisconsin Act 74 , effective July 1 , 1984 , created a drinking age of 19 .
Meeting in special session at the call of the governor , the legislature enacted 1985 Wisconsin Act 337 , which raised the drinking age to 21 and brought the state into compliance with the NMDA ( National Minimum Drinking Age ) on September 1 , 1986 .
The NMDA law was amended to permit an exception for those persons who were between ages 18 and 21 on the effective date of the law .
Wisconsin 19- and 20-year - olds were " grandfathered in " by this exception after enactment of Act 337 .
In effect , the state did not have a uniform age of 21 until September 1 , 1988 .
SEE ALSO * Dry county * List of dry communities by U.S. state#Wisconsin
* Tavern League of Wisconsin REFERENCES