1991 LOKHANDWALA COMPLEX SHOOTOUT
The 1991 Lokhandwala Complex shootout was a gunbattle that occurred on 16 November 1991 at the Lokhandwala Complex , Bombay ( now Mumbai ) , between seven gangsters led by Maya Dolas and members of the Mumbai police and the ATS led by the then Additional Commissioner of Police , Aftab Ahmed Khan .
The four - hour - long shootout was termed as India 's " first daylight encounter " and was videographed and conducted in full view of the public .
It ended in the deaths of all seven gangsters , including Maya Dolas , Dilip Buwa and Anil Pawar .
PRELUDE
Section::::Prelude .
In the late 1980s , the Bombay underworld was under the firm control of the D - Company , headed by Dawood Ibrahim .
From his base in Dubai , Ibrahim controlled underworld activities through his various lieutenants .
Among the most prominent was Mahindra Dolas , a gangster who was known more popularly by his nickname Maya .
Dolas had got his start running several successful extortion rackets for the criminal - politician , Ashok Joshi 's gang at Kanjurmarg .
On 3 December 1988 , Joshi was killed at the Bombay - Pune road near Panvel by a 15-man hit squad led by Chhota Rajan at Ibrahim 's orders .
After Joshi 's murder , Maya later broke out of the Ashok Joshi gang , and formed his own gang .
He then convinced notorious Joshi gang sharpshooter Dilip Buwa to switch sides and together on 17 September 1989 , they led a stealth attack against the Joshi gang in Kanjurmarg , in which five people were killed .
This brought them into favour with Dawood Ibrahim , who was gunning for the Joshi gang after the killing of his pointman Satish Raje .
Dolas and Buwa were a feared duo and soon began a steady rise within the ranks of the D - Company .
They also conducted extortion activities on Ibrahim 's behalf .
However , they were also fugitives on the run , with ongoing arrest warrants for them .
Maya Dolas , had in fact escaped from prison a few years prior to the shootout .
SHOOTOUT Section::::Shootout .
A news and current affairs video magazine NEWSTRACK captured the entire shoot out live in 1991 .
According to the former Additional Commissioner of Police Aftab Ahmed Khan , the ATS received a tip - off from a police informer that Maya Dolas and his gang were hiding in the A wing , flats 002 and 003 in the Swati building at the Lokhandwala Complex , a posh upper middle class residential area .
The informer reported that they were armed and were waiting for a few builders who would be coming in the evening .
The apartment in which they were hiding belonged to Gopal Rajwani , a fugitive gangster from Ulhasnagar and associate of Dawood Ibrahim .
The ATS formed three teams for the task of arresting the fugitives and taking them into custody .
One was for reconnaissance , while the other two cordoned off the spot .
What happened next is subject to dispute and controversy .
According to the official police version , Officer M.I. Qavi was the first to go there .
Qavi spotted Gopal Rajwani at the main gate , but did not arrest him for fear of surprising the gangsters hidden inside the building .
On the other hand , Rajwani did not recognise the police officers who were in their plain clothes and escaped without any incident .
The ATS officers Sunil Deshmukh , Z.M. Gharal and Qavi were the first to walk into the ground floor apartment where seven of them were watching TV .
When they burst into the apartment , six of the gangsters , including Dolas , raised their arms in surprise .
Dilip Buwa , who was armed with an AK-47 assault rifle , opened fire on the officers .
Officer Gharal , who was not wearing body armour , was shot in the chest twice , puncturing his lungs .
Qavi was shot in the elbow .
Buwa 's brazen attack was soon followed by the others .
The ground floor apartment had two doors , one opening into the compound and the other to the building 's staircase .
While the police officers came out from the front door , the gangsters escaped into the interiors using the stairs .
Khan used the loudspeakers to request residents to go to the kitchen and lie on the floor , to avoid accidentally getting hit by a stray bullet .
He also asked the gangsters to surrender , even when half the force was surrounding the building .
The gangsters refused to surrender and responded with bullets and profanities .
In the ensuing shootout , the police used 450 rounds of ammo .
Every other wall on all sides of the building was rained heavily with bullets .
At the end , all seven gangsters were killed , with the last gangster being shot down at the terrace of Swati building .
Although post shootout media coverage made out Maya Dolas to be the main shooter , according to Khan , in reality it was Dilip Buwa .
Khan stated that Dolas just kept hurling abuses from inside the building , while the real bullets were being pumped by Buwa : AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
The shootout resulted in a great deal of controversy for the ATS .
The ATS was suspected of staging a fake encounter and subsequently dragged to court .
A magisterial inquiry was ordered as questions were raised on the use of 450 rounds of ammo and the need for a " daylight " encounter .
The ATS was also charged with walking away with Rs 7 million which belonged to Maya Dolas .
Petitions alleging corruption were also filed against Khan .
However , the trial ended with Khan and other involving ATS officers acquittal .
The fugitive underworld don Chotta Rajan was also extremely vocal in criticising the police operation as a " fake encounter " .
According to Chotta Rajan , the encounter was planned by his former boss Dawood Ibrahim , when they were allies , as part of a campaign to downsize Rajan 's gang and curtail his power .
He further claimed that the ground level co - ordination for the operation was conducted by a Dawood Ibrahim subordinate , Samir Shah .
He stated that Maya Dolas had expressed his willingness to surrender , but the police insisted on eliminating him .
Khan dismissed the allegations as ridiculous , claiming that Dolas and the others were in no mood to surrender .
He asserted that the operation was videographed and it was conducted in full view of the public .
He further stated that a public interest litigation claiming that the encounter was stage - managed was dismissed by the Bombay high court .
The court even dubbed it " vexatious litigation " .
He also justified the shootout , by stating that it had a demoralising effect on the Bombay underworld .
In the aftermath of the Lokhandwala encounter , three dreaded shooters fled the city .
While Subash Sawant and Subash Singh Thakur fled to Nepal , Anil Parab fled to Dubai .
While the Lokhandwala shootout made Khan famous , he later faced criticism about the way he handled the Bombay riots under his jurisdiction .
The Bharatiya Janata Party and the Shiv Sena protested his alleged partisan attitude towards their workers in the riots .
In 1995 , when the BJP - Shiv Sena government came to power in Maharashtra , Khan promotion to the rank of Additional Director General of Police was stalled and he was transferred to Nagpur .
Frustrated at this insignificant posting , Khan retired and set up a security agency in 1996 , which his son now runs .
He also became a politician and joined the Janata Dal , with whom he stood elections in the Mumbai North - west constituency in 1998 .
Gopal Rajwani , the gangster who had inadvertently managed to avoid being caught in the crossfire , returned to Ulhasnagar and joined politics as a Shiv Sena member in 1995 .
He was eventually shot dead by four of rival mobster Pappu Kalani 's henchmen on 24 January 2000 in the premises of the First Class Magistrate 's court there .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The infamous shootout was immortalised in the 2007 film Shootout at Lokhandwala , starring Sanjay Dutt as ACP Aftab Ahmed Khan , Vivek Oberoi as Maya Dolas , Tushar Kapoor as Dilip Buwa and Amrita Singh as Maya 's mother Ratnaprabha Dolas .
The movie also featured the real - life former ACP Aftab Ahmed Khan in a cameo role as his superior , the police commissioner Krishnamurthy .
The film was however , criticised by underworld don Chotta Rajan on grounds that it grossly distorted the facts .
In a May 2007 interview , he told the Times of India newspaper that the encounter was fake , while the film sought to depict it as an actual event .
He stated that he would take it to the film 's producer Sanjay Gupta , although when questioned , Gupta refused to pass any comment .
The film makers were unable to film the shootout scene in the real Swati building , a set worth 5 million was constructed in Film City which consisted of seven buildings and roads and trees and made it look exactly like how Swati building was in 1991 .
SEE ALSO
* List of cases of police brutality in India REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Indian news report on the shootout , on youtube.com