VISA POLICY OF MONTENEGRO Visitors to Montenegro must obtain a visa from one of the Montenegrin diplomatic missions unless they come from one of the visa exempt countries .
Visa policy is regulated by Regulation on Visa Regime Act .
Where there are no diplomatic or consular representations of Montenegro , visa requiring foreigners may obtain them from ( depending on the country ) diplomatic or consular representations of Serbia , Bulgaria and Croatia .
Visa policy of Montenegro is similar to the visa policy of the Schengen Area .
It grants 90-day visa - free entry to all Schengen Annex II nationalities , except for Kiribati , Marshall Islands , Micronesia , Palau , Solomon Islands , Tonga and Tuvalu .
It also grants visa - free entry to several additional countries – Azerbaijan , Belarus , Cuba , Ecuador , Kosovo , Kuwait , Qatar , Russia and Turkey .
Visitors must hold passports that are valid for at least 3 months beyond the period of intended stay .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA FREE TRAVEL Section::::Visa free travel .
Citizens of the following countries can stay for up to 90 days without a visa .
ORDINARY PASSPORTS
Section::::Ordinary passports .
Citizens and holders of ordinary passports of the following 97 countries and territories can enter Montenegro without a visa up to 90 days ( unless otherwise noted ) :
* All European Union citizens valign = top } DIPLOMATIC AND SERVICE PASSPORTS Section::::Diplomatic and Service passports .
Nationals of the following countries can visit Montenegro if they are holding a diplomatic passport :
Nationals of the following countries can visit Montenegro if they are holding a diplomatic or service passport : valign = top Holders of a Laissez - Passer , issued by the United Nations , provided travelling on duty can also visit Montenegro visa - free .
FOREIGN VISA HOLDERS Section::::Foreign visa holders .
Nationals of any country may visit Montenegro without a visa for up to 30 days if they hold a passport with visas issued by Ireland , a Schengen Area member state , the United Kingdom or the United States or if they are permanent residents of those countries .
Residents of the United Arab Emirates do not require a visa for up to 10 days , if they hold a return ticket and proof of accommodation .
Refugees issued with Refugee travel document by Australia , Canada , Iceland , Japan , New Zealand , Norway , Switzerland , United States , or an EU member state can visit Montenegro without a visa for up to 30 days .
RECIPROCITY Section::::Reciprocity .
Montenegrin citizens can enter without a visa some of the countries whose citizens are granted visa - free access to Montenegro but require a visa for Antigua and Barbuda , Australia , Azerbaijan , Bahamas , Barbados , Brunei , Canada , Colombia , El Salvador , Grenada ( grants visa on arrival ) , Guatemala , Honduras , Ireland , Japan , Kazakhstan , Kuwait , Malaysia , Mauritius
( grants visa on arrival ) , Mexico , New Zealand , Nicaragua ( grants visa on arrival ) , Paraguay , Qatar ( grants visa on arrival ) , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Taiwan , United Arab Emirates , United Kingdom , United States , Uruguay and Venezuela .
SEE ALSO
* Visa policy in the European Union
* Visa requirements for Montenegrin citizens
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Overview of visa regimes for foreign citizens