EATING MUCUS Eating mucus is the act of extracting nasal mucus with one 's finger ( rhinotillexis ) and the succeeding action of ingesting the mucus from the nose - picking ( mucophagy ) .
Nasal mucus is also termed as boogers , snot , bogeys , mucus secretion , and other related terms .
Mucophagy is a common behavior in children and many adults .
However , this action is frowned upon and stigmatized in most cultures and societies which try to prevent development of the habit and attempt to break it if already established .
However , there seems to be great health benefits to eating your own mucus .
Scientists at a number of universities including Harvard and the University of Saskatchewan say parents should not discourage their children from picking their noses because they contain ' a rich reservoir of good bacteria . '
HEALTH Section::::Health .
Mucophagy , despite its benefits on one 's immunity , comes with some health risks due to the potential physical aggravation resulting from the action of nose picking , and the germs on fingers and in mucus .
Picking one 's nose can cause upper airway irritation as well as other injuries including nasal septal perforation ( a " through - and - through defect " of the cartilage separating the nostrils ) , and epistaxis ( nosebleed ) .
In a study by Andrade and Srihari , 25 % of subjects were ailed by nose bleeds , 17 % with nasal infections , and 2 % with damage more serious than bleeding .
W. Buzina studied the fungal diversity in nasal mucus in 2003 .
104 samples were gathered with 331 identifiable strains of fungi and 9 different species per patient .
POSSIBLE REASONS
Section::::Possible reasons .
The Obsessive – Compulsive Disorder Association of South Africa collectively concluded that nose picking ( and mucophagy ) are passing behaviors .
Andrade and Srihari studied persons who were more apt to suffer from " habitual and obsessive – compulsive behaviors .
" They discovered that those with psychotic issues showed correlation between nose picking and self - mutilation motives .
Diagnoses have also included passive – aggressive personality disorder and schizophrenia .
Mucophagy has also been referred to as a " tension phenomenon " based on children 's ability to function in their environment .
The different degrees of effectively fitting in socially may indicate psychiatric disorders or developmental stress reactions .
However , most parents view these habits as pathological issues .
Moreover , Andrade and Srihari cited a study performed by Sidney Tarachow of the State University of New York which reported that people who ate their boogers found them " tasty . "
Stefan Gates in his book Gastronaut discusses eating dried nasal mucus , and says that 44 % of people he questioned said they had eaten their own dried nasal mucus in adulthood and said they liked it .
As mucus filters airborne contaminants , eating it could be thought to be unhealthy ; Gates comments that " our body has been built to consume snot " , because the nasal mucus is normally swallowed after being moved inside by the motion of the cilia .
Friedrich Bischinger , a lung specialist at Privatklinik Hochrum in Innsbruck , says that nose - picking and eating could actually be beneficial for the immune system .
In 2016 researchers in the quest for ways to fight superbugs discovered a promising candidate , a bacterium Staphylococcus lugdunensis that produces lugdunin , which The Week noted as " possibly a powerful antibiotic against resistant bacterial strains .
" The German team included study author Andreas Peschel , who told the L.A. Times
" It was totally unexpected to find a human - associated bacteria to produce an antibiotic . "
SEE ALSO * Allergic salute ( wiping of the nose with the hand )
* Neti ( Hatha Yoga )
* Nasal irrigation * Taboo REFERENCES