CANNABIS IN COLORADO
Cannabis in Colorado refers to cannabis ( legal term marijuana ) use and possession in Colorado , United States .
The Colorado Amendment 64 , which was passed by voters on November 6 , 2012 , led to legalization in January 2014 .
The policy has led to cannabis tourism .
There are two sets of policies in Colorado relating to cannabis use : those for medicinal cannabis and for recreational drug use along with a third set of rules governing hemp .
HISTORY PROHIBITION ( 1917 )
Section::::History .
Section::::Prohibition ( 1917 ) .
Amidst an early 20th century trend of limiting the drug , Colorado first restricted cannabis on March 30 , 1917 .
In November 1914 Colorado voters approved the 22nd Amendment to the Colorado Constitution , also known as the Prohibition Amendment , prohibiting alcohol beginning January 1 , 1916 ; and on December 18 , 1917 the Eighteenth Amendment ( establishing Prohibition ) was proposed by Congress .
Shortly after the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act went into effect on October 1 , 1937 , the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and Denver Police Department arrested Moses Baca for possession and Samuel Caldwell for dealing .
Baca and Caldwell 's arrest made them the first marijuana convictions under U.S. federal law for not paying the marijuana tax .
Judge Foster Symes sentenced Baca to 18 months and Caldwell to four years in Leavenworth Penitentiary for violating the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act .
PROSECUTION
( 1917-PRESENT ) Section::::Prosecution ( 1917-Present ) .
In 1975 , during a decade - long wave of increased penalties and prosecutions in the country , including dramatic increases in the length of prison sentences , a 53 % increase in drug arrests , a 188 % increase in the number of people arrested for marijuana offenses , and a 52 % increase in the number of people in state prisons for drug offenses , Colorado continued to prosecute people and incarcerate individuals for marijuana possession .
A contributing factor in the favor of decriminalization was the work on behalf of NORML by Pitkin County Deputy District Attorney Jay Moore , who helped win over the legislature 's Republican leadership with arguments as to money wasted on needless enforcement of marijuana laws .
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ( 2000 )
Section::::Medical marijuana ( 2000 ) .
On November 7 , 2000 , 54 % of Colorado voters approved Amendment 20 , which amended the State Constitution to allow the use of marijuana in the state for approved patients with written medical consent .
Under this law , patients may possess up to of medical marijuana and may cultivate no more than six marijuana plants ( no more than three of these mature flowering plants at a time ) .
Patients who are caught with more than this in their possession may argue " affirmative defense of medical necessity " but are not protected under state law with the rights of those who stay within the guidelines set forth by the state .
Furthermore , doctors , when making a patient recommendation to the state can recommend the rights to possess additional medicine and grow additional plants , because of the patient 's specific medical needs .
Conditions recognized for medical marijuana in Colorado include : cachexia ; cancer ; chronic pain ; chronic nervous system disorders ; epilepsy and other disorders characterized by seizures ; glaucoma ; HIV or AIDS ; multiple sclerosis and other disorders characterized by muscle spasticity ; and nausea .
Additionally , patients may not use medical marijuana in public places or in any place where they are in plain view , or in any manner which may endanger others ( this includes operating a vehicle or machinery after medicating ) .
Colorado medical marijuana patients can not fill prescriptions at a pharmacy because under federal law , marijuana is classified as a schedule I drug .
Instead , patients may get medicine from a recognized caregiver or a non - state - affiliated club or organization , usually called a dispensary .
Dispensaries in Colorado offer a range of marijuana strains with different qualities , as well as various " edibles " or food products that contain marijuana extracts .
Certain dispensaries also offer patients seeds and " clones " for those who want to grow their own medicine .
In April 2013 , the Colorado Court of Appeals held in Coats v. Dish Network that since marijuana remains against federal law , employers can use that standard rather than state law as a rationale for banning off - the - job worker use , and are not bound by Colorado 's Lawful Activities Statute : On June 10 , 2016 Governor John Hickenlooper signed House Bill 16 - 1359 .
This bill stated that the court shall not prohibit the use or possession of medical marijuana as a condition of probation unless the individual is sentenced to probation for a conviction under Article 43.3 of Title 12 , C.R.S. ; or if the court determines based upon any material evidence that such a prohibition is necessary and appropriate to accomplish the goals of sentencing stated in 18 - 1 - 102.5 , C.R.S. RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ( 2012 ) Section::::Recreational marijuana ( 2012 ) .
Since the enactment of Colorado Amendment 64 in November 2012 , adults aged 21 or older can grow up to six marijuana plants ( with no more than half being mature flowering plants ) privately in a locked space , legally possess all marijuana from the plants they grow ( as long as it stays where it was grown ) , legally possess up to one ounce of marijuana while traveling , and give as a gift up to one ounce to other citizens 21 years of age or older .
Any adult in Colorado 's territory may possess up to one ounce of marijuana at any time , regardless of whether they are an in - state resident or an out - of - state visitor , as of 2016 .
Retail concentrate / edible limits are as follows : 8 g of retail concentrate will be equal to 1 oz of flower , and therefore 800 mg of THC in the form of retail edibles will be equal to 1 oz of retail flower .
Consumption is permitted in a manner similar to alcohol , with equivalent offenses prescribed for driving .
Consumption in public was recently passed in Denver under Ordinance 300 with a vote of 53 % for legal public consumption , and a 46 % vote against .
Within 60 days the new rules will be written and should be similar to current public alcohol consumption rules and regulations .
Amendment 64 also provides for licensing of cultivation facilities , product manufacturing facilities , testing facilities , and retail stores .
Visitors and tourists in Colorado can use and purchase marijuana , but face prosecution if found in possession in any adjacent state .
Denver airport has banned all possession of marijuana but admits it has not charged a single person with possession nor has the airport seized any marijuana since the ban went into effect .
Governor Hickenlooper signed several bills into law on May 28 , 2013 implementing the recommendations of the Task Force on the Implementation of Amendment 64 .
On September 9 , 2013 , the Colorado Department of Revenue adopted final regulations for recreational marijuana establishments , implementing the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code ( HB 13 - 1317 ) .
On September 16 , 2013 , the Denver City Council adopted an ordinance for retail marijuana establishments .
The state prepared for an influx of tourists with extra police officers posted in Denver .
Safety fears led to officials seeking to limit use of the drug in popular ski resorts .
According to a Quinnipiac University poll released July 21 , 2014 , Coloradans continued to support the state 's legalization of marijuana for recreational use by a margin of 54–43 percent .
At the same time , the poll indicated 66 percent of voters there think marijuana use should be legal in private homes and in members - only clubs , but should not be legal in bars , clubs or entertainment venues where alcohol is served .
Sixty - one percent of respondents also said laws regulating marijuana use should be as strict as laws regulating alcohol use .
During 2014 , the first year of implementation of Colorado Amendment 64 , Colorado 's legal marijuana market ( both medical and recreational ) reached total sales of $ 700 million .
In September 2014 , legislation was submitted by Alabama senator Jeff Sessions to ensure that Electronic Benefit Transfer cards could not be used to purchase marijuana , as the United States Department of Health and Human Services stated that their usage in marijuana shops was not prohibited .
By April 2018 , revenue from legalized marijuana only amounted to 2 % of the state 's education budget , with some calling it " a drop in a bucket . "
During this month , sales records showed that marijuana sales were flat and were about the same as they were the previous year .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
General regulations for the legal commercial production and vending of marijuana in the state , which continue to be updated by the General Assembly , are published through the Marijuana Enforcement Division of the Department of Revenue
Hemp is defined as any form of the cannabis plant which has less than " 3/10 's of one percent " delta-9-THC .
The state department of agriculture regulates hemp production .
IMPAIRED DRIVING
Section::::Impaired driving .
Like other states , driving while impaired by any drug is illegal in Colorado , though it took the legislature six attempts and three years to pass marijuana intoxication measures .
Ultimately the legislators decided on a nanogram limit in the bloodstream , though the number they picked was scoffed at by activists .
Today Colorado law states that juries may convict a person of marijuana intoxication if they have five or more nanograms of THC per milliliter of blood , but defendants are allowed to argue that they were not intoxicated despite having such levels of THC in their bloodstream .
RESULTS Section::::Results .
The Colorado amendment 64 , which was passed by voters on November 6 , 2012 , led to legalization in January 2014 .
Surveys conducted in Colorado in 2016 interviewed over 17,000 students in middle & high school showing that from 2009 to 2015 the rates in which teenagers smoked marijuana has decreased .
Colorado has also seen the percentage of teenagers who have smoked marijuana in the past 30 days drop to 21 % , from 25 % .
The number of teenagers sent to emergency rooms more than quadrupled after marijuana was legalized .
The state has also seen car crash claim rates increase after legalization , but there has been no increase in fatalities in comparison with other states .
Colorado 's youth marijuana use rate dipped after legalization and is lower than the national average .
In 2014 , Colorado invested $ 2 million generated from marijuana sales tax revenue on campaigns aimed at anti - marijuana education of minors and the state
has plans to spend double that amount , $ 4 million in 2015 ( out of a total projected marijuana sales tax revenue of $ 125 million ) .
The current campaigns provide information on marijuana laws , the impacts of youth use , the dangers of driving under the influence of any drug , and the harmful side effects of using marijuana .
In 2017 , the government of Colorado collected over $ 247 million in taxes , fees , and licensing costs .
SEE ALSO
* Colorado Amendment 44 ( 2006 )
* Colorado Amendment 64 ( 2012 )
* Law of Colorado * Cannabis Law Reform
* Prohibition of drugs
* Washington Initiative 502 *
Colorado Badged Network
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Denver Marijuana Info at Colorado.gov