MOONSHINE BY
COUNTRY Moonshine is a generic term for distilled alcoholic beverages made throughout the globe from indigenous ingredients reflecting the customs , tastes , and raw materials for fermentation available in each region .
The term commonly applies to small - scale production , which is often illegal or tightly regulated in many countries .
COUNTRIES
AFGHANISTAN
Section::::Countries .
Section::::Afghanistan .
Zarbali is a moonshine still , a type of distilled alcoholic beverage supposedly made from fermented raisins .
ALBANIA Section::::Albania .
In Albania , moonshine ( Raki ) is the primary alcoholic beverage consumed on daily basis .
It is made from different fruits , usually grapes , but also plums , apples , blackberries , cornelian cherry , strawberry tree , mulberry , persimmons , figs , juniperus and walnuts .
ARMENIA
Section::::Armenia .
The Armenian name for moonshine is oghee .
The production of oghee is widespread in Armenia .
White mulberry , grape , cornelian cherry , plum , and apricot moonshine are especially popular , particularly in the countryside .
The Arabic word Araq ( Arak ) is derived from the Sanskrit word Ark ( or Urk , where the sound of U is as in BUT ) , which means distillate .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Distillation of alcohol requires an excise license in Australia .
The sale of stills and other distilling equipment , including yeasts , flavourings , and other ingredients specific to distillation , is legal .
After World War II , there was large - scale immigration from Italy , with many of the immigrants settling in irrigation areas with orchards and grapevines .
Many of the immigrants made wine for their own use , which was perfectly legal .
However , some of them gathered and fermented leftover grape skins , seeds and stems to distill homemade grappa .
Because of the woody seeds and stems , the raw liquor held substantial methanol ; and there were occasional incidents of poisoning , sometimes at large parties , by distillers who did n't discard the head ( the first portion of their condensate ) .
Thus , the widespread deaths meant home - distillation has greatly decreased with later generations , and farm consolidation .
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA Section::::Bosnia and Herzegovina .
In Bosnia , home distillation of plum rakia / šljivovica is common ( plum = šljiva ) .
Bosnians have a long tradition of making plum rakia and it is often made by individuals , with some brands exceeding 60 % of alcohol .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
Brazil has a long tradition of home distilling , especially in rural areas .
Artisanal liquors ( especially cachaça made on small farms ) tend to be of good quality and are prized by collectors .
One form that can be qualified as moonshine is known as " " ( " Crazy Mary " ) .
This is aguardente , made in jails by inmates .
It can be made from many cereals , ranging from beans to rice or whatever can be converted into alcohol , be it fruit peels or candy , using improvised and illegal equipment .
BULGARIA Section::::Bulgaria .
The national spirit in Bulgaria is called " rakia " [ ракия ] .
It is usually made from grapes , but other fruits are used as well , such as plum ( Slivovica ) , apricot , apple , pear , raspberry , or peach .
Rakia is the most popular drink in Bulgaria along with wine .
Like wine , it is often produced by villagers , either in a community owned ( public ) still , or in simpler devices at home .
Homemade rakia is considered of better quality and " safer " than rakia made in factories , since there were , especially during the 1990s , many counterfeit products on sale .
By tradition , distilling a certain amount of rakia for home use has been free of taxes .
In connection with Bulgaria joining the European Union in 2007 , there were government decisions to raise taxes on homemade spirits .
This led to protests in late 2006 and early 2007 .
With respect to local traditions , there is little risk that makers will actually have to pay the new taxes .
In Bulgarian tradition , drinking rakia is accompanied by eating little dishes ( called meze [ мезе ] ) , usually some kind of salad , e.g. , Shopska salad .
Rakia also has many uses as a folk medicine .
BURMA Section::::Burma .
Burma ( Myanmar ) has several forms of moonshine .
Although it is illegal , moonshine has majority share of the alcohol market especially in rural areas of the country .
In the countryside , moonshine shares the alcohol market with what some call palm wine .
CAMEROON Section::::Cameroon .
Arki odongtol or mfofo is the Cameroon moonshine .
It has an alcohol content of 80 % .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
The common names in Canada for home - made alcohol are shine ( bagosse in French ) or screech ( which usually refers to a rum rather than a whiskey ) in Newfoundland ; in Manitoba , the term home - brew is also common .
Two legal products that are marketed as shine or screech are Myriad View Artisan Distillery Strait Shine and Newfoundland Screech .
COLOMBIA Section::::Colombia .
In Colombia moonshine is called " Tapetusa " or " Chirrinchi " and is illegal .
However , it is quite popular in some regions and has been traditional for hundreds of years .
The cost of tapetusa is a fraction of the heavily taxed legal alcoholic beverages .
The aborigines used to make their own version of alcoholic drink called " Chicha " before the arrival of Europeans .
Chicha is usually made of corn , which is chewed and spat in an earthen container that was then buried for some time ( weeks ) .
The latter is a special kind of alcoholic beverage , and similar to that made by Chilean Indians ( Mapuches ) , but in Chile a legal version of Chicha , made of fermented apples , is sold in September .
In the Caribbean coast there is a moonshine called " Cococho " , an Aguardiente famous for the number of blindness cases due to the addition of methanol .
On the Caribbean coast of Colombia , the Wayuu tribe produces chirrinche for local consumption and trade with tourists .
Chirrinche is very strong , and often produces a severe hangover .
COSTA RICA Section::::Costa Rica .
In Costa Rica it 's called Guaro de Contrabando , which means counterfeit liquor .
Also known as chirrite , it can be made from any kind of fermented fruit from " manzana de agua " ( Malay ( rose ) apple ) to pineapple .
CROATIA Section::::Croatia .
The tradition in Croatia is similar to Bosnia , and it is also called " rakija " and it 's made of various fruits .
Each fruit has its own quality .
Most common fruit for producing " rakija " is plum , because of its high percent of fruit sugar which should be better than industrial sugar , since the final product should contain no methanol .
It can also be made from wine and grapes , when it is called " Lozovača " .
In some parts of Croatia herbs are put into " Lozovača " , which they call " Travarica " and it is said that it could heal stomach pains and various diseases .
This kind of brandy production is very common in the Croatian culture and was fully legal before Croatia 's accession to the EU on 1 July 2013 when certain restrictions were imposed .
CUBA Section::::Cuba .
In Cuba , gualfarina or gualfara is a type of moonshine which is made at homes illegally .
Its main ingredients are sugar and yeast , and its flavor is not pleasant .
In the production of gualfarina , most people use the same alcohol used in hospitals to cure wounds , etc .
The term " gualfarina " is thought by many to come from the word warfarina ( warfarin in English ) , an anticoagulant .
CYPRUS Section::::Cyprus .
In Cyprus a traditional drink is made from distilling grapes , known as zivania .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
The staple Czech liquor is traditionally made from distilling plums and is known as ' slivovice ' ( pronounced " slivovitze " ) , or ' meruňkovice ' , made from apricots .
Traditionally produced in garages and cellars , nowadays it is also produced by specialist distillers .
It is found especially in the region of Moravia and is popular at celebrations , including weddings .
Czech distillers also offer a service to distill your own fruit mash for you , but they charge heavily , on top of the taxes .
The Czech slang term for this type of informally produced alcohol is " pálenka . "
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO Section::::Democratic Republic of the Congo .
Home - made corn or cassava - based whiskey is known as lotoko in the DRC .
Lotoko is usually made from maize , but sometimes made from cassava , or plantain .
Heads of corn are cut up and boiled into a mash which is then fermented and distilled using improvised stills made from cut - down oil drums .
Because of the woody core of the cobs of corn , the alcohol produced contains high levels of methanol which is toxic .
Although it is officially banned , because of its high alcohol content ( over 50 % ) , its production is widespread in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Lotoko made from cassava or plantains does n't carry the same methanol risk .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
In Denmark , moonshine is referred to as hjemmebrændt ( lit . :
home burnt , that is home distilled ) .
In Denmark an excise license is required to manufacture spirits above 14 % .
The penalty for illegal manufacture of spirits is a large fine or prison and confiscation of the spirit - making equipment .
Even the possession or manufacturing of moonshine equipment is a criminal act .
Importing any equipment that can be used for spirit distillation is supposed to be reported to the authorities .
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Section::::Dominican Republic .
In the Dominican Republic , moonshine is called cleren in the towns near the border with Haiti and pitrinche in the eastern towns .
It is made from sugar or fermented sugar cane .
Its production is illegal but the law is rarely enforced .
Another form is berunte , fermented from either corn ( which is the most common ) , rice , melon , pineapple or wheat .
ECUADOR Section::::Ecuador .
In Ecuador , moonshine is often distilled from sugarcane , and referred to as Puro , Spanish for pure , or trago from the Spanish verb tragar , to swallow .
Some people refer to it as Puntas ( Tips )
It is also known as " fuerte " or strong .
It is often put in glass containers with fruits .
A popular preparation mixes the alcohol with sugar cane juice and lemon juice .
ENGLAND Section::::England .
In England an excise licence is required to manufacture spirits by any means .
The penalty for " moonshine " ( = illegal manufactured spirits ) is a fine of up to £ 1,000 and confiscation of the spirit - making equipment .
ESTONIA Section::::Estonia .
In Estonia moonshine is referred to as puskar , samagonn , samakas or metsakohin and is usually made from potatoes or rye .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
Finnish moonshine , pontikka , is home - made vodka , usually made from any fermentable carbohydrates , most commonly grain , sugar or potato , made into kilju and distilled , ideally three times ( kolmasti kirkastettu ) .
It is said that the name pontikka came about due to the poor quality French wine from Pontacq .
Other names are ponu ( an abbreviation of pontikka ) , ponantsa ( a pun on Bonanza ) , kotipolttoinen ( home - burnt ) , tuliliemi ( fire sauce ) , korpiroju ( wildwood junk ) , or korpikuusen kyyneleet ( tears of wildwood spruce ) as stills often are located in remote locations .
In Finland Swedish , the most common term is moscha , deriving from English " moonshine " , as the term was first used by emigrants who had returned home from America .
Home distillation was forbidden in 1866 , but it was nevertheless widely practiced .
Moonshining was boosted by prohibition in Finland in 1919–32 , but even though alcohol was legalized , high excise taxes were still levied on it and various restrictions were in place .
However , in recent years , the structural change of the rural Finland , the changes in Finnish alcohol politics due to EU membership , the rise of living standards and the availability of cheaper legal liquors , caused by lowering the excise taxes and abolishment of specific import restrictions from Estonia , have made making pontikka a rarity , and it is no longer considered a serious policy issue .
Unlicensed moonshining is technically illegal in Finland , but it is often considered a challenge or hobby .
In practice prosecution follows only if the authorities become aware that the product is being sold .
Most Finnish moonshiners use simple pot stills and flash distillation .
Some have constructed sophisticated reflux or rock stills for fractional distillation , containing plate columns or packed columns , with reflux filling components of Raschig rings , crushed glass , nuts , glass pellets or steel wool .
The city of Kitee is the most famous Finnish " moonshine - city " .
Although by definition illegal , drinks produced by the same process are legally available : a brand of vodka called " Kiteen kirkas " ( " Kitee 's Clear " ) is available commercially and Helsinki Distilling Company also produces " sea - buckthorn pontikka " .
FRANCE Section::::France .
Eau de vie , gnôle , goutte , lambic , fine , or more generically the simple name of the fruit they were distilled from – poire ( Pear ) , prune ( Plum ) , mirabelle ( Mirabelle )
– there is a wide variety of terms in French to speak of strong alcohols , which also reflects the wide variety of recipes and ingredients available to make them .
There are strong local traditions depending on the provinces : lambic or calvados is distillated from cider in Brittany and Normandy , mirabelle , prune , and kirsch are mainly produced in the East ( Alsace , Lorraine , Bourgogne , Champagne ) , and every wine - producing region has , to some extent , a tradition of making brandy , the most famous being Cognac and Armagnac .
Unlicensed moonshining was tolerated in France up to the late 1950s .
Since 1959 the right can no longer be transferred to descendants , and only a few are still exercising their right .
Owning a registered fruit orchard or a vineyard still gives the right to have the production distilled , but is no longer free , and a licensed distiller must be utilized .
The excise amounts to 7.50 € per litre of pure alcohol for the first 10 litres , and 14.50 € per litre above that limit .
GEORGIA Section::::Georgia .
In Georgia the traditional grape moonshine is called chacha .
Recently , with modernized distilling and aging technology , chacha is promoted as " Georgian brandy " or " Georgian vodka " , and is compared to grappa .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In Germany , moonshine is called Schwarzgebrannter .
The term is very often translated " black burned " since the word schwarz means black , but in this case schwarz means illegal ( as in black market ) .
A more accurate translation is " illegally distilled liquor " .
Generally , home - distillation of alcohol is illegal in Germany , and even the use of very small stills up to capacity is illegal since January 2018 .
Such stills were only used by hobbyists until that date .
Possession of such a still is not illegal , but its use has since January 2018 .
The ownership of larger stills must be reported to fiscal authorities , otherwise it is illegal , and the use of these stills requires a licence .
The German market for moonshine is limited , in part because legal alcohol is inexpensive , compared to most European countries and in part because controls are generally effective .
German home - distilled alcohol is in most cases a type of traditional German schnapps , often a type of fruit brandy .
There are many legal and often very small distilleries in Germany .
Most of these small distilleries are located in Southern Germany , located on farms and are home - distilleries .
These producers of distilled beverages are called abfindungsbrennerei and the operation of these small distilleries requires a special type of licence .
The number of such licences is limited and it is difficult to obtain one , since in most cases all licences are in use .
An abfindungsbrennerei is only allowed to produce a limited amount of pure alcohol per year and the operation of the still is limited to some months of the year .
There are tight controls of these limitations .
The products of an abfindungsbrennerei , though in many cases home - distilled , are not considered schwarzgebrannter , since they are taxed and legal .
GHANA Section::::Ghana .
Ghanaian moonshine is referred to as akpeteshie , and is distilled from palm wine , or juice from the sugar cane .
It is also at times referred to as apio or simply hot drink .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
Greek moonshine is known as tsipouro ( Greek : τσίπουρο ) or raki ( Greek : ρακή ) .
In the island of Crete it is also known as raki ( Greek : ρακή ) or tsikoudia ( Greek : τσικουδιά ) .
It is usually made from pomace grapes .
The best quality of raki ( Greek : ρακή ) is made from grape berries .
There is also anise - flavored tsipouro , usually made in Thessaly ( Tsipouro Tyrnavou ) and also tsipouro ( Greek : τσίπουρο ) made from Greek Strawberry Tree berries ( Greek : κουμαριά ) , usually made in Northern Epirus .
There are legal commercial distilleries , but private stills are quite common , particularly in rural areas .
Home distilled products are generally produced in limited quantities , for the distiller 's personal use and for gifts to friends and family — many of whom are often present during the distillation process .
Home distilled products are not in direct competition with commercial products , since moonshine is generally not sold or consumed in public places .
GUATEMALA Section::::Guatemala .
The broadest term for Guatemalan moonshine is cusha .
It is popular in large regions of the countryside , where it is made by fermenting fruits , particularly for Mayan festivities .
If forbidden , nobody is prosecuting its manufacture .
Cusha is also a valuable for shamans , who consume it during cleansing ceremonies and spit on their " patients " with it .
HAITI Section::::Haiti .
In Haiti moonshine is called clairin .
It is made from sugar or fermented sugar cane .
HONDURAS
Section::::Honduras .
In Honduras , moonshine is commonly called guaro .
It is normally distilled from sugarcane .
In small towns , it is often sold out of the home by the producer .
In cities and larger towns you can find it where other liquors are sold , usually in plastic bottles with labels of local producers .
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
Hungarian moonshine is called házipálinka ( pálinka is a spirit , házi means ' homemade ' ) .
It is mostly made in rural areas where the ingredients , usually fruit , are readily available .
In modern times , home destillation was illegal ( since medieval time , it was a privilege of the nobility ) , as it constituted a tax fraud if not carried out at a licensed distillery , however it was , and is quite widespread .
Since 2010 , it is legal to produce small portions ( up to 86 liters 42 %
ABV per year per person ) házipálinka for personal use ( ie . to be consumed by " the distiller , their family and guests " ) for a small , yearly fee .
Community distilleries also exist , operated by one or more villages , to make maintaining the equipment profitable ( in case of rented distill - time , however , the personal quota is 50 liters ) .
Because the ingredients are usually of good quality , and the equipment used ( while possibly old and obsolete ) is designed for this purpose , the quality of these spirits is usually higher than most of the other moonshine varieties ; however , expertise is still required and brewing good - quality pálinka is usually a source of prestige in communities , thus making most of the moonshiners adhere to the strict rules defining pálinka .
Because of this , házipálinka - induced methanol poisoning is exceptionally rare when compared to other moonshines .
ICELAND Section::::Iceland .
Icelandic moonshine ( Landi ) is distilled gambri or landabrugg .
It is largely made by hobbyists due to high liquor taxes , but used to be a prolific business during the prohibition .
Due to the lack of natural cover and harsh weather conditions , most " moonshining " activity occurs indoors in a controlled environment .
Although potatoes are the most common constituent of Icelandic moonshine , any carbohydrate can be used , including stale bread .
Landi is often consumed by people who can not buy alcohol , either due to their young age or distance from the nearest alcohol store .
INDIA Section::::India .
Locally produced moonshine is known in India as tharra .
It is made by fermenting the mash of sugar cane pulp in large spherical containers made from waterproof ceramic ( terra cotta ) .
In South India , moonshine is any alcoholic drink not made in distilleries .
Toddy and arrack are not synonyms or Indian names for moonshine liquor .
Toddy(or taddy ) is an alcoholic beverage made from the sap of palm trees , and arrack refers to strong spirits made traditionally from fermented fruit juices , and the sap of the palm tree .
In the Indian state of Goa , a locally produced cashew flavored drink Feni is popular among locals and the tourists .
There are frequent deaths associated with consumption of unsafe liquors in India , such as the Hooch tragedy in West Bengal in December 2011 .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
Arrack is commonly produced as moonshine , as thus has resulted in deaths from contaminants .
IRAN Section::::Iran .
Arak ( especially Aragh Sagi ) made from various kinds of fruit based liqueurs as well as from wine is commonly produced as moonshine .
Its underground production practices have resulted in deaths from contaminants .
Also because of the danger of carrying Arak in Iran ( as a forbidden drink in Islam ) or simply the difficulty of finding it , some use pure Ethanol made for chemical uses which increases the chance of alcohol poisoning .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Grain or potato based moonshine made illegally in Ireland is called poitín , or poteen .
The term is a diminutive of the word pota ' a pot ' .
As elsewhere , poteen is the basis for extensive folklore with crafty hillsmen pitted against the " excise men " as in the song The Hackler from Grouse Hall .
In the past , the wisp of smoke on an isolated hillside was what gave the poteen - maker away : in modern times this risk was removed by the use of bottled gas to fire the clandestine still .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
Clandestine distillation of alcohol typically from grapes which is called grappa was common in the once poor north eastern part of Italy , which still produces some of the finest grappa in the country but with tighter control over the supply of distillation equipment its popularity has slumped .
However , distillation of grappa still continues in the rural areas of Italy especially in the south where control over distilling equipment is not as rigid .
Typically , families produce small quantities for their own consumption and for gifts to others .
Nowadays , the supply of production equipment larger than three litres is controlled , and anything smaller must bear a sign stating that moonshine production is illegal .
On the island of Sardinia , one can still find local varieties of grappa which are dubbed ' filuferru ' , the local pronunciation for ' iron - thread ' ; this peculiar name comes from the fact that grappa jugs and bottles were buried to hide them from authorities with iron - thread tied to them for later retrieval .
Legal production occurs both by large - scale industrial producers as well as small producers who still use the traditional ( formerly illegal ) methods .
KENYA Section::::Kenya .
Illegally distilled alcohol is widely made in Kenya , known as " Changaa " , " Kumi kumi " or " Kill me quick " .
It is mostly made from maize and produced with crude stills made from old oil drums .
It has been known to cause blindness and death .
This may be caused by unscrupulous adulteration by sellers who want to give the beverage more ' kick ' , for example , adding battery acid .
It may be caused by impure distillation .
Because use is so widespread in Kenya the government has little control and has considered legalization to avert deaths .
LAOS Section::::Laos .
In Laos ( Lao People 's Democratic Republic ) the home distillation of spirits is technically illegal , although this law is rarely enforced . '
Lao Lao ' is the name given to home - produced liquor , and it is drunk openly especially in rural areas , with many small villages operating a communal still .
Usually brewed from rice , it varies from well produced , smooth tasting liquor to very rough spirits with many impurities .
LATVIA Section::::Latvia .
In Latvia , moonshine " kandža " ( 45–55 % vol ) is generally made from sugar , sometimes from potatoes or also grains .
The brewing kettle commonly is an old aluminum milk - can ( approximately 40l ) .
Normally sugar , baker 's yeast and water is fermented for few weeks and then distilled with help of gas - burner or wood - cooker .
Brewing of " kandža " is illegal ; however , in reality as long as it is used for own consumption ( not for sale ) there are no problems with authorities .
LITHUANIA Section::::Lithuania .
The Lithuanian name for moonshine is naminė degtinė or in short naminė or naminukė ( naminė means ' homemade ' ) ; also the word samagonas ( from Russian samogon ) is often used .
Quite often samagonas is shorted to samanė which connotates with the word samanos ( means ' moss ' )
as usually Lithuanian moonshine is made illegally , thus hiding in the woods .
Moonshine " Samanė " ( i.e. named after common name ) is made from triticale grain in Dzūkija region .
The fermented mash ( broga in Lithuanian ) is held in stainless steel reservoir and distilled twice what determines its strength of 50–90 % vol and specific aroma .
MACEDONIA Section::::Macedonia .
In Macedonia moonshine is not only legal , but is also the liquor of choice , where it is called ракија ( rakija ) .
Typically , the moonshine is made out of grapes , which are the leftovers from the production of wine , but also made from plums ( Slivovica ) .
Moonshine is highly popular because it is commonly used for medicinal purposes .
This process usually uses diluted moonshine with caramelised sugar , and the liquor is then boiled and consumed while still hot .
MALAWI Section::::Malawi .
In Malawi moonshine is commonly brewed and distilled by women in townships and villages .
Known as " kachasu " or " Jang'ala " in Chichewa , various sources of starch may be used including potatoes , sugar cane or maize .
Although technically illegal , there is no social stigma attached to moderate consumption .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
In the state of Sarawak , moonshine is called Langkau , meaning ' hut ' in the Iban language , which is where people cook them ( illegally ) .
Langkau is made from fermented rice wine ( tuak ) and cooked in a barrel with a little house hanging off the top of the barrel .
Some rural folks like to drink ' Langkau ' at festivals and during leisure hours .
In Sabah , a drink similar to ' Langkau ' is called ' Montoku ' .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
Mexico has a variety of home - made alcohol based on sugar cane or agave .
The most common name for sugar - cane based moonshine is ' win ' in the central Mexican states or ' charanda ' in Michoacan in the west coast .
Agave - based distilled beverages are generally named ' mezcal ' .
However , depending on the region , it can take the names of ' tequila ' , ' sotol ' , or ' bacanora ' .
NEPAL Section::::Nepal .
Nepal has an indigenous liquor raksi ( ) that is distilled illegally at home as well as legally in rustic distilleries .
The legal product is usually made from fruit since there are statutes against diverting grain away from human consumption .
Distilled liquor made from grain may also be called daru or double - daru if distilled twice .
Legal raksi is seldom aged ; usually quite harsh to the taste .
Illegal daru may be smoother , or it can be poisonous if improperly prepared .
It is not uncommon for Nepalese to tell outsiders that the concoction does not exist .
The Nepalese sometimes add rakshi to hot tea , calling the mixture ' Jungle Tea ' .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
New Zealand is one of the few western societies where home distillation is legal for personal consumption but not for private sale .
In New Zealand , stills and instruction in their use are sold openly .
Hokonui Moonshine was produced in Southland by early settlers whose ( then ) illegal distilling activities gained legendary status , see Hokonui Hills .
Hokonui Moonshine is now produced legally and commercially by the Southern Distilling Company which has recently started to export it .
NICARAGUA
Section::::Nicaragua .
In the country of Nicaragua , home distilled spirits are called " Cususa " .
[ koo - soo'-sah ]
Cususa is made of corn and " dulce de tapa " ( dried sugarcane molasses ) or just plain sugar .
It is distilled by means of a cold bowl of water ( porra ) placed over a metal drum full of the fermented corn .
A tube channels the condensation to a bottle .
NIGERIA
Section::::Nigeria .
In Nigeria , home based brewing is illegal .
Moonshine is variously called ' ogogoro ' , , , ' Abua first eleven ' , , , " , ' push me , I push you ' , ' koo koo juice ' , ' crazy man in the bottle ' , or ' Sapele water ' ( particularly in Delta State ) , depending on locality .
Several companies produce moonshine legally as ' Gin ' examples include Orijin , Schnapps , Chelsea Dry Gin etc .
Following the addition of other herbal substances the product may be referred to as " man powa " .
NORWAY Section::::Norway .
Due to the very high taxation of alcohol , moonshine production — primarily from potatoes and sugar — remains a popular , albeit illegal , activity in most parts of the country .
Moonshining occurs in the Mid- and North - Norwegian regions in particular and rural areas in general .
Norwegian moonshine is called " hjemmebrent " or " heimebrent " ( which translates into English as " home - burnt " ) , sometimes also " heimkok"/"himkok " ( meaning " home - cooked " ) or " heimert"/"himert " ( slang ) , " blank vara " or " blank fløte " ( meaning " clear stuff " or " clear cream " ) and the mash is called " sats " .
In rural parts of eastern Norway , it is also referred to as " ni - seks"(meaning " nine - six " , referring to the alcohol content , 96 % ABV ) as a common moonshine variant is rectified spirits from potatoes .
In the county of Telemark mash is also referred to as " bæs " .
A more contemporary name is " sputnik " after the Soviet satellites , a joke that the liquor 's strength could send one into orbit .
In the old days on Finnskogen they called the mash
Skogens vin ( " Wine of the forest " ) , a name used by poorer people without access to distilling equipment .
When talking to foreigners , some Norwegians use the term " something local " about their moonshine .
In Norway , moonshine is commonly mixed with coffee , and sometimes a spoon of sugar .
This drink is known as karsk , and has a special tie to the mid- and north - Norwegian regions , but is also enjoyed elsewhere .
A common joke is that the traditional mixture was made by brewing the strongest , blackest coffee possible , then putting a 5 Øre piece ( a copper coin of size and color of a pre - decimalization English penny , no longer in circulation ) in a cup .
Add coffee to the cup until the coin can no longer be seen , then add hjemmebrent , straight from the still until the coin can again be seen .
Apple juice is also a common beverage for mixing , as it is said to " kill the taste " of bad moonshine .
While brewing is permitted in Norway , distillation is not .
Possession of equipment capable of distilling is also illegal .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
Alcohol is strictly licensed or otherwise illegal in Pakistan .
However unregulated production in rural areas thrives .
Products include tharra and its variants including what is ironically known as " Hunza water " and rudimentary beers made from barley , rye and other grain mixtures .
Some brandy is also produced in the north where fruit is more readily available .
Methanol contamination is a serious problem in some regions .
PANAMA Section::::Panama .
In the faraway rural areas of Panama , the illegal beverage is known as " chirrisco " or " chicha fuerte " , and is highly persecuted by the law , as it is a public health concern .
It is often made out of any kind of fruit but is especially brewed from rice or corn .
Unscrupulous or ignorant distillers often add car battery acid or toxic chemicals to increase potency , thereby leading to poisoning and severe health problems .
In fact , discarded herbicide containers are used to store chirrisco .
Sweet cane liquor also is very famous and highly against the law , mainly made and consumed on Azuero 's peninsula area , it is known as " guarapo " .
It is fermented buried into the ground for around a year then distilled up to 3 times .
This is a tradition well known by a few Spanish descendant from the peninsula passed down from generations .
PERU Section::::Peru .
Peru is one of the few countries where moonshine is completely legal .
The production and sale of homemade alcoholic drinks is entirely unregulated and their consumption is common in daily meals .
Pisco is one of the most common alcoholic drinks in Peru , although different types of chicha , with their generally low alcohol content , are the most popular alcoholic drinks in the country , with regional variations common in all areas .
Even small children enjoy chicha as commonly as children in other countries may drink juice .
This is especially true of the non - alcoholic chicha morada ( purple chicha ) , loved by both children and adults .
The low alcohol content rarely causes drunkenness or dependence , even in small children .
Chicha was also consumed by the ancient Peruvians , before the Incas ' empire ; it was apparently consumed by Chavin De Huantar , one of the first cultures in Peru .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
is distilled from the sap either of the coconut flower or of the nipa palm fruit .
Commercial versions — usually 80 to 90 proof — are widely available , but homemade lambanog can be found in the coconut - producing regions of the country .
POLAND
Section::::Poland .
The Polish name for moonshine is bimber ; although the word samogon ( from Russian ) is also used .
Far less common is the word księżycówka , which is roughly equivalent to " moonshine " , being a nominal derivation from the word księżyc , " moon " .
The tradition of producing moonshine might be traced back to the Middle Ages when tavern owners manufactured vodka for local sale from grain and fruit .
Later , other means were adopted , particularly those based on fermentation of sugar by yeast .
Some of the moonshine is also made from distilling plums and is known under the name of śliwowica .
The plum moonshine made in area of Łącko ( Southern Poland ) called Łącka Śliwowica gained nationwide fame , with tourists travelling long distances to buy one or two bottles of this strong liquor .
Because of the climate and density of the population , most of the activity occurred indoors .
In Poland , the simplest recipe for producing moonshine by fermentation of yeast with the use of 1 kilogram of sugar , 4 liters of water , and 10 dag (= 100 g ) of yeast is jokingly abbreviated as 1410 – the year of the Battle of Grunwald , the most famous victory of the Kingdom of Poland , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and their allies over the Knights of the Teutonic Order in the Middle Ages .
It is illegal to manufacture moonshine in Poland , as confirmed by the Supreme Court 's ruling of 30 November 2004 .
Selling home - made alcohol is also a tax offence as there is an excise imposed on sale of alcohol , and there is no provision for those manufacturing alcohol illegally to pay this duty if they want to .
In reality the law is not consistently enforced , an example being the authorities ' toleration of the large - scale manufacture and sale of Śliwowica Łącka .
The small sets for home distillation can also be easily purchased in any chemical glass shop with no control whatsoever .
PORTUGAL
Section::::Portugal .
In Portugal the most common type of moonshine is a drink commonly named bagaço .
The word refers to bagasse , the mash of grape skins and stems left over from the production of wine , which is distilled to produce this spirit that bears the same name .
When aged in oak casks , it acquires an orange color , similar to whisky , and enhanced flavour .
This is called bagaceira .
In the Algarve , Arbutus unedo is endemic , and its fruit ferments on its own while still on the tree .
A drink is made from it called medronho .
PUERTO RICO Section::::Puerto Rico .
The common Puerto Rican term for moonshine rum is pitorro , from the Andalusian term " pintorro " , given to a white wine ( or rum , near the rum - producing sugar cane fields of Málaga ) of inferior quality which has some grape ( in the case of the wine ) or molasses ( in the case of rum ) coloring in it .
ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
In Romania , plum brandy is called țuică ( tzuika ) , rachiu ( raki ) or palincă ( palinka ) , depending on the region in which it is produced .
It is prepared by many people in rural areas , using traditional methods , both for private consumption and for sale .
Production is subject to government inspection , for purposes of levying the alcohol tax ; undeclared distilleries , even for personal use , are illegal .
Some țuică is sold in markets or fairs and even in supermarkets .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
The Russian name for any homemade distilled alcoholic beverage is called samogon ( ru : ) , meaning " self - distilled " , literally " self - ran " ; ( гнать - gnat ' is the Russian word for making someone run ; -gon is derived from ) .
Historically , it was made from malted grain ( and therefore similar to whisky ) , but this method is relatively rare nowadays , due to increased availability of more convenient base ingredients , such as table sugar , which modern samogon is most often made from .
Other common ingredients include beets , potatoes , bread , or various fruit .
Samogon of initial distillation is called pervach ( ru : ) , literally translated as " the first one " – it is known for its high quality ( pure alcohol evaporates at the beginning of the process , but impurities do not ; over time impurities evaporate as well , thus making the rest of the batch not as clean ) .
The production of samogon is widespread in Russia .
Its sale is subject to licensing .
Unauthorised sale of samogon is prohibited , however , production for personal consumption has been legal since 1997 in most of the country .
Samogon often has a strong repulsive odor , but due to cheap and fast production , and the ability to personalize the flavor of the drink , it is relatively popular .
Pervach is known for having a little or no smell .
Samogon is one of the most popular alcoholic beverages in the country .
It directly competes with vodka , which is more expensive ( in part due to taxes on distilled alcohol ) , but contains fewer impurities .
A 2002 study found that , among rural households in central Russia , samogon was the most common alcoholic beverage , its per capita consumption exceeding the consumption of vodka 4.8 to 1 .
The study estimated that , at the time , it was 4 to 5 times cheaper to manufacture homemade samogon from sugar than to buy an equivalent quantity of vodka .
Since then , the price of vodka has been rising above the rate of inflation .
As of 2011 , typical cost of production of homemade samogon is on the order of 30 rubles ( approx .
1 USD ) per liter , mainly determined by the price of sugar .
The breakeven cost of " economy - class " vodka is 100 rubles / liter , but federal taxes raise retail prices almost threefold , to 280 rubles / liter .
Possibly due to rising taxes , per capita consumption of vodka in Russia has been falling since 2004 .
It has been largely replaced with samogon among marginal classes .
Some analysts forecast that the trend will result in increased adoption of samogon among the middle class , and by 2014 , samogon will overtake vodka as the most common alcoholic beverage nationwide .
In 2016 , it was estimated that the black market share in hard liquor sales in Russia dropped to 50 percent in 2016 from 65 percent in 2015 and sells for about a third of the vodka sold in shops .
SAUDI ARABIA Section::::Saudi Arabia .
In Saudi Arabia , where alcohol is prohibited , black - market alcohol , typically distilled from fermented sugar water , is mostly known as " Aragh " ( " عرق " in Arabic ) . '
Sidiki ' or ' sid ' are also commonly recognized terms . '
Sid ' is often produced by fermenting fruit juice and sugar , after distillation it is commonly cut 2–3 parts water : 1 part ' Sid ' .
American soldiers , in the American military bases , and South Korean workers in Saudi Arabia create improvised moonshines from water , fruits ( lemons and oranges ) , and yeast .
SCOTLAND
Section::::Scotland .
Illicitly produced whisky from Scotland is called peatreek .
The term refers to the smoke ( or reek ) infused in the drink by drying the malted barley over a peat fire . "
Peat Reek " is also the brand name of a legal , commercially available whisky .
Production of spirits in Scotland requires the relevant excise licences , as in the rest of the UK .
SERBIA Section::::Serbia .
Many types of moonshine are produced in Serbia , even though they are almost exclusively fruit - based , made in pot - stills and commonly referred to as rakija .
Šljivovica ( plum brandy ) is the most popular , but brandies based on other fruits , such as breskovača ( peach brandy ) , kajsijevača or kajsijara ( apricot brandy ) , viljamovka ( pear brandy ) , jabukovača ( apple brandy ) and dunjevača ( quince brandy ) .
Product quality can range from poorly produced low ABV brlja ( cheap raw brandy ) to oak barrel aged fine quality rakija that is superior to the bulk of the commercial market .
Rakija is readily available on open markets even in the big cities , so finding a producer of quality product is the only real challenge in the process .
There has been a scarcity of reports on poisoning , which indicates a high level of product safety derived from a long tradition .
While most of it is produced in the farming regions ( central and north ) , moonshine is being produced throughout the country and one would be hard - pressed to find a village without at least one pot still .
Rakija is not commonly used for mixing with any other drinks as it is considered a fine beverage on its own , but some people have been known to drink beton ( literally translated as concrete ) , which is a shot - glass of low quality šljivovica dropped into a glass of beer .
Until recently , rakija had the image of a low - class category of drinks , not comparable to foreign imports , such as whiskey or rum .
A recent upsurge in nationalism has reintroduced rakija as a connoisseur 's drink to the general public and posh bars that stock quality rakija in many varieties have opened up in major cities ' clubbing districts .
SLOVAKIA Section::::Slovakia .
The common term referring to moonshine in Slovakia is domáce , meaning " made at home " ; or páleno , which roughly translates as " burned " , derived from the process of burning during distillation .
A common moonshine in Slovakia is slivovica , sometimes called plum brandy in English .
It is notorious for its strong but enjoyable smell delivered by plums from which it is distilled .
The typical amount of alcohol is 52 % ( it may vary between 40–60 % ) .
The homemade slivovica is highly esteemed .
It is considered a finer quality spirit compared to the industrial products which are usually weaker ( around 40 % ) .
Nowadays this difference in quality is the primary reason for its production , rather than just the economic issues .
A bottle of a good homemade slivovica can be a precious gift , since it can not be bought .
The only way to obtain it is by having parents or friends in rural areas who make it .
Slivovica is sometimes used also as a popular medicine to cure the early stages of cold and other minor aches .
Though small - scale home production is illegal , the government seems to tolerate it .
Several other fruits are used to produce similar homemade spirits , namely pears – hruškovica and wild cherries – čerešňovica .
Another common traditional Slovak moonshine is called borovička , distilled from juniper berries or pine .
Its flavor , although much stronger , resembles gin and can a reach 50–70 % alcohol content .
SLOVENIA Section::::Slovenia .
In Slovenia , especially in the western part , moonshine is distilled from fermented grapes remaining from wine production , and sugar if necessary .
It is called tropinovec ( tropine , means squeezed half - dried grapes , in the west of the country ) .
Šnops or Žganje , as its otherwise known , is generally distilled from pears , plums and apples .
Because it has around 60–70 % of alcohol is often mixed with boiled water to make it lighter ( vol .
50 % ) .
Tropinovec is rarely drunk in large quantities .
It is often mixed with fruits ( cherries , pears , etc . ) to cover the strong odor and taste , or herbs ( Anise , Wolf 's bane , etc . ) for alternative medical treatment .
Home distilling is legal in Slovenia .
Still owners are obliged to register and pay excise duties ( approximately 15 USD for 40–100 l stills and 30 USD for stills larger than 100 l ) .
There were 20,539 registered home distillers in 2005 , down from over 28,000 in 2000 .
SOLOMON ISLANDS Section::::Solomon Islands .
In the Solomon Islands illegal liquor known as Kwaso is distilled and widely consumed .
It is often of low quality and is thought to have caused death , blindness and severe health problems .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In South Africa moonshine made from fruit ( mostly peaches or marulas ) is known as mampoer ( named after the Pedi chief Mampuru ) .
The equivalent product made from grapes is called witblits ( white lightning ) .
Witblits has a long history in the Western Cape Province ( over 200 years ) and many producers take pride in their product , which is widely available from liquor stores and at farmer 's markets .
Most witblits is of a very high quality compared to typical moonshine worldwide and is generally comparable to grappa .
A licence is required to distill alcohol in South Africa .
A limited number of " cultural heritage " small - scale distillers are licensed .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
Most of the moonshine in Spain is made as a byproduct of wine making by distilling the squeezed skins of the grapes .
The basic product is called orujo or aguardiente ( burning water ) .
The homemade versions are usually stronger and have a higher alcoholic content , well over the 40 % that the commercial versions typically have .
Starting with orujo there are a countless number of blends and flavours around .
Typically adding herbs , spices or berries or fruits or mixing the moonshine with other distillates .
The best - known are probably : pacharán , licor de café and orujo de hierbas
( tea mixed with orujo ) .
SRI LANKA Section::::Sri Lanka .
In Sri Lanka , home based brewing is illegal .
However , this is a lucrative underground business in most parts of the island .
Illicit brew is known by many names ; ' Kasippu ' is the most common and accepted name , ' Heli Arrakku ' ( archaic term means , Pot - Liquor ) , ' Kashiya ' ( which is a pet name derived from more mainstream term Kasippu ) , ' Vell Beer ' ( means , beer of the paddy field ) , ' Katukambi ' , ' Suduwa ' ( means , the white substance ) , ' Galbamuna ' , ' Gahapan Machan '
( means drink it , mate ) , fanta depending on locality .
The raw materials used in the production are mainly common white sugar ( from Sugarcane ) or local fruits for special brew kasippu manufactured in Sri Lanka , yeast , and urea as a nitrogen source .
SUDAN Section::::Sudan .
In Sudan , all domestically produced distilled alcoholic beverages can be considered moonshine , on account of a general prohibition of alcohol pursuant to the demands of Islamists for the establishment of Sharia .
Nevertheless , production remains widespread , particularly in rural areas of the country , predominantly in the form of araqi , produced from dates .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
Moonshine is in Sweden known as hembränt in Swedish ( literally " home - burnt " ) with common nicknames like HB and skogsstjärnan ( " the forest star " ) or humorous names like garagenkorva ( a pun from " garage " and " Koskenkorva " ) and Folksprit ( booze of the people ) .
As the desired product is a neutral spirit ( resembling vodka ) , the " mash " is typically a mix of sugar and yeast in water which gets a simple distillation followed by filtration in activated charcoal after being diluted to 30%–50 % ABV as higher strengths lessens the efficiency of the filtering .
Sometimes freeze distillation is used to make apple brandy or other drinks with lower alcohol content .
Unlicensed manufacture , transfer and possession of distilled alcohol is illegal in Sweden , as is the manufacture , transfer and possession of stills or parts of stills intended for unlicensed manufacture of alcohol .
The manufacture , transfer and possession of mash intended for this purpose is also illegal .
Due to relaxed import regulation since 2005 , business has declined .
Moonshine is most socially accepted in the countryside , where it 's produced for own consumption rather than for sale .
SWITZERLAND
Section::::Switzerland .
In Switzerland , absinthe was banned in 1910 , but underground distillation continued throughout the 20th century .
The Swiss constitutional ban on absinthe was repealed in 2000 during a general overhaul of the national constitution , but the prohibition was written into ordinary law instead .
Later that law was also repealed , so from 1 March 2005 , absinthe is again legal in its country of origin , after nearly a century of prohibition .
Absinthe is now not only sold in Switzerland , but is once again distilled in its Val - de - Travers birthplace , with Kübler and La Clandestine Absinthe among the first new brands to emerge , albeit with an underground heritage .
The alcohol contents variation of those legal absinthes in their first few years is interesting to note .
Whereas pre-2005 bootleg absinthe usually clocked in at 65–70 % alcohol by volume ( ABV ) , the first few legal absinthes were aligned on the 42–45 % ABV of other common domestic spirits such as fruit schnapps .
This proved lacking in taste intensity for a drink that is drunk watered down as a rule , and by 2010 most Swiss absinthes contained something on the lines of 54 % ABV , a few being back to the pre-2005 strength that is 65 % ,
sometimes up to 72 % ABV .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
In Thailand , home - brewed alcohol , most commonly distilled from glutinous rice , is called lao khao ( เหล้าขาว ; literally " white liquor " ) or officially sura khao ( สุราขาว ) .
It is sometimes mixed with various herbs to produce a medicinal drink called yadong ( ยาดอง ; literally " fermented herb ( in alcohol ) " ) .
Yadong is prepared by mixing lao khao with various herbs and allowing the mixture to ferment for 2–4 weeks before use .
Some people claim that it helps them regain strength .
These days you can find instant yadong mixes that significantly reduce the time it takes to produce the final product .
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO Section::::Trinidad and Tobago .
In Trinidad and Tobago , an illegally distilled rum is produced , known as ba - bash , bush rum or mountain dew .
It is primarily made from fermented sugar cane .
The " stills " used are very similar to those used in North America .
Although ba - bash is illegal in Trinidad and Tobago
it is readily available if contacts are right .
TUNISIA Section::::Tunisia .
Boukha is a spirit produced from figs in Tunisia .
Its name means ' alcohol vapor ' in Tunisian Judeo - Arabic dialect .
It is obtained by simple distillation of Mediterranean figs from Tunisia .
Its alcohol percentage ranges between 36 and 40 percent .
Boukha is consumed dry , room temperature or cold .
It can also serve as the basis for many cocktails , flavors and fruit salad or drunk with a meal at room temperature .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
Turkish moonshine is called Raki .
Sometimes it is flavored with anise .
The name however does not imply illegal distilling , as there are legal distilleries that produce raki too .
Real " moonshine " from clandestine sources that are homemade from grapes , figs , berries or sourcherries are popular in the south called " Boğma " .
A very distinctive source of 100 % pure Turkish moonshine made by locals of Arabic descent is the district of Samandağ in Hatay Province , close to Syria .
Boğma is also made by and very popular among the Arab population in the city of Adana , especially the suburb of Güneşli .
UGANDA Section::::Uganda .
Waragi is a moonshine gin produced from bananas and often stored in jerrycans .
In moonshine form , it is drunk mostly by people who can not afford commercially available alcohol , although there are several brands that use the term " waragi " in their names .
In April 2010 , more than 80 people were poisoned in the Kambala district after consuming waragi laced with methanol .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
While home distillation is illegal in the United States , it continues to be practiced , mainly in Appalachia .
The product is sometimes called white lightning , because it is not aged and is generally sold at high alcohol proof , often bottled in Mason jars .
A typical moonshine still may produce 1000 gallons per week and net $ 6000 per week for its owner .
The simplicity of the process , and the easy availability of key ingredients such as corn and sugar , make enforcement difficult .
However , the price advantage that moonshine once held over its legally sold competition has fallen .
Nevertheless , over half the retail price of a bottle of distilled spirits typically consists of taxes .
With the availability of cheap refined white sugar , moonshiners can make saleable product for a fraction of the price of heavily taxed and legally sold distilled spirits .
Some people also use moonshine alcohol for herbal tinctures .
The number of jurisdictions that ban alcoholic beverage sales has steadily decreased , which means many of former moonshine consumers are much nearer to a legal alcohol sales outlet than before .
Many legal distilled beverages , usually neutral spirits or corn whiskey , with names evoking moonshine exist , such as Onyx Moonshine , Virginia Lightning , Georgia Moon Corn Whiskey , Ole Smoky Tennessee Moonshine , and Junior Johnson 's Midnight Moon are produced commercially and sold in liquor stores , typically packaged in a clay jug or glass Mason jar .
While these products may refer to themselves as " moonshine , " any alcohol that is legally sold can not be accurately called " moonshine " by nature of the term .
Moonshining has always been popular in the southeastern part of the United States , especially in farm communities , partly because farmers have the produce ( corn , barley , apples , grapes , etc . ) to make illegal liquor .
In some cases , farmers use produce they can not sell to make moonshine for a profit .
Lengthy prison sentences for those caught manufacturing or distributing illegal alcohol makes moonshiners conceal their still sites in secret locations .
Stills are unique contraptions that typically consist of several metal drums , copper pipes , and heat sources that heat the mash of sugar , starch and fruit or grain product .
The weight and overall size of stills makes concealment difficult .
This has led many moonshiners to hide their still sites in very clever locations ; most of these moonshiners take refuge deep in the backwoods of America , in abandoned barns in addition to underground structures and tunnels .
A classic example of underground still sites that are still being utilized today is the usage of old abandoned mining tunnels .
This idea is said to have started in the old mining caves in Tennessee soon after the civil war .
Illegal distillers would use these caves because it provided adequate cover that protected them from being discovered by law enforcement officers .
American moonshiners also preferred the use of caves due to the natural abundance of water that the caves provided ; which is a key ingredient to moonshine .
These caves were used to manufacture moonshine until well into the 20th century .
During prohibition ( which lasted from 1920 to 1933 ) , the sale , manufacture and distribution of alcohol was severely curtailed .
This new legal sanction created a landslide of illegal distribution of liquor and moonshine , which some farmers and illegal distillers would call the golden age of moonshining .
Since alcohol was illegal , moonshiners and bootleggers faced a high demand for liquor that allowed them to have a monopoly over the alcohol trade in the United States .
The Great Depression — from 1929 to 1939—also contributed to the popularity of moonshining in the United States .
During that time of economic hardship , many Americans turned to manufacturing and distributing illegal products .
In the southern states , some moonshiners sold their product to bootleggers , who transported it all over the country , often selling to crime syndicates such as that run by Al Capone .
As early as prohibition , there have been stories of moonshiners using their product as a powerful fuel in their automobiles , usually when evading law - enforcement agencies while delivering their illegal product .
The sport of stock car racing got its start when moonshiners would modify their automobiles to outrun federal government revenue agents .
Junior Johnson , one of the early stock car racers in the mountains of North Carolina who was associated with running moonshine , has even " gone legitimate " by marketing a legally produced grain alcohol , which is made by the first legal distillery in the state .
Stokesdale , a town not far from where the distillery is located , has a moonshine still on its official town seal to reflect corn liquor 's history in the town 's past .
VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
Moonshine made from yeast - fermented rice is called rượu , which is also the common name for alcohol .
WALES Section::::Wales .
Welsh moonshine is simply called " Chwisgi " or Llaeth Mwnci ( monkey milk ) .
The tradition of illicit distilling is not as strong as in Ireland or Scotland .
REFERENCES