TAXATION IN PUERTO RICO
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States and Puerto Ricans are US citizens .
However , Puerto Rico is not a US state .
Because of this , only Puerto Rican residents who are government employees , and those with income sources outside of the territory , pay federal income tax .
All other employers and employees pay no federal income taxes .
However , residents of Puerto Rico and businesses operating in Puerto Rico do pay some federal taxes , and the commonwealth 's government has its own taxes as well .
In July 2018 , approximately 21 % of the labor force on Puerto Rico were employed by the government .
FEDERAL TAXES
Section::::Federal taxes .
The Commonwealth government has its own tax laws and Puerto Ricans are also required to pay some US federal taxes , although most residents do not have to pay the federal personal income tax .
In 2016 , Puerto Rico paid into the US Treasury .
Residents of Puerto Rico pay into Social Security , and are thus eligible for Social Security benefits upon retirement .
However , they are excluded from the Supplemental Security Income .
The federal taxes paid by Puerto Rico residents include import / export taxes , federal commodity taxes , and others .
Residents also pay federal payroll taxes , such as Social Security and Medicare taxes .
Only certain residents of Puerto Rico are required to file federal income tax forms .
According to the Internal Revenue Service : Employers in Puerto Rico are subject to both Federal Insurance Contributions Act ( FICA ) tax ( a payroll withholding tax , which funds Social Security and Medicare ) and the Federal Unemployment Tax Act ( FUTA ) .
Employers in Puerto Rico must withhold the employee portion of FICA taxes from their employees ' wages and contribute the employer portion of FICA .
COMMONWEALTH TAXES
Section::::Commonwealth taxes .
Puerto Rico imposes a separate income tax in lieu of federal income tax .
All federal employees , those who do business with the federal government , Puerto Rico - based corporations that intend to send funds to the US , and some others also pay federal income taxes ( for example , Puerto Rico residents who earned income from sources outside Puerto Rico ) .
In addition , because the cutoff point for income taxation is lower than that of the US IRS code , and the per - capita income in Puerto Rico is much lower than the average per - capita income on the mainland , more Puerto Rico residents pay income taxes to the local taxation authority than if the IRS code were applied to the island .
That occurs because " the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico government has a wider set of responsibilities than do U.S. State and local governments . "
As residents of Puerto Rico pay into Social Security , Puerto Ricans are eligible for Social Security benefits upon retirement but are excluded from the Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) ( Commonwealth of Puerto Rico residents , unlike residents of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and residents of the 50 States , do not receive the SSI ) , and the island actually receives less than 15 % of the Medicaid funding it would normally receive if it were a state .
However , Medicare providers receive less - than - full state - like reimbursements for services rendered to beneficiaries in Puerto Rico even though the latter paid fully into the system
In general , " many federal social welfare programs have been extended to Puerto Rican ( sic ) residents , although usually with caps inferior to those allocated to the states .
"
A common misconception is that the import / export taxes collected by the U.S. on products manufactured in Puerto Rico are all returned to the Puerto Rico Treasury .
That is not the case , as such import / export taxes are returned only for rum products , and even then , the US Treasury keeps a portion of the taxes .
The main body of domestic statutory tax law in Puerto Rico is the Internal Revenue Code of Puerto Rico
( Spanish : Código de Rentas Internas de Puerto Rico ) .
The code organizes commonwealth laws covering commonwealth income tax , payroll taxes , gift taxes , estate taxes and statutory excise taxes .
SALES TAX Section::::Sales tax .
On July 4 , 2006 , the government approved Law Number 117 , The 2006 Contributive Justice Law , establishing a tax with a 5.5 % rate at state level and an optional 1.5 % rate at municipal level .
The tax went into effect on November 15 , 2006 .
The tax is better known as the Sales and Use Tax '
( Impuesto sobre Ventas y Uso ) , often referred to by its Spanish acronym " IVU " .
The law amended Article B of the Code and created subarticle BB .
On July 29 , 2007 , the government approved Law Number 80 , making the tax mandatory for all municipalities of the island .
Also , the tax rates changed to 6 % at the state level and 1 % at the municipal level .
The tax originated in some municipalities ( Caguas , Yauco and Villalba ) in 2005 .
Seeing the economic success of these municipalities , many other municipalities enacted sales tax ordinances , usually by copying the ordinance of Caguas .
By the middle of 2006 , more than 30 municipalities had enacted sales and uses taxes on the island .
During the second and third quarters of 2006 , the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico suffered several political struggles in its Legislative Assembly .
They were largely caused of the budget deficit of the government and the refusal of the Legislative Assembly to approve the taxes proposed by the Governor of the Island .
Government offices were shut down until the Assembly approved Law 117 , which included the first sales tax of that possession of the United States .
On July 1 , 2006 , the first Commonwealth - wide sales tax was approved with a 5.5 % rate at state level and an optional 1.5 % rate at municipal level .
The adoption of the municipal tax was mixed .
The tax went into effect on November 15 , 2006 .
Since the tax reform of July 2007 , the tax is applied in all 78 municipalities of the island and at Commonwealth level .
On February 6 , 2008 , the governor of the island proposed to remove the state part of the IVU .
Also , with the February 6 , 2008 changes , the tax rates are now 6 % at the state level and 1 % at the municipal level .
On July 1 , 2015 , the sales tax rate was increased to 11.5 % , in response to the island 's suffering economy .
The new tax contributes 1 % to the municipality and 10.5 % to the state .
The IVU was scheduled to expire on April 1 , 2016 , to be replaced with a value - added tax ( VAT ) of 10.5 % for the state level , with the 1 % IVU continuing for the municipalities .
On 2 May 2016 the House of Representatives voted to repeal the adoption of value added tax ( VAT ) , followed shortly by the Senate on 5 May 2016 .
The Legislature has decided to continue the existing Sales and Use Taxation ( SUT ) system .
SEE ALSO * Federal voting rights in Puerto Rico * Jones – Shafroth Act * Law of Puerto Rico * Legal profession in Puerto Rico * Puerto Rican citizenship * Puerto Ricans in the United States REFERENCES