10 EURO NOTE
The ten euro note ( € 10 ) is the second - lowest value euro banknote and has been used since the introduction of the euro ( in its cash form ) in 2002 .
The note is used in the 23 countries which have it as their sole currency ( with 22 legally adopting it ) ; with a population of about 343 million .
In August 2018 , there were approximately 2,500,000,000 ten euro banknotes in circulation around the eurozone .
It is the fourth most widely circulated denomination , accounting for over 11 % of the total banknotes .
Estimates suggest that the average life of a ten euro banknote is about 1.5 years before it is replaced due to wear .
It is the second - smallest note measuring 127x67 mm with a pink colour scheme .
The ten euro banknotes depict bridges and arches / doorways in Romanesque architecture ( between the 11th and 12th centuries ) .
The ten euro note contains several complex security features such as watermarks , invisible ink , holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The euro was founded on 1 January 1999 , when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe .
For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency , only used in accountancy .
Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002 , when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12 , such as the Italian lira and the German mark .
Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007 , Cyprus and Malta in 2008 , Slovakia in 2009 , Estonia in 2011 , Latvia joined on 1 January 2014 .
and Lithuania joined on 1 January 2015 .
THE CHANGEOVER PERIOD Section::::The changeover period .
The changeover period during which the former currencies ' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months , going from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002 .
The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state .
The earliest date was in Germany , where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001 , though the exchange period lasted for two months more .
Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender , they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever .
CHANGES
Section::::Changes .
Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank , Wim Duisenberg , who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean - Claude Trichet , whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 .
Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank , incumbent Mario Draghi .
A new series , similar to the current one , was released on 23 September 2014 .
The European Central Bank will , in due time , announce when banknotes from the first series lose legal tender status .
The first series issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union : Cyprus is not depicted on those notes as the map does not extend far enough east ; Malta is also missing as it does not meet the first series ' minimum size for depiction .
Since the European Central Bank plans to redesign the notes every seven or eight years after each issue , a second series ( Europa series ) of banknotes was already in preparation in 2012 .
New production and anti - counterfeiting techniques are employed on the new notes , but the design is of the same theme and similar colours of the current series ; bridges and arches .
However , they are recognisable as a new series .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The ten euro note is the second smallest at × with a red colour scheme .
All bank notes depict bridges and arches / doorways in a different historical European style ; the ten euro note shows the Romanesque era ( between the 11th and 12th centuries ) .
Although Robert Kalina 's original designs were intended to show real monuments , for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era .
Like all euro notes , it contains the denomination , the EU flag , the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of said bank in different EU languages , a depiction of EU territories overseas , the stars from the EU flag and twelve security features as listed below .
SECURITY FEATURES ( FIRST SERIES )
Section::::Security features ( first series ) .
As a lower value note , the security features of the ten euro note are not as high as the other denominations , however , it is protected by : * A hologram , tilt the note and one should see the hologram image change between the value and a window or doorway , but in the background , one should see rainbow - coloured concentric circles of micro - letters moving from the centre to the edges of the patch .
* A EURion constellation , * Special printing processes give the euro notes their unique feel .
* A glossy stripe , tilt the note and a glossy stripe showing the value numeral and the euro symbol will appear .
* Watermarks , it appears when the banknote is against the light .
* Raised printing , special methods of printing makes the ink feel raised or thicker in the main image , the lettering and the value numerals on the front of the banknotes .
To feel the raised print , run your finger over it or scratch it gently with your fingernail .
* Ultraviolet ink , Under ultraviolet light , the paper itself should not glow , fibres embedded in the paper should appear , and should be coloured red , blue and green , the European Union flag looks green and has orange stars , the ECB President signature turns green , the large stars and small circles on the front glow and the European map , a bridge and the value numeral on the back appear in yellow .
* Microprinting , On numerous areas of the banknotes you can see microprinting , for example , inside the " ΕΥΡΩ " ( EURO in Greek characters ) on the front .
You will need a magnifying glass to see it .
The tiny text is sharp , and not blurred .
* A security thread , The security thread is embedded in the banknote paper .
Hold the banknote against the light - the thread will appear as a dark stripe .
The word " EURO " and the value can be seen in tiny letters on the stripe .
* Perforations , Hold the banknote against the light .
You should see perforations in the hologram which will form the € symbol .
You should also see small numbers showing the value .
* A matted surface , the note paper is made out of pure cotton , which feels crisp and firm , but not limp or waxy .
* Barcodes , * A serial number .
SECURITY FEATURES ( EUROPA SERIES )
* Watermark : When the note is held under a normal light source , a portrait of Europa and an electrotype denomination appear on either side .
*
Portrait Hologram : When the note is tilted , the silver - coloured holographic stripe reveals the portrait of Europa - the same one as in the watermark .
The stripe also reveals a window and the value of the banknote .
* Emerald Number : When the note is tilted , the number on the note displays an effect of light that moves up and down .
The number also changes color from emerald green to deep blue .
* Raised Printing : On the front of the note , there is a series of short raised lines on the left and right edges .
The main edge , the lettering and the large value numeral also feel thicker .
* Security Thread : When the note is held against the light , the security thread appears as a dark line .
The Euro symbol ( € ) and the value of the banknote can be seen in tiny white lettering in the thread .
* Microprint : Tiny letters which can be read with a magnifying glass .
The letters should be sharp , not blurred .
*
Ultraviolet ink : Some parts of the banknote shine when under UV or UV - C light .
These are the stars in the flag , the small circles , the large stars and several other areas on the front .
On the back , a quarter of a circle in the centre as well as several other areas glow green .
The horizontal serial number and a stripe appear in red .
* Infrared light : Under infrared light , the emerald number , the right side of the main image and the silvery stripe are visible on the obverse of the banknote , while on the reverse , only the denomination and the horizontal serial number are visible .
CIRCULATION Section::::Circulation .
The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes .
It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the euro area .
In January 2018 , there were € 10 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone .
for € .
This is a net number , i.e. the number of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem central banks , without further distinction as to who is holding the currency issued , thus also including the stocks held by credit institutions .
Besides the date of the introduction of the first set to January 2002 , the publication of figures is more significant through the maximum number of banknotes raised each year .
The number is higher the end of the year , except for this note in 2002 .
The figures are as follows ( Nov. 3 , 2017 ) : ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col
" Banknotes ! scope="col " € Value ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col
" Banknotes ! scope="col " € Value align="center " align="center " align="center " align="center " align="center " align="center " On September 2014 , a new ' Europe ' series was issued .
The first series of notes were issued in conjunction with those for a few weeks in the series ' Europe ' until existing stocks are exhausted , then gradually withdrawn from circulation .
Both series thus run parallel but the proportion tends inevitably to a sharp decrease in the first series .
! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Banknotes ! scope="col " € Value !
scope="col " Series ' 1 ' remainder ! scope="col
" € Value ! scope="col " Proportion align="center " align="center " align="center " align="center " The latest figures provided by the ECB are the following : ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Banknotes ! scope="col " € Value !
scope="col " Series ' 1 ' remainder ! scope="col
" € Value ! scope="col " Proportion align="center " LEGAL INFORMATION Section::::Legal information .
Legally , both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes .
In practice , only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes .
The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations .
TRACKING Section::::Tracking .
There are several communities of people at European level , most of which is EuroBillTracker , that , as a hobby , it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands , to keep track and know where they travel or have travelled .
The aim is to record as many notes as possible to know details about its spread , like from where and to where they travel in general , follow it up , like where a ticket has been seen in particular , and generate statistics and rankings , for example , in which countries there are more tickets .
EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016 , worth more than € 2.897 billion .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS