MR .
MONK AND THE END
" Mr. Monk and the End " is the two - part series finale of the USA Network original criminal mystery dramedy television series , Monk .
It is the fifteenth and sixteenth episodes of the eighth and final season , and is the 124th and 125th episodes in the series overall .
Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) finally discovers his wife Trudy 's ( Melora Hardin ) murderer after twelve years of searching , concluding a seven - year , eight - season long arc .
When " Part 2 " aired , it set a series high and a new viewership record for the most watched episode of a regular drama series ever in basic cable with 9.4 million viewers .
Both parts were written by series creator Andy Breckman and directed by Randall Zisk .
PLOT SYNOPSIS
PART
I Section::::Plot synopsis .
Section::::Part I.
On the morning of December 14 , 1997 , Trudy Monk is discussing with Adrian how hard it is to keep secrets from him .
She asks him about his latest investigation , the disappearance of a midwife named Wendy Stroud .
Monk notices a present under their Christmas tree , but Trudy instructs him not to open it until Christmas Day .
Monk notes she appears nervous .
Later that day , Trudy goes to a meeting with someone at multi - story parking garage , but panics when a six fingered man who had been watching her emerges from the shadows .
Trudy returns to her car ; explosives planted in it detonate when she turns the key .
Monk and Captain Stottlemeyer question Dr. Malcolm Nash ( Ed Begley , Jr. ) , director of the Palgrove Birthing Center where Stroud worked .
They learn that Stroud was the first midwife he hired and had never been late for work .
Stottlemeyer receives a phone call and informs Monk that Trudy has been killed .
In the present day , 2009 , Monk awakes on his usual side of the bed to find himself seeing a vision of Trudy before him , telling him it is time for him to say goodbye to her and to sleep in the middle of the bed , and that " it wo n't be much longer " .
When Monk discusses this later that day with his assistant Natalie Teeger , he finds that their latest case is taking them back to the same birthing clinic he had been to 12 years ago , when he first heard the news of Trudy 's death .
Although Stottlemeyer offers Monk the chance to sit the case out , he insists he is okay .
The pair learn that from the police 's initial investigation that Dr. Nash had been shot dead while he had been digitizing patient records , and that the killer 's gun had a silencer on it , as no - one heard the crime being committed .
Monk concludes that the scene the police found had been set up to make it appear that the killer was a drug addict ; in reality , the murder was done by a professional hitman , and the police soon find a partial fingerprint that identifies the suspect as Joey Kazarinski ( John Edward Lee ) .
Seeking a warrant for his arrest from Judge Ethan Rickover ( Craig T. Nelson ) , the group overhear Rickover discussing with his wife that he will never move out of his current house , learning that he has been nominated for the State Supreme Court , despite it having not been officially announced by the governor at present .
That night , Kazarinski receives a phone call from his employer , who instructs him to kill Monk ; when he questions why he must do so , his employer declares that they had killed Trudy .
When attending a dinner the following day at Natalie 's house , with her daughter Julie and Natalie 's boyfriend Steven Albright , Monk starts to see spots and soon runs a high fever .
Taken to hospital for a blood test , haemotologist Dr. Matthew Shuler ( D.B. Woodside ) reveals that the results of the test found that Monk has been poisoned with a powerful synthetic toxin based on ricin .
As no - one else got sick , the conclusion is that the poison was n't in the food at the dinner , and so the decision is made to test all of the food and other consumables in Natalie 's house , although Shule reveals that they can not create or administer an antidote , without knowing which form of the poison was used .
When Stottlemeyer and Lieutenant Disher arrive to check up on Monk , they learn he will die within 2 - 3 days if not treated .
After a search of items Monk had purchased fails to turn up anything poisoned , after Natalie identifies Kazarinski as having been at a supermarket that she and Monk had visited , Stottlemeyer gathers an unofficial task force within the SFPD - Disher
leads one half to find out who hired the hitman to kill Dr. Nash , while Stottlemeyer leads the other half to find the hitman in order to find out what poison he used on Monk , ordering his group not to use their guns , as Kazarinski must be captured alive in order for them to save Monk .
After interrogating a contact of the hitman , the group track down Kazarinski to a train station , only for him to spot an undercover police officer and make a run for it .
After a lengthy chase , Kazarinski is hit by a freight train and dies , much to Stottlemeyer 's horror .
Learning that the hitman had rented a motel room , the police search it and find the chemicals he used to make the poison , only for Stottlemeyer to learn that the police labs wo n't be able to find the necessary information for the antidote in time .
Having learned that none of the food he had bought at the supermarket was found to be poisoned , Monk visits Dr. Neven Bell ( Héctor Elizondo ) to talk about all that has happened in the past few days , and then leaves him dejected when he sets off to cancel his remaining appointments and finalize his affairs before his death .
Taking a moment to visit Trudy 's grave with Natalie , Monk returns home and finally decides to open his wife 's small present for him , finding it to be a video tape .
Playing it , he finds it be a recording made by Trudy , who addresses him and reveals that she managed to keep a secret from him , a terrible one that occurred years before they had met .
PART II Section::::Part II .
Two hours into the recording , Monk pauses it as he is unable to continue watching the rest .
Natalie is forced to do so , despite the visible distraught on Monk 's face when he hears how Trudy had had an affair with Rickover when he had been a law professor at Berkeley .
In her confession , she assures Monk that she never knew he was married , but that the affair left her being pregnant with a baby girl , whom she never got to see ; the baby died nine minutes after birth .
She then reveals a posthumous conviction to Monk - ten years after the affair , Rickover called her out of the blue in order to arrange a meeting with her at a parking garage , but that she is nervous over this due to the sinister tone in his voice during the phone call , and the fact that Stroud , the woman who had disappeared at the time the call was made , had been involved in delivering the child created by the affair .
Trudy suspects that Rickover is covering up the affair 's existence by silencing those involved , thus she has made a video in order to tell Monk the truth if she should meet an untimely end , adding that if he is watching it , her fears came true and she is dead , otherwise , she would have replaced the tape with the digital watch he had wanted that year .
Furious and determined not to die yet until he exposes Rickover 's crimes , despite Natalie 's efforts to dissuade him , Monk confronts Rickover during his confirmation hearing for the office of State Supreme Justice , in order to question him .
When he does n't confess and soon begins to insult both Monk 's and Trudy 's mental stability , Monk violently attacks him until he is escorted away by guards .
Brought back to hospital , Monk is visited by Stottlemeyer and Randy , who bring him several files on Rickover , and reveal that phone records had shown several calls between him and Dr. Nash .
Before Stottlemeyer leaves , Monk has him promise to kill Rickover when he dies , but knows he is lying when he agrees to Monk 's request .
As Monk goes over the files , he realizes something is missing , and after hearing a nurse quip that no one bothers to cover up affairs any more , he remembers the conversation between Rickover and his wife over his house , and deduces that a crucial clue is connected to it .
At Monk 's apartment , while putting his things into clear plastic bags with her boyfriend , Natalie starts to feel ill and begins seeing spots .
She immediately realizes that the poison was planted into Monk 's handwipes that she had used on the bags , and has Albright telephone the hospital with this information so that the antidote can be made .
However , after she is treated , Natalie , Stottlemeyer and Disher soon learn from a nurse that Monk had sedated the guard protecting him , stolen his gun , and disappeared from the hospital , leading them to realize what he is planning to do .
As they arrive at Rickover 's house with uniformed officers and the antidote , the group witness Monk forcing Rickover at gunpoint to dig at a spot before his front yard 's sundial , stating to the group that the remains of the missing midwife are there .
As Disher continues digging , Monk reveals to the group that Rickover committed the murders , in order to ensure that nothing stopped him from securing the position of appellate judge that he had worked hard for .
Twelve years ago , Wendy Stroud had found religion and told Rickover she intended to tell the press about his affair with Trudy and the child it caused , that she had helped to deliver , forcing him to kill her and bury her in his front yard ; his reason for not wanting to leave his home , even if it meant commuting to Sacramento , was because he did n't want to risk anyone digging up the remains .
After killing the midwife , Rickover was forced to kill Trudy , as she was the only person who would be able to connect Stroud 's disappearance to him .
Twelve years later , Dr. Nash came across references to the child when digitizing the birthing clinic 's patient records , and thus suspected what had happened to Stroud .
Becoming greedy , he attempted to blackmail him , causing Rickover to panic and hire Kazarinski to kill him , before later having him poison Monk upon the detective becoming a serious issue ; he knew the handwipes had been poisoned , as when Monk dropped one when confronting him , Rickover had picked it up with his pen .
Upon Disher finding the remains , Rickover steals Monk 's gun as he suffers a coughing fit , shouts " You take care of her " , and then commits suicide in order to avoid going to jail .
A few days later , Monk , having recovered since being given the antidote , meets with Dr. Bell to discuss Rickover 's final words , and how he feels unhappy that his quest to find Trudy 's murderer had been such a part of his life in the past several years , that now he knows the truth he has begun wondering what he will now do with himself .
While packing up Trudy 's things into boxes when he returns home , Monk finds an old newspaper article concerning Stroud 's disappearance , and discovers that Trudy 's child did not die after birth ; Stroud had secretly taken the child away at Rickover 's request , and put her up for adoption , as the baby 's date of birth matches the date that Trudy gave birth on .
Anxious to meet her , he is pleasantly surprised when Stottlemeyer tracks her down .
Attending the meeting , Monk finally meets with Trudy 's daughter , Molly Evans ( Alona Tal ) , whom he discovers to bear a striking resemblance to Trudy and that she , much like her mother , is a writer , working as a film critic for a local paper in Monterey County .
The pair find themselves happy to meet each other and begin to spend time together .
While showing off his many pictures of her to the others , Stottlemeyer finds Disher trying to hide away a letter and grabs it , finding that his lieutenant has been offered a position as Chief of Police in Summit , New Jersey , and that his secrecy over his vacation to the east coast had been due to him having been dating Monk 's former nurse and assistant Sharona Fleming .
As Monk takes a walk along the beach with Molly , she asks him what he will do now that Trudy 's murder is solved , to which replies that he wants to retire and follow Molly around and document her life with scrapbooks of photographs .
Molly tells him that he ca n't give up being a detective , advising him to use the gift he has to " help all the Trudys in the world " ; Monk agrees to continue his work as a detective consultant .
As Monk prepares for another day , with his actions , speech and style of clothing implying that his various phobias and obsessions are now under control , he informs Natalie that he will be going to the movies with Molly before the pair leave to take on another case , with Monk returning to check that the stove is off .
There follows a montage of clips from the course of the show 's eight seasons : Disher comfortably settles into his new job as Police Chief ; Stottlemeyer is now happily married to T.K. ( Virginia Madsen ) ; and Monk and Natalie arrive at a crime scene to tackle their next case for Stottlemeyer .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
" Mr. Monk and the End " has received generally positive reviews .
Allison Waldman of TvSquad called the cliffhanger at the end of " Part 1 " great and said that she was " dying to know how [ it would be ] resolved " .
She also praised Tony Shalhoub 's acting in the bed scene in which he talks to Trudy .
Waldman called the drama " tense " in " Part 2 " , and praised Shalhoub and Craig T. Nelson 's acting .
Jonah Krakow of IGN had mixed feelings about the finale , saying that Molly 's introduction was a nice way to send the show off , although he felt cheated that the show 's biggest mystery was literally handed to Monk in a box .
Like Waldman , he praised Shalhoub 's and Nelson 's acting , and the tension of their scene in which Nelson digs up the midwife 's body .
Overall he gave it an 8 out of 10 .
The A.V. Club Todd VanDerWerff called it " a surprisingly sweet ending to a show that I have n't watched regularly in a few years " , and gave it a " B+ " .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
" Part 1 " gained 5.8 million viewers .
"
Part 2 " set various records in television history , with 9.4 million viewers .
It was the series high ( previously set by the prior season 's finale " Mr. Monk Fights City Hall " ) , USA Network 's most - watched scripted television show ( previously set by Burn Notice ) , and basic cable 's most - watched hour - long drama ( previously set by The Closer with 9.2 million viewers ) . AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Tony Shalhoub was nominated for the 2010 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series for this episode .
Additionally , Randy Newman won the 2010 Primetime Emmy Award for Original Outstanding Music and Lyrics for the song " When I 'm Gone " .
REFERENCES