CAPITAL PUNISHMENT IN NEW YORK
While laws regarding the imposition of capital punishment in the State of New York are still on the books , it is no longer enforced as it is been declared unconstitutional in the state and this ruling has not been overturned .
The last execution took place in 1963 , when Eddie Mays was electrocuted at Sing Sing Prison .
The state was the first to adopt the electric chair as a method of execution , which replaced hanging .
Following the U.S. Supreme Court 's ruling declaring existing capital punishment statutes unconstitutional in Furman v. Georgia ( 1972 ) , New York was without a death penalty until 1995 , when then - Governor George Pataki signed a new statute into law , which provided for execution by lethal injection .
In June 2004 , the state 's highest court ruled in People v. LaValle that the state 's death penalty statute violated the state constitution , and New York has had an effective moratorium on capital punishment since then .
Subsequent legislative attempts at fixing or replacing the statute have failed , and in 2008 then - Governor David Paterson issued an executive order disestablishing New York 's death row .
Legislative efforts to amend the statute have failed , and death sentences are no longer sought at the state level , though certain crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the federal government are subject to the federal death penalty .
COLONIAL PERIOD AND STATEHOOD Section::::Colonial period and statehood .
During various periods from the 1600s onward , New York law prescribed the death penalty for crimes such as sodomy , adultery , counterfeiting , perjury , and attempted rape or murder by slaves .
In 1796 , New York abolished the death penalty for crimes other than murder and treason , but arson was made a capital crime in 1808 .
TEMPORARY ABOLITION
Section::::Temporary abolition .
In 1860 , the New York Legislature passed a bill which effectively , though unintentionally , abolished capital punishment in the state , by repealing hanging as a method of execution without prescribing an alternative method .
The bill was signed by Governor Edwin D. Morgan in April 1860 .
The New York Court of Appeals ruled the statute unconstitutional , in part , as an ex post facto law .
Governor Morgan signed legislation to restore the death penalty in 1861 , and again in 1862 to fully repeal the earlier statute .
INTRODUCTION OF THE ELECTRIC CHAIR Section::::Introduction of the electric chair .
In 1886 , newly elected New York State governor David B. Hill set up a three - member " New York Commission " to determine a new , more humane system of execution to replace hanging .
The commission included the human rights advocate and reformer Elbridge Thomas Gerry , New York lawyer and politician Matthew Hale , and Buffalo dentist and experimenter Alfred P. Southwick .
Southwick had been developing an idea since the early 1880s of using electric current as a means of capital punishment after hearing about how relatively painlessly and quickly a drunken man died due to grabbing the energized parts on a generator .
Southwick had published this proposal first in 1882 and , being a dentist accustomed to performing procedures on subjects in chairs , used the form of a chair in his designs , which became known as the " electric chair " .
The commission reviewed ancient and modern forms of execution including lethal injection but finally settled on electrocution in 1888 .
A bill making electrocution New York State 's form of execution passed the legislature and was signed by Governor Hill on June 4 , 1888 , set to go into effect on January 1 , 1889 .
The first individual to be executed in the electric chair was William Kemmler , on August 6 , 1890 .
Current was passed through Kemmler for 17 seconds and he was declared dead , but witnesses noticed he was still breathing , and the current was turned back on .
From start to finish , the execution took eight minutes .
During the execution , blood vessels under the skin ruptured and bled , and some witness reported that Kemmler 's body set on fire .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
From 1890 to 1963 , 695 people were executed in New York .
The first was William Kemmler on August 6 , 1890 , and the last was Eddie Lee Mays on August 15 , 1963 .
Kemmler was the first person in the world known to be executed in an electric chair .
Except for four individuals , all of the people executed during this period were convicted of murder .
The four exceptions were Joseph Sacoda and Demetrius Gula , who were convicted of kidnapping and executed January 11 , 1940 , and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg , who were convicted of espionage and executed June 19 , 1953 .
FAMOUS CASES
Section::::Famous cases .
In 1901 , Leon Czolgosz was electrocuted for the assassination of U.S. President William McKinley .
Ruth Snyder was one of the very few women executed at Sing Sing .
She was put to death in 1928 for the murder of her husband .
A lesser known case dates to January 1936 , when serial killer Albert Fish was put to death for the cannibal murder of 10-year - old Grace Budd .
At age 65 , Fish was the oldest person ever executed at Sing Sing .
Other notable cases are those of seven members of Mafia hit squad Murder , Inc between 1941 and 1944 , and " Lonely hearts killer " Raymond Fernandez and Martha Beck in 1951 , who are believed to have killed as many as 20 women .
The most famous execution in state history occurred in June , 1953 , when Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were put to death at Sing Sing for espionage against the United States .
RESTRICTIONS Section::::Restrictions .
In 1965 , Governor Nelson Rockefeller , a liberal Republican who supported capital punishment , signed legislation which abolished the death penalty except for cases involving the murder of a police officer .
FURMAN V. GEORGIA Section::::Furman v. Georgia .
In the July 1972 decision in Furman v. Georgia , the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the existing death penalty procedures across the United States .
The moratorium lasted until 1976 , when the Court ruled in Gregg v. Georgia that states could resume capital punishment under reworked statutes .
GRASSO EXTRADITION AND EXECUTION Section::::Grasso extradition and execution .
On January 11 , 1995 , convicted killer Thomas J. Grasso , who had been sentenced to death by Oklahoma but was serving a sentence of 20 years to life in New York , was extradited from New York to Oklahoma to face execution .
Grasso was transported to Buffalo Niagara International Airport and flown to Oklahoma .
He was executed on March 20 , 1995 .
1995 REINSTATEMENT Section::::1995 reinstatement .
In 1995 , fulfilling a campaign promise , newly elected Governor George Pataki , a Republican , signed legislation reinstating the death penalty in New York , establishing lethal injection as the method of execution .
STATUTE STRUCK DOWN IN 2004
Section::::Statute struck down in 2004 .
On June 24 , 2004 , the New York Court of Appeals , the state 's highest court , held 4–3 in People v. LaValle that the state 's death penalty statute violated the New York Constitution .
Governor Pataki criticized the ruling and promised a quick legislative fix .
Between December 2004 and February 2005 , public hearings were held in Manhattan and Albany .
New York Law School Professor and death penalty advocate Robert Blecker advocated strongly in favor of reinstatement , while Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau strongly opposed reinstatement .
In 2007 , the New York Court of Appeals heard arguments in People v. John Taylor , and , in rejecting the arguments of the Queens District Attorney , commuted the sentence to life without parole , leaving New York with an empty death row .
POLITICAL SIGNIFICANCE IN MANHATTAN DISTRICT ATTORNEY
ELECTIONS
Section::::Political significance in Manhattan District Attorney elections .
In the 2005 Democratic primary for Manhattan District Attorney , incumbent Robert Morgenthau 's successful campaign produced television advertisements criticizing opponent Leslie Crocker Snyder , a prosecutor who had stated in her autobiography that in one case , she would have been willing to give a lethal injection to a defendant herself , saying Snyder was " Wrong on the Death Penalty , Wrong for Manhattan " .
The New York Times endorsed Snyder but expressed concern about her support for the death penalty .
For the duration of Morgenthau 's tenure as Manhattan District Attorney , he never once sought the death penalty in the period
it was legal in New York .
In the 2009 Democratic primary in which Morgenthau did not run , Snyder ran for District Attorney again , against Cyrus Vance , Jr. ( who would win ) and Richard Aborn .
Both opponents strongly opposed the death penalty , and criticized Snyder for her previous comments .
Snyder accused Vance and Aborn of taking her comments out of context , and stated that her position on the death penalty had changed due to learning about wrongful convictions .
Aborn said he would oppose attempts to restore it , and would " lead the effort against any attempt to revive it " .
LEGISLATIVE EFFORTS TO REINSTATE THE DEATH PENALTY Section::::Legislative efforts to reinstate the death penalty .
In 2005 , supporters of the death penalty in the New York Legislature passed a bill restoring New York 's death penalty in the Republican - controlled State Senate , but the legislation was voted down by a legislative committee in the Democratic - controlled New York Assembly , and was not enacted into law .
In 2008 , the State Senate again passed legislation that would have established the death penalty for the murder of law enforcement officers , but the Assembly did not act on the legislation .
DEATH ROW DISESTABLISHED Section::::Death row disestablished .
In 2008 , Governor David Paterson , a Democrat , issued an executive order requiring the removal of the state 's execution equipment .
SEE ALSO
* List of individuals executed in New York
* New York State Electrician ( executioner )
* Crime in New York * Law of New York REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Videos of hearings
* Timeline of New York 's death penalty