FOLD CHANGE
Fold change is a measure describing how much a quantity changes between an original and a subsequent measurement .
It is defined as the ratio between the two quantities ; for quantities A and B , then the fold change of B with respect to A is B / A. Fold change is often used when analysing multiple measurements of a biological system taken at different times as the change described by the ratio between the time points is easier to interpret than the difference .
Fold change is so called because it is common to describe an increase of multiple X as an " X - fold increase " .
As such , several dictionaries , including the Oxford English Dictionary and Merriam - Webster Dictionary , as well as Collins 's Dictionary of Mathematics , define " -fold " to mean " times " , as in " 2-fold " = " 2 times " = " double " .
Likely because of this definition , many scientists use not only " fold " , but also " fold change " to be synonymous with " times " , as in " 3-fold larger " = " 3 times larger " ..
More ambiguous is fold decrease , where , for instance , a decrease of 50 % between two measurements would generally be referred to a " half - fold change " rather than a " 2-fold decrease " .
Fold change is often used in analysis of gene expression data from microarray and RNA - Seq experiments for measuring change in the expression level of a gene .
A disadvantage and serious risk of using fold change in this setting is that it is biased and may misclassify differentially expressed genes with large differences ( B − A ) but small ratios ( B / A ) , leading to poor identification of changes at high expression levels .
Furthermore , when the denominator is close to zero , the ratio is not stable , and the fold change value can be disproportionately affected by measurement noise .
ALTERNATIVE DEFINITION Section::::Alternative definition .
There is an alternative definition of fold change , although this has generally fallen out of use .
Here , fold change is defined as the ratio of the difference between final value and the initial value divided by the initial value .
For quantities A and B , the fold change is given as ( B − A)/A , or equivalently B /
A − 1 .
This formulation has appealing properties such as no change being equal to zero , a 100 % increase is equal to 1 , and a 100 % decrease is equal to −1 .
However , verbally referring to a doubling as a one - fold change and tripling as a two - fold change is counter - intuitive , and so this formulation is rarely used .
This formulation is sometimes called the relative change and is labeled as fractional difference in the software package Prism .
FOLD CHANGES IN GENOMICS AND BIOINFORMATICS
Section::::Fold changes in genomics and bioinformatics .
In the field of genomics ( and more generally in bioinformatics ) , the modern usage is to define fold change in terms of ratios , and not by the alternative definition .
However , log - ratios are often used for analysis and visualization of fold changes .
The logarithm to base 2 is most commonly used , as it is easy to interpret , e.g. a doubling in the original scaling is equal to a log fold change of 1 , a quadrupling is equal to a log fold change of 2 and so on .
Conversely , the measure is symmetric when the change decreases by an equivalent amount e.g. a halving is equal to a log fold change of −1 , a quartering is equal to a log fold change of −2 and so on .
This leads to more aesthetically pleasing plots , as exponential changes are displayed as linear
and so the dynamic range is increased .
For example , on a plot axis showing log fold changes , an 8-fold increase will be displayed at an axis value of 3 ( since 2 = 8) .
However , there is no mathematical reason to only use logarithm to base 2 , and due to many discrepancies in describing the log fold changes in gene / protein expression , a new term " loget " has been proposed .
SEE ALSO
* Ratio * Relative change
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A comparison of fold - change and the t - statistic for microarray data analysis