FASHION IN MILAN
The Italian city of Milan is recognised internationally as one of the world 's most important fashion capitals , along with Paris , New York and London .
It is additionally recognised as the main sartorial hub in the country , with Rome and Florence being other major centres .
Milan has established a long history within the fields of fashion , textiles and design in general .
Throughout the late 19th century , Milan , being the capital of Lombardy , was a major production centre , benefitting from its status as one of the country 's salient economic and industrial powerhouses .
Milanese fashion , despite taking inspiration from the leading Parisian couture of the time , developed its own approach , which was by nature devoted to sobriety , simplicity and the quality of the fabric .
Throughout the 20th century , the city expanded its role as a fashion centre , with a number of rising designers contributing to Milan 's image as a stylistic capital .
Following this development , Milan emerged in the 1960s and 1980s as one of the world 's pre - eminent trendsetters , maintaining this stint well into the 1990s and 2000s and culminating with its entrenchment as one of the " big four " global fashion capitals .
As of today , Milan is especially renowned for its role within the prêt - à - porter category of fashion .
In 2009 , the city was declared as the " fashion capital of the world " by the Global Language Monitor that tracks how many times a city is posted in social media using " fashion capital , " even surpassing its relative cities .
The next year , Milan dropped out of the top four falling to sixth place , yet in 2011 it returned to fourth place .
2012 saw the city suffer its lowest ranking to date , as it slipped to eighth place .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Milan 's fashion history has evolved greatly throughout the years .
Milan began as a centre of fashion in the Middle Ages and Renaissance , as in Venice and Florence , the making of luxury goods was an industry of such importance that in the 16th century the city gave its name to the English word " milaner " or " millaner " , meaning fine wares like jewellery , cloth , hats and luxury apparel .
By the 19th century , a later variant , " millinery " , had come to mean one who made or sold hats .
In the mid-19th century cheaper silk began to be imported from Asia and the pest phylloxera damaged silk and wine production .
More land was subsequently given over to industrialisation .
Textile production was followed by metal and mechanical and furniture manufacture .
In 1865 , the first major department store in the country opened in Milan by the Bocconi brothers ( which was called Alle Città d'Italia and later in 1921 became La Rinascente ) .
This was regarded as a novelty at the time with regards to retailing in Italy .
Though , traditionally , artisans would sell the items they made directly or to small stores , the opening of these new department stores modernised the distributions of clothes in the city .
In terms of the Milanese people , they are said to have probably been " fashion conscious " in the 1880s and late 19th century .
The Milanese style was partially inspired by French fashion , which at the time was still dominant in terms of influence , yet adapted according to local tastes ; this included a generally sombre and simple style , which was moderate in terms of decoration and ornamentation , and put an emphasis on the quality of tailoring and the different fabrics and textiles .
The general Milanese interest in styling was reflected in the number of fashion magazines which circulated in the city at the time , as well as the fact that the people were ready to follow trends ; nevertheless , the Milanese style was relatively traditional .
The city had several tailors and seamstresses which in 1881 amounted to 249 and in 1886 to 383 ( which were listed in guides ) .
In this period , the city was one of the biggest industrial powerhouses in Italy , and had a diversified fashion and clothing economy which was mainly based on small workshops rather than large companies ( highlighted in an 1881 census ) .
The importance of this industry continued in the city into the early 20th century , where 42,711 out of 175,871 workers were in the clothing sector in 1911 .
Later , in the early-20th century , Milan became a major centre of silk and textile productions .
Nevertheless , in the 1950s and 1960s , Florence was the fashion capital of Italy and home of the Italian " Alta Moda " , equivalent to the French " haute couture " .
However , in the 1970s , Milan 's fashion image became more glamorous , and as Florentine designs were usually very formal and expensive , the city became a more popular shopping destination , with numerous boutiques which sold both elegant and everyday clothes .
Milanese designs were known for their practicality and simple elegance , and became more popular and affordable than Florentine and Parisian designs .
The city became one of the main capitals for ready - to - wear female and male fashion in the 1970s .
Milan started to become an internationally successful and famous fashion capital towards the late-1980s and early 1990s .
After a brief fall of popularity in the 2000s ( when , according to the Global Language Monitor Milan ranked slightly lower than its relatives , such as New York City , Paris , London and Rome ) , the city has throned 2009 's fashion capital of the world .
The city left the top four in 2010 going to sixth place , yet came back up to fourth in 2011 .
DESIGNERS , HOUSES , AND MODELLING AGENCIES HOUSES AND LABELS Section::::Designers , houses , and modelling agencies .
Section::::Houses and labels .
Most of the major Italian fashion houses and labels are based in Milan , even though many of them were founded in other cities .
They include : Armani , Bottega Veneta , Canali , Costume National , Dolce & Gabbana , Dsquared2 , Etro , Iceberg , Les Copains , Marni , Missoni , Miu Miu , Moncler , Frankie Morello , Moschino , MSGM , N ° 21 , Prada , Fausto Puglisi , Tod 's , Trussardi , Valentino , Versace , Giuseppe Zanotti , Zagliani , Ermenegildo Zegna , and the eyewear company Luxottica .
SHOPPING QUARTERS AND AREAS
Section::::Shopping quarters and areas .
The city 's most important shopping streets and districts include Piazza del Duomo ( with the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II )
the Quadrilatero della Moda ( including Via Montenapoleone , Via della Spiga , Corso Venezia and Via Manzoni ) .
The latter is one of the leading shopping districts in the world ; Via Monte Napoleone has been ranked as the sixth most expensive shopping street in the world , with a $ 770 rent per year per square foot .
Streets in this district contain exclusive fashion and couture boutiques .
Nevertheless , there are other important shopping streets and locations in the city , including the Via Dante , Corso Buenos Aires , Piazza San Babila and the Corso Vittorio Emanuele II .
Corso Buenos Aires is one of the biggest shopping streets in Europe .
The Brera district , the city 's bohemian quarter , is also a fashionable area with several boutiques .
Furthermore , the Porta Ticinese quarter , which turns into Corso San Gottardo just past the porta contain more independent and also more local fashion stores .
GALLERY REFERENCES