LIST OF ACCOLADES RECEIVED BY THE LORD OF THE RINGS FILM SERIES + List of accolades received byThe Lord of the Rings film series Peter Jackson Academy Award African - American Film Critics Alexandria Awards Amanda Award American Cinema Editors American Film Institute Award American Society of Cinematographers Art Directors Guild ASCAP Film and Television Music Award Angel Awards AOL Moviegoer Awards Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts Award Circuit Community Award Of The Japanese Academy Bodil Awards
Bogey Awards
Bram Stoker
Awards British Academy Film Award British Society of Cinematographers
Broadcast Film Critics Association Award Bubakar Awards Central Ohio Film Critics Chicago Film Critics Cinema Audio Society Award Cinemarati Awards
Cinema Writer Circle Spain
Costume Designers Guild
Chlotrudis Awards Czech Lion
Dallas - Fort Worth Film Critics
Directors Guild of America Award Directors Guild of Great Britain Award DVD Exclusive Awards Empire Award Film Critics Circle of Australia Florida Film Critics Gabon National Honor Of Merit Awards
German Dubbing Awards Golden Globe Award
Gold Spirit
Awards
Golden Trailer Award Golden Tommatoes Award Grammy Award Hollywood Makeup Artist and Hair Stylist Guild Award Hugo Award Iowa Film Critics International Online 3-D Society Awards
International Online Cinephile Society Internet Movie
Awards Irish Film and Television Award Italian online movie Award Italian Syndicate Of Film Journalists jupiter movie Award Joblo Awards Kansas City Film Critics Key Art Awards
Las Vegas Film Critics locus Award London Film Critics Los Angeles Film Critics Motion Picture Sound Editors
Movieguide Awards MTV Movie Award National Board of Review National Society of Film Critics Nebula Award New York Film Critics NRJ cine cine awards
Online Film Critics
Online Film And Television Association
People 's Choice Award Phoenix Film Critics Producers Guild of America Robert Award Rondo Hotton Classic Horror Award San Diego Film Critics San Francisco Film Critics
Santa Barbara International Film Festival Satellite Award Saturn Award Screen Actors
Guild
Seattle Film Critics SFX
Awards Southeastern Film Critics
Spacey Awards Toronto Film Critics
Utah Film Critics USC Scripter Award Vancouver Film Critics Visual Effects Society
Washington D.C. Area Film Critics World Soundtrack Award
Writers Guild of America Young Artist Award Total number of wins and nominations
The Lord of the Rings film series is a series of epic fantasy - drama films directed by Peter Jackson .
The three films , entitled , , and , were released serially worldwide between December 2001 and 2003 .
They are based on J. R. R. Tolkien 's epic fantasy novel , The Lord of the Rings , adapted for the screen by Jackson , Fran Walsh , and Philippa Boyens .
Set in Tolkien 's fictional Middle - earth , the plot follows the hobbit Frodo Baggins and his fellow members of the Fellowship of the Ring as they embark on a quest to destroy the One Ring , which will rid Middle - earth of the Dark Lord Sauron .
A large ensemble cast was featured in the series , which included Elijah Wood , Ian McKellen , Viggo Mortensen , Sean Astin , Orlando Bloom , Liv Tyler , John Rhys - Davies , Sean Bean , Billy Boyd , Dominic Monaghan , Andy Serkis , Cate Blanchett , Christopher Lee , Hugo Weaving , Ian Holm , John Noble , Bernard Hill , David Wenham , Miranda Otto , Karl Urban , and Brad Dourif .
All three films premiered to widespread critical acclaim .
The Toronto Film Critics Association awarded Jackson a " Special Citation " for his work on the series as a whole , while the Austin Film Critics Association selected the entire series as the decade 's third best film .
The films won seventeen out of thirty Academy Award nominations , and The Return of the King holds the record for most Oscars with eleven alongside Titanic and Ben - Hur .
The Return of the King also has the distinction of being the only fantasy film to have won the Academy Award for Best Picture ( best film ) .
In addition to receiving the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture and National Board of Review Award for Best Cast , many of the actors were also recognized for their individual work , including McKellen ( 12 nominations ) , Serkis ( 10 nominations ) , Astin ( 9 nominations ) , and Mortensen ( 5 nominations ) .
Composer Howard Shore received recognition for his original score , as he was the recipient of two Academy Awards , two BAFTA nominations , and three Grammy Awards in addition to a number of other awards .
The series also received accolades in various technical categories , including those in editing , sound mixing , and visual effects .
Walsh , Boyens , and Jackson 's screenwriting earned them 10 awards out of 23 total nominations , including the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay ( for The Return of the King ) .
In total , the series received 475 awards out of 800 nominations , thus making the films the most awarded film series in cinematic history .
THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING Section::::The Fellowship of the Ring . was released in theatres worldwide on 19 December 2001 .
Faced with a production budget of $ 93 million , the first film earned a worldwide gross of $ 871,530,324 .
As in the rest of the series , The Fellowship of the Ring had a large ensemble cast , introducing Elijah Wood , Ian McKellen , Viggo Mortensen , Sean Astin , Orlando Bloom , Liv Tyler , John Rhys - Davies , Sean Bean , Billy Boyd , Dominic Monaghan , Cate Blanchett , Christopher Lee , Hugo Weaving , Ian Holm , and Andy Serkis .
The first film 's plot follows Frodo Baggins ( Wood ) and the rest of the Fellowship of the Ring as they begin their journey to destroy the One Ring and defeat the Dark Lord Sauron once and for all .
According to film site aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , 91 percent of critics were favorable about The Fellowship of the Ring .
Entertainment Weekly columnist Lisa Schwarzbaum called the film " thrilling – a great picture , a triumphant picture , a joyfully conceived work of cinema that ( based on this first installment , with two more ready for release in the next two years ) would appear to embrace Tolkien 's classic with love and delight , and rewards both adepts and novices with the highest compliment of all : an intelligence and artistry as a movie independent of blind fidelity to the page . "
Nev Pierce of BBC added , " Funny , scary and , totally involving , Peter Jackson 's assured adaptation of J. R. R Tolkien 's The Lord of The Rings turns the book 's least screen - worthy volume into a gripping and powerful adventure movie . "
The Fellowship of the Ring received thirteen Academy Award nominations , winning in four categories .
It also earned thirteen nominations at the 55th British Academy Film Awards , leading to wins in the categories for Best Film , Best Direction , Best Special Visual Effects , and the Orange Film of the Year Award .
Other notable ceremonies where it received much recognition included the American Film Institute Awards , the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards , the Empire Awards , the Golden Globes , the MTV Movie Awards , the Satellite Awards , and Saturn Awards .
Various critics groups , such as those in ChicagoAcademy Awards Best Picture Peter Jackson , Barrie M. Osborne and Fran Walsh
Best Director Peter Jackson
Best Adapted Screenplay Fran Walsh , Philippa Boyens and Peter Jackson Best Supporting Actor Ian McKellen Best Art Decoration Art Direction :
Grant Major ;
Set Decoration : Dan Hennah
Best
Costume Design
Ngila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best Film Editing John Gilbert
Best Makeup Peter Owen and Richard Taylor
Best Original Score
Howard Shore
Best Original Song Enya , Nicky Ryan and Roma Ryan
Best Sound Christopher Boyes , Michael Semanick , Gethin Creagh and Hammond Peek
Best Visual Effects
Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie !
scope="row
" Amanda Awards Best Foreign Feature Film Peter Jackson !
scope="row
" American Cinema Editors Best Edited Film – DramaJohn Gilbert ! scope="row
" rowspan=4 American Film Institute Awards Movie of the Year Peter Jackson , Barrie Osborne , Tim Sanders , and Fran Walsh Composer of the Year
Howard Shore Digital Effects Artist of the Year Jim Rygiel Production Designer of the Year Grant Major !
scope="row " American Society of Cinematographers Outstanding Cinematography – Theatrical ReleasesAndrew Lesnie !
scope="row " Art Directors Guild colspan=2Excellence in Production Design – Fantasy or Period Film !
scope="row " ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards Top Box Office Films Howard Shore ! scope="row " Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts
Best Foreign Film Barrie Osborne , Peter Jackson , Fran Walsh , and Tim Sanders !
scope="row " Bodil Awards Best American Film Peter Jackson !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " Boston Society of Film Critics
colspan=2 Best Picture
Best DirectorPeter Jackson !
scope="row " Bram Stoker Awards Best Screenplay Philippa Boyens , Peter Jackson , and Frances Walsh ( based on the novel by J. R. R. Tolkien ) !
scope="row " rowspan=13
British Academy Film Awards
Best Film Peter Jackson , Barrie Osborne , Fran Walsh , and Tim Sanders
Best Director Peter Jackson Best Screenplay – Adapted Philippa Boyens , Peter Jackson , and Fran Walsh Best Actor in a Leading Role Ian McKellen
Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie
Best
Costume Design Ngila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best Editing John Gilbert Film Music Howard Shore
Best Makeup and Hair Peter King , Peter Owen , and Richard Taylor
Best Production Design
Grant Major Best Sound Christopher Boyes , Gethin Creagh , David Farmer , Mike Hopkins , Hammond Peek , Michael Semanick , and Ethan Van der Ryn Best Visual Effects
colspan=2Orange Film of the Year Award !
scope="row " British Society of Cinematographers Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie !
scope="row " rowspan=4Broadcast Film Critics colspan=2Best
Film
Best
DirectorPeter Jackson
Best ComposerHoward Shore Best SongEnya , for the song " May It Be " ! scope="row
" rowspan=4 Chicago Film Critics !
scope="row " Cinema Audio Society
Outstanding Sound Mixing – Motion PicturesChristopher Boyes , Gethin Creagh , Hammond Peek and Michael Semanick !
scope="row " Dallas - Fort Worth Film Critics Best CinematographyAndrew Lesnie ! scope="row " Directors Guild of America Outstanding Directing –
Motion PicturePeter Jackson !
scope="row " rowspan="8 " Empire Awards
rowspan=2Best
Actor Viggo Mortensen
Elijah
Wood
rowspan=2 Best British Actor Sean Bean rowspan=2 Best Debut Orlando Bloom !
scope="row " rowspan=2 Florida Film Critics !
scope="row
" rowspan=4 Golden Globe Awards colspan=2Best
Film – Drama
Best Director Best Original Score Howard Shore
Best Original Song Enya !
scope="row "
Golden Tomatoes Awards ! scope="row " rowspan=2 Grammy Awards Best Score Soundtrack Album – Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media Best Song – Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media Enya , Nicky Ryan , and Roma Ryan ! scope="row " Heartland Film Festival
colspan=2 Truly Moving Picture Award !
scope="row
" Hugo Awards colspan=2Best Dramatic Presentation ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " Jupiter Awards !
scope="row " Locus Awards Best Script Fran Walsh , Philippa Boyens , and Peter Jackson !
scope="row"Los Angeles Film Critics
Best Music ScoreHoward Shore !
scope="row
" rowspan=2 Motion Picture Sound Editors Best Sound Editing – Foreign FilmMike Hopkins , Ethan Van der Ryan , David Farmer , Brent Burge , John McKay , Timothy Nielsen , Craig Tomlinson , Dave Whitehead , Jason Canovas , Ray Beentjes , and Chris Todd
Best Sound Editing – Music – Feature Film , Domestic and ForeignSuzana Peric , Nancy Allen , Michael Price , and Andrew Dudman ! scope="row " rowspan=6 MTV Movie Awards
Best Breakthrough Performance Orlando Bloom Best Fight Christopher Lee vs. Ian McKellen !
scope="row " rowspan=3National Board of Review Outstanding Production DesignGrant Major ! scope="row " rowspan=2National Society of Film Critics
colspan=2Best Film Best Director Peter Jackson !
scope="row " Nebula Awards ! scope="row " rowspan="7 " Online Film Critics
colspan=2 Best Picture
colspan=2 Best Cast ! scope="row " rowspan=2People 's Choice Awards colspan=2 Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture colspan=2 Favorite Motion Picture !
scope="row " Producers Guild of America Motion Picture Producer of the Year Award Barrie M. Osborne , Peter Jackson , and Fran Walsh !
scope="row " Robert Awards Best American Film Peter Jackson !
scope="row " rowspan=9 Satellite Awards colspan=2Best Motion Picture , Animated or Mixed Media
Best Screenplay , Adapted Fran Walsh , Philippa Boyens , and Peter Jackson Best Art Director & Production
Design Grant Major and Dan Hennah
Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie
Best
Costume Design Ngila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best Film Editing John Gilbert
Best Sound ( Mixing & Editing ) Gethin Creagh , Christopher Boyes , Michael Semanick , and Hammond Peek
Best Supporting Actor ,
Drama
Ian McKellen
Best Visual Effects Jim Rygiel , Richard Taylor , Alex Funke , and Randall William Cook !
scope="row " rowspan=9 Saturn Awards colspan=2Best
Fantasy Film
Best Director Peter Jackson Best ScreenplayFran Walsh , Philippa Boyens , and Peter Jackson
Best Supporting ActorIan McKellen Best Costumes Ngila Dickson and Richard Taylor Face of the Future –
Male Best Makeup Peter Owen and Richard Taylor
Best Score Howard Shore
Best Special EffectsJim Rygiel , Randall William Cook , Richard Taylor , and Mark Stetson !
scope="row " rowspan=2 Screen Actors Guild Ian McKellen Outstanding Cast –
Motion PictureSean Astin , Sean Bean , Cate Blanchett , Orlando Bloom , Billy Boyd , Ian Holm , Christopher Lee , Ian McKellen , Dominic Monaghan , Viggo Mortensen , John Rhys - Davies , Andy Serkis , Liv Tyler , Hugo Weaving , and Elijah Wood !
scope="row
" rowspan=2Toronto Film Critics Best DirectorPeter Jackson
Best Supporting ActorIan McKellen !
scope="row
" USC Scripter Awards !
scope="row " rowspan=3 World Soundtrack Awards Composer of the Year Howard Shore
Best Original Soundtrack of the Year –
OrchestralHoward Shore Public Choice AwardHoward Shore !
scope="row " Writers Guild of America !
scope="row " Young Artist Awards
colspan=2 Best Family Feature Film – Drama
THE TWO TOWERS Section::::The Two Towers .
The worldwide theatrical release of occurred on 18 December 2002 .
The series ' second film earned a worldwide gross of $ 926,047,111 based on a production budget of $ 94 million .
The film introduced new characters played by Bernard Hill , Miranda Otto , Karl Urban , David Wenham , and Brad Dourif .
The Two Towers received critical acclaim ; film site aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 96 percent of critics were positive .
CNN film critic Paul Clinton called The Two Towers an " utter triumph " , and writer Philip French of The Guardian noted in a review of the second film that " these Tolkien films have a weight and seriousness that very few sword - and - sorcery pictures of the past 30-odd years have attained .
" Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Owen Gleiberman remarked " The Two Towers conjures an illusion of the gravity that you want from an emotionally charged storybook epic .
Really , though , what it comes down to is superbly staged battle scenes and moral alliances forged in earnest yet purged of the wit and dynamic , bristly ego that define true on - screen personality .
" The film was also listed on a number of critics ' lists ; Dallas - Fort Worth Film Critics named The Two Towers 2002 's third best film , while Central Ohio Film Critics named The Two Towers that year 's fifth best film and Southeastern Film Critics ranked it the eighth .
The Two Towers won two out of six Academy Award nominations and three accolades out of ten nominations at the 56th British Academy Film Awards .
Like its predecessor , the second film also received recognition at the American Film Institute Awards , the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards , the Empire Awards , the Golden Globes , the MTV Movie Awards , the Satellite Awards , and the Saturn AwardsAcademy Awards
Best Picture
Barrie M. Osborne , Fran Walsh and Peter Jackson
Best Art Direction Art Direction :
Grant Major ;
Set Decoration : Dan Hennah and Alan Lee
Best
Film Editing Michael Horton
Best Sound Christopher Boyes , Michael Semanick , Michael Hedges and Hammond Peek
Best
Sound
Editing
Best Visual Effects Jim Rygiel , Joe Letteri , Randall William Cook and Alex Funke !
scope="row
" Amanda Awards Best Foreign Feature FilmPeter Jackson !
scope="row"American Cinema Editors Best Edited Film – DramaMichael Horton !
scope="row
" American Film Institute Awards colspan=2AFI Movies of the Year – Official Selections ! scope="row " ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards
Top Box Office Films Howard Shore !
scope="row " Art Directors Guild Excellence in Production Design – Fantasy or Period FilmGrant Major , Dan Hennah , Joe Bleakley , Rob Otterside , Phil Ivey , Mark Robins , Jules Cook , Ross McGarva , Jacqui Allen !
scope="row " Austin Film Critics Association
Top
10 Films Of The Decade
The Lord Of The Rings Trilogy !
scope="row " Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts
Best Foreign Film Peter Jackson , Barnie M. Osborne , and Fran Walsh !
scope="row " Bogey Awards colspan=2 Bogey Award In Titanium !
scope="row " rowspan=10 British Academy Film Awards
Best FilmPeter Jackson , Barrie Osborne , and Fran Walsh
Best Director Peter Jackson Best Costume DesignNgila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best
EditingMichael Horton Best Make Up & HairPeter King , Peter Owen , and Richard Taylor
Best Production DesignGrant Major Best SoundChristopher Boyes , David Farmer , Michael Hedges , Michael Hopkins , Hammond Peek , Michael Semanick , and Ethan Van Der Ryn
Best Visual EffectsRandall William Cook , Alex Funke , Joe Letteri , and Jim Rygiel
colspan=2Orange Film of the Year Award !
scope="row " British Society of Cinematographers Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie !
scope="row " rowspan=3Broadcast Film Critics colspan=2Best Picture
Best ComposerHoward Shore Best Digital Acting PerformanceAndy Serkis as Gollum !
scope="row
" rowspan=4Chicago Film Critics colspan=2Best Picture
Best
DirectorPeter Jackson
Best
CinematographyAndrew Lesnie Best Original ScoreHoward Shore !
scope="row " Cinema Audio Society
Outstanding Sound Mixing – Motion PicturesChristopher Boyes , Michael Semanick , Michael Hedges , and Hammond Peek ! scope="row " Costume Designers Guild Excellence in Costume Design – Fantasy or Period Film Ngila Dickson !
scope="row " rowspan= " 2 " Dallas - Fort Worth Film Critics
colspan=2 Best Picture Best Director Peter Jackson !
scope="row " Directors Guild of America Outstanding Directing – Motion PicturePeter Jackson !
scope="row " rowspan="7 " Empire Awards Best Actor Viggo Mortensen
rowspan=2 Best British Actor Andy Serkis ! scope="row
"
rowspan=2 Golden Globe Awards colspan=2Best
Picture – Drama Best Director Peter Jackson !
scope="row
" Golden Tomatoes Awards colspan=2 Best Film ! scope="row " Golden Trailer Awards !
scope="row " Grammy Awards Best Score Soundtrack Album – Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media ! scope="row " Hugo Awards colspan=2Best Dramatic Presentation :
Long Form !
scope="row " London Film Critics Director of the Year Peter Jackson !
scope="row
" rowspan=2 Motion Picture Sound Editors Best Sound Editing – Foreign FilmMike Hopkins , Andrew Dudman , Steve Price , Mark Willsher , Malcolm Fife , Nigel Scott , Jonathan Schultz , Rebecca Gatrell , and Raphaël Mouterde
Best Sound Editing – Music – Feature Film , Domestic and ForeignMike Hopkins , Ethan Van der Ryn , David Farmer , Brent Burge , Dave Whitehead , John McKay , Kyrsten Mate Comoglio , Craig Tomlinson , Hayden Collow , Jason Canovas , Ray Beentjes , Polly McKinnon , Nigel Stone , and Mark Franken ! scope="row " rowspan=5 MTV Movie Awards Best Virtual Performance Gollum ! scope="row " Nebula Awards ! scope="row " rowspan="12 " Online Film Critics colspan=2 Best Picture colspan=2 Best Art Direction
colspan=2 Best Cast colspan=2 Best Costume Design
colspan=2 Best Sound colspan=2 Best Visual Effects !
scope="row " People 's Choice Awards colspan=2 Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture !
scope="row " Producers Guild of America Motion Picture Producer of the Year Award Peter Jackson , Barrie Osborne , and Fran Walsh !
scope="row " rowspan=10 Satellite Awards colspan=2Best Picture – Drama
Best
DirectorPeter Jackson Best Actor in a Supporting Role –
DramaViggo Mortensen
Best
CinematographyAndrew Lesnie Best EditingMichael Horton Best Screenplay , Adapted Philippa Boyens , Peter Jackson , Stephen Sinclair , and Fran Walsh
Best SoundChristopher Boyes , Michael Hedges , Hammond Peek , and Michael Semanick
Best Visual EffectsRandall Cook , Alex Funke , Joe Letteri , and Jim Rygiel
Best Overall DVD Best DVD Extras !
scope="row " rowspan=10 Saturn Awards colspan=2Best
Fantasy Film
Best
DirectorPeter Jackson
Best
ActorViggo Mortensen
Best Supporting ActorAndy Serkis Best CostumesNgila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best MakeupPeter Owen and Peter King Best MusicHoward Shore
Best Special EffectsJim Rygiel , Joe Letteri , Randall William Cook , and Alex Funke
Best WritingFran Walsh , Philippa Boyens , Stephen Sinclair , and Peter Jackson
Best Young ActorElijah Wood !
scope="row
" Screen Actors Guild Outstanding Cast – Motion Picture Sean Astin , Cate Blanchett , Orlando Bloom , Billy Boyd , Brad Dourif , Bernard Hill , Christopher Lee , Ian McKellen , Dominic Monaghan , Viggo Mortensen , Miranda Otto , John Rhys - Davies , Andy Serkis , Liv Tyler , Hugo Weaving , David Wenham , and Elijah Wood ! scope="row " rowspan=6 SFX Awards rowspan=3 Best SF Or Fantasy Film Actor Viggo Mortensen !
scope="row " USC Scripter Awards !
scope="row "
rowspan=2 Spacey Awards
colspan=2 Best Fantasy or Sci - fi
Film
colspan=2 Best Action Sequence !
scope="row " rowspan=9Visual Effects Society Best Visual Effects in an Effects Driven Motion PictureJim Rygiel , Joe Letteri , Randall William Cook , and Alex Funke Best Character Animation in a Live Action Motion PictureRichard Baneham , Eric Saindon , Ken McGaugh , and Bay Raitt Best Special Effects in a Motion PictureSteve Ingram , Blair Foord , Rich Cordobes , and Scott Harens
Best Matte Painting in a Motion PictureYanick Dusseault , Max Dennison , Roger Kupelian , and Mathieu Raynault
Best Models and Miniatures in a Motion PictureRichard Taylor , Paul Van Ommen , and Matt Aitken
Best Visual Effects Photography in a Motion PictureAlex Funke , Brian
Van't Hul , and Richard Bluck Best Effects Art Direction in a Motion PictureAlan Lee , Jeremy Bennett , Christian Rivers , and Gino Acevedo
Best Compositing in a Motion PictureMark Lewis , GG Heitmann Demers , Alex Lemke , and Alfred Murrle
Best Performance by an Actor in an Effects FilmAndy Serkis , Elijah Wood , and Sean Astin !
scope="row " rowspan=2 Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association
colspan=2 Best Picture
Best DirectorPeter Jackson !
scope="row"World Soundtrack Awards
Best Original Song Written for a Film ( for " Gollum 's Song")Howard Shore Emilíana Torrini Fran Walsh , Janet Roddick , David Donaldson , Steve Roche , and David Long !
scope="row " Young Artist Awards
colspan=2 Best Family Feature Film – Drama
THE RETURN OF THE KING Section::::The Return of the King .
The worldwide theatrical release of occurred on 17 December 2003 .
The series ' third film earned a worldwide gross of $ 1,119,929,521 off a production budget of $ 94,000,000 and became the second highest worldwide grossing until James Cameron 's Avatar released in 2009 .
In addition to containing most of the cast from the previous two films , The Return of the King introduced Denethor , the Steward of Gondor , played by John Noble ( though the character appeared in the extended edition of The Two Towers ) .
The Return of the King continued the series ' critical success , with Rotten Tomatoes reporting that 95 percent of the critics were positive .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times believed the film to be the best of the three , as it " certifies the Ring trilogy as a work of bold ambition at a time of cinematic timidity . "
Entertainment Weekly film critic Lisa Schwarzbaum was equally praiseworthy of the final chapter .
She explained , " I ca n't think of another film trilogy that ends in such glory , or another monumental work of sustained storytelling that surges ahead with so much inventiveness and ardor .
The conclusion of Peter Jackson 's masterwork is passionate and literate , detailed and expansive , and it 's conceived with a risk - taking flair for old - fashioned movie magic at its most precious , a rarity now that CGI prowess has fallen into the hands of run - of - the - mill studio ring - chasers . "
The Guardians Peter Bradshaw wrote , " With enormous energy and a passionately exacting eye for detail , Jackson has made the regressive - romantic legend live again .
He has given the Tolkien myth a turbo - charged rush into the 21st century . "
The film won eleven Academy Awards ( from eleven nominations ) , tying Titanic and Ben - Hur for the most Oscars won .
The Return of the King also became the first fantasy film to have won the Academy Award for Best Picture .
The Return of the King won five BAFTAs , three Empire Awards , four Golden Globes , one Satellite Award , and eight Saturn AwardsAcademy Awards
Best Picture Peter Jackson , Barrie Osborne and Fran Walsh Peter Jackson
Best Adapted Screenplay Philippa Boyens , Fran Walsh and Peter Jackson
Best
Costume Design Ngila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best Art Direction Art Direction : Dan Hennah ;
Set Decoration : Alan Lee and Grant Major
Best
Film Editing Jamie Selkirk
Best Makeup Peter King and Richard Taylor
Best Original Score
Howard Shore
Best Original Song Fran Walsh , Howard Shore and Annie Lennox(for
the song " Into the West " ) Best Sound Mixing Christopher Boyes , Michael Semanick , Michael Hedges and Hammond Peek
Best Visual Effects Jim Rygiel , Joe Letteri , Randall William Cook and Alex Funke !
scope="row " African American Film Critics Association colspan=2 Best Picture !
scope="row
" Amanda Awards Best Foreign Feature FilmPeter Jackson !
scope="row"American Cinema Editors Best Edited Film – DramaJamie Selkirk !
scope="row
" American Film Institute Awards colspan=2AFI Movies of the Year – Official Selections !
scope="row
" rowspan=2 American Society of Cinematographers Outstanding Cinematography – Theatrical ReleasesAndrew Lesnie !
scope="row " Art Directors Guild Excellence in Production Design – Fantasy or Period FilmJacqui Allen , Joe Bleakley , Simon Bright , Jules Cook , Dan Hennah , Philip Ivey , Grant Major , and Ross McGarva !
scope="row " ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards Top Box Office Films Howard Shore ! scope="row " Austin Film Critics Association Top 10 Films Of The Decade
The Lord Of The Rings Trilogy !
scope="row " Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts
Best Foreign Film Peter Jackson , Barnie M. Osborne , and Fran Walsh !
scope="row " Bodil Awards Best American Film Peter Jackson !
scope="row " Bogey Awards colspan=2 Bogey Award In Titanium !
scope="row " rowspan=13
British Academy Film Awards
Best FilmBarrie M Osborne , Fran Walsh , and Peter Jackson
Best
DirectorPeter Jackson Best Screenplay – AdaptedFran Walsh , Philippa Boyens , and Peter Jackson
Best Supporting ActorIan McKellen Best Costume DesignNgila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best
CinematographyAndrew Lesnie
Best
EditingJamie Selkirk Film MusicHoward Shore Best Make Up & HairRichard Taylor , Peter King , and Peter Owen Best Production DesignGrant Major
Best SoundEthan Van Der Ryn , Michael Hopkins , David Farmer , Christopher Boyes , Michael Hedges , Michael Semanick , and Hammond Peek
Best Visual EffectsJoe Letteri , Jim Rygiel , Randall William Cook , and Alex Funke
colspan=2Orange Film of the Year Award !
scope="row " British Society of Cinematographers Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie !
scope="row " rowspan=5Broadcast Film Critics colspan=2Best
Acting Ensemble ! scope="row " rowspan=7 Chicago Film Critics rowspan=2Best
Supporting ActorSean Astin Andy Serkis !
scope="row " Cinema Audio Society
Outstanding Sound Mixing – Motion PicturesChristopher Boyes , Michael Semanick , Michael Hedges , and Hammond Peek ! scope="row " Costume Designers Guild Excellence in Costume Design – Fantasy or Period Film Ngila Dickson !
scope="row
" rowspan=3 Dallas - Fort Worth Film Critics colspan=2Best Film Best Director Peter Jackson Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie !
scope="row " Directors Guild of America Outstanding Directing – Motion PicturePeter Jackson !
scope="row " Directors Guild of Great Britain Outstanding Directing – International FilmPeter Jackson ! scope="row " rowspan="8 " Empire Awards
rowspan=2Best
Actor Viggo Mortensen Sean Astin
rowspan=3 Best British Actor Andy Serkis !
scope="row " Film Critics Circle of Australia !
scope="row
" rowspan=3 Florida Film Critics colspan=2Best Film Best Director Peter Jackson Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie !
scope="row " rowspan=4 Golden Globe Awards
colspan=2 Best Picture –
Drama Peter Jackson
Best Original Score
Howard Shore
Best Original Song Annie Lennox , Howard Shore and Fran Walsh(for
" Into the West " ) !
scope="row " rowspan="8 " GoldSpirit Awards colspan=2 best CD Release !
scope="row"Golden Trailer Awards
Best Drama
" The Ant Farm " ! scope="row
" rowspan=2 Grammy Awards Best Score Soundtrack Album – Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual Media Best Song – Motion Picture , Television or Other Visual MediaAnnie Lennox , Howard Shore and Fran Walsh(for
" Into the West " ) ! scope="row
" Hugo Awards colspan=2Best Dramatic Presentation : Long Form !
scope="row " rowspan=3 International Online Film Critics ' Poll Best Director Of The Decade Peter Jackson !
scope="row"Irish Film and Television Awards
Best International Film Peter Jackson !
scope="row " rowspan=12 Italian Online Movie Awards
colspan=2 Best Picture Best Director Peter Jackson
colspan=2 Best Adapted Screenplay
colspan=2 Best Cast
Best Cinematography Andrew Lesnie
Best Original Score
Howard Shore
colspan=2 Best Original Song
colspan=2 Best Art Direction
colspan=2 Best Costume Design
colspan=2 Best Make - up colspan=2 Best Visual Effects
colspan=2 Best Sound Effects !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " Jupiter Award ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " London Film Critics colspan=2 Film of the Year !
scope="row
" rowspan=3 Los Angeles Film Critics
Best Production Design Grant Major ! scope="row " rowspan=2 Motion Picture Sound Editors Best Sound Editing – Foreign FilmMike Hopkins , Ethan Van der Ryan , David Farmer , Brent Burge , Dave Whitehead , Hayden Collow , Craig Tomlinson , Beau Borders , Timothy Nielsen , Addison Teague , Katy Wood , Peter Mills , Jason Canovas , Mark Franken , Ray Beentjes , Nick Breslin , Polly McKinnon , and Chris Ward
Best Sound Editing – Music – Feature Film , Domestic and ForeignJonathan Schultz , Andrew Dudman , Steve Price , Michael Price , Malcolm Fife , Nigel Scott , and Rebecca Gatrell ! scope="row
" rowspan=2 MTV Movie Awards
colspan=2Best Movie !
scope="row " National Board of Review !
scope="row " National Society of Film Critics !
scope="row " Nebula Awards !
scope="row
" New York Film Critics colspan=2Best Picture !
scope="row " rowspan="11 " Online Film Critics
colspan=2 Best Picture rowspan="2 " Best Supporting Actor Andy Serkis
colspan=2 Best Art Direction
colspan=2 Best Costume Design
colspan=2 Best Sound colspan=2 Best Visual Effects !
scope="row " Producers Guild of America Motion Picture Producer of the Year Award Peter Jackson , Barrie Osborne , and Fran Walsh ! scope="row " rowspan=2 San Diego Film Critics Best Production Design Grant Major ! scope="row " San Francisco Film Critics !
scope="row " Santa Barbara International Film Festival !
scope="row
" rowspan=8Satellite Awards
Best Art Direction & Production DesignGrant Major , Dan Hennah , and Alan Lee
Best
CinematographyAndrew Lesnie Best Costume DesignNgila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best Film EditingJamie Selkirk
Best Original ScoreHoward Shore
Best Sound ( Mixing & Editing)David Farmer , Ethan Van der Ryn , and Michael Hopkins Best Visual EffectsJim Rygiel , Joe Letteri , Randall William Cook , and Alex Funke ! scope="row
" rowspan=13Saturn Awards colspan=2Best
Fantasy Film
Best
DirectorPeter Jackson
Best ScreenplayFran Walsh , Phillipa Boyens , and Peter Jackson rowspan=2Best
ActorElijah Wood
Viggo Mortensen rowspan=3Best
Supporting ActorSean Astin
Ian McKellen Andy Serkis Best Supporting ActressMiranda Otto Best Costume DesignNgila Dickson and Richard Taylor
Best Make - upRichard Taylor and Peter King
Best ScoreHoward Shore Best Visual EffectsJim Rygiel , Joe Letteri , Randall William Cook , and Alex Funke !
scope="row " Screen Actors Guild Outstanding Cast – Motion Picture Sean Astin , Sean Bean , Cate Blanchett , Orlando Bloom , Billy Boyd , Brad Dourif , Bernard Hill , Ian Holm , Christopher Lee , Ian McKellen , Dominic Monaghan , Viggo Mortensen , John Noble , Miranda Otto , John Rhys - Davies , Andy Serkis , Liv Tyler , Karl Urban , Hugo Weaving , David Wenham , and Elijah Wood !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " SFX Awards
colspan=2 Best Film ! scope="row
" rowspan=3 Spacey Awards ! scope="row " rowspan=2 Toronto Film Critics !
scope="row
" USC Scripter Awards !
scope="row
" rowspan=2Vancouver Film Critics Circle ! scope="row " rowspan=8 Visual Effects Society Outstanding Visual Effects – Visual Effects Driven Motion PictureRandall Cook , Joe Letteri , Jim Rygiel , and Dean Wright Outstanding Character Animation – Live Action Motion Picture Greg Butler , Steven Hornby , Matthias Menz , and Andy Serkis Outstanding Compositing – Motion Picture Moritz Glaesle , Mark Lewis , and Kara Vandeleur
Outstanding Models and Miniatures –
Motion PictureEric Saindon , Richard Taylor , and Paul Van Ommen Outstanding Male or Female Actor – Effects Film Sean Astin Outstanding Special Effects in Service to Visual Effects –
Motion PictureScott Harens , Sven Harens , and Chuck Shuman Outstanding Visual Effects
Photography – Motion PictureAlex Funke , Rob Kerr , and Henk Prins !
scope="row " rowspan=4 Washington D.C. Area Film Critics !
scope="row"World Soundtrack Awards
Best Original Song Written for a FilmHoward Shore Annie Lennox Fran Walsh !
scope="row " Writers Guild of America Best Screenplay – Adapted Philippa Boyens , Peter Jackson , and Fran Walsh ! scope="row " Young Artist Awards
colspan=2 Best Family Feature Film – Drama
SEE ALSO
* List of accolades received by The Hobbit film series * 2001 in film * 2002 in film * 2003 in film
* List of films considered the best * List of highest - grossing films
REFERENCES
General
Specific
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Accolades received by The Fellowship of the Ring at the Internet Movie Database * Accolades received by The Two Towers at the Internet Movie Database
* Accolades received by The Return of the King at the Internet Movie Database