NETHERLANDS – UNITED KINGDOM RELATIONS
The Netherlands and the United Kingdom have a strong political and economic partnership .
Over forty Dutch towns and cities are twinned with British towns and cities .
Linguistic ties include the fact that both English and Dutch are West Germanic languages , with West Frisian , a minority language in the Netherlands being the closest relative of the English Language if one excludes Scots .
In addition , between 90 % and 93 % of people in the Netherlands claim to speak English while a negligible percentage of British people can speak Dutch .
The Netherlands has an embassy in London , and the United Kingdom has an embassy in The Hague and a consulate in Amsterdam .
The UK also has a consulate in Willemstad , Curaçao .
There are also strong ties between the UK 's overseas territory of Anguilla and Sint Maarten of the Netherlands .
COUNTRY COMPARISON Section::::Country comparison . ! !
The Kingdom of the Netherlands !
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland HISTORY ANGLO - DUTCH WARS Section::::History .
Section::::Anglo - Dutch Wars .
The Anglo - Dutch wars were battles between England ( and the Kingdom of Great Britain during the fourth war ) and the Dutch Republic during the 17th and 18th centuries .
There were four wars in total , two were won by each side , and ended with the Fourth Anglo - Dutch War .
The wars were largely fought to secure trade routes and to enable colonial expansion .
GLORIOUS REVOLUTION Section::::Glorious Revolution .
The Glorious Revolution , also called the Revolution of 1688 , was the overthrow of King James II of England ( VII of Scotland and II of Ireland ) in 1688 by a union of Parliamentarians with an invading army led by the Dutch Republic stadtholder William III of Orange - Nassau ( William of Orange ) who , as a result , ascended the English throne as William III of England .
The crisis besetting King James II came to a head in 1688 , when the King fathered a son , James Francis Edward Stuart on 10 June ( Julian calendar ) , until then the throne would have passed to his daughter , Mary , a Protestant and the wife of William of Orange .
The prospect of a Catholic dynasty in the kingdoms was now likely .
Already troubled by the King 's Catholicism and his close ties with France , key leaders of the Tories united with members of the opposition Whigs and set out to resolve the crisis by inviting William of Orange to England .
The invasion ended all attempts by England , in the Anglo - Dutch Wars of the 17th century , to subdue the Dutch Republic by military force .
However , the personal union and the co - operation between the English and Dutch navies shifted the dominance in world trade from the Republic to England and then to the 18th century Kingdom of Great Britain .
EIGHT ARTICLES OF LONDON Section::::Eight Articles of London .
The Eight Articles of London , also known as the London Protocol of 21 June 1814 , were a secret convention between the Great Powers : United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , Prussia , Austria , and Russia to award the territory of current Belgium and the Netherlands to William I of the Netherlands , then " Sovereign Prince " of the United Netherlands .
He accepted this award on 21 July 1814 .
ANGLO - DUTCH TREATY OF 1814 Section::::Anglo - Dutch Treaty of 1814 .
The Anglo - Dutch Treaty of 1814 ( also known as the Convention of London ) was signed between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands in London on 13 August 1814 .
It was signed by Robert Stewart , Viscount Castlereagh , for the British and Hendrik Fagel for the Dutch .
The treaty returned the colonial possessions of the Dutch as they were at 1 January 1803 before the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars , in the Americas , Africa , and Asia with the exceptions of the Cape of Good Hope and the South American settlements of Demerara , Essequibo , and Berbice , where the Dutch retained trading rights .
In addition , the British ceded to the Dutch Bangka Island in the Indonesian Archipelago in exchange for the settlement of Kochi and its dependencies on the coast of Malabar , in India .
The Dutch also ceded the district of Barnagore , situated close to Calcutta , in exchange for an annual fee .
The treaty noted a declaration of 15 June 1814 , by the Dutch that ships for the slave trade were no longer permitted in British ports and it agreed that this restriction would be extended to a ban on involvement in the slave trade by Dutch citizens .
Britain also agreed to pay £ 1,000,000 to Sweden to resolve a claim to the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe ( see Guadeloupe Fund ) .
The British and the Dutch agreed to spend £ 2,000,000 each on improving the defences of the Low Countries .
More funds , of up to £ 3,000,000 , are mentioned for the " final and satisfactory settlement of the Low Countries in union with Holland .
" Disputes arising from this treaty were the subject of the Anglo - Dutch Treaty of 1824 .
ANGLO - DUTCH TREATY OF 1824 Section::::Anglo - Dutch Treaty of 1824 .
The Anglo - Dutch Treaty of 1824 , also known as the Treaty of London ( one of several ) , was signed between the United Kingdom and the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in London in March 1824 .
The treaty sought to resolve disputes arising from the execution of the Anglo - Dutch Treaty of 1814 .
For the Dutch , it was signed by Hendrik Fagel and Anton Reinhard Falck , and for the UK , George Canning and Charles Williams - Wynn .
WORLD WAR II Section::::World War II .
During World War II the United Kingdom and the Netherlands were close allies .
After the German occupation of the Netherlands , Queen Wilhelmina and the Dutch government found refuge in Britain .
The Royal Netherlands Navy brought most of its ships to England .
A few Dutch pilots escaped and joined the Royal Air Force to fight in the Battle of Britain .
In July 1940 , two all - Dutch squadrons were formed with Royal Netherlands Navy personnel and Fokker seaplanes from the Dutch naval air service : 320 Squadron and 321 Squadron ( which afterwards moved to Sri Lanka ) .
In 1943 , an all - Dutch fighter squadron was formed in the UK , 322 Squadron .
POLITICAL RELATIONSHIP Section::::Political relationship .
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands are both countries that are run under a constitutional monarchy .
King Willem - Alexander of the Netherlands is around 890th in line to the British throne .
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands co - operate on a project to help people living in the developing world adapt to climate change .
The Infrared Astronomical Satellite was the first - ever space - based observatory to perform a survey of the entire sky at infrared wavelengths .
Launched in 1983 , its mission lasted ten months .
The telescope was a joint project of the Netherlands ( NIVR ) , and the United Kingdom ( SERC ) as well as the USA .
While commenting on British - Dutch relations Doug Henderson stated in 1997 that : We like fair play and straightforwardness .
We have a deep interest and a sense of responsibility for what goes on in the wider world .
We both share a commitment to global trade and have both traditionally promoted strong trans - Atlantic links .
Furthermore , as former colonial powers , we both have important international interests .
His Dutch counterpart Frits Bolkestein responded by saying : In the past the Netherlands was a staunch supporter of British entry into the European community .
Apart from feeling sympathy for the British people , this was motivated by our common value and interests , such as long - standing and deeply - rooted democratic tradition , the Atlantic outlook , the free market orientation and two large multi - nationals , Shell and Unilever , with a common Dutch - British origin .
ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP Section::::Economic partnership .
Royal Dutch Shell and Unilever are both joint British / Dutch businesses .
The Netherlands - British Chamber of Commerce was established to further economic co - operation between the two countries .
In 2006 the Netherlands imported £ 16.6bn worth of goods from the United Kingdom , making it the UK 's fifth biggest export market .
Dutch - British trade is made simpler by good relations , transparent legal framework , sophisticated financial services system , good transport links and close geographical proximity .
It is possible to reach either country by train , Eurostar , ferry or aeroplane .
TWINNINGS
*
Alkmaar , North Holland and Bath , Somerset * Almelo , Overijssel and Preston , Lancashire
* Amstelveen , North Holland and Woking , Surrey * Amsterdam , North Holland and Manchester , Greater Manchester
* Arnhem , Gelderland and Airdrie , North Lanarkshire * Arnhem , Gelderland and Croydon , Greater London
* Delft , South Holland and Kingston upon Thames , Greater London
* Dordrecht , South Holland and Hastings , East Sussex
* Gouda , South Holland and Gloucester , Gloucestershire * Graft - De Rijp , North Holland and Chalfont St. Giles , Buckinghamshire * Groningen , Groningen Province and Newcastle - upon - Tyne , Tyne and Wear * Haaren , North Brabant and Desborough ,
Northamptonshire
*
Hellevoetsluis , South Holland and Torbay , Devon * Leiden , South Holland and Oxford , Oxfordshire
* Meerssen , Limburg and Sherborne , Dorset * Rotterdam , South Holland and Hull , East Riding of Yorkshire
* Stampersgat , North Brabant and Cheltenham , Gloucestershire
* Zutphen , Gelderland and Shrewsbury , Shropshire ARMED FORCES Section::::Armed forces .
The Royal Marines and Netherlands Marine Corps are allied through a ' Bond of friendship ' .
Since 1973 , units of the Netherlands Marine Corps have formed part of the British 3 Commando Brigade during exercises and real conflict situations .
Together , these form the UK / NL Landing Force .
Either the First or the Second Marine Combat Group can be assigned as the Dutch contribution to this force .
The co - operation between the Korps Mariniers and the Royal Marines has led to extensive integration in the areas of operations , logistics and materials .
Within NATO this is seen as a prime example of what can be achieved in military integration .
In combined RNLMC and Royal Marines actions by the British and Dutch navies during the War of the Spanish Succession ( 1702–1713 ) , amphibious operations were carried out , the most notable being the capture of Gibraltar in 1704 .
During this action , a successful attack was carried out against the fortress of Gibraltar by an 1800-strong brigade of Dutch and British Marines under the command of Prince George of Hesse - Darmstadt .
Both corps share this battle honour .
The nickname of the Dutch Marines among their British Royal Marine counterparts is " Cloggies , " due to the stereotype that most or all Dutch wear clogs , instead of " normal " footwear .
Royal Navy Submarine Service officers taking the Submarine Command Course use a Dutch submarine simulator for part of the course .
SEE ALSO * Foreign relations of the United Kingdom * Foreign relations of the Netherlands * List of diplomats from the United Kingdom to the Netherlands * Dutch people in the United Kingdom * List of Dutch Britons REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Ashton , Nigel .
Unspoken Allies : Anglo - Dutch Relations since 1780 . .
Google Books
* Horn , David Bayne .
Great Britain and Europe in the eighteenth century ( 1967 ) .
Covers 1603–1702 ;
pp .
86–110 .
* Jones , James Rees .
The Anglo - Dutch Wars of the Seventeenth Century
( Routledge , 2013 )
* Levy , Jack S.
" The Rise and Decline of the Anglo - Dutch Rivalry , 1609–1689 " , pp .
172–200 in William R. Thompson , ed .
Great power rivalries ( 1999 )
online
* Palmer , M. A. J.
" The Military Revolution Afloat : The Era of the Anglo - Dutch Wars and the Transition to Modern Warfare at Sea " .
War in History
( 1997 ) 4#2 .
pp .
123–149 .
* Raven , G. J. A. , and Nicholas A. M. Rodger .
Navies and Armies : The Anglo - Dutch Relationship in War and Peace , 1688–1988
( John Donald , 1990 ) .
*
Wigglesworth , Neil .
Holland at War Against Hitler : Anglo - Dutch Relations , 1940–1945
( Psychology Press , 1990 )
* Wilson , Charles Henry .
Anglo - Dutch Commerce & Finance in the Eighteenth Century ( 1941 ) EXTERNAL LINKS
* Our Kinsfolk in the Netherlands - " Always closely associated with Britain " * Anglo - Dutch society
*
A look into the long - lasting links between Britain and Holland forged during the war
* " England and the Netherlands : the ties between two nations "
* " William : A razor sharp cynic "