WHEEL OF FORTUNE ( U.S. GAME SHOW ) Wheel of Fortune ( often known simply as Wheel ) is an American television game show created by Merv Griffin that debuted in 1975 .
The show features a competition in which contestants solve word puzzles , similar to those used in Hangman , to win cash and prizes determined by spinning a giant carnival wheel .
Wheel originally aired as a daytime series on NBC from January 6 , 1975 , to June 30 , 1989 .
After some changes were made to its format , the daytime series moved to CBS from July 17 , 1989 , to January 11 , 1991 .
It then returned to NBC from January 14 , 1991 , until it was cancelled on September 20 , 1991 .
The popularity of the daytime series led to a nightly syndicated edition being developed , which premiered on September 19 , 1983 , and has aired continuously since .
The network version was originally hosted by Chuck Woolery and Susan Stafford , with Charlie O'Donnell as its announcer .
O'Donnell left in 1980 and was replaced by Jack Clark .
After Clark 's death in 1988 , M. G. Kelly took over briefly as announcer until O'Donnell returned in 1989 .
O'Donnell remained on the network version until its cancellation , and continued to announce on the syndicated show until his death in 2010 , when Jim Thornton succeeded him .
Woolery left in 1981 , and was replaced by Pat Sajak .
Sajak left the network version in January 1989 to host his own late - night talk show , and was replaced on that version by Rolf Benirschke .
Bob Goen replaced Benirschke when the network show moved to CBS , then remained as host until the network show was canceled altogether .
Stafford left in 1982 , and was replaced by Vanna White , who remained on the network show for the rest of its run .
The syndicated version has been hosted continuously by Sajak and White since its inception .
Wheel of Fortune ranks as the longest - running syndicated game show in the United States , with over 6,000 episodes aired .
TV Guide named it the " top - rated syndicated series " in a 2008 article , and in 2013 , the magazine ranked it at
No .
2 in its list of the 60 greatest game shows ever .
The program has also come to gain a worldwide following with sixty international adaptations .
The syndicated series ' 36th season premiered on September 10 , 2018 .
GAMEPLAY MAIN GAME Section::::Gameplay .
Section::::Main game .
The core game is based on Hangman .
Each round has a category and a blank word puzzle , with each blank representing a letter in the answer , and punctuation revealed as needed .
Most puzzles are straightforward figures of speech that fit within a mostly static list of categories , and this list has evolved over the course of the series .
Crossword puzzles were added to the rotation in 2016 .
In such rounds , a clue bonding the words in the puzzle is given instead of a traditional category , and contestants win by solving all the words in the crossword .
The titular Wheel of Fortune is a roulette - style wheel mechanism with 24 spaces , most of which are labeled with dollar amounts ranging from $ 500 to $ 900 , plus a top dollar value : $ 2,500 in round 1 , $ 3,500 in rounds 2 and 3 , and $ 5,000 for round 4 and any subsequent rounds .
The wheel also features two Bankrupt wedges and one Lose a Turn , both of which forfeit the contestant 's turn , with the former also eliminating any cash or prizes the contestant has accumulated within the round .
Each game features three contestants , or occasionally , three two - contestant teams positioned behind a single scoreboard with its own flipper .
The left scoreboard from the viewer 's perspective is colored red , the center yellow , and the right blue , with the contestants ' positions determined by a random selection prior to taping .
A contestant spins the wheel to determine a dollar value and guess a consonant .
Calling a correct letter earns the value before the corresponding flipper , multiplied by the number of times that the letter appears in the puzzle .
Calling a correct letter keeps the wheel in the contestant 's control , allowing the contestant to spin again , buy a vowel for a flat rate of $ 250 , or attempt to solve the puzzle .
Contestants may continue to buy vowels so long as they have enough money to keep doing so , until all of the vowels in the puzzle have been revealed .
Control passes to the next contestant clockwise if the wheel lands on Lose a Turn or Bankrupt , if the contestant calls a letter that is not in the puzzle , calls a letter that has already been called in that round , fails to call a letter within five seconds of the wheel stopping , or attempts unsuccessfully to solve the puzzle .
The only exception is the Free Play wedge , on which the contestant may call a consonant for $ 500 per occurrence , call a free vowel , or solve the puzzle , with no penalty for an incorrect letter or answer .
In the first three rounds , the wheel contains a Wild Card and a Gift Tag , while two ½ Car tags are present in rounds two and three only ( except on episodes with two - player teams ) .
The Wild Card may be used to call an additional consonant after any turn ( for the amount that the contestant has just spun ) or taken to the bonus round to call an extra consonant there .
The Gift Tag offers either a $ 1,000 credit toward purchases from , or $ 1,000 in cash courtesy of the sponsoring company .
The ½ Car tags award a car if the contestant wins the round(s ) in which he or she claims both .
Unlike the other tags , the ½ Car tags are replaced in subsequent rounds unless the car is won .
A special wedge in the first two rounds awards a prize which is described by the announcer if won .
All of the tags and the prize wedge are located over the $ 500 wedges , so calling a letter that appears in the puzzle when landed upon awards both the tag / wedge and $ 500 per every occurrence of that letter in the puzzle .
The first three rounds also contain a special wedge which , if won and taken to the bonus round , offers an opportunity to play that round for $ 1,000,000 .
A contestant must solve the puzzle in order to keep any cash , prizes , or extras accumulated during that round except for the Wild Card , which is kept until the contestant either loses it to Bankrupt or uses it .
Bankrupt does not affect score from previous rounds , but it does take away the Wild Card , individual ½ Car tags , and/or million dollar wedge if any was claimed in a previous round .
Contestants who solve a round for less than $ 1,000 in cash and prizes ( $ 2,000 on weeks with two - contestant teams ) have their scores increased to that amount .
Each game also features three toss - up puzzles , which reveal the puzzle one random letter at a time , and award cash to whoever rings in with the right answer .
The first puzzle , worth $ 1,000 , determines who the host interviews first ; the second , worth $ 2,000 , determines who spins first in round 1 ; and the third , worth $ 3,000 , determines who starts round 4 .
Contestants may only ring in once for each toss - up puzzle , and no cash is awarded if all three contestants fail to solve the puzzle , or if the last letter of the puzzle is revealed .
In this case , the contestant closest to the host goes first .
In addition to the toss - ups , each game has a minimum of four rounds , with more played if time permits .
Rounds 2 and 3 are respectively started by the next two contestants clockwise from the contestant who began round 1 .
Round 2 features two " mystery wedges .
" Calling a correct letter after landing upon one offers the contestant the chance to accept its face value of $ 1,000 per letter , or forfeit that amount to flip over the wedge and see whether its reverse side contains a $ 10,000 cash prize or Bankrupt .
Once either mystery wedge is flipped over , the other becomes a standard $ 1,000 space and can not be flipped .
Round 3 is a prize puzzle , which offers a prize ( usually a trip ) to the contestant who solves it .
Starting with season 31 in 2013 , an " Express " wedge is also placed on the wheel in round 3 .
A contestant who lands on this space and calls a consonant that appears in the puzzle receives $ 1,000 per appearance .
The contestant can then either " pass " and continue the round normally , or " play " and keep calling consonants for $ 1,000 each ( without spinning ) and buying vowels for $ 250 .
The Express play ends when the contestant either calls an incorrect letter ( which has the same effect as landing on a Bankrupt wedge ) or solves the puzzle .
The final round is always played at least in part in a " speed - up " format , in which the host spins the wheel ; each consonant in that round is worth the value at the red contestant 's arrow plus $ 1,000 .
Vowels do not add or deduct money from the contestants ' scores in the speed - up round .
The contestant in control calls one letter , and if it appears in the puzzle , the contestant is given three seconds to attempt to solve .
Play proceeds clockwise , starting with the contestant who was in control at the time of the final spin , until the puzzle is solved .
The three - second timer does not begin until the hostess has revealed all instances of a called letter and moved aside from the puzzle board , and the contestant may offer multiple guesses on his / her turn .
After the speed - up round , the contestant with the highest total winnings wins the game and advances to the bonus round .
Contestants who did not solve any puzzles are awarded a consolation prize of $ 1,000 ( or $ 2,000 on weeks with two - contestant teams ) .
If a tie for first place occurs after the speed - up round , an additional toss - up puzzle is played between the tied contestants .
The contestant who solves the toss - up puzzle wins $ 1,000 and advances to the bonus round .
BONUS ROUND Section::::Bonus round .
As of season 35 , the winning contestant chooses one of three puzzle categories before the round begins ( prior to season 35 , the category and puzzle were predetermined ) .
After doing so , the contestant spins a smaller wheel with 24 envelopes to determine the prize .
The puzzle is revealed , as is every instance of the letters R , S , T , L , N , and
E. The contestant provides three more consonants ( four
if he /
she is holding the Wild Card ) and one more vowel .
After any instances of those letters are revealed , the contestant has 10 seconds to solve the puzzle .
The contestant can offer multiple guesses , as long as the contestant begins the correct answer before time expires .
Whether or not the contestant solves the puzzle , the host opens the envelope at the end of the round to reveal the prize at stake .
Prizes in the bonus round include various cash amounts ( with the lowest being the season number multiplied by $ 1,000 ) , a vehicle ( or two vehicles during weeks with two - contestant teams ) , and a top prize of $ 100,000 .
If the contestant has the Million Dollar Wedge , the $ 100,000 envelope is replaced with a $ 1,000,000 envelope .
The $ 1,000,000 prize has been awarded three times : to Michelle Loewenstein ( October 14 , 2008 ) , Autumn Erhard ( May 30 , 2013 ) , and Sarah Manchester ( September 17 , 2014 ) .
Contestants who win the $ 1,000,000 may receive it in installments over 20 years , or in a lump sum of that amount 's present value .
If the contestant did not land on the $ 1,000,000 , the host reveals the location of the envelope on the prize wheel after the bonus round .
PREVIOUS RULES
Section::::Previous rules .
Originally , after winning a round , contestants spent their winnings on prizes that were presented onstage .
At any time during a shopping round , most often if the contestant did not have enough left to buy another prize , a contestant could choose to put his or her winnings on a gift certificate , or he or she could put the winnings " on account " for use in a later shopping round .
However , a contestant lost any money on account by landing on Bankrupt or failing to claim it by not winning subsequent rounds .
The shopping element was eliminated from the syndicated version on the episode that aired October 5 , 1987 , both to speed up gameplay and to alleviate the taxes paid by contestants .
However , the network version continued to use the shopping element until the end of its first NBC run on June 30 , 1989 .
Before the introduction of toss - up puzzles at the start of the 18th syndicated season in 2000 , the contestant at the red arrow always started round 1 , with the next contestant clockwise starting each subsequent round .
In addition , if a tie for first place occurred , an additional speed - up round was played between the tied contestants for the right to go to the bonus round .
The wheel formerly featured a Free Spin wedge , which automatically awarded a token that the contestant could turn in after a lost turn to keep control of the wheel .
It was replaced in 1989 with a single Free Spin token placed over a selected cash wedge .
Free Spin was retired , and Free Play introduced , at the start of the 27th syndicated season in 2009 .
Between September 16 , 1996 and the end of season 30 in 2013 , the show featured a progressive Jackpot wedge , which had been in several different rounds in its history .
The jackpot started at $ 5,000 and had the value of every spin within the round added to it .
To claim the jackpot , a contestant had to land on the wedge , call a correct letter , and solve the puzzle all in the same turn .
In later years , it also offered $ 500 per correct letter and $ 500 to the jackpot , regardless of whether or not it was won in that turn .
The network version allowed champions to appear for up to five days originally , which was later reduced to three .
The syndicated version , which originally retired contestants after one episode , adopted the three - day champion rule at the start of the seventh season in 1989 .
In 1996 , this was changed to have the top three winners from the week 's first four shows returned to compete in the " Friday Finals " .
When the jackpot wedge was introduced , it began at $ 10,000 instead of $ 5,000 on Fridays .
The rules allowing returning champions were eliminated permanently beginning with the syndicated episode aired September 21 , 1998 , and contestants appear only on a single episode , reverting to the pre-1989 rules .
Before December 1981 , the show did not feature a bonus round .
Under the bonus round 's original rules , no letters were provided automatically .
The contestant asked for five consonants and a vowel , and then had fifteen seconds to attempt solving the puzzle .
Also , bonus prizes were selected by the contestant at the start of the round .
The current time limit and rules for letter selection were introduced on October 3 , 1988 .
Starting on September 4 , 1989 , the first episode of the seventh syndicated season , bonus prizes were selected by the contestant choosing from one of five envelopes labeled W , H , E , E , and L. One prize was always $ 25,000 in cash , and the rest were changed weekly .
Any prize that was won was taken out of rotation for the rest of the week .
During seasons 16 through 18 ( 1998–2001 ) , the $ 25,000 remained in - place the entire week of shows regardless if it was won .
At the start of season 19 on September 3 , 2001 , there were three car envelopes and two $ 25,000 envelopes , which were available the entire week of shows .
These envelopes were replaced with the bonus wheel on October 22 , 2001 .
CONCEPTION AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Conception and development .
Merv Griffin conceived Wheel of Fortune just as the original version of Jeopardy ! ,
another show he had created , was ending its 11-year run on NBC with Art Fleming as its host .
Griffin decided to create a Hangman - style game after recalling long car trips as a child , on which he and his sister played Hangman .
After he discussed the idea with Merv Griffin Enterprises ' staff , they thought that the idea would work as a game show if it had a " hook " .
He decided to add a roulette - style wheel because he was always " drawn to " such wheels when he saw them in casinos .
He and MGE 's then - president Murray Schwartz consulted an executive of Caesars Palace to find out how to build such a wheel .
When Griffin pitched the idea for the show to Lin Bolen , then the head of NBC 's daytime programming division , she approved , but wanted the show to have more glamour to attract the female audience .
She suggested that Griffin incorporate a shopping element into the gameplay , and so , in 1973 , he created a pilot episode titled Shopper 's Bazaar , with Chuck Woolery as host and Mike Lawrence as announcer .
The pilot started with the three contestants being introduced individually , with Lawrence describing the prizes that they chose to play for .
The main game was played to four rounds , with the values on the wheel wedges increasing after the second round .
Unlike the show it evolved into , Shopper 's Bazaar had a vertically mounted wheel , which was spun automatically rather than by the contestants .
This wheel lacked the Bankrupt wedge and featured a wedge where a contestant could call a vowel for free , as well as a " Your Own Clue " wedge that allowed contestants to pick up a rotary telephone and hear a private clue about the puzzle .
At the end of the game , the highest - scoring contestant played a bonus round called the " Shopper 's Special " where all the vowels in the puzzle were already there , and the contestant had 30 seconds to call out consonants in the puzzle .
Edd Byrnes , an actor from 77 Sunset Strip , served as host for the second and third pilots , both titled Wheel of Fortune .
These pilots were directed by Marty Pasetta , who gave the show a " Vegas " feel that more closely resembled the look and feel that the actual show ended up having , a wheel that was now spun by the contestants themselves , and a lighted mechanical puzzle board with letters that were now manually turnable .
Showcase prizes on these pilots were located behind the puzzle board , and during shopping segments a list of prizes and their price values scrolled on the right of the screen .
By the time production began in December 1974 , Woolery was selected to host , the choice being made by Griffin after he reportedly heard Byrnes reciting " A - E - I - O - U " to himself in an effort to remember the vowels .
Susan Stafford turned the letters on Byrnes ' pilot episodes , a role that she also held when the show was picked up as a series .
PERSONNEL HOSTS AND HOSTESSES Section::::Personnel .
Section::::Hosts and hostesses .
The original host of Wheel of Fortune was Chuck Woolery , who hosted the series from its 1975 premiere until December 25 , 1981 , save for one week in August 1980 when Alex Trebek hosted in his place .
Woolery 's departure came over a salary dispute with show creator Merv Griffin , and his contract was not renewed .
On December 28 , 1981 , Pat Sajak made his debut as the host of Wheel .
Griffin said that he chose Sajak for his " odd " sense of humor .
NBC president and CEO Fred Silverman objected as he felt Sajak , who at the time of his hiring was the weatherman for KNBC - TV , was " too local " for a national audience .
Griffin countered by telling Silverman he would stop production if Sajak was not allowed to become host , and Silverman acquiesced .
Sajak hosted the daytime series until January 9 , 1989 , when he left to host a late - night talk show for CBS .
Rolf Benirschke , a former placekicker in the National Football League , was chosen as his replacement and hosted for a little more than five months .
Benirschke 's term as host came to an end due to NBC 's cancellation of the daytime Wheel after fourteen years , with its final episode airing on June 30 , 1989 .
When the newly formatted daytime series returned on CBS on July 17 , 1989 , Bob Goen became its host .
The daytime program continued for a year and a half on CBS , then returned to NBC on January 14 , 1991 and continued until September 20 , 1991 when it was cancelled for a second and final time .
Susan Stafford was the original hostess , serving in that role from the premiere until October 1982 .
Stafford was absent for two extended periods , once in 1977 after fracturing two vertebrae in her back and once in 1979 after an automobile accident .
During these two extended absences , former Miss USA Summer Bartholomew was Stafford 's most frequent substitute , with model Cynthia Washington and comedian Arte Johnson also filling in for Stafford .
After Stafford left to become a humanitarian worker , over two hundred applicants signed up for a nationwide search to be her replacement .
Griffin eventually narrowed the list to three finalists , which consisted of Summer Bartholomew , former Playboy centerfold Vicki McCarty , and Vanna White .
Griffin gave each of the three women an opportunity to win the job by putting them in a rotation for several weeks after Stafford 's departure .
In December 1982 , Griffin named White as Stafford 's successor , saying that he felt she was capable of activating the puzzle board letters ( which is the primary role of the Wheel hostess ) better than anyone else who had auditioned .
White became highly popular among the young female demographic , and also gained a fanbase of adults interested in her daily wardrobe , in a phenomenon that has been referred to as " Vannamania " .
White remained on the daytime series for the rest of the time it was on the air .
Sajak and White have starred on the syndicated version continuously as host and hostess , respectively , since it began , except for very limited occasions .
During two weeks in January 1991 , Tricia Gist , the girlfriend and future wife of Griffin 's son Tony , filled in for White when she and her new husband , restaurateur George San Pietro , were honeymooning .
Gist returned for the week of episodes airing March 11 through 15 , 1991 , because White had a cold at the time of taping .
On an episode in November 1996 , when Sajak proved unable to host the bonus round segment because of laryngitis , he and White traded places for that segment .
On the March 4 , 1997 episode , Rosie O'Donnell co - hosted the third round with White after O'Donnell 's name was used in a puzzle .
On April 1 , 1997 , Sajak and Alex Trebek traded jobs for the day .
Sajak hosted that day 's edition of Jeopardy !
in place of Trebek , who presided over a special two - contestant Wheel celebrity match between Sajak and White , who were playing for the Boy Scouts of America and the American Cancer Society , respectively ; Lesly Sajak , Pat 's wife , was the guest hostess for the day .
In January and February 2011 , the show held a " Vanna for a Day " contest in which home viewers submitted video auditions to take White 's place for one episode , with the winner determined by a poll on the show 's website ; the winner of this contest , Katie Cantrell of Wooster , Ohio ( a student at the Savannah College of Art and Design ) , took White 's place for the second and third rounds on the episode that aired March 24 , 2011 .
ANNOUNCERS Section::::Announcers .
Charlie O'Donnell was the program 's first and longest tenured announcer .
In 1980 , NBC was discussing cancelling Wheel and O'Donnell agreed to take the position as announcer on The Toni Tennille Show .
The network decided against the cancellation but O'Donnell decided to honor his commitment and left the series .
His replacement was Jack Clark , who added the syndicated series to his responsibilities when it premiered in 1983 and announced for both series until his death in July 1988 .
Los Angeles radio personality M. G. Kelly was Clark 's replacement , starting on the daytime series in August 1988 and on the syndicated series when its new season launched a month later .
Kelly held these positions until O'Donnell was able to return to the announcer position , doing so after his duties with Barris Industries came to an end at the end of the 1988–89 television season .
O'Donnell remained with the series until shortly before his death in November 2010 .
Don Pardo , Don Morrow , and Johnny Gilbert have occasionally served as substitute announcers .
After O'Donnell 's death , the producers sought a permanent replacement , and a series of substitutes filled out the rest of the season , including Gilbert , John Cramer , Joe Cipriano , Rich Fields , Lora Cain and Jim Thornton .
For the show 's twenty - ninth season , which began in 2011 , Thornton was chosen to be the new announcer for Wheel , and has been with the show ever since .
PRODUCTION STAFF Section::::Production staff .
Wheel of Fortune typically employs a total of 100 in - house production personnel , with 60 to 100 local staff joining them for those episodes that are taped on location .
Griffin was the executive producer of the network version throughout its entire run , and served as the syndicated version 's executive producer until his retirement in 2000 .
Since 1999 , the title of executive producer has been held by Harry Friedman , who had shared his title with Griffin for his first year , and had earlier served as a producer starting in 1995 .
John Rhinehart was the program 's first producer , but departed in August 1976 to become NBC 's West Coast Daytime Program Development Director .
Afterwards , his co - producer , Nancy Jones , was promoted to sole producer , and served as such until 1995 , when Friedman succeeded her .
In the 15th syndicated season in 1997 , Karen Griffith and Steve Schwartz joined Friedman as producers .
They were later promoted to supervising producers , with Amanda Stern occupying Griffith 's and Schwartz 's former position .
The show 's original director was Jeff Goldstein , who was succeeded by Dick Carson ( a brother of Johnny Carson ) in 1978 .
Mark Corwin , who had served as associate director under Carson , took over for him upon his retirement at the end of the 1998–99 season , and served as such until he himself died in July 2013 ( although episodes already taped before his death continued airing until late 2013 ) .
Jeopardy !
director Kevin McCarthy , Corwin 's associate director Bob Cisneros , and Wheel and Jeopardy !
technical director Robert Ennis filled in at various points until Cisneros became full - time director in November 2013 .
Ennis returned as guest director for the weeks airing October 13 through 17 and November 17 through 21 , 2014 , as Cisneros was recovering from neck surgery at the time of taping .
With the start of the 33rd season on September 14 , 2015 , Ennis was promoted to full - time director .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Wheel of Fortune is owned by Sony Pictures Television ( previously known as Columbia TriStar Television , the successor company to original producer Merv Griffin Enterprises ) .
The production company and copyright holder of all episodes to date is Califon Productions , Inc. , which like SPT has Sony Pictures for its active registered agent , and whose name comes from a New Jersey town where Griffin once owned a farm .
The rights to distribute the show worldwide are owned by CBS Television Distribution , into which original distributor King World Productions was folded in 2007 .
The show was originally taped in Studio 4 at NBC Studios in Burbank .
Upon NBC 's 1989 cancellation of the network series , production moved to Studio 33 at CBS Television City in Los Angeles , where it remained until 1995 .
Since then , the show has occupied Stage 11 at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City .
Some episodes are also recorded on location , a tradition which began with two weeks of episodes taped at Radio City Music Hall in late 1988 .
Recording sessions usually last for five or six episodes in one day .
SET Section::::Set .
Various changes have been made to the basic set since the syndicated version 's premiere in 1983 .
In 1996 , a large video display was added center stage , which was then upgraded in 2003 as the show began the transition into high - definition broadcasting .
In the mid-1990s , the show began a long - standing tradition of nearly every week coming with its own unique theme .
As a result , in addition to its generic design , the set also uses many alternate designs , which are unique to specific weekly sets of themed programs .
The most recent set design was conceived by production designer Renee Hoss - Johnson , with later modifications by Jody Vaclav .
Previous set designers included Ed Flesh and Dick Stiles .
The first pilot used a vertically mounted wheel which was often difficult to see on - screen .
Flesh , who also designed the sets for The $ 25,000 Pyramid and Jeopardy ! , designed the wheel mechanism .
Originally made mostly of paint and cardboard , the modern wheel mechanism is framed on a steel tube surrounded with Plexiglas and more than 200 lighting instruments , and is held by a stainless steel shaft with roller bearings .
Altogether , the wheel weighs approximately .
The show 's original puzzle board had three rows of 13 manually operated trilons , for a total of 39 spaces .
On December 21 , 1981 , a larger board with 48 trilons in four rows ( 11 , 13 , 13 and 11 trilons ) was adopted .
This board was surrounded by a double - arched border of lights which flashed at the beginning and end of the round .
Each trilon had three sides : a green side to represent spaces not used by the puzzle , a blank side to indicate a letter that had not been revealed , and a side with a letter on it .
While the viewer saw a seamless transition to the next puzzle , with these older boards in segments where more than one puzzle was present , a stop - down of taping took place during which the board was wheeled offstage and the new puzzle loaded in by hand out of sight of the contestants .
On February 24 , 1997 , the show introduced a computerized puzzle board composed of 52 touch - activated monitors in four rows ( 12 on the top and bottom rows , 14 in the middle two ) .
To illuminate a letter during regular gameplay , the hostess touches the right edge of the monitor to reveal it .
The computerized board obviated the stop - downs , allowing tapings to finish quicker at a lower cost to the production company .
Although not typically seen by viewers , the set also includes a used letter board that shows contestants which letters are remaining in play , a scoreboard that is visible from the contestants ' perspective , and a countdown clock .
The used letter board is also used during the bonus round , and in at least one case , helped the contestant to see unused letters to solve a difficult puzzle .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Alan Thicke composed the show 's original theme , which was titled " Big Wheels " .
In 1983 , it was replaced by Griffin 's own composition , " Changing Keys " , to allow him to derive royalties from that composition 's use on both the network and syndicated versions .
Steve Kaplan became music director starting with the premiere of the 15th syndicated season in 1997 , and continued to serve as such until he was killed when the Cessna 421C Golden Eagle he was piloting crashed into a home in Claremont , California , in December 2003 .
His initial theme was a remix of " Changing Keys " , but by the 18th syndicated season ( 2000–01 ) , he had replaced it with a composition of his own , which was titled " Happy Wheels " .
Since 2006 , music direction has been handled by Frankie Blue and John Hoke .
Themes they have written for the show include a remix of " Happy Wheels " and an original rock - based composition .
In addition to " Changing Keys " , Griffin also composed various incidental music cues for the syndicated version which were used for announcements of prizes in the show 's early years .
Among them were " Frisco Disco " ( earlier the closing theme for a revival of Jeopardy !
which aired in 1978 and 1979 ) , " A Time for Tony " ( whose basic melody evolved into " Think ! " , the longtime theme song for Jeopardy ! )
, " Buzzword " ( later used as the theme for Merv Griffin 's Crosswords ) , " Nightwalk " , " Struttin ' on Sunset " , and an untitled vacation cue .
AUDITION PROCESS Section::::Audition process .
Anyone at least 18 years old has the potential to become a contestant through Wheel of Fortunes audition process .
Exceptions include employees and immediate family members of CBS Corporation , Sony Pictures Entertainment , or any of their respective affiliates or subsidiaries ; any firm involved in supplying prizes for the show ; and television stations that broadcast Wheel and/or Jeopardy ! , their sister radio stations , and those advertising agencies that are affiliated with them .
Also ineligible to apply as contestants are individuals who have appeared on a different game show within the previous year , three other game shows within the past ten years , or on any version of Wheel of Fortune itself .
Throughout the year , the show uses a custom - designed Winnebago recreational vehicle called the " Wheelmobile " to travel across the United States , holding open auditions at various public venues .
Participants are provided with entry forms which are then drawn randomly .
Individuals whose names are drawn appear on stage , five at a time , and are interviewed by traveling host Marty Lublin .
The group of five then plays a mock version of the speed - up round , and five more names are selected after a puzzle is solved .
Everyone who is called onstage receives a themed prize , usually determined by the spin of a miniature wheel .
Auditions typically last two days , with three one - hour segments per day .
After each Wheelmobile event , the " most promising candidates " are invited back to the city in which the first audition was held , to participate in a second audition .
Alternatively , a participant may submit an audition form with a self - shot video through the show 's website to enter an audition .
Contestants not appearing on stage at Wheelmobile events have their applications retained and get drawn at random to fill second - level audition vacancies .
At the second audition , potential contestants play more mock games featuring a miniature wheel and puzzle board , followed by a 16-puzzle test with some letters revealed .
The contestants have five minutes to solve as many puzzles as they can by writing in the correct letters .
The people who pass continue the audition , playing more mock games which are followed by interviews .
BROADCAST HISTORY Section::::Broadcast history .
Wheel of Fortune premiered on January 6 , 1975 , at 10:30 am ( 9:30 Central ) on NBC .
Lin Bolen , then the head of daytime programming , purchased the show from Griffin to compensate him for canceling the original Jeopardy !
series , which had one year remaining on its contract .
Jeopardy !
aired its final episode on the Friday before Wheel 's premiere .
The original Wheel aired on NBC , in varying time slots between 10:30 am and noon , until June 30 , 1989 .
Throughout that version 's run , episodes were generally 30 minutes in length , except for six weeks of shows aired between December 1975 and January 1976 which were 60 minutes in length .
NBC announced the cancellation of the show in August 1980 , but it stayed on the air following a decision to cut the duration of The David Letterman Show from 90 to 60 minutes .
The network Wheel moved to CBS on July 17 , 1989 , and remained there until January 14 , 1991 .
After that , it briefly returned to NBC , replacing Let 's Make a Deal , but was canceled permanently on September 20 of that year .
The daily syndicated version of Wheel premiered on September 19 , 1983 , preceded by a series of episodes taped on location at the Ohio State Fair and aired on WBNS - TV in Columbus , Ohio .
From its debut , the syndicated version offered a larger prize budget than its network counterpart .
The show came from humble beginnings : King World chairmen Roger , Michael , and Robert King could initially find only 50 stations that were willing to carry the show , and since they could not find affiliates for the syndicated Wheel in New York , Los Angeles , or Chicago , Philadelphia was the largest market in which the show could succeed in its early days .
Only nine stations carried the show from its beginning , but by midseason it was airing on all 50 of the stations that were initially willing to carry it , and by the beginning of 1984 the show was available to 99 percent of television households .
Soon , Wheel succeeded Family Feud as the highest - rated syndicated show , and at the beginning of the 1984–85 season , Griffin followed up on the show 's success by launching a syndicated revival of Jeopardy ! , hosted by Alex Trebek .
The syndicated success of Wheel and Jeopardy !
siphoned ratings from the period 's three longest - running and most popular game shows , Tic - Tac - Dough , The Joker 's Wild , and Family Feud , to the point that all three series came to an end by the fall of 1986 .
At this point , Wheel had the highest ratings of any syndicated television series in history , and at the peak of the show 's popularity , over 40 million people were watching five nights per week .
The series , along with companion series Jeopardy ! , remained the most - watched syndicated program in the United States until dethroned by Judge Judy in 2011 .
The program has become America 's longest - running syndicated game show and its second - longest in either network or syndication , second to the version of The Price Is Right which began airing in 1972 .
The syndicated Wheel has become part of the consciousness of over 90 million Americans , and awarded a total of over $ 200 million in cash and prizes to contestants .
The popularity of Wheel of Fortune has led it to become a worldwide franchise , with over forty known adaptations in international markets outside the United States .
Versions of the show have existed in such countries as Australia , Denmark , France , , Italy , Malaysia , New Zealand , the Philippines , Poland , Russia , Spain , United Kingdom and Vietnam ( Chiec Non Ky Dieu ) .
The American version of Wheel has honored its international variants with an occasional theme of special weeks known as " Wheel Around the World " , the inaugural episode of which aired when the 23rd syndicated season premiered on September 12 , 2005 .
Between September 1997 and January 1998 , CBS and Game Show Network concurrently aired a special children 's version of the show titled Wheel 2000 .
It was hosted by David Sidoni , with Tanika Ray providing voice and motion capture for a virtual reality hostess named " Cyber Lucy " .
Created by Scott Sternberg , the spin - off featured special gameplay in which numerous rules were changed .
For example , the show 's child contestants competed for points and prizes instead of cash , with the eventual winner playing for a grand prize in the bonus round .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Wheel of Fortune has long been one of the highest - rated programs on U.S. syndicated television .
It was the highest - rated show in all of syndication before it was dethroned by Two and a Half Men in the 28th season ( 2010–11 ) .
The syndicated Wheel shared the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Game / Audience Participation Show with Jeopardy !
in 2011 , and Sajak won three Daytime Emmys for Outstanding Game Show Host — in 1993 , 1997 , and 1998 .
In a 2001 issue , TV Guide ranked Wheel number 25 among the 50 Greatest Game Shows of All Time , and in 2013 , the magazine ranked it number 2 in its list of the 60 greatest game shows ever , second only to Jeopardy !
In August 2006 , the show was ranked number 6 on GSN 's list of the 50 Greatest Game Shows .
Wheel was the subject of many nominations in GSN 's Game Show Awards special , which aired on June 6 , 2009 .
The show was nominated for Best Game Show , but lost to Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader ? ; Sajak and White were nominated for Best Game Show Host , but lost to Deal or No Deals Howie Mandel ; and O'Donnell was considered for Best Announcer but lost to Rich Fields from The Price
Is Right .
One of the catchphrases uttered by contestants , " I 'd like to buy a vowel " , was considered for Favorite Game Show Catch Phrase , but lost to " Come on down ! " , the announcer 's catchphrase welcoming new contestants to Price .
The sound effect heard at the start of a new regular gameplay round won the award for Favorite Game Show Sound Effect .
The sound heard when the wheel lands on Bankrupt was also nominated .
Despite having been retired from the show for nearly a decade by that point , " Changing Keys " was nominated for Best Game Show Theme Song .
However , it lost to its fellow Griffin composition , " Think ! "
from Jeopardy !
A hall of fame honoring Wheel of Fortune is part of the Sony Pictures Studios tour , and was introduced on the episode aired May 10 , 2010 .
Located in the same stage as the show 's taping facility , this hall of fame features memorabilia related to Wheels syndicated history , including retired props , classic merchandise , photographs , videos , and a special case dedicated to White 's wardrobe .
Two years later , in 2012 , the show was honored with a Ride of Fame on a double decker tour bus in New York City .
MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
Numerous board games based on Wheel of Fortune have been released by different toy companies .
The games are all similar , incorporating a wheel , puzzle display board , play money and various accessories like Free Spin tokens .
Milton Bradley released the first board game in 1975 .
In addition to all the supplies mentioned above , the game included 20 prize cards to simulate the " shopping " prizes of the show , with prizes ranging in value from $ 100 to $ 3,000 .
Two editions were released , with the only differences being the box art and the included books of puzzles .
Other home versions were released by Pressman Toy Corporation , Tyco / Mattel , Parker Brothers , Endless Games , and Irwin Toys .
Additionally , several video games based on the show have been released for personal computers , the Internet , and various gaming consoles spanning multiple hardware generations .
Most games released in the 20th century were published by GameTek , which produced a dozen Wheel games on various platforms , starting with a Nintendo Entertainment System game released in 1987 and continuing until the company closed in 1998 after filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection .
Subsequent games were published by Hasbro Interactive and its acquirer Infogrames / Atari ; Sony Online Entertainment , THQ and Ubisoft .
Wheel has also been licensed to International Game Technology for use in its slot machines .
The games are all loosely based on the show , with contestants given the chance to spin the wheel to win a jackpot prize .
Since 1996 , over 200 slot games based on the show have been created , both for real - world casinos and those on the Internet .
With over 1,000 wins awarded in excess of $ 1,000,000 and over $ 3 billion in jackpots delivered , Wheel has been regarded as the most successful slots brand of all time .
NOTES
REFERENCES
FOOTNOTES WORKS CITED EXTERNAL LINKS