EPISODES ( TV SERIES )
Episodes is an American - British television comedy series created by David Crane and Jeffrey Klarik and produced by Hat Trick Productions .
It premiered on Showtime in the United States on January 9 , 2011 and on BBC Two in the United Kingdom on January 10 , 2011 .
The show is about a British husband - and - wife comedy writing team who travel to Hollywood to remake their successful British TV series , with unexpected results .
It stars Matt LeBlanc portraying a satirical version of himself .
On June 10 , 2015 , it was announced that Showtime had renewed Episodes for a fifth season , which was due to begin filming in London in 2016 .
On April 11 , 2016 , Season 5 was confirmed to be the show 's last ; it consists of seven episodes and premiered on August 20 , 2017 .
The series finale , Season 5 's " Episode Seven " , aired on October 8 , 2017 .
Episodes has received positive reviews by critics , with specific praise being given to the performances of stars Stephen Mangan , Tamsin Greig , and Matt LeBlanc .
For his performance in the series Matt LeBlanc won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy and has been nominated for four Primetime Emmy Awards .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
After married couple Sean ( Stephen Mangan ) and Beverly ( Tamsin Greig )
Lincoln win yet another BAFTA Award for their successful British sitcom , Lyman 's Boys , they are persuaded to move to Hollywood and remake their series for an American audience .
Unfortunately , the network starts to make changes and pressures the couple into casting Matt LeBlanc in the lead role .
Sean becomes friends with Matt , while Beverly is less impressed .
Continuing changes to the scripts threaten to damage the show and other pressures result in difficulties in Sean and Beverly 's marriage .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
In May 2010 , the BBC announced that seven episodes had been ordered and that filming had begun , with James Griffiths directing .
Sean and Beverly Lincoln are played by Stephen Mangan and Tamsin Greig , who previously co - starred in the British sitcom Green Wing ( 2004–2007 ) .
Beverly was originally to be portrayed by Claire Forlani , but she left the cast in April 2010 when the series was in pre - production .
LeBlanc was to play a " larger than life version of himself " as character Matt LeBlanc .
Thomas Haden Church was also to have a role in the series as Merc Lapidus , the American television executive who commissions the remake , but he left due to scheduling conflicts , and was replaced by John Pankow .
Although the majority of the show was set in Los Angeles , it was mainly filmed in the UK , including the 103-room mansion Updown Court that Sean and Beverly Lincoln briefly stayed in .
Inserts were shot on location in LA .
LeBlanc 's Malibu mansion was also UK - based .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* Matt LeBlanc as Matt LeBlanc – a fictionalized version of himself .
Matt is a wealthy , charming , but arrogant actor , who was persuaded by the high salary to take the starring role of Coach Lyman in Pucks .
His short attention span and need for immediate gratification tends to cause problems with his relationships , especially with Sean and Beverly , but also in any long - term romance he attempts .
Matt has two sons , who spend most of their time with their mother Diane ( Fiona Glascott ) , with whom Matt has an antagonistic yet ultimately protective relationship .
* Stephen Mangan as Sean Lincoln – co - creator of Pucks .
Sean moves from London to Hollywood with wife / co - creator Beverly to adapt their award - winning show Lyman 's Boys for American audiences .
Sean initially adapts to Hollywood better than Beverly , finding it easier to bond with Matt on some level than she does .
Although he grows to loathe Hollywood and professes to want to return home , Sean stays because the paychecks are much bigger .
He has a terrible relationship with any member of his family who has been mentioned .
* Tamsin Greig as Beverly Lincoln – co - creator of Pucks .
When Beverly and Sean move to Hollywood , she is quickly overwhelmed by the new business .
Unlike Sean , Beverly struggles to adjust to life in Los Angeles – and the only person she feels close to is network executive Carol Rance ( Kathleen Rose Perkins ) , with whom she often goes hiking in Griffith Park and smokes pot .
The only thing about Hollywood which she likes is the gift baskets , because Beverly loves getting things for free , whether she wants the things or not .
* John Pankow as Merc Lapidus – the president of the network .
He purchases the American rights to Lyman 's Boys without watching it , based on the acclaim it has received , but immediately insists on major changes which ultimately have a significant impact on the quality of the show .
While he is boorish and arrogant , lies to everybody to avoid responsibility and has a very short attention span , his main quirk happens to be cheating on his blind wife with his network subordinate , Carol .
He also has a penchant for greeting friends and strangers alike with a hug .
* Kathleen Rose Perkins as Carol Rance – the network 's head of programming .
She is Merc 's second - in - command .
Carol is incredibly good at her job , but she often undermines herself professionally because she has a fetish for people who have authority over her , leading her to engage in a series of affairs with her bosses .
She becomes good friends with Beverly , with whom she often goes hiking and smokes pot .
* Mircea Monroe as Morning Randolph – the leading actress employed by the network to play Nicola McCutcheon opposite Matt 's character on Pucks !
A running gag throughout the show is that Morning 's age , while never explicitly revealed , is significantly older than her appearance suggests .
She has frequent plastic surgery to maintain the appearance of youth which she feels Hollywood insists on from actresses .
Morning perceives herself as a household name equal to Matt because she was " Kelly " on the show Kelly Girl many years ago .
She has a 19-year - old daughter , Dawn , who she pretends is her younger sister .
RECURRING CAST
* Joseph May as Andy Button ( Seasons 1–5 ) – the head of casting of the network .
By the end of Season 1 , he is fired by Merc because he likes the talking dog show Merc hates .
In Season 2 , he is re - hired when he threatens a lawsuit against the network .
* Daisy Haggard as Myra Licht ( Seasons 1–5 ) – the head of comedy of the network .
She constantly makes negative facial expressions and utters disapproving noises .
In Season 4 , she obliviously becomes pregnant and ultimately gives birth .
* Genevieve O'Reilly as Jamie Lapidus ( Seasons 1–3 ) – Merc 's third wife who is blind , but can surprisingly get around .
She is aware of Merc 's affair with Carol and eventually leaves him for Matt .
* Sophie Rundle as Labia ( Seasons 2–3 ) –
Matt 's stalker who has been stalking Matt for 15 years .
She was a Make - A - Wish child whose wish had Matt take her to Disneyland , but she survives cancer and starts stalking him , leading to him getting a restraining order against her .
Nevertheless , he has slept with her more than once .
She subsequently outgrows Matt in Season 3 .
* Fiona Glascott as Diane ( Seasons 1–5 ) –
Matt 's ex - wife who is often angry at Matt , but still feels some affection for him .
She is overprotective of their two sons .
* Michael Brandon as Elliot Salad ( Seasons 2–5 ) – the chairman of the network .
* Chris Diamantopoulos as Castor Sotto ( Seasons 3–4 ) –
Merc 's replacement as network executive .
Castor has significant psychological issues and bold ideas for changes at the network .
* Andrea Savage as Helen Basch ( Seasons 4–5 ) –
Castor 's replacement as network executive .
Helen is a lesbian who demonstrates good instincts about creative ideas , but is prone to jealousy .
* Alex Rocco as Dick LeBlanc ( Seasons 3–4 ) –
Matt 's father from whom he is estranged , although he supports him financially .
* Caroline Aaron as Linda ( Seasons 3–5 ) – Dick 's crotchety girlfriend who takes care of and lives with him .
She keeps Matt in the loop about his father , although she and Matt do n't really get along well .
* Rhoda Gemignani as Mrs. LeBlanc ( Seasons 4–5 ) –
Matt 's almost - deaf mother who requires hearing aids in order to hear better .
* Oliver Kieran - Jones as Andrew Lesley ( Seasons 1–4 ) – Sean and Beverly 's former personal assistant who becomes smug towards them due to his rapid rise in show business .
* Bruce Mackinnon as Tim Whittick ( Seasons 4–5 ) –
Sean 's former writing partner , with whom he stopped writing with after beginning a creative and romantic relationship with Beverly .
According to Beverly , Tim refers to her as Yoko Ono by somehow adding the phrase "
oh no " into their conversations .
* Nigel Planer as Sanford Shamiro ( Seasons 2–4 ) – Matt 's lawyer .
He always handles the ramifications of Matt 's actions and tends to be very frustrated with Matt as a result .
* Roger Bart as Roger Riskin ( Seasons 3–5 ) –
Matt 's agent , who generally pitches him ideas that are high - paying but humiliating .
[ NOTE :
William Hope was Matt 's agent in Seasons 1 . ]
* Andrea Rosen as Eileen Jaffee ( Seasons 3–5 ) – an agent at William Morris Endeavor who takes in Sean and Beverly as her clients .
She always goes out of her way to act on Sean and Beverly 's projects without their consent .
* Ella Kenion as Beth ( Seasons 3–5 ) –
Matt 's publicist .
She handles Matt 's public statements whenever news of Matt 's controversial actions break out .
* Geoff McGivern as Bob ( Season 4 ) – Matt 's finance manager .
He gives Matt woes whenever he calls him , with Matt knowing that it usually involves his money , yielding the two words the latter dreads the most , " It 's Bob . "
* James Purefoy as Rob ( Season 2 ) –
Morning 's younger brother , who briefly dates Beverly .
*
Scarlett Rose Patterson as Wendy ( Seasons 2–4 ) – Sean and Beverly 's monotonous personal assistant .
She never concentrates on her work and often tries to leave early .
* Sam Palladio as Stoke Stamon ( Seasons 2–4 ) – a 31-year old actor who plays the ice hockey team player Howie in Pucks !
He does well in Hollywood because he is the one " with the hair " .
* Harry McEntire as Jason Julius ( Seasons 2–3 ) – a 27-year old actor who plays the ice hockey team player Max in Pucks !
In Season 2 , he reveals to Sean and Beverly that he , Stoke and Kevin are much older than they look and that he 's entering his second marriage .
* Jacob Anderson as Kevin Garillo
( Season 2 ) – a 29-year old actor who plays the ice hockey team player Kyle in Pucks !
His character in the show has two gay fathers .
[ NOTE :
Eros Vlahos ' character in Season 1 , " Pucks !
Boy " , also has two gay fathers like Kevin , making it unclear whether or not both actors played the same character in Pucks ! . ]
* Rufus Jones as Anthony Powner Smith ( Seasons 3 & 5 ) – a British actor who initially replaces Matt in Andrew 's NBC pilot but gets temporarily paralyzed after a kickboxing accident .
* Lou Hirsch as Wallace ( Season 1 ) – the security guard at the gates of the Beverly Hills estates where Sean and Beverly live in Season 1 .
He never remembers the two and often gives them trouble in letting them inside the gates .
Fed up with his memory loss for a third time , Beverly succeeds in making a profanity - laced demand for him to open the gate .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The response of American critics was positive .
Robert Bianco of USA Today called the show " easily the best new sitcom of the season " and
The Boston Globes Matthew Gilbert said that " Each of the season 's seven half - hours is a little sliver of pleasure . "
A Boston Herald review by Mark A. Perigard was lukewarm ; he said he feared that the show would never achieve a broad audience , and David Wiegand from the San Francisco Chronicle praised the performances of the actors but felt that the series simply was not funny .
Alan Sepinwall of HitFix went further declaring the show to be one of the worst TV moments of 2011 .
The UK critics ' response to the first episode was broadly lukewarm while remaining optimistic .
More screentime for Matt LeBlanc was eagerly anticipated by some , with The Independents Brian Viner believing that this might improve the series .
The second season received positive reviews from critics .
Henry Goldblatt of Entertainment Weekly called the second season " a terrific second season of this industry - set sitcom .
"
USA Today said of the show : " As smartly written as it is played , Episodes offers the comic pleasures , not just of clashing cultures , but of contrasting comic styles .
On one side you have LeBlanc , who handles the big laughs and the broader humor , and does it so well , it serves as a reminder that he was under - appreciated during his years on Friends .
"
Ed Bark of Uncle Barky praised the season saying it was " a thoroughly entertaining romp , with the television industry as a combination Tilt - A - Whirl / merry - go - round . "
On the Firewall & Iceberg podcast Alan Sepinwall and Dan Fienberg commented on the second season , saying that the " self - congratulatory , obvious " show that is " oddly tone - deaf about the business that it was trying to satirize " is " not about anything " and " as a result is better for it , " but is still " groaningly unfunny " .
The third season received mixed reviews from critics .
Emily Nussbaum of The New Yorker gave the season a positive review , saying " It seemed doubtful that the show 's creators could keep those plates spinning for another round , but the third season introduces a fantastic new contrivance : a psychotic new network head , played by Chris Diamantopoulos . "
Brian Lowry of Variety gave the season a lukewarm review , praising Matt LeBlanc 's performance , writing : " Episodes remains distinguished , mostly , by Matt LeBlanc 's gameness in playing a jaundiced , utterly self - absorbed version of himself , the classic stereotype of a sitcom star with an oversized ego . " .
Phil Dyess - Nugent of The A.V. Club gave the season a " C+ " grade and a mixed review , writing : " It 's turned out to be a fairly tired satire of Hollywood , one that 's stayed yoked to its dubious premise . "
In the UK , episode one of the series premiered with an audience of 1.86 million , an audience share of 8.5 % .
Episode Two received 1.53 million viewers ( 7.4 % ) – and by Episode Four , viewing numbers were down to 1.09 million ( 5.3 % ) .
Episode Five saw a slight rise in viewers to 1.33 million ( 6.6 % ) , but numbers once again fell for Episode Six to 1.12 million ( 5.5 % ) and the season ended with the lowest number of viewers , 1.06 million ( 5.1 % ) , tuning in for the final episode .
The second series in the UK began with 1.34 million , audience share of 6.8 % , but by episode seven had steadily declined to 0.68 million viewers and an audience share of 3.3 % .
As in the US , the UK 's reception to the second series was positive with The Arts Desk saying " There were some very funny industry - related gags , not least network boss Merc ( John Pankow ) and his PA - cum - mistress Carol ( Kathleen Rose Perkins ) having sex on his desk while roaring the ratings figures back at one another .
The cast are excellent value but at the moment only Greig seems to be playing for genuine emotional stakes .
Portraying an exaggerated version of his on - screen persona , LeBlanc 's sweet , sex - obsessed shallowness is all that 's required , but Mangan – a terrific comic actor - seems constantly to be toying with a smirk , devaluing some of the emotional currency you sense Episodes is striving for .
Together , they 've proved they can make us laugh . "
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series premiered in Australia on Nine on July 3 , 2012 , with season two returning on September 4 , 2012 .
The first two seasons were replayed by subscription television network BBC UKTV ( as opposed to Nine which is a free - to - air network ) , premiering January 28 , 2014 .
Unlike the first two seasons which premiered in Australia on Nine , season three premiered on pay TV .
Although originally set to air on BBC UKTV , the series premiered on BBC First on September 12 , 2014 , and returned for season four on September 7 , 2015 .
On 14 November 2016 , it was reported that the fifth and final season would have its premiere on streaming provider Stan in 2017 .
This move is believed to be the result of BBC no longer being a co - producer of the series and that Stan has an output agreement with Showtime .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
+ Awards and nominations for Episodes !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Result
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media . !
DVD Name !
Ep # !
Release Date
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * for Showtime