MINOR SHERLOCK HOLMES CHARACTERS
This article features minor characters from the Sherlock Holmes stories by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , and from non - canonical derived works .
INSPECTOR BAYNES Section::::Inspector Baynes .
Inspector Baynes of the Surrey force appears in the two - part story " The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge " , subtitled ( i )
" The Singular Experience of Mr John Scott Eccles " , and ( ii ) " The Tiger of San Pedro " .
He is the only official policeman in the books to have ever matched Sherlock Holmes in his investigative skills .
In this story , the reader finds that despite working along different lines , they both arrive at the correct conclusion and solve the case at the same time .
In fact , Baynes had misled even Holmes as he used a method similar to one that Holmes often used when he arrested the wrong man and provided inaccurate information to the press in order to lull the true criminal into a false sense of security .
Holmes congratulated this inspector and believed that he would go far .
In Japanese puppetry Sherlock Holmes , Baynes is a pupil of Beeton School as well as Holmes and has a strong sense of rivalry against him .
Baynes speaks in a precocious manner and provokes Holmes to find the truth of the disappearance of two pupils , Garcia and Henderson .
After that , he provokes Holmes again by posting a message using the stick figures of dancing men in the school .
Yōsuke Asari voices him .
BILLY
Section::::Billy .
Billy is Holmes 's young page , appearing in the stories The Valley of Fear , " The Problem of Thor Bridge " and " The Mazarin Stone " .
In the latter he plays a significant role in helping to arrest the lead villain .
He is a more significant character in all three of Doyle 's plays featuring Sherlock Holmes , Sherlock Holmes ;
A Drama in Four Acts , The Stonor Case and The Crown Diamond , and in the spoof The Painful Predicament of Sherlock Holmes written by William Gillette .
In 1903 Charlie Chaplin began his career by playing Billy on stage in both the four - act play and Gillette 's spoof .
Billy has appeared in the films Sherlock Holmes ( 1922 ) , Sherlock Holmes ( 1932 ) and The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes ( 1939 ) .
In the episode of the TV series Sherlock entitled " The Abominable Bride " , Billy makes an appearance played by Adam Greaves - Neal , who previously played an original character named Archie in " The Sign of Three " ( though presumably Archie drew some inspiration from Billy ) .
INSPECTOR BRADSTREET Section::::Inspector Bradstreet .
Inspector Bradstreet is a detective who appears in three short stories : " The Man with the Twisted Lip " , " The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle " and " The Adventure of the Engineer 's Thumb " .
Doyle described him as " a tall , stout official ... in a peaked cap and frogged jacket " .
Sidney Paget 's illustrations for the Strand Magazine depict him with a full beard .
Beyond this little is revealed about him in the canon .
Bradstreet originally served in Scotland Yard 's E Division which associates him with the Bow Street Runners , a forerunner of Scotland Yard .
He claims to have been in the force since 1862 ( " The Man with the Twisted Lip " )
but in June 1889 Dr Watson writes he is in B Division to oversee " The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle " .
According to Sherlockian author Jack Tracy , B Division was : In " The Adventure of the Engineer 's Thumb " , he accompanied Holmes to Eyford , a village in Berkshire .
According to Jack Tracy 's The Encyclopaedia Sherlockiana , he was " assigned most likely to the central headquarters staff . "
Bradstreet is not a martinet ; in " The Man with the Twisted Lip " he could have prosecuted the false beggar , but chose to overlook this action to spare Neville St Clair the trauma of shaming his wife and children .
Bradstreet appears four times in Granada Television 's The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes : " The Blue Carbuncle " , " The Man with the Twisted Lip " , " The Adventure of the Bruce - Partington Plans " ( substituting for Inspector Lestrade , as Colin Jeavons was unavailable ) , and a cameo appearance in " The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone " .
Initially he was played by Brian Miller as a blustering , pompous plodder , then later as much more competent by Denis Lill .
He is also featured in M. J. Trow 's series The Adventures of Inspector Lestrade .
INSPECTOR GREGSON Section::::Inspector Gregson .
Inspector Tobias Gregson , a Scotland Yard inspector , was first introduced in A Study in Scarlet ( 1887 ) , and he subsequently appears in " The Adventure of the Greek Interpreter " ( 1893 ) , " The Adventure of Wisteria Lodge " ( 1908 ) and " The Adventure of the Red Circle " ( 1911 ) .
Holmes declares him to be " the smartest of the Scotland Yarders , " but given Holmes ' opinion of the Scotland Yard detectives , this is not sweeping praise .
In one of the stories Watson specifically mentions the callous and cool way in which Gregson behaved .
Gregson first appears in A Study in Scarlet and is a polar opposite of another Yarder Doyle created , Inspector Lestrade .
Lestrade and Gregson are such visual opposites , it indicates the barrier Doyle drew between them to emphasise their professional animosity .
Gregson is tall , " tow - headed " ( fair - haired ) in contrast to the shorter Lestrade 's dark " ferretlike " ( narrow ) features and has " fat , square hands " .
Of all the Yarders , Gregson comes the closest to meeting Sherlock Holmes on intellectual grounds , while acknowledging Holmes 's abilities .
He even admits to Holmes that he always feels more confident when he has Holmes 's aid in a case .
Regrettably , he is bound within the confines of the law he serves , and the delay in getting his assistance turns to tragedy in " The Adventure of the Greek Interpreter " .
He also has some regrettable human flaws .
During A Study in Scarlet he publicly laughs at Lestrade 's incorrect assumptions , even though he is also on the wrong trail .
Unlike Lestrade , Gregson overlooks the little grey areas of the law , and in " The Adventure of the Greek Interpreter " overlooks Holmes 's breaking of a window in order to enter a premises .
The life of Mycroft Holmes 's fellow lodger is saved by this minor criminal act .
Gregson last appears in Doyle 's " The Adventure of the Red Circle " in events that happen in 1902 but are not published by Dr Watson until 1911 .
In this story , Watson observes that : Our official detectives may blunder in the matter of intelligence , but never in that of courage .
Gregson climbed the stair to arrest this desperate murderer with the same absolutely quiet and businesslike bearing with which he would have ascended the official staircase of Scotland Yard .
The Pinkerton man had tried to push past him , but Gregson had firmly elbowed him back .
London dangers were the privilege of the London force .
In the 1945 film The Woman in Green , Gregson was played by Matthew Boulton .
A character named Captain Gregson of the NYPD appears in the TV adaptation Elementary , portrayed by Aidan Quinn .
Originally he was to be called Tobias Gregson , after the character in the stories , but his name was changed to Thomas Gregson .
INSPECTOR HOPKINS Section::::Inspector Hopkins .
Inspector Stanley Hopkins is a Scotland Yard detective and a student of Holmes 's deductive methods , who attempts to apply them in his own investigations .
Holmes , however , is very critical of Hopkins 's ability to apply them well , Hopkins sometimes making such mistakes as arresting a man whose notebook was found at a crime scene despite it being physically impossible for the man in question to have killed the victim in the manner that he was discovered ; after the real culprit was captured , he learns to be more open - minded in future cases .
Hopkins refers several cases to Holmes , all within the South - East areas of England and London , including : *
" The Adventure of the Golden Pince - Nez " , set in 1894 in Chatham , Kent , and * " The Adventure of Black Peter " , in Weald set in 1895 , and * " The Adventure of the Abbey Grange " , in 1897 in Chislehurst .
In the 1946 film Dressed to Kill , Hopkins was portrayed by Carl Harbord .
In the first episode of Season Two of Elementary , a " DCI Hopkins " calls Holmes to London from New York .
A female Inspector named Stella Hopkins appears in the episode of Sherlock entitled " The Six Thatchers " .
While uncertain , it can be presumed that the character drew inspiration from Inspector Hopkins .
MRS .
HUDSON Section::::Mrs .
Hudson .
Mrs. Hudson is the landlady of the house 221B Baker Street , in which Holmes lives .
Mrs. Hudson is a woman who wants the home to be clean and tidy , and often fights with Holmes for this .
Watson describes her as a very good cook ; in " The Naval Treaty , " Holmes says " Her cuisine is a little limited , but she has as good an idea of breakfast as a Scotchwoman , " which some readers have taken to mean that she is Scottish , and others that she can not possibly be .
Other than one mention of her " stately tread " , she is given no physical description or first name , although some commentators have identified her with the " Martha " in " His Last Bow " .
Watson described the relationship between Holmes and Hudson in the opening of " The Adventure of the Dying Detective " :
At one point in " A Scandal in Bohemia " Holmes calls the landlady " Mrs. Turner " , rather than Mrs. Hudson , which has caused much speculation among Holmes fans .
In film and television adaptations of the stories , Mrs. Hudson is usually portrayed as an older woman ; on rare occasions she is presented as a young woman .
In the BBC series Sherlock , she is played by actress and TV presenter Una Stubbs .
She offers Holmes a lower rent because he helped her out by ensuring the conviction and execution of her husband in Florida after he murdered two people .
In " A Scandal in Belgravia " when agents torture Mrs. Hudson trying to find a mobile phone , Sherlock repeatedly throws the agent responsible out of an upper - level window , and later states that " England would fall " if Mrs. Hudson left Baker Street .
In " His Last Vow " her name is revealed to be Martha Louise Hudson ( née Sissons ) , a semi - reformed alcoholic and former exotic dancer .
Her " pressure point " , according to Charles Augustus Magnussen 's information on her , is marijuana .
Mrs. Clara ( née Clarisa )
Hudson is a much more developed character in Laurie R. King 's series of novels focusing on the detective scholar Mary Russell .
In this alternative extension of the Holmes mythology , the retired Holmes marries his much younger apprentice and partner .
Russell and Holmes meet after the traumatic death of her family in California when she moves to the farm adjoining Holmes ' Sussex home .
Mrs. Hudson takes the young and emotionally fragile Russell under her wing , and Russell comes to think of her as a friend , a second mother , and a rock in the whirl of danger that always surrounds Holmes .
The novel The Murder of Mary Russell tells Mrs. Hudson 's biography over several generations , her meeting and bond with Holmes , and her ties to Russell .
The novel appeared after the development of Mrs. Hudson 's character in the BBC series Sherlock .
As in that rendition of the character , Mrs. Hudson has a criminal past and initially met Holmes in unsavory circumstances , in this case when she murdered her father to save Holmes ' life .
Holmes buys the Baker St. house for Hudson and establishes her as his landlady .
In typical Holmesian logic , this relieves him of the tedium of homeownership and explains both her forbearance with her tenant and his uncharacteristic affection for her .
A skilled actress and con artist , she is comfortable with the criminals who inhabit his world and enjoys playing occasional roles in investigations in which an eminently respectable older woman might be needed .
In this series , she is slightly older than Holmes ( although Russell and Watson thinks she is significantly older ) , born in Scotland , raised in Australia , and an immigrant to England .
She acted as a mother surrogate to Billy Mudd , Holmes ' first ' Irregular ' , has one sister who lived to adulthood , and one illegitimate child of her own .
Holmes states explicitly that the condition of her remaining in England and their relationship is that Hudson 's life prior to the murder is never to be mentioned , that they must never have a sexual or romantic relationship , and that she know that her history as a criminal and murderer will always be present in his mind whenever they interact .
To Holmes , Hudson represents a way of solving the ethical problem of what to do with someone who murders to prevent harm , but who may return to criminal activity .
His manipulation of Hudson removes Hudson and Mudd from lives as criminals , keeps Hudson 's infant from the workhouse , and provides Holmes with a housekeeper and intelligent ally .
A transgender Ms. Hudson appears in the 19th episode of the US series Elementary as an expert in Ancient Greek who essentially makes a living as a kept woman and muse for various wealthy men ; Holmes allows her to stay in the apartment after a break - up , and she subsequently agrees to clean for them once a week as a source of income and to prevent Holmes from having to do it himself .
In Sherlock Holmes ' War of the Worlds it is suggested that Holmes and Mrs. Hudson had a long - lasting love relationship , obvious to all but the naive Watson .
In the TMS anime series Sherlock Hound directed by Hayao Miyazaki , Mrs. Hudson is depicted as a younger woman , and a widow of a pilot named Jim .
In this incarnation , her full name is revealed to be Marie Hudson , and fitting with the theme of the characters being canines , she resembles a Golden Retriever .
She normally stays behind at 221B Baker Street , but accompanies Hound and Watson on a few cases , usually any that involve something related to flight , and is shown to be a very skilled driver , pilot , and marksman .
She is once kidnapped by Professor Moriarty and his henchmen as a part of a scheme to defeat Hound , though Moriarty vows to never involve her in his schemes after she shows him kindness during the time she 's kept as a hostage .
Additionally , it 's shown that most of the main male cast of the series ( namely Hound and especially Watson ) are attracted to her .
In the NHK puppetry Sherlock Holmes , Mrs. Hudson ( voiced by Keiko Horiuchi ) is a jolly housemother of Baker House , one of the houses of Beeton School .
She loves singing and baking biscuits and calls Holmes by his first name Sherlock .
She is particularly kind to him and Watson for Holmes saves her when she is in a predicament in the first episode " The First Adventure " based on " A Study in Scarlet " .
In the episode 11 based on " The Adventure of the Speckled Band " , she finds a big snake in the school .
Mrs Hudson is the detective in the novels Mrs Hudson and the Spirits ' Curse ( 2002 ) , Mrs Hudson and the Malabar Rose ( 2005 ) and Mrs Hudson and the Lazarus Testament ( 2015 ) , by Martin Davies , and in The House at Baker Street ( 2016 ) and The Women of Baker Street ( 2017 ) , by Michelle Birkby .
SHINWELL JOHNSON Section::::Shinwell Johnson .
Shinwell " Porky " Johnson is a former criminal who acts as informant and occasional muscle for Sherlock Holmes ( Although Watson notes that he is only useful in cases that by their nature will not go to court as he would compromise his connection to Holmes and thus render himself useless as a source if he ever had to testify as part of a case ) .
He appears in " The Adventure of the Illustrious Client " where he protects Kitty from Baron Grüner 's henchmen and provides Holmes with insight into how he might go about infiltrating Grüner 's house to acquire a certain book .
He is referred to in the radio adaptations of Sherlock Holmes , specifically in The Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes :
The Ferrers Documents where he appears to carry on with intimidation business .
The fifth season of the TV show Elementary introduced an updated version of the character ( played by Nelsan Ellis ) as both a former patient of Watson 's and ex - convict now attempting to go straight .
He became part of a complex sting operation to infiltrate and dismantle his old gang , but after Sherlock and Joan decided to trust him even after learning that he killed one of his old associates in the gang , he was killed before he could complete his assignment .
ATHELNEY JONES Section::::Athelney Jones .
Inspector Athelney Jones is a Scotland Yard detective who appears in The Sign of the Four .
He arrests the entire household of Bartholomew Sholto , including his brother and servants , on suspicion of his murder , but is forced to release all but one of them , much to his own embarrassment .
MARY MORSTAN ( LATER WATSON ) Section::::Mary Morstan ( later Watson ) .
Mary Morstan is the wife of Dr. Watson .
She is first introduced in The Sign of the Four , where she and Watson tentatively become attracted to each other , but only when the case is resolved is he able to propose to her .
She is described as blonde with pale skin .
At the time she hires Holmes she had been making a living as a governess .
Although at the end of the story the main treasure is lost , she has received six pearls from a chaplet of the Agra Treasure .
Her father , Captain Arthur Morstan , was a senior captain of an Indian regiment and later stationed near the Andaman Islands .
He disappeared in 1878 under mysterious circumstances that would later be proven to be related to the mystery , The Sign of the Four .
Her mother died soon after her birth
and she had no other relatives in England , although she was educated there ( in accordance with the received wisdom of the time about children in the colony of India ) until the age of seventeen .
Shortly afterwards her father disappeared and she found work as a governess .
Watson and Mary marry in 1889 .
Mary Morstan is mentioned in passing in " The Adventure of the Crooked Man " and " The Boscombe Valley Mystery " , but by the time of " The Adventure of the Norwood Builder " ( after Holmes 's return )
Mary Morstan has died and Watson has returned to his former lodgings in Baker Street .
Her cause of death is never mentioned .
FILM AND TELEVISION APPEARANCES Section::::Film and television appearances .
Mary Morstan has been portrayed on film and television by several actresses .
In many cases , her role is expanded to be critical in new stories , and she is often given a career of her own .
* Isobel Elsom in the 1913 silent film Sherlock Holmes Solves
The Sign of the Four * Isla Bevan in the 1932 film The Sign of Four : Sherlock Holmes ' Greatest Case featuring Arthur Wontner as Holmes * Ann Bell in The Sign of Four episode of the 1965 - 68 Sherlock Holmes series featuring Peter Cushing as Holmes and Nigel Stock as Watson * Gila von Weitershausen in the 1974 French / German film Das Zeichen der Vier * Samantha Eggar in the 1976 film The Seven - Per - Cent Solution * Cherie Lunghi in the 1983 film
The Sign of Four featuring Ian Richardson as Holmes * Yekaterina Zinchenko in the 1983 Soviet film The Treasures of Agra ( Priklyucheniya Sherloka Kholmsa i doktora Vatsona : Sokrovishcha Agry )
* Jenny Seagrove in the 1984 television series starring Jeremy Brett
* Susannah Harker in the 1991 television adaptation of the play The Crucifer of Blood , starring Charlton Heston as Sherlock Holmes .
In the play and the telefilm , Morstan is renamed " Irene St. Claire " .
Glenn Close played the character in the original 1978 Broadway cast of the play ; Susan Hampshire played her in the original 1979 London cast .
* Sophie Lorain in the 2001 film
The Sign of Four , with Matt Frewer as Sherlock Holmes and Kenneth Welsh as Dr. Watson .
In this version , Mary Morstan becomes engaged to Thaddeus Sholto rather than Dr. Watson .
* Kelly Reilly in Guy Ritchie 's 2009 film Sherlock Holmes , starring Robert Downey , Jr. as Sherlock Holmes and Jude Law as Dr Watson .
In the film , Mary is first introduced to Holmes as Watson 's fiancée rather than as a client .
Reilly reprises the role in the 2011 film .
* Amanda Abbington in the third season of Sherlock .
She is first introduced in " The Empty Hearse " when Watson is attempting to propose .
Sherlock interrupts and surprises John to let him know that he is not dead ; however , this backfires as Watson is angry with Sherlock .
Morstan likes Sherlock and agrees to talk to Watson , whom she marries , but in the following episode , she shoots Sherlock non - fatally and it is revealed she was an assassin in the past with the initials A.G.R.A ..
Sherlock admits that he had deduced some degree of her secret due to her past only extending back a few years , and muses that Watson would have only married a woman who appealed to his subconscious ' need ' for danger .
She and Watson are reconciled and they are expecting a daughter as of the last episode of the series .
In a subsequent special , Mary is shown to be less guarded about her past , using her skills from her former profession to assist Sherlock and vex Mycroft .
Her past is expanded upon in the first episode of the fourth season , The Six Thatchers .
Mary was once part of an international secret agent group , called A.G.R.A. , an acronym of the names of the members : Alex , Gabriel , Rosamund ( Mary 's real name ) and Ajay .
During a rescue mission in the British Embassy in Tbilisi , A.G.R.A. is betrayed by Vivian Norbury , secretary to Lady Elizabeth Smallwood , resulting in the deaths of half the team , the ones surviving being Mary and Ajay .
Ajay , having been tipped off by his captors , attempted to kill Mary on the belief that she betrayed the team .
Ajay is killed in the confrontation .
Mary later finds out that Vivian was the traitor and confronted her with Sherlock .
As Vivian was about to be arrested , she shot at Sherlock , but Mary dived in front of it .
John arrived and watched as she succumbed to her wound .
* Anna Ishibashi voices Mary Morstan , a pupil of Archer House in the NHK puppetry Sherlock Holmes .
In the show , her elder brother Arthur is attacked by someone and she requests Holmes to find the truth behind it .
Meanwhile , Watson falls in love with her at first sight and tries to show her his braveness .
But there is a rival called Jonathan Small who sent her a picture postcard every week before her entrance into Beeton School and writes a song
" You are My Treasure " for her .
Small joins a chorus band formed by Arthur and the Sholto twins but is betrayed by Arthur who changes the title to " Agra Treasure " and makes it his own .
* Lexi Wolfe in popular viral spoof
No Place Like Holmes by Ross K Foad , and in spin - off The Mary Morstan Mysteries .
Mary Watson appears as a detective herself in two 2010 novels by Molly Carr , The Sign of Fear and A Study in Crimson .
LANGDALE PIKE Section::::Langdale Pike .
Langdale Pike is a celebrated gossipmonger whose columns are published in numerous magazines and newspapers ( referred to as the " garbage papers " by Watson ) .
He 's introduced in " The Adventure of the Three Gables " in which he helps Holmes learn the name of the woman who led Douglas Maberley to his demise , although he does not actually appear in the story itself and is only referred to by Watson who describes Pike as " strange " and " languid " and states that all of Pike 's waking hours are spent " in the bow window of a St. James 's Street club " .
His character has however been expanded on or fleshed out elsewhere .
In William S. Baring - Gould 's biography of Sherlock Holmes , Sherlock Holmes of Baker Street , it is claimed that Pike is a college acquaintance of Holmes who encourages a young Holmes to try his hand at acting .
Here his real name is given as ' Lord Peter ' .
In Peter Ling 's radio play for the BBC Radio series , Pike 's real name is said to be Clarence Gable .
Here he is also an old school - friend of Holmes 's and is nervous of strangers and reluctant to leave his club for this reason .
In the Granada television adaptation starring Jeremy Brett as Holmes meanwhile , Pike ( played by Peter Wyngarde ) is also apparently an old university friend of Holmes 's .
Here he claims to be the benevolent counterpart of Charles Augustus Milverton ( the eponymous blackmailer of The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton ) , who suppresses more information than he exposes .
Though Watson is rather scathing about Pike , Holmes is more sympathetic towards him , suggesting that Pike is isolated , much like Holmes himself .
In the American television series Elementary , Pike appears in the first episode of the second season as one of Holmes ' sources in London ; details are not seen as Pike moves quickly when delivering a package to Watson .
" Langdale " is used as a British Intelligence codename in the first episode of the fourth series of Sherlock , along with " Porlock , " the name of another Holmes informer in the original stories .
In the NHK puppetry Sherlock Holmes , Pike is a pupil of Beeton School and assists Holmes in his investigation .
He also works as informant and is fast at his job but tight with money .
Besides he sells photographs of girls to male pupils .
Tomokazu Seki voices him .
TOBY Section::::Toby .
Toby is a dog who is used by Sherlock Holmes .
He is first introduced in The Sign of the Four and is described by Watson as an " ugly long haired , lop - eared creature , half spaniel and half lurcher , brown and white in colour , with a very clumsy waddling gait . "
Though used by Holmes , the dog belongs to Mr Sherman who keeps a menagerie of creatures at No . 3 Pinchin Lane in Lambeth .
Toby lives at No . 7 within his house .
Holmes states he would " rather have Toby 's help than that of the whole detective force in London " and requests the dog by name .
Toby also featured in the novel Sherlock Holmes vs Dracula ; or , The Adventures of the Sanguinary Count by Loren D. Estleman , when Watson and Holmes called on Toby to track Count Dracula after finding him in a meat - packing district – Dracula 's carriage having rolled through a distinctive piece of rubbish – allowing the two to track Dracula to Watson 's house in time to learn that he has abducted Mary Watson .
In the Holmes - esque
The Great Mouse Detective , Toby is a Basset Hound and a permanent resident of 221b Baker Street .
He is frequently used by Basil , the eponymous protagonist , as a means of transport and to pick up trails .
In the NHK puppetry Sherlock Holmes , Toby is kept by Sherman in a shed in Beeton School and assists Holmes in his investigation .
In the series , Sherman is a female pupil who loves animals and communicates with them , unlike Mr Sherman in " The Sign of the Four " .
Though being a pupil of Baker House , she does n't live in the house but in the shed with animals .
A dog also appears in the Guy Ritchie 's Sherlock Holmes films , but the similarity stops at it being a dog and living with Sherlock .
Its name is Gladstone , it 's clearly an English bulldog and technically belongs to Watson .
Sherlock does n't use it as a hound , but as a subject for his experiments , especially those involving narcotics of some kind .
Hence the running gag in the films " He 's killed the dog again ! "
In these respects it bears a far stronger resemblance to the dog in A Study in Scarlet upon which Holmes tests out the murderer 's poison pills ( and in so doing euthanises the hound . )
In the BBC series Sherlock , in the first episode of the fourth season titled The Six Thatchers , Sherlock Holmes requires the services of a bloodhound named Toby .
WIGGINS Section::::Wiggins .
Wiggins is a street urchin in London and head of the Baker Street Irregulars .
He has no first name in the stories .
His first appearance is in A Study in Scarlet ( 1886 ) .
The film The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes , directed by Billy Wilder , features a character called Wiggins ( played by Graham Armitage ) who is a footman at the Diogenes Club .
He delivers a note to Mycroft Holmes ( played by Christopher Lee ) and receives instructions concerning various items .
The character , credited as " Bill Wiggins " , also appears in the series three finale of Sherlock portrayed by Tom Brooke as a drug user who actually demonstrates the beginning of Sherlock 's deductive skills , and later appoints himself a " pupil " of Sherlock 's .
NON - CANONICAL Section::::Non - canonical .
Some fictional characters associated with Sherlock Holmes are not part of the Conan Doyle canon and were created by other writers .
AUGUSTE LUPA Section::::Auguste Lupa .
Auguste Lupa is the son of Sherlock Holmes and Irene Adler .
He appears in two pastiche novels by author John Lescroart , Son of Holmes ( 1986 ) and Rasputin 's Revenge ( 1987 ) .
Lupa , a secret agent during the First World War , is strongly implied to be the younger version of fictional detective Nero Wolfe in the mystery series by Rex Stout .
ENOLA HOLMES Section::::Enola Holmes .
Enola Holmes is the younger sister and youngest sibling of Sherlock and Mycroft Holmes .
She appears in the series The Enola Holmes Mysteries by Nancy Springer
and it could be inferred that she appears in the story The Copper Beeches as Violet Hunter
, however there is not enough evidence to support the idea .
Enola is a very independent and rebellious girl who likes to wear trousers while riding her bike .
She becomes a Perditorian , or finder of lost things , when her mother runs away with the gypsies and her brothers try to send her to boarding school .
Using her natural cunning which seems to be inherited by every member of the Holmes family , she creates multiple disguises on her quest to be reunited with her mother and evade her brothers .
EURUS
HOLMES Section::::Eurus Holmes .
A third Holmes sibling appears as a reference by Mycroft in the BBC Sherlock series , in the third - season episode " His Last Vow " .
At the end of the first episode of the fourth season , Mycroft requests to be put through to " Sherrinford " ( see below ) .
In the second episode of the fourth season , it was confirmed that Mycroft and Sherlock in fact have a sister named Eurus .
She had posed as Faith Smith , the daughter of serial killer Culverton Smith and gave Sherlock a piece of paper which led him to the belief that Culverton Smith was a serial killer .
Eurus had also posed as a woman on the bus who John Watson met and later texted , wanting to further their relationship .
She also posed as John Watson 's therapist and then later revealed herself to be Eurus Holmes , and at the end of the episode shoots John Watson with a handgun .
In the last episode , " The Final Problem " , it is revealed that Sherrinford is in fact a high - security complex on an island to house some of the most dangerous criminals in the world , including Eurus .
With Eurus having simply shot John with a tranquiliser dart , Sherlock and John stage a scenario where Mycroft will admit Eurus 's existence .
Mycroft explains that Eurus was the youngest child , 8 years younger than Mycroft and one year younger than Sherlock , possessing a transcendent intellect that gave her the potential to be the equivalent of Newton in her era , but she was twisted by her inability to comprehend human feeling , once slicing at her arm to see her own muscles and having to ask the meaning of ' pain ' .
After a traumatic experience where she was involved in ( or perpetrated ) the disappearance and death of Sherlock 's best friend , and then burned down the family home , she was confined as a child in a mental institution by her uncle , who took charge of her care .
The traumatized young Sherlock reinvented his friend in memory as his dog , to lessen the emotional pain , and successfully repressed any memory of her or his childhood friend well into his adult life .
Later , Mycroft assumed responsibility for Eurus , and arranged for her death to be faked to their parents , and for Eurus to be incarcerated in a highly secure prison facility .
Despite her incarceration , Mycroft occasionally consulted Eurus for her insight into potential national threats , apparently predicting the dates of three major attempted terrorist attacks on Britain after an hour on Twitter , in exchange for ' favours ' , including five minutes of unsupervised conversation with Jim Moriarty .
Having taken subtle control of her prison through her skills at manipulating others , Eurus traps Sherlock , John , and Mycroft in a game which culminates in her ordering Sherlock to shoot either John or Mycroft , only to resort to tranquilising all three of them when Sherlock threatens to shoot himself instead .
At the conclusion of the episode Eurus has trapped John in the deep well where Eurus left her first victim to drown .
Under pressure Sherlock deduces that a childish song she gave as the only ' clue ' to what she had done to his disappeared friend was actually a coded message that invited Sherlock to Eurus 's room , allowing Sherlock to save his friend by making a genuinely emotional appeal to Eurus , giving her the love of an older brother and a form of relationship he 'd denied her as a child , which convinces her to stand down .
She is returned to incarceration , with Mycroft describing her as reduced to a catatonic state , although she responds in duet when Sherlock plays the violin near her cell .
MARY RUSSELL Section::::Mary Russell .
Mary Russell is a fictional character in a book series by Laurie R. King , focusing on the adventures of Russell and her mentor and , later , husband , an aging Sherlock Holmes .
RAFFLES HOLMES Section::::Raffles Holmes .
Raffles Holmes , the son of Sherlock Holmes , is a fictional character in the 1906 collection of short stories Raffles Holmes and Company by John Kendrick Bangs .
He is described as the son of Sherlock Holmes by Marjorie Raffles , the daughter of gentleman thief A.J. Raffles .
Wold Newton family theorist Win Scott Eckert devised an explanation in his Original Wold Newton Universe Crossover Chronology to reconcile the existence of Raffles Holmes with canonical information about Sherlock Holmes and A.J. Raffles , which fellow Wold Newton speculator Brad Mengel incorporated into his essay " Watching the Detectives . "
According to the theory , Holmes married Marjorie in 1883 , and she died giving birth to Raffles later that year .
Since Raffles and Holmes are contemporaries , it has been suggested that Marjorie was actually Raffles ' sister .
Eckert further proposed in his Crossover Chronology that ( 1 ) Raffles Holmes was the same character as the " lovely , lost son " of Sherlock Holmes referred to in Laurie R. King 's Mary Russell novels , and ( 2 ) Raffles Holmes was the father of Creighton Holmes , who is featured in the collection of short stories The Adventures of Creighton Holmes by Ned Hubble .
Mengel 's online essay was revised for publication in the Eckert - edited Myths for the Modern Age : Philip José Farmer 's Wold Newton Universe ( MonkeyBrain Books , 2005 ) , a collection of Wold Newton essays by Farmer and several other " post - Farmerian " contributors , authorised by Farmer as an extension of his Wold Newton mythos .
He does not appear or is ever mentioned in any of the original stories of Sherlock Holmes and is not a creation of Doyle .
SHERRINFORD HOLMES Section::::Sherrinford Holmes .
Sherrinford Holmes is a proposed elder brother of Sherlock Holmes and Mycroft Holmes .
His name is taken from early notes as one of those considered by Arthur Conan Doyle for his detective hero before settling on " Sherlock Holmes " .
The name is used of Holmes by Stamford in the 1954 radio show ' Dr Watson Meets Sherlock Holmes ' as he attempts to remember Holmes ' first name .
He was first proposed by William S. Baring - Gould who wrote in his fictional biography Sherlock Holmes of Baker Street ( 1962 ) that Sherrinford was the eldest brother of Sherlock Holmes .
Holmes once stated that his family were country squires , which means that the eldest brother would have to stay to manage the estate .
If Mycroft were the eldest , he could not play the role he does in four stories of the Sherlock Holmes canon , so Sherrinford frees them both .
This position is strengthened by the fact that Mycroft 's general position as a senior civil servant was a common choice among the younger sons of the gentry .
The character ( as " Sherringford " ) appears along with his brothers in the Virgin New Adventures Doctor
Who novel All - Consuming Fire by Andy Lane , where he is revealed to be the member of a cult worshiping an alien telepathic slug that is mutating him and his followers into an insect - like form ; the novel culminates with Holmes being forced to shoot his brother to save Watson .
He also appears , accused of a murder that Sherlock must find him innocent of , in the Call of Cthulhu roleplaying game adventure
The Yorkshire Horrors .
Sherrinford also appears in the Italian comic series Storie da Altrove ( a spin - off of Martin Mystère ) as the eldest brother , born nine years before him , of Sherlock himself .
SEE ALSO
* List of detectives , constables , and agents in Sherlock Holmes REFERENCES