DOUBLE DOWN ( SANDWICH )
The Double Down is a dish offered by Kentucky Fried Chicken ( KFC ) restaurants where a " sandwich " is formed by two pieces of fried chicken rather than the more usual halves of a bread roll .
The Double Down contains bacon , cheese , and The Colonel 's secret sauce between two pieces of fried chicken fillet .
Variants offered by KFC have included grilled instead of fried chicken fillets and fillets with Zinger spicy coating .
HISTORY
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::History .
Section::::Africa .
Section::::South Africa .
KFC South Africa premiered the Double Down in March 2013 .
To obtain its halal certification , the bacon is replaced with a slice of processed smoked chicken .
ASIA INDIA Section::::Asia .
Section::::India .
On October 2017 , the burger was unveiled as a secret burger for the first week and was available for purchase for a certain number of invitees and their friends as a part of a promotion .
In another week , the burger was unveiled to be " Double Down " burger and was available for purchase for everyone for limited time .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
On February 2 , 2012 , the Double Down went on sale in Japan for a limited time as the Chicken Fillet Double .
It returned in November 1 , 2018 as The Double .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
KFC Singapore launched the Zinger Double Down on April 16 , 2012 .
Instead of regular bacon , the Singapore version uses turkey bacon to conform to halal standards .
The most recent release of the Double Down includes a Hawaiian version , with a pineapple slice and BBQ sauce included .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
KFC Malaysia introduced the Double Down on September 25 , 2012 .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
In November 2010 , the Double Down was launched in select branches in the Philippines , the first in Asia .
Nearly one year later , in October 2011 , KFC Philippines replaced it with the Zinger Double Down , with a spicy flavor and crunchy skin .
The product was discontinued in the Philippines in mid-2012 , but reintroduced in January 2014 together with a smaller version , the Junior Double Down .
It was discontinued yet again in May 2014 , but relaunched in January 2015 for a limited time only , together with a new variation , the Double Down Dog .
In January 2016 , another new variation was introduced , the Double Down G which contains " crispy fried spinach " with a " secret green sauce " .
SOUTH KOREA Section::::South Korea .
The Zinger Double Down was sold from December 1 , 2012 through March 1 , 2013 , and re - released in October 2013 along with a variant named Zinger Double Down MAXX with added hash brown patty and salsa .
Both the Zinger Double Down and the Double Down MAXX were later added as a year - round menu in March 2014 , and in April the original Double Down was also made available .
In October 2014 , the Zinger Double Down KING was announced , with a beef patty and barbecue sauce in the middle of two Zinger patties .
EUROPE
DENMARK
Section::::Europe .
Section::::Denmark .
The Double Down was introduced in Denmark in January 2017 .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
The Double Down was introduced in Germany and was available until March 2017 .
The German version contains two chicken strips , bacon , Monterey Jack and the special Double Down Sauce by KFC .
FRANCE Section::::France .
KFC released the Double Down into French markets in October 2014 as a limited edition product .
It was then re - released in two flavours - Original Bacon and Spicy Zinger - in August 2015 .
And again with the 3rd flavor " Black Pepper " in September 2017 .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
In March 2016 , the Double Down was introduced in Spain .
The Spanish version has bacon , cheddar cheese and barbecue sauce in the two pieces of chicken fillet .
Its advertising slogan is " No apto para cobardes " ( " Not for cowards " ) .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The Double Down was released in the UK on 9 October 2017 , following a launch a few days before , remaining available for six weeks until November 21st .
NORTH AMERICA
CANADA Section::::North America .
Section::::Canada .
On October 18 , 2010 , KFC restaurants in Canada began selling the fried version of the Double Down for a limited time .
It was reported that on its launch date , a KFC in Victoria , British Columbia was sold out of the Double
Down by as early as 2
p.m. In French Canada , it is known as " Coup Double " , roughly translated as " Double Punch " .
The Double Down was discontinued in Canada on November 14 , 2010 , but on 25 May 2011 , KFC announced it was returning at least temporarily .
In 2012 the Double Down returned to Canada , again for a limited time .
In August 2015 , KFC Canada finally brought the Double Down back again after a three - year absence .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The KFC Double Down was initially test marketed in Omaha , Nebraska , and Providence , Rhode Island .
KFC announced it in an April Fools ' Day press release , and launched the item in the United States on April 12 , 2010 .
It has been promoted via billboards and a TV commercial that says it has " so much 100 percent premium chicken , we did n't have room for a bun . "
Originally a limited time offer that was supposed to end on May 23 , 2010 , KFC reversed course on May 19 , 2010 , stating that the item would remain available indefinitely .
The chain cited its popularity in overall sales , as well as videos of people eating the Double Down becoming a YouTube sensation .
Stephen Colbert ate one on The Colbert Report , spurring the item 's popularity even more .
OCEANIA AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND Section::::Oceania .
Section::::Australia and New Zealand .
KFC Australia started selling the Double Down ( renamed The Double ) with the tagline " make time for mantime " on March 30 , 2011 , for a limited time only .
The Double was successful in Australia , although it was criticized for being unhealthy .
KFC Australia announced via their Facebook page that if they reached 500,000 likes , they would bring the Double back to Australian stores for a limited time period of two days .
The page reached 500,000 likes on June 15 , 2012 , and KFC announced that the Double would go on sale on June 27 and 28 .
The Double reappeared on menus in December 2012 , again for a limited time only .
From May 10 , 2011 , the Double Down was available in New Zealand for an initially limited period of five weeks .
The Double Down was also brought back for one day only on March 31 , 2012 exclusively in Dunedin to raise funds for the Otago Rugby Union which faced financial difficulties in early 2012 .
On July 24 , 2012 , KFC resumed sales of the Double Down in New Zealand .
On October 28 , 2016 , KFC announced via Facebook that they would again sell the Double Down for a limited time of four weeks , as well as a new spinoff product called the Hawaiian Double ( replacing bacon with pineapple ) , commencing November 1 .
This was in response to an online campaign launched by Australian Facebook page '
Yeah
the Boys ' .
NUTRITIONAL ANALYSIS
Section::::Nutritional analysis .
NPR compared its calorie count to that of McDonald 's Premium Crispy Chicken Club Sandwich .
Both the grilled and fried Double Down products have nearly a full day 's worth of sodium according to the American Heart Association 's guidelines .
A Los Angeles Times reviewer pointed out that the grilled chicken Double Down has fewer calories and less fat than the fried chicken
Double Down ( 460 versus 540 calories , and 23 g versus 32 g fat ) but that the grilled chicken option has more sodium ( 1,430 mg versus 1,380 ) .
The L.A. Times article also noted that both Double Downs have fewer calories than Burger King 's TenderCrisp chicken sandwich , which has 800 calories .
SALES Section::::Sales .
From its April 12 , 2010 nationwide launch through early July , a KFC spokesperson reported that the chain had sold 10 million units for a total of about US$ 50 million in revenue .
An analyst said that figure accounts for 5 % of KFC 's sales in that time period , a figure insubstantial to KFC 's financial bottom line .
In Canada , the Double Down became KFC 's best - selling new menu item ever , selling over 350,000 units in less than 10 days .
Despite sales in excess of one million units , KFC Canada discontinued the Double Down in 2010 , reviving it again for a short period in 2011 .
In August 2015 , KFC Canada brought back the Double Down for a small period of time .
Sales in New Zealand were 600,000 units over its five - week promotion .
Grant Ellis , CFO of New Zealand KFC operator Restaurant Brands , said that despite these sales the Double Down " did cannibalise some of our better - margin products . "
Following the launch of Zinger Double Down in Korea , the overall sales for KFC Korea increased by 20 % .
REFERENCES