ROUND LIGAMENT PAIN Round ligament pain ( RLP ) is pain associated with the round ligament of the uterus , usually during pregnancy .
RLP is one of the most common discomforts of pregnancy and usually starts at the second trimester of gestation and continues until delivery .
It usually resolves completely after delivery although cases of postpartum RLP ( that is , RLP that persisted for a few days after delivery ) have been reported .
RLP also occurs in nonpregnant women .
The round ligament of the uterus goes from the pelvis , passes through the internal abdominal ring , and runs along the inguinal canal to the labia majora .
It is the structure that holds the uterus suspended inside the abdominal cavity .
There are at least 2 other round ligaments in the human body , the round ligament of the liver ( ligamentum teres hepatis ) and the round ligament of the head of the femur ( ligamentum teres femoris ) .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
The most common symptoms of RLP are : * Sudden pain in the lower abdomen , usually in the right side of the pelvic area that can extend to the groin .
* Shooting abdominal pain when performing sudden movements or physical exercise .
Pain is sudden , intermittent and lasts only for a few seconds .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
The pathogenesis of RLP is varied .
Although very common during pregnancy , non - gestating women can also experience RLP .
The most common causes of RLP are as follows : * RLP may be caused by a spasm or cramp when the ligament contracts involuntarily .
The ligament pulls on nerve fibers and sensitive structures of the female reproductive system .
Since the uterus tends to be oriented towards the right side of the body , the pain is also often felt on the right side .
This leads to frequent confusion with appendicitis .
*
During pregnancy , the uterus expands to accommodate the growing fetus .
This increase in size and weight of the uterus puts stress on the ligament that holds it , causing it to stretch .
During physical exertion or sudden movements , the ligament is overly stretched , causing pain .
* Varicosities , e.g. enlargement of the blood vessels of the round ligament can occur during pregnancy , causing pain and swelling .
The varicocoele starts at the veins draining the round ligament and the inguinal canal and is associated with engorgement of the veins of the ovaries and the pelvis during pregnancy .
* Endometriosis that infiltrates or borders the uterine round ligament can cause RLP in fertile , non - gestating women .
* Other pathologies that involve the uterine round ligament can cause RLP .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Abdominal pains during pregnancy may be due to various pathologies .
RLP is one of the most common and benign of these pains .
However , diagnosis of RLP is problematic .
Some of the conditions that may present symptoms similar to those of RLP are appendicitis , ectopic pregnancy , kidney stones , urinary tract infection , uterine contractions , inguinal hernia , ovarian cysts , and endometriosis .
If abdominal pain is continuous and accompanied by vaginal bleeding , excessive vaginal discharge , fever , chills , or vomiting , then it is most unlikely to be RLP and immediate consultation with a health care provider is warranted .
Physical examination , ultrasonography , and blood and urine tests may be able to pinpoint the actual cause of abdominal pain .
In some cases , however , RLP was only diagnosed during exploratory surgery .
CASE REPORTS
Section::::Case reports .
In many cases , RLP is confused with other conditions that cause abdominal pain .
Described below are some problematic diagnoses related to RLP .
RLP and appendicitis
A 22-year - old pregnant woman presenting abdominal pains was initially diagnosed with RLP and was discharged .
Subsequent symptoms and further tests revealed acute non - perforated appendicitis that required surgery .
Appendectomy was successful but premature labor occurred 7 days after discharge , leading to spontaneous abortion .
RLP and inguinal hernia Several cases of varicosity , of the round ligament during pregnancy leading to RLP have been reported although they were frequently misdiagnosed as inguinal hernia .
In one case , a woman in the 28th week of gestation developed a lump in the left pubic area .
The swelling was prominent when standing but not in the supine position and has a cough impulse .
Ultrasonography revealed varicosities on the uterine round ligament .
In another case , a woman at 22 weeks gestation was diagnosed with inguinal hernia and underwent surgery .
Explorative surgery did not locate a hernia but revealed varicosities of the round ligament .
Resection of the uterine ligament was successfully performed and no perinatal and postpartum complications were reported .
Postpartum RLP
Several cases of postpartum RLP have been reported .
In one case , a 27-year - old woman presented with abdominal pain 24 hours after normal vaginal delivery .
Another case was that of a 29-year - old woman who presented with RLP 3 days after delivery .
In both cases , initial diagnosis was inguinal hernia .
In the first case , emergency surgery did not locate any hernia but found the round ligament of the uterus to be edematous and filled with thrombosed varicose veins .
The thrombosed part was excised and the patient recovered without sequelae .
Another case report described a 37-year - old woman presenting with inguinal mass 6 days after normal vaginal delivery .
CT and MRI revealed thrombosed blood vessels along the inguinal course of the uterine round ligament that extended towards the labia majora .
RLP and endometriosis Several cases of inguinal endometriosis , that infiltrates the round ligament of the uterus have been reported in fertile , non - pregnant women .
In the majority of these cases , diagnosis was problematic .
In some cases , definitive diagnosis of round ligament endometriosis was only possible during exploratory surgery .
RLP and myoma Cases of myoma - like growth occurring on the uterine round ligament have been reported .
RLP and IVF Gonadotropin stimulation during in vitro fertilization can induce cyst development in certain parts of the female reproductive system .
A case report documented the development of a mesothelial cyst on the uterine round ligament of a woman after IVF stimulation .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Once RLP has been diagnosed , there are many ways to reduce the pain without jeopardizing the pregnancy .
* Analgesics .
Acetaminophen or paracetamol is safe to take during pregnancy , thus is the most commonly prescribed pain reliever for pregnant women with RLP .
* Heat application .
Applying a hot compress to the area of pain may give some relief .
Hot soaks and hot baths may also help .
* Modifications in movements and position .
Triggering factors that can cause RLP are sudden movements , ( e.g. sitting up and down , standing up , sneezing , coughing ) , physical exertion , and long periods in the same resting position .
A change in daily activities can help find relief and prevent worsening of the condition .
Avoid sudden movements that can cause spasms of the ligament .
When about to sneeze or cough , brace yourself by bending and flexing the hips to minimize the pull on the ligaments .
* Rest .
Resting is one of the best remedies against RLP .
When lying down , changing position slowly and regularly is recommended .
*
Physical exercises
Daily stretching exercise may be recommended by a gynecologist .
An example of such an exercise is kneeling with hands and knees on the floor , then lowering your head to the floor , and keeping your bottom up in the air .
The so - called pelvic ( hip ) tilt exercise also appears to help in reducing pain intensity and duration .
* Surgery .
In RLP pathologies involving endometriosis and ademyosis , surgery may be necessary to perform resection of the ligament or removal cysts and myoma .
REFERENCES