REFUSAL OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
In emergency medical services such as an ambulance squad , a refusal of medical assistance is the term for when a patient refuses any or all parts of medical treatment .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The refusal of medical assistance , or RMA , ensures the continuum of care that ambulance squads have a responsibility towards .
In a typical emergency call , the ambulance service will assess and transport the patient to an appropriate facility .
The ambulance squad 's duty towards the patient begins with patient contact and generally ends with transfer to the emergency department of the receiving hospital .
The call can terminate in other ways ; for example an ambulance service may cancel their own services if the patient becomes violent ( scene safety ) , if they are canceled by on - scene personnel ( such as the police or , in the case of a MICU service , the on - scene BLS EMT ) , or at the discretion of the dispatcher ( if another ambulance is better positioned to take the call ) .
In general , once patient contact has been established , the ambulance service must either transport or obtain an appropriate refusal from the patient .
TYPES Section::::Types .
There are three general types of RMA , designated by scope .
In the widest sense , the patient may even refuse to be evaluated by EMS .
Generally , however , the patient will submit to an evaluation ( consisting of vitals and an assessment ) before asking or being asked about refusal by the EMS agency .
Or a patient may refuse only specific actions , such as C - spine precautions .
USES Section::::Uses .
As policy , ambulance services are usually unable to release a patient on their own - that is , a crew is usually unable to determine that a patient is fine
( this is the job of the doctors in a hospital ) .
Unofficially , it may be obvious that a patient does not need transport - in these situations , EMS personnel may ' guide ' the patient towards an RMA .
The refusal is best suited for these situations ; for example , a minor cut or bruise or uninjured parties in a motor vehicle accident .
It can also be used where non - critical transport is advised , but it would be counterproductive to take the party by ambulance , e.g. an injured but fearful child could be comforted and transported to the hospital or doctor 's office by the parent .
In general , ambulance squads are unable to contravene the wishes of a mentally competent patient .
This may lead to situations of likely cardiac compromise , likely internal trauma , or other life - threatening situations .
However , if the patient is of sound mind , they are generally able to refuse treatment .
The EMS provider has limited options at this point , since EMS generally can not restrain and take a person involuntarily .
However , depending on local policy , the police may be able to place the patient in protective custody ( essentially arresting the person and releasing them to the EMS agency ) .
This option is not to be pursued lightly .
This is typically termed the RMA - AMA ( refusal of medical assistance against medical advice ) to differentiate it from a standard RMA ( which may be assumed to be the end to a trivial call ) ISSUES WITH REFUSAL Section::::Issues with refusal .
Most EMS providers operate on the principle of informed consent ; that is , patients must know exactly what it is they are refusing , and what the possible consequences might be , in order to make a proper decision .
This precludes parties who are intoxicated or otherwise incapable of making an informed decision , such as the mentally incompetent .
Otherwise , agencies could release someone who was not able to understand what refusing might mean to their health .
For similar reasons , minors ( those under the age of 18 ) are generally unable to refuse medical care .
In these circumstances , the crew can elect to wait for a parent or other legal guardian , who is able to .
THE REFUSAL ITSELF Section::::The refusal itself .
Ideally , the refusal is a form provided by and filled out by the agency and signed by multiple parties - usually the EMS agency itself , the patient ( or his legal proxy or guardian ) , and a witness ( ideally a police officer ) .
A copy is attached to the patient care report or otherwise secured and retained by the agency , and another copy is usually given to the patient .
The patient is advised of the risks of refusal , including the fact that their condition may worsen , and advised to call 9 - 1 - 1 or the emergency number without hesitation if they feel the need .
SEE ALSO
* Informed refusal REFERENCES