LIPID PROFILE
Lipid profile or lipid panel is a panel of blood tests that serves as an initial screening tool for abnormalities in lipids , such as cholesterol and triglycerides .
The results of this test can identify certain genetic diseases and can determine approximate risks for cardiovascular disease , certain forms of pancreatitis , and other diseases .
Lipid panels are ordered as part of a physical exam , along with other panels such as the complete blood count ( CBC ) and basic metabolic panel ( BMP )
COMPONENTS Section::::Components .
The lipid profile typically includes : * Low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) * High - density lipoprotein ( HDL ) *
Triglycerides
* Total cholesterol Using these values , a laboratory may also calculate : * Very low - density lipoprotein ( VLDL )
* Cholesterol : HDL ratio
The lipid profile tests are of 7 types :
* Total lipids * Serum total cholesterol * serum HDL cholesterol * Total cholesterol / HDL cholesterol ratio
* Serum triglycerides
* Serum Phospholipids *
Electrophoretic fractionation to determination percentage of *
( a ) Chylomicrons
* ( b ) LDL * ( c ) VLDL
* ( d ) HDL PROCEDURE AND INDICATION Section::::Procedure and indication .
Current recommendations for cholesterol testing come from the Adult Treatment Panel ( ATP ) III guidelines , and are based on many large clinical studies , such as the Framingham Heart Study .
For healthy adults with no cardiovascular risk factors , the ATP III guidelines recommend screening once every five years .
A lipid profile may also be ordered at regular intervals to evaluate the success of lipid - lowering drugs such as statins .
In the pediatric and adolescent population , lipid testing is not routinely performed .
However , the American Academy of Pediatrics and NHLBI now recommend that children aged 9–11 be screened once for severe cholesterol abnormalities .
This screening can be valuable to detect genetic diseases such as familial hypercholesterolemia that can be lethal if not treated early .
Traditionally , most laboratories have required patients to fast for 9–12 hours before screening .
However , recent studies have questioned the utility of fasting before lipid panels , and some diagnostic labs now routinely accept non - fasting samples .
Typically the laboratory measures only three quantities : total cholesterol ; HDL ; Triglycerides .
From these three data LDL may be calculated .
According to Friedewald 's equation : * LDL = Total cholesterol - HDL - Triglycerides/5 Other calculations of LDL from those same three data have been proposed which yield some significantly different results .
VLDL may be defined as the total cholesterol that is neither HDL nor LDL .
Then Friedewald 's equation mentioned above yields :
* VLDL =
Triglycerides/5
The alternative calculations mentioned above may yield significantly different values for VLDL .
IMPLICATIONS Section::::Implications .
This test is used to identify dyslipedemia ( various disturbances of cholesterol and triglyceride levels ) , many forms of which are recognized risk factors for cardiovascular disease and rarely pancreatitis .
A total cholesterol reading can be used to assess an individual 's risk for heart disease , however , it should not be relied upon as the only indicator .
The individual components that make up total cholesterol reading — LDL , HDL , and VLDL — are also important in measuring risk .
For instance , someone 's total cholesterol may be high , but this may be due to very high HDL ( " good cholesterol " ) cholesterol levels,—which can actually help prevent heart disease ( the test is mainly concerned with high LDL , or " bad cholesterol " levels ) .
So , while a high total cholesterol level may help give an indication that there is a problem with cholesterol levels , the components that make up total cholesterol should also be measured .
REFERENCES