LIST OF MBTA COMMUTER RAIL STATIONS
The MBTA Commuter Rail is the commuter rail system for the Greater Boston metropolitan area of Massachusetts .
It is owned by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority ( MBTA ) and operated under contract by the Massachusetts Bay Commuter Railroad Company ( MBCR ) .
As of the first quarter of 2013 , it was the sixth - busiest commuter rail system in the United States with an average weekday ridership of 127,500 .
There are currently 138 stations on 12 lines , with one additional station used only for special events at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough .
The system 's routes span the eastern third of Massachusetts and the northern half of Rhode Island .
They stretch from Newburyport in the north to North Kingstown , Rhode Island in the south , and reach as far west as Worcester and Fitchburg .
There are plans to expand the area covered by the Commuter Rail further into Rhode Island to the south as well as into New Hampshire to the north .
The system is split into two parts , with lines north of Boston having a terminus at North Station and lines south of Boston having a terminus at South Station .
There is no direct connection between the two stations , but travel is made possible by transferring to the MBTA 's subway system ( although this requires an intermediate transfer at either or ) or the 4 bus .
This lack of direct connection could be alleviated by the proposed ( but currently shelved )
North – South Rail Link , which would build a tunnel connecting the two terminals .
Currently , there are several extensions of the Commuter Rail system under construction or in the planning stages .
The extension of service from Providence further into Rhode Island opened to in December 2010 and to in April 2012 .
The Fairmount Line is undergoing a major rehabilitation that includes the construction of four new stations in Boston ; the first three of these opened in November 2012 and July 2013 .
Planning work on the South Coast Rail project to restore service to Fall River and New Bedford is continuing with bridge work already started , and proposed extensions of commuter rail service to Nashua , New Hampshire via the Lowell Line and Plaistow , New Hampshire via the Haverhill Line are in the planning stages .
KEY Section::::Key .
Station
STATIONS
Link BAT ( 10 , 11 )
BAT ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 4A , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 )
At :
At : GATRA ( 11 , 16 , 24 ) RIPTA ( R - Line , 50 , 5 , 56 , 57 )
Link Link
At : MWRTA ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 )
WRTA ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 11 , 14 , 16 , 19 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 33 , 42 , Paxton Shuttle )
Peter Pan Bus Lines Greyhound Lines
128BC Waltham Shuttle
MinuteVan Wachusett Mountain shuttle Logan Express MVRTA ( 41 )
Peter Pan Bus Lines Sunshine Travel bus MVRTA ( 01 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 51 , 73 , 83 )
CATA ( Yellow Line — Beverly Shuttle ) FUTURE STATIONS Section::::Future stations .
The following stations are in design or under construction : !
Station !
Line !
Connections !
City !
Fare zone !
Status !
Planned opening !
class="unsortable"Refs
FORMER STATIONS
STATIONS
DROPPED UPON START OF MBTA SUBSIDY Section::::Former stations .
Section::::Stations dropped upon start of MBTA subsidy .
When the MBTA began to subsidise commuter rail services on a line ( this happened at different times for different lines ) , service on the line often extended beyond the boundary of the MBTA 's service district at the time ; communities located outside the district could ( if they wished ) contract with the MBTA for continued commuter rail service to some or all of the stations located in the community in question .
Most of the following stations were located in out - of - district communities that either did not contract for continued service , or else paid for service to some but not all of their stations ; the remainder were stations in in - district communities which the MBTA decided to allow the railroad providing service to abandon .
( Stations to which service was later resumed are not included . ) !
Station !
Line !
City !
Date closed STATIONS DROPPED AFTER THE START OF MBTA SERVICE Section::::Stations dropped after the start of MBTA service .
The following stations had MBTA - subsidised service at one point , but are no longer served by the MBTA : !
Station !
Line !
City !
Fare zone !
Date closed REFERENCES