PHIL HARRIS ( FISHERMAN ) Phillip Charles " Phil " Harris ( December 19 , 1956 – February 9 , 2010 ) was an American captain and part owner of the crab fishing vessel Cornelia Marie , which is featured on Discovery Channel 's documentary reality TV series Deadliest Catch .
He suffered a massive stroke while offloading C. opilio crab in port at Saint Paul Island , Alaska , on January 29 , 2010 .
Despite extreme improvements in his condition , Harris died on February 9 , 2010 at the age of 53 , while suffering a pulmonary embolism in the hospital .
The episode of Deadliest Catch featuring the Captain 's death aired on July 20 , 2010 , followed by a special tribute episode .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Harris started fishing with his father at age eight and after high school began crab fishing .
He initially worked on a crab boat as an unpaid deckhand until he proved his worth .
By the time he was 21 he was one of the youngest crab fishing boat captains on the Bering Sea .
He had been captain of the Cornelia Marie for more than 20 years at the time of his death .
From 2004 and until his death , Harris and his boat were followed by an embedded film crew for the series Deadliest Catch .
The Cornelia Marie was first shown during the opilio crab portion of Season 1 , as partner ship of the F / V Maverick .
The Cornelia Marie was heavily involved in search efforts for the Big Valley after it sank .
It became a regular fixture of the show from the second season on .
Harris was thrown from his bunk during a storm in the 2008 season , and thought he had broken his ribs .
He spent several hours coughing up blood until his sons and crew finally convinced him to seek medical attention and enlisted the film crew to watch his condition .
Doctors later determined that he had suffered a pulmonary embolism .
Medical treatment for this condition prevented him from fishing for almost a year .
He returned for the opilio crab fishing season in January 2009 .
Some of Harris 's sea stories were included in the book Deadliest Catch : Desperate Hours .
In 2008 , Harris developed a line of coffees , " Captain 's Reserve " , with blends named after fishing themes such as " Harris Family Blend " and " Midnight Sunrise . "
Harris 's chain - smoking , which was frequently seen on the show , added to his health woes .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Captain Harris suffered a massive stroke during the sixth televised opilio crab season of Deadliest Catch .
He was offloading crab on January 29 , 2010 at St. Paul Island , Alaska .
He was flown to Anchorage for surgery , and was placed in an induced coma to reduce intracranial pressure and swelling .
He awoke from the coma after his condition improved .
He was squeezing hands , talking , and showing other signs of improvement .
Harris ' doctors were amazed by his extreme improvement , saying that he was making gains in a few days that usually take months for stroke victims .
However , Harris died from an intracranial hemorrhage on February 9 , 2010 .
Captain Phil Harris was cremated , and half of the ashes were buried ( in an ornately painted Harley Davidson motorcycle gas tank ) with the remains of his mother .
Harris ' family spread the remainder of the ashes at sea .
His sons Jacob and Joshua issued a statement from the Harris family , saying , " It is with great sadness that we say goodbye to our dad -- Captain Phil Harris .
Dad has always been a fighter and continued to be until the end .
For us and the crew , he was someone who never backed down .
We will remember and celebrate that strength .
Thanks to everyone for their thoughts and prayers . "
The sixth season of Deadliest Catch featured footage of Phil Harris at work for the last time .
The series began airing on the Discovery Channel on April 13 , 2010 .
A memorial service to Phil Harris was hosted by the Discovery Channel along Seattle 's waterfront on Smith Cove Cruise Terminal at Pier 91 on Friday evening , April 30 , 2010 .
This was the night before the Puget Sound 's annual Opening Day for boating season .
Phil 's sons Jake and Josh Harris spoke at this service .
A boat gave a final salute from the location where Phil 's vessel is based in Elliott Bay .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Harris was single at the time of his death , but had been married and divorced twice .
His first marriage , from 1982 to 1991 was to Mary Harris , mother of his two sons , Joshua and Jacob .
Joshua and Jacob worked on board his fishing vessel , Cornelia Marie , as deckhands .
His second marriage began January 22 , 1992 and ended in divorce in 2006 to Teres Harris .
His hometown was Bothell , Washington .
He enjoyed driving fast and owned both a Harley - Davidson motorcycle and a Chevrolet Corvette .
Besides driving fast and fishing , he also enjoyed building bird feeders .
Before his death , Phil Harris set up a coffee company called the Captain 's Reserve .
His sons Jake and Joshua are now in the process of promoting the brand and expanding the family business .
National retail expansion began January 2011 , and went global the same year .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS * Official Cornelia Marie Site * Phil Harris moments on Discovery Channel