BLUE VALENTINE ( FILM )
Blue Valentine is a 2010 American romantic drama film written and directed by Derek Cianfrance .
The film premiered in competition at the 26th Sundance Film Festival .
Derek Cianfrance , Cami Delavigne , and
Joey Curtis wrote the film , and Michelle Williams and Ryan Gosling played the lead roles as well as serving as co - executive producers for the film .
The band Grizzly Bear scored the film .
The film depicts a married couple , Dean Pereira ( Gosling ) and Cynthia " Cindy " Heller ( Williams ) , shifting back and forth in time between their courtship and the dissolution of their marriage several years later .
The film received critical acclaim and Williams was nominated for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress while Gosling received a Golden Globe nomination for best actor .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film is presented in a nonlinear narrative .
Throughout the film , the present timeline is intercut with the story of how Dean and Cindy became involved .
The following is a linear summary of the plot .
Dean is a young hopeless romantic high school dropout , working for a moving company in Brooklyn .
Cindy is an aspiring doctor studying pre - med , living with her constantly fighting parents and caring for her grandmother in Pennsylvania .
She is also dating a fellow student named Bobby .
During intercourse one day , Bobby did n't use protection causing an angered Cindy to break up with him .
Dean and Cindy meet at her grandmother 's nursing home while Dean is delivering a new resident 's furniture .
He gives her his number
but she never calls .
They coincidentally meet again on a bus and begin dating shortly afterwards .
The two fall deeply in love and soon after , a jealous Bobby finds out and beats Dean up .
Cindy discovers she is pregnant and tells Dean the baby is unlikely to be his .
At an abortion clinic , Cindy decides at the last moment to cancel the procedure .
Dean comforts Cindy and tells her he does n't mind if the child is not his and wants to begin a family with her .
Cindy and Dean get married .
Five years later , the couple lives in rural Pennsylvania with their daughter , Frankie and family dog , Megan .
Dean paints houses for a living and struggles with alcohol while Cindy is a nurse at a clinic .
Megan goes missing one day and is found dead on the road side , further straining the couple 's marriage .
After watching old family videos , Dean insists on taking Cindy out for a romantic getaway at a motel so they can have some time off from their preoccupied lives , much to Cindy 's reluctance .
At a liquor store , Cindy runs into Bobby and begins a conversation .
Cindy and Dean get into an argument in the car when she mentions seeing Bobby again .
At the motel , Dean constantly tries to seduce Cindy but she rebuffs him .
They start fighting and she locks him outside the motel room .
Cindy is called away by the clinic early in the morning .
She takes the car and leaves a note for Dean .
At the clinic , Cindy 's boss , Dr. Feinberg , talks to her about a position he had offered her .
He suggests her to move closer to work , but instead of moving her whole family , just for her to get an apartment and go back home for the weekends .
He adds that he could keep her company during the week if she gets lonely .
Visibly upset , Cindy says she previously thought he offered her the position because of her job skills .
Angered that Cindy left the motel without waking him , Dean shows up drunk at the clinic .
He has a heated argument with Cindy which leads to a violent altercation with Dr. Feinberg .
Dr. Feinberg kicks both Dean and Cindy out , firing the latter .
Cindy demands a divorce while leaving the clinic .
At her parent 's house , Dean tries to persuade Cindy to give the marriage another chance , asking if she wants their daughter to grow up in a broken home .
Cindy says she does not want Frankie to grow up with parents who are so hateful to each other .
After Dean reminds Cindy of their wedding vows , they hug and apologize .
Cindy then pulls away asking for some space .
Dean is seen walking away from the house while Frankie runs after him .
Dean tells Frankie to go back to her mom despite Frankie begging him to stay .
Dean challenges her to a race in an attempt to send her back to Cindy .
He continues walking away while Cindy picks up an upset Frankie , who cries " I love him .
" The film ends with photos of Dean and Cindy in the early days of their romance illuminated by fireworks .
CAST
* Ryan Gosling as Dean Pereira
* Michelle Williams as Cindy Heller * Faith Wladyka as Frances " Frankie " * John Doman as Jerry
* Mike Vogel as Bobby * Marshall Johnson as Marshall
* Jen Jones as Gramma
* Ben Shenkman as Dr. Feinberg * Maryann Plunkett as Glenda PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Williams was 21 when she received the script in 2002 and Gosling committed to the production four years later , but filming did not begin until 2009 , when Williams was 28 ( as was Gosling ) , owing to Cianfrance 's inability to find financing .
The director was also unable to film the " young " and " older " scenes several years apart as he had hoped , again due to lack of money .
The film was to be shot in California but production was moved to Brooklyn , New York and Honesdale , Pennsylvania .
Williams wanted to stay close to her Brooklyn home to take care of her daughter , Matilda ( after the passing of Heath Ledger the year prior ) , so the director chose Honesdale due to its proximity to Brooklyn .
Gosling and Williams improvised dialogue ; the scene in which their characters wander through New York together was unscripted , for example ; the actors — who had both appeared in The United States of Leland ( 2003 ) but had not shared scenes — got to know each other during its filming .
Before filming the marriage dissolution between the main characters , Gosling and Williams prepared by renting a home , bringing their own clothing and belongings , buying groceries with a budget based on their characters ' incomes , filming home movies and taking a family portrait at a local Sears ( which as of 2018 has gone bankrupt after 132 years of business history ) with the actress who played their daughter , and staging out arguments .
Cianfrance visited the actors and assisted them in building tension while remaining in character : " One night he told Gosling to go into Williams ' bedroom and try to make love to her .
Gosling , soundly rejected , ended up sleeping on the couch . "
The film was shot in Super 16 mm and Red One .
The former was used for the pre - marriage scenes and the latter was used for the post - marriage scenes .
Andrij Parekh used only one professional light in the filming of the outside scenes , otherwise using only practical lights for the inside scenes .
While on The Hollywood Reporter Director 's Roundtable , Cianfrance said that he had given up his entire director 's fee to help fund the film : " I mean , it came down to
we were exactly my fee short .
They paid me and I just paid it back .
So I still have to pay taxes on it , you know .
So I actually had to pay to make the movie . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Gosling wrote and performed some songs by himself .
The band Grizzly Bear composed the score of the film .
A soundtrack for the film was released by Lakeshore Records .
One of the film 's feature songs , " You and Me " , which is presented as the couple 's personal song , was originally recorded as a demo by a group called Penny & The Quarters for the obscure Prix Label of Columbus , Ohio in the early 1970s .
It was re - released on a compilation album by the Numero Group in 2007 without the members of the group being identified .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival and premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 15 , 2010 .
In Australia , the film was released on December 26 , 2010 through Palace Films .
In the United States , it was distributed by The Weinstein Company as a limited release on December 29 , 2010 .
RATING Section::::Rating .
On October 8 , 2010 , Blue Valentine was given an NC-17 rating by the MPAA for American cinemas .
This was due to a scene depicting cunnilingus .
Gosling accused the MPAA of sexism and misogyny .
" There 's plenty of oral sex scenes in a lot of movies , where it 's a man receiving it from a woman – and they 're R - rated .
Ours is reversed and somehow it 's perceived as pornographic " , he stated .
The Weinstein Company appealed the decision and aimed for an R without any trims to the film , believing the prior decision would significantly harm the film 's potential box office take in the United States .
The appeal was successful on December 8 , 2010 , and the film received an R rating .
The film was given an uncut 15 certificate from the British Board of Film Classification .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray on May 10 , 2011 .
Special features include an audio commentary with Director Derek Cianfrance , a making - of documentary , deleted scenes , and home movies .
The film has grossed $ 5,336,207 through US video sales .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Blue Valentine received critical acclaim .
Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , reports that 87 % of 203 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating is 7.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus states : " This emotionally gripping examination of a marriage on the rocks is n't always easy to watch , but Michelle Williams and Ryan Gosling give performances of unusual depth and power . "
On Metacritic , the film has an average score of 81 out of 100 based on 42 reviews , meaning " universal acclaim " .
Roger Ebert gave it 3.5/4 stars , writing : " Dean seems stuck .
He seems to stay fixed at the initial stage .
Can you see the difference between ( 1 ) "
He loves me as much as he always did " , and ( 2 )
" He loves me exactly like he always did " ?
I 've read reviews saying Cianfrance is n't clear about what went wrong as they got from there to here .
Is anybody ? "
TOP TEN LISTS Section::::Top ten lists .
Blue Valentine was listed on many critics ' top ten lists .
* 1st – Nathan Rabin , The A.V. Club
* 1st – Mick LaSalle , San Francisco Chronicle
* 1st – Joe Neumaier , New York Daily News
* 2nd –
Drew McWeeny , HitFix
* 3rd – Claudia Puig , USA Today * 4th – Andrew O'Hehir , Salon.com
* 4th – Peter Hartlaub , San Francisco Chronicle * 4th – Steve Persall ,
St. Petersburg Times
* 6th –
Chuck Wilson , L.A. Weekly
* 6th –
Mike Scott ,
The Times - Picayune * 7th – Owen Gleiberman , Entertainment Weekly *
7th –
Clint O'Conner , Cleveland Plain Dealer
* 8th – Rene Rodriguez , Miami Herald
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically ) – Dana Stevens , Slate
* Top 10 ( ranked alphabetically ) –
Joe Williams , St. Louis Post - Dispatch ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In 2006 , the script won the Chrysler Film Project , a competition that awards cash to an outstanding new feature film director overseen by Independent Feature Project .
+ List of awards and nominations !
Award !
Date of ceremony !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS