SHIRL JENNINGS Shirley " Shirl " Jennings ( 1940 – October 26 , 2003 ) was one of only a few people in the world to regain his sight after lifelong blindness and was the inspiration for the character of Virgil Adamson in the movie At First Sight ( 1999 ) starring Val Kilmer and Mira Sorvino .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Born in Bedford County , Virginia in 1940 , at age 3 Shirl became dangerously ill with three illnesses at once : meningitis , polio , and cat scratch fever . "
His sickness plunged him into a coma , from which he emerged after two weeks with paralyzed legs and damaged eyesight .
When he was 7 or 8 , Jennings was diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa , a progressive , untreatable disease of the retina that causes blindness .
By the time he was 10 , he could distinguish only light from dark .
He attended the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind and later the YMCA School of Swedish Massage . "
TREATMENT AND RETURN OF SIGHT Section::::Treatment and return of sight .
In 1991 , at the urging of his then - girlfriend , Barbara , Shirl visited ophthalmologist Dr. Trevor Woodhams to investigate opportunities to restore his sight .
Woodhams suggested surgery to remove his dense cataracts and to determine the true underlying condition of his retinas .
Woodhams believed that the removal of the cataracts would return some of Shirl 's vision .
The surgery did restore some of Shirl Jenning 's vision .
However , he was overwhelmed with visual sensory data and was unable to connect what he was seeing with his visual memory , which had all but disappeared .
The family contacted Dr. Oliver Sacks , a famous neurologist known for his book Awakenings , who , along with other physicians , concluded that Shirl would need to relearn how to identify objects that he could feel and smell by using their visual cues .
Shirl 's extraordinary metamorphosis was featured in a 1995 article in The New Yorker magazine , " To See and Not See " , by Dr. Sacks .
RE - LOSS OF SIGHT Section::::Re - loss of sight .
In February 1992 , Jennings contracted pneumonia , which led to respiratory failure that deprived his brain of oxygen .
After recovering , while he could still see some colors and movement , his sight virtually vanished .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Shirl reconnected with his future wife Barbara in 1988 after learning that Barbara , a woman he had dated 20 years earlier , had since divorced and moved back into the Atlanta , Georgia area .
They were married in 1991 .
In 1996 , Jennings began taking painting lessons and became a painter .
His first one - man art show was held in 2002 at the Center Street Arts Gallery in Conyers , Georgia .
FILM Section::::Film .
Shirl and Barbara Jennings became the inspiration for the characters of Virgil Adamson and Amy Benic in the movie At First Sight ( 1999 ) starring Val Kilmer and Mira Sorvino .
Val Kilmer spent time with Shirl Jennings in preparation for portraying him in the film .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Shirl Jennings died from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 2003 at the age of 63 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * , excerpted in The New Yorker , 1993