CORDON BLEU ( DISH ) A cordon bleu or schnitzel cordon bleu is a dish of meat wrapped around cheese ( or with cheese filling ) , then breaded and pan - fried or deep - fried .
Veal or pork cordon bleu is made of veal or pork pounded thin and wrapped around a slice of ham and a slice of cheese , breaded , and then pan fried or baked .
For chicken cordon bleu chicken breast is used instead of veal .
Ham cordon bleu is ham stuffed with mushrooms and cheese .
NAME Section::::Name .
The French term cordon bleu is translated as " blue ribbon " .
According to Larousse Gastronomique cordon bleu " was originally a wide blue ribbon worn by members of the highest order of knighthood , L'Ordre des chevaliers du Saint - Esprit , instituted by Henri III of France in 1578 .
By extension , the term has since been applied to food prepared to a very high standard and by outstanding cooks .
The analogy no doubt arose from the similarity between the sash worn by the knights and the ribbons ( generally blue ) of a cook 's apron . "
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origins of cordon bleu as a schnitzel filled with cheese are in Brig , Switzerland , probably about the 1940s , first mentioned in a cookbook from 1949 .
The earliest reference to " chicken cordon bleu " in The New York Times is dated to 1967 , while similar veal recipes are found from at least 1955 .
VARIANTS Section::::Variants .
There are many variations of the recipe , all of which involve a cutlet , cheese , and meat .
A popular way to prepare chicken cordon bleu is to butterfly cut a chicken breast , place a thin slice of ham inside , along with a thin slice of a soft , easily melted cheese such as Swiss .
The chicken breast is then rolled into a roulade , coated in bread crumbs and then deep fried .
Other variations exist with the chicken baked rather than fried .
Other common variations include omitting the bread crumbs , wrapping the ham around the chicken , or using bacon in place of ham .
A variant popular in the Asturias province of Spain is cachopo , a deep - fried cutlet of veal , beef or chicken wrapped around a filling of Serrano ham and cheese .
In Spain , the version made with chicken is often called san jacobo .
In largely Muslim - populated countries , the halal versions of chicken cordon bleu are also popular , such that the chicken is rolled around beef or mutton instead of pork product .
SEE ALSO * Culinary Heritage of Switzerland
* Chicken Kiev
* Karađorđeva šnicla
* Dishes à la
Maréchale *
Breaded cutlet
* List of stuffed dishes REFERENCES