SPONGE CAKE Sponge cake is a cake based on flour ( usually wheat flour ) , sugar , butter and eggs , and is sometimes leavened with baking powder .
It has a firm yet well - aerated structure , similar to a sea sponge .
In the United Kingdom a sponge cake is produced using the batter method , while in the US cakes made using the batter method are known as butter or pound cakes .
Two common British batter - method sponge cakes are the layered Victoria sponge cake and Madeira cake .
The Victorian creation of baking powder by English food manufacturer Alfred Bird in 1843 enabled the sponge to rise higher than cakes made previously .
Cakes made using the foam method are not classed as sponge cakes in the UK ; these cakes are classed as foam cakes , which are quite different .
These cakes are common in Europe , especially in Italian patisseries .
The cake was first invented by the Italian pastry chef Giovan Battista Cabona ( called Giobatta ) , at the court of Spain with his lord , the Genoese marquis Domenico Pallavicini , around the middle of the 16th century .
The sponge cake is thought to be one of the first of the non - yeasted cakes , and the earliest attested sponge cake recipe in English is found in a book by the English poet Gervase Markham , The English Huswife , Containing the Inward and Outward Virtues Which Ought to Be in a Complete Woman ( 1615 ) .
Though it does not appear in Hannah Glasse 's The Art of Cookery made Plain and Easy ( 1747 ) in the late 18th century , it is found in Lydia Maria Child 's The American Frugal Housewife ( 1832 ) , indicating that sponge cakes had been established in Grenada in the Caribbean by the early 19th century .
Variations on the theme of a cake lifted , partially or wholly , by trapped air in the batter exist in most places where European patisserie has spread , including the Anglo - Jewish " plava " , Italian génoise , the Portuguese pão - de - ló , and the possibly ancestral Italian pan di Spagna ( " Spanish bread " ) .
Derivatives of the basic sponge cake idea include the American chiffon cake and the Latin American tres leches cake .
METHODS OF PREPARATION Section::::Methods of preparation .
The essential ingredients are eggs , fat ( often butter ) , sugar , and flour .
An authentic British sponge cake is made by first mixing the fat with the sugar and then beating the eggs with the sugar - fat mix until the mixture is light and creamy , then carefully sieving and folding in the flour .
Depending on the recipe , the flour may be mixed with a small amount of baking powder though some recipes use only the air incorporated into the egg mixture , relying on the denaturing of the egg proteins and the thermal expansion of the air to provide leavening .
In the French version the yolks are beaten with the sugar first while the whites are beaten separately to a meringue - like foam , to be gently folded in later .
The mixture is then poured into a cake tin and baked .
Both methods take great care to incorporate air in the beating , whisking , and sieving stages .
Before the cooked cake has cooled , it is still flexible .
This allows the creation of rolled cakes such as the Swiss roll .
This basic recipe is also used for many treats and puddings , such as madeleines , ladyfingers , and trifles , as well as some versions of strawberry shortcake ; the earliest recipe for shortcake is in an English cookbook from 1588 .
In addition , the foam cake technique is used in angel food cake ( where only egg whites are used ) and some recipes for Belgian waffles ( where the egg whites are separated from the yolks and folded into the batter at the end of preparation ) .
VICTORIA SPONGE
Section::::Victoria sponge .
The Victoria sponge , also known as the Victoria sandwich or Victorian cake , was named after Queen Victoria , who was known to enjoy a slice of the sponge cake with her afternoon tea .
The sponge part evolved from the classic pound cake – equal quantities of butter , sugar , eggs and flour .
The difference was the Victorian creation of baking powder , which was discovered by English food manufacturer Alfred Bird in 1843 , which enabled the sponge to rise higher .
This invention , writes cookery author Felicity Cloake , " was celebrated with a patriotic cake " , Victoria sponge .
A typical Victoria sponge filling consists of strawberry jam and whipped double cream ( thick cream with a high fat - content ) or The jam and cream are sandwiched between two sponge cakes ; the top of the cake is not iced or decorated apart from a dusting of icing sugar .
The Women 's Institute publishes a variation on the Victoria sandwich that has strawberry jam as the filling and is dusted with caster sugar , not icing sugar .
A Victoria sponge is made using one of two methods .
The traditional method involves creaming caster sugar with fat ( usually butter ) , mixing thoroughly with beaten egg , then folding flour and raising agent into the mixture .
The modern method , using an electric mixer or food processor , involves simply whisking all the ingredients together until creamy .
Additionally , the modern method typically uses an extra raising agent , and some recipes call for an extra - soft butter or margarine .
Both the traditional and modern methods are relatively quick and simple , producing consistent results , making this type of mixture one of the most popular for children and people in a hurry .
This basic " cake " mixture has been made into a wide variety of treats and puddings , including cupcakes , chocolate cake , and Eve 's pudding .
Although simple to make , Victoria sponge recipes are notoriously sensitive to cooking times and temperatures .
As such , oven manufacturers often use a Victoria sponge recipe to test their ovens .
Competitive Victoria sponge baking is part of the classic British fête .
AT
PASSOVER Section::::At Passover .
Since sponge cakes are not leavened with yeast , they are popular dessert choices for the Passover feast .
Typically , Passover sponges are made with matzo meal , shredded coconut , matzo flour , potato flour , or nut flour ( almond , hazelnut etc . )
since raw wheat products may not be used .
No raising agent may be used due to the strict prohibition of even the appearance of a leavening effect .
Therefore , the beating of egg whites in the mix to achieve the aeration is an essential characteristic of any Passover sponge recipe .
Many families have at least one recipe they pass down through generations , and matzo meal - based cake mixes are available commercially .
Several brands are easily found in kosher stores , especially before Passover .
Typical flavorings include almonds , apples , dark chocolate , lemon , pecans , and poppy seeds .
Apple or orange juice is the liquid ingredient .
Milk is avoided , because it can not be included in a dessert to be served after a meat based meal .
The sponge , or a heavier variant in the form of an almond pudding , may be included as an element of the dessert in the Passover meal during the Seder service , when it is often combined in serving with a fruit compote .
REFERENCES