16
WISHES 16 Wishes is a 2010 Canadian - American television teen film starring Debby Ryan and Jean - Luc Bilodeau , which premiered on June 25 , 2010 on Disney Channel and July 16 , 2010 on the Family Channel .
The film was directed by Peter DeLuise and written by Annie DeYoung .
The film was the most watched cable program on the day of its premiere on the Disney Channel .
In addition , 16 Wishes introduced Debby Ryan to new audiences , such as the contemporary adult audiences since the movie received high viewership in the adults demographic ( 18–34 ) .
The film was the second most watched program on cable on the week 16 Wishes premiered .
It was the second film to be released on the Disney Channel in 2010 that was not promoted as a " Disney Channel Original Movie " ( after ) and is a co - production between Disney Channel , Family Channel and the Canadian production company MarVista Entertainment .
In other countries , it is advertised as Disney Channel Original Movie .
It was planned to have its UK premiere on November 19 , 2010 on Disney Channel UK , but was replaced with Starstruck , which had already been shown in May ; it was later shown in December 2010 in the UK .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Abby Jensen has been planning for her sweet sixteen birthday since she was a little girl .
She keeps a list of wishes that she wants to come true .
When the big day finally arrives , she excitedly adds her sixteenth and final wish to the list : a photo of Logan , her crush .
Her parents and her brother Mike surprise her , but she rejects them .
Then begins the first of many unusual occurrences , each involving visits from a peculiar woman , Celeste .
She first appears as an exterminator when the Jensens ' house gets overrun by wasps from a nest that had been building up for 16 years .
Celeste saves Abby 's wish list , but the family is unable to go back inside their house until the wasps are exterminated .
Abby 's best friend Jay Kepler appears and offers Abby his jacket .
When Abby reaches into a pocket , she finds a birthday present for her - a necklace with a half of a heart saying " BFF .
"
Jay uses the other half as a charm on his key ring .
A delivery truck pulls up , and Celeste comes out dressed as a mail woman and gives a package with 16 candles and a matchbox to Abby .
Abby lights the first candle , her first wish , meeting celebrity Joey Lockhart , is fulfilled .
Abby then realizes that the candles correspond to the wishes on her wish list .
Abby lights up the eighth candle and her wish for a red car is fulfilled .
Out of the car comes Celeste .
Abby realizes Celeste is a magical being .
Abby unsuccessfully tries to make a third wish .
Celeste explains that Abby must wait to make new wishes within new hours , and that at midnight Abby 's candles expire and the wishes she made will be permanent .
Abby makes more wishes , causing her to beat her nemesis Krista Cook in a volleyball match , and become Student Body President .
Abby remembers that she needs a dress for her birthday party and decides buy it with Jay , who agrees to pay for it .
They are followed by Krista , who takes Jay 's wallet when he drops it .
She convinces the store clerk that the two not actually going to buy anything ; the clerk kicks them out .
Abby uses the 9th candle to make a wish to be treated like an adult , which instead makes her an adult .
Abby is suddenly not allowed to attend high school anymore , and no one at school remembers her , not even Jay .
Her parents buy her a new apartment and leave her to live on her own .
Regretting her wish , Abby unsuccessfully tries to make new wishes and change some .
Abby makes a wish for her parents to understand her ; her parents do understand her , but under the impression that she is an adult .
Abby walks by Krista 's Sweet 16 and spots Jay .
She restores Jay 's memories that they are best friends by showing him the necklace he gave her .
However , Jay is unable to help her .
Abby talks to Krista , and realizes that she is on good terms with her in adulthood .
She also realizes that Jay wanted to be Student Body President all along .
Desperate ,
Abby returns to her apartment , where Celeste appears .
Abby eventually finds a loophole through the rules of magic because her last wish was glued on with gum , acting as a " barrier " between the picture and the rules .
She switches the picture for a picture of her taken that morning and wishes she could go back to that morning right before midnight strikes .
Abby 's life then goes back to normal .
Abby throws her wish list away and gives her money to Mike for a guitar .
Abby finds Krista carrying posters saying ' Vote For Krista . '
She and Krista reconcile after Krista tells Abby that she dislikes her because she took Jay away from her as a friend .
Abby and Krista stop competing and work together to make Jay Student Body President , fulfilling his dream .
Abby and Krista have a joint birthday party .
Krista and Logan become a couple , and Mike 's talent is recognized .
Abby tells Jay that she has no more wishes , and they kiss .
Celeste then turns into a fairy and flies away .
The couples - Abby and Jay and Krista and Logan - then dance together at the party .
CAST
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Some scenes were filmed at Walnut Grove Secondary School in Langley , British Columbia .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
16 Wishes is the soundtrack album for the film of the same name , released on June 15 , 2010 , by MarVista Entertainment .
TRACK LISTING RECEPTION
Section::::Reception .
The movie garnered over 5.6 million viewers in its first showing .
The film went on to become the most watched cable program on the day of its premiere on Disney Channel .
The Sunday airing of the film received over 4.0 million viewers .
INTERNATIONAL RELEASE
Section::::International release . !
Country / Region !
Network(s ) !
Premiere !
Title REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website