WHOSE LINE IS IT ANYWAY ?
( U.S. TV SERIES )
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
( often known as simply Whose Line ? ) is an improvisational comedy television show , an adaptation of the British show of the same name .
It aired on ABC and ABC Family from August 5 , 1998 to December 15 , 2007 , hosted by Drew Carey .
A revival of the show , hosted by Aisha Tyler , began airing on The CW on July 16 , 2013 .
The series features Ryan Stiles , Colin Mochrie , and Wayne Brady as its regular performers with the fourth seat occupied by a guest panelist .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
The show consists of a panel of four performers who create characters , scenes , and songs on the spot , in the style of short - form improvisation games .
Topics for the games are based on either audience suggestions or predetermined prompts from the host , who would set up a game and situation that the performers would improvise .
The original host Drew Carey awarded arbitrary point values after each game , often citing a humorous reason for his decision .
The points were purely decorative and served no practical purpose .
He would reiterate this at the beginning of , and multiple times throughout , each episode by describing Whose Line as " the show where everything 's made up and the points do n't matter " .
The style of the games were varied ( see Games , below ) .
Some featured all four performers , while others featured fewer .
Between games , the performers sat in four chairs facing the audience .
The performers who were not involved in a game remained in their seats .
Additionally , the show was marked by humorous banter among the performers and host .
At the conclusion of each episode , a winner or several winners were chosen arbitrarily by Carey .
The " prize " was either to play a game with the host , or to sit out while the other performers did so .
After this game during the first season of the series , credits simply rolled under the show 's theme .
In the second season , the reading of the credits was performed by one or more cast members in a comedic fashion , based on a theme announced by Carey that often derived from a successful joke earlier in the show .
The show 's " short - form " approach to improv received criticism from some improv actors .
However , performer Colin Mochrie has stated the show was never intended to be the " be - all and end - all " of improv , but that it was meant to introduce improv to the masses .
PERFORMERS / PLAYERS Section::::Performers / players .
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
features four performers , two of whom , Colin Mochrie and Ryan Stiles , were featured prominently in the UK original .
Another performer who made frequent , recurring appearances was Wayne Brady .
During his tenure as host , Drew Carey also took part , though only in one game , after one of the performers was declared the " winner " and allowed to take his place at his desk in the studio ; host Aisha Tyler did not take part in games when the show was revived , but has occasionally joined in for a quick scene during the Scenes from a Hat game .
Alongside Mochrie and Stiles , other veterans of the UK series who appeared on the U.S. version included Greg Proops , Brad Sherwood , and Chip Esten .
The U.S. version introduced several newcomers that took part , including Denny Siegel , Kathy Greenwood , Jeff Davis , Patrick Bristow , Stephen Colbert , Kathy Kinney , and Ian Gomez , though mainly in the early seasons of the show .
Unlike the UK original , the US version occasionally featured a celebrity guest performer , such as Robin Williams , Kathy Griffin , and Whoopi Goldberg , while on other occasions , a celebrity made a guest appearance for individual games ; such appearance have included Sid Caesar , David Hasselhoff , Florence Henderson , Jerry Springer , Joanie " Chyna " Laurer , Richard Simmons , Katie Harman , Jayne Trcka , the Loyola Marymount University cheerleaders , Hugh Hefner , and Lassie .
Celebrity guests became a regular feature of the show beginning with season 9 .
Improvisational musician Laura Hall , who appeared in the final season of the UK original , joined the original U.S. format for its entire run and performed piano and keyboards in games featuring improvisational singing by the cast members .
From the second season onward , other musicians joined Hall – Linda Taylor made frequent appearances playing guitar and occasionally keyboards , while Cece Worrall - Rubin , Anne King , Candy Girard , and Anna Wanselius appeared alongside Hall ( and sometimes also Taylor ) on occasion .
GAMES Section::::Games .
The number and type of games played varied from episode to episode , yet while some games became more common over time , others faded from use .
Some games are based on traditional improv games , with a considerable number brought over from the UK original , including Scenes from a Hat , Greatest Hits , Props , Hoedown , Helping Hands , Questions Only and Party Quirks .
Others were new and uniquely created for both the U.S. original format , and the revived show , with several only being played once or twice , due either to the games not having been well - received by audiences , or to Stiles ' reluctance to perform certain rounds .
There are eight games that have been performed at least once in every season ; these are Scenes from a Hat , Greatest Hits , Props , Let 's Make a Date , Weird Newscasters , Duet , Helping Hands , and Questions Only .
All games are designed to test the performers ' improvisational comedy skills , with some games requiring the host to ask the studio audience for suggestions for specific topics or situations , while at other times these suggestions were written by the production staff , or submitted by the audience in advance , and chosen from among these .
In addition , the host would control a buzzer which would signify the end of most games , or the end of individual sections of rapid - fire games such as " Scenes from a Hat " .
In addition to being tested on their comedy skills in improv games , the performers are also tested on other skills , such as singing , dancing , or impressions , as Whose Line features a number of musical games , with one or more of the show 's resident musicians playing live backing music for them , except on a few occasions when pre - recorded music was also used .
Although they had no bad feelings about these sort of games , many of the performers disliked them ; while Wayne Brady turned out to be well suited to them , having Chip Esten , Jeff Davis , Brad Sherwood and Gary Anthony Williams making frequent appearances as his duet partner , Stiles frequently expressed open disdain towards the " Hoedown " game , which became a bit of a running gag , while Mochrie rarely sings any lyrics , mainly preferring to deliver his lines in a spoken word fashion , much like in the UK original .
GAME DETAILS
S1S2S3S4S5S6S7S8S9S10S11S12S13S14 ! scope="col " Game ! scope="col " Performers ! scope="col " Episodes
S1S2S3S4S5S6S7S8S9S10S11S12S13S14 HISTORY Section::::History .
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ? was created by Dan Patterson and Mark Leveson in 1988 as a radio show on BBC Radio 4 in the United Kingdom .
This early incarnation of the show is notable as being the origin of its tradition of having the performers read the credits in an amusing style ; as it was a radio show , it was necessary for somebody to read the credits , and it was decided that it might as well be done as part of the program , rather than being done by a traditional BBC Radio announcer .
This approach to reading credits was pioneered by the earlier BBC radio show
I 'm Sorry
, I 'll Read That Again .
Indeed , the title of the show itself is a comedic riposte to another radio show ,
What 's My Line , merged with the title of a 1972 teleplay ( and eventual theatrical play )
Whose Life Is It
Anyway ? . The radio series lasted for six episodes , after which Channel 4 developed the franchise for television .
The British television version lasted for a total of 10 seasons , with 136 episodes , all of which were hosted by Clive Anderson .
Colin Mochrie and Ryan Stiles , who would later star in the U.S. version , became regular cast members in the seventh and eighth seasons .
The format of the American version was very similar to the British program .
A major difference was Carey 's use of the game - show facade , explicitly stating at the start of each episode that " the points do n't matter , " and sometimes emphasizing this throughout the episodes .
The difference in standards in the UK compared to U.S. prime time meant stricter censoring of both language and content on the U.S. series .
Production of the American version was canceled by ABC in 2003 because of low ratings , with already - produced episodes airing first - run into 2004 .
The ABC Family cable channel , which had been airing repeats of the show since 2002 , also showed " new " episodes from 2005 to 2006 , formed from previously filmed but unaired performances .
HIATUS Section::::Hiatus .
Following the cancellation , Drew Carey went on to create the short - lived Drew Carey 's Green Screen Show , which premiered in 2004 on the WB .
The series was very similar to Whose Line ? , and featured many of the same cast .
The major gimmick on that series was that the acting was done in front of a green screen , and animators later added cartoon imagery to the scenes .
Carey and several cast members also started touring North America with a live - action show called ( Drew Carey 's )
Improv All - Stars .
The show was a live stage show similar to Whose Line ? , and featuring many of the same games , though also with some new ones .
The live shows started in 2003 , and since 2006 , are only seen on occasion , mostly due to Carey 's current television obligations .
Colin Mochrie , Brad Sherwood and Drew Carey performed at the Just for Laughs festival in Montreal as " Improv All - Stars " in 2003 and 2004 .
Since 2005 , Mochrie and Sherwood have toured semi - regularly as An Evening With Colin and Brad .
The show was recorded on Stage 29 at Paramount Studios .
Greg Proops and Ryan Stiles presented Stiles & Proops Unplanned which was a live improv comedy show based on the successful Baddiel and Skinner Unplanned format that took place at Centaur Theatre in Montreal , Quebec , Canada in July 2008 .
They also tour with former co - star Jeff Davis under the name Whose Live
Anyway ?
doing live improv .
Proops appeared as Max Madigan on Nickelodeon 's True Jackson , VP , and is currently hosting Head Games on The Science Channel and was the host of " Odd News " segments for Yahoo !
( now called Broken News Daily ) while Esten has made multiple appearances in various TV series including The Office , ER ( also produced by Warner Bros. ) and Big Love and guest - starred in Enlightened .
In 2007 , Mochrie was host of a five - episode run of Are You Smarter Than a Canadian 5th Grader ?
on Global TV in Canada .
Carey , Stiles , Brady , and Esten were all later employed by American television network CBS ; Carey succeeded Bob Barker as the host of the long - running game show The Price Is Right ( after a short stint as host of another game show , Power of 10 ) .
In addition , Sherwood and Davis served as guest announcers for the 2010 - 11 season of The Price Is Right , after the departure of Rich Fields , who was eventually replaced by George Gray .
Stiles appeared as a supporting character on the sitcom Two and a Half Men .
Esten had a recurring role on The New Adventures of Old Christine and made a guest appearance in , before moving to star in the ABC drama Nashville .
Brady had a summer variety show on ABC in 2001 , The Wayne Brady Show and then hosted a daytime talk show of the same name for two seasons , starting in September 2002 .
He also was the host of Fox 's Do n't Forget the Lyrics .
In 2007 , he made a guest appearance in one episode of 30 Rock , and has made several appearances on How I Met Your Mother as Barney Stinson 's homosexual brother .
He also had a couple of guest appearances on Chappelle 's Show .
Since October 5 , 2009 , Brady has been the host of CBS ' revival of the classic game show
Let 's Make a Deal .
Featuring Jonathan Mangum as announcer and Co - Host , this new iteration utilized some classic elements of improv from Whose Line , most notably Brady 's singing and comedic abilities , occasionally breaking out into spontaneous musical improv in front of or involving contestants , and not being a stipulated aspect of the particular game to be played .
As of 2009 , every main Whose Line participant has hosted at least one game show except Ryan Stiles .
On November 18 , 2010 , Variety announced that Drew Carey would start a primetime improv show on GSN .
The series , entitled Drew Carey 's Improv - A - Ganza , debuted on April 11 , 2011 and featured most of the
Whose Line regular cast before ending in June 2011 ; Rich Fields was the announcer for the series .
A second season was not ordered and the show was terminated .
On July 10 , 2012 , ABC premiered a new improv comedy series featuring several of the Whose Line alumni called Trust Us With Your Life .
Some of the players included Colin Mochrie , Wayne Brady , Greg Proops , Jonathan Mangum , and Nicole Parker .
However , on July 30 , after only six episodes had aired , ABC pulled the remaining episodes after its host Fred Willard was arrested on a lewd - conduct charge at the Tiki Theater , an adult movie theater in Hollywood , California .
In February 2013 , Ryan Stiles revealed in an interview that he would be returning to Los Angeles in April for a new season of Whose Line , hosted by Aisha Tyler and featuring the original cast of the U.S. version .
Colin Mochrie would later confirm the revival .
CW REVIVAL Section::::CW revival .
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
returned to television , this time on The CW , with Colin Mochrie , Ryan Stiles , and Wayne Brady , and Aisha Tyler taking the role of the host .
In addition to the traditional rotating fourth improv player ( often drawn from same pool of regulars that appeared on the original show ) , a new feature was that of a " special guest " .
This fifth player would not necessarily have an improv background , but would still participate in some of the improv games .
The initial summer run was made up of twelve half - hour episodes with the three veteran players joined by a featured player , along with a different special guest for each episode who would play in some of the games .
On July 29 , 2013 , The CW announced that it had renewed the show for a 24-episode season , airing Fridays at 8 ET / PT starting March 21 , 2014 , due to solid ratings .
Illness prevented Stiles from appearing in two season 10 episodes , the first Whose Line shows he had missed in nearly 20 years , dating back to the original British series .
Frequent guest Greg Proops filled in for Stiles on these occasions .
On July 18 , 2014 , The CW announced that the show would be returning for a 24-episode eleventh season ( and third season on The CW ) which started airing on April 17 , 2015 .
On August 11 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a twelfth season ( fourth on The CW ) to start airing May 23 , 2016 .
On October 24 , 2016 , The CW renewed the show for a thirteenth season ( fifth season on The CW ) to start airing May 29 , 2017 .
On October 26 , 2017 , The CW renewed the show for a fourteenth season ( sixth season on the CW ) .
The first two episodes aired June 4 , 2018 .
On October 9 , 2018 , The CW renewed the show for a fifteenth season ( seventh season on the CW ) .
PERFORMERS Section::::Performers .
Several of the performers , including the three regulars
Brady , Mochrie and Stiles , had previously appeared in the original run of Whose Line in the UK ; other performers who had made appearances in the British version are Greg Proops , Brad Sherwood , Chip Esten , Karen Maruyama and Josie Lawrence , as well as musician Laura Hall .
Mochrie and Stiles have been regulars since the show started , whilst Brady became a regular from season 2 to 7 , appearing as a recurring performer in seasons 1 and 8 .
Mochrie is the only performer to have appeared in every episode of the US series of Whose Line ? , with Stiles having missed two recordings due to illness .
The original host of the U.S. show was Drew Carey , who appeared in every episode of seasons 1–8 .
Carey notably took more of an active role in the show than his predecessor Clive Anderson , as following the announcement of the " winner " of each show , Carey would perform a game with the other performers .
After the CW revival in 2013 , Aisha Tyler took over as host , as Carey was the host of The Price is Right , which ran at the same time as Whose Line ; however , Carey is mentioned numerous times by Tyler and the other performers .
Unlike Carey , Tyler does not perform full games with the other performers ; however , she does occasionally interject in quick fire games such as Scenes from a Hat with her own suggestions or to help another performer with their scene .
MAIN * Colin Mochrie –
327 episodes
* Ryan Stiles – 325 episodes * Wayne Brady –
317 episodes * Drew Carey ( host ) –
219 episodes
* Aisha Tyler ( host ) – 108 episodes RECURRING * Greg Proops –
69 episodes
* Brad Sherwood – 68 episodes * Charles " Chip " Esten –
41 episodes
* Jeff Davis – 38 episodes * Kathy Greenwood –
33 episodes
* Gary Anthony Williams – 21 episodes
* Jonathan Mangum – 16 episodes * Denny Siegel –
14 episodes * Heather Anne Campbell –
10 episodes
* Keegan - Michael Key – 9 episodes *
Nyima Funk – 4 episodes * Kathy Griffin –
4 episodes
* Karen Maruyama – 3 episodes MUSICIANS * Laura Hall –
282 episodes
* Linda Taylor – 173 episodes
* Cece Worrall – 37 episodes
* Anne King –
10 episodes
* Anna Wanselius – 6 episodes GUEST STARS Section::::Guest stars .
Seasons 1–8
* Patrick Bristow –
2 episodes
* Stephen Colbert –
2 episodes
* Whoopi Goldberg –
2 episodes
* Ian Gomez –
2 episodes
* Josie Lawrence – 2 episodes * Jerry Springer –
2 episodes
* Kathy Kinney ( season 1 , episode 6 )
* Robin Williams ( season 3 , episode 9 ) * Lassie and Sid Caesar ( season 4 , episode 15 ) * Hugh Hefner , Ava Fabian , and Victoria Fuller ( season 4 , episode 24 ) * Katie Harman , Miss America 2002 ( Season 5 , episode 2 ) * Florence Henderson ( season 5 , episode 4 )
* Joanie " Chyna " Laurer ( season 5 , episode 8)
* Richard Simmons ( season 5 , episode 17 )
* David Hasselhoff ( Season 5 , episode 19 )
* Jayne Trcka ( Season 5 , episode 21 )
* Veena and Neena Bidasha
( Season 5 , episode 25 )
* Undarma Darihu ( Season 5 , episode 28 )
* Loyola Marymount University Cheerleaders ( Season 6 , episode 6 )
* Santa Claus and Donner ( Season 8 , episode 6 ) Season 9 *
Lauren Cohan ( episode 1 )
* Kevin McHale ( episode 2 )
* Candice Accola ( episode 3 )
* Kyle Richards ( episode 4 )
* Mary Killman and Mariya Koroleva
( episode 5 )
* Wilson Bethel ( episode 6 )
* Lisa Leslie ( episode 7 )
* Laila Ali ( episode 9 )
* Maggie Q ( episode 10 )
* Chloe Butler ( episode 11 )
* Shawn Johnson ( episode 12 ) Season
10 * Kat Graham ( episode 1 )
* Tara Lipinski ( episode 2 )
* Verne Troyer ( episode 3 )
* Darren Criss ( episode 4 ) *
Michael Weatherly ( episode 5 ) * Byambajav Ulambayar ( episode 6 )
* Nolan Gould ( episode 7 )
* Mircea Monroe ( episode 8) * Jack Osbourne ( episode 10 ) * Rob Gronkowski ( episode 11 ) * Robbie Amell ( episode 12 ) * Misha Collins ( episode 13 )
* Sheryl Underwood ( episode 14 )
* Mel B. ( episode 15 )
* Kunal Nayyar ( episode 16 )
* Padma Lakshmi ( episode 18 )
* Matt Barnes ( episode 20 )
* Brian Shaw ( episode 22 )
* Wendi McLendon - Covey ( episode 23 ) Season 11 *
Cedric the Entertainer ( episode 1 ) *
Adelaide Kane ( episode 2 )
* Jaime Camil ( episode 4 )
* Scott Porter ( episode 5 ) *
Willie Robertson ( episode 6 )
* Heather Morris ( episode 7 ) * Vernon Davis ( episode 8) * Penn & Teller ( episode 10 )
* Kathie Lee Gifford ( episode 11 )
* Randy Couture ( episode 12 )
* Gina Rodriguez ( episode 13 )
* Nina Agdal ( episode 15 )
*
Bill Nye ( episode 17 )
* Carson Kressley ( episode 19 ) Season 12 * Alfonso Ribeiro ( episode 1 ) * Karla Souza ( episode 3 ) * Yvette Nicole Brown ( episode 4 ) *
Kaitlin Doubleday ( episode 5 )
* Lolo Jones ( episode 6 )
* Joey Fatone ( episode 8) * Tamera Mowry ( episode 9 ) * Misty May - Treanor ( episode 11 )
* Lyndie Greenwood ( episode 12 ) * Chris Jericho ( episode 13 ) * Rachel Bloom ( episode 14 ) * Lea Thompson ( episode 15 ) * Katie Cassidy ( episode 16 )
* Brett Dier ( episode 17 )
* Emily Bett Rickards ( episode 18 )
* Cheryl Hines ( episode 20 ) Season 13
* Tony Hawk ( episode 1 )
* The Bella Twins ( episode 2 )
* Candice Patton ( episode 3 )
* Malcolm Goodwin ( episode 4 )
* Wil Wheaton ( episode 5 ) * Kearran Giovanni ( episode 6 )
* Ralph Macchio ( episode 8) * Tony Cavalero ( episode 9 )
* Jillian Michaels ( episode 10 )
* Charles " Chip " Esten ( episode 11 )
* Wanya Morris ( episode 12 )
* Danielle Panabaker ( episode 13 )
* Marisol Nichols ( episode 14 )
* Grace Byers ( episode 15 ) Season 14
* Ross Mathews ( episode 1 )
* Andrea Navedo ( episode 3 ) * Charles " Chip " Esten ( episode 5 ) * Carmen Electra ( episode 12 )
* Cornelius Smith Jr. ( episode 15 )
* Lance Bass ( episode 17 ) EPISODES AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Won : * 2003 :
Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program for Wayne Brady Nominated : * 2001 :
Emmy Award for ' Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program ' for Wayne Brady * 2002 :
Emmy Award for ' Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program ' for Wayne Brady * 2002 :
Emmy Award for ' Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program ' for Ryan Stiles INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
The U.S. version of Whose Line ? has been broadcast in the UK , originally on Channel 4 .
Challenge was the first non - terrestrial channel to broadcast the show for a brief period in 2005 .
From 2007 to 2012 , 5USA aired the show .
In Canada , the show also ran on the CTV network from 1998 to 2003 , and then on The Comedy Network from 2003 onwards .
The show 's original run in Australia was on the Nine Network in an early morning time slot ; One repeated the program from 2011 .
It also airs on The Comedy Channel .
In New Zealand , the show was broadcast on the Box .
From 2014 , South African youth channel Vuzu started airing the CW revival .
In India , the earlier seasons were aired on FX while the revived series has been aired on Comedy Central .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The first DVD , Season 1 , Volume 1 , of the U.S. version of Whose Line ? was released on September 26 , 2006 .
It comes in " censored " or " uncensored " versions .
Both releases include the first ten episodes of the first season , with the episodes being the same on either version .
The first seven episodes have had their original theme music ( including all credits and ad bumpers ) replaced with the version used for the rest of the episodes .
Warner Home Video released Season 1 , Volume 2 on October 9 , 2007 , but only in an " uncensored " version .
Warner Home Video released a two - disc " best of " compilation with ten episodes on June 9 , 2009 .
Featured in this release were celebrity guest episodes including appearances by David Hasselhoff , Florence Henderson , Jerry Springer , Richard Simmons and bodybuilder Jayne Trcka , along with the hour - long " Best of Whose Line " compilation episode aired at the beginning of season three . !
DVD title !
No . ofepisodes !
Run time(minutes ) !
Release !
Notes
align="center"10 align="center"110
align="center"10
align="center"220
align="center"10 align="center"260
align="center"11 align="center"300 SEE ALSO * List of Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
episodes
* Drew Carey 's Green Screen Show * Drew Carey 's Improv - A - Ganza
* Trust Us With Your Life
*
Wild ' n Out REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ? , The CW website , includes all past U.S. episodes *
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
, Hat Trick Productions website * Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
U.S. and U.K. episodes