SOUL SURFER ( FILM )
Soul Surfer is a 2011 American biographical drama film directed by Sean McNamara , based on the 2004 autobiography Soul Surfer : A True Story of Faith , Family , and Fighting to Get Back on the Board by Bethany Hamilton about her life as a surfer after a horrific shark attack and her recovery .
The film stars AnnaSophia Robb , Helen Hunt , Dennis Quaid , and Lorraine Nicholson with Carrie Underwood , Kevin Sorbo , Sonya Balmores , Branscombe Richmond , and Craig T. Nelson .
Filming took place in Hawaii in early 2010 , with additional filming taking place in Tahiti in August 2010 .
Soul Surfer was released in theaters on , 2011 in the United States and Canada by a partnership between FilmDistrict and TriStar Pictures , and was a commercial success , earning $ 47.1 million on a $ 18 million budget , but received mixed reviews from critical audiences .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 2003 , teenager Bethany Hamilton lives in Kauai , Hawaii with her parents Tom and Cheri , and two brothers , Noah and Timmy .
All are surfers , but she and her best friend Alana Blanchard have grown up with a passion for the sport and enter a competition .
Her church youth ministry leader , Sarah Hill , is disappointed when she has to withdraw from a planned mission trip to Mexico because of the contest .
In the competition , Bethany and Alana place first and third , respectively .
A few days later , Tom goes to the hospital for knee surgery , and the girls go surfing with Alana 's father Holt and brother Byron .
As Bethany dangles her left arm in the water , a tiger shark notices her arm floating in the water .
The shark unexpectedly attacks , taking away her arm below the shoulder .
Holt , Alana , and Byron get her out of the water where Holt makes a tourniquet out of his swimshirt to put on her while Byron calls 911 as Cheri is also informed .
An ambulance meets them on the way to the hospital .
Just before starting Tom 's knee surgery , Dr. David Rovinsky is called to the emergency room to treat Bethany .
Besides losing her left arm , she also lost 60 % of her blood and Dr. Rovinsky calls her survival a miracle .
The onslaught of paparazzi also proves to be a great strain on her family and their privacy .
The Hamiltons are grateful to Holt for his quick and active thinking and decisive action that saved her life .
Her injury prevents her from participating in the Rip Curl photo shoots , but she wishes Alana well .
Bethany perseveres and after a recuperation period , gets back in the water , and learns to surf with one arm .
Inside Edition offers to provide a prosthetic one that is cosmetically perfect and has bendable joints , in exchange for an interview .
She angrily rejects it when she learns it will not help her surf as it is not weight bearing , as a result of the size of her arm stump .
Bethany eventually re - enters the competition , telling rival Malina not to go easy on her , and rejects a five - minute head start offered by the judges .
She does not perform well because she can not stay on the board long enough to go out and catch a competitive wave
so Malina wins .
Disappointed at this loss , she decides to give up competitive surfing and her friendship with Alana is strained following an argument .
Bethany decides to surprise Sarah by joining the youth group on another mission trip to help the people of Phuket , Thailand who were devastated by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami .
Despite her recent tragedy , she joins her youth group to help the Thai children get over their fear of the ocean .
They are understandably afraid of the water , including a little boy .
She decides to go into it with a surfboard , hoping this will coax him into it .
It works , and the realization that she can use her gift to inspire people motivates her to take up surfing again .
Tom , who believes that Bethany possesses a great surfer 's instinct for sensing when the best waves will form , rigs a handle on her surfboard which she can use to prevent falling off while paddling out to the waves , which is not prohibited by the competition 's rules .
Bethany trains for the competition while rekindling her friendship with Alana .
She enters the national championship .
During the competition , she performs respectably , though she is still chasing third place .
Suddenly , with only minutes left on the clock , the waves die down and all the surfers can only loiter , waiting for the waves to start back up .
Tom 's belief in his daughter 's instinct is proven when she is the only one to sense a big wave forming , and she alone paddles out .
When it forms , the others can not get out in time and she catches it just as the horn sounds .
If it is in time , she will win , but the judges rule that the time has expired .
Malina is the winner , but she has finally gotten over her differences with Bethany , inviting her up on the platform to share first place .
Subsequently , Bethany lets the reporters interview her .
One asks her what she would do if given the chance to undo the loss of her arm .
She says that she would still lose it because she can embrace more people now than she ever could with both .
CAST * AnnaSophia Robb as Bethany Hamilton * Helen Hunt as Cheri Hamilton * Dennis Quaid as Tom Hamilton * Carrie Underwood as Sarah Hill * Kevin Sorbo as Holt Blanchard
* Ross Thomas as Noah Hamilton * Chris Brochu as Timmy Hamilton * Lorraine Nicholson as Alana Blanchard * Jeremy Sumpter as Byron Blanchard * Sonia Balmores Chung as Malina Birch , Bethany 's rival * Craig T. Nelson as Dr. David Rovinsky
* Cody Gomes as Keoki
* Branscombe Richmond as Ben * Bethany Hamilton as Herself ( archive footage )
* Alana Blanchard as Herself ( archive footage )
* Sean McNamara cameos as a Rip Curl executive .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Plans for a biopic film about Hamilton have existed since months after her shark attack and her subsequent recovery in 2004 .
During Hamilton 's media attention , the father of Bethany 's friends Chantilly and Tiffany , Roy " Dutch " Hofstetter , became the Hamilton family 's media manager .
Hofstetter , in February 2004 , envisioned a film based on Bethany 's experience , provisionally titled The Bethany Hamilton Story .
Bethany published her biographical book Soul Surfer in 2004 , and BBC reported that a film about her life was scheduled to begin filming in January 2005 .
Production did not begin as anticipated , and Time reported in July 2006 that production was scheduled for later in the year .
Variety reported that the project at one point had an investment of and the backing of Peter Schlessel , a Sony Pictures executive .
Though production had not begun by the end of 2006 , in January 2007 Sean McNamara was announced to be directing the biographical film .
While Hamilton had a series of surfing successes , turning pro in 2007 , McNamara and producer David Brookwell with her manager Roy " Dutch " Hofstetter sought more material for the film .
The book was considered " a straightforward account " that was targeted to Christian readers , so the filmmakers met with the Hamilton family to determine if there were any unpublished conflicts that could be highlighted in the film .
They discovered that the incident had strained the family , that family members questioned their Christian faith , and that Bethany Hamilton struggled with her physical appearance and how boys would perceive her .
The media attention on the family was described by Brookwell as " a second shark attack " that had made their lives uncomfortably public .
McNamara , Brookwell , Hofstetter and Douglas Schwartz spent several years raising money for production .
The director wrote an adapted screenplay with Michael Berk , Douglas Schwartz and Deborah Schwartz .
Additional uncredited writing was performed by Ron Bass , Jen Smolka and Kara Holden .
Before the film entered production , Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions acquired distribution rights for North America and most other territories .
The production companies Mandalay Vision , Brookwell McNamara Entertainment and Life 's a Beach Entertainment collaborated for the production , with Enticing Entertainment and Island Film Group providing financing .
Bethany Hamilton chose with her mother AnnaSophia Robb to portray her , as well as Sonia Balmores Chung and Jeremy Sumpter to play Malina and Alana 's brother , Byron .
In February 2010 , Robb was announced to be part of the film as Bethany Hamilton , along with Dennis Quaid and Helen Hunt who were cast as Bethany 's parents .
Singer Carrie Underwood , in her feature film debut , was cast as a church youth leader .
All the surfing scenes after the shark attack were done by Hamilton herself .
Filming began the same month in Hawaii .
Principal photography and second - unit aerial work took place for 40 days ; cinematographer John R. Leonetti shot on 35 mm film .
During filming , Robb wore a green sleeve on her arm
so visual effects could be included later .
Though McNamara was editing the film by May 2010 , additional filming took place in August 2010 in Tahiti .
During post - production , the VFX company Engine Room worked on 450 arm - removal shots , digitally inserting the upper arm residuum in place of Robb 's green sleeve .
The Hamilton family was involved in the choice of music .
Ultimately , the film 's production budget was .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
In July 2010 , USA Today reported Soul Surfer as one of several faith - based films similar to The Blind Side , Get Low , Like Dandelion Dust , and Jumping the Broom .
In September 2010 , independent studio FilmDistrict was launched , and the company formed a partnership with TriStar Pictures to release Soul Surfer .
FilmDistrict originally committed to release the film at , but when executives saw the final product , they invested in a print and advertising commitment with the goal of releasing Soul Surfer in .
Prior to the film 's commercial release , it was screened for religious leaders .
A scene in which Dennis Quaid 's character reads the Bible in the hospital at his daughter 's bedside had the words " Holy Bible " digitally removed from the cover .
Bethany Hamilton 's father said that David Zelon , an executive at Mandalay Pictures , lobbied to reduce the Soul Surfers Christian elements so the film could appeal more to non - Christian audiences .
The Hamilton family objected , and the words " Holy Bible " were restored in the scene in a follow - up screening .
Another debated scene was one in which Carrie Underwood 's character , a church youth leader , quotes biblical scripture ( Jeremiah 29:11 ) .
While those involved with the film were fine with the verse , they did not want the scene to explicitly indicate that its origin was the Bible .
Their stance was challenged , and the scene indicates the verse being from the Bible .
The Hollywood Reporter cited the dust - up as an example of Hollywood learning to appeal to the faith - based community while still attracting secular audiences .
The Blind Side , which accomplished both , had grossed in the United States and Canada .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film was released in in the United States and Canada on , 2011 .
It grossed over its opening weekend , ranking fourth at the box office .
Sony Pictures reported that 80 % of the audience was female and that 56 % were under 25 years old .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Soul Surfer has received mixed reviews from critics .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives a score of 46 % based on reviews from 101 critics , with an average rating of 5.3/10 .
The site 's consensus is : " There 's an amazing true story at the heart of Soul Surfer -- and unfortunately , it 's drowned by waves of Hollywood cheese .
" CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a rare " A+ " grade . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times was mildly positive in his review , giving the film two - and - a - half stars out of four and writing " Soul Surfer is a wholesome movie , intended as inspirational .
Whether it will cheer viewers who are not as capable as Bethany is an excellent question .
AnnaSophia Robb is a convincing , cheerful heroine .
Dennis Quaid and Helen Hunt , as Bethany 's parents , are stalwart and supportive , although the script indeed leaves them with no other choice . "
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B grade , writing " [ t]he
more cynical viewers out there may say , ' Not for me . '
But Soul Surfer , while formulaic in design , is an authentic and heartfelt movie . "
S. Jhoanna Robledo of Common Sense Media gave the film three stars out of five , writing "
Yes , it 's a message movie , but the message burrows deep enough under your skin to make the movie , given its utter conventionality , unexpectedly stirring . "
Despite mixed critical reception , it was a hit among audiences ; CinemaScore polls reports that the average grade moviegoers gave it was a rare A+ .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Soul Surfer was released on DVD and Blu - ray on August 2 , 2011 by TriStar Pictures and FilmDistrict .
ACCOLADES
Best Sports Movie Soul Surfer Best Film for Family Audiences
Soul Surfer Most Inspiring Performance in Movies in 2011 Dennis Quaid , AnnaSophia Robb , Kevin Sorbo
Favorite Book Adaptation Soul Surfer
Best Original Score
Marco Beltrami
Choice Movie Drama Soul Surfer
Choice Movie Drama Actress Soul Surfer
FURTHER READING
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS