ITALIAN MEAL STRUCTURE
Italian meal structure is typical of the Mediterranean region and different from meal structure of Northern Europe / Northwestern Europe and Germanic and Slavic Europe , though it still often consists of breakfast , lunch , and supper .
However , much less emphasis is placed on breakfast , and breakfast itself is often skipped or involves lighter meal portions than are seen in other non - Mediterranean Western countries .
Late - morning and mid - afternoon snacks , called merenda ( plural merende ) , are also often included in this meal structure .
Italians also commonly divide a celebratory meal into several different courses .
DAYTIME MEAL STRUCTURE BREAKFAST ( COLAZIONE ) Section::::Daytime meal structure .
Section::::Breakfast ( Colazione ) .
Italian breakfast ( prima colazione ) consists of caffè latte ( hot coffee with milk ) or coffee with bread or rolls , butter and jam .
A cookie - like rusk hard bread , called fette biscottate , and cookies are commonly eaten .
Children drink hot chocolate , plain milk , or hot milk with very little coffee .
If breakfast is eaten in a bar ( coffee shop ) , it is composed of cappuccino and cornetto ( frothed hot milk with coffee and a pastry ) or espresso and pastry .
Other products , such as breakfast cereals , fruit salad ( macedonia ) , muesli and yogurt , are becoming increasingly common as part of the meal .
However , Italian breakfasts vary by region and by season .
In some regions , such as Tuscany and Umbria , in the past , people used to drink red wine ( notably Chianti ) into which they would dip their biscuits .
It is also very common for Italians to have a quick breakfast snack during the middle of the morning ( typically a tramezzino or bread roll ) .
LUNCH ( PRANZO ) Section::::Lunch ( Pranzo ) .
Lunch is usually regarded as the most important meal .
Most shops close for the pausa pranzo ( lunch break ) between 13:00 and 15:00 .
In most schools , children are given a lunch break when they can go home for lunch , or eat at the school cafeteria , or eat a packed lunch .
Since the introduction of fast foods , takeaways and frozen and tinned foods , Italians tend to eat less home - made food but fresh food is still quite common and most people buy bread , milk and other foods daily .
Many adults still make their own food ( e.g. , tomato sauce from their own tomatoes ) and takeaways are not very frequent .
A typical Italian lunch consists of a first course il primo ( pasta , rice or similar ) , a second - course il secondo ( meat or fish ) served together with a side dish il contorno ( vegetable or salad ) and fruit .
Commuters and other workers tend to eat less often at home but instead , have a quick meal in a restaurant or pizzeria .
Many foreign fast - food chains operate in Italy , especially in big cities and along motorways .
Italian fast - food chains , like Autogrill , are also prevalent , often featuring versions of local dishes .
MID - AFTERNOON SNACK ( MERENDA ) Section::::Mid - afternoon snack ( Merenda ) .
Many children and adults have a mid - afternoon snack called merenda , generally consumed after school or in mid - afternoon .
This may include a wide variety of foods .
Merenda is often similar to breakfast , and might consist of a hot milky drink with bread and honey / jam or brioches ; other foods are also eaten , such as yogurt , gelato , granita , fruit salad ( or just fruit ) , nuts , biscuits and cookies , cake , sweets , etc .
SUPPER ( CENA )
Section::::Supper ( Cena ) .
For cena , people tend to have the same or more amount of food than for " pranzo " and usually it consists of the same kind of dishes reported above .
FORMAL MEAL STRUCTURE Section::::Formal meal structure .
A structure of an Italian meal in its full form , usually performed during festivities .
Aperitivo :
The aperitivo opens a meal , and it is similar to an appetizer .
Most people gather around standing up and have alcoholic / non - alcoholic drinks such as wine , prosecco , spritz , vermouth , gingerino .
Occasionally small amounts of food are consumed , such as olives , crisps , nuts , cheese , sauce dips , little quiches or similar snacks .
Antipasto : The antipasto is a slightly heavier starter .
It is usually cold and lighter than the first course .
Examples of foods eaten are salumi ( such as salame , mortadella , prosciutto , bresaola and other charcuterie products ) , cheeses , sandwich - like foods ( panino , bruschetta , tramezzino , crostino ) , vegetables , cold salmon or prawn cocktails ; more elaborate dishes are occasionally prepared .
Primo : A primo is the first course .
It consists of hot food and is usually heavier than the antipasto , but lighter than the second course .
Non - meat dishes are the staple of any primo piatto : examples are risotto , pasta , soup and broth , gnocchi , polenta , crespelle , casseroles , or lasagne .
Secondo : This course may include different meats and types of fish , including turkey , sausage , pork , steak , stew , beef , zampone , salt cod , stockfish , salmon , lobster , lamb , chicken , or a roast .
The primo or the secondo piatto may be considered more important depending on the locality and the situation .
Contorno ( side dish ) :
A contorno is a side dish and it 's commonly served alongside a secondo piatto .
These usually consist of vegetables , raw or cooked , hot or cold .
They are usually served in a separate dish , not on the same plate as the meat .
Insalata : If the contorno contained many leafy vegetables , the salad might be omitted .
Otherwise , a fresh garden salad would be served at this point .
Formaggi e frutta : An entire course is dedicated to local cheeses and fresh seasonal fruit .
The cheeses will be whatever is typical of the region ( see List of Italian cheeses ) .
Dolce :
Next follows the dolce , or dessert .
Frequent dishes include tiramisu , panna cotta , cake or pie , panettone or pandoro ( the last two are mainly served at Christmas time ) and the Colomba Pasquale ( an Easter cake ) .
A gelato or a sorbetto can be eaten too .
Though there are nationwide desserts , popular across Italy , many regions and cities have local specialties .
In Naples , for instance , zeppole and rum baba are popular ; in Sicily , cassata and cannoli are commonly consumed ; mostarda , on the other hand , is more of a Northern dish .
Caffè :
Coffee is often drunk at the end of a meal , even after the digestivo .
Italians do not have milky coffees or drinks after meals ( such as cappuccino or caffè macchiato ) , but strong coffee such as espresso , which is often drunk very quickly in small cups while still hot .
Digestivo :
The digestivo , also called ammazzacaffè if served after the coffee , is the drink to conclude the meal .
Drinks such as grappa , amaro , limoncello or other fruit / herbal drinks are drunk .
Digestivo indicates that the drinks served at this time are meant to ease digestion of a long meal .
SEE ALSO
* Full course dinner * Italian food products REFERENCES