OVARIAN PREGNANCY
Ovarian pregnancy refers to an ectopic pregnancy that is located in the ovary .
Typically the egg cell is not released or picked up at ovulation , but fertilized within the ovary where the pregnancy implants .
Such a pregnancy usually does not proceed past the first four weeks of pregnancy .
An untreated ovarian pregnancy causes potentially fatal intra - abdominal bleeding and thus may become a medical emergency .
CAUSE AND PATHOLOGY Section::::Cause and pathology .
The cause of ovarian pregnancy is unknown , specifically as the usual causative factors – pelvic inflammatory disease and pelvic surgery – implicated in tubal ectopic pregnancy seem to be uninvolved .
There appears to be a link to the intrauterine device ( IUD ) , however , it can not be concluded that this is causative as it could be that IUDs prevent other but not ovarian pregnancies .
Some have suggested that patients who undergo IVF therapy are at higher risk for ovarian pregnancy .
An ovarian pregnancy is usually understood to begin when a mature egg cell is not expelled or picked up from its follicle and a sperm enters the follicle and fertilizes the egg , giving rise to an intrafollicular pregnancy .
It has also been debated that an egg cell fertilized outside of the ovary could implant on the ovarian surface , perhaps aided by a decidual reaction or endometriosis .
Ovarian pregnancies rarely go longer than 4 weeks ; nevertheless , there is the possibility that the trophoblast finds further support outside the ovary and thus may affect the tube and other organs .
In very rare occasions the pregnancy may find a sufficient foothold outside the ovary to continue as an abdominal pregnancy , and an occasional delivery has been reported .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The diagnosis is made in asymptomatic pregnant women by obstetric ultrasonography .
On pelvic examination a unilateral adnexal mass may be found .
Typical symptoms are abdominal pain and , to a lesser degree , vaginal bleeding during pregnancy .
Patients may present with hypovolemia or be in circulatory shock because of internal bleeding .
Ideally , ultrasound will show the location of the gestational sac in the ovary , while the uterine cavity is " empty " , and if there is internal bleeding , it can be identified .
Because of the proximity of the tube , the sonographic distinction between a tubal and an ovarian pregnancy may be difficult .
Serial hCG levels generally show not the normal progressive rise .
In a series of 12 patients the mean gestation age was 45 days .
Histologically , the diagnosis has been made by Spiegelberg criteria on the surgical specimen of the removed ovary and tube .
However , the tube and ovary are not usually removed as sonography allows for earlier diagnosis and surgeons strive to preserve the ovary .
Prior to the introduction of Spiegelberg 's criteria in 1878 , the existence of ovarian pregnancy was in doubt ; his criteria helped to identify the ovarian pregnancy from other ectopics :
* The gestational sac is located in the region of the ovary .
*
The gestational sac is attached to the uterus by the ovarian ligament .
* Ovarian tissue is histologically proven in the wall of the gestational sac .
*
The oviduct on the affected side is intact ( this criterion , however , holds not true for a longer ongoing ovarian pregnancy ) .
An ovarian pregnancy can be mistaken for a tubal pregnancy or a hemorrhagic ovarian cyst or corpus luteum prior to surgery .
Sometimes , only the presence of trophoblastic tissue during the histologic examination of material of a bleeding ovarian cyst shows that an ovarian pregnancy was the cause of the bleeding .
MANAGEMENT
Section::::Management .
Ovarian pregnancies are dangerous and prone to internal bleeding .
Thus , when suspected , intervention is called for .
Traditionally , an explorative laparotomy was performed , and once the ovarian pregnancy was identified , an oophorectomy or salpingo - oophorectomy was performed , including the removal of the pregnancy .
Today , the surgery can often be performed via laparoscopy .
The extent of surgery varies according to the amount of tissue destruction that has occurred .
Patients with an ovarian pregnancy have a good prognosis for future fertility and therefore conservative surgical management is advocated .
Further , in attempts to preserve ovarian tissue , surgery may involve just the removal of the pregnancy with only a part of the ovary .
This can be accomplished by an ovarian wedge resection .
Ovarian pregnancies have been successfully treated with methotrexate since it was introduced in the management of ectopic pregnancy in 1988 .
An ovarian pregnancy can develop together with a normal intrauterine pregnancy ; such a heterotopic pregnancy will call for expert management as not to endanger the intrauterine pregnancy .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Ovarian pregnancies are rare : the vast majority of ectopic pregnancies occur in the fallopian tube ; only about 0.15 - 3 % of ectopics occur in the ovary .
The incidence has been reported to be about 1:3,000 to 1:7,000 deliveries .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1614 Mercier ( also shown as Mercerus ) described ovarian pregnancy for the first time , as a condition separate from a tubal pregnancy .
Once the study of physiology emerged , Boehmer classified extra - uterine pregnancy into three classes : abdominal , ovarian , and tubal .
There were many doubters that such a condition existed , particularly Mayer , who wrote an essay not only denying the existence of ovarian pregnancy , but demonstrating that recorded cases to that time were other conditions .
Then Cohnstein proposed four criteria that would need to be present for ovarian pregnancy exist .
His requirements were : 1 ) absence of the ovary on the side in which the alleged pregnancy was located ; 2 ) connection of the uterus and sac via an ovarian ligament ; 3 ) cylindrical tissue must line the layers of the sac with direct connection between the tunica albuginea and sac wall ; and 4 ) evidence of the amniotic cavity connection to the ovarian follicle or corpus luteum .
These were replaced by Otto Spiegelberg 's criteria in 1878 , which have been used into the 20th century with additions and modifications .
Up to 1845 , about 80 cases of ovarian pregnancy were proposed .
With Mayer 's 1845 denial that ovarian pregnancy could exist , physicians began taking more care in their descriptions and analysis of cases .
Though numerous cases were evaluated , some failed to provide microscopic evidence and others failed to show the necessary histological changes of pregnancy , or failed on one or more of the criteria .
In 1899 , Catharine van Tussenbroek finally settled the question of the existence of ovarian pregnancy , by providing the first accurate clinical and histological description of a case .
Though doubted , her results were confirmed three years later in a case by Thompson .
REFERENCES CITATIONS
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Ectopic Pregnancy Trust - Information and support for those who have suffered the condition by a medically overseen and moderated UK based charity , recognised by the National Health Service ( UK ) Department of Health ( UK ) and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists