COWBOYS – STEELERS RIVALRY
The Cowboys – Steelers rivalry is a rivalry in the NFL .
The Cowboys currently lead the all - time series 17–15 .
As the two teams met in the Super Bowl 3 times and play in different conferences ( In which the Dallas Cowboys are in the NFC East and the Pittsburgh Steelers are in the AFC North ) , they only meet once every 4 regular seasons and occasionally in the preseason .
SIMILARITIES BETWEEN THE TWO REGIONS Section::::Similarities between the two regions .
Western Pennsylvania with the Pittsburgh Tri - State area ( including parts of Northern West Virginia and Eastern Ohio ) and the entire state of Texas are known to be football hotbeds at all levels .
High school football in both regions draws crowds in the tens of thousands and gets regular press coverage in both regions .
The local communities in both regions usually shut down local businesses for these games , which also serve as the largest social gathering for many of these communities .
College football is popular in both regions , and have produced powerhouse football teams .
Four of the ten Big 12 Conference schools are located in Texas , while Pitt Panthers , Penn State Nittany Lions and West Virginia Mountaineers are in the Pittsburgh Tri - State Region with many fans of the nearby Ohio State Buckeyes residing in the area .
In addition to these traditional powers , during the birth of the college game the Pittsburgh city schools of Duquesne University , Carnegie Mellon University and Washington & Jefferson College all qualified for multiple major - bowls in the 1910s through the 1940s and annually ranked in the top 10 of the AP .
While in Texas the Longhorns have had at least one player selected in each of the last 71 NFL Drafts dating back to 1938 , while Penn State itself had a 53-year draft streak that ended in 2005 .
Pro Football Hall of Fame defensive lineman Ernie Stautner , who played his entire 14-year career with the Steelers , later served as defensive coordinator under Cowboys head coach and fellow Hall of Famer Tom Landry during the Cowboys successful run in the 1970s , while the Cowboys would later draft another Hall of Famer , Tony Dorsett , the Pitt standout and Heisman Trophy winner and native of the Pittsburgh suburb of Hopewell Township .
Both of Dallas ' 1970s Super Bowl MVP's -- Chuck Howley and Randy White — hail from the Pittsburgh Tri - State , as well as Super Bowls V and VI Cowboys star Mike Ditka .
Conversely , two members of the Steelers ' famed Steel Curtain defensive line ( Ernie Holmes and " Mean Joe " Greene ) are Texas natives , as is former Steelers Pro Bowl nose tackle Casey Hampton , as well as the player that Chuck Noll chose in front of Dan Marino during the 1983 NFL Draft , Gabriel Rivera .
Former Buffalo Bills head coach Chan Gailey served as offensive coordinator in Pittsburgh before becoming the head coach of the Cowboys for two years in the late 1990s .
There have also been demographic shifts in both regions that have contributed to Pittsburgh fans living in Dallas , and Dallas fans living in Pittsburgh .
In the 1980s the Pittsburgh region was hit hard by the decline and closure of many steel mills and related industries in the region .
Many left the region to find work elsewhere , including Texas .
Since this was shortly after the Super Bowl teams of the 1970s , fans ' allegiance to the Steelers naturally stayed strong – the beginnings of Steeler Nation .
In the mid-2000s the reverse happened – Marcellus Shale drilling in the Pittsburgh Metropolitan region brought a significant influx of Texans and Oklahomans to the region due to the expertise needed to drill wells and related personnel originally from the Dallas - Fort Worth Metroplex .
Today there are significant numbers of persons living in the Dallas Metroplex and Houston that were born and raised in the Pittsburgh region , as well as significant numbers of North Texans living in the southern and western areas of the Pittsburgh Metropolitan region .
Finally , a large number of native Texans that lived outside the DFW Metroplex adopted the Steelers during the 1970s , in what seems to be a type of blowback for the cultural pervasiveness of the " big city " " America 's Team " phenomenon .
This group of Steeler fans mostly grew up in East Texas .
HISTORY
1952–1960 : BEFORE THE COWBOYS Section::::History .
Section::::1952–1960 : Before the Cowboys .
The roots to the Cowboys – Steelers rivalry can be traced several years before the Cowboys played a game , and to another team entirely .
Following the 1951 NFL season , New York Yanks owner Ted Collins sold his team back to the NFL due to financial difficulties competing with the New York Giants in the same market , as well as the All - America Football Conference folding just two years before and putting a severe drain on the team .
Not wanting the team to compete with the Giants in the same market , the NFL decided to move the rights to the franchise to either the Dallas – Fort Worth Metroplex or Baltimore .
Baltimore had previously been home to an NFL team , the original Baltimore Colts which had come over from the AAFC along with the Cleveland Browns and San Francisco 49ers , but had folded after the 1950 NFL season due to financial difficulties despite strong fan support .
Dallas , and the state of Texas in general , was a true expansion market that was untapped , and the NFL owners liked the appeal that Dallas offered due to the aforementioned following of football in the state .
The NFL owners voted 10–1 to award the assets of the Yanks to the Dallas group led by Giles Miller as opposed to the Baltimore group , which became the Dallas Texans .
The lone holdout was Steelers founder and owner Art Rooney .
Rooney , an Irish Catholic , was more tolerant of African Americans than the other owners ( most of whom were Protestant and had their own discrimination towards Catholics ) and was concerned about the racism that existed in the Southern United States at the time and the subsequent civil rights movement that would take place later in the decade .
Rooney 's assumptions would be later proven correct : while the Texans struggled on the field , it also struggled at the gate partly because two of the team 's best players , George Taliaferro and Buddy Young , were both black , which made fans in Texas automatically turn away from the team simply because of prejudice .
The Texans folded after the 1952 NFL season and their assets would be sold to Carroll Rosenbloom to form the new Baltimore Colts , which currently play in Indianapolis .
1960–1969 :
EARLY YEARS
Section::::1960–1969 :
Early years .
After the failure of the Texans , the NFL had no plans to return to the state in the foreseeable future .
However , in 1959 , Lamar Hunt , the son of oil tycoon H. L. Hunt , approached the NFL about putting another expansion team in Dallas .
The NFL said no , stating that the league was not expanding at the time .
He then approached the Chicago Cardinals about buying the team from owner Violet Bidwill Wolfner , who ultimately decided to keep the team and whose son Bill Bidwill remains the owner ( the Cardinals did move to St. Louis , Missouri for the 1960 NFL season ; the team currently is based in Phoenix , Arizona ; the Cowboys and Cardinals were divisional rivals from 1961–66 , and again from 1970–2001 ) .
Due to these rebuffs , Hunt formed the American Football League with his own Dallas team , the AFL 's incarnation of the Dallas Texans .
In response , the NFL suddenly reversed course and awarded an expansion team to Dallas for the 1960 season that ultimately became the Cowboys .
The plan worked : although the Texans were by far the better team on the field and won the 1962 AFL Championship , due to the Cowboys being part of the more - established NFL , the Texans took their AFL Championship north to Kansas City , Missouri , where they remain as the Kansas City Chiefs .
In the meantime , the Cowboys started play in the NFL in 1960 .
Their first game was against the same Steelers team that voted against putting an NFL team in Dallas eight years earlier , with the Steelers coming away with a 35–28 victory at the Cotton Bowl , en route to an 0–11–1 first season for the Cowboys .
The following year , the two teams met again in the season opener at the Cotton Bowl and the results would be different : the young Cowboys beat the veteran - filled Steelers 27–24 , the first victory for the Cowboys in franchise history .
The two teams would head in opposite directions the rest of the decade , with the Cowboys competing for the NFL championship in 1966 and 1967 ( both losses to the Vince Lombardi - led Green Bay Packers , the latter matchup in the Ice Bowl ) while the Steelers would be among the NFL 's worst teams , culminating in a 1–13 record in 1969 that saw the team win its season opener against the Detroit Lions , then lose every game afterwards in the first season of Hall of Fame head coach Chuck Noll .
The Cowboys defeated the Steelers 10–7 at Pitt Stadium in week 12 of the 1969 season , the final meeting between the clubs before the AFL - NFL merger .
1970–1979 : TEAMS OF THE 1970S Section::::1970–1979 : Teams of the 1970s .
The Steelers would be moved to the newly formed American Football Conference as a result of the AFL – NFL merger for the 1970 NFL season while the Cowboys would be placed in the National Football Conference .
The Cowboys would split the first two Super Bowl matchups of the decade while the Steelers started improving .
Around this time , both teams would have firm identities .
Both were strong on defense with the Steelers ' famed Steel Curtain defense , called a " Stunt 4–3 " , while the Cowboys boasted the Doomsday Defense , based around Landry 's " Flex " 4–3 defense .
On the offensive side of the ball brought key differences , as the Cowboys had Hall of Fame quarterback Roger Staubach and his aerial attack , as well as his reputation for fourth - quarter comebacks , earning him the nickname " Captain Comeback " .
The Steelers meanwhile , were powered offensively by the running game , led by Hall of Fame running back Franco Harris .
The teams met in September 1972 at Texas Stadium , with the Cowboys prevailing 17–13 .
The Steelers would go on to win the AFC Central division and qualify for the playoffs for the first time .
In the postseason , Pittsburgh defeated the Oakland Raiders 13–7 on Franco Harris ' " Immaculate Reception " , but lost the AFC championship game to the eventual Super Bowl champion Miami Dolphins 21–17 .
The two would have their first postseason meeting in Super Bowl X , with both teams vying to tie the Packers and Miami Dolphins for their second Super Bowl Championship .
The Steelers won this game , 21–17 , after safety Glen Edwards intercepted a Staubach pass in the end zone to seal the victory .
The hostility was evident in the third quarter when Steelers kicker Roy Gerela missed his second field goal , a 33-yard attempt .
After the miss , Cowboys safety Cliff Harris mockingly patted Gerela on his helmet and thanked him for " helping Dallas out " , but was immediately shoved to the ground by Steeler linebacker Jack Lambert .
Lambert could have been ejected from the game for defending his teammate , but the officials decided to allow him to remain .
After the Cowboys won Super Bowl XII , the two would meet again in Super Bowl XIII , considered one of the greatest Super Bowls ever played and consisted of a combined 20 players , coaches , and front - office administration that ended up in the Pro Football Hall of Fame , an NFL record .
The Steelers would once again come victorious , holding off the Cowboys 35–31 .
By this point , both teams would have rabid fan bases established nationally due to prominent television exposure .
The two would meet in the regular season in 1979 at Three Rivers Stadium , a 14–3 Steelers victory that many thought would be preview of Super Bowl XIV .
While the Steelers did go on to win Super Bowl XIV that season , the Los Angeles Rams crashed the party , having upset the Cowboys in the divisional round of the playoffs 21–19 in Staubach 's last game en route to meeting the Steelers in Super Bowl XIV .
1980–1989 :
DOWN YEARS
Section::::1980–1989 : Down years .
Age eventually caught up to both teams once the 1980s hit , though both remained competitive into the middle of the decade .
The highlight of the decade for this rivalry would come in the 1982 season opener at Texas Stadium , when the Steelers ended the Cowboys NFL - record 17-year season - opening winning streak with a 36–28 victory against the Cowboys .
By the middle of the decade , both teams were rebuilding .
The 1986 NFL season would be the first year since the 1965 NFL season that both teams missed the playoffs , which would happen for two more years before the Steelers clinched a wild card spot in 1989 .
During this time , the Steelers , with a mix of aging veterans and younger players , remained competitive in the AFC Central while the wheels fell off completely in Dallas .
In 1988 , both Tom Landry and Chuck Noll appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated together , asking if both coaches had lost their touch .
Though both teams had young future Hall of Famers in Michael Irvin and Rod Woodson , the Cowboys and Steelers would finish 3–13 and 5–11 , respectively , for 1988 .
New Cowboys owner Jerry Jones fired Landry after the season .
Noll would retire just three seasons later after missing the playoffs by just a few games each year after his breakout 1989 wild - card spot and two playoff thrillers , a 26–23 overtime victory in Houston and a 24–23 loss at Denver .
1990–PRESENT :
RETURN TO PROMINENCE
Section::::1990–present : Return to prominence .
The Cowboys would return to prominence in the 1990s , winning three Super Bowls , while the Steelers would return to AFC Championship contention under head coach Bill Cowher .
The rivalry resumed in the 1990s , but unlike the 1970s matchups that were dominated by Pittsburgh , Dallas got the upper hand this time around .
The Cowboys swept all four matchups between the two teams in the decade .
The possibility of Cowboys – Steelers III for Super Bowl XXIX existed , as both teams advanced to their respective conference championships .
Such a matchup would be a rematch from Week 1 of the regular season , which the Cowboys won 26–9 .
The Cowboys were the two - time defending Super Bowl champions , while the Steelers behind their " Blitzburgh " defense was the favorite to win the AFC .
However , the favored Steelers were upset by the San Diego Chargers 17–13 while the San Francisco 49ers , who had lost in the NFC Championship game the previous two years to the Cowboys , beat the Cowboys 38–28 .
Fans would only have to wait another year for Cowboys – Steelers III in the Super Bowl , as both teams advanced to Super Bowl XXX .
Like the previous two matchups , the game was close , but this time favored the Cowboys , who won 27–17 after Steelers quarterback Neil O'Donnell threw two interceptions to Cowboys cornerback Larry Brown , who would be named Super Bowl MVP for his efforts .
The Steelers have remained competitive since and have won two more Super Bowls ( Super Bowl XL , Super Bowl XLIII ) and losing one ( Super Bowl XLV ) while the Cowboys have not been back to the Super Bowl since Super Bowl XXX and have won only three playoff games from 1996 onward .
The two teams have only met four times since the 1998 NFL season .
The Steelers defeated the Cowboys in the first two games , winning 24–20 in 2004 and 20–13 in 2008 .
The Cowboys then defeated the Steelers in 2012 by a 27–24 margin in overtime and again in 2016 by a 35–30 margin .
REFERENCES