TABLE RESERVATION
A table reservation is an arrangement made in advance to have a table available at a restaurant .
While most restaurants in the vast majority of the world do not require a reservation , and some have no policy or simply any channel for making one , so - called higher - end restaurants mainly in overcrowded cities often require a reservation , and some may have tables booked for weeks in advance .
At particularly exclusive venues , it may be impossible to make a reservation on the same day as the planned visit .
The modern reservation system evolved from the prior practice of arranging catering at a restaurant .
Today , at such venues , observes Joy Smith , author of Kitchen Afloat : Galley Management and Meal Preparation ( 2002 ) :
" It 's always smart to inquire about a restaurant 's reservation policy .
Some will only reserve for large parties of six or more " .
In recent times , many restaurants have replaced the traditional pencil and notebook with an online reservation system .
Some websites exist which provide this service for multiple venues , such as Bookatable , Chope , EZTABLE , Dimmi , Killer Rezzy ( which also offers " rogue " reservations , which members can sell ) , OpenTable , Resy , Yelp Reservations ( formerly known as SeatMe ) ,
Shout ( which allows users to either make a reservation or put the one they have up for sale ) , Zomato , ResDiary and Zurvu .
Reservations for later dining times may prove problematic , as a restaurant may have a backlog which will require the reservation - holders to wait beyond their stated arrival time .
In addition , diners with a late reservation face a higher chance that the restaurant will run out of necessary ingredients for a particularly popular dish .
Most restaurants do not charge a customer who fails to honor their reservations , and courts have tended not to impose substantial penalties on restaurants that fail to honor reservations .
Nonetheless , it is generally considered polite to call and cancel a reservation once it is known one will not use it .
BENEFITS Section::::Benefits .
Nowadays it has become common for fine dining restaurants to offer table reservations to their clients .
In fact , this service has become an integral part of a restaurant 's operation , because of its multiple benefits .
Even though there are still types of restaurants that prefer the modality of first - come , first served , the majority of fine dining and casual restaurants organize their operation through table reservations .
As it has become part of restaurants ' service to offer reservations , clients are tending more and more towards making use of this offer , and for some people , it has become mandatory to make a table reservation before going out to a restaurant since there are also benefits for the client in this type of service .
BENEFITS TO RESTAURANTS Section::::Benefits to restaurants .
A restaurant will weigh the advantages and the disadvantages of offering the service of table reservations to its customers , and even though there is a cost involved in this service , the benefits it offers will outweigh all the disadvantages one may consider .
Offering table reservations may be a good tool to increase demand for certain restaurants .
As clients know that there is a limited capacity of seats , they will always prefer to make a table reservation instead of arriving at the restaurant and facing a long waiting line .
This tool helps the restaurant to keep a high demand of its customers on busy nights , and even better , to increase traffic on slow nights , when customers make reservations because they do n't know how crowded the restaurant will be .
Table reservations are also a handy tool in competitive markets since it makes it possible for restaurants to " steal " some market share from its competition .
This occurs when clients are not able to get a reservation at their " first choice " restaurant and they decide to go to their " second choice " restaurant , where they are able to get a reservation .
This service represents an important benefit for restaurants , because by guaranteeing customers a seat , they will be able to start operating at an earlier time , and serve food until a later time than average , and thus , serve more parties each day , and consequently , have a higher daily income .
The modality of table reservations helps restaurants to estimate demand in a more accurate way , and therefore , to improve sourcing and staffing , and to manage costs more efficiently .
By managing workflow in a better way , through reservations , the restaurant will be able to deliver a better quality of service .
BENEFITS TO CLIENTS Section::::Benefits to clients .
A client will always benefit from being able to make a table reservation at the restaurant to which he wishes to go .
Nowadays , the majority of people prefer to go out knowing that they have a reservation , instead of incurring the risk of not getting a table at the desired place .
A clear benefit of making a table reservation for a client is the security that they will experience when going out to a restaurant .
; i.e. , making a reservation will guarantee the client that he will receive his table at the time and place he has planned .
It is an advantage for the customer to know in advance that he will not have to go through the trouble of waiting until a table is available , or being put on a waiting list , or in the worst case , needing to find another place to eat , because the one chosen wo n't be able to serve him .
Another important benefit of making a reservation in the desired restaurant is the better quality of service one will receive .
As the restaurant knows at what time and with how many people the customer will arrive , a comfortable table with enough seats and space will be reserved , and the restaurant 's staff will be prepared to serve the arriving group .
BENEFITS OF AN ONLINE RESERVATION SYSTEM Section::::Benefits of an online reservation system .
Traditionally , restaurants have managed their reservation systems with a reservation book , which means they received the reservations via telephone calls and wrote them down in a book .
Nowadays , as a consequence of the massive use of the Internet and its benefits , experts have seen the opportunity and great added value of creating online reservation systems , and already many restaurants have replaced the traditional format with these new systems .
An important advantage of online reservation systems is the flexibility they offer when making a reservation .
When reservations are managed in the traditional way , patrons will only be able to call a restaurant to make a reservation during operational hours .
On the contrary , when reservations are managed through an online reservation system , customers will be able to make their reservation at any time and from any place they choose .
In general , patrons will have a better experience when making an online reservation , because it will be a quick process , the service will be available 24/7 , and the system will provide all the necessary information in order to make the desired reservation with tranquility .
Restaurants will experience a great number of benefits when using an online reservation system .
Some of these benefits translate into a decline in incoming phone calls , a better control of the capacity of the restaurant and the number of reservations one will be able to accept , and a number of handy statistics and reports that will help to analyze the business in interesting ways .
These benefits arise from a wide range of management tools provided by online reservation systems , like operational reports , floor management software , customer reservation histories , and customer databases that include customer data and preferences , and grow with each new table booking .
Restaurants will also be able to track cancellations , and manage walk - in and waitlists in a better way , eliminate overbookings , and create target email and postal mailings with the information from the customer database .
Some online reservation systems include integrated email marketing tools .
DISADVANTAGES Section::::Disadvantages .
Reservations can cause logistical issues for venues .
For example , paper - and - pencil reservations can lead to overbooking if performed incorrectly .
Although point - of - sale ( POS ) systems and online systems provide solutions to this issue , overbooking can still occur for reasons such as miscommunication between multiple staff members .
Additionally , if a venue is constantly fully booked , it may deter new customers from trying to book a reservation in the future .
Guests who create reservations but neither cancel nor show up pose a significant financial risk to restaurants , leading to overstaffing and loss of business from potential paying customers .
SEE ALSO
* List of restaurant terminology REFERENCES