CINCO
DE MAYO Cinco de Mayo ( in Latin America , Spanish for " Fifth of May " ) is an annual celebration held on May 5 .
The date is observed to commemorate the Mexican Army 's victory over the French Empire at the Battle of Puebla , on May 5 , 1862 , under the leadership of General Ignacio Zaragoza .
In the United States , Cinco de Mayo has taken on a significance beyond that in Mexico .
More popularly celebrated in the United States than Mexico , the date has become associated with the celebration of Mexican - American culture .
In Mexico , the commemoration of the battle continues to be mostly ceremonial , such as through military parades or battle reenactments .
Cinco de Mayo is sometimes mistaken for Mexico 's Independence Day — the most important national holiday in Mexico — which is celebrated on September 16 , commemorating the Cry of Dolores that initiated the war of Mexican independence from Spain .
BACKGROUND EVENTS LEADING TO THE BATTLE OF PUEBLA Section::::Background .
Section::::Events leading to the Battle of Puebla .
Cinco de Mayo has its roots in the Second French intervention in Mexico , which took place in the aftermath of the 1846–48 Mexican – American War and the 1858–61 Reform War .
The Reform War was a civil war that pitted Liberals ( who believed in separation of church and state , and freedom of religion ) against Conservatives ( who favored a tight bond between the Catholic Church and the Mexican state ) .
These wars nearly bankrupted the Mexican Treasury .
On July 17 , 1861 , Mexican President Benito Juárez issued a moratorium in which all foreign debt payments would be suspended for two years .
In response , Britain , France , and Spain sent naval forces to Veracruz to demand reimbursement .
Britain and Spain negotiated with Mexico and withdrew , but France , at the time ruled by Napoleon III , decided to use the opportunity to establish an empire in Mexico that would favor French interests , the Second Mexican Empire .
The empire was part of an envisioned " Latin America " ( term used to imply cultural kinship of the region with France ) that would rebuild French influence in the American continent and exclude Anglophone American territories .
FRENCH INVASION AND MEXICAN VICTORY Section::::French invasion and Mexican victory .
Late in 1861 , a well - armed French fleet stormed Veracruz , landing a large French force and driving President Juárez and his government into retreat .
Moving on from Veracruz towards Mexico City , the French army encountered heavy resistance from the Mexicans close to Puebla , at the Mexican forts of Loreto and Guadalupe .
The French army of 8,000 attacked the poorly equipped Mexican army of 4,000 .
On May 5 , 1862 , the Mexicans decisively defeated the French army .
The victory represented a significant morale boost to the Mexican army and the Mexican people at large and helped establish a sense of national unity and patriotism .
EVENTS
AFTER THE BATTLE Section::::Events after the battle .
The Mexican victory , however , was short - lived .
A year later , with 30,000 troops , the French were able to defeat the Mexican army , capture Mexico City , and install Emperor Maximilian I as ruler of Mexico .
The French victory was itself short - lived , lasting only three years , from 1864 to 1867 .
By 1865 , " with the American Civil War now over , the U.S. began to provide more political and military assistance to Mexico to expel the French " .
Upon the conclusion of the American Civil War , Napoleon III , facing a persistent Mexican guerilla resistance , the threat of war with Prussia , and " the prospect of a serious scrap with the United States " , retreated from Mexico starting in 1866 .
The Mexicans recaptured Mexico City , and Maximilian I was apprehended and executed , along with his Mexican generals Miguel Miramón and Tomás Mejía Camacho in Cerro de las Campanas , Querétaro .
"
On June 5 , 1867 , Benito Juárez finally entered Mexico City where he installed a new government and reorganized his administration . "
SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Significance .
The Battle of Puebla was significant , both nationally and internationally , for several reasons .
First , although considerably outnumbered , the Mexicans defeated a much - better - equipped French army .
" This battle was significant in that the 4,000 Mexican soldiers were greatly outnumbered by the well - equipped French army of 8,000 that had not been defeated for almost 50 years . "
Second , since the Battle of Puebla , some have argued that no country in the Americas has subsequently been invaded by any other European military force .
Historian Justo Sierra has written in his Political Evolution of the Mexican People that , had Mexico not defeated the French in Puebla on May 5 , 1862 , France would have gone to the aid of the Confederacy in the U.S. Civil War and the United States ' destiny would have been different .
HISTORY OF THE HOLIDAY
UNITED STATES Section::::History of the holiday .
Section::::United States .
According to a paper published by the UCLA Center for the Study of Latino Health and Culture about the origin of the observance of Cinco de Mayo in the United States , the modern American focus on that day first started in California in 1863 in response to the resistance to French rule in Mexico .
" Far up in the gold country town of Columbia ( now Columbia State Park )
Mexican miners were so overjoyed at the news that they spontaneously fired off rifle shots and fireworks , sang patriotic songs and made impromptu speeches . "
A 2007 UCLA Newsroom article notes that , " the holiday , which has been celebrated in California continuously since 1863 , is virtually ignored in Mexico . "
TIME magazine reports that " Cinco de Mayo started to come into vogue in 1940s America during the rise of the Chicano Movement .
" The holiday crossed over from California into the rest of the United States in the 1950s and 1960s but did not gain popularity until the 1980s when marketers , especially beer companies , capitalized on the celebratory nature of the day and began to promote it .
It grew in popularity and evolved into a celebration of Mexican culture and heritage , first in areas with large Mexican - American populations , like Los Angeles , Chicago , Houston and San Jose .
In a 1998 study in the Journal of American Culture it was reported that there were more than 120 official US celebrations of Cinco de Mayo in 21 different states .
An update in 2006 found that the number of official Cinco de Mayo events was 150 or more , according to José Alamillo , a professor of ethnic studies at Washington State University in Pullman , who has studied the cultural impact of Cinco de Mayo north of the border .
Los Angeles ' Fiesta Broadway has been billed as the largest Cinco de Mayo celebration in the world , which it most certainly was at its peak in the 1990s when it attracted crowds of 500,000 or more .
In recent years attendance has seen a dramatic decrease .
On June 7 , 2005 , the United States Congress issued a concurrent resolution calling on the President of the United States to issue a proclamation calling upon the people of the United States to observe Cinco de Mayo with appropriate ceremonies and activities .
To celebrate , many display Cinco de Mayo banners while school districts hold special events to educate students about its historical significance .
Special events and celebrations highlight Mexican culture , especially in its music and regional dancing .
Examples include baile folklórico and mariachi demonstrations held annually at the Plaza del Pueblo de Los Ángeles , near Olvera Street .
Commercial interests in the United States have capitalized on the celebration , advertising Mexican products and services , with an emphasis on alcoholic beverages , foods , and music .
According to Nielsen , in 2013 more than $ 600 million worth of beer was purchased in the United States for Cinco de Mayo , more than for the Super Bowl or St. Patrick 's Day .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
On May 9 , 1862 , President Juárez declared that the anniversary of the Battle of Puebla would be a national holiday regarded as " Battle of Puebla Day " or " Battle of Cinco de Mayo " .
Today , the commemoration of the battle is not observed as a national holiday in Mexico ( i.e. not a statutory holiday ) .
However , all public schools are closed nationwide in Mexico on May 5 .
The day is an official holiday in the State of Puebla , where the Battle took place , and also a full holiday ( no work ) in the neighboring State of Veracruz .
In Puebla , historical reenactments , parades , and meals take place to commemorate the battle .
Parade participants dress as French and Mexican soldiers to reenact the battle .
Every year the city also hosts the Festival Internacional de Puebla , which gathers national and international artists , traditional musicians and dancers .
As well as the Festival Internacional del Mole , with an emphasis on the city 's iconic mole poblano .
In Mexico City , military commemoration is occasionally held at the Campo Marte .
A street , , in the Historic Center of Mexico City was named after the battle in 1862 by Benito Juárez .
ELSEWHERE
Section::::Elsewhere .
Events tied to Cinco de Mayo also occur outside Mexico and the United States .
As in the United States , celebrations elsewhere also emphasize Mexican cuisine , culture and music .
For example , Windsor , Ontario , Canada , holds a " Cinco de Mayo Street Festival " , some Canadian pubs play Mexican music and serve Mexican food and drink , and a sky - diving club near Vancouver holds a Cinco de Mayo skydiving event .
In the Cayman Islands , in the Caribbean , there is an annual Cinco de Mayo air guitar competition , and at Montego Bay , Jamaica , there is a Cinco de Mayo celebration .
The city of Brisbane , Queensland , Australia , holds an annual Mexican Festival to honor the day , and celebrations are held in London and New Zealand .
Other celebrations of the day can also be found in Cape Town , South Africa , Lagos , Nigeria , and in Paris .
Cinco de Mayo is celebrated in Japan in Osaka and in Tokyo 's Yoyogi Park Event Space as a celebration of Latin American culture .
SEE ALSO
* Siege of Puebla ( 1863 ) , fall of Puebla to the Imperialists * Third Battle of Puebla ( 1867 ) , recapture of Puebla and decisive victory for the restoration of the Republic REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Citations Sources * Hayes - Bautista , David E. El Cinco de Mayo :
An American Tradition ( University of California Press ; 2012 )
293 pages EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cinco De Mayo Videos on The History Channel
* Cinco De Mayo Quick Facts * " Cinco de Mayo is NOT Mexican Independence Day ? "
on The Law Library of Congress 's blog
* " Origin of the Cinco De Mayo celebration " – Mexican American News /
Xcano Media