DANIELLE COLBY Danielle Colby ( born December 3 , 1975 ) is an American reality television personality who co - stars on the History reality television show American Pickers .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Danielle Colby was born in Davenport , Iowa , and brought up as a Jehovah 's Witness .
By 2004 , she was married with two children .
Colby 's television career eventually led to the breakup of her marriage .
In May 2012 , she told WQAD - TV that " fame and notoriety are not easy for him to deal with at all , so the relationship ended up not working out " .
Danielle currently resides in the Chicago area .
PERFORMANCE CAREER Section::::Performance career .
Colby owned and participated in a female roller derby team , the Big Mouth Mickies , for three years until injuries forced her to give it up .
While living with her family in Chicago , she attended a burlesque performance starring comedian Margaret Cho and dancer Satan 's Angel .
This prompted in her a desire to become a burlesque dancer ; and , after she moved back with her family to the Quad Cities area of Iowa , she created the professional burlesque troupe Burlesque Le Moustache , with nine performers , including Colby herself under the stage name Dannie Diesel , touring eastern Iowa and western Illinois .
As of October 2014 , Colby owned a burlesque academy called Dannie Diesel 's Bump ' n ' Grind Academy in the Rogers Park neighborhood of Chicago .
AMERICAN PICKERS Section::::American Pickers .
Colby had been a close friend of Mike Wolfe for a decade before the concept of the show had even been developed .
Once the show was sold to the History Channel , Wolfe asked Colby to work at the office of the antique shop Antique Archaeology .
American Pickers premiered on History , formerly known as the History Channel , on January 18 , 2010 .
As of September 8 , 2010 , it was the top rated non - fiction series of 2010 among total viewers and adults 25 - 54 .
FASHION DESIGN Section::::Fashion design .
Colby owns and operates 4 Miles 2 Memphis , a retro clothing based company .
A brick and mortar location opened on January 8 , 2013 in the Wicker Park area of Chicago however closed within a year .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Danielle Colby American Pickers site
* Danielle Colby Cushman Interview