PLAYSTATION VITA
The PlayStation Vita ( officially abbreviated PS Vita or Vita ) is a handheld game console developed and released by Sony Computer Entertainment .
It is the successor to the PlayStation Portable as part of the PlayStation brand of gaming devices .
It was released in Japan on December 17 , 2011 , with releases in North America , Europe , and other worldwide regions starting on February 22 , 2012 .
It primarily competes with the Nintendo 3DS as part of the eighth generation of video game consoles .
The original model of the handheld includes a OLED multi - touch capacitive touchscreen , two analog joysticks , front and shoulder push - button input , and supports Bluetooth , Wi - Fi and optional
3G. Internally , the Vita features a quad - core ARM Cortex - A9 MPCore processor and a quad - core SGX543MP graphics processing unit .
A revised model , the PS Vita 2000 series , released across 2013 and 2014 , sports all of the same features with a slightly smaller size , extended battery life , and an LCD screen replacing the OLED display .
Sony also released the PlayStation TV , a short - lived , re - purposed version of the Vita that allowed for the play of PS Vita games on a television screen similar to a home video game console , though the PS TV variant was discontinued by the end of 2015 .
The system 's design was created to meld the experience of big budget , dedicated video game platforms with the then up - and - coming trend of mobile gaming through smartphones and tablets .
However , in the year after the device 's successful launch , sales of the hardware and its bigger budget games stalled , threatening to end its lifespan .
A concentrated effort to attract smaller , indie developers in the West , combined with strong support from mid - level Japanese companies , helped keep the platform afloat .
While this led to less diversity in its game library , it did garner strong support in Japanese - developed role - playing video games and visual novels alongside a wealth of Western - developed indie games , leading it to become a moderate seller in Japan , and build a smaller , yet passionate userbase in the West .
While Sony has not released exact sales figures , late - lifespan estimates in sales fall around 15 to 16 million units .
In the platform 's later years , Sony also promoted its ability to work in conjunction with its other gaming products , notably the ability to play PlayStation 4 games on it through the process of Remote Play , similar to the Wii U 's function of Off - TV Play .
Production of the system and its physical cartridge games are scheduled to end in 2019 .
HISTORY BACKGROUND Section::::History .
Section::::Background .
After the massive success of Nintendo 's Game Boy line of handheld game consoles throughout the 1990s and early 2000 , with little in the way of market competition , and Sony 's massive success with its PlayStation and PlayStation 2 home video game consoles around the same time , Sony decided to enter the handheld market as well .
In 2004 , it released the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) to compete with the Nintendo DS as part of the seventh generation of video game consoles .
After a slow start in the worldwide market , it was invigorated in Japan with multiple releases in the Monster Hunter series .
With the series being less popular in western regions , it failed to revive the platform in the same way .
The PSP ended up being a mixed result for the company .
It was seen as a success in that it was the only handheld video game platform that had ever significantly competed with Nintendo for market share in a meaningful way , selling almost 80 million units in its lifespan , roughly the same amount as Nintendo 's Game Boy Advance had during the sixth generation of video game consoles .
Despite this , it had still only managed to sell a little over half of what its actual market competitor , the DS , had sold , which was over 150 million units by the end of 2011 .
Rumors of a successor to the PSP came as early as July 2009 when Eurogamer reported that Sony was working on such a device , which would utilize the PowerVR SGX543MP processor and perform at a level similar to the original Xbox .
Through mid-2010 , websites continued to run stories about accounts of the existence of a " PSP 2 " .
Reports arose during the Tokyo Game Show that the device was unveiled internally during a private meeting during mid - September held at Sony Computer Entertainment 's headquarters in Aoyama , Tokyo .
Shortly after , reports of development kits for the handheld had reportedly already been shipped to numerous video game developers including both first - party and third - party developers to start making games for the device , a report later confirmed by Mortal Kombat Executive Producer Shaun Himmerick .
By November , Senior Vice President of Electronic Arts , Patrick Soderlund , confirmed that he had seen that the PlayStation Portable successor existed , but could not confirm details .
In the same month , VG247 released pictures of an early prototype version showing a PSP Go - like slide - screen design along with two analog sticks , two cameras and a microphone , though the report mentioned that overheating issues had since caused them to move away from the design in favor of a model more similar to the original PlayStation Portable device .
Throughout 2010 , Sony would not confirm these reports of a PSP successor , but would make comments regarding making future hardware .
Shuhei Yoshida , President of Sony Computer Entertainment Worldwide Studios revealed that his studio , despite usually being more involved with software , had a continued role in future hardware development at the time .
In December , Sony Computer Entertainment CEO Kazuo Hirai stated that Sony aimed to appeal to a wide demographic of people by using multiple input methods on future hardware ; buttons and joysticks for traditional handheld game system users , and touchscreens for smart phone users .
The device was officially announced by Sony on January 27 , 2011 , at their " PlayStation Meeting " press conference held by the company in Japan .
The system , only known by its code name " Next Generation Portable " , was announced to be a handheld gaming device that aimed for PlayStation 3 quality visuals , which was later clarified to not be taken at a literal level because , according to David Coombes , platform research manager at Sony Computer Entertainment America ,
" Well , it 's not going to run at 2 GHz [ like the PS3 ] because the battery would last five minutes and it would probably set fire to your pants " .
Its power was later described by Sony engineers as about halfway between the PSP and PS3 .
As rumors had suggested , the device was designed to present " the best of both worlds " between mobile and handheld gaming , including a 5-inch OLED touchscreen , a rear touchpad coupled with physical buttons and dual analog sticks .
Sony also revealed that the device would be using a mix of retail and digital distribution of games .
Further details were announced at Game Developers Conference 2011 , including that Sony would be dropping the PSP 's UMD disc format in favor of small game cartridges of 2 GB or 4 GB size variants .
along with two cameras , facial detection , head detection and tracking capabilities .
LAUNCH AND EARLY YEARS Section::::Launch and early years .
On June 6 , 2011 , at E3 2011 , Sony announced that the device 's official name would be the PlayStation Vita , with the word " vita " being Latin for " life " .
Despite reports of the 2011 earthquakes in Japan delaying the release of the device , Sony reconfirmed that it was on track for a late 2011 release in Japan and a February 2012 release date for other major regions of the world .
The release date was later narrowed down to a December 17 , 2011 , release in Japan , and a February 22 , 2012 release date for America and Europe , although a limited edition was released a week earlier in North America on February 15 , 2012 , which included the 3G / WiFi model of the device , the game Little Deviants , a limited - edition carry case , and a 4 GB memory card .
The Vita launched with 26 titles in Japan , with Sony announcing that there were over 100 titles in development prior to the system 's release overall .
The Vita launched in the west with 25 titles , including original titles such as and Wipeout 2048 , and ports of games such as FIFA 12 and Rayman Origins .
The sales of the Vita started strong at launch , but then stalled and greatly underperformed .
The Vita had a strong launch in Japan , selling over 300,000 units in its first week of availability , though figures shortly afterwards shrunk down 78 % to under 73,000 sold in its second week , and then settled into about 12,000 sold per week in the following weeks .
Similarly , in the United States , the system debuted with 200,000 units sold in the first month , before slinking down into an amount of about 50,000 a month .
1.2 million units were reported as sold as of February 26 , 2012 – after it had launched in most regions .
The system continued to get high - profile games over the course of 2012 , including Gravity Rush , LittleBigPlanet PS Vita , Sonic & All - Stars Racing Transformed , Persona 4 Golden , , and .
Despite this , the system still only managed to sell 4 million units worldwide in its first 10 months on the market , and estimated by analysts to only be at 6 million units sold after two years of availability .
After 2012 , Sony ceased releasing direct sales figures of the Vita , instead opting to release combined sales figures with it and the PSP .
Still , the system under - performed ; while Sony projected selling 16 million units of combined Vita and PSP systems , it had to slash its forecast twice in the same year — down to 12 and then 10 million units sold .
With higher profile games not pushing the system sales enough in 2012 , big third party companies like Ubisoft and Activision started reducing or eliminating support for the system , especially in the West .
Additionally , while the Monster Hunter series had significantly boosted the sales of the PSP , its absence instead hurt the Vita .
Its developer , Capcom , had decided to release Monster Hunter Tri and future Monster Hunter games exclusively on the Nintendo 3DS , where it would sell millions of copies for Sony 's main competitor .
With support diminishing , Shahid Ahmad , Sony 's Director of Strategic Content , instead began a new approach to software , through directly reaching out to , and making accommodations for , smaller , independent developers who were previously release games for mobile and PC platforms .
While not completely reversing the sales trends of the Vita , the lower costs of making or porting smaller - budget games made it easier for developers to make a profit on the systems 's smaller userbase , and in turn , increased consumer attention on the console , keeping the device afloat .
Fez , Spelunky , Hotline Miami , and OlliOlli all found success with releases on Vita .
Ahmad also maintained interest in the device by directly interacting with consumers on social media ; the game Tales of Hearts R was localized into English only because it was number one in a survey of game 's desired on the platform .
Sony continued to support the system with games through 2013 as well , albeit lesser
so , with titles such as and Tearaway , along with a handful of other Western - developed ports such as FIFA 13 and Rayman Legends .
While the focus on indie games kept the device afloat in the West , in Japan , no such measures were necessary , as the Vita maintained moderate hardware sales .
While it was routinely outsold by its main competitor , the Nintendo 3DS , the Vita still managed to be one of the top consoles sold overall , partially due to Japan 's preference towards handheld gaming .
Strong support by Japanese developers also helped , with companies such as Bandai Namco , Falcom , Koei Tecmo , 5pb , Compile Heart , Spike Chunsoft , and Atlus releasing many games in the JRPG and visual novels genre to help kept a steady flow of mid - level releases coming to the system .
Additionally , big games such as Final Fantasy X / X-2 HD Remaster sold well and roughly in - line with their home console counterparts .
The heavier support from Japan , in turn , also helped support the system in the West as well , with many games in the Atelier , Ys , Danganronpa , Persona , and The Legend of Heroes series localized into English on the Vita , or made playable through the system 's backward compatibility with digital PSP games .
While the system managed to stay afloat as a minor success , other issues continued to persist , including the high price of the system in comparison to its main competitor , the Nintendo 3DS , and its sibling device , the PS3 , the high price of its memory cards used for game and data storage , and the increasing popularity of smartphones and tablets .
In August 2013 , Sony addressed the first two , dropping the price to $ 199 in North America and € 199 in Europe , and cutting the suggested retail price of the memory cards as well .
The price cut also coincided with the release of a slight redesign of the system , the " PS Vita 2000 " model .
The redesign included making the system 20 % thinner and 15 % lighter , while adding 1 GB of internal storage , and an extra hour of battery life .
However , the redesign did remove the OLED screen in favor of a cheaper LCD screen .
SHIFTING FOCUS
Section::::Shifting focus .
Towards the end of 2013 , around the launch of Sony 's next video game device , the home video game console the PlayStation 4 , Sony began making comments in regards to the change in focus with the Vita .
Yoshida stated that Sony would be releasing fewer first party games for the platform .
Sony Computer Entertainment 's Product Planning & Platform Software Innovation Director Don Mesa stated that the " economics simply do n't work with the traditional process " .
Sony addressed the " economics of Vita game development " issue with beginning on focusing on the fact that almost all PlayStation 4 games could be streamed and played through a Vita through Remote Play .
Sony attempted to attach the device to the PS4 due to its extreme popularity ; it took only a few weeks for the sales to surpass the sales of the Vita over the course of almost two years .
In July 2014 , Yoshida stated that the company would focus on it less as a dedicated handheld video game console , and more on its combination of uses , stating " it 's not about individual Vita games any more .
It 's more about how Vita can have multiple uses – with PS4 Remote Play , PS3 games with PS
Now , and the dedicated games .
The whole ecosystem with PS4 at the center , the Vita 's a part of that . "
Sony later announced that the Vita will have PlayStation VR integration in the form of a second screen as well .
Open beta trials for PlayStation
Now functionality on the PS Vita began on October 14 , 2014 in North America .
The PlayStation TV , released across late 2013 and 2014 , also aimed to expand the system 's userbase by allowing for Vita games to be played on a television like a home console , though the device was discontinued in the West by the end of 2015 , and did not fare well in Japan 's handheld - focused region either .
In November 2014 , SCEA president Shawn Layden suggested that the new approach was working on hardware level , stating that Vita sales had increased since the implementation of PS4 Remote Play , though he and another Sony representative did not give specific figures .
Sony continued to make games for the device , though in smaller number than in past .
The last major Sony - developed title , Freedom Wars , still found success , selling over 188,000 copies in its first week of release in Japan .
The debut was the highest Sony game debut for the system , and the second highest , only to Namco Bandai 's late 2013 release of God Eater 2 on the platform .
In September 2015 , Yoshida stated that Sony had no current plans for a Vita successor , stating that " climate is not healthy for now because of the huge dominance of mobile gaming . "
At E3 2015 , he had stated that Sony would not be making any more AAA , big budget games to the system , but by October , the comment had been revised that Sony would not be making any more games for it at all .
Reasons cited included the company focusing on supporting the PS4 , and the fact that it felt that third party Japanese developers and Western indie developers were sufficiently supporting the device .
In March 2016 , Sony announced that instead , it would be forming a new company , " Forward Works " , and be instead concentrating on bringing PlayStation - based games to mobile platforms like iOS and Android .
Despite Sony 's focus on the PS4 and mobile for the future , the Vita still continues to receive substantial third party company game support in the way of Japanese - style role - playing games and visual novels and Western - style indie video games .
Minecraft in particular was successful for the platform , with it selling over 1.2 million physical copies in Japan alone as of September 2017 .
The device is considered to have sold fairly well in Japan , and still a crucial part of Sony 's overall strategy in the region , while Sony has acknowledged that the device still has a very vocal and passionate user - base in the West as well , with the company still encouraging third party companies to create games for the device .
At the 2016 Game Developers Conference , research analyst firm EEDAR estimated the sales of the Vita to be about at 10 million unit sold through the end of 2015 .
Multi - platform releases with the PS4 have also incidentally helped sustain the Vita 's stream of software , even in the west , through 2016 and 2017 ; games receive a Vita version more to appeal to Japan 's larger Vita user - base , and receive a PS4 version more to appeal to North America 's larger user - base .
The March 2017 launch of the Nintendo Switch , which operates on a similar concept of providing high budget video games on a portable unit , further overshadowed the Vita , though niche support through indie games and JRPGs continued into the year .
In mid-2017 , Glixel estimated the Vita userbase to be around 15 million .
On September 20 , 2018 , Sony announced at Tokyo Game Show 2018 that the Vita will be discontinued in 2019 , ending its hardware production .
Worldwide production of new physical Vita games will cease by the end of Sony 's 2018 fiscal year , which ends on March 31 , 2019 .
At the time of the announcement , USgamer estimated that the Vita userbase had grown to approximately 16 million units .
HARDWARE Section::::Hardware .
In line with Sony 's ambition to combine aspects of traditional video game consoles with mobile devices like smartphones and tablets , the Vita contains a multitude of input methods .
The device features a " super oval " shape similar to the design of the original PlayStation Portable , with a qHD OLED capacitive touchscreen in the centre of the device .
The device features two analog sticks , a D - pad , a set of standard PlayStation face buttons ( , , and ) , two shoulder buttons ( L and R ) , a PlayStation button and Start and Select buttons .
Motion control is also possible through Sony 's Sixaxis motion sensing system , consisting of a three - axis gyroscope and a three - axis accelerometer .
In addition to these input methods , specific to just the Vita , is a secondary touchpad that is on the back of the device .
Other hardware includes stereo speakers , a microphone , built - in Wi - Fi , and Bluetooth 2.1+EDR connectivity , and two cameras .
The cameras are both 0.3 megapixel and run at 640×480 ( VGA ) at 60 frames / s , or at 320×240 at 120 frames / s .
They can be used to take photos or videos using built - in applications on the system .
The two cameras feature the abilities of face detection , head detection , and head tracking .
The platform also launched with a model with 3 G mobile data support , which required a separate data plan through a data provider .
The 3 G service has been partnered with NTT DoCoMo in Japan , AT&T in the US , Rogers in Canada and Vodafone in Europe and Australia .
The 3 G model was discontinued in 2013 and not made available in the system 's future revised models .
Internally , the device features a custom system on chip with a quad - core ARM Cortex - A9 MPCore processor and a quad - core GPU SGX543MP4 + .
Sony has stated that the Vita generally runs well under its full clock speed due to overheating and battery consumption issues that would ensue , instead placing its processing power " around halfway between the current PSP and the PS3 " .
The Vita 's internal battery has between 3–5 hours of power for game playing , depending on the processing power required for the game , screen brightness , sound level and network connections , as well as other factors .
Additionally , the battery can supply about five hours for video watching , and up to nine hours of music listening with the screen off .
The system does allow for additional external battery solutions as well .
The PlayStation Vita has 512 MB of system RAM and 128 MB of VRAM .
The amount of RAM allows cross - game chat to be used on the system .
Software for the PlayStation Vita is distributed on a proprietary flash memory card called " PlayStation Vita game card " rather than on Universal Media Discs ( UMDs ) as used by the PlayStation Portable .
The size and shape of the card itself is very similar to an SD card .
5–10 % of the game card 's space is reserved for game save data and patches .
The PS Vita is incompatible with standard memory cards , such as SD cards , and instead stores data on proprietary PS Vita memory cards , which are available in sizes of 4 GB , 8 GB , 16 GB , 32 GB and 64 GB .
A maximum of 500 applications and games can be stored on the device at a time , regardless of data storage available .
When the limit is reached , applications or games must be moved or deleted in order to access those beyond the limit .
REMOTE PLAY INTERACTIVITY WITH PLAYSTATION 4
Section::::Remote Play interactivity with PlayStation 4 .
All games developed for the PlayStation 4 , with the exception of games requiring the use of special peripherals such as PlayStation Camera , are playable on the Vita through Remote Play .
With the use of a Vita , PS4 , and PS4 game , this allows a PS4 game to be run on the PS4 , but its output transmitted to the Vita , with the Vita being used for the controller input , and the image and sound being transmitted to the Vita 's screen and speakers instead of a television .
The end result is similar to what a Wii U console does with its GamePad controller through Off - TV Play .
The Vita technically has Remote Play functionality with the PlayStation 3 as well , though very few PS3 games supported the feature due to limitations with the less - powerful PS3 hardware .
More PS3 games are available for streaming on the Vita through Sony 's cloud gaming service PlayStation Now , though they are streamed over the internet in the form of cloud computing rather than directly from a physical PS3 console .
First implemented in 2014 , the service was announced to be discontinued on the Vita on August 15 , 2017 .
REVISED MODEL
Section::::Revised model .
A revised model of the Vita was released in Japan on October 10 , 2013 , in Europe on February 7 , 2014 and in North America on May 6 , 2014 .
The revised model , officially called the PCH-2000 series and commonly referred to as the PS Vita Slim , is 20 % thinner and 15 % lighter compared to the original model .
While it largely maintains the original 's overall structure and layout , the original 's OLED screen has been replaced with a lower - cost LCD display .
The model also roughly added about an extra hour of battery life .
The newer model also comes with 1 GB of internal storage memory , although it is not possible to use both the internal memory and memory card concurrently .
Upon inserting a PS Vita memory card , the system will offer to copy the existing data from the internal memory to the new card .
This model has a micro USB Type B port , which can be used to charge the device along with any standard micro USB cable .
The model was released in six colors in Japan ( white , black , light blue , lime green , pink , and khaki ) , although it was only released in black and light blue in North America and Europe .
PLAYSTATION TV Section::::PlayStation TV .
The PlayStation TV is a non - portable variant of the Vita ; instead of featuring its own display screen like a handheld video game console , it connects to a television via HDMI like a traditional home video game console , and is controlled though the use of a DualShock 3 or DualShock 4 controller .
Due to the difference in controller input between the Vita and a DualShock controller , Vita games that are dependent on the system 's touch - screen , rear touchpad , microphone or camera , are not compatible .
It also shares the Remote Play and PS
Now functionality of a regular Vita .
The system was released in Japan in November 2013 , in North America in October 2014 , and in Europe on November 14 , 2014 .
The device did not fare well and had a short retail shelf life in North America and Europe , where it was discontinued at the end of 2015 .
SOFTWARE GAME LIBRARY Section::::Software .
Section::::Game library .
Physical software for the Vita is distributed on a proprietary flash memory card called " PlayStation Vita game card " .
All Vita games are also made available to be downloaded digitally on the PlayStation Network via the PlayStation Store , although not all games are released physically .
Since its launch , digital - only releases have slowly become more prominent , partially in an effort to reduce production costs for release on the platforms comparatively smaller user - base , and partially due to the influx smaller - scale indie mobile phone games that have always been digital - only releases .
Like the PS3 and PS4 , the Vita contains Trophy support for games .
The system was designed so that it would be easy for developers to extract PS3 game assets and in turn use them to make Vita versions of games .
Prior to the Vita 's release , several third - party studios showcased tech demos of the device by exporting existing assets from their PlayStation 3 counterpart and then rendering them on the device , high budget examples including , Yakuza 4 , and Lost Planet .
While none of these particular high budget tech demos materialized into actual game releases , and few big - budget Western games would be made for both outside of PlayStation All - Stars Battle Royale , many Japanese development teams would go on to develop mid - level games that would release for both platforms , including Falcom 's Trails of Cold Steel duology , Compile Hearts ' original Hyperdimension Neptunia trilogy , and many entries from Tecmo Koei 's Atelier and Dynasty Warriors series .
The trend continued on the PS4 as well , with Vita / PS4 releases becoming common due to the spread of their userbases – Vita versions for Japan , where the Vita was larger in its initial years , and PS4 versions of games for North America and Europe , where the PS4 userbase was substantially larger .
Few PlayStation 2 titles were ported to the Vita due to the PS2 's complicated infrastructure – games that did , such as Final Fantasy X / X2 Remaster and Persona 4 Golden required extensive reworking , or were based on their PS3 counterparts , such as Jak and Daxter Collection , Ratchet and Clank Collection , and Sly Cooper Collection .
Towards the end of its lifespan , Vita versions of games began to be cancelled , in favor of PS4 or Nintendo Switch releases .
BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY Section::::Backward compatibility .
The device is backward compatible with most PSP games ; however , its lack of a UMD disc drive limits this capability to those titles which have been digitally released on the PlayStation Network via the PlayStation Store , but not physical PSP games or films .
The Vita is also backward compatible with the majority of the PS one Classics – the group of PlayStation 1 games Sony has made available digitally for download , and PlayStation Minis – small - budget downloadable titles originally created for the PSP and PS3 .
Games from Sony 's PlayStation Mobile initiative had initially been compatible , but were removed when the service was shutdown in September 2015 .
In Japan , select downloadable PC Engine and PocketStation titles became backward compatible as well .
APPLICATIONS
Section::::Applications .
A number of applications are available to run on the Vita , some initially pre - loaded on the device , while others are available via Sony 's PlayStation Store .
Pre - loaded apps include an internet browser , a " Content Manager " app for monitoring data saved to the device , an email app , a music playing app , a photo app , and a video playing app .
The system 's web browser supports HTML5 , cookies , and JavaScript , but not Adobe Flash .
Also included was " Near " , a social media / GPS like app that allowed the user to see other Vita players in the area , and what games or applications they had been using , with the opportunity for some limited interactivity and communication , although most of its functionality was disabled in 2015 .
A number of other third party apps commonly found on mobile devices have also been made available on the Vita , including Google Maps , ( removed in 2015 ) , YouTube ( removed in 2015 ) , Facebook ( removed in 2015 ) , Skype ( removed in 2016 ) , Netflix , Hulu Plus , Redbox Instant , and Flickr .
While the Google Maps and YouTube apps have been removed , the websites are still accessible and usable through the internet browser .
SYSTEM SOFTWARE Section::::System software .
Unlike the PSP and PlayStation 3 , the PlayStation Vita does not use the XrossMediaBar interface .
Instead it uses a touchscreen - based UI dubbed LiveArea , which includes various social networking features via the PlayStation Network .
Each game or application is represented by its own circle icon , and selecting it leads the user to a panel with multiple options present , including running software itself , going to its respective website through the internet , seeing if there are downloadable updates available for the software , and seeing a newsfeed - like list of activities related to it , such as installing it or obtaining trophies , for both the user and others the user has interacted with recently .
RECEPTION AND SALES Section::::Reception and sales .
According to review aggregator Metacritic , the Vita 's original hardware release was generally well - received with critics , although a few concerns persisted as well .
Metacritic editor Jason Dietz noted that reviewers tended to praise the Vita 's actual hardware design and operating system , but expressed some concern on its practicality , namely competing in 2012 onward , with a large size and price , where mobile phones with large screens and cheap games were prevalent as an alternative .
As of its initial Western launch in February 2012 , out of 44 professional critic reviews , 9 fell in the " Great " rating , 29 in the " Good " rating , 6 in the " Mixed " rating , and 0 in the " Bad " or " Awful " rating .
Its initial launch sales were generally seen as positive , selling over 300,000 units in Japan , and 200,000 units in North America .
However , a large dropoff occurred in both regions .
In Japan , second - week sales dropped 78 % , and leveled off at selling about 12,000 units per week .
Similarly , sales dropped off to about 30,000 to 50,000 units sold per month for the year after launch in North America .
Overall , Sony fell far short of the worldwide sales targets of 10 million Vitas sold by the end of March 2013 .
The device sold 1.2 million units as of the end of February 2012 , 4 million by the end of 2012 , and were only estimated by analysts to have reached 6 million by the end of 2013 , figures that have not been confirmed due to Sony 's ceasing to release Vita sales figures after hitting the 4 million mark at the end of 2012 .
Views on the hardware dropped to more moderate levels in 2013 , after the platform 's initial sales lulls .
Surveys in Japan showed that consumers were not purchasing the device due to its high retail price and perceived lack of software variety , and that current Vita owners only showed a 46 % rate of approval for the device and its software library .
Similarly , many Western critics felt that the low sales through 2013 would lead to an early death for the product .
From 2013 onward , Sony was able to reverse the trajectory of the system by changing focus , aiming to be more of a niche product than one with mass market appeal – focusing more on small Western mobile phone games and mid - level Japanese developed games , and attaching it to the rise of popularity of its PlayStation 4 platform with its remote play connectivity functions .
Sony also released the Vita model revision , the PCH-2000 , which was generally well received by critics as well for addressing a number prior complaints about the system , which included a price and size reduction .
However , reviewers felt more mixed on the decision to change from OLED to LCD screen in the revised model , with some feeling it led to a minor downgrade in image quality .
While not giving specific figures , Sony stated that Vita sales beat projections in North America in 2014 , which it was happy and surprised with , sometimes even falling out of stock .
Similar response was found in the UK as well .
The platform has been considered to have sold well in Japan , where it outsold the PS4 in 2015 , and reached 5 million units sold in 2016 according to sales tracker Media Create .
It also obtained million - selling software in the same year , with the Japanese Vita release of Minecraft .
By the end of 2015 , research firm EEDAR estimated the sales of the Vita worldwide to be around 10 million .
Despite the smaller userbase , the platform continues to be viable for game release into 2017 due to the high attach rate of software sold per hardware user .
Limited Run Games and various indie game developers praised the platform for its wide selection of more original and niche video games , and the strong respective sales of them .
In mid-2017 , Glixel estimated that approximately 15 million units of the system had been sold , while by September 2018 , USGamer estimated it had grown to about 16 million units .
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website – United States * Official website – United Kingdom * Official website – Japan