CHEAPER BY THE DOZEN Cheaper by the Dozen is a semi - autobiographical novel written by Frank Bunker Gilbreth , Jr. and Ernestine Gilbreth Carey , published in 1948 .
The novel recounts the authors ' childhood lives growing up in a household of 12 kids .
The bestselling book was later adapted into a feature film by Twentieth Century Fox in 1950 and followed up by the sequel , Belles on Their Toes ( 1950 ) , which was adapted as a 1952 film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The book tells the story of time and motion study and efficiency experts Frank Bunker Gilbreth and Lillian Moller Gilbreth , and their children as they reside in Montclair , New Jersey for many years .
Lillian Gilbreth was described in the 1940s as " a genius in the art of living . "
The best - selling biographical novel was composed by two of her twelve children who wrote about their childhoods .
Gilbreth 's home doubled as a sort of real - world laboratory that tested her and her husband Frank 's ideas about efficiency .
The title comes from one of Frank Sr . 's favorite jokes : it often happened that when he and his family were out driving and stopped at a red light , a pedestrian would ask , " Hey , Mister !
How come you got so many kids ?
" Gilbreth would pretend to ponder the question carefully , and then , just as the light turned green , would say , " Well , they come cheaper by the dozen , you know , " and drive off .
In real life , the Gilbreths ' second eldest child , Mary , died of diphtheria at age five .
The book does not explicitly explain the absence of Mary Gilbreth .
It was not until the sequel , Belles on Their Toes , was published in 1950 that her death is mentioned in a footnote .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Cheaper by the Dozen was made into a 1950 motion picture , starring Clifton Webb and Myrna Loy as Frank and Lillian Gilbreth .
Cheaper by the Dozen ( 1992 ) has been adapted as a stage play by Christopher Sergel .
It played at Grey Lite Theatre in 1992 , directed by Lori David .
Cheaper by the Dozen has been adapted as a musical , dramatized by Christopher Sergel with a score by David Rogers and Mark Bucci .
Cheaper by the Dozen ( 2003 ) and Cheaper by the Dozen 2 ( 2005 ) , starring comedians Steve Martin and Bonnie Hunt , make a few references to the 1950 film .
On the cover of Kate 's book ( Kate is the female lead character in the movies ) , the title is shown to be Cheaper by the Dozen , and the author 's maiden name appears as Gilbreth ( the name of the real family in the book upon which the 1950 film was based ) .
During a game of Apple Schmear , Nora tells Hank that her " Great Grandma Gilbreth " invented the game .
Furthermore , Lorraine and Tom argue about how much time she should be allotted in front of the mirror in the mornings .
He allots her a few extra minutes , connecting back to the time efficiency specialist that the father , Frank Gilbreth , was in the 1950 film .
CONTEMPORARY APPRAISALS Section::::Contemporary appraisals .
Re - reading the book in 2003 , Pulitzer Prize - winning critic Jonathan Yardley wrote in The Washington Post : " [ I]t is a joy to report that Cheaper by the Dozen still reads remarkably well . ...
The prose ... is unadorned and matter of fact , and its organizational structure is a bit difficult to detect , but what matters most is that it is a touching family portrait that also happens to be very , very funny . "
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
*
( Article by Frank Jr. about their summer home on Nantucket Island . )
* , comprehensive family and professional history .