PAT WALSHE Patrick Walshe ( July 26 , 1900 – December 11 , 1991 ) was an American dwarf character actor and circus performer who specialized portraying animals
( animal impersonating ) .
He is best known for playing Nikko , the head of the Winged Monkeys in The Wizard of Oz .
He appeared in only a few films , as most of his work was in theater , vaudeville and circus .
LIFE AND CAREER Section::::Life and career .
Walshe was born as Patrick Walshe , on July 26 , 1900 , in New York City .
Living his early years in Brooklyn , Walshe suffered from a form of restricted growth , and as a result never grew to be taller than 3'10 " .
Performing came to him young , appearing in various vaudeville shows and circuses .
In 1908 , he made his earliest Broadway appearance with Lew Fields for his production of The Girl Behind the Counter , where he played " Thompkins " , a waiter , a role which he continued till the production 's close in December 1910 .
Shortly after , Walshe appeared in the Ringling Brothers Circus , a circus run by the famed five Ringling Brothers .
In the following years , Walshe appeared in the Broadway show ;
Hell and was later reunited with Lew Fields for Bunty , Bulls and Strings , in which he played " Mr MacGregor " , a Scottish farmer .
In 1913 , Walshe heard that the American Play Company where producing a performance of Within the Law , consisting entirely of a cast of dwarf actors , and he wrote to them hoping for a part .
The same year , Walshe appeared in the Broadway production A Good Little Devil , starring Mary Pickford .
In this production Walshe played the roles of a gnome called " Huggermunk " , and also squirrel .
During 1914 , Walshe spent time with the Frank A. Robbins Circus .
Many of Walshe 's performances included playing animals , particularly monkeys or apes .
Eventually Walshe began to specialize in performing monkeys , which gained him popularity on the vaudeville circuit , appearing in such events as Lew Fields 's and Joe Weber 's Reunion show .
Appearing in many variety shows , Walshe earned prominence for his performances and received him the nickname ; ' the monkey man ' .
Of particular note was the meticulous attention to detail that Walshe gave to his performances .
Walshe would spend time visiting the zoo , and studying the movement of the apes .
Walshe had much fascination with the creatures putting significant effort into successfully mimicking not only the monkey 's physicality but also impersonating the sounds that they made .
Walshe was even allowed by the zookeeper ( who he was friends with ) to enter the cages of the apes , to spend time close up with them .
Walshe 's performances were perfected to such a degree of accuracy that , when wearing his costume , he allegedly was able to convince a particular chimp , that he was in fact an ape , scaring the creature .
Rather than gluing fur to his body , Walshe had a costumer make a special fur suit for him .
However , Walshe dealt with the makeup himself .
With grey paint , he used highlights and shadows , as well as protruding false teeth and a wig to transform himself into a monkey .
Walshe often worked directly with apes , which was dangerous work due to the unpredictable nature of the creatures .
Though Walshe was well acquainted with them , having an in - depth knowledge of ape psychology as well as being naturally comfortable around them .
In addition to working with live apes , simply to mimic their movements , Walshe also performed with them .
One of his best - known performances was alongside the trained chimp , Baldy , of which he was the custodian of for several years .
Walshe and Baldy appeared together in many shows , with a particular act , amongst other stunts , including the two of them riding a two - seated bicycle .
Working with Baldy 's trainer , the two of them spent weeks inside Baldy 's cage , to help prepare her for the performance , as well as simply studying her behavior .
He had a close bond with Baldy , and was known to carry around a picture of her in his pocket .
Walshe , admitted his admiration for Baldy , who he described as " the most intelligent of all performers of the animal kingdom " .
Throughout the 1920s , Walshe had earned a reputation for his act .
At one point , Walshe did work as a businessman , though he found being a little person and having to do business with average sized people , considerably difficult .
His business was unsuccessful and after a period of illness Walshe 's career as a businessman ceased , so he stuck with performing , In 1928 , Walshe was enlisted to appear in Rain or Shine , at the George M. Cohan Theatre , starring Joe Cook .
The Broadway musical , centered on a circus , and Walshe was cast in the production due to his prior knowledge of circus performing .
In the show , Walshe appeared alongside fellow circus performers , Fred Gregory ( a noted acrobat for Barnum and Bailey ) and Dave Chasen ( later famous for Chasen 's ) .
All three had extensive experience appearing in circus and carnivals , unlike many of the principal cast .
The three of them performed a circus act during the show that consisted of various acrobatics and stunts .
Walshe portrayed the role of marmoset , and one part of the act included him being propelled from end of a pole .
Despite their prominence in the show , neither Gregory nor Walshe were credited in the show 's program , but did receive billing on the posters and were mentioned in press releases .
Walshe continued to perform on the stage in vaudeville , variety shows , circuses as well as Broadway productions , for the rest of his career .
From 1930 to 1931 , Walshe appeared in a production of Fine and Dandy ( featuring the song Fine and Dandy ) , once again with Joe Cook with whom he worked previously with in 1928 for Rain or Shine .
Walshe appeared alongside another dwarf actor named Hermon Ergotti , a German standing 3'8 " .
Ergotti and Walshe portrayed " The Colt " , with Walshe also doubling as " J. Newton Wheer " .
In 1936 he appeared in Topsy Turvy Revue , billed as the ' midget Tarzan ' , with Joe Cook again .
THE WIZARD OF OZ Section::::The Wizard of Oz .
On October 4 , 1938 , Walshe was cast in the most prominent role of his career .
He was to make his feature film debut in The Wizard of Oz .
Due to Walshe 's recognition for novelty performances dressed as animals and his expressive movement , Walshe was awarded the role of Nikko , the head king of the Winged Monkeys .
Unlike the other monkeys , Nikko was a credited role , serving as the Wicked Witch 's ( played by Margaret Hamilton )
second in command and minion .
Though Walshe had no spoken lines , performing his character through physical performance , he did receive an on - screen credit ( which was rare for bit players at the time ) .
Instead of the simple stage makeup that Walshe used in his shows , he had to wear complex prosthetics designed by Jack Dawn .
While the other monkeys wore simple rubber masks , Walshe 's needed to appear in close - ups , so instead a multi - piece prosthetic makeup was produced .
The prosthetics were moulded to Walshe 's features and then glued to his face , with some appliances protruding out .
Walshe also wore a full fur body suit , with a short open tunic as well as a tail and wings .
Walshe is listed in the end credits as playing Nikko , and despite being featured frequently in the movie , the name Nikko is never mentioned in the film .
In the book , the character is simply called " the Monkey King " , so many viewers were unsure as to who the character was .
Some confused Nikko with the Captain of the Winkie Guards ( played by Mitchell Lewis ) , though it is evident that he was in fact the monkey , since Walshe was 3'10 " ( like the monkey ) and was well known for his animal impersonations .
From 1945 to 1946 he performed with both the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus and Al Dean 's Circus .
Some of Walshe 's other performances include at the Court Square Theater , and the Cole Bros. Circus .
In addition to the extensive circus and theater work , he did also make a few other film appearances throughout his career with minor roles in Pinky , Roseanna McCoy , and 1941 , in addition to serving as a stunt double .
He also made played a featured role in Panic in the Streets , in one of his only on screen speaking roles .
Walshe played a newspaper peddler , named Pat after himself .
Through his long career in theater and his film appearances , Walshe rose to significance as both veteran of vaudeville and circus , famous for his monkey performances .
In his old age Walshe ceased to perform due to the physical demands of his work , but was still well remembered for his appearance in the classic The Wizard of Oz .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
On December 11 , 1991 , in Los Angeles , Walshe died of a heart attack at the age of 91 .
At this time he was the last surviving credited cast member of The Wizard of Oz .
His resting place is Westwood Memorial Park .
EARLY THEATER APPEARANCES
* The Girl Behind the Counter ( 1908 - 10 )
* Ringling Brothers Circus ( 1910 ) *
Hell ( 1911 )
* Bunty Bull and Strings ( 1912 )
* A Good Little Devil ( 1913 )
* Frank A. Robbins Circus ( 1914 )
* Weber and Fields Reunion ( 1915 )
* Good - Bye , Bill ( 1918 )
* As You Were ( 1920 ) * The Merchant of Venice ( 1922 )
* The Jeweled Tree ( 1926 ) * Rain or Shine ( 1928 ) * Fine and Dandy
( 1930–31 )
* Topsy Turvy Revue ( 1936 ) FILMOGRAPHY
* The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) -
Nikko
* Pinky ( 1949 )
- Minor Role ( uncredited ) * Roseanna McCoy ( 1949 ) -
A Hatfield ( uncredited ) * Panic in the Streets ( 1950 ) - Pat - Newspaper Peddler ( uncredited ) ( final film role ) * 1941
( 1979 , double - uncredited ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pat Walshe at the Internet Broadway Database