CALL OF DUTY :
BLACK OPS Call of Duty : Black Ops is a first - person shooter video game , developed by Treyarch and published by Activision .
It was released worldwide on November 9 , 2010 for Microsoft Windows , the PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and Wii , with a separate version for Nintendo DS developed by n - Space .
Aspyr later released the game for OS X on September 27 , 2012 .
It is the seventh title in the Call of Duty series and the third to be developed by Treyarch .
It serves as the sequel to .
Set in the 1960s during the Cold War , the game 's campaign follows CIA operative Alex Mason as he attempts to recall certain memories in combat in order to locate a numbers station .
This station is due to transmit broadcasts to sleeper agents who are bound to use chemical weapons across the United States .
Mason and CIA operative Jason Hudson are the game 's main playable characters , as well as Red Army soldier Viktor Reznov in only one mission .
Locations featured in the game include Cuba , Russia , United States , Kazakhstan , Hong Kong , Laos , Vietnam , and the Arctic Circle .
The multiplayer of Black Ops features multiple objective - based game modes that are playable on 14 different maps included with the game .
Improvements to loadout options and killstreak rewards are made .
A form of virtual currency , COD Points , allows players to purchase weapons and customization options for their in - game character , as well as attachments and customization options for their weapon .
Development for the game began in 2009 .
It runs an enhanced version of the IW 3.0 engine used in Treyarch 's past title , World at War .
The improvements made allowed for bigger campaign levels to be made as well as enhanced lighting .
Treyarch focused specifically on Black Ops during development ; they were developing two games at once while making World at War .
Different teams within the company focused on a certain game mode .
Music was composed by Sean Murray , with music by The Rolling Stones , Creedence Clearwater Revival , Eminem and Avenged Sevenfold appearing in the game .
Marketing of the game began in April 2010 .
Multiple trailers promoting the game and its modes were released from May until October .
The game received generally positive reviews from critics .
Within 24 hours of going on sale , the game had sold more than 5.6 million copies , 4.2 million in the U.S. and 1.4 million in the UK , breaking the record set by its predecessor by some 2.3 million copies .
After six weeks on release , Activision reported that Black Ops had exceeded $ 1 billion in sales .
On August 3 , 2011 , Activision confirmed that the game had sold over 25 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best - selling games of all time in the US , UK and Europe .
A sequel , , was released on November 13 , 2012 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Black Ops is a first - person shooter , retaining the same gameplay mechanics as previous Call of Duty titles .
The player assumes the role of a foot soldier who can wield various firearms ( only two of which can be carried at once ) , throw grenades and other explosives , and use other equipment as weapons .
A player close enough to an enemy can kill with one knife blow .
A character can take three stances : standing , crouching or prone .
Each affects rate of movement , accuracy , and stealth .
The player can drop to the prone stance from the standing stance while running ( colloquially known as " dolphin diving " ) , and can momentarily sprint before having to stop .
The screen glows red to indicate damage to a player 's health , which regenerates over time .
When the character is within the blast radius of a live grenade , an on - screen marker indicates where it is in relation to the player , helping the player to move away or to throw it back .
Among the weapons new to the series in Black Ops are crossbows with bolts and explosive ammunition , Dragon 's Breath rounds and ballistic knives .
The player assumes the role of various characters during the single - player campaign , changing perspectives throughout the story .
The playable characters are special forces operatives conducting black operations behind enemy lines .
In this way , the player 's characters have their own traits such as voices and shadows .
Each mission features a series of objectives that are displayed on the heads - up display , which marks the direction and distance towards and from such objectives as it has been in the earlier versions .
The player is accompanied by friendly troops throughout the game .
Although primarily a first - person shooter , certain levels feature sequences where the player pilots a Hind helicopter and guides friendly troops from a SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft .
The campaign features several scripted cinematic moments .
One of them is a bullet time effect during the " Victor Charlie " level , activated when the player fires toward the last enemy of a Viet Cong squad .
As a first in the Call of Duty main series , player characters can now speak during gameplay , whereas in previous installments , primarily those made by Infinity Ward , characters would be silent during gameplay , even if they could speak during cutscenes .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
The online multiplayer mode of Black Ops usually revolves around two teams on a specific mission .
For example , in Team Deathmatch the team with the most kills wins , while in Capture the Flag , players take the other team 's flags and return it to their own base .
Additionally , there is Free For All in which players are n't separated into teams .
Not including Downloadable maps , there are 14 different maps .
Black Ops retains the experience points and unlockable reward system that has been kept since Call of Duty 4 .
The game 's multiplayer focuses on socialization and customization . "
Create - a - Class 2.0 " allows enhanced personalization with appearance items as well as upgradable perks ; weapons are extensively customizable with writing , emblems , attachments and camouflage painting .
Even reticles can be modified .
There are more than one style for an attachment , which allows for a lot more personalized weaponry ; for example , the player can choose between a red dot sight or a reflex sight , both of which share many of the same traits , although the red dot fills up less of the screen ( something desired by many players ) .
Character models depend on the first tier perk instead of the weapon 's type .
Furthermore , face paints can be unlocked .
New custom killstreak rewards include explosive R / C cars , guided missiles and controllable attack helicopters .
A currency system has been implemented allowing players to buy weapons , accessories and clothes .
Players can gamble with their " COD Points " in a free - for - all based playlist called " Wager Match " , which is composed of four game modes .
Time limited objectives known as " Contracts " can be purchased to gain more currency and experience points .
The progression system is not featured in local split - screen multiplayer .
In local split - screen play , all character customization options are already unlocked .
Players can no longer define game rules such as win conditions .
Players can play alone or with friends against AI opponents in " Combat Training " with a separate progression system .
Online split - screen is re - introduced on Xbox 360 and PS3 .
The guest account can rank up but is reset after each sign out .
Only on Xbox 360 , a second Gold Xbox Live account can be used to keep the second player 's progression .
Aside from the Combat Training mode , Xbox users can also have up to four players in split - screen mode play against AI opponents even without having an Xbox Live account .
This is done by configuring the Local Split Screen settings and setting the number of enemies to a value greater than zero .
For the first time in the series , clips from online gameplay can be recorded .
Some specific features that have been removed from the PC version of Infinity Ward 's Modern Warfare 2 return , such as lean , mod tools , the developer console and dedicated servers .
Dedicated servers are exclusively provided by Game Servers .
Steam is the exclusive platform for Black Ops on PC , and the game is protected by Valve Anti - Cheat .
The Wii version of the game includes in - game voice chat .
This is the first Call of Duty title to include the voice chat feature for the Wii .
Nintendo and PDP have partnered to release the first headset to be used with the Wii known as PDP 's Headbanger Headset .
ZOMBIES
Section::::Zombies .
A zombie cooperation mode , titled " Zombies " , is included in the game .
Originally featured in World at War , it was revamped to be included in Black Ops .
It is a four - player online and two - player split screen co - op mode ( which can also be unlocked online ) .
Based on the original game , in the map " Five " , players take the roles of John F. Kennedy , Richard Nixon , Robert McNamara , and Fidel Castro as they fight zombies at The Pentagon .
Another map , called " Kino der Toten " ( " Cinema of the Dead " in German ) , features the characters from World at War – Edward Richtofen the German , Tank Dempsey the American , Takeo Masaki the Japanese , and Nikolai Belinski the Russian .
Limited editions of the game offer graphically - enhanced versions of the four zombies maps from World at War , featuring the newer weapons from the rest of the game .
There is an unlockable top - down , two - stick arcade - shooter version of Zombies known as Dead Ops Arcade .
PLOT SINGLE - PLAYER CHARACTERS AND SETTING Section::::Plot .
Section::::Single - player .
Section::::Characters and setting .
Call of Duty : Black Ops takes place between 1961 and 1968 during the Cold War , 20 years after the events of .
It portrays a secret history of CIA clandestine black operations carried out behind enemy lines .
Missions take place in various locations around the globe such as the Ural Mountains , Kazakhstan , Cuba , Hong Kong , Laos , South Vietnam , the Arctic circle and Siberia .
The single - player campaign revolves around an experimental chemical weapon codenamed " Nova-6 " .
This weapon is bound to be used by sleeper agents in the United States , who are infused with sequences of numbers , once broadcasts are transmitted from an unknown numbers station .
The player controls the protagonist , SAD / SOG special forces operative Cpt .
Alex Mason ( Sam Worthington ) .
Occasionally , CIA paramilitary operations officer Jason Hudson ( Ed Harris ) and some other characters are playable to progress the story .
Alex is often joined by fellow operatives Sgt .
Frank Woods ( James C. Burns ) and Joseph Bowman ( Ice Cube ) , while Jason teams up with Grigori Weaver ( Gene Farber ) , a Russian - born field operative .
Viktor Reznov ( Gary Oldman ) , a key character from the Soviet campaign in World at War , returns along with that game 's Russian protagonist Dimitri Petrenko ( Boris Kievsky ) also making an appearance .
Oldman also voices Daniel Clarke , a British scientist assisting in the development of Project Nova .
Opposing the CIA are the leaders of Project Nova :
former Red Army General Nikita Dragovich ( Eamon Hunt ) ,
Colonel Lev Kravchenko ( Andrew Divoff ) , and former Nazi scientist Doctor Friedrich Steiner ( Mark Bramhall ) .
Black Ops also features several historical figures : during the story Mason meets John F. Kennedy , Robert McNamara , and Fidel Castro .
STORY Section::::Story .
On February 25 , 1968 , SAD operative Alex Mason is strapped to a chair in an interrogation room , bombarded with questions by his unseen captors about the location of a numbers station .
Mason then recalls several events , as an attempt to answer their questions .
On April 17 , 1961 , Mason , Woods , and Bowman take part in Operation 40 to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba during the Bay of Pigs Invasion .
Mason apparently succeeds and stays behind to protect the extraction plane from an oncoming blockade , before being captured by the real Castro , having shot a double .
Handed over to Major General Nikita Dragovich to be held captive at Vorkuta Gulag , Mason befriends inmate and former Red Army soldier Viktor Reznov .
Reznov recounts to Mason the identities of their enemies :
Dragovich , his right - hand man Lev Kravchenko , and ex - Nazi scientist Friedrich Steiner , who defected to the Soviet Union .
In October 29 , 1945 , Reznov and were sent to extract Steiner from a Nazi base in the Arctic .
However , they were betrayed by Dragovich , who tested Steiner 's nerve gas known as " Nova 6 " on Petrenko , killing him .
Reznov was spared the same fate when British Commandos , also interested in acquiring Nova 6 , attacked the Soviets .
Reznov destroyed the Nova 6 and escaped , only to be captured by the Soviets and sent to Vorkuta .
The Soviets later recreated Nova 6 with the help of a British scientist , Daniel Clarke .
Having spent over a year imprisoned , Mason and Reznov spark an uprising to flee the gulag , but only Mason manages to escape .
On November 10 , 1963 , Mason meets with President John F. Kennedy , who authorizes a mission to assassinate Dragovich ; Mason briefly envisions aiming a handgun at Kennedy .
Mason , Woods , Bowman , and Weaver are dispatched to the Baikonur Cosmodrome to disrupt the Soviet space program and eliminate members of " Ascension " , a Soviet program giving sanctuary to Nazi scientists in exchange for their knowledge .
The team destroys the Soyuz spacecraft , while Woods apparently kills Dragovich in a car explosion with a commandeered BTR .
On January 21 , 1968 , Mason 's team is sent to Vietnam .
After defending Khe Sanh , they recover a dossier on Dragovich from a Russian defector in Hue City during the Tet Offensive .
The defector turns out to be none other than Reznov , who joins them as they penetrate Laos to recover a Nova 6 shipment from a downed Soviet plane .
They are captured by Viet Cong and Spetznaz infiltrators at the crash site .
Bowman is executed , but Woods and Mason hijack an Mi-24 Hind in the confusion and escape , moving on to rescue Reznov from Kravchenko 's base .
They confront Kravchenko and Woods stabs him , but Kravchenko pulls the pins off of four grenades strapped to himself , forcing Woods to sacrifice himself by pushing both himself and Kravchenko out of a window .
In a huge explosion , Mason presumes the two dead .
Meanwhile , Hudson and Weaver interrogate Clarke in Kowloon City .
Clarke reveals the location of a hidden facility in Mount Yamantau before being killed by Dragovich 's men .
Hudson and Weaver move to destroy the facility and receive a transmission from Steiner requesting to meet at Rebirth Island , as Dragovich has begun killing loose ends .
Mason and Reznov head there to assassinate Steiner at the same time , succeeding just as Hudson and Weaver arrive .
Mason is adamant that Reznov executed Steiner , but Hudson had witnessed Mason carrying out the act alone .
Hudson and Weaver are revealed to be Mason 's interrogators .
Dragovich has communist sleeper cells placed all over the United States which , when ordered by the numbers broadcast , will release the Nova 6 gas .
As a result , the U.S. is preparing a pre - emptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union , which would result in the inevitable Mutual Assured Destruction of World War III .
Hudson needed Steiner to abort the gas launch , but after his death , only Mason has any knowledge of the numbers station .
Hudson reveals that Dragovich brainwashed Mason to understand the numbers broadcasts and assassinate Kennedy , effectively making him a Soviet sleeper agent .
The real Reznov never escaped , but died during the Vorkuta breakout attempt , and the Soviet defector in Hue was actually killed before Mason reached him .
Mason 's visions of Reznov are a result of a dissociative disorder caused by the traumatic brainwashing program .
Prior to the Vorkuta uprising , Reznov reprogrammed Mason to assassinate Dragovich , Kravchenko , and Steiner instead .
Mason finally remembers the location of the broadcast station : a Russian cargo ship called Rusalka off the coast of Cuba .
An assault on the Rusalka begins , with Mason and Hudson infiltrating the underwater submarine base protecting the ship .
Hudson calls in the United States Navy to destroy the Rusalka .
Mason and Hudson finally confront Dragovich in the lower levels of the facility , and Mason strangles and drowns him to death before escaping with Hudson .
They regroup with Weaver , who declares victory .
Archive footage of President Kennedy prior to his assassination on November 22 , 1963 is shown , revealing Mason was among onlookers who watched Kennedy disembark from Air Force One at Love Field .
His presence , and Dragovich 's taunt before his death , suggest that Mason may have carried out his initial programming .
A hidden message that can be accessed in the game 's main menu reveals that Woods survived the confrontation with Kravchenko and is currently incarcerated in the Hanoi Hilton .
ZOMBIES CHARACTERS AND SETTINGS Section::::Zombies .
Section::::Characters and settings .
The Zombies story takes place over various eras of time , mostly during the final year of World War II , and the 1960s .
The story mainly follows four soldiers : Corporal " Tank " Dempsey ( Steven Blum ) of the United States Marine Corps , Sergeant Nikolai Belinski ( Fred Tatasciore ) of the Red Army , Captain Takeo Masaki ( Tom Kane ) of the Imperial Japanese Army , and Doctor Edward Richtofen ( Nolan North ) of the Wehrmacht .
Other characters include Doctor Ludvig Maxis ( Fred Tatasciore ) and his daughter Samantha ( Julie Nathanson ) .
The map " Five " features historical figures : John F. Kennedy ( Jim Meskimen ) , Robert McNamara ( Robert Picardo ) , Richard Nixon ( Dave Mallow ) , and Fidel Castro ( Marlon Correa ) .
" Call of the Dead " features the appearance of celebrities : Sarah Michelle Gellar , Robert Englund , Danny Trejo , Michael Rooker , and George A. Romero , all playing themselves .
STORY Section::::Story .
During World War II , Doctor Ludvig Maxis formed Group 935 , a group of scientists that was intended to improve the human condition .
Lacking funds , they soon turned to creating superweapons to aid the Nazis .
Their discovery of Element 115 from a meteorite in Japan lead to the creation of zombies .
Maxis and his assistant , Dr. Edward Richtofen , also work on other projects , leading to the creation of teleportation devices and 115-powered weapons .
Attempting to use himself as a test subject , Richtofen accidentally teleports to a catacomb within the Moon , where he comes into contact with a mysterious pyramid device that causes him to hear mysterious voices , slowly taking away his sanity .
He is later teleported to an exotic jungle known as Shangri - La , where he spends three weeks studying the Vril energy force .
Upon returning to Germany , Richtofen secretly forms a plan to kill Maxis , and gathers many members of Group 935 to build a moon base , known as Griffin Station .
While maintaining his cover with Maxis and the rest of Group 935 , Richtofen manages to capture three soldiers : Tank Dempsey , Nikolai Belinski , and Takeo Masaki ; he begins to conduct experiments with Element 115 , causing memory loss for all three soldiers .
Maxis continues his work on other experiments , attempting to use his daughter 's dog , Fluffy , as a test subject for his own teleportation device .
However , the experiment fails , and Fluffy is transformed into an undead Hellhound .
Richtofen takes the opportunity and traps Maxis and his daughter Samantha inside the teleporter with Fluffy , believing that they would die .
Richtofen escapes with his three captured soldiers , and arrives at the Rising Sun research facility in Japan , where Element 115 was first discovered .
After gathering a sample of 115 at the site , and recovering a weapon known as the Wunderwaffe DG-2 , they return to the Der Riese factory in Germany .
In an attempt to escape the zombie horde , the group accidentally overloads a teleporter with the DG-2 , sending them forward in time .
They arrive at an abandoned Nazi theater in the 1960s , where Richtofen discovers several recordings left behind by Dr. Maxis .
Samantha , having survived and managing to control the zombies , continues raising the undead in order to hunt down Richtofen .
Some time in 1963 , the United States government manages to grab hold of several of Group 935 's inventions , keeping them hidden in the Pentagon .
Due to the presence of the undead - raising Element 115 , zombies breach the Pentagon .
John F. Kennedy , Richard Nixon , Robert McNamara , and Fidel Castro are trapped within the Pentagon , forced to fight their way out .
Meanwhile , Richtofen 's crew arrive at a Soviet Cosmodrome site , where Richtofen intends to travel to Group 935 's moon base , Griffin Station .
The crew is contacted by Gersh , a member of the Ascension Group who requests to be freed from Samantha 's grip .
After freeing Gersh , the four of them are teleported further in time , and arrive at a Siberian lighthouse sometime in 2011 , once used by Richtofen as a secret lab .
However , they are trapped within a locked room , and forced to rely on four movie actors : Sarah Michelle Gellar , Danny Trejo , Robert Englund , and Michael Rooker , who are filming a zombie movie on - site along with director George A. Romero , who had been infected as well .
Richtofen requests the four celebrities to find a golden rod , which is a Vril generator device , which he then uses to fix the teleporter .
He transports himself and the other three soldiers back to Shangri - La , leaving the celebrities behind to continue fighting Romero and the horde .
At Shangri - La , the group discovers two explorers , Gary and Brock , who died trapped within a time loop while trying to discover the secrets of the mythical Agartha realm .
The group saves the explorers ' lives by traveling back and forth in time , altering the environments of the temple in the process .
They discover an altar within the temple with Richtofen 's name written on it , as well as a piece of a meteorite containing Element 115 .
However , the explorers remain stuck in the never - ending loop .
With the Vril generator and the meteorite piece , Richtofen now believes he can control the zombies , and returns to Griffin Station .
Here , they attempt to activate the MPD , a machine that controls the Aether energy , which opens to reveal Samantha inside ; instead of dying by Richtofen 's trap , Samantha was teleported to the moon while Maxis was sent somewhere else .
Samantha accidentally triggered the MPD and was trapped within the device , but this also allowed her to enter the Aether realm .
Maxis , who was retrieved by Group 935 scientists , apologized to his daughter and committed suicide in front of her , prompting her to assume control of the zombies and seek vengeance on Richtofen .
Richtofen fuses the golden rod and the meteorite piece , and using it to switch souls with Samantha , takes over as the new zombie controller .
This causes his former allies to feel betrayed , and they ally themselves with Samantha ( who now resides in Richtofen 's body ) .
Maxis is revealed to have become a sentient artificial intelligence living within the systems of Griffin Station , and he guides his daughter and the three soldiers to launch three missiles at the Earth .
This severs Richtofen 's link with the Aether , but the launch results in the , while still leaving Richtofen in control of the undead .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
In May 2009 , publisher Activision was rumored to be looking for licensing regarding Vietnam War - era music which led to speculation that Call of Duty 7 would be set in Vietnam .
In May 2009 , Treyarch employee David Kim revealed on his LinkedIn profile that he would work as a senior animator on Call of Duty 7 .
In November 2009 , only a few days before Modern Warfare 2 's release , Activision officially announced a new Call of Duty title for 2010 through their third quarter financial call .
In February 2010 , a casting call for Call of Duty 7 led to speculation that the game would be taking place during the Cold War era with some battles taking place in South Vietnam .
On April 30 , 2010 , Black Ops was officially announced .
The game runs on an enhanced World at War engine ( which itself was improved from Call of Duty 4 ) at 60 frames per second across all platforms , excluding the Wii .
It features a streaming texture technology ( also seen in Modern Warfare 2 ) , making bigger levels possible such as " Payback " where the player controls a helicopter .
Lighting effects have been improved as well .
Call of Duty :
Black Ops supports 3-D imaging rendered by the engine itself .
This feature is available on the PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 versions .
For Black Ops , Treyarch focused only on this game unlike past practice .
However , it had different teams , each working on separate game modes .
Treyarch used a motion capture technology similar to the one used in James Cameron 's film Avatar , which allows accurate facial expressions , capturing the whole performance of the actor .
The studio also consulted special forces veterans from both belligerents of the Cold War : Major John Plaster ( US Army - Ret . ) who served in the MACV - SOG during the Vietnam War , and former Soviet special forces operative Sonny Puzikas .
The latter taught Treyarch how Spetsnaz soldiers would react in combat , such as rolling out of the line of fire .
Spetsnaz AIs in the game have been modeled after him , from his tactics and his movements to his face .
Although having a historical background , the classified aspect of these Cold War black operations allowed the studio to create its own fictional story .
The game also allows players to turn down the blood and turn off the profanity .
It was announced on November 9 , 2015 that Black Ops would become backwards compatible with the Xbox One .
It was originally meant to be available for backwards compatibility in December 2015 , but the date was later changed to some time in 2016 .
Black Ops was originally the sixth - most requested Xbox 360 title to become backwards compatible with the Xbox One .
On May 17 , 2016 , the game was made available through Xbox One 's backward compatibility .
Shortly after , it was reported that sales of the Xbox 360 version had increased by 13,000 percent .
AUDIO Section::::Audio .
Black Ops features the voices of Sam Worthington as Alex Mason , Ed Harris as Jason Hudson , Gary Oldman reprises his role as Viktor Reznov from World at War and also voices Dr. Clarke , James C. Burns voices and provides performance capture for Frank Woods and Ice Cube voices Joseph Bowman , who is also the multiplayer announcer for the SOG faction .
Gene Farber voices Grigori Weaver
, Emmanuelle Chriqui plays a live - action character called Numbers
, Eamon Hunt voices
Nikita Dragovich , Andrew Divoff voices Lev Kravchenko and Robert Picardo voices Secretary Robert McNamara .
Dimitri Diatchenko , an American born actor and musician voices the Spetsnaz faction and several other characters due to his strong Russian accent .
Call of Duty : Black Ops features Vietnam War era music including " Sympathy for the Devil " by The Rolling Stones ( played during a gameplay sequence , the credits , and as an easter egg in the multiplayer map Nuketown ) and Creedence Clearwater Revival 's " Fortunate Son " .
Eminem 's " Wo n't Back Down " ( featuring Pink ) is used for the credits as well , and additionally appears as an Easter Egg in the Zombie map " Five " .
In the Call of the Dead zombie map the song "
Not Ready to Die " by American heavy metal band Avenged Sevenfold is featured as an easter egg .
The original music was composed by Sean Murray , who also composed Call of Duty : World at War while Kevin Sherwood composed music for the Zombies mode .
The soundtrack was released on November 9 .
The use of The Rolling Stones ' music in the game has seen a significant increase in the band 's music sales since launch . "
Gimme Shelter " sold 2,000 copies in the week before the launch trailer was revealed , 5,000 the week after , and 11,000 the week after the game 's release .
" Sympathy for the Devil " experienced a similar boost as gamers discovered the band 's music .
The game 's score was composed by Sean Murray , and the official soundtrack was released on November 9 , 2010 .
In addition , a soundtrack for the popular Zombies mode was released on January 25 , 2011 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Black Ops was first officially unveiled when the website for the game went live on April 30 , 2010 prior to the release of its debut teaser trailer on GameTrailers TV Episode 310 .
In early April 2010 , an unmarked envelope was sent to various gaming news publications as well as high - profile Call of Duty fans via mail .
It contained a USB flash drive with sound and text files .
These files were codes to be decrypted , only to find a mysterious teaser site for an unknown game .
Other codes were updated periodically .
Similarly to , the first full - length trailer of Black Ops was aired after the 3rd quarter on ESPN during the NBA Eastern Conference Finals on May 18 , 2010 .
During E3 2010 , studio head Mark Lamia opened the Microsoft conference by playing Black Ops on stage .
It was also announced that the timed Xbox 360 exclusivity for additional content of Call of Duty titles , which began with Modern Warfare 2 , extends until 2012 .
A remixed version of the ESPN trailer with Eminem 's " Wo n't Back Down " was released on June 14 , prior to the E3 Activision conference for which he also performed .
A multiplayer teaser trailer was released on August 9 , 2010 revealing killstreaks , weapons , and other in - game multiplayer features .
A full multiplayer reveal took place on September 1 , 2010 , and revealed many multiplayer features from the game .
Chrysler produced a limited - edition Call of Duty Jeep as the Wrangler is featured in Black Ops .
In late September , viral site GKNOVA6 was updated revealing fuzzy footages of zombies .
On October 11 , a single player trailer aired on ESPN during the New York Jets versus Minnesota Vikings NFL Monday Night Football game .
The same trailer was aired the next day in the United Kingdom at half time of the England versus Montenegro 2012 European Football Championship qualifying game .
On October 29 , the official launch trailer was released online .
The same trailer aired on October 31 during the New Orleans Saints versus Pittsburgh Steelers NFL Sunday Night Football game .
The trailer features the song " Gimme Shelter " by The Rolling Stones .
RETAIL VERSIONS
Section::::Retail versions .
Like Modern Warfare 2 ,
" Hardened " and " Prestige " limited editions are available
: the Hardened Edition includes a SteelBook case , a medal with its display case , four exclusive co - op levels and an Xbox Live or PlayStation Home avatar outfit .
The Prestige Edition offers , in addition to the Hardened Edition 's content , a real RC - XD remote - control vehicle modeled after the in - game killstreak reward , which gives video and audio feedback to its controller .
In Japan , the game is distributed by Square Enix .
Two versions are available : subtitled or dubbed , released respectively on November 18 , 2010 and December 16 , 2010 .
Both have dismemberment censored .
Gore is censored as well in Germany in addition to the removal of " Sympathy for the Devil " and Nazi symbols considered " anti - constitutional " in the country .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
Treyarch released the " First Strike " Map Pack on February 1 , 2011 for the Xbox 360 .
The PlayStation 3 received the map pack on March 3 , 2011 and the PC version was released on March 25 , 2011 through Steam .
The Map Pack includes additional maps that can be played in the Multiplayer .
These maps include " Berlin Wall " , " Discovery " , " Kowloon " and " Stadium " and a map for the Zombies mode titled " Ascension " which takes place in a Soviet launch site .
On April 11 , 2011 , a second map pack called " Escalation " was announced by Activison and Microsoft .
It features 4 new multiplayer maps named " Zoo " , " Hotel " , " Convoy " , " Stockpile " and one new zombies map named ' Call of the Dead ' .
This map is based on the movies by George A. Romero , the revolutionary epic - zombie - horror director .
The trailer for this map shows the four playable characters : Danny Trejo , Sarah Michelle Gellar , Robert Englund and Michael Rooker .
The name is a reference to the immensely popular Dead Series created and directed by Romero .
The trailer also offers a sneak peek of a zombiefied version of George A. Romero himself , lurking out of water .
The map is set on a ship , with instead of Nazi zombies , shipcrew zombies .
It was released on May 3 , 2011 for the Xbox 360 , June 2 on the PC and June 10 for the PlayStation 3 .
A third map pack called " Annihilation " was released for the Xbox 360 on June 28 , 2011 , and on July 28 , 2011 for the PlayStation 3 and PC .
It contains four new multiplayer maps named " Hangar 18 " , " Hazard " , " Drive - In " , " Silo " , and a new zombies map named " Shangri La " , which takes place in a legendary shrine lost in an exotic jungle .
The fourth map pack , " Rezurrection " was released on August 23 , 2011 for the Xbox 360 and September 22 , 2011 on PlayStation 3 and PC .
The Rezurrection Map Pack is made up of 5 Zombies mode only maps .
It includes the first 4 maps from ( " Shi No Numa"/"Swamp " , " Nacht Der Untoten"/"Night " , " Verruckt"/"Asylum " , " Der Riese"/"Factory " ) and a new map called " Moon " .
" Moon " allows players to fight zombies in zero gravity with both the player and the zombies under zero gravity influence .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Call of Duty : Black Ops has received generally positive reviews from critics .
GameSpot awarded it 9.0 out of ten and wrote " Call of Duty : Black Ops bears the series ' standard superbly , delivering an engrossing campaign and exciting competitive multiplayer .
"
Edge magazine was less positive , giving it a 7/10 , writing that " As polished and pretty and fun as Black Ops often is , it feels more like a yearly update than a sequel [ which ] is n't distinct from its predecessors in any important way " .
Several reviewers also complained that the game felt too much like a rail shooter , with PC Gamer branding it " barely interactive " .
Reviewers also noted that the PC version of the game was buggy and had " a number of frustrating problems " , including a lag in multiplayer modes which for some players rendered the game almost " unplayable " .
Players have also reported serious bugs with the PlayStation 3 version , including compatibility issues with 3D televisions .
PC World magazine noted that user reviews of the game were much less positive than those of critics .
As of November 12 , 2010 , three days after the release , PC , PS3 , and Xbox 360 versions of the game held average user ratings of 3.1 , 3.1 , and 1.8 stars on Amazon.com , respectively ( on a 1 to 5 scale ) , with many PC users complaining about lag , stuttering and bugs .
In January 2011 , to a player complaining about the remaining connection problems for the game on PlayStation 3 , an Activision customer service representative threatened that they could shut down the servers for the game for the PlayStation Network at any time .
After some days and following some game media heat , Dan Amrich , Activision Social Media Manager , declared that even if they could kill the servers , they did not plan currently to do it .
The Daily Telegraph praised Black Ops as a superb experience of gameplay , " the meaty kick of the guns , the blistering pace of the action and the sterling soundtrack of explosions , gunshots and whistling bullets all serve to quicken the player 's pulse and tighten their grip on the controller " , and mentioned , it is beyond the overwhelming , chaotic action in the game 's major gun battles , offers among other things , a stealthy infiltration of a substation in the snow - capped steppes , in which the slow down in action is compensated for by nail - shredding tension and creepy atmosphere .
Official Nintendo Magazine awarded the Wii version 90 % and said " Black Ops on Wii is a fantastic shooter packed with all the features of its HD brothers , with the only exception being split - screen multiplayer . "
Martin Gaston at VideoGamer.com gave the Wii version 6 out of 10 , complaining of Treyarch 's reworking of in - game sequences as movies , poor AI , and gameplay problems from lower - resolution graphics .
In February 2011 , the Xbox 360 version was named the Xbox Live 's top title of 2010 by GameSpot .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Within 24 hours of its release , Black Ops had sold a combined total of 5.6 million units in the U.S. and UK market , surpassing that of Modern Warfare 2 and establishing a new record for largest entertainment launch .
Compared to the much anticipated opening of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 , the game earned more than twice as much as the film , earning $ 360 million .
Only five days after its release , sales from the game worldwide reached US$ 650 million , surpassing the previous record achieved by Modern Warfare 2 which earned $ 550 million in five days .
By November 22 , the game remained the bestselling title in the United Kingdom , despite sales dropping by 85 % .
Some estimates had placed sales of the game as reaching 18 million units sold , earning a revenue of $ 818 million .
This would fall about 2 million copies and $ 182 million short of Modern Warfare 2 .
By December 22 , worldwide revenue of Black Ops exceeded $ 1 billion .
Sales remained strong months after the game 's release , remaining at the top - seller list in February 2011 .
On March 3 , 2011 the news magazine The Hollywood Reporter also reported on the best selling video games ever .
It announced that Call of Duty : Black Ops was the best - selling game ever in the United States of America .
Black Ops was the best - selling game of all time in the UK until Grand Theft Auto V overtook it in November 2014 .
By November 2013 , the game had sold 26.2 million copies .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Cuba has condemned the release of the game as it has special forces trying but failing to kill a young Fidel Castro , killing instead a body - double .
The Cuba - based pro - Fidel Castro website Cubadebate said the game " encourages sociopathic attitudes of American children and adolescents , the main consumers of these virtual games " .
MOBILE PHONE VERSION Section::::Mobile phone version .
Black Ops was also released for both mobile phones and smartphones .
This version is a side - scrolling shooter .
It features a different storyline , a different set of characters , and is set in the Vietnam War in 1967 .
The game was developed by Glu Mobile and published by Activision .
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS