DANCE ACADEMY Dance Academy is an Australian teen - oriented television drama produced by Werner Film Productions in association with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and ZDF .
Series one premiered on 31 May 2010 , and series two began airing on 12 March 2012 .
Series three premiered on ABC3 on 8 July 2013 in Australia .
A film sequel to the television series , Dance Academy :
The Movie , was released by StudioCanal in Australian cinemas on 6 April 2017 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dance Academy is narrated mainly from the perspective of Tara Webster ( Xenia Goodwin ) , a newly accepted first year student at the National Academy of Dance in Sydney , which also doubles as a Year 10 - 12 high school for the dancers .
Throughout the series , she learns to better her ballet technique , as well as learn contemporary ballet and hip - hop dance ; while creating lifelong friendships and experiencing many hardships .
In the first series , Tara soon befriends fellow students Kat ( Alicia Banit ) and Ethan Karamakov ( Tim Pocock ) , Sammy Lieberman ( Tom Green ) , Abigail Armstrong ( Dena Kaplan ) and Christian Reed ( Jordan Rodrigues ) , as well as eventually getting to know her teacher Ms. Raine ( Tara Morice ) .
Series two saw Tara return to the Academy for her second year with the hope of representing Australia in an international ballet competition , the Prix de Fonteyn .
This series introduced characters Grace Whitney ( Isabel Durant ) , Ben Tickle ( Thomas Lacey ) , Ollie Lloyd ( Keiynan Lonsdale ) , and Saskia Duncan ( Brooke Harman ) , and saw the characters ' reaction to the untimely death of Sammy .
Series three followed the characters as third years at the Academy , competing for a contract with the dance company to become principal dancers .
After the temporary contracts have been established , the third years go on tour for " Romeo and Juliet " .
EPISODES
CAST 123 PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Dance Academy is produced by Joanna Werner 's film company Werner Films Productions in association with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation , Screen Australia , Film Victoria , Film New South Wales and ZDF for Germany .
, airing rights to Dance Academy have been sold to 180 territories , airing on every continent except Antarctica .
CASTING AND FILMING SERIES ONE
Section::::Casting and filming .
Section::::Series one .
Casting for series
one began in early 2009 in Brisbane , Melbourne and Sydney .
All cast members had to be skilled in drama and dancing and had to cope with Australia 's best choreographers .
Filming began on 13 July 2009 and wrapped up in early November .
The series premiere was originally planned for a mid-2010 premiere on ABC3 , however , like Dead Gorgeous , the premiere was pushed to ABC1 on 31 May 2010 and ABC3 on 6 June 2010 .
The first series premiered on Germany 's ZDF on 26 September 2010 .
SERIES TWO
Section::::Series two .
Production of series two was officially green - lit by ABC and ZDF on 2 July 2010 .
Casting calls were issued on 14 September 2010 , and principal photography in Sydney took place between 31 January and 4 August 2011 .
Series two premiered on ABC3 on 12 March 2012 and ran for 26 episodes , airing each week from Monday through Thursday , ending on 24 April .
SERIES THREE
Section::::Series three .
Screen Australia approved investment funding for a third series of 13 episodes on 5 December 2011 .
Filming began 27 August 2012 , ended filming 27 November 2012 .
On 5 June 2013 , Alicia Banit and Thomas Lacey appeared on ABC3 's Studio 3 to announce the series 3 premiere on 8 July 2013 .
RELEASE
ONLINE
STREAMING Section::::Release .
Section::::Online streaming .
The show is available on streaming sites , including Hulu.com and Netflix.com .
Entire episodes of all three seasons are also available , for free , on the show 's official YouTube channel , however it is not available in Australia .
DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases .
The Australian Broadcasting Corporation has released all episodes from series one through three on DVD — with series one and two across four volumes and series three over two — as well as series collections and a complete series one to three compilation . !
Title !
Region 4release date !
Episodes AWARDS Section::::Awards . !
Ceremony ! !
Award ! !
Nominee ! !
Result BOOKS Section::::Books .
ABC Books has released seven paperback novels , each based on a particular episode and from the perspective of a single character .
The books are published by ABC Books and HarperCollins Australia .
FILM :
DANCE ACADEMY :
THE MOVIE Section::::Film :
Dance Academy : The Movie .
On 22 April 2015 , a feature film adaption of Dance Academy was announced along with other feature film projects to have received funding from Screen Australia .
The film is a sequel to the television series , set 18 months after the events of series three , and follows Tara 's journey as she pursues her dream to become a ballerina star .
Pre - production for the film , then titled Dance Academy :
The Comeback , began on 17 April 2016 .
Shooting for the film began on 29 May 2016 , and wrapped on 22 July .
The official trailer for the film was released on 25 December 2016 .
The film , retitled Dance Academy : The Movie , was released by StudioCanal to Australian cinemas on 6 April 2017 .
It was released internationally on Netflix under the title Dance Academy : The Comeback .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* at the Australian Broadcasting Company * Dance Academy on Hulu in the United States