THE CARRIE DIARIES
The Carrie Diaries is a young adult novel , the first in a series of the same name by American author Candace Bushnell .
The series is a prequel to Bushnell 's 1997 collection Sex and the City , and follows the character of Carrie Bradshaw during her senior year of high school during the early 1980s and part of her life in New York City working as a writer .
The Los Angeles Times described it as " [ a]n addictive , ingenious origin story . "
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The Carrie Diaries focuses on Carrie Bradshaw , a high - school student who lives in Castleberry , Connecticut .
Carrie is followed through high - school starting her junior year , continuing through the summer , and ending at senior year graduation .
Carrie , her friends , and family are shown going through many different trials during this time .
Carrie handles these well , including having a few boyfriends along the way .
She and her dad have disagreements but do not come to blows until the end of the book .
Carrie 's final decision to not attend Brown University contributes to her living with her eventual lifelong friend Samantha Jones .
This sets up Carrie as the precedent of a main character in Sex and the City .
CHARACTERS
* Carrie Bradshaw : The protagonist of the novel .
She is an aspiring writer who dreams of moving to New York City .
* Sebastian Kydd : The handsome , mysterious new kid at school and the love interest of Carrie .
* Donna LaDonna :
The school 's most popular girl and an aspiring model .
She is followed around by two minions , the Jens .
* Lali Kandesie : Carrie 's childhood best friend who later becomes her " frenemy " .
* Maggie Stevenson : One of Carrie 's best friends and Walt 's sexually active ex - girlfriend .
* Roberta " The Mouse " Castells : One of Carrie 's best friends and the smartest girl in school .
* Walt : One of Carrie 's best friends , who dates Maggie before coming out as gay .
* Peter Arnold : One of Maggie 's boyfriends , described by Carrie as " the second - smartest boy in our class and kind of a jerk " .
He is the editor - in - chief of the school newspaper , The Nutmeg , which Carrie later writes for .
* George Carter :
Carrie 's handsome suitor from New York City and a student at Brown University .
* Dorrit Bradshaw : Carrie 's rebellious younger sister .
* Missy Bradshaw : Carrie 's middle sister .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Carrie Diaries received generally favorable reviews .
Joel Ryan of the Los Angeles Times gave the novel a positive review , calling it " [ a]n addictive , ingenious origin story " , while asserting that the brilliance of the book is that " sex is really beside the point . "
Sabrina Rojas Weiss of MTV 's Hollywood Crush also gave it a positive review , stating , " All that plot is great and keeps you glued to the page until the end , but what sticks with you later are Carrie 's internal musings . "
Meeta Agrawal of Entertainment Weekly rated the book A− and wrote , " It would have been easy to write a coming - of - age story about Carrie Bradshaw that ham - fistedly foreshadows everything fans of the franchise know will come to pass .
But Bushnell nails something harder : telling another chapter in the story of a cherished character that stands on its own . "
TELEVISION ADAPTATION Section::::Television adaptation .
In September 2011 , it was officially announced that The CW was moving forward with a television series as a prequel to the original series , based on The Carrie Diaries .
The project was developed by Gossip Girl producers Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage .
Former Sex and the City writer Amy B. Harris was tapped to pen the adaptation .
On January 18 , 2012 , The CW network ordered a pilot of The Carrie Diaries .
The project was helmed by executive producers Josh Schwartz , Stephanie Savage , Len Goldstein , and Bushnell .
On February 15 , 2012 , the series ' first role was cast when Stefania Owen landed the part of Carrie Bradshaw 's 14-year - old sister Dorrit .
On February 27 , 2012 , it was announced that AnnaSophia Robb had won the role of the young Carrie .
The series was formally picked up by The CW on May 11 , 2012 , and premiered on January 14 , 2013 .
It was renewed for a second season on May 9 , 2013 .
It was canceled on May 8 , 2014 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Carrie Diaries at HarperCollins