THE WHITE QUEEN ( NOVEL )
The White Queen is a 2009 historical novel by Philippa Gregory , the first of her series The Cousins ' War .
It tells the story of Elizabeth Woodville , queen consort of King Edward IV of England .
The 2013 BBC One television series
The White Queen is a 10-part adaptation of Gregory 's novels The White Queen , The Red Queen ( 2010 ) and The Kingmaker 's Daughter ( 2012 ) , and features Rebecca Ferguson as Elizabeth Woodville .
Gregory 's 2011 novel
The Lady of the Rivers is a prequel to The White Queen , narrated by Elizabeth 's mother Jacquetta of Luxembourg .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Young widow Lady Elizabeth Grey puts herself in the path of King Edward IV to seek his assistance in reclaiming her late husband 's estate for her sons , but it is love at first sight for both of them .
They marry in secret , which later puts Edward , Elizabeth and Elizabeth 's entire family at odds with Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , who had helped place Edward on the throne expecting to control the young king .
Masterminded by Elizabeth 's mother Jacquetta , an experienced courtier formerly allied with the ousted queen Margaret of Anjou , Edward and Elizabeth secure strategic marriages and positions for Elizabeth 's siblings and other relatives to bolster Edward 's power and alliances against Warwick .
Edward and Elizabeth have three daughters , and Warwick rebels , attempting to put Edward 's malleable younger brother George , Duke of Clarence on the throne instead .
Edward foils their plan and reconciles with Warwick and George to consolidate his power , but not before Warwick executes Elizabeth 's father , Richard Woodville , Earl Rivers and brother , John Woodville .
Elizabeth vows revenge .
Warwick marries his elder daughter Isabel to George and rebels again , luring Edward into an arranged uprising where he plans to kill Edward .
The plot fails , and Warwick and George flee to France .
Isabel gives birth during the journey , but the child dies .
Warwick marries his second daughter Anne to Edward of Lancaster , son and heir to the deposed king Henry VI , to secure Warwick 's new alliance with Henry 's exiled queen , Margaret of Anjou .
Warwick invades England .
Caught off guard , Edward is forced to flee to Flanders with Elizabeth 's brother Anthony .
Warwick arrests Jacquetta on charges of witchcraft , but she is soon released on the orders of her old friend Margaret .
Jacquetta joins a pregnant Elizabeth and her children in sanctuary in Westminster Abbey , where they are left unmolested by Warwick .
Elizabeth gives birth to Edward 's son , also named Edward .
Returning to England , Edward is reunited with George and first defeats the forces of Warwick , who is killed , and then Margaret 's army .
Her son Edward of Lancaster is killed on the battlefield , and Edward murders the captive simpleton Henry VI to end the Lancastrian claim to the throne once and for all .
England is at peace , but a covetous George continues his plotting to undermine Edward 's rule .
Their younger brother Richard marries the widowed Anne Neville , and disapproves of Edward 's choice to broker peace with France rather than fight for English holdings there .
Isabel 's death drives George over the edge , and his plots and slanders against Edward and Elizabeth result in his conviction for treason .
Despite the protestations of their mother Cecily , Edward has George executed .
Edward later dies himself , leaving his brother Richard as guardian to his surviving sons Edward and Richard despite Elizabeth 's protestations .
Richard seizes young Edward from the custody of Elizabeth 's brother Anthony , and from sanctuary Elizabeth eventually relinquishes to Richard a page boy posing as her younger son , whom she actually sends to Flanders to be raised in secret under an assumed name .
Believing he has both of Edward 's heirs under his control in the Tower of London , Richard has Edward and Elizabeth 's marriage declared invalid , and accedes the throne himself as Richard III .
Meanwhile , Elizabeth plots with her brother in law and former ward , the Duke of Buckingham , and Margaret Beaufort , the mother of the exiled Lancastrian claimant Henry Tudor , to overthrow Richard and free the young princes in the Tower .
They betroth Tudor to Elizabeth of York , Edward and Elizabeth 's eldest daughter , in part to seek the support of Yorkists for Tudor 's cause .
The young princes vanish and are presumed murdered , and though Elizabeth has not forgiven Richard for his execution of her brother Anthony and her son Richard Grey , she suspects that Buckingham , Margaret and Henry are more likely responsible for the disappearance of the boys as part of their own plotting to wrest the throne from Richard .
Elizabeth leaves sanctuary and sends her older daughters to Richard 's court as ladies - in - waiting to Queen Anne .
Richard 's and Anne 's son Edward dies , followed by Anne herself .
In the meantime , Richard and the younger Elizabeth have fallen in love , but he fears losing the support of the northern lords loyal to Anne 's family if he marries Elizabeth right away .
Henry Tudor 's forces arrive in England .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Publishers Weekly wrote of the novel , " Gregory earned her international reputation evoking sex , violence , love and betrayal among the Tudors ; here she adds intimate relationships , political maneuvering and battlefield conflicts as well as some well - drawn supernatural elements .
"
The review adds that the author " is especially poignant depicting Elizabeth in her later years " and that " she captures vividly the terrible inertia of war , " but notes that the novel " may not be as fresh as earlier efforts . "
Maureen Waller of The Telegraph called the novel " entrancing " and its heroine " intriguing , " adding that " Gregory is very good at describing the bitchiness of the women in this tale of dynastic rivalry . "
The White Queen has been released in audiobook form in both abridged ( performed by Bianca Amato ) and unabridged ( narrated by Susan Lyons ) versions .
AudioFile magazine wrote of the novel , " Gregory has become wildly popular in the U.S.
It 's easy to see why in her latest heady mix of history , romance , and political intrigue as she teases apart the tangled skeins of the War of the Roses .
" The magazine praised both recordings , calling Amato 's performance " powerful and compellingly believable " and Lyon 's voice " regal " and " self - possessed . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Philippa Gregory website