COUNTRY
STRONG Country Strong ( originally titled Love Do n't Let Me Down ) is a 2010 drama film starring Gwyneth Paltrow , Tim McGraw , Garrett Hedlund , and Leighton Meester .
The film , about an emotionally unstable country music star who attempts to resurrect her career , was directed and written by American filmmaker Shana Feste .
It premiered in Nashville , Tennessee on November 8 , 2010 , and had a wide release in the United States on January 7 , 2011 .
This is the second film in which McGraw and Hedlund have worked together , the first being Friday Night Lights in 2004 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Beau sings with Kelly , a recovering alcoholic going through rehab .
He is clearly smitten by her , and it is later revealed that the two have been having an affair , even though Kelly is married to James .
Kelly is checked out of rehab a month early by James , who wants her to go on a three - city tour to restore her image .
She agrees on the condition that Beau becomes her opening act .
James has already planned to see Chiles Stanton , a beauty queen with potential to become a rising singer , perform that night in hopes that she will be Kelly 's opener instead .
On the night of Chiles ' performance , Beau dismisses Chiles as a " Country Barbie " and does not want her on the tour .
Chiles ' performance nearly falls apart as she gets stage fright and can not sing ; however , Beau steps in and begins to sing " Friends in Low Places " .
The two sing the song together , and it gives Chiles the courage to continue on her own .
James is impressed by Beau 's performance , and offers the opening act to both of them .
He suggests that Beau and Chiles could make quite the duo , but Beau disagrees .
Nevertheless , Beau agrees to go on the tour because he cares about Kelly .
The first show is a disaster : before going on , Kelly receives an anonymous package containing a bloody baby doll with a note reading " Baby Killer , " referring to the baby Kelly miscarried when she fell off the stage in Dallas during her last concert before she went into rehab .
At that concert , she was five months pregnant and was found to have a blood alcohol level of 0.19 when she was in the hospital for the injuries related to the fall .
Kelly falls apart , starts drinking , and almost refuses to go on .
However , she is coerced into going on stage by James .
She begins to sing " Country Strong " but breaks down on stage .
She attempts to try another song , " A Fighter " , but breaks down again and is led off stage by her husband , ending the show .
They tell the media at a press conference that they had to cancel the show due to food poisoning and head off to the next show .
Beau ends his relationship with Kelly , and begins to spend more time with Chiles , whose fame has been increasing as the tour progresses .
Chiles and Beau form a bond and Beau lets go of his earlier hostilities towards her .
She even finishes the chorus to his song " Give in to Me " .
Later , Beau confronts James about Kelly 's worsening condition .
James insists that Kelly may get better , and says that he ca n't let her go out with a failure .
Beau disagrees and subtly admits their affair .
Enraged , James punches him in the jaw .
Before the next show in Austin , Kelly is unable to go on stage after drinking .
Beau and Chiles still do their opening act , where they perform " Give in to Me " for the first time together .
JJ , Kelly 's agent , nearly cancels the tour but is dissuaded by Kelly 's offer of sex ; having witnessed this , Beau becomes frustrated with Kelly .
That same night , Chiles and Beau have sex , and Beau confesses to Chiles that he likes her .
In Dallas , Beau gives Chiles a pair of star - shaped earrings and asks her to move with him to California .
Chiles immediately agrees , but then asks for more time to consider the offer .
The two perform and Kelly comes out , this time sober and ready , and performs her entire set for the first time .
Kelly performs " Country Strong " , " Shake That Thing " , and " Coming Home " .
After the concert , James and JJ immediately begin making plans for Kelly 's future .
That night , Kelly commits suicide by overdosing on prescription medication .
She leaves a letter to Beau , echoing his earlier words that " Love and fame ca n't live in the same place . "
In the letter , she gives him the advice to choose " love " .
Beau takes her advice , and after Kelly 's funeral , he moves to California .
Later on , Beau is singing in a bar in California , when Chiles walk in , wearing the earrings he gave her .
They begin singing " Give in to Me " together .
CAST
* Gwyneth Paltrow as Kelly Canter
* Tim McGraw as James Canter * Leighton Meester as Chiles Stanton * Garrett Hedlund as Beau Hutton * Marshall Chapman as Winnie
* Lari White as Hair Stylist * Jeremy Childs as J.J.
* Jim Lauderdale as Kelly 's Bandmate * Amanda Shires as Kelly 's Bandmate * Chris Scruggs as Beau 's Bandmate PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
With a budget of $ 15 million , pre - production work on the project began in November 2009 .
Shana Feste was working as a nanny for Tobey Maguire , caring for his daughter , when she wrote the screenplay of Country Strong .
She showed him her " work - in - progress " at his request
and he agreed to co - produce the film .
She had real country stars in mind when she wrote the script .
Garrett Hedlund took guitar lessons because he could not play the guitar nor sing before the film .
He explained : " When I read the script and started playing guitar
I knew I wanted to get there .
I mean I was n't going to have a hand double
come in and be playing the chords , having to have two different set ups just because I could n't get it down . "
Gwyneth Paltrow also took guitar lessons .
Paltrow stated she had trouble understanding her character 's alcohol abuse and sought advice in playing the character from Robert Downey Jr. , who has suffered from addiction in the past .
In interviews , Feste has said that American pop singer Britney Spears inspired Paltrow 's character in the film .
Principal photography took place in Nashville , Tennessee .
Locations used for the film include the Ryman Auditorium , the Union Station Hotel , Belle Meade Plantation , Mount Olivet Cemetery , the Nashville Municipal Auditorium , and the Andrew Jackson Hall .
Filming also took place in Liberty , Tennessee .
The film was shot in 2010 from early January to the first week of March .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On December 14 , 2010 , the official screening took place at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Beverly Hills , California .
It was attended by the film 's stars and included Tim McGraw , Gwyneth Paltrow , Leighton Meester , Garrett Hedlund , and many other stars of Hollywood and country music .
In the United States , the film received a wide release on January 7 , 2011 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Country Strong has received mixed to negative reviews .
Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 22 % of critics have given the film a positive review based on 130 reviews , with an average score of 4.5/10 .
However , Gwyneth Paltrow was praised for her role .
The critical consensus is : " The cast gives it their all , and Paltrow handles her songs with aplomb , but Country Strongs cliched , disjointed screenplay hits too many bum notes . "
Another review aggregate , Metacritic , gave the film a 45/100 , indicating mixed or average reviews .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film opened to a wide release on January 7 , 2011 , taking in $ 7.5 million and coming in sixth place that weekend .
It eventually grossed $ 20.6 million , beating its $ 15 million budget .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home Media .
The film was released on DVD / Blu - ray on April 12 , 2011 .
The special features include the soundtrack , deleted scenes , music videos , extended performances , the original ending , as well as featurettes about the cast , the songwriters , and the costumes .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Date of ceremony !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's title track was recorded by Paltrow and released as a single to country radio on August 23 , 2010 .
Country artist Sara Evans ' single " A Little Bit Stronger " , is featured on the film 's soundtrack and was released as a single in September 2010 ( which also served as a single for her sixth studio album , Stronger ) .
Both singles were promoted by RCA Nashville .
The soundtrack debuted at # 16 on the Billboard Top Country Albums chart upon its release on October 26 , 2010 .
Following the film 's release in January 2011 , the soundtrack rose to a new peak of # 2 on that chart , as well as # 6 on the all - genre Billboard 200 albums chart .
The film 's score was composed by Michael Brook . "
Coming Home " by Bob DiPiero , Tom Douglas , Lindsey , Troy Verges and performed by Gwyneth Paltrow was nominated for Best Original Song at the 68th Golden Globe Awards and 83rd Academy Awards , but it lost both to
" You Have n't Seen The Last of Me " from Burlesque and " We Belong Together " from Toy Story 3 , respectively .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS