BECKET CONTROVERSY
The Becket controversy or Becket dispute was the quarrel between Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , and King Henry II of England , from 1163 to 1170 .
The controversy culminated with Becket 's murder in 1170 , and was followed by Becket 's canonization in 1173 and Henry 's public penance at Canterbury in July 1174 . BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
King Henry II appointed his chancellor , Thomas Becket , as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1162 .
This appointment was made to replace Theobald of Bec , the previous archbishop , who had died in 1161 .
Henry hoped that by appointing his chancellor , with whom he had very good relations , royal supremacy over the English Church would be reasserted and royal rights over the Church would return to what they had been in the days of Henry 's grandfather , King Henry
I of England .
START OF THE DISPUTE Section::::Start of the dispute .
However , shortly after Becket 's consecration , the new archbishop resigned the chancellorship , and changed his entire lifestyle .
Previously , Becket had lived ostentatiously , but he now wore a cilice and lived like an ascetic .
That said , modern Becket historian Frank Barlow argues that the stories of Becket immediately wearing a hair shirt are later embellishments .
He also no longer aided the king in defending royal interests in the church , but instead began to champion ecclesiastical rights .
Although a number of small conflicts contributed to the controversy , the main source of conflict was over what to do with clergy who committed secular crimes .
Because even those men who took minor orders were considered clergy , the quarrel over the so - called " criminous clerks " potentially covered up to one - fifth of the male population of England at the time .
Becket held the position that all clergy , whether only in minor orders or not , were not to be dealt with by secular powers , and that only the ecclesiastical hierarchy could judge them for crimes , even those that were secular in nature ( the benefit of clergy ) .
Henry , however , felt that this position deprived him of the ability to govern effectively , and also undercut law and order in England .
Henry held that the laws and customs of England supported his position , and that Theobald of Bec , the previous archbishop , had admitted in 1154 to the papacy that the English custom was to allow secular courts to try clerks accused of crimes .
Among the other issues between the king and the archbishop were the actions Becket took to recover lands lost to the archdiocese , some of which he reacquired with a royal writ that authorized the archbishop to restore any alienated lands .
His high - handedness caused many complaints to the king , and added to the dispute .
Another disagreement involved Henry 's attempts to collect sheriff 's aid in 1163 .
Becket argued that the aid was a free will offering to the sheriffs , and could not be compelled .
This culminated in a heated argument at Woodstock , Oxfordshire in July 1163 .
Yet another contributing factor was Becket 's excommunication of a royal tenant - in - chief who had resisted the archbishop 's attempt to install a clerk in a church where the tenant claimed the right to name the appointment .
A still later quarrel between the king and Becket resulted in Becket giving way to the king 's statement that the custom of England was that no tenant - in - chief could be excommunicated without royal permission .
BUILDUP TO EXILE Section::::Buildup to exile .
In October 1163 , Henry summoned the ecclesiastical hierarchy to Westminster to hear his complaints about the governance of the English Church .
At first , the bishops did not agree with the king , who then asked them if they would agree to observe the ancient customs of England .
The bishops remained steadfastly behind Becket , and refused to agree to observe the customs if they conflicted with canon law .
The council only met for a day , and the next day , the king took his heir , Henry the Young King , out of Becket 's custody , as well as confiscating all the honours that he had formerly given to Becket .
This was effectively a dismissal of Becket from royal favour .
Over the next year , both sides maneuvered to gain advantages , working on diplomatic efforts to secure allies .
The king , advised by Arnulf of Lisieux , worked on the bishops and managed to swing many of them over to his viewpoint .
Both sides petitioned the papacy , and Becket also sent diplomatic feelers to King Louis VII of France and the Holy Roman Emperor .
The pope , Alexander III , refused to take sides , and urged moderation on both sides .
Becket also began to secure possible safe places of refuge on the continent , if he should need to go into exile .
In late January 1164 , the king summoned his major barons as well as the bishops to Clarendon Palace for a council .
Once it assembled , the king demanded that the bishops and Becket swear to uphold without reservations the customs of the church as they had been in the king 's grandfather 's reign .
At first , Becket refused , but threats and other arguments eventually persuaded him to support the customs , and Becket then ordered the remaining bishops to assent also .
The king then proposed to have a committee of barons and clerks compile these customs into a written document , which would be presented to the council .
This was done , but in the middle of the recitation of the customs , Becket asked for a postponement in order for him to consult with others about the customs .
However , he eventually accepted these customs , and the bishops also swore to uphold these , which subsequently became known as the Constitutions of Clarendon .
In August 1164 , Becket attempted to go to France without permission , which was forbidden by the Constitutions .
He was caught , and then tried on 6 October 1164 at a royal court on different charges of failing to adequately address a suit brought against him by nobleman John Marshal about lands that Becket had confiscated .
Once at the council , Becket was found guilty of ignoring the court summons and under pressure from the bishops , accepted the sentence of confiscation of all non - landed property pending the pleasure of the king .
However , the original dispute over John Marshal 's lands was decided in the archbishop 's favour .
The king then brought further charges and asked for an accounting of Becket 's spending while the archbishop had been chancellor .
Another charge was that he was not fulfilling his oath to observe the Constitutions .
Becket replied that he was not prepared to answer those charges and was eventually found guilty of both .
The archbishop refused to accept the sentence , and fled Northampton and took sanctuary .
EXILE Section::::Exile .
Thomas took a ship to the continent on 2 November 1164 , eventually reaching a resting spot at Sens , where both sides presented their cases to Alexander .
Although Becket was not ordered back to England as the king 's envoys requested , neither was the king ordered to back down .
Instead , Becket went into exile at Pontigny .
Afterward , the king confiscated all the benefices of the archbishop 's clerks , who had accompanied him into exile .
The king also ordered the exile of Becket 's family and servants .
While in exile , Becket engaged in letter writing , writing to many English noblemen and bishops .
He engaged in a series of letter exchanges with Gilbert Foliot , the Bishop of London , who was also the recipient of letters from the pope .
Becket continued to attempt to resolve the dispute , but Alexander ordered the archbishop to refrain from provoking the king before spring 1166 .
Meanwhile , Henry had delegated much of the everyday business of the English Church to Foliot , who although supportive of the king was no compliant supplicant , and was known as a supporter of papal positions .
Neither Foliot nor Henry had any great desire to settle with Becket quickly .
In late spring 1166 , Becket began to threaten the king with ecclesiastical punishments if he did not settle with him .
Henry ignored the initial warning letters , but Becket 's position was strengthened by the grant to Becket of the status of a papal legate to England , dated on 2 May 1166 .
On Whitsun 1166 , Becket excommunicated a number of Henry 's advisers and clerical servants , including John of Oxford , Richard of Ilchester , Richard de Lucy , and Jocelin de Balliol , among others .
A bishop was also excommunicated , Josceline de Bohon , the Bishop of Salisbury .
The king and Foliot responded to these actions with the summoning of a council that was held at London around 24 June 1166 .
The council sent letters both to the pope and to Becket , appealing against the excommunications .
After the dispatch of these letters , letters from the archbishop were delivered to Foliot , ordering him to publicize Becket 's decisions , and disallowing any appeal to the papacy against the archbishop 's sentences .
Foliot and the bishops then once again sent letters to the papacy , probably from Northampton on 6 July .
A more concrete effort was the appeal of the king to the Cistercian Order 's general convocation in 1166 , protesting the aid the Cistercian monasteries of Potigny , Cercamp and Rigny had given to Becket and threatening to expel the order from Henry 's lands .
Although the Order did not exactly expel Becket from Potigny , a delegation of Cistercians did meet with Becket , pointing out that while they would not throw him out , they felt sure that he would not wish to bring harm to the Order .
Becket then secured aid from the king of France , who offered a sanctuary at Sens .
In December 1166 , Alexander wrote to the English bishops that he was sending papal legates a latere to England to hear the various cases .
Although later writers on both sides of the controversy claimed that there was to be no appeal from the legates ' decisions , nowhere in the documents announcing their appointment was any such limitation mentioned .
Alexander wrote two letters , one to each of the main combatants .
The letter to the king stressed that the pope had forbidden the archbishop from escalating the dispute until the legates had decided the issues , and that the legates were to absolve the excommunicated once they arrived in England .
The letter to the archbishop , however , stressed that the pope had begged the king to restore Becket to Canterbury , and instead of commanding Becket to refrain from further escalation , merely advised the archbishop to restrain himself from hostile moves .
Meanwhile , John of Oxford had returned to England from a mission to Rome , and was proclaiming that the legates were to depose Becket , and supposedly showed papal letters confirming this to Foliot .
The pope wrote to the papal legates complaining that John of Oxford 's actions had harmed the pope 's reputation , but never claimed that John of Oxford was lying .
For the next four years , papal legates were dispatched to try to bring the dispute to a negotiated conclusion .
Neither Becket nor Henry were disposed to settle , and the pope needed Henry 's support too much to rule against him , as the pope was engaged in a protracted dispute with the German emperor , and needed English support .
In November 1167 Foliot was summoned to Normandy , then ruled by Henry II , to meet with papal legates and the king .
Roger of York , Hilary of Chichester , and Roger of Worcester were also summoned to attend .
After some discussion and argument , Henry appears to have agreed that the legates could judge both the king 's case against Becket as well as the bishops ' case .
Henry also offered a compromise on the subject of the Constitutions of Clarendon , that the legates accepted .
However , when the legates met with Becket on 18 November , it quickly became apparent that Becket would not accept negotiations with the king nor accept the legates as judges of either case against him .
As the legates had no mandate to compel Becket to accept them as judges , the negotiations came to an end with the king and bishops still appealing to the papacy .
On 13 April 1169 , Becket excommunicated Foliot , along with Hugh , Earl of Norfolk , Josceline of Salisbury , and seven royal officials .
Becket did this even though none of them had been warned , and despite the fact that the pope had asked that Becket not make any such sentences until after a pending embassy to King Henry had ended .
Becket also warned a number of others that unless they made amends to him , they too would be excommunicated on 29 May , Ascension Day .
In his excommunication , Becket called Foliot " that wolf in sheep 's clothing " .
Although Foliot tried to enlist the help of his fellow bishops in an appeal , they were less than helpful .
Foliot then prepared to appeal his sentence to the pope in person , and travelled to Normandy in late June or early July , where he met the king , but proceeded no further towards Rome , as the papacy was attempting once more to secure a negotiated settlement .
In late August and early September serious but ultimately fruitless negotiations took place between the king and the archbishop .
Foliot then proceeded to Rome , but at Milan he received word that his envoy at the papal court had secured the right for him to be absolved by the Archbishop of Rouen , Rotrou .
Foliot then returned to Rouen , where he was absolved on 5 April and reinstated in his see on 1 May.
The only requirement of this absolution was that Foliot accept a penance to be imposed by the pope .
Much of Foliot 's objections to Becket 's excommunication stemmed from the lack of warning that Foliot and the others had received , contrary to the customary and normal procedures .
Becket and his supporters pointed out that there were some situations in which it was possible to excommunicate without warning , but Foliot claimed that the present situation was not one of them .
According to Foliot , Becket 's habit was " to condemn first , judge second " .
Foliot 's example of appealing excommunications to the papacy was an important step in the setting up of an appeal process for excommunication during the 12th century .
END OF THE DISPUTE Section::::End of the dispute .
On 14 June 1170 , Henry 's son , Henry the Young King , was crowned junior King of England ( because Henry was still alive ) by the Archbishop of York , which infringed on the right of Becket as Archbishop of Canterbury to crown English monarchs .
Although there is no definitive evidence that Foliot assisted in the coronation , it appears likely that he did so .
The coronation drove the pope to allow Becket to lay an interdict on England as punishment , and the threat of an interdict forced Henry to negotiate with Becket in July 1170 .
Becket and the king came to terms on 22 July 1170 , allowing the archbishop to return to England , which he did in early December .
However , shortly before he landed in England , he excommunicated Roger of York , Josceline of Salisbury , and Foliot .
One possible reason for the excommunications was that the three ecclesiastics had electors from the various vacant bishoprics with them , and were escorting those electors to the king on the continent in order to reward a number of royal clerks with the long vacant bishoprics .
Included among those royal clerks were some of Becket 's most bitter foes during his exile .
Although Becket offered to absolve Josceline and Foliot , he argued that only the pope could absolve Roger , as he was an archbishop .
Roger persuaded the other two to appeal to the king , then in Normandy .
When they did so , the royal anger at the timing of the excommunications was such that it led to Henry uttering the question often attributed to him : "
Will no one rid me of this turbulent priest ? " .
This inspired four knights to set off from the king 's court in Normandy to Canterbury , where on 29 December 1170 , they murdered Becket .
EFFECTS OF THE DISPUTE Section::::Effects of the dispute .
For the ten years that the dispute ran , Henry was unable to appoint any new bishops in England to replace those who had died .
It was only in 1173 that new bishops were finally appointed .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
In May 1172 , Henry negotiated a settlement with the papacy , the Compromise of Avranches , in which the king swore to go on crusade as well as allow appeals to the papacy in Rome .
He also agreed to eliminate all customs to which the Church objected .
In return , the king managed to secure good relations with the papacy at a time when he faced rebellions from his sons .
After Becket 's death his sentences of excommunication were confirmed , as well as the suspensions from ecclesiastical office .
The pope in his confirmation referred to Roger of York , Foliot , and Josceline of Salisbury , as the " Gilbertine trinity " .
The excommunication was absolved for Foliot on 1 August 1171 , but he remained suspended from office .
He secured his restoration to office on 1 May 1172 , after clearing himself of any involvement in Becket 's murder .
The king performed a public act of penance on 12 July 1174 at Canterbury , when he publicly confessed his sins , and then allowed each bishop present , including Foliot , to give him five blows from a rod , then each of the 80 monks of Canterbury Cathedral gave the king three blows .
The king then offered gifts to Becket 's shrine and spent a vigil at Becket 's tomb .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Although little actually changed from the position that Henry took early in the dispute – he was still able to appoint his own choices as bishops , as well as enjoying many of the rights King Henry I had enjoyed in the Church – the controversy was one of a number of similar disputes between the papacy and secular governments in the 12th century .
CITATIONS REFERENCES