COOL FLAME Cool flame is a flame having maximal temperature below about .
It is usually produced in a chemical reaction of a certain fuel - air mixture .
Contrary to conventional flame , the reaction is not vigorous and releases very little heat , light , and carbon dioxide .
Cold fires are difficult to observe and are uncommon in everyday life , but they are responsible for engine knock – the undesirable , erratic , and noisy combustion of low - octane fuels in internal combustion engines .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Cool flames were accidentally discovered in the 1810s by Sir Humphry Davy , who was inserting a hot platinum wire into a mixture of air and diethyl ether vapor .
" When the experiment on the slow combustion of ether is made in the dark , a pale phosphorescent light is perceived above the wire , which of course is most distinct when the wire ceases to be ignited .
This appearance is connected with the formation of a peculiar acrid volatile substance possessed of acid properties . "
After noticing that certain types of flame did not burn his fingers or ignite a match , he also found that those unusual flames could change into conventional ones and that at certain compositions and temperatures , they did not require an external ignition source , such as a spark or hot material .
Harry Julius Emeléus was the first to record their emission spectra , and in 1929 he coined the term " cold flame " .
PARAMETERS Section::::Parameters .
Cool flame can occur in hydrocarbons , alcohols , aldehydes , oils , acids , waxes , and even methane .
The lowest temperature of a cool flame is poorly defined and is conventionally set as temperature at which the flame can be detected by eye in a dark room ( cool flames are hardly visible in daylight ) .
This temperature slightly depends on the fuel to oxygen ratio and strongly depends on gas pressure – there is a threshold below which cool flame is not formed .
A specific example is 50 % n - butane–50 % oxygen ( in volume percent ) which has a cool flame temperature ( CFT ) of about 300 ° C at .
One of the lowest CFTs ( 156 ° C ) was reported for a CHOCH
+ O
+
N mixture at .
The CFT is significantly lower than the auto - ignition temperature ( AIT ) of conventional flame ( see table ) .
The spectra of cool flames consist of several bands and are dominated by the blue and violet ones – thus the flame usually appears pale blue .
The blue component originates from the excited state of formaldehyde ( CHO * ) which is formed via chemical reactions in the flame :
A cool flame does not start instantaneously after the threshold pressure and temperature are applied , but has an induction time .
The induction time shortens and the glow intensity increases with increasing pressure .
With increasing temperature , the intensity may decrease because of the disappearance of peroxy radicals required for the above glow reactions .
Self - sustained , stable cool flames have been established by adding ozone into oxidizer stream .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
Whereas in a usual flame molecules break down to small fragments and combine with oxygen producing carbon dioxide ( i.e. burn ) , in a cool flame , the fragments are relatively large and easily recombine with each other .
Therefore , much less heat , light and carbon dioxide is released ; the combustion process is oscillatory and can sustain for a long time .
A typical temperature increase upon ignition of a cool flame is a few tens of degrees Celsius whereas it is on the order of 1000 ° C for a conventional flame .
Most experimental data can be explained by the model which considers cool flame just as a slow chemical reaction where the rate of heat generation is higher than the heat loss .
This model also explains the oscillatory character of the cool flame : the reaction accelerates as it produces more heat until the heat loss becomes appreciable and temporarily quenches the process .
APPLICATIONS
Section::::Applications .
Cool flames may contribute to engine knock – the undesirable , erratic , and noisy combustion of low - octane fuels in internal combustion engines .
In a normal regime , the conventional flame front travels smoothly in the combustion chamber from the spark plug , compressing the fuel / air mixture ahead .
However , the concomitant increase in pressure and temperature may produce a cool flame in the last unburned fuel - air mixture ( the so - called end gasses ) and participate in the autoignition of the end gasses .
This sudden , localized heat release generates a shock wave which travels through the combustion chamber , with its sudden pressure rise causing an audible knocking sound .
Worse , the shock wave disrupts the thermal boundary layer on the piston surface , causing overheating and eventual melting .
The output power decreases and , unless the throttle ( or load ) is cut off quickly , the engine can be damaged as described in a few minutes .
The sensitivity of a fuel to a cool - flame ignition strongly depends on the temperature , pressure and composition .
The cool flame initiation of the knock process is likely only in highly throttled operating conditions , since cool flames are observed at low pressures .
Under normal operating conditions , autoignition occurs without being triggered by a cool flame .
Whereas the temperature and pressure of the combustion are largely determined by the engine , the composition can be controlled by various antiknock additives .
The latter mainly aim at removing the radicals ( such as CHO * mentioned above ) thereby suppressing the major source of the cool flame .
SEE ALSO
* Fire * Flame * Plasma ( physics )
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* - an explanation of the oscillatory nature of cool flame .