NUCLEIC ACID SECONDARY STRUCTURE Nucleic acid secondary structure is the basepairing interactions within a single nucleic acid polymer or between two polymers .
It can be represented as a list of bases which are paired in a nucleic acid molecule .
The secondary structures of biological DNA 's and RNA 's tend to be different : biological DNA mostly exists as fully base paired double helices , while biological RNA is single stranded and often forms complex and intricate base - pairing interactions due to its increased ability to form hydrogen bonds stemming from the extra hydroxyl group in the ribose sugar .
In a non - biological context , secondary structure is a vital consideration in the nucleic acid design of nucleic acid structures for DNA nanotechnology and DNA computing , since the pattern of basepairing ultimately determines the overall structure of the molecules .
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS BASE PAIRING Section::::Fundamental concepts .
Section::::Base pairing .
In molecular biology , two nucleotides on opposite complementary DNA or RNA strands that are connected via hydrogen bonds are called a base pair ( often abbreviated bp ) .
In the canonical Watson - Crick base pairing , adenine ( A ) forms a base pair with thymine ( T ) and guanine ( G ) forms one with cytosine ( C ) in DNA .
In RNA , thymine is replaced by uracil ( U ) .
Alternate hydrogen bonding patterns , such as the wobble base pair and Hoogsteen base pair , also occur — particularly in RNA — giving rise to complex and functional tertiary structures .
Importantly , pairing is the mechanism by which codons on messenger RNA molecules are recognized by anticodons on transfer RNA during protein translation .
Some DNA- or RNA - binding enzymes can recognize specific base pairing patterns that identify particular regulatory regions of genes .
Hydrogen bonding is the chemical mechanism that underlies the base - pairing rules described above .
Appropriate geometrical correspondence of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors allows only the " right " pairs to form stably .
DNA with high GC - content is more stable than DNA with low GC - content , but contrary to popular belief , the hydrogen bonds do not stabilize the DNA significantly and stabilization is mainly due to stacking interactions .
The larger nucleobases , adenine and guanine , are members of a class of doubly ringed chemical structures called purines ; the smaller nucleobases , cytosine and thymine ( and uracil ) , are members of a class of singly ringed chemical structures called pyrimidines .
Purines are only complementary with pyrimidines : pyrimidine - pyrimidine pairings are energetically unfavorable because the molecules are too far apart for hydrogen bonding to be established ; purine - purine pairings are energetically unfavorable because the molecules are too close , leading to overlap repulsion .
The only other possible pairings are GT and AC ; these pairings are mismatches because the pattern of hydrogen donors and acceptors do not correspond .
The GU wobble base pair , with two hydrogen bonds , does occur fairly often in RNA .
NUCLEIC ACID
HYBRIDIZATION
Section::::Nucleic acid hybridization .
Hybridization is the process of complementary base pairs binding to form a double helix .
Melting is the process by which the interactions between the strands of the double helix are broken , separating the two nucleic acid strands .
These bonds are weak , easily separated by gentle heating , enzymes , or physical force .
Melting occurs preferentially at certain points in the nucleic acid .
T and A rich sequences are more easily melted than C and G rich regions .
Particular base steps are also susceptible to DNA melting , particularly T A and T G base steps .
These mechanical features are reflected by the use of sequences such as TATAA at the start of many genes to assist RNA polymerase in melting the DNA for transcription .
Strand separation by gentle heating , as used in PCR , is simple providing the molecules have fewer than about 10,000 base pairs ( 10 kilobase pairs , or 10 kbp ) .
The intertwining of the DNA strands makes long segments difficult to separate .
The cell avoids this problem by allowing its DNA - melting enzymes ( helicases ) to work concurrently with topoisomerases , which can chemically cleave the phosphate backbone of one of the strands so that it can swivel around the other .
Helicases unwind the strands to facilitate the advance of sequence - reading enzymes such as DNA polymerase .
SECONDARY STRUCTURE
MOTIFS Section::::Secondary structure motifs .
Nucleic acid secondary structure is generally divided into helices ( contiguous base pairs ) , and various kinds of loops ( unpaired nucleotides surrounded by helices ) .
Frequently these elements , or combinations of them , are further classified into additional categories including , for example , tetraloops , pseudoknots , and stem - loops .
DOUBLE HELIX Section::::Double helix .
The double helix is an important tertiary structure in nucleic acid molecules which is intimately connected with the molecule 's secondary structure .
A double helix is formed by regions of many consecutive base pairs .
The nucleic acid double helix is a spiral polymer , usually right - handed , containing two nucleotide strands which base pair together .
A single turn of the helix constitutes about ten nucleotides , and contains a major groove and minor groove , the major groove being wider than the minor groove .
Given the difference in widths of the major groove and minor groove , many proteins which bind to DNA do so through the wider major groove .
Many double - helical forms are possible ; for DNA the three biologically relevant forms are A - DNA , B - DNA , and Z - DNA , while RNA double helices have structures similar to the A form of DNA .
STEM - LOOP STRUCTURES Section::::Stem - loop structures .
The secondary structure of nucleic acid molecules can often be uniquely decomposed into stems and loops .
The stem - loop structure ( also often referred to as an " hairpin " ) , in which a base - paired helix ends in a short unpaired loop , is extremely common and is a building block for larger structural motifs such as cloverleaf structures , which are four - helix junctions such as those found in transfer RNA .
Internal loops ( a short series of unpaired bases in a longer paired helix ) and bulges ( regions in which one strand of a helix has " extra " inserted bases with no counterparts in the opposite strand ) are also frequent .
There are many secondary structure elements of functional importance to biological RNA 's ; some famous examples are the Rho - independent terminator stem - loops and the tRNA cloverleaf .
Active research is on - going to determine the secondary structure of RNA molecules , with approaches including both experimental and computational methods ( see also the List of RNA structure prediction software ) .
PSEUDOKNOTS Section::::Pseudoknots .
A pseudoknot is a nucleic acid secondary structure containing at least two stem - loop structures in which half of one stem is intercalated between the two halves of another stem .
Pseudoknots fold into knot - shaped three - dimensional conformations but are not true topological knots .
The base pairing in pseudoknots is not well nested ; that is , base pairs occur that " overlap " one another in sequence position .
This makes the presence of general pseudoknots in nucleic acid sequences impossible to predict by the standard method of dynamic programming , which uses a recursive scoring system to identify paired stems and consequently can not detect non - nested base pairs with common algorithms .
However , limited subclasses of pseudoknots can be predicted using modified dynamic programs .
Newer structure prediction techniques such as stochastic context - free grammars are also unable to consider pseudoknots .
Pseudoknots can form a variety of structures with catalytic activity and several important biological processes rely on RNA molecules that form pseudoknots .
For example , the RNA component of the human telomerase contains a pseudoknot that is critical for its activity .
The hepatitis delta virus ribozyme is a well known example of a catalytic RNA with a pseudoknot in its active site .
Though DNA can also form pseudoknots , they are generally not present in standard physiological conditions .
SECONDARY STRUCTURE
PREDICTION Section::::Secondary structure prediction .
Most methods for nucleic acid secondary structure prediction rely on a nearest neighbor thermodynamic model .
A common method to determine the most probable structures given a sequence of nucleotides makes use of a dynamic programming algorithm that seeks to find structures with low free energy .
Dynamic programming algorithms often forbid pseudoknots , or other cases in which base pairs are not fully nested , as considering these structures becomes computationally very expensive for even small nucleic acid molecules .
Other methods , such as stochastic context - free grammars can also be used to predict nucleic acid secondary structure .
For many RNA molecules , the secondary structure is highly important to the correct function of the RNA — often more so than the actual sequence .
This fact aids in the analysis of non - coding RNA sometimes termed " RNA genes " .
One application of bioinformatics uses predicted RNA secondary structures in searching a genome for noncoding but functional forms of RNA .
For example , microRNAs have canonical long stem - loop structures interrupted by small internal loops .
RNA secondary structure applies in RNA splicing in certain species .
In humans and other tetrapods , it has been shown that without the U2AF2 protein , the splicing process is inhibited .
However , in zebrafish and other teleosts the RNA splicing process can still occur on certain genes in the absence of U2AF2 .
This may be because 10 % of genes in zebrafish have alternating TG and AC base pairs at the 3 ' splice site ( 3'ss ) and 5 ' splice site ( 5'ss ) respectively on each intron , which alters the secondary structure of the RNA .
This suggests that secondary structure of RNA can influence splicing , potentially without the use of proteins like U2AF2 that have been thought to be required for splicing to occur .
SEE ALSO
* DNA nanotechnology
* Molecular models of DNA
* DiProDB .
The database is designed to collect and analyse thermodynamic , structural and other dinucleotide properties .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * MDDNA : Structural Bioinformatics of DNA * Abalone — Commercial software for DNA modeling * DNAlive : a web interface to compute DNA physical properties .
Also allows cross - linking of the results with the UCSC Genome browser and DNA dynamics .