BLUE BLOODS ( TV SERIES )
Blue Bloods is an American police procedural fictional drama series that airs on CBS .
The series is filmed on location in New York City with occasional references to nearby suburbs .
The series debuted on September 24 , 2010 , with episodes airing on Fridays following before being moved to Wednesdays at 10:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific time and 9:00 p.m. Central and Mountain time for a four - week tryout .
After four weeks , it returned to its original Friday 10:00 p.m. Eastern time slot , where it has remained since .
On April 18 , 2018 , CBS renewed the series for a ninth season , which premiered on September 28 , 2018 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The series follows the Reagan family of police officers with the New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) .
Francis Xavier " Frank " Reagan is the Police Commissioner .
Frank 's oldest son Danny is an NYPD detective , his youngest son Jamie is an NYPD police officer ( later sergeant ) , and his daughter Erin is an assistant district attorney .
Frank 's second - oldest son Joe was murdered by a crooked cop in the line of duty in events that pre - date the series , when he was involved with the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) investigating a group of corrupt NYPD cops known as the Blue Templar .
Frank 's father Henry is a former NYPD beat cop who rose through the ranks to Police Commissioner .
Each member of the family represents a different aspect of police work or the legal process :
Frank as the commissioner , Danny as the detective , Jamie as the beat cop and Erin as the prosecutor .
Additionally , while each person 's story might occasionally interweave with another 's , the show also follows the professional and , at times , personal relationships with their respective partners and colleagues .
Frank with Garrett Moore , the NYPD Deputy Commissioner of Public Information and de facto Chief of Staff , Detective 1st Grade Abigail Baker , the Primary Aide to the Commissioner , and later Lieutenant Sidney Gormley , the Special Assistant to the Commissioner and de facto Chief of Department ;
Danny with Detective Maria Baez ; Jamie with Officer Edit " Eddie " Janko ; and Erin with Detective Anthony Abetemarco in the DA 's office .
Both Henry 's and Frank 's wives , Betty and Mary , are deceased .
Erin is divorced and has one college student daughter , Nicky , who lives with her .
Danny is a widower with two sons named Jack and Sean ; he was married to Linda , a nurse who was killed offscreen between seasons 7 and 8 .
Jamie is unmarried , though romantic feelings develop between him and his current partner , Eddie Janko ; they acknowledge their mutual attraction during season 7 and get engaged at the end of season 8 .
A running plot feature of the show entails Sunday dinner around the table in Frank Reagan 's Bay Ridge home at 8070 Harbor View Terrace .
Four generations gather here to eat and discuss their week , and the rule is that no one can take a first bite before every last family member is present and seated , and grace is said .
Discussion of the week 's events then ensues , often including the adults ' current work cases , and controversies therefrom are often discussed and hashed out by the entire family .
The grandchildren have questions which adults answer sometimes to humor them , sometimes to give their viewpoints .
At times the dialogue becomes heated and emotionally charged , but the family always remains loving and united in spite of any differences they encounter .
The Sunday dinner has been a Reagan family tradition for more than a century , and is well known to their friends and neighbors .
CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters . !
rowspan="2 " Actor ! !
rowspan="2 " Character ! !
colspan="9"Seasons 1
! 2 !
3 !
4 !
5 !
6 !
7 !
8 ! 9
EPISODES PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Selleck mentioned that he was drawn to the project because of the strong pilot script and that he was concerned about becoming involved in an ongoing series because he did not want to compromise his commitment to the Jesse Stone television movies .
Beginning January 19 , 2011 , Blue Bloods was moved to Wednesdays at 10 p.m. for a four - week tryout .
In February 2011 , the series returned to its Friday night time slot due to the series premiere of .
In the UK , the show helped launch Sky Atlantic by premiering on Tuesday , February 1 , 2011 , at 10:30 p.m.
In Australia , the show premiered in February 2011 in a primetime Wednesday slot on Network TEN , then from February 2013 for season two was moved from the network 's primary SD channel to its HD channel one alongside White Collar , then on August 26 , 2013 , the show moved back to the primary SD channel on Mondays for season three .
In New Zealand , the show premieres on July 13 , 2013 on TV3 replacing in a primetime Saturday slot after .
On October 20 , 2012 , CBS announced that Jennifer Esposito was being dropped from the series , with her character , Detective Curatola , being placed on indefinite leave of absence .
Esposito and CBS had been at odds over her limited availability for work after the actress was diagnosed with celiac disease .
She had missed a week after collapsing on set earlier in the season .
According to Esposito , CBS challenged her request for a reduced work schedule , and further , kept her from finding work elsewhere .
In a press release from CBS , the network said that Esposito had " informed us that she is only available to work on a very limited part - time schedule .
As a result , she 's unable to perform the demands of her role and we regretfully had to put her character on a leave of absence .
" Curatola 's last appearance was in the season three episode " Nightmares " .
According to TV by the Numbers , by committing itself to a third season of Blue Bloods , CBS all but guaranteed a fourth season , because , as a CBS Television Studios production , CBS had a financial incentive to produce at least the minimum number of episodes needed for stripped syndication .
On March 27 , 2013 , CBS made it official by renewing Blue Bloods for a fourth season to begin in the fall of 2013 .
Blue Bloods was renewed for a fifth season on March 13 , 2014 , and has since been renewed for seasons 6 , 7 , 8 , and 9 .
A house in Bay Ridge in Brooklyn is used for exterior shots of the Reagan house .
The series received $ 79 million in tax breaks from the state of New York for its seasons four through seven .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In Australia , the series premiered on Network Ten 's primary channel on February 2 , 2011 .
Due to poor ratings of the first season , Ten moved the series to its HD channel One , which premiered the second season on October 31 , 2011 .
Due to decreased viewership of Ten 's primary channel , season three moved back from August 26 , 2013 , and season four returned on March 17 , 2014 .
In New Zealand , the series premiered on TV3 on July 13 , 2013 .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , Sky Atlantic premiered the series on February 1 , 2011 , with season two returning on October 4 , 2011 , season three on December 13 , 2012 , and season four on November 28 , 2013 .
Season five premiered on January 21 , 2015 .
RERUNS Section::::Reruns .
Reruns of Blue Bloods air nationally in the United States on Ion Television and WGN America , the latter of which airs the show daily .
CBS Television Distribution currently distributes the series to local outlets on weekends , with two episodes being offered .
Repeats of Blue Bloods air on Pick in the UK .
The show airs twice a day on TV2 Charlie in Denmark .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reviewers have praised the series ' on - location shooting .
The New York Daily News praised Selleck 's performance as Frank Reagan , while also praising the family dinner scene for discussion of morally complex issues .
The Daily News drew comparisons between Selleck 's characters Jesse Stone and Frank Reagan , saying that both Reagan and Stone are moral , principled men of few words .
In Entertainment Weeklys annual Fall TV Preview , Ken Tucker named Blue Bloods one of the " 5 Best New Shows " of 2010 .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The pilot episode garnered 15.246 million viewers because of the Live + 7 days after with viewings from DVRs .
Without the DVR adding to the live viewing the show 's debut episode garnered a total of 13.02 million viewers .
Overall , the ratings have been steady for the series , after the pilot episode .
The lowest viewer total of 8.88 million occurred in episode eight of season seven ( which ran against Game 3 of the 2016 World Series ) , and is to date the only episode that had fewer than 9 million initial - broadcast viewers .
The second - season finale on May 11 , 2012 , was watched by 10.73 million viewers and received a 1.2/4 ratings / share among adults ages 18–49 .
The highest ( non - pilot ) live viewership of 12.93 million occurred in episode 14 of season four ( " Manhattan Queens " ) , which was the series ' 81st episode .
In January 2013 , CBS1 ! 2 !
3 !
4 ! 5 !
6 !
7 ! 8 ! 9 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS