WORLD OF TANKS World of Tanks ( WoT ) is a massively multiplayer online game developed by Belarusian company Wargaming , featuring mid-20th century
( 1930s–1960s ) era combat vehicles .
It is built upon a freemium business model where the game is free - to - play , but participants also have the option of paying a fee for use of " premium " features .
The focus is on player vs. player gameplay with each player controlling an armored vehicle , which may be a light , medium or heavy tank , tank destroyer , or self - propelled gun .
World of Tanks debuted as an eSports game at the World Cyber Games 2012 .
World of Tanks has been ported to multiple gaming consoles .
An Xbox 360 version was developed by Wargaming West studio , called World of Tanks :
Xbox 360 Edition .
Xbox 360 players use separate servers to those playing the Windows version , and players of each version have separate accounts .
The PlayStation 4 version was released in 2016 .
World of Tanks has also recently expanded to mobile platforms under the name World of Tanks Blitz , in addition to a board game titled World of Tanks Rush and a collectable card game titled World of Tanks : Generals .
As of December 2013 , the game has 75million registered players worldwide and a 1.1 million peak concurrent players .
This is an increase of 15 million over the 60 million in June 2013 and 30 million over the 45 million in December 2012 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The player takes control of a single armored vehicle of their choice , and is placed into a battle on a random map .
The player has control over the vehicle 's movement , firing , and can communicate with allied players through typed or voice chat .
A simple random match is won either by destroying all vehicles on the opposing team or capturing the opposing team 's base .
There are other game modes that change the rules of the battle , but gameplay mechanics remain the same .
World of Tanks contains multiple game mechanics such as camouflage , shell ricochets , and module damage .
GAME MODES Section::::Game modes .
The players in World of Tanks can choose six primary types of battles : random battles , team - training battles , tank - company battles , team battles , stronghold battles and special battles . "
Historical Battle " and " Rampage " are former options but have since been taken down for improvement upon its poor reception following its release .
Within random battles , players can also participate in platoons , groups of two to three players who are put into the same team .
There are also missions to be completed in the game modes for varying amounts of rewards .
VEHICLE TYPES Section::::Vehicle types .
The vehicles are modeled to closely resemble their counterparts in real life ; however , certain parameters have been simplified or modified to fit game mechanics , and better gameplay .
World of Tanks has five different types of vehicles : light tanks , medium tanks , heavy tanks , tank destroyers , and self - propelled guns .
Each nation has at least one line of vehicles starting at tier I to tier X , players progress by playing games in vehicles in that line .
CLAN WARS
Section::::Clan Wars .
Clan Wars in World of Tanks has two main components : Strongholds and the Global Map .
STRONGHOLDS Section::::Strongholds .
Each clan can have their own stronghold , if the clan 's commander wishes to construct one .
Each stronghold begins with one zone and can grow up to four zones as the clan 's membership increases .
Many different types of structures exist , however only one of each can be built .
Some structures generate ( by consuming industrial resource ) special missions or reserves that can be used to temporarily boost clan members experience or credits , or enable artillery or airstrikes during a battle for stronghold .
In order to build structures industrial resource is required , which can be won by attacking another stronghold or through skirmishes .
GLOBAL MAP Section::::Global Map .
The Global Map is a collection of fronts on a map based off the real - world map .
There are three fronts for tier 6 , 8 , and 10 .
Each front has provinces which generate gold for whichever clan that currently owns it .
A clan may enter the global map by entering a tournament for a specific province , facing other clans and ultimately the current land owner .
CUSTOMIZATION Section::::Customization .
All vehicles can be customized to a certain degree , either visually or in terms of performance , with the majority of parts ( such as tracks , guns , turrets , and engines ) being modular parts purchased from the game 's Tech tree .
Various two - tone and three - tone camouflage schemes are available for all tanks as well , including both historically accurate patterns and game - specific , custom variants .
Camouflage is available for temporary use by paying with freely earned in - game credits , or for permanent use by paying with gold purchased in the World of Tanks store or won in an in - game event .
Players can apply national flags , pre - designed slogans , and camouflage ( that will increase the chance of remaining undetected ) .
All vehicles can mount three pieces of additional equipment , which varies from vehicle to vehicle , and offers various advantages .
Some equipment allow the gun to fire faster , some increase the durability of certain parts of the vehicle , and some help keep the vehicle hidden while stationary .
Each vehicle can carry three consumables .
Examples of these include repair kits , medical kits , and extra rations that boost the tank 's crew for the duration of a single battle .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The developers thought of the concept of World of Tanks in December 2008 .
The game was officially announced by Wargaming on 24 April 2009 .
Developers claim that the game budget was the largest ever in the game industry of CIS ,
The open beta of the English version of the game was launched on 27 January 2011 ; the official release was scheduled for 12 April 2011 .
The World of Tanks pre - orders were scheduled to be available for the American and European clusters before the game release .
World of Tanks was released online on 12 April 2011 in Europe and North America , before being released for retail in the latter on 6 September 2011 , and in the former on 2 December 2011 .
The game was localised into the Japanese language within the Asia server on 5 September 2013 .
The Japanese version has collaboration events related to the tank - battle anime series Girls und Panzer .
Additionally , six voice packs featuring the characters from the anime as well as an expansion pack changing the tanks look were released .
In addition , the Vietnamese server was shut down and merged into the Asia server during 2014 .
As of June 2017 , Wargaming released two premium tanks , based from the anime series Valkyria Chronicles on the East Asia server .
In April 2016 , Wargaming announced that a comic book based on the World of Tanks universe is in development .
Titled World of Tanks : Roll Out , the five - issue series was written by Garth Ennis and Carlos Ezquerra , and was set to be published by Dark Horse Comics .
On August 2017 , Wargaming and World of Tanks announced a collaboration with the Swedish metal band Sabaton , shooting a World of Tanks drive - style video for Sabaton 's song Primo Victoria , and adding a tank named the " Primo Victoria " based on the Swedish Strv 81 to the game , featuring the Sabaton logo , with its crew featuring the visual likeness of Sabaton members , and lead singer Joakim Brodén voicing the captain of the tank .
VERSIONS
WORLD OF TANKS BLITZ Section::::Versions .
Section::::World of Tanks Blitz .
In May 2013 , Wargaming announced World of Tanks Blitz , a mobile version of World of Tanks for tablets and smartphones using Windows 10 , Android and iOS .
The game allows 7v7 battles , as compared to the 15v15 battles on PC .
The Closed Beta Test ( CBT ) started on 19 March , and ended 3 April .
World of Tanks Blitz was released ( in the iOS version only ) on May 2014 in European countries like Norway , Sweden , Finland , Denmark , and Iceland , with all other countries currently awaiting launch .
It was released on 27 June 2014 in North America , ( again , in the iOS version only ) .
Beta testing and/or release of the Android version had been released on the Russian server .
World of Tanks Blitz was released on Android on 4 December 2014 .
As of February 2015 , the Android version had 1.1 million downloads .
The game was released in the Windows Store on 28 December 2015 , making it available for PC users running Windows 10 .
CONSOLE VERSIONS XBOX 360 AND XBOX
ONE Section::::Console versions .
Section::::Xbox 360 and Xbox One .
World of Tanks :
Xbox 360 Edition was developed with Wargaming West , formerly Day 1 Studios until purchased early in 2013 .
Day 1 was looking for a publisher for their console mech game when Wargaming asked the studio about porting World of Tanks .
Day 1 prototyped the game on the Xbox 360 " in mere days " .
They were given unrestricted access to Wargaming 's servers and art .
The game 's client side runs on Wargaming 's Despair engine .
The company aimed to give each tank class 100 hours of unlockable content , or 400 to 500 hours overall .
The version is free - to - play for Xbox Live Gold subscribers , and includes a 7-day trial for Xbox Live Silver subscribers .
Playing the game earns experience for tanks and accessories , and silver for buying tanks and equipment .
Players can use gold , an in - game currency , to buy premium World of Tanks accounts , which in turn give players more experience and credits faster .
Players can buy gold with real money in the later patches .
Gold for premium accounts and tanks is the fastest method for progressing through the game .
The Xbox 360 Edition is not connected with the PC game , with a separate user base and no crossplay .
A closed beta test began in early 2013 , and E3 2013 attendees were invited to the beta after the game 's announcement .
The game was working on retail Xbox 360s by mid - May 2013 .
In late May 2013 , Wargaming announced that they would be showing its first console game at E3 2013 .
The game was officially announced during Microsoft 's E3 2013 press event .
An open beta with 40 American and German tanks was scheduled to begin the weekend after E3 2013 .
The beta was for stress testing the servers and multiplayer matchmaking .
Players could not buy gold in the open beta , but Wargaming provided free in - game gold to test the store , though this reset with the official release .
British tanks were also available within the beta .
About 60 total tanks were expected to be included in the full version .
The open beta was released on 7 August 2013 .
The beta closed on 28 January 2014 .
All stats on all of the players who participated were reset .
The people who participated in the beta got the game first when the full version came out on 12 February 2014 .
Xbox Live regulations bar Wargaming from offering premium accounts as recurring subscriptions .
Expansion released on 3 June 2014 includes Russian tanks .
Wargaming West said that if the Xbox 360 version gets a " meaningful user base " then they will focus on the Xbox One edition .
On 18 February 2015 , Wargaming announced that they were developing an Xbox One version of the game .
The game was released on 28 July 2015 .
It supports cross - platform play between Xbox 360 and Xbox One .
Players ' status and progress can be transferred from the Xbox 360 version to the Xbox One version .
PLAYSTATION 4 Section::::Playstation 4 .
On September 17 , 2015 Wargaming CEO Victor Kislyi announced at the Tokyo Game Show that World of Tanks would be coming to the PlayStation 4 .
Developed by Wargaming West , the same developer as the Xbox One and Xbox 360 versions .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
World of Tanks ( and the iOS version of World of Tanks Blitz ) received " generally favorable reviews " on all platforms according to the review aggregation website Metacritic .
GameZone gave the PC version a score of eight out of ten and stated , " For a free - to - play game , World of Tanks is insanely detailed and has combat that takes a while to get used to .
The more you learn about the game and the more you play , the better you 'll become at it .
It 's like an investment — spend time playing and you 'll be able to upgrade more and compete better .
In that sense , the game really drives you towards becoming better .
Since it 's free , it does n't hurt to try this game out if you have n't already .
Just make sure you get past the growing pains and give it a chance , because it really does have a lot to offer .
"
In Japan , Famitsu gave the Xbox 360 version a score of one eight , one six , and two sevens for a total of 28 out of 40 .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS