SHREK FOREVER
AFTER Shrek
Forever After ( previously promoted as Shrek :
The Final Chapter ) is a 2010 American computer - animated , comedy film by DreamWorks Animation .
It is the fourth installment in the Shrek film franchise and the sequel to Shrek the Third ( 2007 ) .
The film was directed by Mike Mitchell from a script by Josh Klausner and Darren Lemke , and stars Mike Myers , Eddie Murphy , Cameron Diaz , Antonio Banderas , Julie Andrews , and John Cleese reprising their previous roles , with Walt Dohrn introduced in the role of Rumpelstiltskin .
The plot follows Shrek struggling as a family man with no privacy , who yearns for the days when he was once feared .
He is tricked by Rumpelstiltskin into signing a contract that leads to disastrous consequences .
The film premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 21 , 2010 .
It was theatrically released in the United States by Paramount Pictures on May 21 , 2010 , in 3D and IMAX 3D formats .
The film debuted as the top - grossing film at the box office , a position it held for three consecutive weeks in the United States and Canada , grossing a worldwide total of $ 752 million and becoming the fifth - highest - grossing film of 2010 .
In addition , Shrek Forever After became DreamWorks Animation 's second - highest - grossing film at the foreign box office .
Although originally marketed as the final installment in the film franchise , a fifth Shrek film has unofficially been reported to be in production with speculation it could be released as early as 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In a flashback , King Harold and Queen Lillian are about to sign the kingdom of Far Far Away over to Rumpelstiltskin , in exchange for lifting their daughter 's curse .
The deal is abruptly cancelled at the last second when a knight informs the King and Queen that Princess Fiona has been rescued by Shrek .
An angry Rumpelstiltskin laments his loss and wishes that Shrek was never born .
In the present time , Shrek has grown steadily weary of being a family man and celebrity among the local villagers , leading him to wish for when he felt like a " real ogre " again .
When he takes his family to Far Far Away to celebrate his children 's first birthday , a series of mishaps further injure his ego , causing him to lose his temper and walk out in anger .
Shrek encounters Rumpelstiltskin , who seizes his chance , having observed Shrek 's angry outburst .
He follows Shrek and arranges for him to appear to save his life .
He gives Shrek a day to live like a real ogre , in exchange for a day from his childhood that he would not remember being erased to " thank " him .
Shrek signs the contract and appears in an alternate reality where the events starting from Fiona 's rescue are irrelevant .
Now feared by villagers , he takes the opportunity to cause some lighthearted mischief until he finds " WANTED " posters for Fiona and his home deserted and desolate .
He is kidnapped by witches and taken to Rumpel , now the King of Far Far Away , which has become derelict and run down .
Upon inquiry , Rumpel reveals that he took away the day Shrek was born .
Therefore , Shrek never saved Fiona or met Donkey , and consequently Rumpel was able to trick King Harold and Queen Lillian into signing their kingdom over to him , making them both disappear .
When the day ends , Shrek will disappear as well as he was never born in this timeline .
Shrek escapes Rumpel 's castle with Donkey .
Initially terrified of Shrek , Donkey decides to trust him after seeing Shrek cry over his erased history , something he had never seen an ogre do before .
After Shrek explains the situation , Donkey helps him find a hidden exit clause : the contract can be nullified by " true love 's kiss " .
They soon encounter an army of ogres who are resisting Rumpel .
The ogres are led by a still - cursed Fiona who , after escaping from the tower where she was held captive , keeps the retired and overweight Puss in Boots as a pet .
Shrek does everything he can to gain Fiona 's love , but she is too busy preparing an ambush on Rumpel .
She is also bitterly cynical and disillusioned about the power of true love and throws herself into planning Rumpel 's capture .
While sparring with her , Fiona begins to like Shrek , but stops short of kissing him .
Puss encourages him to continue pursuing Fiona .
During the ambush , the ogres are captured by the Pied Piper , though Shrek and Fiona escape with the intervention of Puss and Donkey .
Shrek insists Fiona kiss him , saying it will fix everything ; however , because in this altered timeline Fiona does not truly love him , the kiss does not work .
When he hears that Rumpel is offering a wish to the one who brings him Shrek , Shrek turns himself in and uses the wish to free the other ogres .
Afterwards , Rumpel reveals a captured Fiona whom he is going to feed to Dragon along with Shrek .
Donkey leads the Ogre army to storm the castle , battle the witches , and capture Rumpel , while Shrek and Fiona trap Dragon .
As the sun rises , Shrek begins to fade from existence , but Fiona , having fallen in love with him , kisses Shrek just before he disappears , restoring Shrek to his world just before he lashed out at the party .
Shrek embraces his friends and family with a newfound appreciation for everything he has .
CAST
* Mike Myers as Shrek * Eddie Murphy as Donkey * Cameron Diaz as Princess Fiona * Antonio Banderas as Puss in Boots
* Julie Andrews as Queen Lillian
* John Cleese as King Harold
* Walt Dohrn as Rumpelstiltskin
* Jon Hamm as Brogan the Ogre * Jane Lynch as Gretched the Ogre * Craig Robinson as Cookie the Ogre * Lake Bell as Patrol Witch ,
Wagon Witch No . 2 * Kathy Griffin as Dancing Witch and Wagon Witch No . 1 * Mary Kay Place as Guard Witch * Kristen Schaal as Pumpkin Witch , Palace Witch * Conrad Vernon as Gingerbread Man * Aron Warner as Wolf * Christopher Knights as Blind Mice
* Cody Cameron as Pinocchio , Three Pigs , Felicia , Farkle * Dante James Hauser as Fergus * Chris Miller as Magic Mirror , Geppetto * Meredith Vieira as Broomsy Witch * Jeremy Steig as Pied Piper * Larry King as Doris
the Ugly Stepsister
* Regis Philbin as Mabel
the Ugly Stepsister * Mike Mitchell as Witch Guard No . 2 and Butter Pants
* Ryan Seacrest as Father of Butter Pants PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Following the success of Shrek 2 , a third and fourth Shrek film , along with plans for a fifth and final film , were announced in May 2004 by Jeffrey Katzenberg .
In October 2006 , DreamWorks Animation revealed that the fourth film would be released in 2010 .
In October 2007 , Katzenberg announced a title for the fourth film , Shrek Goes Fourth , explaining that " Shrek goes out into the world , forth ! "
In May 2009 , however , DreamWorks Animation retitled the film to Shrek Forever After , indicating that it would be the last in the Shrek series .
In November 2009 , Bill Damaschke , head of creative production at DreamWorks Animation , confirmed with " All that was loved about Shrek in the first film is brought to the final film . "
Tim Sullivan was hired to write the script in March 2005 , but was later replaced by Darren Lemke and Josh Klausner .
Klausner , about the script 's evolution , said , " When I first came onto the project , it was n't supposed to be the final chapter — there were originally going to be 5 Shrek movies .
Then , about a year into the development , Jeffrey Katzenberg decided that the story that we 'd come up with was the right way for Shrek 's journey to end , which was incredibly flattering . "
In May 2007 , shortly before the release of the third film , it was announced Mike Mitchell would be on board to direct the new installment .
Much of the film was written and recorded in New York City .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Similar to most of the other Shrek films , the film 's original score was composed by British composer Harry Gregson - Williams .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
Shrek Forever After premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 21 , 2010 .
It was publicly released on May 20 , 2010 , in Russia , while the American release followed the next day .
The film was also released in IMAX 3D format .
In July 2014 , the film 's distribution rights were purchased by DreamWorks Animation from Paramount Pictures and transferred to 20th Century Fox before reverting to Universal Pictures in 2018 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Shrek Forever After earned $ 238.7 million in North America , and $ 513.9 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 752.6 million .
This made it the 52nd - highest - grossing film , the 12th - highest - grossing animated film , the fifth - highest - grossing of 2010 , the second - highest - grossing animated film of 2010 ( behind Toy Story 3 ) and the second - lowest - grossing film of the Shrek series .
Shrek Forever After had the widest release for an animated film ( 4,359 theaters , later expanded to 4,389 ) in North America .
On its opening day ( May 21 , 2010 ) , it ranked No.1 , grossing $ 20.8 million , which was lower than the opening days of the last two Shrek films .
The film then opened in three days with $ 70.8 million , lower than box office analysts ' predictions of an opening of $ 105 million and also lower than the two previous films of the franchise .
Anne Globe , head of worldwide marketing for DreamWorks Animation , said they were " happy with the film 's opening " since it debuted at No . 1 and also had the fourth - best opening for an animated film , at the time , in the United States and Canada .
Shrek Forever After was No.1 for three consecutive weekends .
In North America , it was the eighth - highest - grossing film of 2010 , the fourth - highest - grossing DreamWorks Animation film , 2010 's third - highest - grossing animated film , trailing Toy Story 3 and Despicable Me and the lowest - grossing Shrek film .
Executives at DreamWorks Animation were impressed because the film earned $ 238.7 million in North America , although it was the fourth film in the series , seemingly being outgrown by its fans .
Having made $ 513.9 million in other continents , it is the highest - grossing Shrek film , DreamWorks Animation 's second - biggest hit ( behind ) and the seventh - highest - grossing animated film .
It topped the weekend box office once on July 16–18 , 2010 with $ 46.3 million .
In Russia and the CIS , its second - highest - grossing country , it had a $ 19.7 million opening weekend which was a record among animated films .
It earned $ 51.4 million in total .
Third in total earnings came the United Kingdom , Ireland and Malta , where it opened with £ 8.96 million ( $ 13.6 million ) and finished its box office run with £ 31.1 million ( $ 51.1 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , Shrek Forever After has an approval rating of 58 % based on 191 reviews , with an average rating of 5.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " While not without its moments , Shrek Forever After too often feels like a rote rehashing of the franchise 's earlier entries .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , the same score earned by Shrek and Shrek 2 .
Stephen Holden of The New York Times stated " What fortifies " Shrek
Forever After " are its brilliantly realized principal characters , who nearly a decade after the first " Shrek " film remain as vital and engaging fusions of image , personality and voice as any characters in the history of animation .
"
Pete Hammond of BoxOffice gave the film 4.5 stars out of 5 , writing " Hilarious and heartfelt from start to finish , this is the best Shrek of them all , and that 's no fairy tale .
Borrowing liberally from
Frank Capra 's It 's a Wonderful Life , this edition blends big laughs and emotion to explore what Far Far Away might have been like if Shrek never existed .
"
James Berardinelli of Reelviews awarded the film 3 out of 4 stars and wrote " Even though Shrek Forever After is obligatory and unnecessary , it 's better than Shrek the Third
and it 's likely that most who attend as a way of saying goodbye to the Jolly Green Ogre will not find themselves wishing they had sought out a more profitable way of spending 90-odd minutes . "
James White of Empire gave the film four out of four stars , saying " DreamWorks could be entering a period of fresh creativity .
With How To Train Your Dragon and a balanced , darker - hued and very funny Shrek finale , they 've found the magic again . "
Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " B− " grade , saying " Everyone involved fulfills his or her job requirements adequately .
But the magic is gone and Shrek
Forever After is no longer an ogre phenomenon to reckon with . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote " It 's a fun ride .
What 's missing is the excitement of a new interpretation . "
Mary Pols of Time concluded her review with " Can an ogre jump a shark ?
I think so .
" Giving the film 1 star out of 4 , Kyle Smith of the New York Post wrote " After the frantic spurt of fairy - tale allusions and jokes in the first three Shreks , this one inches along with a few mostly pointless action scenes and the occasional mild pun . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Category / Recipient(s ) !
Result !
References Teen Choice
Awards 2010
Choice Movie : Animated Film
rowspan="9
" Nickelodeon Australian Kids ' Choice Awards 2010
Favorite Movie
37th People 's Choice Awards Favorite Family Movie Animated Effects in an Animated Production Music in a Feature Production Voice Acting in a Feature Production ( Cameron Diaz )
Storyboarding in a Feature Production Production Design in a Feature Production Favorite Animated Film Favorite Voice From An Animated Movie ( Eddie Murphy ) Favorite Voice From An Animated Movie ( Cameron Diaz )
rowspan="4 " 37th
Saturn Awards
Best Animated Film Outstanding Animation in an Animated Feature Motion Picture ( Jason Reisig , Doug Cooper , Gina Shay , Teresa Cheng )
rowspan="2 " Outstanding Effects Animation in an Animated Feature Motion Picture ( Jeff Budsberg , Andrew Kim , Yancy Lindquist ,
Can Yuksel ) HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Shrek Forever After was released on DVD and Blu - ray on December 7 , 2010 .
As of April 24 , 2011 , the movie has made $ 75 million in DVD and Blu - ray sales .
The film is also included in Shrek :
The Whole Story , a box set released on the same day that included all four Shrek movies and additional bonus content .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
Shrek Forever After is an action - adventure video game based on the movie of the same name .
It was released by Activision on May 18 , 2010 .
POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
In February 2014 , in an interview with Fox Business Network , Katzenberg hinted that a fifth film still may be made , saying , " We like to let [ the characters ] have a little bit of time to rest .
But I think you can be confident that we 'll have another chapter in the Shrek series .
We 're not finished and , more importantly , neither is he . "
On June 15 , 2016 , after NBCUniversal purchased DreamWorks Animation for $ 3.8 billion , NBCUniversal 's president and chief executive officer Steve Burke discussed plans to revive the franchise , as well as other DreamWorks films .
In July 2016 , The Hollywood Reporter cited sources saying that a fifth film was planned for a 2019 release .
In September 2016 , Eddie Murphy confirmed that the film was expected to be released in 2019 or 2020 , and that the script had been completed .
In October 2016 , Mike Mitchell stated that Austin Powers screenwriter Michael McCullers had written a script based on his own original idea .
In March 2017 , asked about the script , McCullers said it featured " a pretty big reinvention " for the film series .
On November 6 , 2018 , it was reported by Variety that Illumination 's CEO and founder Chris Meledandri had been tasked by Universal Pictures to revive both Shrek and Puss in Boots film series , with the original cast potentially returning .
SPIN - OFF Section::::Spin - off .
Puss in Boots is a computer - animated feature film that was released on October 28 , 2011 .
The movie is based on and follows the character of the same name on his adventures with Kitty Softpaws and mastermind Humpty Dumpty before his first appearance in Shrek 2 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS