MAN - MADE STRUCTURES VISIBLE FROM SPACE Man - made structures visible from earth orbit without magnification ( by mechanical aids such as a camera or binoculars ) include highways , dams , and cities .
Recently made world 's tallest statue Statue of Unity in India is not visible from space without magnification .
Also the Great Wall of China , is not visible from low Earth orbit without magnifying instrument and even then only under perfect conditions , but not from the Moon .
Part of the problem in authoritatively answering questions about visibility from space is that such questions are often very vaguely framed : askers frequently do not precisely define how far above sea level their hypothetical or actual observer in space is located .
When just speaking of " space " , an asker might mean anywhere from the edge of space ( Kármán line ) at an altitude of to low Earth orbit of 160–2,000 km ( 99 - 1200 mi ) to Apollo 12 's orbit at to the Moon , which orbits about away .
The Kármán line is accepted by the World Air Sports Federation , an international standard setting and record - keeping body for aeronautics and astronautics , as the boundary between the Earth 's atmosphere and outer space .
However , a practical definition for the purpose of answering questions on what astronauts generally can see from space would reflect altitudes that manned spacecraft typically orbit the Earth at — often several hundreds of kilometres .
There are major differences in visibility from just above the Kármán line ( 100 km/62 miles ) and the ISS orbit ( 394 km/245 miles ) , for example .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
From US Space Shuttles , which typically orbited at around , cities were easily distinguishable from surrounding countryside .
Using binoculars , astronauts could even see roads , dams , harbors , even large vehicles such as ships and planes .
At night , cities are also easily visible from the higher orbit of the ISS .
Metropolitan areas are clear at night , particularly in industrialized countries , due to a multitude of street lights and other light sources in urban areas ( see light pollution ) .
THE GREENHOUSES OF ALMERÍA Section::::The Greenhouses of Almería .
The greenhouse complex that covers almost in the province of Almería , Andalucía , Spain is visible from space .
BINGHAM CANYON MINE Section::::Bingham Canyon Mine .
The Bingham Canyon Mine , more commonly known as Kennecott Copper Mine , is an open - pit mining operation extracting a large porphyry copper deposit southwest of Salt Lake City , Utah , in the Oquirrh Mountains .
The mine is the largest man - made excavation in the world .
MISCONCEPTIONS
THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA Section::::Misconceptions .
Section::::The Great Wall of China .
The claim that the Great Wall of China is the only man - made object visible from the moon or outer space has been debunked many times , but remains a common misconception in popular culture .
According to astronauts Eugene Cernan and Ed Lu , the Great Wall is visible from the lower part of low Earth orbit , but only under very favorable conditions .
Different claims are made for the factoid that the Great Wall is visible from the Moon .
William Stukeley mentioned this claim in his letter dated 1754 , and Henry Norman made the same claim in 1895 .
The issue of " canals " on Mars was prominent in the late 19th century and may have led to the belief that long , thin objects were visible from space .
A viewer would need visual acuity 17,000 times better than normal to see the Great Wall from the Moon .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
Trivia questions and urban legends often claim certain constructed objects or effects are so large they are visible from outer space .
For example , a giant beaver dam in Canada was described as " so large it is visible from outer space . "
Field and Stream , a Canadian Magazine , wrote , " How big ?
Big enough to be visible ... from outer space . "
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Great Wall of China from space
* Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth