DIFF'RENT STROKES Diff'rent Strokes is an American sitcom that aired on NBC from November 3 , 1978 , to May 4 , 1985 , and on ABC from September 27 , 1985 , to March 7 , 1986 .
The series stars Gary Coleman and Todd Bridges as Arnold and Willis Jackson , two Black boys from Harlem who are taken in by a rich white Park Avenue businessman and widower named Phillip Drummond ( Conrad Bain ) and his daughter Kimberly ( Dana Plato ) , for whom their deceased mother previously worked .
During the first season and first half of the second season , Charlotte Rae also starred as the Drummonds ' housekeeper , Mrs. Edna Garrett ( who ultimately spun off into her own successful sitcom , The Facts of Life ) .
The series made stars out of child actors Gary Coleman , Todd Bridges and Dana Plato and became known for the " very special episodes " in which serious issues such as racism , illegal drug use , hitchhiking , kidnapping and child sexual abuse were dramatically explored .
The lives of these stars were later plagued by legal troubles and drug addiction , with Plato and Coleman later suffering early deaths .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In pre - production , the original proposed title was 45 Minutes from Harlem ( even though Harlem is only ten or fifteen minutes away from the Drummond residence by subway or taxi ) .
The title was eventually changed to Diff'rent Strokes , inspired by the quote " Different strokes for different folks " popularized by boxer Muhammad Ali in 1966 ( Ali makes a guest appearance in season 2 ) .
The series was originally devised as a joint vehicle for Maude co - star Conrad Bain ( after Maude had abruptly finished production in 1978 ) , and child actor Gary Coleman , who had caught producers ' attentions after appearing in a number of commercials .
The sitcom starred Coleman as Arnold Jackson and Todd Bridges as his older brother , Willis .
They played two children from a poor section of Harlem whose deceased mother previously worked for rich widower Philip Drummond ( Conrad Bain ) , who eventually adopted them .
They lived in a penthouse with Drummond , his daughter Kimberly ( Dana Plato ) , and their maid .
There were three maids during the sitcom 's run : Edna Garrett ( Charlotte Rae ) , Adelaide Brubaker ( Nedra Volz ) , and Pearl Gallagher ( Mary Jo Catlett ) .
They lived in the Penthouse Suite at 697 Park Avenue in New York City .
As Arnold , Coleman popularized the catchphrase " What'chu talkin ' 'bout , Willis ? "
The ending often varied , depending on whom he was addressing .
Early episodes addressed typical issues in a family .
Later episodes at times though focused on drug abuse , alcoholism , hitchhiking , and crime , among other issues .
SEASONS 1–4
( 1978–1982 ) Section::::Seasons 1–4 ( 1978–1982 ) .
In Season 1 , Charlotte Rae appeared in every episode as Edna Garrett , but she departed the show partway through the second season to star in her own spin - off , The Facts of Life .
Following Rae 's departure , Nedra Volz took over as the housekeeper , Adelaide Brubaker .
Although she was not part of the official main cast and not added to the opening credits , Volz appeared as a frequent semi - regular character .
SEASONS 5–6 ( 1982–1984 )
Section::::Seasons 5–6 ( 1982–1984 ) .
In Season 5 , Mary Jo Catlett portrayed Pearl Gallagher , the last of the three maids , and joined the cast as a series regular .
Pearl appeared in almost every episode until the final season .
Midway through Season 6 , Dana Plato became pregnant and approached the producers of the show to include her pregnancy .
Initially they agreed to add it , but they later decided not to add the pregnancy , with Plato 's publicized brushes with substance abuse contributing to this decision , resulting in her dismissal from the series .
Plato 's character , Kimberly , was written out of the story lines with the explanation that she moved to Paris to study for a couple of years .
Plato did not appear as a regular cast member in the final two seasons of the series , but she made several guest appearances .
At the same time , ratings were beginning to fall , so new characters were added to open up future storylines .
Dixie Carter and Danny Cooksey portrayed recently divorced television aerobics instructor Margaret " Maggie " McKinney , and her son , Sam McKinney .
Carter was introduced midway into the sixth season ; after she left for California , Drummond and the family took off after her , during a two - part trip in February 1984 , a storyline which also introduced Sam .
Phillip proposed to Maggie , and they married .
Several past characters attended the wedding ceremony including Dudley , Aunt Sophia , Adelaide and Mrs. Garrett .
SEASON 7
( 1984–1985 )
Section::::Season 7 ( 1984–1985 ) .
In the seventh season , Dixie Carter and Danny Cooksey were added to the opening credits ( with Carter getting special " and " billing , last in the order ) , and many new areas and ideas were explored in the storylines , as viewers now got to see Philip as a happily married man .
Dana Plato was no longer appearing as a main cast member , because of her pregnancy in real life .
The producers felt that the pregnancy would n't be acceptable , so she was dropped from the show and returned for the season finale A Special Friend as a guest star .
Also , since there was a new fresh - faced kid in the house with Sam , Arnold now had his own little sidekick and was happy to be a " big brother " for a change , and with Willis being dropped into the background slightly , this new brotherly duo took center stage for many storylines .
In the season , Todd Bridges was continuing the show as a main cast member , but developed absences in several episodes .
Additionally , stories focusing on Arnold 's school life ( featured occasionally in many previous seasons ) were delved into much more .
The ratings did not improve to NBC 's hopes .
Dixie Carter departed at the end of the seventh season and was replaced with Mary Ann Mobley in the eighth season .
SEASON 8
( 1985–1986 )
Section::::Season 8 ( 1985–1986 ) .
In the spring of 1985 , NBC canceled the series because of poor ratings .
ABC picked up the series for an eighth season , and aired it Friday nights .
In this season , Mary Ann Mobley replaced Dixie Carter as Maggie McKinney Drummond .
Mobley , who had previously played an unrelated , one - off love interest of Drummond 's in the second - season episode " Teacher 's Pet " , was considered for Maggie when the role was created .
But she was not initially chosen in part due to age disparity between her and Conrad Bain .
ABC canceled the series after 19 episodes , and aired its final episode on March 7 , 1986 .
The show returned to ABC 's schedule in June for three months of summer reruns , which ended on August 30 , 1986 .
The final season ranked 76th out of 106 shows , and averaged an 11.5 household rating .
CAST * Conrad Bain as Phillip Drummond * Gary Coleman as Arnold Jackson
* Todd Bridges as Willis Jackson * Dana Plato as Kimberly Drummond ( 1978–84 , 1985–86 recurring )
* Charlotte Rae as Edna Garrett ( 1978–79 ) * Nedra Volz as Adelaide Brubaker ( 1980–84 ) * Janet Jackson as Charlene DuPrey ( 1980–84 recurring )
* Dody Goodman as Sophia Drummond ( 1981–84 recurring )
* Shavar Ross as Dudley Johnson ( 1980–86 recurring )
* Le Tari as Ted Ramsey ( 1980–84 recurring ) * Mary Jo Catlett as Pearl Gallagher ( 1982–86 ) * Rosalind Chao as Miss Chung ( 1981–83 recurring ) * Steven Mond as Robbie Jason ( 1980–85 recurring )
* Dixie Carter as Maggie McKinney Drummond # 1 ( 1984–85 ) *
Mary Ann Mobley as Maggie McKinney Drummond
# 2 ( 1985–86 ) and as Ms. Osbourne * Danny Cooksey as Sam McKinney ( 1984–86 )
* Jason Hervey as Charlie ( 1985–86 recurring )
* Nikki Swasey as Lisa Hayes ( 1982–86 recurring ) Section::::Cast .
Phillip Drummond is the only character to appear in every episode of the series .
Arnold Jackson missed five episodes .
Two from the 1981–82 season , " First Day Blues " and " The Team " .
He then missed three episodes from the 1984–85 season , " The Gymnasts " , " Sam Adopts a Grandparent " and " Baseball Blues " .
SUPPORTING CHARACTERS Section::::Supporting characters .
Outside of the Drummond household , there were a large number of supporting characters seen over the years .
Phillip 's slightly dotty sister Sophia ( Dody Goodman ) was regularly seen in the fourth season , playing matchmaker for her brother in hopes of getting Philip to marry again .
Dudley Johnson ( Shavar Ross ) was Arnold 's new best friend , who , like Arnold , was also adopted , with whom he shared many memorable childhood scrapes .
Some of these were important or serious storylines under the " very special episode " heading , which Diff'rent Strokes popularized ( see below ) .
Ted Ramsey ( Le Tari ) was Dudley 's adoptive father , who turned up occasionally .
In the third season , Janet Jackson played Willis ' girlfriend Charlene DuPrey .
She was a frequent recurring character until Season 6 , when Charlene and Willis decided to break up , but remain friends .
Other classmates and friends of Arnold seen over time included Robbie Jason ( Steven Mond ) and snobby Lisa Hayes ( Nikki Swasey ) , who initially was sweet on Arnold , but later came to despise him , leading to hatred between the pair and many squabbles .
Miss Chung ( Rosalind Chao ) was Arnold 's teacher .
In the fall of 1985 , when the series moved to ABC , Arnold , Dudley and Lisa entered high school , where they gained a new friend in Charlie ( Jason Hervey ) .
An oft - mentioned character , spanning the entire show 's run , was " The Gooch " , a notorious bully at Arnold 's school .
First mentioned in the first - season episode " The Fight " , which revolves around his bullying of Arnold , his name is mentioned in numerous episodes ( and his bullying of Arnold returned as the center of several plots ) , with Arnold 's frequent descriptions of him as a burly , troublesome brute , forever looking for trouble but not very intelligent , but the character never actually appeared on screen .
In season 7 , after years of harassing Arnold ( and later Sam ) , the Gooch was finally defeated by Arnold 's neighbor and nemesis Carmella .
EPISODES
VERY SPECIAL EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Very special episodes .
Diff'rent Strokes was also known for its many " very special episodes " , most notably an anti - drug episode ( " The Reporter " , in Season 5 ) that featured First Lady Nancy Reagan , who promoted her
" Just Say No " campaign , and " The Bicycle Man " , a two - part episode that guest starred Gordon Jump as a pedophile who lures Arnold and Dudley into his bicycle shop and attempts to molest them .
Another episode involved a con artist ( played by Whitman Mayo ) posing as a relative of Arnold and Willis in an attempt to get access to the inheritance they were left by a former neighbor .
Another episode involved Kimberly 's new boyfriend Roger not allowing his sister to go to their school 's costume ball with Willis because he is African - American .
In an episode on the dangers of hitchhiking , Kimberly and Arnold ( who were out in the cold weather and did n't have money for cab or bus fare ) were abducted by a serial kidnapper - rapist ( played by Woody Eney ) , who initially acted as a good Samaritan by giving the two of them a ride , and inviting them to his apartment .
After the man 's true nature became known , Arnold escaped to look for help and the man nearly raped Kimberly before the police arrived to arrest him .
At the end of the episode , Conrad Bain ( in an out of character PSA ) spoke about what to do if real life situations as the one portrayed on the show were to occur .
Two notable episodes dealt with the consequences of alcoholism .
In season 5 , Willis moves out of the penthouse to live with a friend who abuses alcohol .
In season 7 , Arnold must deal with a classmate whom he catches drinking a thermos of alcohol in the school bathroom .
In the final season ( when the sitcom moved from NBC to ABC ) , the one - hour season opener revolved around Sam being kidnapped by a bereaved father ( played by Royce D. Applegate ) hoping to replace his own dead son .
In other notable episodes , the family discovered that Kimberly was suffering from bulimia .
In another episode , Arnold and Sam met Karen , a street performer .
After a performance , she has an epileptic seizure , and Sam is scared thinking she 's dying .
The boys then feel uncomfortable around her , and when they begin making jokes about her seizures , they find out that housekeeper Pearl herself has epilepsy , but unlike Karen controls her seizures by taking medication .
SPIN - OFF AND CROSSOVERS Section::::Spin - off and crossovers .
The Facts of Life ( 1979–88 ) is a spin - off of Diff'rent Strokes featuring Drummond 's former maid Mrs. Garrett ( Charlotte Rae ) , who had accepted a job as the house - mother for a dormitory at an all - girls private school that Kimberly was attending .
In a late first - season episode of Strokes ( which served as the " backdoor pilot " of Facts ) , Mrs. Garrett took Kimberly to the school with the intent of helping her sew costumes for a school play .
While there , Mrs. Garrett met Kimberly 's classmates and was offered the job as " dorm mother " .
She declines in this episode , but come fall , clearly had a change of heart .
The Diff'rent Strokes cast appeared in the first episode of The Facts of Life ( at one point , Drummond asks Mrs. Garrett " Are you sure we ca n't change your mind to come back to us ? " ) .
The success of the spin - off led to several Strokes / Facts crossovers in the ensuing years .
While not a spin - off , Hello , Larry ( 1979–80 ) had a connection to Strokes as it was established in a crossover episode that Philip Drummond and Larry Alder ( McLean Stevenson ) were old army buddies , and Mr. Drummond had bought the company that owned the radio station where Larry worked as a talk show host .
Additionally , Arnold appeared on the Silver Spoons episode " The Great Computer Caper " and the Amazing Stories episode " Remote Control Man " .
LATER APPEARANCES
AS THE CHARACTERS Section::::Later appearances as the characters .
In 1994 , Coleman appeared in an episode of Married ... with Children , playing a building code inspector whom Al Bundy called to report an illegal driveway .
When Kelly recognizes him , he denies any connection to Arnold Jackson , but utters his catchphrase to Al , " What'chu talkin ' about , Bundy ? " .
Also , in 1996 , Coleman and Bain reprised their roles for the series finale of The Fresh Prince of Bel - Air entitled " I , Done Part 2 " .
In their scene , they reference Willis by name before meeting Will Smith 's character , leading to Coleman uttering a variation of his catchphrase , " What'chu talkin ' about , Will ? " .
ADDITIONAL CATCHPHRASE REFERENCES AND APPEARANCES IN POPULAR
CULTURE
Section::::Additional catchphrase references and appearances in popular culture .
In 2004 , Gary Coleman appeared on the second season of The Surreal Life and was pressured to quote his famous catchphrase by Vanilla Ice .
He also guest - starred as himself on The Wayans Bros. , The Ben Stiller Show , Drake & Josh , The Jamie Foxx Show , The Parkers , Robot Chicken and The Simpsons .
AFTER
DIFF'RENT STROKES ENDED Section::::After Diff'rent Strokes ended .
Following the cancellation of Diff'rent Strokes , Gary Coleman , Todd Bridges and Dana Plato encountered difficulty in obtaining acting jobs .
All three experienced various legal problems while Bridges and Plato also struggled with drug addictions , all of which were documented in the press .
The press and fans of the series blamed the cast 's personal problems and faltering careers on what was eventually dubbed the " curse of Diff'rent Strokes " by various tabloids .
GARY COLEMAN Section::::Gary Coleman .
Three years after the series ended , Gary Coleman sued his parents and his former manager over misappropriation of his trust fund .
Although he was awarded over $ 1,000,000 in the decision , he filed for bankruptcy in 1999 .
In 1998 , Coleman was charged with assault after he punched a woman while working as a security guard at a shopping mall .
In 2001 , Coleman ( still working as a security guard ) was videotaped trying to stop a vehicle from entering the mall .
The driver ridiculed him , and released the tape to be broadcast on numerous television shows .
In 2007 , Coleman was cited for disorderly conduct in Provo , Utah , for having a " heated discussion " with a woman .
On May 26 , 2010 , Coleman , who had battled health problems since childhood caused by congenital kidney disease , was admitted to Utah Valley Regional Medical Center in Provo after falling and hitting his head after suffering a seizure .
Coleman was then placed on life support after suffering an intracranial hemorrhage , and died on May 28 , 2010 , from complications of his injury at age 42 .
DANA PLATO Section::::Dana Plato .
During Season 6 , Dana Plato became pregnant and her character was written out of the series ( Plato would go on to make guest appearances for the final two seasons ) .
In 1984 she married the father of her child , musician Lanny Lambert , but the couple divorced in 1990 .
Due to financial difficulties and her growing addiction to drugs and alcohol , Plato relinquished custody of her son , Tyler , to her ex - husband .
In an attempt to boost her faltering career , Plato posed for Playboy in June 1989 but her appearance in the magazine did not help her land acting jobs .
By 1990 , Plato was living in Las Vegas .
Despite having made $ 25,000 an episode while on the series , she was often broke and was working as a cashier at a dry cleaning store .
In February 1991 , she was arrested after robbing a Las Vegas video store armed with a pellet gun .
She was arrested the following year for forging prescriptions for Valium .
In 1998 , she appeared in a softcore pornographic film entitled Different Strokes : The Story of Jack & Jill ... and Jill , which was intended to capitalize on her Diff'rent Strokes fame .
After her arrests , Plato publicly admitted that she struggled with an addiction to drugs and alcohol .
She died of a drug overdose in 1999 at age 34 .
Her death was ruled a suicide .
Her son , Tyler Lambert , would later commit suicide as well .
TODD BRIDGES Section::::Todd Bridges .
After the series ended , Todd Bridges developed an addiction to cocaine .
In February 1988 , he was arrested and charged with the attempted murder of a drug dealer at a crack house in South Central Los Angeles .
He was acquitted in November 1989 .
Bridges was also arrested on a concealed weapon charge and possession of cocaine .
In 1994 , he was arrested after allegedly ramming someone 's car after an argument .
After years of battling his drug addiction , Bridges became sober in the early 1990s .
He now travels across the United States , touring schools and discussing the dangers of drug use .
Bridges has continued acting in films and television .
His more high - profile role was as Monk , a shell - shocked Vietnam veteran , conspiracy theorist , and nephew of Chris ' boss Doc on the sitcom Everybody Hates Chris .
With Plato 's death in 1999 and Coleman 's death in 2010 , Bridges became the sole survivor of the show 's original child actors .
Bridges became the show 's last surviving original cast member after the death of Charlotte Rae in 2018 .
DOCUDRAMAS Section::::Docudramas .
Two unofficial docudramas were produced about the show : *
In 2000 , Fox broadcast a one - hour television movie , After Diff'rent Strokes : When the Laughter Stopped .
This film , which starred unknown actors , focused on Dana Plato 's life after the show , leading to her death .
Todd Bridges guest starred in this film as a drug dealer who sold drugs — to a younger Todd Bridges .
*
On September 4 , 2006 , NBC aired a television drama titled Behind the Camera : The Unauthorized Story of Diff'rent Strokes .
The film , which chronicles the rise and decline of the sitcom 's child stars , also features recent interview clips with Coleman and Bridges .
The two also star in the movie as themselves ( briefly ) in the final scene , standing by Plato 's grave .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment has released Seasons 1 and 2 of Diff'rent Strokes on DVD in Region 1 & 4 .
Season 1 was also released in Regions 2 & 5 on October 6 , 2008 .
On September 29 , 2009 , a " Fan Favorites " DVD was released .
This is a one disc compilation consisting of eight episodes from Season 2 .
On April 6 , 2012 , it was announced that Shout !
Factory had acquired the rights to the series ; they subsequently released the third season on DVD on July 17 , 2012 .
Season 4 was released on November 20 , 2012 .
Season 5 was released on April 4 , 2017 .
Season 6 was released on July 25 , 2017 .
Season 7 was released on February 27 , 2018 .
Season 8 was released on May 29 , 2018 .
On August 27 , 2013 , it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment had acquired the rights to various television series from the Sony Pictures library , including Diff'rent Strokes .
They subsequently re - released the first and second seasons on DVD on July 15 , 2014 . !
rowspan="2"DVD name !
rowspan="2 " ofepisodes !
colspan="2"Release dates !
Region 1 !
Region 4 SEE
ALSO
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture article about Diff'rent Strokes