VISA POLICY OF THE PHILIPPINES
The visa policy of the Philippines is governed by Commonwealth Act No . 613 , also known as the Philippine Immigration Act , and by subsequent legislation amending it .
The Act is jointly enforced by the Department of Foreign Affairs ( DFA ) and the Bureau of Immigration ( BI ) .
Generally , foreign nationals who wish to enter the Philippines require a visa unless : *
He / she is a citizen of a member state of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN )
*
He / she is a citizen of a non - ASEAN member state whose nationals are allowed to enter the Philippines visa - free
*
He / she is a balikbayan and is only returning to the Philippines temporarily VISA POLICY MAP VISA WAIVER PROGRAM Section::::Visa waiver program .
The Philippine visa waiver program is governed by Executive Order No . 408 , signed on November 9 , 1960 by President Carlos P. Garcia , and by subsequent executive issuances amending it .
While visas are issued by the BI , the program itself is administered by the Department of Foreign Affairs , which maintains a list of countries eligible to participate in the program .
In principle , nationals of countries which maintain diplomatic relations with the Philippines and whose nationals are not classified as restricted nationals by the DFA are allowed to enter the Philippines without a visa .
Eligible nationals availing of visa - free entry must possess passports valid for at least six months beyond their contemplated period of stay .
On July 1 , 2013 , the Bureau of Immigration began implementing an extended visa waiver for covered nationals from 21 to 30 days , which the Philippine government hopes will boost tourism Visa exempt foreign nationals may extend their stay two months per extension but not exceeding the maximum period of two years .
Foreign nationals who require a visa may extend their stay one month per extension but not exceeding the maximum period of six months and must have a ticket valid for onward travel .
In March 2015 it was proposed to extend the visa exemption to citizens of China and India .
" Date of visa changes
* 30 August 1962 : Malaysia ( as Federation of Malaya ) and Thailand * 1 February 1963 :
Bolivia * 1 January 1966 :
Sweden * 1 January 1967 : Denmark and Norway * 1 January 1970 :
Israel * 1 July 1970 : France * 1 April 1971 : Belgium , Luxembourg and Netherlands * 22 August 1972 : Brazil ( replaced by another agreement from 25 October 1973 ) * 1 January 1975 : Iceland * 1 January 1978 :
Austria * 13 May 1994 : Mongolia * 22 June 1994 : Macau * 12 July 2005 :
Laos * 19 September 2007 : Russia * 15 April 2014 : Belize , Croatia , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan } Holders of passports of the following jurisdictions do not require a visa for Philippines : 59 DAYS
30 DAYS
*
All European Union citizens valign = top valign =
top valign =
top }
14 DAYS
* ( for passports issued to permanent residents of Macau only )
REPLACEMENT VISAS Section::::Replacement visas .
Nationals of traveling as tourists and holding a valid visa issued by Australia , Canada , Japan , United States or a Schengen Area state may enter and stay without a visa for up to 7 days .
Nationals of holding a valid tourist , business or resident visa issued by Australia , Canada , Japan , Singapore , United Kingdom , United States or a Schengen Area state may enter and stay without a visa for up to 14 days .
They may enter from any port of entry .
VISA ON ARRIVAL Section::::Visa on arrival .
Holders of passports issued by any country except the following may obtain a visa ( for a fee ) valid for 59 days on arrival : valign =
top valign =
top valign =
top ELECTRONIC TRAVEL
AUTHORIZATION Section::::Electronic Travel Authorization .
Citizens of may apply for an entry permit through the Electronic Travel Authorization system on the website of the Manila Economic and Cultural Office .
NON - ORDINARY PASSPORTS Section::::Non - ordinary passports .
Holders of diplomatic , official or service passports of the following countries enjoy an extended length of stay when compared to ordinary passports : valign =
top Holders of diplomatic , official or service passports of the following countries may enter without a visa while ordinary passport holders require one : valign = top APEC BUSINESS TRAVEL CARD Section::::APEC Business Travel Card .
Holders of passports issued by the following countries who possess an APEC Business Travel Card ( ABTC ) containing the " PHL " code on the reverse that it is valid for travel to Philippines can enter visa - free for business trips for up to 59 days .
ABTCs are issued to nationals of : valign =
top TYPES OF VISAS Section::::Types of visas .
The Philippine Immigration Act prescribes fourteen different visas grouped into two broad categories * Section 9 visas ( non - immigrant visas ) , for temporary visits such as those for tourism , business , transit , study or employment
* Section 13 visas ( immigrant visas ) , for foreign nationals who wish to become permanent residents in the Philippines
Some visas have been introduced by subsequent legislation or proclamation of the President which are not classified by the Philippine Immigration Act as either being a Section 9 or Section 13 visa .
These visas are called special visas and are issued to groups such as retirees , investors and entrepreneurs .
LIST OF VISAS Section::::List of visas .
+ Visas in the Philippines !
Type !
Visa !
Description VISITOR STATISTICS
Section::::Visitor statistics .
Most visitors arriving to Philippines were from the following countries of nationality : !
Country ! 2016 2015 2014
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Philippine citizens * Philippine passport REFERENCES AND NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Bureau of Immigration * Visa information from the Bureau of Immigration