JACKSON AVERY Jackson Avery , M.D. is a fictional character in the ABC prime time medical drama , Grey 's Anatomy , portrayed by actor Jesse Williams .
The character was created by series creator and executive producer , Shonda Rhimes .
He was introduced in season six episode " Invasion " as a surgical resident formerly from Mercy West Medical Center when it merges with Seattle Grace Hospital .
Williams initially appeared as a recurring cast member , and was later promoted to a series regular in season seven .
The character 's main storyline involves Jackson trying to achieve success on his own instead of riding on the coattails of his surgeon grandfather 's high reputation .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Jackson Avery ( played by Jesse Williams ) is the grandson of Harper Avery , one of the most famous surgeons in the country and the namesake of the prestigious Harper Avery Award .
The younger Avery grew up hearing at his grandfather 's dinner table about the nobility of being a surgeon , which inspired him to pursue that career .
His father " ran off to God knows where because he could n't stand the pressure of being an Avery " , and his mother Catherine raised him alone .
He says that his family identified him as " just the pretty one " and they never pushed him academically , so he pushed himself .
Jackson is initially a surgical resident at Mercy West Hospital .
Alongside April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) , Reed Adamson ( Nora Zehetner ) , and Charles Percy ( Robert Baker ) , he joins the staff at Seattle Grace Mercy West after the institutions are merged .
His grandfather Harper Avery is affiliated with Harvard and has to be treated at the hospital ; during this period , he tries to convince his grandson to transfer to Massachusetts General Hospital , which he can arrange , but the younger Avery refuses .
In the aftermath of a mass shooting at SGMW , in which 11 people are killed , Avery suffers PTSD .
For comfort , he and Kepner both take rooms in the large house of fellow resident Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) .
Also living there are her husband , Dr. Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , resident Alex Karev and intern Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , her half - sister .
For some time , Avery suffers because of the death of his friend Percy in the shooting , and having assisted in surgery on Shepherd while threatened at gunpoint by the shooter .
The seventh season shows Avery 's emerging interest in Meredith 's sister , Lexie Grey , and they start a relationship .
Avery also starts working with chief of plastic surgery Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , who had previously had a relationship with Lexie .
She is discomfited by the two men working together and , when she later shows that she still has feelings for Sloan , Avery breaks up with her .
As the end of the fifth year of residency is near , the surgical residents , including Avery , prepare for their board certifications as they prepare for fellowships they plan on joining .
The night before taking the exam , Jackson and the virgin Kepner have sexual intercourse .
Though April regrets having broken her promise to Jesus to stay a virgin until marriage , the two have sex again during the period of the exams .
During the exam , Avery is supported by his mother Catherine ( Debbie Allen ) , who happens to be a tester at the exams .
Avery , Meredith Grey , Cristina Yang , and Alex Karev eventually pass their exams , while Kepner fails .
Although Avery has true feelings for her , she pushes him away because she believes that he feels guilty for having sex with her .
In the season eight finale , Avery reveals to April that he is taking the position at Tulane Medical Center , despite feeling sick for leaving Seattle Grace Mercy West and her behind .
As a celebration of the conclusion of their residencies , the former chief of surgery Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) organizes his annual dinner for them .
The eighth season ends with Avery , Karev , Kepner , and Webber waiting for Meredith and Yang .
They are victims of an aviation accident in which Lexie Grey and eventually Mark Sloan die of their injuries .
After the accident , Dr. Avery stays at Seattle Grace and continues his work in plastic surgery .
He and Dr. Kepner continue a sexual relationship , although April is uneasy and believes she is pregnant .
When she tells Avery , he proposes to her and she accepts , anticipating a happy wedding .
But the pregnancy is false and the couple break up before announcing their engagement to the staff .
As a means to avoid each other , the two doctors decide to each bring a date to Dr. Bailey 's wedding selecting this date for each of them , both of which are interns .
After the wedding , Avery has sex in his car with his date , intern Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ) .
Shortly afterward he tells Kepner about the incident , and she thanks him for his honesty .
It is hinted that Avery still loves Kepner when he turns to him for dating advice and he shows jealousy .
They re - establish a friendship .
When the hospital faces a financial crisis , Avery 's mother Catherine agrees to invest in the hospital via the Harper Avery foundation ; but she insists that Avery be made chairman .
The board ( at Avery 's suggestion )
later renames the hospital as Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital .
Kepner gets engaged to Matthew but at their wedding , Avery stands up to profess his love for her .
Kepner chooses Avery , and they run out of her wedding together .
( The scene is reminiscent of a noted one in the film The Graduate . )
When Kepner regrets her decision , Avery proposes to her
and they elope .
They keep their marriage a secret from the rest of the hospital staff , because of a new rule restricting relations among the staff .
Avery 's ex - girlfriend
Stephanie feels especially betrayed because of how he left her .
Catherine Avery is not happy about her son 's eloping with Kepner , as he failed to make a prenuptial agreement to protect the Avery family fortune .
They make up after Kepner signs such an agreement .
Jackson and April soon hit a rough patch when they realize that they have different views about the way their children should be raised in respect to religion .
Soon after their fight , April realizes she is pregnant .
April and Jackson 's baby is diagnosed during pregnancy with Osteogenesis Imperfecta type 2 , and learn that the baby will not survive long after birth .
Jackson believes that termination is the best option , however April would rather give birth to the baby , knowing it will not live very long .
They scheduled an induction for the next day , at the beginning of the appointment they are asked to sign their baby 's death certificate , which is too hard for the couple to bear .
April does n't sign the papers and returns to work the same day praying for a miracle , while at work she has a heart to heart with a lady who lost her fiancée the night before .
They decide to give birth to the baby via induction termination at 24 weeks gestation having it baptized right then .
She gives birth to Samuel Norbert Avery and he passes away shortly after birth .
In the series 11 finale Kepner tells Avery that she is leaving with Owen Hunt to serve as a trauma surgeon in the Army ; it will help her grieve for their son .
Avery lets her go and wonders how he can deal with his own grief .
After discussions over the phone via Facetime , Kepner tells Avery that she is extending her service time .
The sound of gunfire and explosions are heard at April 's base camp , leaving her to quickly terminate the call .
On Valentine 's Day , Kepner returns to the hospital , where she and Avery embrace in the foyer .
In season 12 , their marriage begins to fall apart and they grow estranged .
In episode 11 , they file for a civil divorce .
After their divorce is completed , Kepner reveals that she is pregnant with Avery 's child .
In Season 14 Jackson begins a relationship with Maggie Pierce .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING AND CREATION Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting and creation .
In February 2009 , Michael Ausiello hinted at the possibility of central character , Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , having another sibling .
The series had released a casting call for an actor who could pass as biracial ; casting was postponed until season six .
Williams 's casting was announced in late August 2009 .
Though his name is not given , the character 's arc was expected to last several episodes .
Williams described his audition as a " simple process . "
He got the information on his birthday , August 5 , and went in the next day to read for the role , despite not knowing what part he had auditioned for .
Williams learned he got the job a week later .
In late 2009 , a casting call for a young Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) and a young Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) , who would appear in flashbacks , fueled rumors that Avery could be Meredith 's half - brother .
Williams later shot down the rumor , saying that Meredith would have noticed if her mother were pregnant .
Matt Webb Mitovich noted Williams 's absence from the " Seattle Grace : On Call " webseries as a sign of big plans for the character .
In the episode , " Perfect Little Accident , " which premiered on March 4 , 2010 , Avery is revealed to be the grandson of the legendary Harper Avery ( Chelcie Ross ) .
Shonda Rhimes hinted at the possibility of Williams and his co - star Sarah Drew becoming series regulars in her blog post about the season finale in May 2010 .
Williams 's promotion was eventually confirmed in June 2010 .
CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Characterization .
The character 's profile on official ABC website describes Avery as " hardworking , driven , observant " and " eager . "
However , at times , Avery can be too confident and " overly competitive , " and very " stubborn .
"
He has a habit of teasing his coworkers .
Williams revealed to Essence.com that his character is very " ambitious .
He does n't takes sides or deal with any drama .
He 's there to work and not really get involved in the pettiness . "
He describes the character as much more " cavalier , " and bold .
Matt Webb Mitovitch described Jackson as having a " sense of entitlement , " while Williams described Jackson 's demeanor as " swagger . "
Because his work environment is extremely competitive , Avery acts as if he belongs and refuses to second guess himself .
Upon arrival at Seattle Grace , he is " kind of a wise ass surgeon . "
He feels he is an " invader " in the new team and " he decides to deal with it kind of aggressively and not shy away from it and show his personality .
He is very confident and likes to say what is on his mind .
" Williams also said : " Jackson is more of a lone wolf .
He 's not really built to go seek support and a shoulder to cry on . "
" He 's always been trying to make it on his own .
Jackson does n't want to live off his legacy and his name , which also conflicts with him wanting to be close to his mother . "
RELATIONSHIPS Section::::Relationships .
Jackson immediately clashes with Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) due their competitive natures .
The immediate tension between the duo leads to speculation about a potential romance .
Yang and Avery compete for the same cases , and in the episode , " Invest in Love , " for the first time , Jackson witnesses Cristina taking charge of a situation , and he admires her ; he looks at her differently .
At a party , when Jackson is a bit drunk , he opens up about how attractive he finds Cristina and kisses her .
Jackson is unaware of Yang 's relationship with Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) , so the attraction is natural .
Williams does not worry about fans of the couple hating his character because he understands that fans are n't really supposed to like the Mercy Westers ; Jackson is in the enemy camp and " has to take his lumps .
"
Williams said the kiss was a " pretty relatable crime of passion .
" The kiss does n't have any immediate effects on Owen and Cristina 's romance and it remains secret .
Jackson and Cristina develop a sort of mutual understanding as they tend to push one another to be better .
Speaking of Jackson 's past relationship with Lexie Grey , Williams said : " He tried to be safe and wise and not deal with girls , really , when he first focused on transitioning into Seattle Grace from Mercy West .
He kept his head down , got his work done and did n't get caught up with banging nurses or anything .
But he could n't help himself with Lexie once they got close ; he really kind of fell for her .
He made himself vulnerable probably to the least available person in the hospital , because he knew that she had a longstanding relationship with Mark .
He knew he should n't head in that direction , but he went against his better judgment and got burned for it . "
" They are both kind of suckers for love [ ... ]
they both get caught up in their own momentum [ ... ]
he 's all about his job and pressure from his grandfather but then he gets bowled over with this platonic relationship .
Avery just ca n't help himself with Lexie . "
At the end of the eighth season , April and Jackson 's friendship evolved into an intimate relationship : " I thought they were going to be able to walk the line of staying on the friendship side of things .
What they have is kind of really unique and organic in the world of Grey 's Anatomy – two genders in a completely platonic , wholesome , pleasant and productive relationship / friendship .
Who is to say that has to end ?
" In the ninth season , Jackson started a relationship with intern Stephanie Edward .
Williams gave his insight : "
That 's a relationship that is fun , light , and no strings attached .
She 's sweet .
She 's funny .
They are n't bogged down by these big notions of each other .
Jackson later declares his love for April at her wedding to EMT Matthew .
They get married and have a child together , but he dies shortly after birth .
Distraught and searching for purpose , April turns to the army and goes on tour with Owen , leaving Jackson at Grey - Sloan Memorial .
After extending her leave several times , Jackson gives April an ultimatum that if she does not return immediately to Seattle , their relationship is over .
April does not immediately return , and when she finally does , Jackson feels that April does not respect his needs in the relationship , especially after losing a child .
The two try to make it work , but eventually come to the decision to end their marriage .
April discover she 's pregnant the day of their divorce proceedings , but does not disclose this until after the papers have been signed .
In the fourteenth season Jackson begins a relationship with Maggie Pierce .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Margaret Lyons of Entertainment Weekly wrote the addition of Avery 's character to the show was one of the 10 reasons she loves Grey 's Anatomy again : " Dr. Avery was n't quite clicking as part of the ensemble when Jesse Williams first joined the cast .
But now ?
Oh , mama .
He 's flirty — to a fault — but he 's also a decent dude , and the show was in need of a seriously single male character .
" His bromance with mentor Mark Sloan has been positively received .
Janalen Samson of BuddyTV commented : " these scenes with Jesse Williams are proving to be gems .
I do love a good Bromance and these two actors are bringing the love and the funny in spades .
The pairing was included in Zap2it 's 25 Top Bromances of 2012 .
Reviewing the first part of the ninth season , Lyons said : " Avery 's mom is more interesting than he is . "
He was listed in Wetpaint 's " 10 Hottest Male Doctors on TV " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Jackson Avery at ABC.com * Jackson Avery on IMDb