THE £ 100 K DROP
The £ 100 K Drop ( formerly known as The Million Pound Drop and The Million Pound Drop Live ) is a British game show which is broadcast on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom .
The show was first aired on 24 May 2010 and is presented by Davina McCall .
The show is currently on its 13th series after being off air for two years .
The show used social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter to find contestants , and also to promote the show .
David Flynn , managing director of Endemol 's Remarkable Television , which produced the show , said : " The plan was to create buzz and an air of mystery around the show by trickling information about auditions via Twitter and Facebook , giving fans a level of exclusivity . "
After being off air for two years , the series returned in a daily afternoon slot in May 2018 but with a lower prize fund of £ 100,000 and with a new name , namely The £ 100 K Drop .
Davina McCall presented 60 episodes of the show .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Contestants , alone or in pairs for the first series , or only in pairs from the second through the ninth series , are given one million pounds in £ 50 notes at the start of the show , banded in 40 bundles of £ 25,000 .
They must then answer eight questions in an effort to keep as much of their money as possible .
Many questions are heavily focused on current or recent events ( even events that occur during the airing of the show ) with the words of " this week " , " today " even " right now " , to push the fact that the show is broadcast live .
At the beginning of each round , the contestants choose one of two offered categories .
If the contestants take too long to choose , a coin is flipped to decide .
Each question is multiple - choice , with one correct answer ; the first four questions have four choices , the next three questions have three , and the final question has two .
Each answer choice corresponds to a different trapdoor ( " drop " ) on a shelf behind which the contestants and host are standing .
Once the answers are revealed and the question has been asked , the contestants have a fixed time in which to move all the bundles of cash onto the drops .
If they are unsure of the correct answer , they may distribute the money across two or more drops as they see fit ; however , they must always leave at least one drop unoccupied .
Contestants who leave money on every drop typically face immediate disqualification , except on some international versions of the show .
Once time runs out or the contestants are satisfied with their choices , the drops for the incorrect answers are opened .
Any money placed on them falls down a chute and is removed from play by security guards beneath the stage .
In addition , any money not placed on a drop before time runs out is also forfeited .
All money placed on the correct answer remains in play for the next question .
The contestants win whatever money they still have after the eighth and final question ; if they run out at any point , the game ends immediately and they leave with nothing .
Episodes usually last between 60 and 90 minutes , although the last episode of the series may end slightly sooner or later depending on the contestants ' performance .
On 23 June 2012 , for the first time in the show 's history , the episode was extended to 120 minutes .
The following week 's episode on 30 June 2012 was 100 minutes .
For the 2010 Christmas specials , any contestants who lost all their money and would otherwise have left empty - handed were presented with multiple doors corresponding to bonus prizes .
The contestants would choose which door they wanted and would win what was ' behind ' that door .
From the 2011 Christmas specials onwards , a new feature was introduced to allow online players to compete against one another .
In addition , a counter was added to the display screen for each drop to indicate how much money had been placed on it , eliminating the need for manual counting .
On 2 January 2012 , as part of the Channel 4 Mash - up , Davina McCall played the game with Andrew , her father ; the show was hosted by Phil Spencer from Location , Location , Location .
A second Channel 4 Mash - up happened in 2013 , the show this time being hosted by Alan Carr .
2013 CHANGES Section::::2013 changes .
Significant changes to the format were made in summer 2013 for the tenth series .
Teams of four , rather than just being strictly pairs , can now play the game .
At each question , the player(s ) can swap positions with their teammates – two backstage watching , the other two answering the questions onstage .
Unlike previous series , there are now just seven questions and no question categories ( if a team is playing ) .
Contestants who answer the seventh question correctly are shown two possible answers for a " Final Drop " question , and may choose to attempt it or leave with their winnings .
If they answer the Final Drop correctly , their total is doubled ( for a maximum potential prize of £ 2,000,000 ) ; if they miss it , they leave with nothing .
2014
CHANGES
Section::::2014 changes .
Starting from summer 2014 , contestants could play as individuals again after four years .
Prior to that , only Gemma in the very first UK series ( as well as five contestants in the Chinese version ) had played the Drop as individuals in their countries .
This was also the first regular series to be pre - recorded due to time constraints , hence the change in title from The Million Pound Drop Live to The Million Pound Drop .
THE £ 100 K DROP Section::::The £ 100 K Drop .
On 14 July 2017 , it was announced that the programme would be returning in the daily afternoon slot of 2018 , but with a lower prize fund of £ 100,000 and with the name of the show changing to The £ 100 K Drop .
McCall presented 60 episodes of the show .
The cash is banded in 40 bundles of £ 2,500 each , and the contestants face a maximum of seven questions .
The first three have four answer choices and a 60-second time limit ; the next three , three choices and 45 seconds ; and the last one , two choices and 45 seconds .
INTERACTIVITY Section::::Interactivity .
As the show is broadcast live , viewers are encouraged to play along on their smartphones via the iOS and Android apps , or on the Channel 4 website .
Aggregated statistics of the audience performance appear on screen during the broadcast and being read out by McCall .
Online players receive no prize money but are sometimes given the chance to apply to be on the show .
Bookmakers also take bets on which stage of the game the contestants will leave and how much money will still be in play at various stage of the game .
Often on the show , if there is a question relating to a particular online source , Davina will announce that the website in question has crashed due to a large amount of online players looking up the answers .
Later series added the show 's application for them to play on their tablets .
The interactivity is provided by London second screen company Monterosa .
In 2011 , The Million Pound Drop became the first TV show to serve a second screen advert to the online playing audience .
It was a 3 minute video featuring rapper Tinie Tempah .
The full advert was watched by 20 % of the online playing audience according to Dean Donaldson , Global Head of Media Innovation at DG , responsible for the technology .
The last few series of the show were not broadcast live .
CELEBRITY CONTESTANTS Section::::Celebrity contestants .
Since series two , celebrity contestants regularly appear on the show playing for charity .
Celebrity contestants that lose their whole £ 1,000,000 are given £ 5,000 for their charities .
Celebrities who have appeared on the show include the following : * Alan Carr
* Alex Brooker
* Andi Peters * Andrew Flintoff * Anthony Joshua * Bruno Tonioli *
Charlie Condou
* Chris Moyles
*
Chris O'Dowd
* Chris Steed * Dawn Porter * Dermot O'Leary
* Emma Bunton *
Fearne Cotton
* George Lamb * Greg James
* Greg Rutherford
* Harry Judd
* Hilary Devey * Jack Whitehall
* Jade Jones * Janet Ellis * Jessica Hynes * Jimmy Carr
* Joey Essex *
Johnny Vaughan
*
Jonathan Ross *
Josh Widdicombe
* Keith Lemon * Kirstie Allsopp * Larry Lamb * Louis Smith
* Lucy Watson * Melanie Sykes
* Michael Whitehall * Micky Flanagan * Mollie King * Paddy McGuinness * Pamela Stephenson
* Patsy Kensit
* Peter Andre
* Peter Serafinowicz
* Phil Spencer
* Rochelle Wiseman * Sam Faiers *
Sarah Alexander * Sophie Ellis - Bextor *
Stephen Webb * Vernon Kay * Zara Phillips SPIN - OFFS
THE CHANNEL 4 MASH - UP Section::::Spin - offs .
Section::::The Channel 4 Mash - up .
On 2 January 2012 , a special version of the show aired as part of The Channel 4 Mash - up .
The special edition was hosted by Phil Spencer and featured Davina and her father , Andrew , as contestants .
This special edition was not broadcast live , as the show usually is , but instead was shown in three pre - recorded 20 minute chunks spread throughout the ' mash - up night ' at 18:35 , 19:55 and 21:40 .
Davina and her father made it through to the final question with £ 50,000 but placed their money on the incorrect answer and lost .
The show returned on 4 January 2013 with Alan Carr as host .
The contestants were : Sherrie Hewson , Lisa Maxwell , Jane McDonald , Denise Welch , Alexander Armstrong and Richard Bacon .
STAND UP TO CANCER Section::::Stand Up to Cancer .
On 19 October 2012 , a special version aired live as part of Channel 4 's UK telethon , Stand Up to Cancer .
For this show , the million pounds was doubled ( thus making it The Two Million Pound Drop ) and a special 16-player celebrity relay team took on the drop for cancer - related charities .
A different pair of celebrities handled each question , with the show airing in two segments — questions 1 to 4 at 21:00 and questions 5–8 were later in the evening .
Each pair was given just 30 seconds , instead of the usual 60 seconds , for their question .
McCall switched back and forth between the live telethon , hosted alongside Alan Carr and Dr Christian Jessen , and the two Drop segments .
The celebrity relay banked £ 200,000 for Stand Up to Cancer , with the final four pairs wagering the entire amount on a single answer on each question .
This special was included in the ninth series of the show ( as that series was in progress ) , unlike the Channel 4 ' mash - up ' which was a separate edition .
CRITICAL RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Critical reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The series ' highest - rated episode was 4 February 2011 , which was seen by 2.79 million viewers and received a 14.4 % share .
Ratings for series 10 dropped but remained respectable ; the first episode ( 14 June 2013 ) was seen by 1.57 million viewers and received a 7.6 % share .
INCIDENT
Section::::Incident .
During an episode on 5 November 2010 , contestants Johnny and Dee were faced with the options Sylvester McCoy , Paul McGann , Christopher Eccleston and David Tennant .
They were then asked " Who played Dr Who for the longest period ? " .
The contestants did not know the answer so decided to split their remaining £ 650,000 between McCoy and McGann .
The answer was then revealed to be Tennant and they lost all their remaining money .
Tennant played
Doctor Who from 2005 - 10 .
However , viewers began to query the accuracy of this question , saying it was open to interpretation as McCoy played the Doctor from 1987–89 , but also appeared at the beginning of the Doctor Who television film in 1996 , making his time playing Doctor Who technically nine years uninterrupted .
After producers spoke to the BBC , it became apparent that McCoy was the correct answer .
Channel 4 therefore allowed Johnny and Dee to return and continue with the £ 325,000 that would have remained .
They came back on 12 November 2010 , to continue the game .
They got all the way to the final question and managed to win £ 25,000 .
MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
A board game was released by Drumond Park in November 2010 .
TRANSMISSIONS
THE MILLION POUND DROP Section::::Transmissions .
Section::::The Million Pound Drop . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes CHRISTMAS SPECIALS Section::::Christmas specials . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes CELEBRITY GAMES Section::::Celebrity Games . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes
THE £ 100 K DROP Section::::The £ 100 K Drop . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes NOTES
*
On 2 January 2012 and 4 January 2013 , two special programmes aired as part of The Channel 4 Mash - up .
* Celebrity Games was the first time a series had been pre - recorded .
* The eleventh series onwards will be pre - recorded , while it is also the first pre - recorded regular series .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The series ' highest - rated episode was 4 February 2011 , which was seen by 2.79 million viewers and received a 14.4 % share .
Ratings for the current series ( series 10 ) dropped but remained respectable ; the first episode ( 14 June 2013 ) was seen by 1.57 million viewers and received a 7.6 % share .
INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS
₾100,000 Péter Majoros Majka ( 2017- )
rowspan=2 UnknownUnknown rowspan=2 Edutainment TV HD
K25,000,000
₽
10,000,000 Notes : 1 .
The two Chinese versions are produced without Endemol 's permission .
2 .
According to Endemol 's official website , the format has recently been sold to Niger , but all the exact information is unknown yet .
3 .
Arturo Valls hosted an episode as a cross - over between Atrapa un millón and his own game show
Ahora caigo , which was hosted by Carlos Sobera that afternoon .
4 .
The Thai version 's top prize is in Thai baht .
However , in fact , the cash on the stage is in United States dollars , equal to 2 million baht .
5 .
Russian , Ukrainian and Kazakhstan version ( except Belarusian version ) are take shooting in Moscow ( Gorky Film Studio ) , and under production by Weit Media , Although they are using Russian language ( including Belarusian version ) as their conversation language , however in the Ukrainian and Kazakhstan ( only first season by the host ) version , the host used their native language for the introduction , greeting and closing caption .
The Ukrainian and Kazakhstan ( first season only ) version are also offered the SMS game during the program .
Unlike Russian , Belarusian , Kazakh version which are using Russian language for the question and answer , Ukrainian version is prefer to use Ukrainian Language for the question and answer instead using Russian Language .
RULES VARIATIONS PASS Section::::Rules variations .
Section::::Pass .
In some versions in the Eurozone , like the German version , if the contestants choose the question that is difficult in their opinion , they can " Pass " and switch to the other category which they did not originally choose .
The " Pass " can be only used once during the game .
QUICK CHANGE Section::::Quick Change .
In some versions , as lifelines , there are " Quick Change(s ) " ( or similar words in local language ) , which allows a pair of contestants have 30 seconds ( in the Brazilian and French versions , 10 seconds instead ) to change their answers , only once in all the questions except for the last question .
This lifeline is also used automatically if contestants do not leave one trapdoor empty on a question and they still have the lifeline available .
However , in the second series of the Slovenian version , there are two Quick Changes for each pair of the contestants , but they ca n't use both of them in a single question .
In the French version , though the rules are similar to the UK version , if contestants have made their way to question number five , one more Quick Change is given .
In the Chilean version , there are 105 seconds for the final all - or - nothing question 's betting , with a bonus Quick Change given by the host ( prior to that , there are 75 seconds on the clock , if the contestants are confident enough for the answer , they can refuse the bonus ) .
Starting from autumn 2014 , in the Vietnamese version based on the British format , the Quick Change rule was introduced .
The rules were still unchanged , however , sometimes the game features three boxes randomly contain 5 million VND , 3 million VND or 1 million VND .
After the first question , whatever boxes left on the table will be guaranteed and taken away after the game .
Generally speaking , the top prize was slightly increased to 209 million Vietnam dong .
FINAL FACT
Section::::Final Fact .
This was also introduced in the American version along with Quick Change .
In the final all - or - nothing question , there is no time limit for placing the money on the trapdoor .
Then the host Kevin Pollak will give an extra fact about the question , often with the following words : " These are not meant to change your mind , just give you one more thing to concern .
" Then the contestants are given 60 seconds to decide whether switch the answer or not after the extra notice given by host .
The Final Fact was later removed in most of the versions .
FIRST CHINESE
VERSION Section::::First Chinese version .
In the Chinese version , no real money is used .
Since the episode aired on October 2011 , there are 30 iPads which stand for three different routes to travel - one is to Europe , one is across Asia , and another one is going around China .
There were three questions in a row , and 30 seconds were given to spread the prizes for each question .
If the contestants answer the third all - or - nothing question correctly , the prizes are listed as follows : !
Number of iPads ! !
Prize SPECIALS IN CHINESE VERSION
Section::::Specials in Chinese version .
In episodes 3 , 4 , 6 and 9 of the Chinese franchise , the game used special modes .
In episodes 3 and 4 , there are three contestants on the stage with pre - existing relationships .
One goes down the stage to the separated room beneath the stage watching the game playing on the stage , and the other two play against the Drop .
The game uses the American format , and the only " litigant"(the contestant sitting in the special room ) choose the correct answer that based on his or her life .
There are no quick changes in the game , and each question 's time limit is 60 seconds .
After revealing the answers , the hidden contestant would be also revealed on the screen and he or she might be asked about the background to the question .
In episodes 6 and 9 , the contestants must answer five questions in a row , and all the questions are about the hidden contestant beneath the stage .
SECOND
CHINESE VERSION Section::::Second Chinese version .
The second Chinese version allows the contestant put money on ALL the trapdoors , but if the remaining cash amount is lower than ( or equal to ) 5,000 yuan , they can only put the cash on one single " drop " , but they can eliminate a random wrong answer before the clock begins .
Only 5 questions for each pair of contestants , and they can choose one out of ten sets of questions .
They can hand out 5,000 yuan to use a lifeline to ask a relative who is watching the live broadcast show , but it can be used only once in a game .
It is broadcast every weekday at 20:00 in Shandong Province only .
Also , " Double or Nothing " introduced in UK series 10 also used in the second Chinese version .
TWISTS IN THE SPANISH
VERSION Section::::Twists in the Spanish version .
This is introduced on 27 September 2013 , in the Spanish version .
As the winning of the top prize in the Spanish version , a new rule whereby the contestants can earn more money is introduced .
The first twist is " Double or Triple the Money " .
In the eighth question , the security team brings up the prize money , which is double their current prize .
The final all - or - nothing question contains four choices .
Before the 60-second clock begins , the pair can choose to take the question with all four options or not in 20 seconds .
If not , one wrong answer is removed , and they can choose to play the question or not within 10 seconds .
If not again , another wrong answer is removed , and they must play the original two - option final question .
However options left in play , they must choose only one answer .
If they choose the correct one , they can walk away with double(with three options in the game ) or triple(with four choices ) , whilst they go home with nothing .
Second twist is " Single play " ( Spanish : Solo uno , literally " only one " ) .
The " Single Play " question may be exist in all the question categories except the final two .
If the contestants choose " Single Play " , one of the pair must leave the stage for several minutes beneath the floor , and the remaining contestant must answer the question by him / her own .
If he / she survived the question , they could win an extra € 5,000 and put it to the prize pot .
In this question , they could not use the " Pass " .
So the theoretical top prize in the daily Spanish version is € 615,000 if the contestant play excellently and take " Single play " well .
PHONE
A FRIEND Section::::Phone a Friend .
This is introduced in the Russian version .
Similar to " Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? " 's lifeline with the same name , in the Drop 's " Phone a Friend "
, the contestants can make a telephone call to one of their relatives before the clock starts .
They can only make one phone call in the game .
If the contestants get stuck on one of the questions , they can use the lifeline and make a telephone call to one of their relatives , friends , or somebody else .
After the presenter greet him / her over the phone , the contestants must read out the question and all the answer options .
The 1-minute clock begins after the question and answers are read for the first time , while the question and answers on the main screen are disappeared .
ELIMINATE
WRONG ANSWER(S )
Section::::Eliminate wrong
answer(s ) .
This lifeline is also introduced in the Russian version , also adapted from " Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ?
" 's lifeline called " Fifty - Fifty " , if the contestants are not quite sure about the final answer , they can use this lifeline after the clock runs out .
The lifeline can be only used once before the last question .
If this is into play , one or two incorrect answer(s ) are randomly delected from the table , only leave one correct and one wrong answer , the money must be on one of the two answers .
If they placed the money on the correct answer , they can bring back the money they lost in this question ; otherwise , they are eliminated with nothing .
TOP PRIZE WINNERS NOTABLE EVENTS OUTSIDE
THE UK
*
In the Japanese version , a pair of contestants take their whole JP¥20 million into the final question without using the lifeline " Quick Change " ( the show used British settings but American rules ) , but they lost all the jackpot in the ultimate question 7 .
This was broadcast on 31 October 2012 .
When they returned on 10 January 2013 , they went out on question 1 .
*
Both the youngest and the oldest contestants have appeared on the Chinese version .
The oldest contestant was Chen Lan , 82 years old when the show aired on Guizhou TV on 4 December 2011 .
The youngest one was Tutu ( nickname ) , just 1 year old when she attended the show 's filming , and broadcast on 18 December 2011 .
*
The Chinese version is also the first to use two presenters in one episode worldwide .
This happened on 23 October 2011 , when Wang Qiao , a host currently working in Hunan TV , acted as a guest host with his friend , and the show 's actual host , Ma Ke .
*
In the , the show 's first set of contestants in the premiere episode - Izam and Eugene - lost all the Jackpot - one million Singapore dollars on the very first question .
This happened again in the Portuguese version 's premiere , broadcast on 30 March 2015 : the very first pair of contestants lost all € 100,000 on the very first show 's very first question .
When the first three set of contestants in the premiere episode decided to split the prize cash , they all lost everything .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS