VISA POLICY OF TURKEY
The visa policy of Turkey deals with the requirements which a foreign national wishing to enter Turkey must meet to be permitted to travel to , enter and remain in the country .
Visitors to Turkey must obtain a visa from one of the Turkish diplomatic missions unless they come from one of the 78 visa - exempt countries and territories or one of the 42 countries and territories whose citizens are eligible to apply for an e - Visa online .
Turkish visas are documents issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and its subsequent diplomatic missions abroad with the stated goal of regulating and facilitating migratory flows .
Visitors of most nationalities must hold a passport valid for no less than 150 days from the date of arrival .
The passport validity requirement does not apply to citizens of Belgium , France , Luxembourg , Portugal , Spain and Switzerland who can enter with a passport expired for no more than five years , citizens of Germany who can enter with a passport or an ID card expired for less than one year , and citizens of Bulgaria who are only required to have a passport valid for their period of stay .
An identity card is accepted in lieu of a passport for citizens of Belgium , France , Georgia , Germany , Greece , Italy , Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Malta , Netherlands , Northern Cyprus , Portugal , Spain , Switzerland and Ukraine .
The validity period requirement also does not apply to nationals of countries whose identity cards are accepted .
Even though Turkey is a candidate country for the membership in the European Union , it has a more complex visa policy than the visa policy of the Schengen Area .
Turkey requires visas from citizens of certain EU member states and Schengen Annex II countries and territories – Antigua and Barbuda , Australia , Austria , Belgium , Bahamas , Barbados , Canada , Croatia , Cyprus , Dominica , East Timor , Grenada , Ireland , Kiribati , Malta , Marshall Islands , Mauritius , Mexico , Micronesia , Norway , Netherlands , Palau , Poland , Portugal , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Samoa , Solomon Islands , Spain , Taiwan , Tonga , Tuvalu , United Arab Emirates , United Kingdom , United States , and Vanuatu .
On the other hand , Turkey grants visa - free access to citizens of other countries and territories – Azerbaijan , Belarus , Belize , Bolivia , Ecuador , Iran , Kosovo , Kyrgyzstan , Jordan , Lebanon , Mongolia , Morocco , Qatar , Russia , Tajikistan , Thailand , Tunisia , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan .
VISA POLICY MAP AS OF RIGHT Section::::As of right .
Citizens of the following countries do not require a visa to enter , reside , study , and work indefinitely in Turkey without any immigration restrictions :
* Turkish citizens VISA - FREE Section::::Visa - free .
Citizens of the following 78 countries and territories do not require a visa to visit Turkey for the durations described below for tourism or business purposes ( unless otherwise stated ) .
For visits of up to 90 days within a 180-day period , an identity card is accepted in lieu of a passport for citizens of some countries .
90 days per visit ,
90 days per 180-day period valign =
top valign =
top 60 DAYS PER VISIT , 90 DAYS PER 180-DAY PERIOD 30 DAYS PER VISIT ,
90 DAYS PER 180-DAY PERIOD valign =
top } Section::::30 days per visit , 90 days per 180-day period .
Visa is also not required for holders of a " Laissez - Passer " issued by the United Nations .
The visa - free regime also applies to the citizens of the following countries under certain conditions : * - provided residing in Northern Cyprus and directly arriving from Ercan International Airport or seaports of Famagusta , Kyrenia , or Karavostassi for a maximum stay of 90 days within 180 days
* - provided being not older than 12 or younger than 65 for a maximum stay of 90 days within 180 days
* - provided holding a VIP passport DIPLOMATIC AND SERVICE CATEGORY PASSPORTS
Section::::Diplomatic and service category passports .
Citizens of Algeria , Austria , Azerbaijan , Bahamas , Bahrain , Bangladesh , Barbados , Belgium , Bulgaria , Cambodia , China , Côte d'Ivoire , Croatia , Cuba , Djibouti , Egypt , Grenada , Guyana , Indonesia , Iraq , Jamaica , Kenya , Latvia , Libya , Maldives , Malta , Mauritania , Mauritius , Mozambique , Namibia , Netherlands , Norway , Oman , Pakistan , Philippines , Poland , Portugal , Spain , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Saudi Arabia , South Africa , Spain , Tanzania , Thailand , United Arab Emirates , Vietnam and Yemen and for holders of diplomatic passports of Afghanistan , Benin , Burkina Faso , Burundi , Republic of the Congo , Ethiopia , Fiji , Gabon , Gambia , Guinea , India , Liberia , Mali , Mexico , Niger , Nigeria , Palestine , Russia , Senegal , South Sudan , Sudan , Uganda and United Kingdom – provided holding diplomatic , service and special passports for a maximum stay of 90 days within 180 days Visa waiver agreements for diplomatic passports were signed with Sierra Leone in May 2017 and with Laos in November 2018
and they are yet to come into force .
E - VISA Section::::e - Visa .
Holders of passports of the following 40 countries and territories can obtain e - Visas online for a fee prior to arrival .
The duration of stay for most of these nationalities is 90 days ( 30 days for some ) within 180 days .
valign = top CONDITIONAL E - VISA Section::::Conditional e - Visa .
Citizens of these countries and territories are eligible to apply for a single entry e - Visa OR e - visa on arrival at Istanbul Ataturk ( IST ) on which they can stay for up to 30 days only if meeting the conditions listed below : valign = top valign = top * R Congo valign
= top } Conditions : *
All nationalities , except for citizens of Gabon and Zambia , must hold a valid visa or residence permit from one of the following countries : Schengen area countries , Ireland , the United Kingdom or the United States .
Electronic visas or e - residence permits are not accepted .
Egyptian citizens who are under 20 or over 45 years old do not need to fulfill this requirement .
*
All citizens except for the citizens of Afghanistan , Bangladesh , India , Pakistan and Philippines must travel with one of the airlines that has protocols with Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs .
The following airlines meet the criteria : AtlasGlobal , Onur Air , Pegasus Airlines and Turkish Airlines .
Citizens of Egypt may also travel on flights operated by EgyptAir .
* Must hold a hotel reservation and adequate financial means ( US$ 50 per day ) .
* Algerian citizens must be aged below 18 or over 35 years old to be eligible for e - Visa .
Otherwise , a sticker visa is required .
* Afghanistan , Iraq , Zambia and Philippines citizens not eligible for e - visa on arrival at Istanbul Ataturk VISA ON ARRIVAL
ONLY UNDER LIMITED CIRCUMSTANCES Section::::Visa on arrival only under limited circumstances .
Citizens of may only obtain a visa on arrival for a stay of max 30 days if holding a valid visa or residence permit issued by Schengen area countries , Ireland or the United Kingdom .
STICKER VISA REQUIRED Section::::Sticker visa required .
Citizens of the following countries and territories must obtain a sticker - type visa in advance at one of the Turkish diplomatic missions : * ( for those between 18 and 35 years old ) valign = top * ( for those not qualifying for visa on arrival ) VISITOR STATISTICS Section::::Visitor statistics .
Most visitors arriving to Turkey were from the following countries of nationality : !
Country 2017 2016 2015 2014 Turkey issued 16,199,968 electronic visas between April 2013 and January 1 , 2017 .
Acceptance rate was 87.79 % as 18,452,733 applications were filed in this period .
Most visas were issued to nationals of the United Kingdom ( 4.6 million ) , Iraq ( 2 million ) and the Netherlands ( 1.8 million ) .
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Turkish citizens
* Visa policy of Northern Cyprus EXTERNAL LINKS * Turkish e - Visa Application System
* Turkish Sticker - type visa application *
Turkey visa information REFERENCES