REGULATION D ( FRB ) Reserve Requirements for Depository Institutions ( , Regulation D ) is a Federal Reserve regulation which sets out reserve requirements for banks in the United States .
It is more familiar to the public as the regulation that limits monthly withdrawals from savings accounts .
RESERVE REQUIREMENT Section::::Reserve requirement .
The regulation requires depository institutions to keep cash reserves in order to meet immediate withdrawals against their transaction accounts .
The minimum reserve requirement is 3 % of the total amount over $ 16 million , and an additional 7 % of the amount over $ 122.3 million .
The institution may satisfy the requirement with vault cash and with deposits at a Federal Reserve Bank , or a bank that acts as a Federal Reserve correspondent .
Bankers ' banks and corporate credit unions , which act only as correspondents for other institutions , are not subject to the reserve requirements .
The Federal Reserve Board of Governors may require additional reserves after consulting Congress or deposit insurance authorities .
SIX - TRANSACTION LIMIT Section::::Six - transaction limit .
In consumer banking , " Regulation D " often refers to § 204.2(d)(2 ) of the regulation , which limits withdrawals or outgoing transfers from a savings or money market account .
No more than six such transactions per statement period may be made from an account by various " convenient " methods , which include checks , debit card payments , and automatic transactions such as automated clearing house transfers or electronic bill payment .
Institutions must warn any customer that exceeds the limit and must freeze , close or reclassify accounts that do so repeatedly .
The regulation does not limit transactions made in person , at an ATM , by mail , or by telephone request for a mailed check .
Even in these cases , the institution may require seven - day advance written notice before releasing funds .
This right is not normally exercised , but it must be part of the account agreement .
Each institution sets its own specific policies for responding to violations of the limit .
Discover Bank , for example , will close a savings account if Regulation D is exceeded 3 or more times in a 12-month period .
Wells Fargo charges a $ 15 " Excess Activity Fee " for each item cleared after the regulation has been exceeded , and converts the account to a checking account if the activity persists .
The regulation was amended in 2009 to allow greater freedom for the depositor : beforehand , the limit was six withdrawals per month if the funds remained within the same institution ( e.g. , transfer to checking ) , but was only three drafts where the funds left the institution ( e.g. , check , ACH Network , or card based purchase ) .
SEE ALSO
* Savings account
*
Money market account REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * FRB 12 CFR 204 ( " Regulation D " )
* Regulation D of the Federal Reserve * FDIC PART 204—RESERVE REQUIREMENTS OF DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS ( REGULATION D )