I AM NUMBER FOUR ( FILM )
I Am Number Four is a 2011 American teen science fiction action thriller film directed by D. J. Caruso and starring Alex Pettyfer , Timothy Olyphant , Teresa Palmer , Dianna Agron , and Callan McAuliffe .
The screenplay , by Alfred Gough , Miles Millar , and Marti Noxon , is based on the novel of the same name , one of the Lorien Legacies young adult science fiction novels .
Produced by Michael Bay , I Am Number Four was the first film production from DreamWorks Pictures to be released by Touchstone Pictures , as part of the studio 's 2009 distribution deal with Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
The Hollywood Reporter estimated the budget to be between $ 50 million and $ 60 million .
The film was released in both conventional and IMAX theatres on February 18 , 2011 , received generally negative reviews , and grossed $ 150 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
John Smith is an alien from the planet Lorien .
He was sent to Earth as a child with eight others to escape the invading Mogadorians , who destroyed Lorien .
Here , John is protected by a Guardian , Henri , and has developed powers , including enhanced strength , speed and agility , as well as seven other powers he will develop later in life , known as legacies .
He is protected by a Loric charm which protects him from all Mogadorian harm as long as he is hurt out of order ; he can only be hurt after the first three loriens are killed in order .
The Mogadorians , led by the Commander , learn about the nine children and come to Earth to find them .
The Lorien can only be killed in sequence ; Number One through Number Nine .
Three of them are already dead , with John being Number Four .
Knowing this , he and Henri move from a beachside bungalow in Florida to an old farm in Paradise , Ohio , where John befriends conspiracy theorist Sam Goode and a dog which he names after Bernie Kosar .
He also falls for an amateur photographer , Sarah Hart .
Her ex - boyfriend , football player Mark James is a bully who torments both John and Sam .
During the Halloween Festival , Mark and his friends chase Sarah and John into the woods , where they try to beat John up .
However , he uses his powers to fend them off and rescue Sarah .
Sam witnesses this , which forces John to reveal his true origins .
The next day , Mark 's father , the local sheriff , interrogates Henri on John 's whereabouts when his son and his friends were attacked .
Henri tells John that too many people are suspicious of them
so they have to leave .
John refuses because of Sarah .
Meanwhile , the Mogadorians continue searching for John , while being trailed by another Garde , Number Six , who is also trying to locate Number Four .
Number Six 's guardian was killed , and she realizes that the remaining six of the Garde will have to team up and fight against the Mogadorians .
She knows Number Three is dead and that Number Four is being hunted .
The Mogadorians eventually locate John and manipulate two conspiracy theorists into capturing Henri .
When John and Sam go to rescue him , they are attacked but manage to fend the Mogadorians off .
However , Henri dies after John and Sam escape with some Lorien artefacts , including a blue rock that acts as a tracking device for other Garde .
Sam 's father , a conspiracy theorist who disappeared while hunting aliens in Mexico , had another of the rocks .
While Sam searches for it , John tries to say goodbye to Sarah at a party , only to discover that the Mogadorians have framed him and Henri for the murders of the conspiracy theorists .
Mark sees John and calls his father , who corners John and Sarah .
John saves Sarah from a fall , revealing his powers in the process , and they escape to their high school .
Meanwhile , The Commander arrives in Paradise , in a convoy of trucks .
He is confronted by Mark and his father , and after injuring the sheriff , he forces Mark to show him where John is hiding .
Mark takes him to the school , which he knows is Sarah 's hideout .
There , John , Sarah , and Sam are attacked by the Mogadorians , who brought two Piken to hunt the trio .
They are saved by Number Six and Bernie , who is actually a shapeshifting Chimera sent by John 's biological parents to protect him .
John and Number Six , who can turn invisible and can block energy attacks , continue to fight the Mogadorians .
They eventually defeat them all , including the Commander .
The following day , John and Number Six unite their blue rocks and discover the location of the other four surviving Garde .
John decides to let Sam come with them in hopes of finding Sam 's father .
They set off to find the others so they can all protect Earth from the Mogadorians , leaving Sarah and a repentant Mark , who lies to his father about John 's whereabouts , telling him to head west since he told his father he was heading east , and returns a magic box left to John by his Dad that Henri hid that was in police evidence .
John thanks Mark and promises Sarah that he will come back to Paradise to find her .
While they share their goodbye kiss a hurt and slightly agitated Mark is shown , before shakes his head before waving and putting a fake smile .
The movie ends with John , Sam , Bernie and Number Six driving out towards the sunset smiling and vowing to protect their new home , Earth .
CAST
* Alex Pettyfer as John Smith / Number Four * Timothy Olyphant as Henri
* Teresa Palmer as Number Six
* Dianna Agron as Sarah Hart * Callan McAuliffe as Sam Goode * Kevin Durand as Mogadorian Commander * Jake Abel as Mark James * Jeff Hochendoner as Sheriff James * Patrick Sebes as Kevin * Greg Townley as Number Three * Reuben Langdon as Number Three 's Guardian * Emily Wickersham as Nicole
* Brian Howe as Frank * Andy Owen as Bret * Charles Carroll as Sam 's Stepfather
* Garrett M. Brown as Mr. Simms * Cooper Thornton as Mr. Hart
* Judith Hoag as Mrs. Hart
* Beau Mirchoff as Drew
* Tucker Albrizzi ( uncredited ) as Tuck PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
The film was produced by DreamWorks and Reliance Entertainment .
Film producer and director Michael Bay brought the manuscript of the young adult novel I Am Number Four to Stacey Snider and Steven Spielberg at DreamWorks .
A bidding war developed for the film rights between DreamWorks and J.J. Abrams , with DreamWorks winning the rights in June 2009 , with the intention of having Bay produce and possibly direct the project .
The rights were purchased with the hope of attracting teenage fans of The Twilight Saga films , and the potential of establishing a film franchise , with at least six more installments planned by the book 's publisher .
Al Gough and Miles Millar , the creators of the television series Smallville , were hired to write the screenplay in August 2009 .
Marti Noxon , writer and producer for the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer , also contributed to the screenplay .
D. J. Caruso was brought on to direct in early 2010 , after Bay opted to focus on directing the of the Transformers series .
Caruso had been selected by Spielberg to direct Disturbia and Eagle Eye for DreamWorks , and had success with both films .
Caruso had less than a year to prepare , shoot and edit the film , due to a worldwide release date set for Presidents Day weekend .
Chris Bender , J.C. Spink , and David Valdes executive produced the film .
Steven Spielberg contributed to the film 's characters , but did not take a credit on the film .
It was the first DreamWorks film to be released by Disney 's Touchstone Pictures label , as part of the 30-picture distribution deal between DreamWorks and Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
The film was also the first release for DreamWorks after the studio 's financial restructuring in 2008 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In March 2010 , Alex Pettyfer was in talks to play the title character in the film , Number Four .
It was later confirmed that the 21-year - old British actor would play the lead .
Sharlto Copley was going to star as Henri , Number Four 's guardian and mentor , but had to drop out due to press obligations with his film The A - Team .
Copley was replaced by Timothy Olyphant .
Kevin Durand plays the villain of the film , Commander , the Mogadorian who leads the hunt for the Loriens on Earth .
DreamWorks went through multiple rounds of tests to find the right actress for the female romantic lead .
Dianna Agron , a star in the Fox television series Glee , won the role .
She plays Sarah Hart , a girl who used to date a high school football player , but falls for Number Four and keeps his secret .
Jake Abel plays the football player , Mark James , an antagonist in the film .
Teresa Palmer plays the other Loric , Number Six , and 16-year - old Australian actor Callan McAuliffe plays Sam Goode , Number Four 's best friend .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on May 17 , 2010 , using 20 locations all within the Pittsburgh metropolitan area .
DreamWorks selected the area primarily due to tax incentives from the Pennsylvania Film Production Tax Credit .
The film studio also had a positive experience shooting
She 's Out of My League in Pittsburgh in 2008 .
The production was scheduled to last 12 to 13 weeks .
Cinematographer Guillermo Navarro shot the film on 35 mm , using a format known as Super 1:85 .
Beaver , the former Conley Inn in Homewood , and nearby Buttermilk Falls were used as locations in the film ; interior and exterior scenes were shot near a boat launch in Monaca .
A spring fair scene was filmed in Deer Lakes Park in West Deer ; Port Vue , North Park , New Kensington and Hyde Park were also used as locations .
The setting of the film 's fictional town of Paradise , Ohio is Vandergrift , Pennsylvania , where filming took place from June to July 2010 .
Producers chose Vandergrift as the " hero town " of the film because of its unique look and curved streets , laid out by Frederick Law Olmsted , the designer of New York City 's Central Park .
Franklin Regional High School in Murrysville was chosen over 50 other schools in the area , due to its proximity to nearby woods , a part of the film 's plot , and its surrounding hills .
The school was also selected for its one floor layout , wide hallways , and its football stadium in front .
Teachers and recent graduates appear in the film , and a set that replicates the school was built in a studio in Monroeville for filming explosion scenes .
In the last few weeks of production , scenes were filmed at the 200-year - old St. John 's Lutheran Stone Church in Lancaster Township .
Additional filming took place in the Florida Keys in the beginning of the film in Big Pine Key , Florida as well as the spanning of the drive over the bridge showcases the keys 7 mile bridge .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
I Am Number Four was edited by Jim Page , with Industrial Light & Magic developing the visual effects for the alien Pikens .
The film was scored by former Yes guitarist Trevor Rabin .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
A teaser trailer for the film was issued in late September 2010 , and a full - length trailer premiered on December 8 .
Advertisements ran in Seventeen and Teen Vogue magazines , Disney released a promotional iPhone app in January 2011 .
Disney also developed a lot of Internet content to target a teen audience with their marketing campaign .
A cast tour , in association with American retailer Hot Topic , and cast media appearances were scheduled to lead up to the release of the film .
I Am Number Four premiered at the Village Theatre in Los Angeles on February 9 , 2011 .
The film was released in theaters on February 18 , 2011 , and was also released in the IMAX format .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film was released by Touchstone Home Entertainment on Blu - ray , DVD , and digital download on May 24 , 2011 .
The release was produced in three different packages : a three - disc Blu - ray , DVD , and " Digital Copy " combo pack , a single - disc Blu - ray , and a single - disc DVD .
The " Digital Copy " included with the 3-disc version is a stand - alone disc that allows users to play the film from any location via iTunes or Windows Media Player .
All releases include bloopers and the " Becoming Number 6 " featurette , while the single - disc Blu - ray and three - disc Blu - ray , DVD , and " Digital Copy " combo pack versions additionally include six deleted scenes with an introduction from the director .
In its first three weeks of release , 316,081 Blu - ray units were sold in the US , bringing in $ 7,693,808 .
As of October 2 , 2011 , the standard DVD of ' I am Number Four ' has sold 767,692 copies in the United States , generating $ 12,571,326 , and thus bringing the total gross to $ 166,247,931 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 33 % approval rating and an average rating of 4.8/10 based on 158 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads ,
" It 's positioned as the start of a franchise , but I Am Number Four familiar plot and unconvincing performances add up to one noisy , derivative , and ultimately forgettable sci - fi thriller .
"
Metacritic gives the film an average score of 36 out of 100 based on reviews from 30 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
Empire Magazine gave the film three out of a possible five stars and said , " If you can make it through the bland schmaltz of the first half you 'll be rewarded with a spectacular blast of sustained action and the promise of even better to come .
This could be the start of something great . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box Office .
I Am Number Four grossed $ 55,100,437 at the North American box office and $ 90,778,000 overseas , for a worldwide total of $ 149,878,437 .
It topped the worldwide box office on its second weekend ( February 25–27 , 2011 ) with $ 28,086,805 .
The film opened at number two in the United States and Canada with a gross of $ 19,449,893 .
In its second weekend , it dropped 43.4 % , earning $ 11,016,126 .
The only other market where it has grossed over $ 10 million is China .
It began in third place with $ 3.4 million , but had an increase of 91 % in its second week , topping the box office with $ 6.4 million .
In its third week , it decreased by 21 % to $ 5.0 million .
As of March 27 , 2011 , it has grossed $ 17,328,244 .
SOUNDTRACK
* " Radioactive " - Kings of Leon
* * " Tighten Up " -
The Black Keys *
* " Rolling in the Deep "
- Adele * *
" Somebody 's Watching Me " - Rockwell * * " Shelter " - The xx * * " Soldier On " -
The Temper Trap *
* " Invented " - Jimmy Eat World
* * " Curfew " - Beck * *
" As She 's Walking Away " - Zac Brown Band ( ft .
Alan Jackson )
* * " Letters from the Sky " - Civil Twilight * SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
In 2011 , screenwriter Noxon told Collider.com that plans for an imminent sequel were shelved due to the disappointing performance of the first installment at the box office .
In 2013 , director Caruso was asked if there are any possibilities that The Power of Six will get a movie adaption , he replied : " There 's been some talk in the past couple of months about trying to do something because there is this audience appetite out there [ ... ] .
Most of the people on Twitter that contact me from all over the world ask , " Where 's the next movie ?
" I think DreamWorks is getting those too
so it 'll be interesting .
I do n't know if I 'd be involved , but I know they 're talking about it . "
In a 2015 interview , James Frey , the co - author of the series , said that he hoped more movies would be made .
SEE ALSO
* Cyborg 009
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS