TERRA NOVA ( TV SERIES )
Terra Nova ( ) is an American science fiction drama television series .
It aired one season from September 26 to December 19 , 2011 .
The series documents the Shannon family 's experiences as they establish themselves as members of a colony , set up 85 million years in the Earth 's past , fleeing the dystopian overpopulated and hyperpolluted present of the mid-22nd century .
The series is based on an idea by British writer Kelly Marcel and was executive produced by Steven Spielberg .
On March 5 , 2012 , Fox announced that the show was canceled .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series is initially set in 2149 , when overpopulation and declining air quality threaten all life on Earth .
When scientists discover a temporal rift permitting ( one - way ) human transmission , they initiate a series of " pilgrimages " to a parallel " time stream " resembling Earth 's Cretaceous Period .
The series focuses primarily on police officer James " Jim " Shannon , his wife Elisabeth , and their three children Josh , Maddy , and Zoe , as they join the colony there , named " Terra Nova " ( Latin for " New Earth " or " New World " ) .
Elisabeth Shannon is chosen to join Terra Nova for her medical expertise , and her two older children with her .
Her husband , imprisoned for violating population control by harbouring a third child and assaulting an official agent to protect his young daughter , stows away to join them and eventually convinces the colony 's leader , Commander Nathaniel Taylor , that his own police expertise is of use to the administration .
Opposing the colony and its leader Taylor is a group of separatists known as the " Sixers " , so called because they arrived in the " Sixth Pilgrimage " , working in concert with corporate industrialists to strip the Cretaceous Earth of its resources and transmit them to 2149 , allowing for massive profits at the cost of environmental destruction .
It is later revealed that Commander Taylor 's estranged grown son , Lucas , is working with the Sixers as well .
Toward the end of the series , Lucas perfects travel to and from the future , thus enabling the industrialists , with a private army called " The Phoenix Group " , to invade Terra Nova .
At the end of the series , Jim Shannon returns to 2149 to destroy the gateway permitting travel to the Cretaceous , whereupon the Phoenix Group retreats to the nearby " Badlands " , leaving behind a wooden ship 's figurehead apparently located there by another temporal rift .
CAST
MAIN *
Jason O'Mara as James " Jim " Shannon , a former Chicago Police narcotics detective .
He is married to Elisabeth and is the father of their three children .
After a lengthy imprisonment for breaking population - control laws in 2149 , he escaped and rejoined his family in the Terra Nova colony , where he worked on the gardening division .
After saving Commander Taylor from an assassination attempt , he joined Terra Nova 's security forces , eventually becoming third - in - command of the colony .
* Shelley Conn as Dr. Elisabeth Shannon , a trauma surgeon who works at Terra Nova 's medical center .
She is married to Jim and is the mother of their three children .
In the series premiere , she was instrumental in Jim 's escape from prison and arrival in Terra Nova .
* Landon Liboiron as Josh Shannon , Jim and Elisabeth 's 17-year - old son .
Reluctant to leave his girlfriend behind in 2149 , he initially resented his father ; but in later episodes they repair their relationship .
* Naomi Scott as Maddy Shannon , Jim and Elisabeth 's 16-year - old daughter .
Intelligent but socially - clumsy , and depicted principally either as a student or the love interest of Mark Reynolds , a young soldier .
* Alana Mansour as Zoe Shannon , the five - year - old ( later six - year - old ) daughter of Jim and Elisabeth Shannon .
Early in her life , she was kept hidden by her family , having been a third child and thus contravened the population control laws of 2149 .
When she was discovered , Jim was sent to prison .
With the aid of a friend , Zoe was smuggled into Terra Nova and permitted to remain in the colony .
* Christine Adams as Mira , the leader of the " Sixers " , a rebel group that arrived with the Sixth Pilgrimage but who soon broke away to oppose Terra Nova and to prepare for the Phoenix Group 's invasion .
Mira 's daughter , Sienna , is still in 2149 and is held by Mira 's employers to ensure her cooperation .
Mira 's ambition is to return to 2149 and have a comfortable and peaceful life with her daughter .
* Allison Miller as Skye Alexandria Tate , a veteran resident of Terra Nova from the Fifth Pilgrimage , and Josh 's closest friend .
Her parents reportedly died three years before the series begins , and she was subsequently adopted by Commander Taylor .
She is later revealed to be a Sixer mole , being blackmailed by the Sixers who held her mother hostage and controlled the medicine which kept her alive .
* Mido Hamada as Guzman , a member of Terra Nova 's security forces and father of Tasha , a teenage girl who is one of Skye 's closest friends .
Guzman was originally meant to have a bigger role and was supposed to be the colony 's second - in - command , which is why Hamada was credited as a member of the main cast .
However , after the pilot , Guzman was written out of the show , and the second - in - command was said to be Lt .
Washington .
* Stephen Lang as Commander Nathaniel Taylor , Terra Nova 's head of state .
Himself the first colonist , Taylor survived 118 days alone , helped build a community as new settlers arrived , and has been the colony 's leader for seven years .
When Skye 's parents died , he became her legal guardian and father figure .
Taylor 's relationship with his son , Lucas , has degraded severely since an incident in 2138 in which Taylor was forced to sacrifice his wife to enemy fire .
Lucas arrived in Terra Nova on the Second Pilgrimage , but plotted against his father to destroy the colony , and has since re - appeared as antagonist .
* Rod Hallett as Dr. Malcolm Wallace , the chief science officer for the Terra Nova colony .
Early in the first season , it is revealed that he recruited Elisabeth for Terra Nova , having earlier had a romantic relationship with her , and he was hopeful that she would leave her husband in prison in 2149 .
RECURRING
* Caroline Brazier as Deborah Tate .
Under the cover story that she died in a fever epidemic , she was taken to the Sixers by her daughter Skye who made a deal with Mira , the Sixers ' leader , for treatment of her mother 's illness in return for spying on Taylor and the colonists .
Later in the first season , she was rescued by the soldier Curran and returned to the colony .
* Emelia Burns as Corporal Reilly , a member of Terra Nova 's security forces and an expert at defusing bombs .
* Damien Garvey as Tom Boylan , a bartender and former soldier who occasionally trades with the Sixers .
Often secretive and abrasive , he operates minor crime but proves loyal to Terra Nova when the Phoenix Group invades .
* Dean Geyer as Corporal Mark Reynolds , a soldier under Taylor 's command and eventually the suitor of Maddy Shannon .
He is a competent soldier and able survivalist , but often uncertain of his own position , and therefore formal , when interacting with Maddy and her father Jim .
* Simone Kessell as Lieutenant Alicia " Wash " Washington , the second - in - command to Nathaniel Taylor .
She had served with Taylor for several years prior to her assignment to Terra Nova .
In the season finale , she was reduced by the Phoenix Group to menial status and later killed by Lucas Taylor for abetting the Shannon family 's escape from the settlement .
* Peter Lamb as Casey Durwin , a tradesman that works in Terra Nova 's market and a former member of the U.S. army .
He operates a motorized wheelchair , allegedly having lost his legs to a Carnotaurus .
* Sam Parsonson as Hunter Boyce , a teenager that lives in Terra Nova and came on the 5th Pilgrimage .
He is one of Skye 's closest friends and is also one of her housemates .
He was once injured by an Acceraptor ( a fictional species of dromeosaur ) , and once contracted a 30-ft . tapeworm - like parasite of which he was relieved by Elisabeth and Skye . * Romy Poulier as Kara , Josh 's girlfriend from 2149 .
She was unable to join the Shannons on the Tenth Pilgrimage in the series premiere , whereafter Josh cut a deal with the Sixers to bring her to Terra Nova .
She eventually arrived with the Eleventh Pilgrimage , but was killed shortly thereafter by the Phoenix Group , who used a suicide bomber upon arrival .
* Rohan Nichol as Weaver , a senior associate of Lucas and the Phoenix Group .
He commanded the mercenary forces that invaded Terra Nova in the season finale .
Thereafter he returned to 2149 , but was slain by a juvenile Carnotaurus brought to the future by Jim .
* Jay Ryan as Curran , a member of Terra Nova 's security team .
Banished from the colony for murdering a fellow soldier named Ken Foster , Curran was later encountered by Taylor in the local jungle , who saved Curran from an ' Ancestral Komodo ' .
Thereafter Taylor employed him to infiltrate the Sixers ' camp , whence he rescued Deborah Tate .
In recognition of Curran 's actions , he was readmitted to Terra Nova .
*
Matt Scully as Private Dunham , a member of Terra Nova 's security team .
* Damian Walshe - Howling as Carter , a member of the Sixers who was once injured and captured at Terra Nova .
After escaping , he made an attempt on Nathaniel Taylor 's life and was stopped by Jim Shannon , and released during a trade with the Sixers .
* Ashley Zukerman as Lucas Taylor , the estranged , deceptive and vengeful son of Nathaniel Taylor , and the main antagonist of the series .
A brilliant yet unstable physicist employed by the same people who hired the Sixers and the Phoenix Group to assist their invasion of the alternate , past Earth , for which he remained there at some length , periodically revealing the results of his calculations .
During the finale , his plans were counteracted by Jim Shannon , and Lucas himself was wounded by Skye and not seen again .
EPISODES PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
" Purely as an exercise in ' Can I write something my dad would like ? ' "
, Kelly Marcel produced a treatment for Terra Nova while working in Prime Time Video , a video rental shop in Battersea .
After her agent booked her a fortnight in Los Angeles pitching to American networks from out of a fleabag hotel , she received an offer to write a 13-episode season at $ 300,000 a show , which Marcel refused .
She was just unsure
it was what she wanted to write , a fear more certain after producer Steven Spielberg proposed that the series should involve dinosaurs .
Instead , she simply sold the idea and returned to London .
Alex Graves signed on to direct the pilot .
Brannon Braga and René Echevarria serve as showrunners .
Australia was chosen after Spielberg vetoed Hawaii because he wanted a different filming location from his 1993 film Jurassic Park .
The two - hour pilot was filmed over 26 days in late November to December 2010 .
It was shot in south - east Queensland , Australia , with locations in Brisbane , the Gold Coast , and the Gold Coast Hinterland , namely Bonogin .
The shoot was plagued by torrential rain and additional material had to be shot in 2011 , with a total estimated cost of US$ 14 million to be amortized over the season .
More than 250 sets were constructed .
An episode took from eight to nine days to shoot , like most television dramas , but six weeks in post - production , twice the television average at the time .
The average episode budget was about $ 4 M , not including Australian tax breaks , compared to an average of $ 3 M for broadcast network dramas .
Fox Entertainment president Kevin Reilly stated : " This thing is going to be huge .
It 's going to take an enormous production commitment . "
In an unusual decision , Fox skipped ordering just a pilot , and instead immediately ordered thirteen episodes .
This was partly due to financial reasons , as the large Australian sets are expensive to dismantle and rebuild .
Despite this decision , the producers denied the production was over - budget , with Peter Rice explaining instead the show is " a very expensive ... very ambitious television show " .
Kevin Reilly continued : " We 're not in completely uncharted territory here .
The start - up cost for the series is definitely on the high end .
But it 's not some bank - breaking series . "
With only 10 % of Cretaceous - era dinosaurs recorded in the fossil record , the producers decided to supplement the series with plausible fictional species ; palaeontologist Jack Horner was invited to create realistic creatures for the period and different from those of the Jurassic Park film franchise .
In June 2010 , the first cast member was announced – Jason O'Mara as Jim Shannon .
In late August , Allison Miller joined the cast ; playing the role of Skye Tate .
In September 2010 , Deadline Hollywood reported that Stephen Lang , who played a similar character in the 2009 film Avatar , signed - on to play a leading role of Commander Taylor .
An executive producer , David Fury , left the series as a result of creative differences .
In September , Shelley Conn landed the female lead role .
In October , Brian Tyler was chosen as the composer , Mido Hamada was cast as a security head , while Landon Liboiron , Naomi Scott , and Alana Mansour were cast as the three children .
In November , Christine Adams was cast as Mira .
In May 2011 , Rod Hallett joined the cast .
The cast and crew returned to Queensland , Australia on May 20 , 2011 to continue production on the first season .
Filming commenced on May 25 , 2011 .
With a long production process on the series , it was announced in July 2011 that the first season would consist of thirteen episodes to finish airing in December 2011 .
Many of the weapons used in the show were reworked and repainted Nerf blasters .
CANCELLATION AND MOTION
COMIC Section::::Cancellation and motion comic .
Shortly after the airing of the season one finale in December 2011 , Fox Broadcasting stated that no decision would be made until 2012 regarding the continuation of the series .
Fox announced the cancellation of Terra Nova on March 6 , 2012 .
20th Century Fox Television stated that it would try to sell the show to other networks .
Following the decision 20th Century Fox entered negotiations with Netflix to possibly create a second season .
However nothing ultimately came of this .
Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment set up a " video mashup " website where purchasers of the DVD can create a motion comic continuing the series .
As of December 2013 , the site was no longer active and redirects to Fox Movies .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
Terra Nova was expected to premiere in the U.S. in May 2011 with a two - hour preview , but due to the time involved for visual effects , its pilot was moved to autumn ( late September ) 2011 to air with the rest of season one .
In May 2011 , Fox announced the series would air on Monday nights , and released a full trailer .
Terra Nova premiered at the 2011 San Diego Comic - Con International on July 23 , 2011 .
The Fox premiere drew 9.22 million viewers and 3.1 in the 18–49 demo in live plus same day results , rising to 4.1 in Live+3 , the best result by a new drama .
Terra Nova 's high DVR gains were attributed to competition from Monday Night Football which , being a sports event , is less conducive to delayed viewing .
In its second week on Fox , the show retained 100 % of its demo rating ( 3.1 ) , the best retention by a new series .
Fox aired the entire first season consecutively on Monday nights , until its two - hour finale on December 19 , 2011 .
In Canada , Citytv simulcast every first - season episode ; the Canadian premiere drew 1.4 million viewers , the largest audience for a drama in Citytv 's history .
In 2015 , reruns began airing on Telelatino .
In Australia , where the series was filmed , Network Ten began airing the series within days of its U.S. release .
In the UK and Ireland , digital channel Sky 1 broadcast the show from October 3 , 2011 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Early reviews indicated much promise in the series .
In June 2011 , Terra Nova was one of eight honorees in the Most Exciting New Series category at the Critics ' Choice Television Awards , voted by journalists who had seen the pilots .
The Pittsburgh Post - Gazette compared it to Outcasts .
The Los Angeles Times wrote : "
Easily the most exciting show of the fall season , Fox 's Terra Nova has such obvious , instant and demographically diverse appeal . "
The New York Post called it " Good family fun " , while USA Today wrote , " What matters are the dinosaurs , who – particularly in the first hour – are as convincing and startling as TV has ever offered , roaming a gorgeous , CGI - enhanced terrain .
"
The Wall Street Journal wrote : " Terra Nova leaves ye olde cheap - set series in the dust with production values that make each episode look cinematic . "
The Washington Post wrote , " Literally the biggest thing on TV this fall , Terra Nova has it
all : time travel , misguided utopianism , ' Swiss Family Robinson'-style cohesion and lots of hungry dinosaurs .
It 's all pretty dazzling . "
Mid - season reviews were highly critical .
Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald said that the series was Stargate Universe by Dr. Seuss .
Sam Wollaston of The Guardian stated that there was only one interesting character and that " A lot of the fault lies with what they have to say to each other .
The script is as corny and cheesy as a family - sized portion of cheesy corn nachos .
" New York magazine reviewer Chadwick Matlin vowed never to watch the show again , saying " Sure , the premise had promise , but even masochists like us can only take so much . "
But by the finale in December things had turned around again where critics were mostly pleased and enthusiastic .
Entertainment Weekly called the season finale " exciting " .
The series ' first season received an aggregated score of 64 % across 28 reviews from Metacritic .
U.S. RATINGS Section::::U.S. ratings .
The first season averaged 7.52 million American viewers and a 2.5 rating in the 18–49 demographic .
The show was ranked the # 2 new drama among adults 18–49 , the # 1 new show among men 18–49 , 18–34 , and 25–54 and was one of the top 20 regular programs among teens , as of January 1 , 2012 . ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Season !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Episodes ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Timeslot ( ET / PT ) !
scope="col " colspan="2 " Premiered ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Ended ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " TV season ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Rank ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Viewers(in millions ) ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Premiere viewers(in millions ) !
scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Finale viewers(in millions )
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
In 2011 , the series was honored , along with seven others , with the Critics ' Choice Television Award for Most Exciting New Series .
Also , it won " Best Visual Effects in a Television Series " by the Visual Effects Society in 2011 and was also nominated for " Outstanding Created Environment in a Broadcast Program or Commercial . " SERIES DVD RELEASE Section::::Series DVD release .
The series was released on a 4-disc DVD set on September 11 , 2012 .
The set contains deleted scenes ; bloopers ; and featurettes including " Director 's Diaries – Making the Pilot " , an extended " Occupation / Resistance " episode with audio commentary from Stephen Lang , Brannon Braga and Rene Echevarria , " Mysteries Explored " , and " Cretaceous Life : The Dinosaurs of Terra Nova " .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The series 's original music was composed by Brian Tyler .
La - La Land Records released a soundtrack album on October 9 , 2012 .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring dinosaurs REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS