SARA TANCREDI
Dr. Sara Scofield ( nee Tancredi ) is a fictional character from the American television series , Prison Break .
She is played by Sarah Wayne Callies .
Her role in the first season of the series is a prison physician .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Raised in Chicago , Sara Tancredi 's ambitions to be a doctor began when she was very young .
While at Northwestern University , where she was a Phi Beta Kappa , she was introduced to the works of Mahatma Gandhi and decided to become a humanitarian , which later influenced her decision to work at Fox River State Penitentiary .
Another factor which contributed to her occupational choice was her past morphine addiction , culminating in being unable to help a boy after he was run over , because she was high , which was revealed in a flashback episode of the first season , " Brother 's Keeper " .
At 29 years old , Dr. Sara Tancredi was one of the few doctors working at Fox River .
Her chosen occupation became a constant source of stress for her father .
Sara is the only child of the Governor of Illinois , Frank Tancredi ( portrayed by John Heard ) .
Due to her father 's hectic political career and vastly differing beliefs , she did not have a close relationship with him .
In episode " Buried " , it was revealed that her mother has already died .
APPEARANCES Section::::Appearances .
In the first season , Sara is mostly featured in scenes with Michael Scofield , while in the second season , Sara has mainly appeared in scenes with Frank Tancredi , Paul Kellerman or by herself .
She has appeared in every episode of seasons 1 , 2 and 4 except for second season episodes , " Otis " and " John Doe" .
Her death was faked early in the third season , apparently beheaded by Gretchen Morgan , and her " head " was delivered in a box to Lincoln Burrows .
In season 4 it is discovered that the head was a ploy and that Sara is alive .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
Sara is introduced to the series when Michael Scofield first visits the infirmary in the pilot episode .
In the first and second episode , their interactions are cordial but formal .
However , Sara 's curiosity is awakened when he attempts to charm her , and after she checks his academic record , she is surprised that he had graduated with a master 's degree .
In " Allen " , she notices his nervousness as she tests for his glucose count to confirm his diabetes .
However , she dismisses it after his test apparently passed ( but only because Michael had taken insulin blockers to raise his blood sugar ) .
Michael 's regular visits to the infirmary becomes an important plot point , as it represents a major step in his plan .
Sara treats Michael after two of his toes are cut off in the episode " Cell Test " , and the subsequent bonding between them turns their relationship into a more personal one .
Most episodes feature Sara interacting with Michael during these visits , initially careful to deflect all his attempts to charm her .
However , after Michael rescues Sara from inmates ' intent to rape and kill her in " Riots , Drills , and the Devil " , she begins to grow more comfortable around him .
This is not without duality , though , as another plot point includes Sara discovering that Michael lied about a PI assignment .
However , she is strengthened in her belief that Michael is different from the other prisoners , and several episodes has her trying to obtain information about him , such as when she is required to conduct a medical check - up on Michael 's brother Lincoln Burrows ( Dominic Purcell ) , and questions him on Michael 's background .
She also visits Michael 's former psychiatrist in " Tweener " .
As Sara 's character searches for clues about Michael , and though she knows that something is very suspicious , she ca n't stop herself from being attracted to him .
In later episodes , though , Sara attempts to distance herself from Michael .
After she discovers that he is married and had a conjugal visit in the episode "
And Then There Were 7 "
, she announces that they will now be doctor - patient only .
In the following episodes , her tone with Michael is more distant , though she continues to help him in subsequent episodes despite their relationship .
After meeting with Lincoln Burrows ' lawyers on his execution day in episode " The Rat " , Sara becomes convinced that Lincoln is innocent and attempts to persuade her father to ask him to review Lincoln 's case after Michael pleads with her .
Her father denies the appeal , but additional information emerges to postpone the execution .
Sara 's character plays a critical role in the episode " The Key " , where Michael must take possession of a key to the infirmary door .
He ultimately kisses her as a distraction to steal her keys , but is caught up in the moment and unable to go through with it .
Instead , he has his wife meet Sara and steal the keys .
His plan backfires when she discovers that Michael 's wife has stolen the keys from her , and becomes very cold towards him .
At the end of the episode , she has the locks to the infirmary door changed , thwarting his efforts .
Michael is then forced to come clean in " Tonight " and reveals to her his intent to break Lincoln out of prison .
Sara is confronted with the decision whether she should help Michael or not .
Eventually , Sara returns to Fox River and unlocks the infirmary door .
Horribly distressed at what she has done , Sara injects herself with morphine from the infirmary .
Suspected for being an accessory to the escape , police officers charge into her apartment with an emergency warrant in the Season Finale to find her nearly dead from a morphine overdose .
The character 's fate is left unresolved at the end of the first season .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
After recovering from her drug overdose in " Manhunt " , Sara loses her medical license and becomes a target of The Company - the mysterious organization behind Lincoln 's murder setup .
Posing as Lance , a homosexual addict at a Narcotics Anonymous meeting , Agent Kellerman ( Paul Adelstein ) attempts to befriend Sara to find out the whereabouts of Michael Scofield .
Learning that six other convicts joined Michael 's escape , Sara feels betrayed by him , and the two characters initially have a strained relationship .
After her father alerts her of Kellerman 's suspicious identity and her father 's subsequent death in episode " Buried " , Sara becomes part of the show 's conspiracy plot as she holds the key ( left by her father ) to information that may exonerate Lincoln .
Following this , several attempts on Sara 's life are made by The Company , which force her to find Michael via his coded messages .
She meets with Michael in the episode " Rendezvous " at Gila , New Mexico but their reunion is short - lived when Kellerman and Agent Mahone ( William Fichtner ) find out about their rendezvous point .
At first , Sara is reluctant to leave with Michael to Panama but is captured by Kellerman shortly after .
Kellerman proceeds to torture Sara in episode " Bolshoi Booze " , in an effort to obtain information about a USB drive he thinks her father gave her .
Sara escapes from Kellerman and decides to change her appearance and throws her wallet and ID away .
Two episodes later , Sara returns in " The Message " .
She reunites with Michael in Evansville , Indiana in " Chicago " .
Together with the brothers , Sara travels to Chicago where her father has hidden the audio file that can help prove Lincoln 's innocence .
On the train to Chicago , Sara admits to Michael that she has fallen in love with him , and they kiss .
Later in the episode , Michael admits he has fallen in love with her .
Michael , Sara and Lincoln eventually retrieve the audio file but discover that it 's not legally valid as evidence .
They decide to use it to blackmail President Reynolds for a presidential pardon instead .
When this fails , Michael and Lincoln are forced to leave the country .
When Sara realizes she is being tailed by the FBI , she surrenders herself in order to let the brothers escape .
Sara is then faced with a 12-year prison sentence but as she is about to plead guilty , Kellerman comes forward to testify on her behalf .
His testimony exonerates Sara and Lincoln in " Sona " , and Sara reunites with the brothers in Panama and tells them of the news .
However , when Agent Kim suddenly appears and tries to kill Lincoln and capture Michael , Sara shoots Kim in the chest .
With nowhere to run , Michael and Sara surrender themselves to the Panamanian police but to Sara 's surprise , Michael confesses to Kim 's killing instead of her .
She is last seen in a crowd by Lincoln .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
In this season , standbys are used to portray the character , including Katie A. Keane in the photographs for the episode " Call Waiting " .
She is revealed to have been kidnapped by The Company , and is said in " Good Fences " to have been murdered in response to a failed rescue attempt .
She was decapitated and her head was sent to Lincoln Burrows in a box .
Michael swears to avenge her death .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
In Season 4 , Sara 's death is retconned and she returns as a main cast member for all 24 episodes .
After Gretchen reveals to Michael in the season premiere that Sara 's death was faked , Michael contacts Bruce Bennett , the former aide of Governor Tancredi ( Sara 's father ) and asks him for help tracking down Sara .
The two are reunited later in the episode .
Much of Sara 's plotline in the fourth season focuses on the character processing what happened to her in Panama and making a new life with Michael .
After they are tracked down by the Company hitman Wyatt , Sara escapes with Michael and Lincoln and accompanies them as they strike a deal with , they must get their hands on Scylla , The Company 's little black book .
Sara joins the rest of team as they work to copy the cards , such as in " Breaking and Entering " where she slips , most notably in " Eagles and Angels " where Sara is informed that Bruce Bennett was found dead and goes out to a bar .
She manages not to drink , and instead tells the bartender stories from her childhood and the importance Bruce had for her .
In the next episode , she realizes that Wyatt is following her back from the bar and manages to lose him .
In " Five the Hard Way
" Sara 's character takes part in holding the general 's daughter , Lisa , hostage .
The team is then betrayed by Self , who takes Scylla for himself to sell it to a buyer .
Other homeland security agents chase after them to arrest them for the murder of Trishanne and Self ( Self murdered Trishanne , faked his own death and framed the Scylla team for all of it ) .
Michael offers Sara and Sucre to take a bus back to Chicago , although they decided to stay and help .
In the next episode , Sara finds it increasingly difficult to watch as Michael neglects his health to continue chasing after Scylla .
Sara urges him to get medical attention , but he resists despite her insistence , and refuses to have the necessary operation until Scylla has been acquired .
She is forced to provide temporary relief from his condition through a series of injections .
However she warns him that he is developing a tolerance , and that they are no substitute for proper medical attention .
Nevertheless , Sara helps the team to track down Gretchen and Self .
Despite their best efforts , they are unsuccessful and lose both the missing piece of Scylla , and Michael , who is captured by The Company at the end of " Just Business " .
In the last third of the season , Sara becomes Michael 's only remaining ally , as Lincoln makes a deal with The Company to get Scylla back in exchange for Michael 's surgery .
Michael refuses to accept this deal , and escapes from The Company 's clutches after the surgery with Sara 's help .
The plot of the next few episodes see Michael and Lincoln 's teams working against each other to acquire Scylla .
Sara 's character gives critical help to Michael , such as distracting a guard at the airport where they capture Vincent Sandinsky , a scientist that appears to have ties to The Company .
Sara also attempts to comfort Michael after he learns that his mother , Christina Rose Scofield , is still alive and a Company operative and the buyer of Scylla .
In the same episode it is revealed that Sara is pregnant with Michael 's child .
In " Cowboys and Indians " , Michael and Lincoln put their differences aside and work together to steal Scylla from Christina .
Meanwhile , Sara is kidnapped by The Company to hold Michael at ransom .
In this and the next episode " Rate of Exchange " , Sara shares screen - time with T - Bag for the first time .
She is almost raped by him , but is rescued by Michael at the last minute .
In the series finale , they hand Scylla over to the UN and are all exonerated .
Their happiness is short - lived when it is revealed that Michael 's tumor is back .
In the epilogue of the series set four years later , Sara is shown living in Panama with her son , Michael Scofield Jr.
( presumably she is forced to relocate there after her escape from prison as documented in the Final Break ) .
She then appears at Michael 's grave with her son at the reunion of many of the series ' principal characters - Lincoln , Mahone and Sucre .
She lays flowers on Michael 's grave and the series ends with all the characters walking towards the seaside in the sun .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Sara is shown in the series as a compassionate yet introverted doctor who treated each one of them with the same cordiality and respect .
Given this fact , she has little sense of humour and is incorruptible .
In the episode " The Rat " , Sara 's father questions her motive for helping Lincoln Burrows , to which she replies , " It 's my job to advocate for [ my patients ] .
"
Sarah Wayne Callies , who portrays Sara Tancredi , remarks that the character " feels a certain level of responsibility to these guys .
Partly because who her father is ...
she 's the kind of person who would rather take a stand and sleep well at night than have a peaceful family . "
In the second season , Sara becomes part of the conspiracy plot of the show after her involvement in Michael and Lincoln 's escape , and her father 's later pursuit of information concerning Lincoln 's case .
She is continuously chased by covert agents after the death of her father in " Buried " .
Sara later confides in Michael in episode " Chicago " that the two things keeping her going are her feelings for him and that she wants to seek justice for her father 's death .
The character is described by Jay Bobbin from Zap2it.com as " gutsy " , while TV Guide 's Maya Schechter remarks that Sara is " one tough cookie " .
Regarding her character 's change in the second season , Callies says , " She 's just someone who has really rushed at life and absorbed experience with real enthusiasm .
She 's getting a lot more than she bargained for right now , and I certainly do n't think she 'll be the same person after this . "
CONCEPT AND CREATION CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT Section::::Concept and creation .
Section::::Character development .
Sara Tancredi was introduced to the series as the daughter of the Illinois governor and the prison doctor who the protagonist frequently visits to obtain his insulin shot .
The background story of the character , revealed in the sixteenth episode of the first season , was not actually conceived along with the original conception of the series .
Callies commented in an interview that it was the " very first inkling " that she had about the character 's past .
Also in the same interview , the actress mentioned that during the production of the series pilot , she had suggested to Prison Break creator Paul Scheuring that " it would be interesting to play her as a recovering alcoholic " .
The character 's continuation as a major role in the second season was a " surprise " to Callies since the second season revolves around the lives of the eight fugitives outside the prison .
The actress states that it is " some of the most creative storytelling for women on TV right now " and that she was given " lot of latitude in establishing a sense of who [ the character ] is " .
As the characterization of Sara continues to develop , Scheuring describes the character as " one of [ the series ' ]
strongest components " .
Towards the end of the production of the second season of Prison Break , Callies ' pregnancy was announced .
With the pregnancy not incorporated into the show , the story was written in such a way to account for Sara 's disappearance during Callies ' maternity leave .
At the time Paul Scheuring commented , " It actually fits into what we were already planning . "
He also claimed that the original treatment would have included " explanations for why she was n't in the first [ batch ] of episodes " of the third season , later revealing that it would set up a planned 13-episode story arc that would ultimately culminate with her character 's death .
However , due to Callies and the show 's producers being unable to agree on a new contract , the character was suddenly " killed off " in the fourth episode , much earlier than planned .
Her sparse appearances during the season ( including the use of stand - ins with their faces obscured ) and her gruesome , off screen death was the result of working around the inability to film additional scenes with the actress , as well as for dramatic and emotional impact .
However , Sara 's fate was retconned due to " fan backlash " and she returned to the series with an active role in Season 4 .
PORTRAYAL Section::::Portrayal .
The character Sara Tancredi was portrayed by Sarah Wayne Callies who was the first actress the producers saw at the audition for the role .
Incidentally , Callies was also the first to become a principal cast member .
In season 3 , other actresses were used to portray the role , though their faces were never shown on screen .
PRODUCTION DETAILS Section::::Production details .
A newspaper article about Sara Tancredi is visible and readable in the Pilot episode of the series ( as one of the many that Michael tears off the walls of his apartment ) .
The article gives Sara 's middle name as " Wayne " ( the same as that of the actress portraying her ) .
It also says that she is the " second - eldest daughter of Frank Tancredi " ( later retconned in the episode " Buried " ) .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Mitovich , M. W. , " Sarah Wayne Callies :
Prison Break 's Sara Is in Deep Water " , TV Guide .
November 20 , 2006 .