VISA POLICY OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA Visitors to Bosnia and Herzegovina must obtain a visa from one of the Bosnia and Herzegovina diplomatic missions unless they come from one of the visa exempt countries .
As an applicant country for membership in the European Union , Bosnia and Herzegovina maintains visa policy similar to the visa policy of the Schengen Area .
Bosnia and Herzegovina grants visa - free entry to all Schengen Annex II nationalities and it also grants visa - free entry to several additional countries – Azerbaijan , Bahrain , Kuwait , Oman , Qatar , Russia and Turkey .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA - FREE ACCESS Section::::Visa - free access .
Holders of passports of the following 97 jurisdictions , including resident stateless persons and refugees , may enter and stay in Bosnia and Herzegovina for up to 90 days within 180 days without a visa ( unless otherwise noted ) :
*
All EU citizens valign =
top valign =
top *
( 30 days )
* ( 30 days )
The maximum stay is granted within 6 months ( 2 months to citizens of Russia and Ukraine ) .
SUBSTITUTE VISAS Section::::Substitute visas .
Valid multiple entry visa holders and residents of the European Union , Schengen Area member states , and United States of America can enter Bosnia and Herzegovina without a visa for a maximum stay of 30 days .
This is not applicable to holders of Kosovan passport .
NON - ORDINARY PASSPORTS Section::::Non - ordinary passports .
Holders of diplomatic or official / service passports of Belarus , China , Cuba , Egypt , Indonesia , Iran , Jordan , Kazakhstan , Moldova , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia and Tunisia and holders of only diplomatic passports of Algeria do not require a visa for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Visa is also not required for stateless persons and refugees residing in countries whose citizens do not require a visa for Bosnia and Herzegovina ( except for countries of Central and South America and the Caribbean ) .
Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a visa - waiver agreement for diplomatic and official passport holders with on 30 August 2017 and it is yet to be ratified .
RECIPROCITY Section::::Reciprocity .
Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens can enter without a visa some of the countries whose citizens are granted visa - free access to Bosnia and Herzegovina but require a visa for Antigua and Barbuda , Argentina , Australia , Bahrain , Barbados , Brunei , Canada , Colombia , Costa Rica , El Salvador , Grenada ( grants visa on arrival ) , Guatemala , Honduras , Ireland , Israel , Japan , Kiribati , Kuwait , Mauritius ( grants visa on arrival ) , Marshall Islands , Mexico , New Zealand , Nicaragua , Oman , Paraguay , Qatar , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Solomon Islands , Taiwan , Timor - Leste , Tonga , Tuvalu ( grants visa on arrival ) , United Arab Emirates , United Kingdom , United States , Uruguay , Vanuatu and Venezuela .
VISITORS STATISTICS
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Visa Information and Decision on visas