THE REEF ( 2010 FILM )
The Reef is a 2010 Australian horror film .
The film was written and directed by Andrew Traucki , his second feature film ( the first being Black Water ) , and is about a group of friends who capsize while sailing to Indonesia .
The group decides that their best bet for survival is to swim to a nearby island
but they find themselves stalked by a great white shark .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Luke ( Damian Walshe - Howling ) is delivering a yacht to a customer in Indonesia , and invites his friend , Matt ( Gyton Grantley ) , and Matt 's girlfriend , Suzie ( Adrienne Pickering ) , to join him as he sails there , including Matt 's sister , Kate ( Zoe Naylor ) , and fellow sailor , Warren ( Kieran Darcy - Smith ) .
To get to Indonesia , they must sail through a coral reef .
On the second day of their journey , the yacht strikes part of the reef and capsizes when the keel is destroyed .
With the current taking them further away from land , Luke gathers supplies from the overturned vessel with the intention of swimming to nearby Turtle Island .
With the group gathered on top of the overturned hull , Warren activates the yacht 's EPIRB , but Luke informs him that it is an older model that requires a plane to fly overhead to receive the signal .
When Luke suggests the others join him in swimming to the island , which Luke estimates to be twelve miles away , Warren refuses as he believes the water is shark - infested .
With encouragement , Kate , Suzie and Matt follow Luke into the water as he begins the journey .
During their journey , the group find the carcass of a sea turtle that has had its head bitten off .
On the overturned yacht , Warren spots a large Great White Shark circling the vessel .
Soon , the group are also stalked by the same shark .
It approaches them several times , even brushing past Kate , before leaving .
Kate and Suzie are supported by Matt and Luke as they are both in shock .
However , during the encounter , Kate lost the bodyboard she was using as a flotation device .
When Matt goes to retrieve it , he is attacked by the shark .
His legs are severed and he quickly dies .
As night falls , Luke , Kate and Suzie are once more stalked by the shark .
Suzie blames Luke for talking the group into swimming to an island he seemingly ca n't find .
In the morning , the group has drifted to a shallow area of the reef , where they are able to stand and rest .
In the distance , they can see a larger rock formation protruding from the water , and they swim towards it .
Paranoia affects the group as they continue .
They share a laugh when they mistake a dolphin for the shark that took Matt .
However , the shark soon returns and kills Suzie .
Luke and Kate rest on the reef , and they declare their love for each other .
They begin to swim the final distance to the rocks as the shark closes in .
Luke assists Kate to climb to safety , but as he himself climbs onto the rocks the shark seizes him and drags him underwater .
As she sits on the barren rock , Kate scans the ocean as she continues to call Luke 's name and cries hysterically .
The written epilogue reveals that Kate was rescued by a fishing boat the next day , however extensive searches failed to locate Warren or the vessel .
CAST * Damian Walshe - Howling as Luke
* Gyton Grantley as Matt
* Adrienne Pickering as Suzie * Zoe Naylor as Kate * Kieran Darcy - Smith as Warren
* Mark Simpson as Shane PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The film is based on the true story of Ray Boundy , who was the sole survivor of a similar incident in 1983 .
The film 's five - week shoot began on 12 October 2009 in Queensland 's Hervey Bay , Fraser Island and Bowen Bay , with additional shark footage completed in South Australia .
While in production of the film , cameras were streaming the film online on the film 's website on 5 November .
Traucki stated that " This kind of marketing strategy is absolutely vital " and " the mentality inside the Australian industry does n't usually get behind original marketing strategies like this .
I have ended up building this one myself , late at night with my web team . "
Rob Gaison , the chief executive of Tourism Tropical North Queensland , was concerned about the film being advertised as " based on a true story " which he felt could hurt the tourist industry for the area .
Col McKenzie , the CEO of Association of Marine Park Operators , said that previous films about sharks near reefs attacking people such as Open Water had hurt the tourism industry .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Reef had its world premiere as a market screening at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2010 .
It was later shown at South Korea 's Pusan Film Festival on 10 October 2010 and Spain 's Sitges Film Festival .
The film 's Australian premiere was in late 2010 at both the Brisbane and Canberra film festivals .
The film received a wide Australian release by Pinnacle in March 2011 .
Director Traucki said that " The biggest release we can hope for is 30 screens , which is what you get for Australian films , unless you make something like Australia . "
The film was released straight - to - DVD in the United Kingdom in January 2011 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film received positive reviews from critics , achieving a score of 79 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
Critics praised the use of actual shark footage , as opposed to special effects , in the film , as well as the directing and acting .
Crikey described The Reef as " an unnerving winner : tense , twitchy and frighteningly entertaining . "
Numerous horror review sites gave the film a thumbs up comparing it with Jaws and Open Water .
Stuart Wahlin said " The Reef is good nail - biter I 'm happy to recommend , especially to those who share my craving for stories of sharks with a taste for human flesh . "
Film Horreur says " The Reef turns out to be a good little friendly film that was able to demonstrate a good dose of realism and efficiency without ever falling into the razzle - l'oeil or easy upmanship . "
The UK Film Review Site HeyUGuys.co.uk said " If you 're a lover of being scared and are looking for the next shark movie that will shake you up since Deep Blue Sea , then this is the one for you ! "
SEE ALSO
* List of killer shark films REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS