IMPROVISED WEAPON
An improvised weapon is an object that was not designed to be used as a weapon but can be put to that use .
They are generally used for self - defence or where the person is otherwise unarmed .
In some cases improvised weapons are commonly used by attackers in street fights , muggings , murders or during riots , usually when conventional weapons such as firearms are unavailable or inappropriate .
Improvised weapons are common everyday objects that can be used in a variety of defensive applications .
These objects are not physically altered in any way , in an effort to make them more functional as weapons .
They are generally utilized in their normal state .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Other than items designed as weapons , any object that can be used to cause bodily harm can be considered an improvised weapon .
Examples of items that have been used as improvised weapons include : * Sports equipment such as baseball bats , golf clubs , cricket bats and dumbbells *
Objects made of glass , such as beer bottles
* Tools such as sledgehammers , tire irons , shovels and fire extinguishers * Construction materials , such as 2×4s , pipes and bricks * Natural materials , such as rocks * Vehicles , including rental trucks , light aircraft , such as a Piper PA-28 - 236 Dakota and airliners , such as the Boeing 767 IMPROVISED WEAPONS IN MARTIAL ARTS Section::::Improvised weapons in martial arts .
Throughout history , common tools were used so often as weapons in self - defense that many of them have evolved specifically into weapons or were adapted with the secondary purpose of being used in self - defense , usually by adding modifications to its design .
Well - known examples include the Irish shillelagh , the Japanese bō and hanbō , which were originally used as walking canes and the Buddhist Monk 's spade , a shovel monks used for burying corpses which often had sharpened edges to defend against bandits with more ease .
Many martial arts employ the use of common objects as weapons ; Filipino martial arts such as Eskrima include practice with machetes , canes , bamboo spears , and knives as a result of the 333 year Spanish colonization that took place in the Philippines which prohibited the ownership and use of standard swords and bladed weapons ; Chinese martial arts and some Korean martial arts commonly feature the use of improvised weapons such as fans , hammers and staves .
There are even some western martial arts that are based on improvised weapons such as British quarterstaff fighting and Irish stick fighting .
After the German Peasants ' Wars during 1524 - 1525 , a fencing book edited by Paulus Hector Mair described in 1542 techniques how to fence using a scythe .
LEGAL ISSUES Section::::Legal issues .
Because of the use of common objects as weapons in violent crimes , many countries have laws that prevent the use of some tools and other non - weapon objects to be used for causing harm .
It is possible for a person to be detained , or even arrested , by a law enforcement official or security personnel for carrying a potentially - harmful object in a situation where there is no reasonable use for it .
For example , while it is legal and perfectly understandable for someone to possess a kitchen knife or a hammer and keep it for use in one 's home , it could be judged suspicious for someone to carry a kitchen knife or a hammer concealed on his / her person or in plain sight when walking down a city street .
There are places that prohibit people from entering with objects that may be used as weapons .
Most public schools in North America do not allow their students to bring pocket knives , butter knives or chain - wallets , sometimes with harsh zero tolerance policies .
Airports typically prohibit objects that could be used as weapons from being carried , as a carry - on or in a carry - on bag into the aircraft cabin .
The security repercussions after the September 11 attacks saw restrictions widely extended to cover even objects like nail clippers and spiked wristbands , MAKESHIFT WEAPONS Section::::Makeshift weapons .
A makeshift weapon is an everyday object that has been physically altered to enhance its potential as a weapon .
It can also be used to refer to common classes of weapons such as guns , knives , and bombs made from commonly available items .
Examples of makeshift weapons include : *
Millwall brick * Molotov cocktail *
Pipe bomb *
Shiv *
Improvised firearms * Chainlock ( improvised flail )
* Stink
bomb * Smoke bomb * Blackjack / Sap
* Improvised explosive device
The improvised Molotov cocktail was used with great success by the heavily outnumbered Finnish forces in the Winter War against the Soviet Union .
The mixture of flammable petroleum , often thickened with soap or tar , was so effective against the Soviet tanks that the Finns began mass producing Molotov cocktails , and issuing them to their troops .
While the first documented use of such improvised incendiary devices was in the Spanish Civil War , their use in the Winter War was much more prevalent , and it was at that time they were named after the Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov .
SEE ALSO
* TM 31 - 210 Improvised Munition Handbook
* Suicide attack *
Suicide weapon
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Improvised Self Defence Weapons