JEOPARDY !
Jeopardy !
is an American television game show created by Merv Griffin .
The show features a quiz competition in which contestants are presented with general knowledge clues in the form of answers , and must phrase their responses in the form of questions .
The original daytime version debuted on NBC on March 30 , 1964 , and aired until January 3 , 1975 .
A weekly nighttime syndicated edition aired from September 1974 to September 1975 , and a revival , The All - New Jeopardy ! , ran on NBC from October 1978 to March 1979 .
The current version , a daily syndicated show produced by Sony Pictures Television , premiered on September 10 , 1984 .
Both NBC versions and the weekly syndicated version were hosted by Art Fleming .
Don Pardo served as announcer until 1975 , and John Harlan announced for the 1978–1979 show .
Since its inception , the daily syndicated version has featured Alex Trebek as host and Johnny Gilbert as announcer .
With over 7,000 episodes aired , the daily syndicated version of Jeopardy !
has won a record 33 Daytime Emmy Awards as well as a Peabody Award .
In 2013 , the program was ranked No . 45 on TV Guides list of the 60 greatest shows in American television history .
Jeopardy ! has also gained a worldwide following with regional adaptations in many other countries .
The daily syndicated series ' 35th season premiered on September 10 , 2018 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Three contestants each take their place behind a lectern , with the returning champion occupying the leftmost lectern ( from the viewer 's perspective ) .
The contestants compete in a quiz game comprising three rounds : Jeopardy ! , Double Jeopardy ! , and Final Jeopardy ! .
The material for the clues covers a wide variety of topics , including history and current events , the sciences , the arts , popular culture , literature , and languages .
Category titles often feature puns , wordplay , or shared themes , and the host will regularly remind contestants of topics or place emphasis on category themes before the start of the round .
FIRST
TWO ROUNDS
Section::::First
two rounds .
The Jeopardy ! and Double Jeopardy ! rounds each feature six categories , each of which contains five clues , which are ostensibly valued by difficulty .
The dollar values of the clues increased over time .
On the original Jeopardy !
series , clue values in the first round ranged from $ 10 to $ 50 .
On The All - New Jeopardy ! , they ranged from $ 25 to $ 125 .
The current series ' first round originally ranged from $ 100 to $ 500 , and were doubled to $ 200 to $ 1,000 on November 26 , 2001 .
On the Super Jeopardy !
specials , clues were valued in points rather than in dollars , and ranged in the first round from 200 to 1,000 points .
The Jeopardy !
round begins when the returning champion selects any position on the game board .
The underlying clue is revealed and read aloud by the host , after which any contestant may ring - in using a hand - held signaling device .
The first contestant to ring - in successfully is prompted to provide a response to the clue , phrased in the form of a question .
For example , if a contestant were to select " Presidents for $ 200 " , the resulting clue could be " This ' Father of Our Country ' did n't really chop down a cherry tree " , to which the correct response would be " Who is / was George Washington ? "
( Contestants are free to phrase the response in the form of any question ; the traditional phrasing of " who is / are " for people or " what is / are " for things or words is almost always used . )
If the contestant responds correctly , the clue 's dollar value is added to the contestant 's score , and they may select a new clue from the board .
An incorrect response , or a failure to respond within five seconds , deducts the clue 's value from the contestant 's score and allows the other contestants the opportunity to ring - in and respond .
If no contestant both rings - in and responds correctly , the host gives the correct response ; the " last correct questioner " chooses the next clue .
Contestants are encouraged to select the clues in order from lowest to highest value , as the show 's writers write the clues in each category to flow from one to the next , as is the case with game shows that ask questions in a linear string .
Contestants are not required to do so unless the category requires clues to be taken in order ; the " Forrest Bounce , " a strategy in which contestants randomly pick clues to confuse opponents , has been used successfully by Arthur Chu and the strategy 's namesake Chuck Forrest , despite Trebek noting that the strategy not only annoys him but staffers as well , since it also disrupts the rhythm that develops when revealing the clues and increases the potential for error .
From the premiere of the original Jeopardy !
until the end of the first season of the current syndicated series , contestants were allowed to ring -
in as soon as the clue was revealed .
Since September 1985 , contestants are required to wait until the clue is read before ringing - in .
To accommodate the rule change , lights were added to the game board ( unseen by home viewers ) to signify when it is permissible for contestants to signal ; attempting to signal before the light goes on locks the contestant out for half of a second .
The change was made to allow the home audience to play along with the show more easily and to keep an extremely fast contestant from potentially dominating the game .
In pre-1985 episodes , a buzzer would sound when a contestant signaled ; according to Trebek , the buzzer was eliminated because it was " distracting to the viewers " and sometimes presented a problem when contestants rang in while Trebek was still reading the clue .
Contestants who are visually impaired or blind are given a card with the category names printed in Braille before each round begins , and an audible tone is played after the clue has been read aloud .
The second round , Double Jeopardy ! , features six new categories of clues .
Clue values are doubled from the Jeopardy !
round ( except in Super Jeopardy ! , where Double Jeopardy !
values ranged from 500 to 2,500 points ) .
The contestant with the least amount of money at the end of the Jeopardy !
round makes the first selection in Double Jeopardy ! ;
if there is a tie , the tied contestant standing at the leftmost lectern selects first .
A " Daily Double " is hidden behind one clue in the Jeopardy !
round , and two in Double Jeopardy !
The name and inspiration were taken from a horse racing term .
Only the contestant who uncovers a Daily Double may respond to that clue and need not use his / her signaling device to do so .
Before the clue is revealed , the contestant must declare a wager , from a minimum of $ 5 to a maximum of his / her entire score ( known as a " true Daily Double " ) or the highest clue value available in the round , whichever is greater .
A correct response adds the value of the wager to the contestant 's score , while an incorrect response deducts it .
Whether or not the contestant responds correctly , he or she chooses the next clue .
During the Jeopardy !
round , except in response to the Daily Double clue , contestants are not penalized for forgetting to phrase their response in the form of a question , although the host will remind contestants to watch their phrasing in future responses .
In the Double Jeopardy !
round and in the Daily Double in the Jeopardy !
round , the phrasing rule is followed more strictly , with a response not phrased in the form of a question counting as wrong if it is not re - phrased before the host or judges make a ruling .
If it is determined that a previous response was wrongly ruled to be correct or incorrect , the scores are adjusted at the first available opportunity .
If , after a game is over , a ruling change is made that would have significantly altered the outcome of the game , the affected contestant(s ) are invited back to compete on a future show .
Contestants who finish Double Jeopardy !
with $ 0 or a negative score are automatically eliminated from the game at that point and awarded the third place prize .
On at least one episode hosted by Art Fleming , all three contestants finished Double Jeopardy !
with $ 0 or less , and as a result , no Final Jeopardy !
round was played .
This rule is still in - place for the Trebek version , although staff has suggested that it is not set in stone and that executive producer Harry Friedman may decide to display the clue for home viewers ' play if such a situation were ever to occur .
During Celebrity Jeopardy !
games , contestants with a $ 0 or negative score are given $ 1,000 for the Final Jeopardy !
round .
FINAL JEOPARDY !
Section::::Final Jeopardy !
The Final Jeopardy !
round features a single clue .
At the end of the Double Jeopardy !
round , the host announces the Final Jeopardy !
category , and a commercial break follows .
During the break , barriers are placed between the contestant lecterns , and each contestant makes a final wager between $ 0 and his / her entire score .
Contestants write their wagers using a light pen to write on an electronic display on their lectern .
After the break , the Final Jeopardy !
clue is revealed and read by the host .
The contestants have 30 seconds to write their responses on the electronic display , while the show 's iconic " Think ! "
music plays in the background .
In the event that either the display or the pen malfunctions , contestants can use an index card and a marker to manually write their response and wager .
Visually impaired or blind contestants use a Braille keyboard to type in a wager and response .
Contestants ' responses are revealed in order of their pre - Final Jeopardy !
scores from lowest to highest .
A correct response adds the amount of the contestant 's wager to his / her score , while a miss , failure to respond , or failure to phrase the response as a question ( even if correct ) deducts it .
The contestant with the highest score at the end of the round is that day 's winner .
If there is a tie for second place , consolation prizes are awarded based on the scores going into the Final Jeopardy !
round .
If all three contestants finish with $ 0 , no one returns as champion for the next show , and based on scores going into the Final Jeopardy !
round , the two contestants who were first and second will receive the second - place prize , and the contestant in third will receive the third - place prize .
The strategy for wagering in Final Jeopardy !
has been studied .
If the leader 's score is more than twice the second place contestant 's score , the leader can guarantee victory by making a sufficiently small wager .
Otherwise , according to Jeopardy !
College Champion Keith Williams , the leader will usually wager such that he or she will have a dollar more than twice the second place contestant 's score , guaranteeing a win with a correct response .
Writing about Jeopardy !
wagering in the 1990s , Gilbert and Hatcher said that " most players wager aggressively " .
WINNINGS
Section::::Winnings .
The top scorer(s ) in each game retain the value of their winnings in cash , and return to play in the next match .
Non - winners receive consolation prizes .
Since May 16 , 2002 , consolation prizes have been $ 2,000 for the second - place contestant(s ) and $ 1,000 for the third - place contestant .
Since the show does not generally provide airfare or lodging for contestants , cash consolation prizes alleviate contestants ' financial burden .
An exception is provided for returning champions who must make several flights to Los Angeles .
Before 1984 , all three contestants received their winnings in cash ( contestants who finished with $ 0 or a negative score received consolation prizes ) .
This was changed in order to make the game more competitive , and avoid the problem of contestants who would stop participating in the game , or avoid wagering in Final Jeopardy ! , rather than risk losing the money they had already won .
From 1984 to 2002 , non - winning contestants on the Trebek version received vacation packages and merchandise , which were donated by manufacturers as promotional consideration .
The current cash consolation prize is provided by Geico .
RETURNING CHAMPIONS Section::::Returning champions .
The winner of each episode returns to compete against two new contestants on the next episode .
Originally , a contestant who won five consecutive days retired undefeated and was guaranteed a spot in the Tournament of Champions ; the five - day limit was eliminated at the beginning of season 20 on September 8 , 2003 .
Since November 2014 , ties for first place following Final Jeopardy ! are broken with a tie - breaker clue , resulting in only a single champion being named , keeping their winnings , and returning to compete in the next show .
The tied contestants are given the single clue , and the contestant must give the correct question .
A contestant can not win by default if the opponent gives an incorrect question .
That contestant must give a correct question to win the game .
If neither player gives the correct question , another clue is given .
Previously , if two or all three contestants tied for first place , they were declared " co - champions " , and each retained his or her winnings and ( unless one was a five - time champion who retired prior to 2003 ) returned on the following episode .
A tie occurred on the January 29 , 2014 , episode when Arthur Chu , leading at the end of Double Jeopardy ! , wagered to tie challenger Carolyn Collins rather than winning ; Chu followed Jeopardy !
College Champion Keith Williams 's advice to wager for the tie to increase the leader 's chances of winning .
A three - way tie for first place has only occurred once on the Trebek version , on March 16 , 2007 , when Scott Weiss , Jamey Kirby , and Anders Martinson all ended the game with $ 16,000 .
Until March 1 , 2018 , no regular game had ended in a tie - breaker ; numerous tournament games have ended with a tie - breaker clue .
If no contestant finishes Final Jeopardy !
with a positive total , there is no winner .
This has happened on several episodes , most recently on January 18 , 2016 .
Three new contestants appear on the next episode .
A triple zero has also occurred twice in tournament play ( 1991 Seniors and 2013 Teen ) , and also once in a Celebrity Week episode in 1998 .
All consolation prize money ( regular play , with one $ 2,000 and two $ 1,000 prizes , and Celebrity play , prize money for charities ) are based on standard rules ( score after Double Jeopardy ! ) .
In tournament play , an additional high scoring non - winner will advance to the next round ( but all three players with a zero score in that game are eligible for that position should the score for that non - winner be zero ; all tie - breaker rules apply ) .
A winner unable to return as champion because of a change in personal circumstancesfor example , illness or a job offermay be allowed to appear as a co - champion in a later episode .
Typically , the two challengers participate in a backstage draw to determine lectern positions .
In all situations with three new contestants ( most notably tournaments in the first round ) , the draw will also determine who will take the champion 's position and select first to start the game .
( The player scoring the highest in the preceding round will be given the chance to select first in the semifinal and finals . )
VARIATIONS FOR TOURNAMENT PLAY
Section::::Variations for tournament play .
Tournaments generally run for 10 consecutive episodes and feature 15 contestants .
The first five episodes , the quarter - finals , feature three new contestants each day .
The winners of these five games , and the four highest scoring non - winners ( " wild cards " ) , advance to the semi - finals , which run for three days .
The winners of these three games advance to play in a two - game final match , in which the scores from both games are combined to determine the overall standings .
This format has been used since the first Tournament of Champions in 1985 and was devised by Trebek himself .
To prevent later contestants from playing to beat the earlier wild card scores instead of playing to win , contestants are " completely isolated from the studio until it is their time to compete . "
If there is a tie for the final wild card position , the non - winner that advances will be based on the same regulations as two contestants who tie for second ; the tie - breaker is the contestant 's score after the Double Jeopardy !
round , and if further tied , the score after the Jeopardy !
round determines the contestant who advances as the wild card .
If two or more contestants tie for the highest score ( greater than zero ) at the end of match ( first round , semi - final game , or end of a two - game final ) , the standard tiebreaker is used .
However , if two or more contestants tie for the highest score at the end of the first game of a two - game final , no tiebreaker is played .
If none of the contestants in a quarter - final or semi - final game end with a positive score , no contestant automatically qualifies from that game , and an additional wild card contestant advances instead .
This occurred in the quarter - finals of the 1991 Seniors Tournament and the semi - finals of the 2013 Teen Tournament .
In the finals , contestants who finish Double Jeopardy !
with a $ 0 or negative score on either day do not play Final Jeopardy !
that day ; their score for that leg is recorded as $ 0 .
CONCEPTION AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Conception and development .
In a 1964 Associated Press profile released shortly before the original Jeopardy !
series premiered , Merv Griffin offered the following account of how he created the quiz show : Griffin 's first conception of the game used a board comprising ten categories with ten clues each , but after finding that this board could not easily be shown on camera , he reduced it to two rounds of thirty clues each , with five clues in each of six categories .
He originally intended the show to require grammatically correct phrasing ( e.g. , only accepting " Who is ... " for a person ) , but after finding that grammatical correction slowed the game down , he decided that the show should instead accept any correct response that was in question form .
Griffin discarded his initial title for the show ,
What 's the Question ? , when skeptical network executive Ed Vane rejected his original concept of the game , claiming , " It does n't have enough jeopardies . "
Jeopardy !
was not the first game show to give contestants the answers and require the questions .
That format had previously been used by the Gil Fates - hosted program CBS Television Quiz , which aired from July 1941 until May 1942 .
PERSONNEL HOSTS AND ANNOUNCERS
Section::::Personnel .
Section::::Hosts and announcers .
The first three versions of the show were hosted by Art Fleming .
Don Pardo served as announcer for the original NBC version and weekly syndicated version , but when NBC 's revival The All - New Jeopardy !
launched in 1978 , Pardo 's announcing duties were taken over by John Harlan .
Alex Trebek has served as host of the daily syndicated version since it premiered in 1984 , except when he switched places with Wheel of Fortune host Pat Sajak as an April Fool 's joke on the episode aired April 1 , 1997 .
His most recent contract renewal , from May 2017 , takes his tenure through the 2019–2020 season .
In the daily syndicated version 's first pilot , from 1983 , Jay Stewart served as the show 's announcer , but Johnny Gilbert took over the role when that version was picked up as a series and has held it since then .
Trebek will be 80 at the time his contract with Jeopardy !
expires in 2020 .
On a Fox News program , he said the odds of retirement in 2020 were 50/50 " and a little less " .
He added that he might continue if he 's " not making too many mistakes " but would make an " intelligent decision " as to when he should give up the emcee role .
In November 2018 , it was announced that he had renewed his contract as host through 2022 .
CLUE CREW Section::::Clue Crew .
The Jeopardy !
Clue Crew , introduced on September 24 , 2001 , is a team of roving correspondents who appear in videos , recorded around the world , to narrate some clues .
Explaining why the Clue Crew was added to the show , executive producer Harry Friedman said , " TV is a visual medium , and the more visual we can make our clues , the more we think it will enhance the experience for the viewer . "
Following the initial announcement of auditions for the team , over 5,000 people applied for Clue Crew posts .
The original Clue Crew members were Cheryl Farrell , Jimmy McGuire , Sofia Lidskog , and Sarah Whitcomb .
Lidskog departed the Clue Crew in 2004 to become an anchor on the high school news program Channel One News , and a search was held to replace her in early 2005 .
The winners were Jon Cannon and Kelly Miyahara , who formally joined the crew starting in season 22 , which premiered on September 12 , 2005 .
Farrell continued to record clues for episodes aired as late as October 2008 , and Cannon continued to appear until July 2009 .
The Clue Crew has traveled to 280 cities worldwide , spanning all 50 of the United States and 44 other countries .
In addition to appearing in Jeopardy !
clue videos , the team 's members also travel to meet fans of the show and future contestants .
Occasionally , they visit schools to showcase the educational game Classroom Jeopardy !
Miyahara also serves as announcer for the Sports Jeopardy !
spin - off series .
PRODUCTION STAFF Section::::Production staff .
Robert Rubin served as the producer of the original Jeopardy !
series for most of its run , and later became its executive producer .
Following Rubin 's promotion , the line producer was Lynette Williams .
Griffin was the daily syndicated version 's executive producer until his retirement in 2000 .
Trebek served as producer as well as host until 1987 , when he began hosting NBC 's Classic Concentration for the next four years .
At that time , he handed producer duties to George Vosburgh , who had formerly produced The All - New Jeopardy ! .
In the 1997–1998 season , Vosburgh was succeeded as producer by Harry Friedman , Lisa Finneran , and Rocky Schmidt .
Beginning in 1999 , Friedman became executive producer , and Gary Johnson became the show 's new third producer .
In the 2006–2007 season , Deb Dittmann and Brett Schneider became the producers , and Finneran , Schmidt , and Johnson were promoted to supervising producers .
The original Jeopardy !
series was directed at different times by Bob Hultgren , Eleanor Tarshis , and Jeff Goldstein .
Dick Schneider , who directed episodes of The All - New Jeopardy ! , returned as director for the Trebek version 's first eight seasons .
From 1992 to 2018 , the show was directed by Kevin McCarthy , who had previously served as associate director under Schneider .
McCarthy announced his retirement after 26 years on June 26 , 2018 , and was succeeded as director by Clay Jacobsen .
The current version of Jeopardy !
employs nine writers and five researchers to create and assemble the categories and clues .
Billy Wisse and Michele Loud , both longtime staff members , are the editorial producer and editorial supervisor , respectively .
Previous writing and editorial supervisors have included Jules Minton , Terrence McDonnell , Harry Eisenberg , and Gary Johnson .
The show 's production designer is Naomi Slodki .
Previous art directors have included Henry Lickel , Dennis Roof , Bob Rang , and Ed Flesh ( who also designed sets for other game shows such as The $ 25,000 Pyramid , Name
That Tune , and Wheel of Fortune ) .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The daily syndicated version of Jeopardy !
is produced by Sony Pictures Television ( previously known as Columbia TriStar Television , the successor company to original producer Merv Griffin Enterprises ) .
The copyright holder is Jeopardy Productions , which , like SPT , operates as a subsidiary of Sony Pictures Entertainment .
The rights to distribute the program worldwide are owned by CBS Television Distribution , which absorbed original distributor King World Productions in 2007 .
The original Jeopardy !
series was taped in Studio 6A at NBC Studios at 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City , and The All - New Jeopardy !
was taped in Studio 3 at NBC 's Burbank Studios at 3000 West Alameda Avenue in Burbank , California .
The Trebek version was initially taped at Metromedia Stage 7 , KTTV , on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood , but moved its production facilities to Hollywood Center Studios ' Stage 9 in 1985 .
After the final shows of season 10 were recorded on February 15 , 1994 , the Jeopardy !
production facilities were moved to Sony Pictures Studios ' Stage 10 on Washington Boulevard in Culver City , California , where the show has been recorded ever since .
Five episodes are taped each day , with two days of taping every other week .
SET Section::::Set .
Various technological and aesthetic changes have been made to the Jeopardy !
set over the years .
The original game board was exposed from behind a curtain and featured clues printed on cardboard pull cards which were revealed as contestants selected them .
The All - New Jeopardy!s game board was exposed from behind double - slide panels and featured flipping panels with the dollar amount on one side and the clue on the other .
When the Trebek version premiered in 1984 , the game board used individual television monitors for each clue within categories .
The original monitors were replaced with larger and sleeker ones in 1991 .
In 2006 , these monitors were discarded in favor of a nearly seamless projection video wall , which was replaced in 2009 with 36 high - definition flat - panel monitors manufactured by Sony Electronics .
From 1985 to 1997 , the sets were designed to have a background color of blue for the Jeopardy !
round and red for the Double Jeopardy !
and Final Jeopardy !
rounds .
At the beginning of season 8 in 1991 , a brand new set was introduced that resembled a grid .
On the episode aired November 11 , 1996 , two months after the start of season 13 , Jeopardy ! introduced the first of several sets designed by Naomi Slodki , who intended the set to resemble " the foyer of a very contemporary library , with wood and sandblasted glass and blue granite " .
Shortly after the start of season 19 in 2002 , the show switched to yet another new set , which was given slight modifications when Jeopardy !
and sister show Wheel of Fortune transitioned to high - definition broadcasting in 2006 .
During this time , the show began to feature virtual tours of the set on its official web site .
The various HD improvements for Jeopardy !
and Wheel represented a combined investment of approximately $ 4 million , 5,000 hours of labor , and of cable .
Both shows had been shot using HD cameras for several years before beginning to broadcast in HD .
On standard - definition television broadcasts , the shows continue to be displayed with an aspect ratio of 4:3 .
In 2009 , Jeopardy !
updated its set once again .
The new set debuted with special episodes taped at the 42nd annual International CES technology trade show , hosted at the Las Vegas Convention Center in Winchester ( Las Vegas Valley ) , Nevada , and became the primary set for Jeopardy !
when the show began taping its 26th season , which premiered on September 14 , 2009 .
It was significantly remodeled when season 30 premiered in September 2013 .
THEME MUSIC Section::::Theme music .
Since the debut of Jeopardy !
in 1964 , several different songs and arrangements have served as the theme music for the show , most of which were composed by Griffin .
The main theme for the original Jeopardy !
series was " Take Ten " , composed by Griffin 's wife Julann .
The All - New Jeopardy !
opened with " January , February , March " and closed with " Frisco Disco " , both of which were composed by Griffin himself .
The best - known theme song on Jeopardy !
is " Think ! " , originally composed by Griffin under the title " A Time for Tony " , as a lullaby for his son .
" Think ! " has always been used for the 30-second period in Final Jeopardy !
when the contestants write down their responses , and since the syndicated version debuted in 1984 , a rendition of that tune has been used as the main theme song .
" Think !
" has become so popular that it has been used in many different contexts , from sporting events to weddings .
Griffin estimated that the use of " Think ! " had earned him royalties of over $ 70 million throughout his lifetime .
" Think ! "
led Griffin to win the Broadcast Music ,
Inc. ( BMI ) President 's Award in 2003 , and during GSN 's 2009 Game Show Awards special , it was named " Best Game Show Theme Song " .
In 1997 , the main theme and Final Jeopardy !
recordings of " Think ! " were rearranged by Steve Kaplan , who served as the show 's music director until his December 2003 death .
In 2008 , Chris Bell Music and Sound Design overhauled the Jeopardy !
music package for the show 's 25th anniversary .
AUDITION PROCESS Section::::Audition process .
Prospective contestants of the original Jeopardy !
series called the show 's office in New York to arrange an appointment and to preliminarily determine eligibility .
They were briefed and auditioned together in groups of ten to thirty individuals , participating in both a written test and mock games .
Individuals who were successful at the audition were invited to appear on the program within approximately six weeks .
Auditioning for the current version of the show begins with a written exam , comprising fifty questions in total .
This exam is administered online periodically , as well as being offered at regional contestant search events .
Since season 15 ( 1998–99 ) , the show has used a Winnebago recreational vehicle called the " Jeopardy !
Brain Bus " to conduct regional events throughout the United States and Canada .
Participants who correctly answer at least 35 out of 50 questions advance in the audition process and are invited to compete in mock games .
Those who are approved are notified at a later time and invited to appear on the show .
BROADCAST HISTORY Section::::Broadcast history .
The original Jeopardy !
series premiered on NBC on March 30 , 1964 , and by the end of the 1960s was the second - highest - rated daytime game show , behind only The Hollywood Squares .
The show was successful until 1974 , when Lin Bolen , then NBC 's Vice President of Daytime Programming , moved the show out of the noontime slot where it had been located for most of its run , as part of her effort to boost ratings among the 18–34 female demographic .
After 2,753 episodes , the original Jeopardy ! series ended on January 3 , 1975 ; to compensate Griffin for its cancellation , NBC purchased Wheel of Fortune ,
another show that he had created , and premiered it the following Monday .
A syndicated edition of Jeopardy ! , distributed by Metromedia and featuring many contestants who were previously champions on the original series , aired in the primetime during the 1974–1975 season .
The NBC daytime series was later revived as The All - New Jeopardy ! , which premiered on October 2 , 1978 and aired 108 episodes , ending on March 2 , 1979 ; this revival featured significant rule changes , such as progressive elimination of contestants over the course of the main game , and a bonus round instead of Final Jeopardy !
The daily syndicated version debuted on September 10 , 1984 , and was launched in response to the success of the syndicated version of Wheel and the installation of electronic trivia games in pubs and bars .
This version of the program has met with greater success than the previous incarnations ; it has outlived 300 other game shows and become the second most popular game show in syndication ( behind Wheel ) , averaging 25 million viewers per week .
The show 's most recent renewal , in May 2017 , extends it through the 2019–2020 season .
Jeopardy !
has spawned versions in many foreign countries throughout the world , including Canada , the United Kingdom , Germany , Sweden , Russia , Denmark , Israel , and Australia .
The American syndicated version of Jeopardy !
is also broadcast throughout the world , with international distribution rights handled by CBS Studios International .
Three spin - off versions of Jeopardy !
have been created .
Rock & Roll Jeopardy !
debuted on VH1 in 1998 and ran until 2001 ;
the show centered around post-1950s popular music trivia and was hosted by Jeff Probst .
Jep ! , which aired on GSN during the 1998–1999 season , was a special children 's version hosted by Bob Bergen and featured various rule changes from the original version .
Sports Jeopardy ! , a sports - themed version hosted by Dan Patrick , premiered in 2014 on the Crackle digital service and eventually moved to the cable sports network NBCSN in 2016 .
ARCHIVED EPISODES
Section::::Archived episodes .
Only a small number of episodes of the first three Jeopardy !
versions survive .
From the original NBC daytime version , archived episodes mostly consist of black - and - white kinescopes of the original color videotapes .
Various episodes from 1967 , 1971 , 1973 , and 1974 are listed among the holdings of the UCLA Film and Television Archive .
The 1964 " test episode " , Episode No . 2,000
( from February 21 , 1972 ) , and a June 1975 episode of the weekly syndicated edition exist at the Paley Center for Media .
Incomplete paper records of the NBC - era games exist on microfilm at the Library of Congress .
GSN holds The All - New Jeopardy!s premiere and finale in broadcast quality , and aired the latter on December 31 , 1999 , as part of its " Y2Play " marathon .
The UCLA Archive holds a copy of a pilot taped for CBS in 1977 , and the premiere exists among the Paley Center 's holdings .
GSN , which , like Jeopardy ! , is an affiliate of Sony Pictures Television , has rerun ten seasons since the channel 's launch in 1994 .
Copies of 43 Trebek - hosted syndicated Jeopardy !
episodes aired between 1989 and 2004 have been collected by the UCLA Archive , and the premiere and various other episodes are included in the Paley Center 's collection .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
By 1994 the press called Jeopardy ! "
an American icon " .
It has won a record 33 Daytime Emmy Awards since 1984 .
The show holds the record for the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Game / Audience Participation Show , with fifteen awards won in that category .
Another five awards have been won by Trebek for Outstanding Game Show Host .
Twelve other awards were won by the show 's directors and writers in the respective categories of Outstanding Direction for a Game / Audience Participation Show and Outstanding Special Class Writing before these categories were removed in 2006 .
On June 17 , 2011 , Trebek shared the Lifetime Achievement Award with Sajak at the 38th Annual Daytime Emmy Awards ceremony .
The following year , the show was honored with a Peabody Award for its role in encouraging , celebrating , and rewarding knowledge .
In its April 17–23 , 1993 issue , TV Guide named Jeopardy !
the best game show of the 1970s as part of a celebration of its 40th anniversary .
In January 2001 , the magazine ranked the show number 2 on its " 50 Greatest Game Shows " list — second only to The Price Is Right .
It would later rank Jeopardy !
number 45 on its list of the 60 Best TV Series of All Time , calling it " habit - forming " and saying that the program " always makes [ its viewers ] feel smarter " .
Also in 2013 , the show ranked number 1 on TV Guides list of the 60 Greatest Game Shows .
In the summer of 2006 , the show was ranked number 2 on GSN 's list of the 50 Greatest Game Shows of All Time , second only to Match Game .
A hall of fame honoring Jeopardy !
was added to the Sony Pictures Studios tour on September 20 , 2011 .
It features the show 's Emmy Awards as well as retired set pieces , classic merchandise , video clips , photographs , and other memorabilia related to Jeopardy!s history .
In 1989 , Fleming expressed dissatisfaction with the daily syndicated Jeopardy !
series in an essay published in Sports Illustrated .
He confessed that he only watched the Trebek version infrequently , and then only for a handful of questions ; and also criticized this new iteration mainly for its Hollywood setting .
Fleming believed that , in contrast to New Yorkers who Fleming considered to be more intelligent and authentic , moving the show to Hollywood brought both an unrealistic glamour and a dumbing - down of the program that he disdained .
He also disliked the decision to not award losing contestants their cash earnings ( believing the parting gifts offered instead to be cheap ) and expressed surprise that what he considered to be a parlor game had transformed into such a national phenomenon under Trebek .
Jeopardy!s
answer - and - question format has become widely entrenched : Fleming observed that other game shows would have contestants phrasing their answers in question form , leading hosts to remind them that they are not competing on Jeopardy !
TOURNAMENTS AND OTHER EVENTS
REGULAR EVENTS Section::::Tournaments and other events .
Section::::Regular events .
Starting in 1985 , the show has held an annual Tournament of Champions featuring the top fifteen champions who have appeared on the show since the last tournament .
The top prize awarded to the winner was originally valued at $ 100,000 , and increased to $ 250,000 in 2003 .
Other regular tournaments include the Teen Tournament , with a $ 100,000 top prize ; the College Championship , in which undergraduate students from American colleges and universities compete for a $ 100,000 top prize ; and the Teachers Tournament , where educators compete for a $ 100,000 top prize .
Each tournament runs for ten consecutive episodes in a format devised by Trebek himself , consisting of five quarter - final games , three semifinals , and a final consisting of two games with the scores totaled .
Winners of the College Championship and Teachers Tournament are invited to participate in the Tournament of Champions .
Non - tournament events held regularly on the show include Celebrity Jeopardy ! , in which celebrities and other notable individuals compete for charitable organizations of their choice ; and Kids Week , a special competition for school - age children aged 10 through 12 .
SPECIAL EVENTS Section::::Special events .
Three International Tournaments , held in 1996 , 1997 , and 2001 , featured one - week competitions among champions from each of the international versions of Jeopardy ! .
Each of the countries that aired their own version of the show in those years could nominate a contestant .
The format was identical to the semifinals and finals of other Jeopardy !
tournaments .
In 1996 and 1997 , the winner received $ 25,000 ; in 2001 , the top prize was doubled to $ 50,000 .
The 1997 tournament was recorded in Stockholm on the set of the Swedish version of Jeopardy ! , and is significant for being the first week of Jeopardy !
episodes to be taped in a foreign country .
There have been a number of special tournaments featuring the greatest contestants in Jeopardy !
history .
The first of these " all - time best " tournaments , Super Jeopardy ! , aired in the summer of 1990 on ABC , and featured 35 top contestants from the previous seasons of the Trebek version and one notable champion from the original Jeopardy !
series competing for a top prize of $ 250,000 .
In 1993 , that year 's Tournament of Champions was followed by a Tenth Anniversary Tournament conducted over five episodes .
In May 2002 , to commemorate the Trebek version 's 4,000th episode , the show invited fifteen champions to play for a $ 1 million prize in the Million Dollar Masters tournament , which took place at Radio City Music Hall in New York City .
The Ultimate Tournament of Champions aired in 2005 and pitted 145 former Jeopardy !
champions against each other , with two winners moving on to face Ken Jennings in a three - game final for $ 2,000,000 , the largest prize in the show 's history ; overall , the tournament spanned 15 weeks and 76 episodes , starting on February 9 and ending on May 25 .
In 2014 , Jeopardy !
commemorated the 30th anniversary of the Trebek version with a Battle of the Decades tournament , in which 15 champions apiece from the first , second , and third decades of Jeopardy!s daily syndicated history competed for a grand prize of $ 1,000,000 .
In November 1998 , Jeopardy ! traveled to Boston to reassemble 12 past Teen Tournament contestants for a special Teen Reunion Tournament .
In 2008 , the 25th season began with reuniting 15 contestants from the first two Kids Weeks to compete in a special reunion tournament of their own .
During the next season ( 2009–2010 ) , a special edition of Celebrity Jeopardy ! , called the Million Dollar Celebrity Invitational , was played in which twenty - seven contestants from past celebrity episodes competed for a grand prize of $ 1,000,000 for charity ; the grand prize was won by Michael McKean .
The IBM Challenge aired February 14–16 , 2011 , and featured IBM 's Watson computer facing off against Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter in a two - game match played over three shows .
This was the first man - vs.-machine competition in Jeopardy!s history .
Watson won both the first game and the overall match to win the grand prize of $ 1 million , which IBM divided between two charities ( World Vision International and World Community Grid ) .
Jennings , who won $ 300,000 for second place , and Rutter , who won the $ 200,000 third - place prize , both pledged to donate half of their winnings to charity .
The competition brought the show its highest ratings since the Ultimate Tournament of Champions .
RECORD HOLDERS Section::::Record holders .
Jeopardy!s record for the longest winning streak is held by Ken Jennings , who competed on the show from June 2 through November 30 , 2004 , winning 74 matches before being defeated by Nancy Zerg in his 75th appearance .
He amassed $ 2,520,700 over his 74 wins and a $ 2,000 second - place prize in his 75th appearance .
At the time , he held the record as the highest money - winner ever on American game shows , and his winning streak increased the show 's ratings and popularity to the point where it became TV 's highest - rated syndicated program .
Jennings later won the $ 500,000 second - place prize in the 2005 Ultimate Tournament of Champions , the $ 300,000 second - place prize in the IBM Challenge , and the $ 100,000 second - place prize in the Battle of the Decades .
The highest - earning all - time Jeopardy !
contestant is Brad Rutter , who has won a cumulative total of $ 4,355,102 .
He became an undefeated champion in 2000 and later won an unprecedented four Jeopardy !
tournaments : the 2001 Tournament of Champions , the 2002 Million Dollar Masters Tournament , the 2005 Ultimate Tournament of Champions , and the 2014 Battle of the Decades .
Rutter broke Jennings 's record for all - time game show winnings when he defeated Jennings and Jerome Vered in the Ultimate Tournament of Champions finals .
Jennings regained the record through appearances on various other game shows , culminating in an appearance on Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader ?
on October 10 , 2008 .
In 2014 , Rutter regained the title after winning $ 1,000,000 in the Battle of the Decades , defeating Jennings and Roger Craig in the finals .
Craig is the holder of the all - time record for single - day winnings on Jeopardy ! .
On the episode that aired September 14 , 2010 , he amassed a score of $ 47,000 after the game 's first two rounds , then wagered and won an additional $ 30,000 in the Final Jeopardy !
round , finishing with $ 77,000 .
The previous single - day record of $ 75,000 had been set by Jennings .
The record - holder among female contestants on Jeopardy!—in both number of games and total winnings — is Julia Collins , who amassed $ 429,100 over 21 games between April 21 and June 2 , 2014 .
She won $ 428,100 in her 20 games as champion , plus $ 1,000 for finishing third in her twenty - first game .
Collins also achieved the second - longest winning streak on the show , behind Jennings .
The streak , which was interrupted in May by the Battle of the Decades , was broken by Brian Loughnane .
The highest single - day winnings in a Celebrity Jeopardy !
tournament was achieved by comedian Andy Richter during a first - round game of the 2009–2010 season 's " Million Dollar Celebrity Invitational " , in which he finished with $ 68,000 for his selected charity , the St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital .
Four contestants on the Trebek version have won a game with the lowest amount possible ( $ 1 ) .
The first was U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Darryl Scott , on the episode that aired January 19 , 1993 ; the second was Benjamin Salisbury , on a Celebrity Jeopardy !
episode that aired April 30 , 1997
; the third was Brandi Chastain , on the Celebrity Jeopardy !
episode that aired February 9 , 2001 ; and the fourth was U.S. Navy Lieutenant Manny Abell , on the episode that aired October 17 , 2017 .
OTHER MEDIA PORTRAYALS AND PARODIES Section::::Other media .
Section::::Portrayals and parodies .
Jeopardy ! has been featured in a number of films , television shows and books over the years , mostly with one or more characters participating as contestants , or viewing and interacting with the game show from their own homes .
*
On " Questions and Answers " , a season 7 episode of The Golden Girls aired February 8 , 1992 , Dorothy Zbornak ( Bea Arthur ) auditions for Jeopardy ! , but despite her excellent show of knowledge , she is rejected by a contestant coordinator who feels that America would not root for her .
In a dream sequence , Dorothy competes against roommate Rose Nylund ( Betty White ) and neighbor Charlie Dietz ( David Leisure ) , in a crossover from Empty Nest .
Trebek and Griffin appear as themselves in the dream sequence , and Gilbert provides a voice - over .
* A 1988 episode of Mama 's Family titled " Mama on Jeopardy !
" features the titular Mama , Thelma Harper ( Vicki Lawrence ) , competing on the show after her neighbor and friend Iola Boylan ( Beverly Archer ) is rejected .
For most of the game the questions given by Mama are incorrect , but she makes a miraculous comeback near the end and barely qualifies for Final Jeopardy !
Her final question given is also incorrect , but she finishes in second place by $ 1 and wins a trip to Hawaii for herself and her family .
Again , Trebek guest stars and Gilbert provides a voice - over .
*
In the Cheers episode " What Is ... Cliff Clavin ? "
( 1990 ) , the titular mailman , portrayed by John Ratzenberger , appears on the show and racks up an impressive $ 22,000 going into the Final Jeopardy !
round , well ahead of his competitors .
Despite having a total that his competitors can not reach in Final Jeopardy ! , Cliff risks all of his winnings on the final clue , which is revealed to be " Archibald Leach , Bernard Schwartz and Lucille LeSueur " ( the real names of Cary Grant , Tony Curtis , and Joan Crawford , respectively ) .
Cliff 's response , " Who are three people who 've never been in my kitchen ?
" , is deemed incorrect , and he leaves with no money .
*
In " I Take Thee Quagmire " , a season 4 episode of Family Guy aired March 12 , 2006 , Mayor Adam West appears as a contestant on Jeopardy ! .
He spells Trebek 's name backwards ( as " Kebert Xela " ) , " sending him back " to the fifth dimension , in reference to when Mister Mxyzptlk , a nemesis to DC Comics ' Superman , is sent to the fifth dimension when someone makes him say his own name backwards .
* Trebek appears as himself on " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " , a season 9 episode of The Simpsons in which Marge Simpson appears on a fictional version of the show , but performs very poorly , leaving with – $ 5,200 .
Trebek then demands Marge pay this amount to the show .
*
From 1996 to 2002 and again in 2005 , 2009 , and 2015 , Saturday Night Live featured a recurring Celebrity Jeopardy !
sketch in which Trebek , portrayed by Will Ferrell , has to deal with the exasperating ineptitude of the show 's celebrity guests and the constant taunts of antagonists Sean Connery ( played by Darrell Hammond ) and Burt Reynolds ( Norm Macdonald ) , the latter of whom at one point insists on being called " Turd Ferguson " .
*
Since 2013 , Saturday Night Live has included the recurring sketch Black Jeopardy ! , in which the host and two of the three contestants are stereotypical black Americans and the categories and clues likewise reflect black American culture .
The third contestant in Black Jeopardy !
provides a contrast to the others , such as a professor of African - American studies , a Black Canadian , a white Donald Trump supporter , or the king of the fictional African nation of Wakanda .
* Jeopardy ! is featured in a subplot of the 1992 film White Men Ca n't Jump , in which Gloria Clemente ( Rosie Perez ) attempts to pass the show 's auditions .
She succeeds , and ends up appearing on the show , winning over $ 14,000 .
*
The Univision Deportes program Fútbol Club features a segment similar to Jeopardy !
named " Yoperdy ! " , the name itself a Spanish language parody of the Jeopardy !
name .
* Other films and television series in which
Jeopardy ! has been portrayed over the years include The ' Burbs , Die Hard , Men in Black , Rain Man , , Charlie 's Angels , Dying Young , The Education of Max Bickford , The Bucket List , Groundhog Day , Predator 2 , and Finding Forrester .
*
In the David Foster Wallace short story " Little Expressionless Animals " , first published in The Paris Review and later reprinted in Wallace 's collection Girl with Curious Hair , the character Julie Smith competes and wins on every Jeopardy !
game for three years ( a total of 700 episodes )
and then uses her winnings to pay for the care of her brother , who has autism .
*
The Ellen 's Energy Adventure attraction at Epcot 's Universe of Energy pavilion featured a dream sequence in which Ellen DeGeneres plays a Jeopardy !
game entirely focused on energy .
* Fleming makes a cameo appearance reprising his role as host of Jeopardy !
in the 1982 film .
* The music video " I Lost on Jeopardy " , a parody of Greg Kihn 's 1983 hit song " Jeopardy " , was released by " Weird Al " Yankovic in 1984 , a few months before Trebek 's version debuted ; the video featured cameos from Fleming , Pardo , Kihn , and Dr. Demento .
MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
Over the years , the Jeopardy !
brand has been licensed for various products .
From 1964 through 1976 , Milton Bradley issued annual board games based on the original Fleming version .
The Trebek version has been adapted into board games released by Pressman Toy Corporation , Tyco Toys , and Parker Brothers .
In addition , Jeopardy ! has been adapted into a number of video games released on various consoles and handhelds spanning multiple hardware generations , starting with a Nintendo Entertainment System game released in 1987 .
The show has also been adapted for personal computers ( starting in 1987 with Apple II , Commodore 64 , and DOS versions ) , Facebook , Twitter , Android , and the Roku Channel Store .
A DVD titled Jeopardy !
:
An Inside Look at America 's Favorite Quiz Show , released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on November 8 , 2005 , features five memorable episodes of the Trebek version ( the 1984 premiere , Jennings ' final game , and the three finals matches of the Ultimate Tournament of Champions ) and three featurettes discussing the show 's history and question selection process .
Other products featuring the Jeopardy !
brand include a collectible watch , a series of daily desktop calendars , and various slot machine games for casinos and the Internet .
INTERNET
Section::::Internet .
Jeopardy!s official website , active as early as 1998 , receives over 400,000 monthly visitors .
The website features videos , photographs , and other information related to each week 's contestants , as well as mini - sites promoting remote tapings and special tournaments .
As the show changes its main title card and corresponding graphics with every passing season , the Jeopardy !
website is re - skinned to reflect the changes , and the general content of the site ( such as online tests and promotions , programming announcements , " spotlight " segments , photo galleries , and downloadable content ) is regularly updated to align with producers ' priorities for the show .
In its 2012 " Readers Choice Awards " , About.com praised the official Jeopardy !
website for featuring " everything [ visitors ] need to know about the show , as well as some fun interactive elements " , and for having a humorous error page .
In November 2009 , Jeopardy ! launched a viewer loyalty program called the " Jeopardy !
Premier Club " , which allowed home viewers to identify Final Jeopardy !
categories from episodes for a chance to earn points , and play a weekly Jeopardy !
game featuring categories and clues from the previous week 's episodes .
Every three months , contestants were selected randomly to advance to one of three quarterly online tournaments ; after these tournaments were played , the three highest scoring contestants would play one final online tournament for the chance to win $ 5,000 and a trip to Los Angeles to attend a taping of Jeopardy !
The Premier Club was discontinued by July 2011 .
There is an unofficial Jeopardy !
fansite known as the " J ! Archive " ( j-archive.com ) , which transcribes games from throughout Jeopardy ! 's daily syndicated history .
In the archive , episodes are covered by Jeopardy!-style game boards with panels which , when hovered over with a mouse , reveal the correct response to their corresponding clues and the contestant who gave the correct response .
The site makes use of a " wagering calculator " that helps potential contestants determine what amount is safest to bet during Final Jeopardy ! , and an alternative scoring method called " Coryat scoring " that disregards wagering during Daily Doubles or Final Jeopardy !
and gauges one 's general strength at the game .
The site 's main founding archivist is Robert Knecht Schmidt , a student from Cleveland , Ohio , who himself appeared as a Jeopardy !
contestant in March 2010 .
Before J !
Archive , there was an earlier Jeopardy !
fansite known as the " Jeoparchive " , created by season 19 contestant Ronnie O'Rourke , who managed and updated the site until Jennings 's run made her disillusioned with the show .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS