WALES
AT
THE FIFA WORLD CUP
The FIFA World Cup is an international association football competition contested by the men 's national teams of the members of Fédération Internationale de Football Association ( FIFA ) , the sport 's global governing body .
The championship has been contested every four years since the first tournament in 1930 , except in 1942 and 1946 , due to World War II .
The Wales national football team has entered every World Cup since the 1950 tournament , but to date has only qualified for one World Cup , in 1958 .
On that occasion , they reached the quarter - finals before being eliminated by eventual winners Brazil .
HISTORY
BEFORE 1950 Section::::History .
Section::::Before 1950 .
During the preparations for the 1928 Olympic Football Tournament , FIFA ruled that all its member associations must provide " broken time " payments to cover the expenses of players from their country who participated .
In response to what they considered to be unacceptable interference , the football associations of Wales , England , Ireland and Scotland held a meeting at which they agreed to resign from FIFA .
As a result , Wales did not compete in the three interwar World Cup competitions .
The Football Association of Wales did not rejoin FIFA as a permanent member until 1946 .
BRAZIL 1950
Section::::Brazil 1950 .
The 1949–50 British Home Championship was used as the qualifying group for the four British teams ahead of the 1950 FIFA World Cup , with the top two qualifying for the finals in Brazil .
Defeats for Wales in their first two matches against England ( 4–1 at home ) and Scotland
( 2–0 away ) meant Wales were no longer able to qualify regardless of the result in their final game against Ireland ( IFA ) .
Despite finishing in second place and thus qualifying for the finals , Scotland declined to travel to Brazil , but instead of retaining two British qualifiers and inviting either Wales or Ireland to replace the Scots , FIFA invited France , Portugal and the other Ireland team to participate .
Only France accepted , but they ultimately also pulled out .
SWITZERLAND 1954 Section::::Switzerland 1954 .
As in 1950 , the 1953–54 British Home Championship was used to determine which British nations would qualify for the 1954 FIFA World Cup in Switzerland .
In their three matches , Wales managed just one point , with a 3–3 draw in Scotland sandwiched between home defeats to England ( 4–1 ) and Northern Ireland ( 2–1 ) , leaving them bottom of the table .
Wales ' five goals in qualifying were scored by just two players : John Charles ( 3 ) and Ivor Allchurch ( 2 ) .
SWEDEN 1958 Section::::Sweden 1958 .
The qualification process for the 1958 FIFA World Cup saw FIFA split up the Home Nations for the first time , with Wales drawn into Group 4 with Czechoslovakia and East Germany .
Their qualifying campaign started off well , with a goal from Roy Vernon proving the difference in a 1–0 win over Czechoslovakia in Cardiff , but a 2–1 loss to East Germany in Leipzig and a 2–0 defeat to Czechoslovakia left Wales bottom of the group going into the final match at home to East Germany on 25 September 1957 .
Goals from Des Palmer and Cliff Jones gave Wales a 3–0 lead going into the half - time break ; Manfred Kaiser pulled one back for the East Germans , but it proved to be too great a margin to overcome , and Palmer completed his hat - trick to give Wales a 4–1 win and put them level on points with Czechoslovakia at the top of the group .
A win for East Germany over Czechoslovakia by the right scoreline the following month would see Wales qualify for their first World Cup as group winners .
In the end , Czechoslovakia beat East Germany by the same scoreline as Wales had ( 4–1 ) , consigning Wales to second place in the group and ending their World Cup qualifying journey .
However , elsewhere in qualifying , Israel had reached the final round of qualifying without playing a single match as a result of their opponents pulling out for various political reasons .
FIFA ruled that no team other than the hosts and holders could qualify without playing any matches , so they ordered a qualification play - off against one of the second - placed European teams .
Belgium were drawn first , but refused to participate ; Wales were the next team drawn , and so a two - legged play - off was scheduled for early 1958 .
Wales won each leg 2–0 , giving them a 4–0 aggregate win .
Wales ' manager at the time was Manchester United assistant manager Jimmy Murphy ; the second leg of the Israel play - off was scheduled for the same day as Manchester United 's European Cup quarter - final against Red Star Belgrade , which Murphy missed to lead his country , a decision that might have saved his life – the Manchester United plane crashed in Munich on the return journey from Belgrade in an incident that killed 23 people , including eight Manchester United players and three members of the club 's staff .
At the finals tournament , Wales were drawn in Group 3 along with 1954 finalists Hungary , Mexico and hosts Sweden .
Wales began with a 1–1 draw with Hungary , John Charles scoring a 27th - minute equaliser after József Bozsik had given the Magyars the lead in the fifth minute .
Ivor Allchurch then gave Wales the lead after half an hour of their second game against Mexico , only for Jaime Belmonte to equalise with a minute left to play .
That result left Wales in second place in the group after two matches , but their final match was against leaders Sweden .
The two final matches were not played simultaneously , with Wales and Sweden kicking off five hours earlier than Hungary and Mexico , which allowed Wales to stake an early claim to a place in the quarter - finals ; they held the hosts to a 0–0 draw , the first time Sweden had been shut out at home in almost a year .
Because of the tie - breaking criteria in use at the tournament , that result meant that , regardless of the margin of victory , the best Hungary and Mexico could manage would be to force a play - off against Wales for a place in the quarter - finals – a draw would see them both eliminated .
Hungary won the match 4–0 , and the play - off was scheduled for two days later in Solna .
Hungary took the lead through Lajos Tichy after 33 minutes and held the lead until half - time .
Ten minutes after the break , Ivor Allchurch scored the equaliser , before Terry Medwin scored the winner with just under a quarter of an hour left to play .
The result meant Wales qualified for the quarter - finals , where they would play against the winners of Group 4 , Brazil .
Having impressed in Brazil 's last group match against the Soviet Union , a 17-year - old Pelé again started against Wales ; however , it took almost three - quarters of the match for Brazil to break through the Welsh defence , as Pelé 's flick took him past Mel Charles and he toe - poked home the only goal of the game .
Pelé went on to score a further five goals in the tournament , including a hat - trick in the 5–2 win over France in the semi - finals , and two more in another 5–2 win over Sweden in the final as Brazil won the tournament for the first time .
Group 3 Play - off Quarter - finals CHILE 1962 Section::::Chile 1962 .
In qualifying for the 1962 FIFA World Cup in Chile , Wales were drawn in Group 9 with Austria , Denmark and Spain .
The group was split into two rounds , with Wales and Austria – as the two nations that had qualified for the 1958 World Cup – receiving a bye to the second round .
Denmark withdrew from the qualifying process before any matches were played , so Spain advanced to the second round .
Austria then also withdrew , leaving Wales and Spain to play off over two legs to determine who would advance .
The first leg in Cardiff on 19 April 1961 saw Wales take an early lead through Phil Woosnam after seven minutes , only for Alfonso Rodríguez Salas to level the scores midway through the first half , before Alfredo Di Stéfano scored the winner for Spain with 12 minutes left in the game .
The return leg was played in Madrid a month later with Wales needing to win by a two - goal margin to surpass Spain .
After a goalless first half , Joaquín Peiró opened the scoring in the 55th minute ; Ivor Allchurch scored one of the three goals Wales now required , but they were unable to find the other two and were eliminated .
RECORD
AT
THE FIFA WORLD CUP Section::::Record at the FIFA World Cup . !
Year ! !
Round ! !
Position ! !
GP ! !
W ! !
D * ! !
L ! !
GF ! !
GA !
Total 1/21 — 5 1 3 1 4
4
BY
MATCH
Section::::By match . !
World Cup !
width=110Round !
width=150Opponent !
width=60Score !
width=50Result !
width=120Venue !
Scorers
rowspan="5 " align = center1958rowspan="4"Group stagealign =
center1–1align = center bgcolor="#ffffbb"DSandvikenJ. Charles align =
center1–1align = center bgcolor="#ffffbb"DSolnaI. Allchurch align = center0–0align
= center bgcolor="#ffffbb"DSolna align
= centeralign = center bgcolor="#bbffbb"WSolnaI. Allchurch , Medwin Quarter - finalsalign = center0–1align
= center bgcolor="#ffbbbb"LGothenburg RECORD
BY OPPONENT Section::::Record by opponent . !
colspan=7FIFA World Cup matches ( by team ) !
Opponent !
Wins !
Draws !
Losses !
Total !
Goals scored !
Goals conceded align="left"001101 align="left"110232
align="left"010111
align="left"010100
STATISTICS
MOST APPEARANCES
Section::::Statistics .
Section::::Most appearances .
Seven players appeared in all five of Wales ' matches at the 1958 World Cup .
One of them is Mel Charles , whose older brother John also played four matches in the tournament . !
No . !
Name !
Matches !
World Cups
rowspan=7 align = center1
Ivor Allchurchalign =
center51958
Dave Bowenalign =
center51958
Mel Charlesalign =
center51958
Mel Hopkinsalign =
center51958
Cliff Jonesalign =
center51958
Jack Kelseyalign =
center51958
Stuart Williamsalign =
center51958
rowspan=3 align = center8 John Charlesalign =
center41958
Terry Medwinalign
= center41958
Derrick Sullivanalign
= center41958
TOP GOALSCORERS Section::::Top goalscorers . !
No . !
Name !
Goals !
World Cups
align =
center1
Ivor Allchurchalign =
center21958 rowspan=2 align = center2 John Charlesalign = center11958 Terry Medwinalign = center11958
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* FIFA Official Ranking of all Participants at Finals 1930–2002 .
FIFA Match Results for all Stages 1930–2002