THE LOST HERO
The Lost Hero is an American fantasy - adventure novel written by Rick Riordan , based on Greek and Roman mythology .
It was published on October 12 , 2010 , and is the first book in The Heroes of Olympus series , a spin - off of the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series .
It is preceded by The Last Olympian of Percy Jackson & the Olympians and followed by The Son of Neptune .
The novel has since been translated into many languages and released as a hardcover , e - book , audiobook and paperback .
The story follows Jason Grace , a Roman demigod with no memory of his past .
He , along with Piper McLean , a daughter of Aphrodite , and Leo Valdez , a son of Hephaestus , are given a quest to rescue Hera , the queen of gods , from the clutches of Gaea , the primordial goddess of the earth .
It is the first book in the Camp Half - Blood chronicles to use third - person narration , switching between the points of view of Jason , Piper , and Leo .
The Lost Hero received positive reviews from critics for its complex and mature plot when compared to its predecessors .
Criticism was focused on its streched action sequences and dialogues .
At its peak , the novel has appeared first on The New York Times bestseller list , the USA Today bestseller list , The Wall Street Journal bestseller list , and the Publishers Weekly bestseller list .
It was named the best children 's book of 2010 by Barnes & Noble and won the Junior Young Reader 's Choice Award in 2013 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Jason Grace awakens on a school bus , unable to remember anything about his past .
He is placed next to Piper McLean , his apparent girlfriend and Leo Valdez , his apparent best friend .
All three are part of a class field trip to the Grand Canyon , and after they arrive , a classmate , Dylan , turns into a storm spirit and attacks the trio and their trip leader , Coach Gleeson Hedge who is a satyr .
In the ensuing fight , Jason battles the spirit and surprises everyone with his powers ; Hedge is revealed to be a satyr and is captured by the storm spirit as it flees .
A flying chariot with two demigods appear on the scene .
The female demigod , Annabeth Chase , expresses her frustration upon seeing that her missing boyfriend , Percy Jackson , is not there as she expected .
Jason , Piper , and Leo are told that they are Greek demigods and are taken back to Camp Half - Blood .
There , Leo is revealed as a son of Hephaestus , Piper as a daughter of Aphrodite and Jason as a son of Zeus , though Hera tells him he is her champion .
Leo , who has the rare ability to conjure fire , does not use nor tell anyone about it out of guilt about his mother 's death seven years prior .
Meanwhile , Jason finds out about his sister Thalia Grace , a daughter of Zeus and lieutenant of the Hunters of Artemis .
In the woods , Leo discovers a damaged mechanical bronze dragon and rejuvenates it .
Shortly thereafter , the three are given a quest to rescue Hera from danger .
After encountering Boreas , Piper , Jason , and Leo soon discover that their enemies are working under orders from Gaea , the Greek primordial goddess of the Earth , to overthrow the gods .
Throughout their journey , they overcome numerous obstacles and eventually manage to save Coach Hedge .
During their quest , they meet Thalia and the Hunters , who have also been looking for Percy .
Thalia and Jason have a reunion , the first since Jason was two , but soon get separated on the way to Aelous 's castle .
After almost being imprisoned by Aeolus under Gaea 's orders , the trio manage to escape and end up in San Francisco .
They defeat Enceladus at Mount Diablo and rescue Piper 's father , who was being held captive .
Jason , Piper and Leo , with the Hunters of Artemis , travel to the Wolf House and defeats the forces of Gaea , saving Hera .
They temporarily stall Gaea 's plans , but were unable to completely destroy the ancient beings .
Meanwhile , at camp , Leo creates plans for a ship that would sail to Greece , and the Hephaestus campers decide to undergo the project , appointing Leo as their new counselor .
With part of his memory returned , Jason realizes that he is a son of Jupiter , a hero from a Roman counterpart camp to Camp
Half - Blood called Camp Jupiter somewhere near San Francisco , California .
Hera , known as Juno to the Romans , has switched him with the Greek hero Percy Jackson , who is now at the Roman camp with no memory of his previous life .
Camp Half - Blood and Camp Jupiter always had a ruthless rivalry ; whenever they came into contact , things never ended well .
CHARACTERS
* Jason Grace – demigod son of Jupiter .
The younger brother of Thalia Grace , Jason suffers from amnesia and is inclined to call the gods by their Roman names .
He harbors feelings for Piper McLean .
* Piper McLean – daughter of Aphrodite and Tristan McLean , a Cherokee film actor .
She is in love with Jason Grace and has a dagger named Katoptris , previously wielded by Helen of Troy .
She also has the rare gift of charmspeak .
* Leo Valdez – son of Hephaestus and Esperanza Valdez .
He has a magical tool belt that will produce any tool that can be found in an average mechanical shop .
He can also create fire from nothing , a rare ability sometimes found in Hephaestus 's children .
* Annabeth Chase – demigod daughter of Athena .
She rescues Jason , Piper , and Leo while on the search for Percy Jackson , her missing boyfriend .
*
Coach Gleeson Hedge – satyr who was assigned to watch over two demigods , Piper and Leo , until they could be safely brought to Camp Half - Blood , and suddenly has to guard a third , Jason .
He is taken captive after saving Leo 's life twice .
COMPOSITION AND MARKETING Section::::Composition and marketing .
After realizing how many Greek and Roman myths he had left untouched as well the immense success of the original series , Riordan began writing a second series , using inspiration for his storyline from experiences that he and his children had while playing video and role - playing games such as World of Warcraft and Scion .
After creating the storyline , Riordan created three new main characters — Jason , Piper , and Leo — but continued to use the previous main characters such as Annabeth and Grover as secondary characters .
Unlike the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series which uses first - person narration solely from Percy 's point of view , the second series is told in third - person , with the point of view alternating between various main characters .
In The Lost Hero , those characters are Jason , Piper , and Leo .
Although initially uncertain how fans would react , Riordan later found that they enjoyed the new format , as it allowed them to learn more about each character .
The novel begins several months after the events of The Last Olympian , which allowed continuity with the first series , so previous characters could be included and readers would not be confused .
Riordan says that " it was my way of letting them revisit that world in a fresh twist , but also to catch up with Percy and Annabeth and the rest of the gang from the first series " .
He also decided to include the Roman gods after many readers requested that Riordan write a new series on Roman gods , who are the Roman equivalent of the Greek gods , with some minor changes in personality .
He pondered on how the Roman aspect of the gods would be after moving from Greece to Rome to America .
After a while , " playing with that idea gave me the idea for the new series " .
Before The Lost Hero was released , Disney - Hyperion released several sneak peeks in an effort to build up publicity for the books release .
This included releasing a preview of the first two chapters of the book as well as releasing the book cover .
Along with the excerpt , Disney - Hyperion released information about the series and characters , a book trailer , and an event kit .
To celebrate the release of the book , a release party took place at BookPeople in Austin , Texas .
The party began at 4 pm with over 800 visitors including Riordan himself .
The party featured food , races , and rock climbing .
Afterward , over 10,000 joined Riordan on an online webchat where he read the first two chapters and answered questions from the fans .
He then signed one copy of the book and announced " that seven ' lucky demigods ' will be selected in a sweepstakes to attend an exclusive one - week session at Camp Half - Blood at Bookpeople in July 2011 " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The novel was first released in the United States on October 12 , 2010 : the hardcover had a 2.5 million copy first printing , and audiobook and e - book formats were also released .
Riordan has stated that he intends to finish a new book in the series every year , completing it in 2014 .
Upon release , The Lost Hero was a No . 1 bestseller on The New York Times bestseller list , USA Today bestseller list , The Wall Street Journal bestseller list , and the Publishers Weekly bestseller list .
As of January 30 , 2011 , The Lost Hero has been on The New York Times best seller list for 14 weeks , ranked at number 1 .
In the United Kingdom and Australia , English - language editions in paperback were also released October 4 , 2012 by Puffin Books .
To date , editions have been released in multiple languages .
Although many non - English editions used John Rocco 's cover art originally created for the US edition , a fewand the Puffin editionshave unique covers by other illustrators .
The book received a Lexile score of 660L , making it age- and difficulty - appropriate for the average 8 - 11 year - old .
On Scholastic , the book is recommended to teachers as appropriate material for grades 9 - 12 .
Reviewers for both Publishers Weekly and Common Sense Media gave the book a rating of 10
+ . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Lost Hero received generally positive reviews from critics .
Publishers Weekly gave a favorable review , stating that " Riordan 's storytelling is as polished as ever , brimming with wit , action , and heart " .
The Seattle Times Karen Macpherson called the Greek and Roman mix " fascinating " and also said that the " characters are interesting and well - developed , and the richly complex story has Riordan 's trademark wry humor and nearly nonstop action " .
The book also received a positive review from The Epoch Times , which read , " If anyone was afraid that Riordan could n't top his Percy Jackson series — they can quit worrying .
This new series , even though in the same genre as the Percy Jackson group , has fresh ideas , more mystery and magic and keeps the reader engrossed from start to finish . "
Few reviewers criticized certain aspects of the novel .
Vicky Smith of Kirkus Reviews , for example , wrote that there are " far too many pages of stretched - out action , telling not showing and awkward dialogue " while believing that the novel would be enjoyed by " [ d]ie - hard fans " .
She positively noted that the " Greek - vs.-Roman tension tantalizes " and that " incidental details that bring the gods into the story often shine . "
Lauren Berkes of The National Post appreciated the novel , writing , " Along the way , the novel has a lot of action , a bit of magic , a freaky security system and a metal dragon " but recommended that readers read the predecessor series first as " it will help you to understand a lot of the concepts in The Lost Hero . "
Others were appreciative of the book as an excellent sequel to Percy Jackson and the Olympians .
Anita Burkam of The Horn Book Magazine wrote in her review , " Riordan extends the franchise in a logical direction while maximizing the elements that made the first series so popular : irreverent heroes , plenty of tension - filled moments fighting monsters , and authentic classical mythology mixed in with modern life . "
Carrie R. Wheadon of Common Sense Media rated it 4/5 and opined , " Percy Jackson series spin - off is almost as delightful " and observes , " The story set - up is n't terribly smooth , and this is a denser read than the first few Percy Jackson books , but once the action heats up , that 's easily forgotten . "
Voice of Youth Advocates comments , " The tale is longer than the Percy Jackson originals and can drag a bit at times , but fans hungry for further adventures in Riordan 's modernized mythological realm will be well satisfied . "
Other elements of the novel were also well - received .
Booklist wrote that " the backstory of a master plan to unseat the gods is complex but is doled out in manageable bits with a general air of foreboding " , while also appreciating " [ f]lashes of humor [ that ] lighten the mood at times " .
They conclude , " [ w]ith appealing new characters within a familiar framework , this spin - off will satisfy the demand for more . "
KidsReads appreciated the book for its knowledge , writing , " I always learn something new whenever I read these books , and it certainly helps that I laugh along the way " and also notes , " this time , they cross over to Roman mythology , and the sometimes - blurred lines between the two cultures are examined in closer detail . "
School Library Journal wrote that " Riordan excels at clever plot devices and at creating an urgent sense of cliff - hanging danger " and observed , " [ t]he young heroes deal with issues familiar to teens today . "
The Lost Hero won the Junior Young Reader 's Choice Award in 2013 .
It was also named the best children 's book of 2010 by Barnes & Noble .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
The Son of Neptune was released on October 4 , 2011 .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Heroes of Olympus series site from publisher Disney ( readriordan.com )
* Rick Riordan Myth Master at publisher Penguin Books ( UK )
* The Lost Hero on Google Books