SUPERNATURAL ( SEASON 6 )
The sixth season of Supernatural , an American dark fantasy television series created by Eric Kripke , premiered September 24 , 2010 , and concluded May 20 , 2011 , airing 22 episodes .
This is the first season to have Sera Gamble as showrunner after the full - time departure of Kripke .
The sixth season had an average viewership of 2.27 million U.S. viewers .
The season begins a year after the happenings of the previous season finale with Dean Winchester ( Jensen Ackles ) living a happy and normal life .
Mysteriously , Sam Winchester ( Jared Padalecki ) is freed from Lucifer 's cage in Hell and teams up with Dean , who leaves his new life behind and becomes a hunter again .
In the United States the season aired on Fridays at 9:00 pm ( ET ) on The CW television network .
Special guest stars in this season included Brian Doyle - Murray and Robert Englund .
CAST STARRING * Jared Padalecki as Sam Winchester
* Jensen Ackles as Dean Winchester
* Misha Collins as Castiel SPECIAL GUEST STARS
* Robert Englund as Dr. Robert
* Brian Doyle - Murray as Robert Singer GUEST STARS EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The number in the first column represents the episode 's number overall , whereas the number in the second column indicates the episode 's number within this particular season ( 6 ) .
" U.S. viewers in millions " refers to how many Americans who watched the episode live or on the day of broadcast .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The show 's creator Eric Kripke originally planned for the show to last only five seasons , but due to increased ratings from the fourth and fifth seasons , the CW network renewed the series for a sixth season .
Kripke did not return as showrunner ; however , he remained a hands - on executive producer , leaving long - time series writer Sera Gamble to take over the day - to - day production of the show .
Filming for the season began with the series star Jensen Ackles - directed fourth episode , " Weekend at Bobby 's " , to give the actor enough time for pre - production .
Kripke also wrote the season finale .
Gamble said the sixth season of the show would focus on the brothers ' relationship .
The season steered towards the format of the early seasons with " lots of meat - and - potatoes closed - ended episodes , and ... a season - long story arc to weave in " .
According to a press release by the CW , Heaven and Hell fell into " complete disarray " , forcing Sam and Dean to reunite to " beat back the rising tide of creatures and demon - spawn " that " roam across a lawless and chaotic landscape " .
The season jumped ahead a year to " get some distance between [ Sam and Dean ] , get some personal history for each of them " to allow for " new conflict , new circumstances , new stuff " .
The brothers ' roles were reversed , with Dean now hesitant to return to the hunting lifestyle .
The brothers investigated why monsters have been " acting off - pattern " .
The first few episodes establish the mythology .
An episode spoofing Twilight and other vampire series aired in October 2010 and examined the " current romantic fascination " with vampires .
However , the Twilight fans at the center of the Winchesters ' " disparaging " comments were " slightly fictionalized " .
On this , Gamble noted , " ... part of the thing is finding a balance between [ showing ] a poster from the actual show and having Sam and Dean really speak their minds .
We do n't want to offend .
"
A fan of the Twilight series , she also commented , " I 'm certainly not coming at this from a place of feeling superior to them .
I have great respect . "
Another episode of the season , " Clap Your Hands if You Believe " , consisted of an " insane " storyline featuring Tinker Bell , and the episode began with an alien abduction and a redone title sequence that is a tribute to The X - Files .
Misha Collins returned as series regular Castiel , and Jim Beaver returned as Bobby Singer for several episodes .
Mitch Pileggi made multiple appearances as Sam and Dean 's grandfather Samuel .
The recurring role of Christian , the maternal cousin of Sam and Dean , was given to Corin Nemec ; he was described as " capable , calm under pressure , and very good at his job " .
Kim Rhodes returned as Sheriff Jody Mills , as did Fredric Lehne as Azazel .
A two - hour season finale aired on May 20 , 2011 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100 % approval rating for Supernatural 's sixth season , with an average rating of 7.2/10 based on 5 reviews .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS