NEW YORK COSMOS ( 2010 )
The New York Cosmos is an American professional soccer club based in the New York City borough of Brooklyn that played in the North American Soccer League ( NASL ) from 2013 through 2017 .
The present formation of the team and organization , established since August 2010 , is a rebirth of the original New York Cosmos ( 1970–1985 ) that played in the previous North American Soccer League ( 1968–1984 ) , the former first division of North American soccer .
The Cosmos play at MCU Park on the Coney Island boardwalk .
The Cosmos ' ownership group is headed by chairman Rocco B. Commisso .
The team won the Soccer Bowl Trophy in 2013 , 2015 , and 2016 .
After a hiatus due to the cancellation of the NASL 's 2018 season , the club announced they , along with ten other clubs , would launch a new professional league " in association with the National Premier Soccer League " to begin in 2019 .
HISTORY 1985–2012 :
FALL OF THE ORIGINAL COSMOS AND REVIVAL Section::::History .
Section::::1985–2012 :
Fall of the original Cosmos and revival .
The original New York Cosmos club was founded on December 10 , 1970 , and was named on February 4 , 1971 .
The original North American Soccer League ceased operations after the 1984 season and the Cosmos were dissolved in 1985 after playing a season in the Major Indoor Soccer League .
Peppe Pinton , managing director for the Cosmos at the time , continued to run and operate youth camps started in 1977 and named after the club 's stars .
With the rise of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) during the late 1990s and 2000s , various New York City area entities approached Pinton about using the name for an MLS franchise .
The existing franchise in New York , the MetroStars , made relevant inquiries both before and after becoming the New York Red Bulls in 2006 .
Pinton was reluctant to let the name be used by an MLS team , believing that the league was unwilling to respect the Cosmos ' heritage ; however , after seeing MLS reintroduce historical NASL names , he changed his mind .
In late August 2009 , Pinton sold the name and image rights to Paul Kemsley , the former vice - chairman of English Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur , who headed a group intent on establishing a new Cosmos team in MLS .
As the group 's honorary president , Pelé announced the club 's return on August 1 , 2010 .
Kemsley 's group included English soccer businessman Terry Byrne as vice - chairman , as well as former Liverpool CEO Rick Parry .
Former Manchester United forward
Eric Cantona was added as director of soccer in mid - January 2011 , with former United States player Cobi Jones as associate director .
The original Cosmos ' top goalscorer , Giorgio Chinaglia , was also named an international ambassador before his death in 2012 .
The new Cosmos ' first match was on August 5 , 2011 , when they played against Manchester United at Old Trafford in Paul Scholes 's testimonial match .
Cantona managed a team of guest players from around the world .
On October 26 , 2011 , Kemsley was bought out by Sela Sport , a Saudi Arabian sports marketing company .
The departure of Kemsley as chairman and CEO was announced by the Cosmos with an official club statement saying that he wished " to pursue other interests and commitments " .
His replacement was not immediately announced .
A further press release on November 2 gave news of the company buyout , restructuring and various unspecified management changes within the organization .
The statement also said that the goal of the club remained the same under its new owners – " unequivocally " to become an MLS team .
Within weeks of purchasing the club , new chairman and CEO , Seamus O'Brien , had a series of meetings with MLS commissioner , Don Garber , about joining Major League Soccer .
Garber was eager to add the Cosmos to MLS , but O'Brien balked at the $ 100 M expansion fee , single - entity structure , and requirement that the league control the brand .
O'Brien decided not to apply for MLS entry after all .
2013–2015
: RETURN TO COMPETITIVE LEAGUE PLAY Section::::2013–2015 : Return to competitive league play .
The Cosmos announced on July 12 , 2012 , that they would start competitive play in the second - tier North American Soccer League in 2013 , but insisted in the same press release that the club was still bent on ultimately joining MLS .
In November , Erik Stover was hired as the club 's Chief Operating Officer .
Stover had previously been managing director of the New York Red Bulls , during which time he had been named MLS Executive of the Year , and was seen as instrumental in getting their stadium built .
The following week , Giovanni Savarese was confirmed as the team 's first head coach .
On December 11 , former Red Bulls defender Carlos Mendes , a native of Long Island , became the new Cosmos ' first senior player .
The Cosmos found immediate success in the NASL , winning the Fall Season Championship with a 9–4–1 ( Win - Draw - Loss ) record .
On November 9 , 2013 , the team emerged as the winner of Soccer Bowl 2013 , winning 1–0 against the spring season champions , the Atlanta Silverbacks .
In June 2015 the New York Cosmos played a friendly against the Cuban national team , the first American professional club to play in Cuba after the United States began normalizing relations with the island nation .
Despite on - field success , the Cosmos struggled to draw fans at Hofstra .
After the Cosmos won the 2016 NASL Championship Final , supporters publicly called for a meeting with the club 's owners , citing a lack of transparency from management and concerns over the club 's future .
2016–PRESENT
: FINANCIAL STRUGGLES AND SALE Section::::2016–present :
Financial struggles and sale .
In November 2016 , there were reports the team was in dire financial condition , including furloughs for 60–80 % of the staff and an inability to make payroll .
Later reports indicated that the Cosmos had lost over thirty million dollars since beginning play in 2013 , including as much as $ 10 million in 2016 .
On December 6 , 2016 , various media outlets began reporting that the Cosmos had released all players and coaching staff from their contracts .
Cosmos supporters launched an online campaign to raise funds for affected employees .
On December 9 , most of the club 's employees were officially laid off .
In an interview with the Guardian , O'Brien admitted the financial losses but denied that the club was in danger of going out of business , insisting that they had " zero debt " .
Empire of Soccer pointed out that while O'Brien was saying that , the Cosmos were being sued for over $ 50,000 in unpaid rent on their Garden City , Long Island offices .
Despite O'Brien 's public statements , the team came within a few hours of going out of business altogether , as he came to an agreement to sell the Cosmos brand to a private equity firm .
On December 15 , 2016 , the day O'Brien was to finalize that deal , he began negotiations with Rocco B. Commisso , a cable television executive with a lifelong interest in soccer .
On January 10 , 2017 , it was announced that Commisso purchased the majority interest in the Cosmos .
His investment kept the club and league from folding and allowed both to return for the 2017 NASL Season .
ESPN reported that O'Brien and Sela Sport retained a minority stake in the club , although supporters claim that Commisso assured them that Sela Sport is no longer part of the ownership .
On December 13 , 2017 , the Cosmos announced that Savarese had left the club " to pursue other coaching opportunities " .
Following the cancellation of the NASL 's 2018 season , the league announced that the Cosmos would take a hiatus while exploring options to return to the field in 2019 .
In September 2018 , Chief Operating Officer Erik Stover stepped down to become the CEO of a local soccer academy .
On November 15 , 2018 , the NPSL announced that the Cosmos would be a founding member in a new professional league , commencing with a " NPSL Founders Cup " competition from August to November 2019 , followed by a full league schedule in 2020 at either division 2 or 3 level .
STADIUM Section::::Stadium .
In July 2012 , when the Cosmos ' entry to the second - tier North American Soccer League was confirmed , starting in 2013 , The New York Times reported that the club would initially play home games at James M. Shuart Stadium , on the campus of Hofstra University in Hempstead , New York , about east of downtown New York City on Long Island .
The stadium seats 11,929 , and was home to the original Cosmos club during the 1972 and 1973 seasons .
The Cosmos struggled to draw fans to Hofstra , and after four seasons announced that they would play their 2017 regular - season matches at MCU Park , a minor - league baseball stadium in the Coney Island section of Brooklyn .
The Cosmos had used MCU Park as a home field twice before , once for a regular season match against the Ottawa Fury and once for a post season match against the Fort Lauderdale Strikers , both in 2015 .
The Cosmos proposed to construct a new 25,000-seat stadium at a parking lot next to the Belmont Park racetrack in Elmont , in Nassau County just over the border with Queens .
Plans for the $ 400 million project were submitted to the Empire State Development Corporation as a response to a request for proposal .
On December 9 , 2016 , the Empire State Development Corporation officially withdrew the RFP and rejected all four proposals , including that of the Cosmos .
Scheduling conflicts prevented the Cosmos from using Shuart Stadium for the 2016 Championship Final , and they were forced to rent another stadium .
They eventually settled on Belson Stadium on the campus of St. John 's University .
The announcement that the league 's championship game would be played in a 2,200-seat venue prompted derision from fans of the club and league , who took to social media with the hashtag # BiggerThanBelson .
The Final was played at Belson but failed to sell out , with only 2,150 tickets sold .
KITS AND CREST Section::::Kits and crest .
+ Kit suppliers and shirt sponsors !
Period !
Kit supplier !
Shirt sponsor !
Notes SUPPORTERS
CURRENT Section::::Supporters .
Section::::Current .
There are currently two supporters groups sharing the " Five Points " supporters section at MCU Park .
The groups are La Banda del Cosmos , a barra brava for Latin American fans , and The Cross Island Crew , primarily for fans on Long Island .
The Cross Island Crew was founded as " Sagan 's Army " , in a reference to Carl Sagan , but re - branded in December 2013 .
FORMER Section::::Former .
The original supporters group was the Borough Boys Supporters Club , formed in 2007 to lobby MLS Commissioner Don Garber for a club based in New York City .
After Kemsley 's group bought the Cosmos name in late 2009 , the Borough Boys became their first supporters group , believing that the Cosmos represented " the best choice for MLS expansion " , and remained with the club even after New York City FC was announced as the twentieth MLS club in May 2013 .
In June 2017 , the Borough Boys ' podcast / website This is Cosmos Country announced that they would no longer be covering the Cosmos , following a dispute with the club .
In an interview with Empire of Soccer , they raised questions about the ownership of the Cosmos , including wondering whether Sela Sport still had an interest .
After the EoS article was published , TICC founder Luis Hernandez received a phone call from Cosmos Senior Vice President Joe Barone .
Barone complained about TICC 's coverage of the Cosmos , and claimed to have himself received an angry phone call from Commisso , then in Saudi Arabia for a friendly match .
Hernandez said " We feel we just have to walk away .
They 're trying to bully us .
We love the team .
We 're fans .
We support the on - field product .
We 're behind [
Head Coach Giovanni Savarese ] , his players and staff .
It 's an unfortunate situation .
None of us want to be part of this anymore . "
Commisso later denied making such a call to Barone , saying " Somebody lied . "
As of late 2017 , the Borough Boys no longer had " any official relationship " with the club .
BROADCASTING
Section::::Broadcasting .
The Cosmos were originally broadcast by One World Sports , a network that was run by the team 's chairman Seamus O'Brien .
For the 2013 season , all Cosmos games were broadcast live on One World Sports and live or tape - delayed on SportsNet New York .
The majority of the games featured the on - air team of play - by - play announcer JP Dellacamera and Janusz Michallik as the color analyst .
One World Sports also produced Cosmos Classics , an original series featuring historic Cosmos matches from the 1970s and 1980s .
On March 16 , 2017 , coinciding with the team 's new ownership , and the sale of One World Sports to Eleven Sports , the Cosmos announced a new broadcast deal with MSG Network and WPIX - TV .
Ed Cohen handled play - by - play alongside Sal Rosamilia as color analyst .
RETIRED NUMBERS
HONORS LEAGUE Section::::Honors .
Section::::League . !
colspan=2Honor ! !
Champions ! !
Runners - up rowspan="3
" North American Soccer League Soccer Bowl 2013 , 2015 , 2016 2017
MINOR TROPHIES * Lunar New Year Cup
OWNERSHIP AND TEAM MANAGEMENT OWNERS Section::::Ownership and team management .
Section::::Owners .
The chairman is cable television executive Rocco B. Commisso .
Other members of the ownership group include former club chairman Seamus O'Brien and Sela Sport , a marketing company based in Saudi Arabia .
Ownership partners include International Sports Events and World Sport Group .
DIRECTORS
* Chairman and CEO :
Rocco B. Commisso TECHNICAL STAFF
* Sporting director and head coach : vacant * First assistant coach : Alberto Gallego * Fitness coach : Luis Gutierrez * Technical director : Luke Sassano
OPERATIONS
* Chief operating officer :
Erik Stover * Senior Vice President :
Joe Barone * Vice President of Finance : Kevin Kletz YOUTH ACADEMY Section::::Youth academy .
The club operated the Cosmos Academy , which it formed on foundation in August 2010 .
The academy was affiliated with Blau Weiss Gottschee and based in Queens , New York .
It competed at various levels of the U.S. Soccer Development Academy , fielding teams in the under-9 to under-18 age groups .
The US under-17 team 's Spring 2011 roster included three players from the Cosmos Academy , more than any MLS team .
A western division called Cosmos Academy West existed between August 2010 and August 2011 , based in Pomona , California , about east of Los Angeles .
At the end of 2010 , it was ranked by Soccer America as the third best boys ' club in the United States and the top boys ' club in California .
Six months after its original partnership with Los Angeles Futbol Club was terminated in February 2011 , Cosmos Academy West disbanded in August 2011 , its operations folded into those of MLS club Chivas USA .
This was done so that the Cosmos would fit more closely the requirements of a potential MLS team based out of New York City .
As part of the deal made with the Cosmos in 2010 , Blau Weiss Gottschee were to receive payment from New York in January and August each year .
After the first two bi - annual payments were made on - time , an unspecified amount was still outstanding from the third three months after its due date on August 1 , 2011 , causing Blau Weiss Gottschee to file suit for non - payment against the Cosmos on November 8 , 2011 .
Because of the lack of funding , Blau Weiss was forced to restore the tuition , transport and training fees which players had been required to pay before the 2010 deal , but which had been thereafter covered by the Cosmos sponsorship .
The Blau Weiss statement did not reveal the court in which the claim will be filed .
An under-23 Cosmos side was accepted into the USL Premier Development League ( PDL ) , the fourth tier of the United States soccer pyramid , in May 2011 , and was expected to join for the 2012 season .
In preparation for this it played exhibition matches against existing PDL clubs during 2011 , coached by Savarese .
However , it did not take part in the 2012 PDL season .
In fall of 2014 , the Cosmos announced that recently signed Raúl González Blanco would , upon his retirement from playing , assume a full - time role overseeing the Cosmos academy .
However , when Raúl retired in 2015 , he instead took a position with La Liga , overseeing its offices in the United States , and his son Hugo went into the New York City FC academy .
ATTEMPTED MAJOR LEAGUE
SOCCER EXPANSION Section::::Attempted Major League Soccer expansion .
At the time of the Cosmos ' return in 2010 , MLS was made up of 16 franchises , with three new teams set to join over the following two seasons : the Vancouver Whitecaps FC and Portland Timbers in 2011 , and the Montreal Impact in 2012 .
Newsday reported in late April 2011 that the league was committed to placing the next franchise in the New York borough of Queens if a deal could be reached .
Terry Byrne said in July 2011 that the stadium was the biggest factor regarding the Cosmos ' accession to MLS . "
The league wants us to demonstrate that we are capable of taking a stadium [ area ] and building a stadium , " he said .
Working alongside New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg , the Cosmos sought a location within New York City 's boroughs rather than a surrounding city ( which would distinguish them from the Red Bulls , based in Harrison , New Jersey ) .
Over a dozen locations around Queens , The Bronx , and Manhattan were marked out in March 2011 , narrowed down to four sites by the end of July ; two in Queens and one each in Brooklyn and " uptown " Manhattan .
Apart from the stadium , an issue regarding MLS membership was the franchise fee that the Cosmos would have to pay to the league .
When the club first announced its intention to join , the price stood at $ 40 million , but by the end of July 2011 the fee for any expansion team playing in New York had risen to $ 70 million , a 57 % rise from the entry price paid by Montreal .
At this time the club and league were in negotiations , which included talks over perhaps starting play at a temporary home stadium for " two or three years " .
By the end of 2011 , the Cosmos decided not to apply for an MLS franchise after all , in part because they rejected the league 's single entity structure , and because they did not want to relinquish marketing rights to their name and logo .
In May 2013 , Major League Soccer announced that their 20th franchise would be a different New York –
based team , New York City FC , a new team co - owned by Premier League team Manchester City and Major League Baseball team the New York Yankees .
Cosmos chairman Seamus O'Brien , however , noted that London had fourteen professional soccer teams , so New York City could " handle three . "
In February 2014 , MLS commissioner Don Garber named three other markets as candidates for the final expansion team that would get the league 's stated 24-team target by 2020 , and on April 25 , 2014 , he told Associated Press 's sports editors that there would not be a third MLS team in New York .
FOOTNOTES SEE ALSO * Soccer in New York City
REFERENCES Bibliography Source notes EXTERNAL LINKS