INDIAN RUPEE SIGN
The Indian rupee sign ( sign :
; code : INR ) is the currency symbol for the Indian rupee , the official currency of India .
Designed by Udaya Kumar , it was presented to the public by the Government of India on 15 July 2010 , following its selection through an " open " competition among Indian residents .
Before its adoption , the most commonly used symbols for the rupee were Rs , Re or , if the text was in an Indian language , an appropriate abbreviation in that language .
The design is based on the Devanagari letter " र " ( ra ) with a double horizontal line at the top .
It also resembles the Latin capital letter " R " , especially R rotunda ( Ꝛ ) .
The Unicode character for the Indian rupee sign is .
Other countries that use a rupee , such as Sri Lanka , Pakistan and Nepal , still use the generic character .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
On 5 March 2009 , the Indian government announced a contest to create a sign for the Indian rupee .
During the 2010 Union Budget , then Union Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said that the proposed sign should reflect and capture the Indian ethos and culture .
From around 3,331 responses received , five symbols were shortlisted .
These were the entries from Nondita Correa - Mehrotra , Hitesh Padmashali , Shibin KK , Shahrukh J. Irani , and D. Udaya Kumar and one of them was due to be selected at the Union Council of Ministers of India meeting held on 24 June 2010 .
However , the decision was deferred at the request of the Finance Minister , and the final decision was made when that met again on 15 July 2010 , when they chose the symbol created by Udaya Kumar , Associate Professor IIT Guwahati .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The new sign is a combination of the Devanagari letter " र " ( " ra " ) and the Latin capital letter " R " without its vertical bar ( similar to the R rotunda " Ꝛ " ) .
The parallel lines at the top ( with white space between them ) are said to make an allusion to the tricolor Indian flag .
and also depict an equality sign that symbolizes the nation 's desire to reduce economic disparity .
The final selected symbol was designed by D. Udaya Kumar , a Bachelor of Architecture and visual design student at the Industrial Design Centre , IIT Bombay .
The thoughts and philosophy behind the design are explained in this presentation .
APPROVAL Section::::Approval .
Ministry of Finance and Department of Economic Affairs of the Government of India had finally approved the sign .
The approval was given by Sushil Kumar , Under Secretary of the Government of India .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The Indian rupee sign selection process was challenged in the Delhi High Court , by petitioner Rakesh Kumar , who was a participant in the competition , described the process as " full of discrepancies " and " flawed " , and named the Finance Ministry and the chairman of Indian Rupee Symbol Selection Committee as respondents .
On 26 November 2010 , the Delhi High Court single bench dismissed the writ petition , stating there was no justifiable ground for the stated allegations .
However , later The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi , on 30 January 2013 , in W.P. ( c ) 2449/2012 titled Rakesh Kumar Singh Vs .
Union of India ( PIL ) filed through lawyer Kamal Kumar Pandey , listed before the Division bench of Hon'ble Chief Justice and V. K. Jain J. , taking cognizance of and in view of the irregularities and arbitrariness involved in Public Competitions ( Indian Rupee , UIDAI , I Mark , Indian railway for Common Wealth , RTI ) for designing Symbols / Logos or designing Logos by other methods of important national bodies / institutions , in their historic judgment directed all the ministries of the Government of India to formulate / prepare guidelines to ensure transparency , wider participation of public and also that such guidelines should be of uniform nature and in uniformity with each others .
On 11 April 2013 , Finance Ministry formed the guidelines for conducting public competitions for design of symbol / logo .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
Upon the symbol 's adoption in July 2010 , the Indian government said it would try to adopt the sign within six months in the country and globally within 18 to 24 months .
Major banks have also started printing cheques with the new Indian rupee sign , where the traditional ₨ sign was used .
The Indian Postal Department also started printing postage stamps with this new Indian rupee sign , when it issued the Commonwealth Games commemorative stamps on 3 October 2010 .
In his budget speech on 28 February 2011 , the finance minister , Pranab Mukherjee , announced that the sign will be incorporated in future coin issues .
Coins of denomination of 1 , 2 , 5 and 10 with the new rupee symbol have been put into circulation .
As of January 2012 , the new Indian rupee sign has been incorporated in the currency notes in the denominations of 10 , 100 , 500 and 2000 and as of 12 April 2012 this was extended to denominations of 20 and 50 .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
On 10 August 2010 , the Unicode Technical Committee accepted the proposed code position .
The character has been encoded in the Unicode 6.0 , and named distinctly from the existing character , which will continue to be available as the generic rupee sign .
Ubuntu became the first operating system to support the Indian rupee symbol by default .
Since its 10.10 version it has supported the symbol out of the box , as it was added to the Ubuntu font family by a contributor .
Since then , it has been included in various GNU / Linux distributions .
On 18 May 2011 , Microsoft released an update KB2496898 to Windows Vista , Windows Server 2008 , Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 operating systems to include support for this new Indian rupee symbol .
With the Windows update , it is now possible to use alt code text entry to obtain the Indian Rupee symbol –
+ .
On systems running Windows 8 , the symbol can be typed using the English ( India ) keyboard layout with the key combination
+ .
Apple Inc. has added support for the rupee symbol with iOS 7 .
Mac OS X Lion ( 10.7 ) also includes the new Indian rupee symbol and can be found in the Character Viewer .
As of Mac OS X Mountain Lion ( 10.8 ) , users using the Devanagari keyboard can enter the new Indian rupee symbol by typing - ( a combination that yields the Cent symbol on a US keyboard layout ) .
Sailfish OS also provides the symbol in its default keyboard .
SEE ALSO
* Currency sign * Generic rupee sign REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Udaya Kumar 's design proposal for the Indian rupee sign * Official announcement of the sign
* WebRupee ₹
Drupal Project
* rupyaINR , guidance for use of the Indian Rupee Symbol on the web