HARRY POTTER IN AMUSEMENT PARKS
This article details the appearance of Harry Potter theming in amusement parks .
In the late 1990s , Universal Parks and Resorts began discussing the possibility of purchasing the license for Harry Potter to create and theme amusement park rides .
As Time Warner owns the license , a small walkthrough attraction was constructed at
Warner Bros. Movie World called the Harry Potter Movie Magic Experience in 2001 .
This attraction was removed two years later .
In 2010 , Universal 's Islands of Adventure park opened The Wizarding World of Harry Potter .
Similar attractions are destined for Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Studios Japan .
HISTORY HARRY POTTER MOVIE
MAGIC
EXPERIENCE
AT WARNER BROS .
MOVIE
WORLD Section::::History .
Section::::Harry Potter Movie Magic Experience at Warner Bros. Movie World .
In 2001 , Time Warner used this license to construct and operate the Harry Potter Movie Magic Experience at Warner Bros. Movie World on the Gold Coast , Australia .
The attraction was a small indoor walkthrough featuring many re - creations of locations in the first two movies .
After two years of operation this attraction was removed .
THE WIZARDING WORLD OF HARRY POTTER
AT ISLANDS OF ADVENTURE Section::::The Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Islands of Adventure .
A Harry Potter themed attraction at a Universal Studios park or a Disney park was rumored in 2003 .
However , the rights to the Harry Potter franchise had been acquired by Warner Bros. , who denied all rumors .
In January 2007 , About.com reported a rumor from a " highly credible source " that the Islands of Adventure park 's Lost Continent area was going to be re - themed " to the stories and characters of one of the most popular children 's franchises " .
Other sources followed up in the next few days with unofficial confirmation that the new area would involve Harry Potter .
On May 31 , 2007 , Universal , in partnership with Warner Bros. , officially announced The Wizarding World of Harry Potter would be added to Islands of Adventure .
Construction of the Wizarding World of Harry Potter began seven months after the official announcement , in January 2008 .
By July , the Flying Unicorn and Enchanted Oak Tavern were closed .
The Flying Unicorn then began an almost two year refurbishment which transformed it into the Flight of the Hippogriff .
The Enchanted Oak Tavern was later demolished .
A bridge was built to connect The Lost Continent with Jurassic Park allowing guests to avoid the construction zone that was to be the Wizarding World .
Construction progressed with the Hogwarts castle slowly taking shape .
By September 2008 , the Dueling Dragons entrance was moved to Jurassic Park to make room for construction of Hogsmeade .
One month later , the old entrance was demolished .
By September 2009 , the top shell of Hogwarts castle was completed .
On September 15 , an announcement was made as to what exactly was going to be included in the Wizarding World .
In early 2010 , Universal increased the marketing of the area which included newspaper advertisements , billboards and television commercials .
The Dueling Dragons were closed for some maintenance before being transformed into the Dragon Challenge .
Construction was complete by June 1 , 2010 when the area began soft openings .
A soft opening weekend was held for the media and reserved guests , starting on May 28 , 2010 .
The park had two opening ceremonies that took place on June 16 and June 18 , 2010 .
The first opening was reserved for the cast and crew of the Harry Potter films , J.K. Rowling ( author of the novels ) , Universal Orlando Resort officials , as well as representatives from the media .
The ceremony concluded with a fireworks display and a performance by the Orlando Philharmonic Orchestra , led by John Williams ( composer of the music for the first three films ) .
On June 18 , the second ceremony occurred which officially opened The Wizarding World of Harry Potter to the public .
Universal Orlando representative Bill Davis introduced the area to the audience which included actors from the films including Daniel Radcliffe , Rupert Grint , Michael Gambon , Warwick Davis , Tom Felton , Matthew Lewis , Bonnie Wright and James and Oliver Phelps .
The NBC Today show and The Weather Channel broadcast segments live from the park .
On December 6 , 2011 , Universal Parks & Resorts announced an expansion plan for The Wizarding World of Harry Potter .
The expansion has been described as " significant " by officials .
Few other details have been released .
THE WIZARDING WORLD OF HARRY POTTER
AT OTHER PARKS
Section::::The
Wizarding World of Harry Potter at other parks .
On December 1 , 2011 , the Wall Street Journal reported a rumour from " people familiar with the matter " that Universal Studios Hollywood was going to add their version of Islands of Adventure 's Wizarding World of Harry Potter .
The report also detailed the possibility that Universal Parks & Resorts would open additional Harry Potter - themed areas at Universal Studios Singapore and Universal Studios Japan as well as a location in Spain .
This report was widely relayed by other media sources .
On December 6 , 2011 , Universal officially announced plans to bring The Wizarding World of Harry Potter to Universal Studios Hollywood .
A replica of Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey and Hogwarts will be constructed .
On May 5 , 2012 , the Los Angeles Times reported that Universal Studios Japan would also be receiving a The Wizarding World of Harry Potter by 2014 .
Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey was also confirmed as one of the attractions .
LOCATIONS Section::::Locations . !
Park ! !
Area ! !
Opening date ! !
Closing date ! !
Previous attraction ! !
Replaced by ATTRACTIONS Section::::Attractions .
Below is a list of all of the attractions at Harry Potter themed areas around the world .
The dates shown in the columns refer to the opening and closing dates for the ride under that name .
It does not mean that the ride was closed and/or removed . !
Attraction !
Type !
width="55px"UOR !
width="55px"USJ !
width="55px"USH !
width="55px"WBMW SEE ALSO
* Warner Bros. Studio Tour London -
The Making of Harry Potter NOTES REFERENCES