BUSKING ( U.S. CASE LAW )
In the United States there have been numerous legal cases about regulations and laws that have decided the rights of buskers to perform in public .
Most of these laws and regulations have been found to be unconstitutional when challenged .
In the US , free speech is considered a fundamental right of every individual , guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth constitutional amendments , and in the majority of legal cases it has been concluded that practicing artistic free speech is legal .
Busking is legally considered to be artistic free speech and clearly not panhandling or begging .
In the United States , reasons to regulate or ban busking behavior include public safety issues and noise issues in certain areas such as hospital zones and residential zones .
In residential zones , a reasonable curfew may be allowed .
Such laws must be narrowly tailored to eliminate only the perceived evils by limiting the time , place , and manner that busking may be practiced .
They must also leave open reasonable alternative venues .
The only exceptions to these free speech rules are sedition , as defined by the Smith Act , public displays of pornography and obscenity as defined by the Miller test for obscenity , criminal behavior such as fraud or defamation , certain commercial advertising and the common laws talked about above .
In the US , laws regulating or banning busking must be applied evenly to all forms of free speech according to the first and fourteenth constitutional amendments and the judicial decisions listed below .
Busking can not be prohibited in an area where other forms of free speech are not prohibited .
For example , if busking is regulated or banned but people are allowed to conduct free speech behavior for pickets , protests , religious , political , educational , sports , commercial or other purposes , then the law is illegal .
In the United States any form of regulation on artistic free speech must not be judgmental , and permits must not be so restrictive , complex , difficult or expensive to obtain that they inhibit free speech .
It is also unlawful per federal court decision for law officers to seize a performer 's instruments .
Under Title 18 , U.S.C. , Section 241 Conspiracy Against Rights , it is unlawful for two or more persons to conspire to injure , oppress , threaten , or intimidate any person of any state , territory or district in the free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to him / her by the Constitution or the laws of the United States , or because of his / her having exercised the same .
Under United States law , it is the express duty of all officers of the law or individuals such as security guards , legislators , mayors , Council Persons , judges , Hospitals and Nursing Home Proprietors , etc . , to protect and preserve an individual 's constitutional rights Under Title 18 , U.S.C. , Section 242 - Deprivation of Rights Under Color of Law .
Most of these individuals take oaths to uphold the US Constitution .
It is clearly a violation of federal law for these individuals to violate people 's constitutional or civil rights under the color of the law .
CASES Section::::Cases . !
Year !
Case law REFERENCES