BIG TIME RUSH ( BAND )
Big Time Rush ( also known as BTR ) was an American pop music boy band formed in 2009 .
The group consisted of Kendall Schmidt , James Maslow , Logan Henderson , and
Carlos Pena Jr. The group starred in Nickelodeon 's television series Big Time Rush and signed to a record deal with Nick Records simultaneously with the television series , and then the group was eventually signed to Columbia Records .
The show ran from November 28 , 2009 to July 25 , 2013 .
The pilot episode featured the group 's first promotional single , " Big Time Rush " .
They have released three studio albums which all achieved success .
The band stopped performing in 2014 .
CAREER
2009–10
: FORMATION AND BTR Section::::Career .
Section::::2009–10 :
Formation and BTR .
Nickelodeon signed Big Time Rush to a record deal in 2009 simultaneously with the television series , Big Time Rush .
Then , Nickelodeon partnered with Columbia / Epic Label Group to produce the show and include the original music to the show .
For the series , their debut single , " Big Time Rush " , was released on November 29 , 2009 .
Officially announced by Nickelodeon , the series was first broadcast in the U.S. in November 2009 , until it was eventually released worldwide .
It debuted during a one - hour special preview of the series and it is currently the show 's opening theme .
The series also saw the releases of other singles including " City is Ours " and " Any Kind of Guy " .
Big Time Rush also covered a Play song titled " Famous " .
The song was released on iTunes on June 29 , 2010 .
Another song , " Halfway There " , was released to iTunes on April 27 , 2010 , after its premiere on the series .
The single soon became their first single to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 93 due to digital sales .
On September 21 , 2010 , Big Time Rush released a promotional single , "
Till I Forget About You " , to promote the release of their debut album .
The album , titled BTR , was released on October 11 , 2010 .
The album debuted at number 3 on the Billboard 200 , selling 67,000 copies in its first week of release .
The album also peaked at number 4 on the Internet Albums chart and number one on the Soundtracks chart .
Its track " Big Night " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 79 , making it their highest peaking song .
The album was later certified Gold for sales of over 500,000 copies in the U.S.
In November 2010 , it was announced that a Christmas special of Big Time Rush would debut later that month , and that a Christmas EP would be released to coincide with the episode .
On November 30 , 2010 , they released the Holiday EP Holiday Bundle , with two songs : " Beautiful Christmas " and the cover of " All I Want for Christmas is You " , originally performed by Mariah Carey .
On February 15 , 2011 , " Boyfriend " was released as the band 's first official single to mainstream US radio .
" Boyfriend " peaked at number seventy - two on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming their most successful song to date .
It even peaked at number 30 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart in March 2011 and also charted very well in multiple international countries .
A remix of " Boyfriend " which featured New Boyz was leaked onto the internet .
Big Time Rush was nominated for MTV 's Breakthrough Band award honor in 2011 as well .
Big Time Rush has made several appearances at KCA ( Kid 's Choice Awards . )
Their single " Boyfriend " was nominated for a Premios Oye !
award in Mexico ( similar to the Grammy Award in the United States ) for Best International English Song of the Year .
They lost to Rihanna 's single " Diamonds " .
2011–12 : ELEVATE AND FILM Section::::2011–12 :
Elevate and film .
The group announced they would be recording their second studio album , just after Nickelodeon renewed the series for a third season .
On July 22 , 2011 , the group released a promotional single , " If I Ruled the World " featuring Iyaz , in anticipation of their second album , Elevate .
Elevate was released on November 21 , 2011 and debuted at number 12 on the Billboard 200 , selling over 70,000 copies in its first week .
Though the album had a lower peak position than their previous debut , Elevate sold far more copies its first week respectively than the previous album did .
The first single , " Music Sounds Better with U " , written by the band and Ryan Tedder from OneRepublic , was released on November 1 , 2011 .
The song peaked at number twenty - six on the US Pop Songs .
To promote the release of their second album , the group had their first headlining tour , the Better With U Tour , which took place over sixteen dates in February and March 2012 .
JoJo opened for Big Time Rush for the first five dates , while One Direction opened for ten of the sixteen dates .
In late February , Big Time Rush announced a national summer tour starting July 5 at the Nationwide Arena in Columbus , OH .
The group announced they would be starring in their full - length 2012 film , Big Time Movie .
The movie features them traveling to London , England .
In Big Time Movie , the four members of the group Big Time Rush head to London for their first big world tour but instead get mixed up in a mission to save the world .
The film was released on March 10 , 2012 , in the US to Theaters , while a Germany release was on September 22 , 2012 .
Due to the promotion , the group recorded cover of The Beatles songs and released an EP , Big Time Movie Soundtrack EP .
The film received mixed to positive reviews from most contemporary film critics , many comparing them to The Monkees and praising their fun , carefree image .
The film was a ratings success , having over thirteen million views during its premiere weekend .
2013–14
: 24 / SEVEN Section::::2013–14
: 24 / Seven .
In 2013 Nickelodeon renewed the Big Time Rush series for a 13-episode fourth season , production started on January 7 .
The band also released a song titled " Like Nobody 's Around " which according to the premiere episode " Big Time Invasion " was outlining the history of professional , successful , and All - American Boy Bands ; the Platters , the Temptations , The Jackson 5 , New Kids on the Block , Backstreet Boys , and NSYNC , in response to the British invasion of rival act , and hugely successful One Direction . "
Like Nobody 's Around is the second track on both the standard and deluxe version of Big Time Rush 's third album .
On April 15 , in an interview on Cambio , Big Time Rush announced that their third studio album , 24 / Seven would be released sometime in early June 2013 and that the fourth season of Big Time Rush will air on May 2 , 2013 .
On April 18 , Big Time Rush revealed that 24 / Seven would be released on either June 4 or 11 , 2013 .
On April 20 , nine tracks from the album ( plus " Song for You " without the Karmin vocals and " Get Up " with only Schmidt 's vocals ) was leaked .
On June 4 , EW released the full 10-song Standard version of 24 / Seven online .
The Deluxe version of 24 / Seven has also been leaked on YouTube and a different version of " Love Me Again " was leaked with it .
24
/ Seven was released on June 11 , 2013 , the album cover and track list was revealed on April 29 , 2013 .
24 / Seven was less commercially successful than its preceding record Elevate .
It included singles such as the up - tempo title track 24
/ Seven and the rock ballad
" We Are " .
However , Big Time Rush were still nominated for World 's Best Group , Best Album and Best Live Act for the ceremony in Monte Carlo , Monaco at the Salle des Etoiles Venue for the 22nd annual World Music Awards for their continuing global success with the band and their 24 / Seven release .
It was later confirmed that same night after the awards show that Big Time Rush had won the World 's Best Live Act trophy , making them the very first and only Nickelodeon act and/or artist in history to win a World Music Award trophy .
In 2013 , after the end of the run of the Big Time Rush television series , the group members continued touring until March 2014 and then later putting the band on an indefinite hiatus , and went on to pursue solo careers .
Schmidt stated at that time that they would like to come back together again as a band if they have an opportunity which , , has not happened .
Kendall Schmidt later reformed the band Heffron Drive with Dustin Belt In May 2013 .
ARTISTRY MUSICAL STYLE AND THEMES Section::::Artistry .
Section::::Musical style and themes .
Because the group is associated with the TV series and children 's network Nickelodeon , they have been presented as a " child - friendly " group , but have musical differences .
In a review of their first studio album , BTR , Jessica Dawson from Common Sense Media wrote : " Big Time Rush is a standout , not only because of their boyish charm and good looks , but because their music is a cool blend of synth - pop , hip - hop , and boy - band harmonies . "
The sound of the band is described as " pop - inspired dance - rock " .
PUBLIC IMAGE
Section::::Public image .
The group has been compared to recent boy bands such as One Direction and The Wanted .
Michael O'Connell from The Hollywood Reporter said " One Direction is but one group in this resilient and timeless fad .
They follow the recent success of fellow Brits [ The Wanted ] and Nickelodeon 's cross - market creation [ Big Time Rush ] .
One [ One Direction ] is fluke .
Two
[ The Wanted ] is a coincidence .
And three [ Big Time Rush ] is a trend that you want to father your unborn children . '
Melinda Newman from The Washington Post stated " In the grand tradition of boy bands , these acts share certain traits with their similarly manufactured pop ancestors : Members of The Wanted and Big Time Rush auditioned for their parts at a casting call .
The members of One Direction were put together by Simon Cowell after trying out individually for the British edition of " The X Factor . "
" However , she positively compared them to the Monkees by saying " Big Time Rush is similar to the Monkees with its own TV series as a launchpad , and the group appeals to kids , tweens , teens , and adults .
They are also credited as the pop group that have once again restored creditably , relevance , and for relaunching boy bands back into the public eye once again . "
In Parade Magazine 's 2012 poll , Big Time Rush was voted the " Best Boy Band in the World " , topping both One Direction and The Wanted .
Over 800,000 votes were cast .
The band was featured on the cover of the August 5 , 2012 issue of Parade which was a national top seller .
An interview and photo set highlighting the group 's win that coincided with the honor was featured in the same issue .
The magazine 's website also featured the group amongst its list of " Greatest Boy Bands of All - Time " , along with NSYNC and the Backstreet Boys .
Big Time Rush have been honored and recognized multiple times by major media outlets throughout their time as a group .
Due to their extreme worldwide popularity and success ( along with being heavily credited as one of the bands that helped bring back the boy band wave ) The Washington Times Magazine ranked Big Time Rush Number 15 of their Top 20 Best Boy Bands of the decade in 2012 .
And number 28 on the POP !
Goes The Charts website list of the Top 40 Best Boy Bands of the past 25 years in 2013 .
To Toronto Sun , Pena talked about the group 's impact on both music and television :
" I think the music could stand alone , but I do n't know if it would be as powerful .
The show has definitely been our main audience .
We have four million kids watching .
So when you put a song out , four million kids hear it .
When you put a song on the radio , you 're not going to have four million people listening .
It 's a blessing and a curse being on Nickelodeon – it 's gotten us where we are now , though some people are standoffish to us because of that .
But we have to be grateful that Nickelodeon gave us this opportunity .
Abandoning the show would not be the best idea " .
MEMBERS
* Kendall Schmidt – vocals
* James Maslow – vocals
* Carlos Pena , Jr. – vocals
* Logan Henderson – vocals
DISCOGRAPHY Studio albums
* BTR ( 2010 )
* Elevate ( 2011 )
* 24 / Seven ( 2013 ) TOURS * Big Time Rush in Concert ( 2011 )
* Better with U Tour ( 2012 ) * Big Time Summer Tour ( 2012 )
* Summer Break Tour ( 2013 )
* Live World Tour ( 2014 ) AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Result !
Ref .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official site * Big Time Rush on MTV.com