THE HEROES OF OLYMPUS
The Heroes of Olympus is a pentalogy of fantasy - adventure novels written by American author Rick Riordan .
The novels detail a conflict between Greek and Roman demigods and Gaea , the earth goddess .
The series is a sequel to Percy Jackson & the Olympians , which dealt with Greek gods .
Riordan introduces Roman mythology into his sequel series as well as several new characters .
The first book of the series , The Lost Hero , was published on October 12 , 2010 .
The final entry in the series , The Blood of Olympus , was published on October 7 , 2014 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The Heroes of Olympus is centered around a prophecy , introduced in The Last Olympian , that predicted seven demigods would unite to protect the world from an awakened Gaea .
Demigods from both the Greek camp , Camp Half - Blood , and a newfound Roman camp , Camp Jupiter , work together to save the world from being destroyed by Gaea .
The prophecy reads : Seven half - bloods shall answer the call , To storm or fire , the world must fall .
An oath to keep with a final breath ,
And foes bear arms to the Doors of Death .
Seven demigodsAnnabeth Chase , Leo Valdez , Percy Jackson and Piper McLean from Camp Half - Blood , with Jason Grace , Frank Zhang , and Hazel Levesque from Camp Jupiterjoin forces .
A storm or a fire will destroy the world ( Leo destroys Gaea with a fire ) .
One of the seven will make an oath that is kept until their last breath .
Leo vows to return to Ogygia .
Leo dies in the explosion that kills Gaea .
He is revived thanks to the Physician 's Cure .
( This also could have been to bring back Festus . )
The last line details how demigods , a giant , and a titan will free the Doors of Death .
SWAPPED HEROES
THE LOST HERO Section::::The Lost Hero .
The novel begins by introducing Jason Grace , Piper McLean , and Leo Valdez , three newly discovered demigods who travel to Camp Half - Blood .
In response to a prophecy , they set off on a quest to prevent the rebirth of the giant king Porphyrion and rescue Piper 's father , who has been kidnapped by another giant , Enceladus ( Leo called him Enchiladas ) .
Jason , who has amnesia , also begins to remember pieces of his past throughout the book - most importantly , that he comes from a Roman camp for demigods called Camp Jupiter .
Camp Half - Blood resolves to seek out this other camp both to gain allies in the fight against Gaea , the giants ' mother and commander , and to locate the missing Percy Jackson .
THE SON OF NEPTUNE Section::::The Son of Neptune .
The novel opens with Percy Jackson ( struck with amnesia ) discovering Camp Jupiter and meeting several Roman demigods .
After a prophecy from Mars , he , Frank Zhang , and Hazel Levesque travel to Alaska to stop the rise of the giant Alcyoneus and free the god Thanatos , whom the giant has captured .
After successfully completing their mission , the group returns to Camp Jupiter to defend it from yet another giant , Polybotes , and his army .
After repelling this invasion , the demigods from Camp Jupiter go to meet the delegation from Camp Half - Blood arriving in the flying ship known as the Argo II .
GIANTS BECOME STRONGER
Section::::Giants become stronger .
After the Argo II unintentionally fires on Camp Jupiter , the seven demigods of the " Prophecy of Seven " - Percy Jackson , Annabeth Chase , Hazel Levesque , Frank Zhang , Jason Grace , Piper McLean , and Leo Valdez - rush to escape the angered Roman campers .
They travel to Rome following the Mark of Athena , a magical talisman designed to lead children of Athena ( like Annabeth ) to the missing Athena Parthenos .
During their journey , they hear that Nico di Angelo has been captured by the Aloadae , and go to rescue him .
Although they successfully free the son of Hades and locate the statue , Annabeth and Percy are pulled into Tartarus and the rest of the group resolves to find some way to save them .
In Tartarus , Percy Jackson and Annabeth Chase travel towards the " Doors of Death " ( the only exit to the mortal world ) with help from Bob the Titan , hoping to escape and simultaneously stop more monsters from getting through .
In the mortal world , the remaining demigods search for the mortal side of the Doors to help open them .
They also meet with Reyna Avila Ramírez - Arellano , a Roman demigod ; she , Nico di Angelo , and Coach Hedge leave with the Athena Parthenos for Camp Half - Blood .
Once reunited , the original seven sail for Greece , where they expect Gaea 's main force will gather .
CONCLUSION Section::::Conclusion .
While Reyna Ramírez - Arellano , Nico di Angelo , and Gleeson Hedge travel towards Camp Half - Blood ( where the Romans are preparing to attack the Greeks ) , the seven of the quest travel to Athens .
With help from the gods , the demigods defeat the giants in Athens .
They then return to the fight on Long Island and Leo Valdez sacrifices himself to defeat Gaea and restore peace .
In the final pages , Leo is resurrected by his bronze dragon Festus and goes to find his girlfriend Calypso .
Unaware that he is alive , Camp Half - Blood and Camp Jupiter mourn his loss , determining to become allies and prevent such a deadly war from happening again .
SUPPLEMENTARY WORKS
THE DEMIGOD DIARIES Section::::Supplementary works .
Section::::The Demigod Diaries .
Released August 14 , 2012 , The Demigod Diaries is a collection of short stories .
Similar to The Demigod Files , it contains some new stories with character interviews , illustrations , puzzles , and a quiz .
The four stories include : *
" The Diary of Luke Castellan " : Thalia Grace and Luke Castellan meet Halycon Green , Luke receives his knife , and the pair encounters Annabeth Chase .
The events of the story take place roughly five years before The Lightning Thief , the first book of Percy Jackson & the Olympians .
* " Percy Jackson and the Staff of Hermes " : Percy Jackson and Annabeth are sent by Hermes to retrieve his caduceus from the fire - breathing giant Cacus .
The story takes place between The Last Olympian and The Lost Hero .
* " Leo Valdez and the Quest for Buford " :
Jason Grace , Leo Valdez , and Piper McLean confront a group of Maenads while searching for Buford the table , who has run off with an important piece of the unfinished Argo II .
The story takes place at Camp Half - Blood between The Lost Hero and The Son of Neptune .
* " Son of Magic " :
Alabaster Torrington , a demigod son of Hecate who fought on Kronos 's side , finds himself in a fight to the death with Lamia .
He is alone after being banished from Camp Half - Blood following Kronos 's defeat in The Last Olympian and asks the mortal Howard Claymore for help .
This story was written by Rick Riordan 's son Haley Riordan .
CHARACTERS GREEKS
* Perseus " Percy " Jackson :
The 17-year - old son of Poseidon from Camp Half - Blood , Percy is the narrator and main protagonist of the preceding series Percy Jackson & the Olympians .
In The Son of Neptune , he is depicted fighting amnesia , during which his only memory is his girlfriend , Annabeth Chase .
* Annabeth Chase : Annabeth , 17 years old and a daughter of Athena , is credited as " the smartest girl in camp " by Percy Jackson , a comment that is true and well - deserved .
She is a gifted and dedicated architect as well .
* Piper McLean : A 15-year - old daughter of Aphrodite .
She is one of the few children of Aphrodite who has the rare heriditary gift of " charmspeak " ( the ability to magically convince people to do what the person in question says ) and is described as beautiful by Jason Grace .
She carries a knife called Katropris ( previously owned by Helen of Troy ) that shows her visions of the future .
She begins dating Jason Grace ( son of Jupiter ) during the series .
* Leo Valdez :
A 15-year - old son of Hephaestus who can control fire ( a very rare ability ) .
He is famous among his cabinmates for repairing the automated bronze dragon Festus gone wild , whom had given more experienced campers life altering disabilities .
He leads the building of the Argo II .
Leo begins dating Calypso in The Blood of Olympus after being stranded on Ogygia earlier in the series .
*
Nico di Angelo : A 15-year - old son of Hades who has power over the dead and the ability to " shadow travel " long distances .
He is the only demigod who knew about both Camps before the war .
Nico begins dating Will Solace during the time period encompassing the end of " The Blood of Olympus " and the beginning of " The Hidden Oracle , " the first book in the next series .
* Gleeson Hedge :
An old satyr , formerly a coach at the Wilderness School .
Hedge 's first child is born during the final book of the series .
* Thalia Grace : Thalia is Jason 's biological sister , but a daughter of Zeus rather than Jupiter ( Jupiter and Zeus are the same god in different aspects , making Jason a child of Rome and Thalia a child of Greece ) .
* Tyson : Tyson is a cyclops , the half - brother of Percy *
Rachel Elizabeth Dare : Camp Half - Blood 's oracle .
Rachel is not a demigod or a legacy ; she is a regular mortal human who was born with the gift to see through the Mist .
She is the current Oracle , being a vessel for the Spirit of Delphi .
* Grover Underwood : Percy 's best friend , a satyr ; he and Percy have an empathy link that allows them to sense one another .
Also Grover Underwood is gifted by the lord of the wild , Pan .
ROMANS
* Jason Grace : A 15-year - old Roman son of Jupiter who can fly , control winds and lightning , and create storms .
He is a natural leader and was praetor before Hera took his memory and sent him to Camp Half - Blood .
* Hazel Levesque : A 13-year - old daughter of Pluto .
She originally lived in the 1940s before dying to stop the rise of Alcyoneus and later being revived by her half - brother Nico di Angelo .
She can control precious metals and stones , navigate underground , and manipulate the Mist .
* Frank Zhang :
A 16-year - old son of Mars and a descendant of Poseidon on his mother 's side .
Frank can shapeshift .
* Reyna Avila Ramírez - Arellano : A 16-year - old daughter of the Roman goddess of war , Bellona .
Reyna can lend her useful abilities ( like her courage , strength , and leadership ability ) to other demigods .
* Octavian : An 18-year - old Roman descendant of Apollo , he serves as the Camp Jupiter 's augur .
Octavian is power - hungry and seizes control of the camp after Reyna goes looking for the Athena Parthenos .
He is largely responsible for the Roman Camp attacking Camp Half - Blood .
INSPIRATIONS AND ORIGINS Section::::Inspirations and origins .
After realizing how many Greek and Roman myths he had left untouched as well the immense success of the original series , Riordan began writing a second series , using inspiration for his storyline from experiences that he and his children had while playing video and role - playing games such as World of Warcraft and Scion .
After creating the storyline , Riordan created three new main characters — Jason , Piper , and Leo — but continued to use the previous main characters such as Annabeth and Grover as secondary characters .
Unlike the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series which uses first - person narration solely from Percy 's point of view , the second series is told in third - person , with the point of view alternating between various main characters .
In The Lost Hero , those characters are Jason , Piper , and Leo .
Although initially uncertain how fans would react , Riordan later found that they enjoyed the new format , as it allowed them to learn more about each character .
Riordan says that " it was my way of letting them revisit that world in a fresh twist , but also to catch up with Percy and Annabeth and the rest of the gang from the first series " .
He also decided to include the Roman gods after many readers requested that Riordan write a new series on Roman gods , who are the Roman equivalent of the Greek gods , with some minor changes in personality .
He pondered on how the Roman aspect of the gods would be after moving from Greece to Rome to America .
After a while , " playing with that idea gave me the idea for the new series " .
PUBLISHING HISTORY
Section::::Publishing history .
The Lost Hero , the first book in the Heroes of Olympus series , was released on October 12 , 2010 as a hardcover , audiobook , and ebook .
The initial publishing run consisted of 2.5 million copies .
The book 's official publication was preceded by several " sneak - peek " releases by Disney - Hyperion .
A graphic novel version , adapted and illustrated by Orpheus Collar , was released October 7 , 2014 .
FOLLOW - UP SERIES Section::::Follow - up series .
A sequel pentalogy series titled The Trials of Apollo is currently in - development , with the first installment , The Hidden Oracle released on May 3 , 2016 .
The second installment , The Dark Prophecy , was released on May 2 , 2017 ..
The third installment , The Burning Maze was released on May 1 , 2018 .
ACHIEVEMENTS RECEPTION Section::::Achievements .
Section::::Reception .
The Lost Hero was a number one bestseller on the lists of The New York Times , USA Today , The Wall Street Journal , and Publishers Weekly .
Many critics praised the novel as a good follow - up to Riordan 's previous series .
A review by The Epoch Times commented , " If anyone was afraid that Riordan could n't top his Percy Jackson series — they can quit worrying .
This new series , even though in the same genre as the Percy Jackson group , has fresh ideas , more mystery and magic and keeps the reader engrossed from start to finish . "
Despite this praise , some reviews were more mixed .
Vicky Smith of Kirkus Reviews wrote , " [ there are ] far too many pages of stretched - out action , telling not showing and awkward dialogue ...
Unless Riordan tightens things up considerably by number five , [ readers ] may find themselves hoping that it does not end with a third Great Prophecy " .
The Lost Hero won the Barnes & Noble Best Book of 2010 award and was a Massachusetts Children 's Book Award Honor book for 2014 , among other honors .
Rick Riordan was named " Author of the Year " for the novel at the 2011 Children 's Choice Awards .
The book was also recommended by the ALA Best Fiction for Young Adults list of 2012 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Heroes of Olympus series site from publisher Disney ( readriordan.com )
* Rick Riordan Myth Master at publisher Penguin Books ( UK )