HANNA ( FILM )
Hanna is a 2011 action adventure thriller film that contains some prominent fairy tale elements , directed by Joe Wright .
The film stars Saoirse Ronan as the title character , a girl raised in the wilderness of northern Finland by her father , an ex - CIA operative ( Eric Bana ) , who trains her as an assassin .
Cate Blanchett is a senior CIA agent who tries to track down and eliminate the girl and her father .
The soundtrack was written by The Chemical Brothers .
Hanna was released in North America in April 2011 and in Europe in May 2011 .
The film received a positive response from most critics , with reviewers praising the performances of Ronan and Blanchett as well as the action sequences and themes .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Hanna Heller is a fifteen - year - old girl who lives with her father , Erik , in rural northern Finland .
Since the age of two , Hanna has been trained by Erik , an ex - CIA operative from Germany , to be a skilled assassin .
He teaches her hand - to - hand combat and drills her in target shooting .
Erik knows a secret that can not become public , and Marissa Wiegler , a senior C.I.A. officer , searches for him in order to eliminate him .
Erik has trained Hanna with the intent that she will kill Marissa .
One night , Hanna tells Erik that she is " ready " to face their enemies .
Erik digs up a radio beacon that eventually will alert the C.I.A. to their presence .
Although he warns Hanna that a confrontation with Marissa will be fatal for either her or Marissa , he leaves the final decision to Hanna , who activates the beacon .
Erik leaves , instructing her to meet him in Berlin .
Hanna is taken to an underground C.I.A. complex in Morocco where a suspicious Marissa sends a body double .
While talking to the double , Hanna starts to cry and crawls sobbing into the lap of the double , which makes her captors uneasy .
They send some guards to her cell to sedate her .
As they enter the cell , Hanna kills the double along with some of the guards and escapes .
Hanna meets Sebastian and Rachel , who are on a camper - van holiday with their children , Sophie and Miles in Morocco .
She stows away in the family 's camper - van on the ferry ride to Spain , seeking to reach Berlin .
The family is kind to her , and she and Sophie become friends , even sharing a kiss together .
Marissa hires Isaacs , a sadistic former agent , to capture Hanna .
Hanna travels with the family as they drive north through France .
Isaacs and two skinheads trail them and eventually corner Hanna and the family near Hamburg , but she manages to escape , killing one of the assailants .
Marissa catches up with the British family and during interrogation finds out that Hanna is heading to Berlin .
Arriving at the address that Erik had given her , Hanna meets with Knepfler , an eccentric old magician and a friend of Erik 's , who lives in an abandoned amusement park .
Hanna plans a rendezvous with her father .
However , Marissa and Isaacs arrive .
Hanna escapes , but overhears comments that suggest Erik is not her biological father .
Later , Hanna goes to her grandmother 's apartment where she finds Erik , who has unsuccessfully tried to kill Marissa in her hotel room .
Hanna 's grandmother has been murdered by Marissa .
Erik admits that he is not her biological father .
He once recruited pregnant women into a C.I.A. program where their children 's DNA was enhanced in order to create super - soldiers .
After the project was shut down , its subjects were eliminated .
Marissa and Isaacs arrive ; Erik acts as a distraction to allow Hanna to escape .
Erik kills Isaacs in a fight , but is shot by Marissa , who goes to Knepfler 's house .
Hanna is there , having just discovered Knepfler tortured to death by Isaacs .
After a chase , Hanna kills Marissa .
MAIN CAST * Saoirse Ronan as Hanna Heller
* Eric Bana as Erik Heller
* Cate Blanchett as Marissa Wiegler * Jessica Barden as Sophie
* Aldo Maland as Miles * Tom Hollander as Isaacs * Olivia Williams as Rachel
* Jason Flemyng as Sebastian * Michelle Dockery as False Marissa * Vicky Krieps as Johanna Zadek
* Martin Wuttke as Knepfler PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
The film 's story and script were written by Seth Lochhead while a student at Vancouver Film School .
He wrote the original story and script on spec , and finalized the script in 2006 , with David Farr providing later changes .
Danny Boyle and Alfonso Cuarón were previously attached to direct the film , before it was confirmed that Joe Wright would direct , after Ronan prompted the producers to consider him .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The film was co - produced by the US Holleran Company and German Studio Babelsberg , with financial support from various German film funds and the main distributor , Focus Features , which holds the copyright to the film .
Most of the filming was done at Studio Babelsberg in Berlin , but locations also included Lake Kitka in Kuusamo , Finland , several German locations ( including Bad Tölz , the water bridge at Magdeburg , Köhlbrandbrücke and Reeperbahn in Hamburg , and various sites in Berlin , such as Kottbusser Tor , Görlitzer Bahnhof and Spreepark ) , as well as Ouarzazate and Essaouira in Morocco .
Temperatures during the Finland shoot sometimes fell as low as , but Ronan said " Finland did bring out the fairy tale aspects of the story .
We were shooting on a frozen lake , surrounded by pine trees covered in snow " .
THEMES AND MOTIFS Section::::Themes and motifs .
Reviewers remarked that the setting and style of Hanna significantly depart from a typical action movie .
According to the official website , the film has " elements of dark fairy tales " woven into an " adventure thriller " .
Joe Wright , the director , has said that the movie 's theme is a " fantasy " about " overcoming the dark side " during the " rites of passage " of adolescent maturation when a child transforms and " has to go into the world " .
He said that he was influenced by personal exposure every day as he grew up to " violent , dark , cautionary fairy tales " that " prepare children for the future obstacles in the wider world " , as well as his " deep love for the mystical qualities of David Lynch movies " , by the patterns of narrative that he prefers because of his dyslexia , and by working as a child in his parents ' puppetry company .
In an interview with Film School Rejects , Wright acknowledged David Lynch as a major influence on Hanna and also pointed to The Chemical Brothers ' score : " You can expect an extraordinarily loud , thumping , deeply funky score that will not disappoint " .
The music , including The Devil Is In The Beats and The Devil Is In The Details , underscores the movie 's style , recalling Stanley Kubrick 's A Clockwork Orange with musical motifs consistent with Wright 's " fairy tale theme " of childhood innocence confronting the modern " synthetic " world .
Several reviewers have commented that the movie has a hyper - stylized Kubrickian tone , reminiscent of A Clockwork Orange .
The " Kubrick - esque " style includes Isaacs ' " gleeful sadism ...
at times darkly comedic , " a whistling villain reminiscent of Alex DeLarge .
Joe Wright 's " love of fairy tales and David Lynch movies " was seen as blending A Clockwork Orange and the work of the Brothers Grimm .
Richard Roeper judged it to be a " surreal fairy tale " with " omnipresent symbolism " .
Matt Goldberg said it was " an effective and surreal dark fairy tale " ... ... " with a dreamlike sensibility ... ...
Everything in the picture is slightly askew and provides immediacy to Hanna 's offbeat coming - of - age tale ... ...
a film that refuses to exist solely in the realm of reality or fairy tale ... ...
' gritty ' realism simply is n't worthy of the story he 's trying to tell . "
Fairy tale motifs are strewn through the film .
In the " tightly - edited patchwork of visual iconography , allusion and symbolism " Wiegler is equated with the Big Bad Wolf or the queen in Snow White .
" Classic fairy tale movie tropes abound ; " for example , the camera spins in obvious circles as Hanna makes her escape from the underground government facility early in the film , " just as the young heroine 's world is spinning out of control .
"
Peter Bradshaw found the fairy tale mythology " unsubtle " .
Conversely , some reviewers did not comment on the fairy tale elements , and others did so with expressive reservation .
Kyle Munkittrick of Discover magazine notes that Hanna is a " transhumanist hero " .
Despite being genetically engineered to have " high intelligence , muscle mass , and no pity " , she is still a good - natured person .
He says Hanna " symbolizes the contest between genetics and environment " , or , " perhaps more familiarly , nature versus nurture " .
The film also contains references to the novel Frankenstein .
A scene in which Hanna observes a family interacting through a small opening in the box where she is hiding parallels the Monster 's experience while he hides in a cottage .
That she is a being created by people playing god is an overarching thematic similarity .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Hanna received mostly positive reviews ; it has a 71 % favorable rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on 212 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus states : " Fantastic acting and crisply choreographed action sequences
propel
this unique , cool take on the revenge thriller " .
On Metacritic , the film received a weighted average score of 65/100 based on 40 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Justin Chang of Variety said that Hanna is " an exuberantly crafted chase thriller that pulses with energy from its adrenaline - pumping first minutes to its muted bang of a finish " .
Roger Ebert gave the film three and a half stars out of four , commenting " Wright combines his two genres into a stylish exercise that perversely includes some sentiment and insight " .
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian , on the other hand , gave the film two stars out of five , stating " With its wicked - witch performance from Cate Blanchett , its derivative premise , its bland Europudding location work and some frankly outrageous boredom , this will test everyone 's patience . "
Kenneth Turan , of the Los Angeles Times , stated that the film " starts off like a house afire but soon burns itself out " , adding that even though the film is " [ b]lessed with considerable virtues , including a clever concept , crackling filmmaking and a charismatic star , it ultimately squanders all of them , undone by an unfortunate lack of subtlety and restraint " .
According to The Hollywood Reporter , Hanna came in second place at the U.S. box office in its first weekend behind Hop .
When the film closed on 7 July 2011 , it had grossed $ 40.3 million in North America and $ 25.1 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 65.3 million .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result !
scope = col class="unsortable "
rowspan=2 Alliance of Women Film JournalistsCritics ' Choice Movie AwardsSt .
Louis Film Critics Association SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack album features a score composed by the British big beat duo , The Chemical Brothers .
TV SERIES Section::::TV series .
In March 2017 , David Farr was announced to write a TV series based on the film .
On May 23 , 2017 , Amazon officially ordered the series to production .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS