FLAG OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
The flag of Jammu and Kashmir is the official flag of the state of Jammu and Kashmir in northern India .
It consists of a deep red field , representing labour , charged with a plough to represent agriculture .
Three stripes are found on the hoist side and represent the three geographic regions of the state : Jammu , the Kashmir Valley and Ladakh .
The region of Jammu and Kashmir is a disputed state .
Jammu and Kashmir is ' permitted ' to fly its own ' state ' flag along with the national flag .
Jammu and Kashmir also has a separate constitution which works under Article 370 of the Constitution of India .
This is due to the state 's special status under the Indian Constitution .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The flag has its origin in events that took place on 13 July 1931 in Srinagar .
During a demonstration against the Dogra rulers , the police opened fire and 21 people were killed .
The blood - tainted shirt of one of the victims was then hoisted by the crowd as the new flag of Kashmir .
13 July is known as Martyrs ' Day and is an official holiday in Jammu and Kashmir .
On 11 July 1939 , the flag was adopted by the Jammu & Kashmir National Conference , a political party .
Then on 7 June 1952 , a resolution was passed by the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir , making it the official flag of the State .
Meanwhile , according to the Delhi Agreement between Nehru and Sheikh Abdullah , the flag of India has the same status in Jammu and Kashmir as in the rest of India .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Article 144 states that flag of the state shall be rectangular 3:2 format .
Its color is red , which originally represented the blood of the martyrs of the 13 July 1931 demonstration , but later came to symbolise workers and labourers .
In the middle , a white plough further symbolises the peasants .
Next to the staff , three vertical white stripes represent the three regions of Jammu , Kashmir valley and Ladakh .
2015 CONTROVERSY Section::::2015 controversy .
The Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir makes it mandatory to hoist the state flag alongside the Union flag of India at all times .
However , in 2015 , the newly elected Bharatiya Janata Party members in the Jammu and Kashmir legislative assembly refused to hoist the state flag in their offices .
BJP Ministers did not hoist the State flag either , as they consider that it has no importance .
The government led by Chief Minister Mufti Mohammad Sayeed then issued a circular making it compulsory to hoist the state flag along with the national flag , stating that " The state flag has the same sanctity and position as the Union flag has under the Indian Constitution and other statutory provisions . "
However , within 20 hours , the state government withdrew this circular .
On withdrawal of the circular , the Jammu & Kashmir BJP spokesperson said , " " Our leaders can not have any other flag on their vehicles besides the Tricolour .
We welcome the withdrawal of the circular . "
In December 2015 , the Jammu and Kashmir High Court ordered the government of the state to hoist the state flag along with national flag on official buildings and vehicles of constitutional authorities .
However , this decision was contested by the Bharatiya Janata Party and in January 2016 Jammu and Kashmir High Court stayed their decision of hoisting state flag .
Deputy Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir Nirmal Kumar Singh said that no flag could be hoisted at an equal level of the national flag of India .
Other parties alleged that the BJP is trying to impose its nationalist agenda on a state with special status .
Despite the stance of the BJP , ministers of its coalition partner PDP continue to use the state flag alongside the national flag in official meetings .
Youth wing of National Conference also launched a campaign encouraging people to use the state flag as the profile image on their social media accounts saying that " the State flag of J&K does n't undermine or take away the protocol or status of the National Flag and is clearly provided for in our constitution . "
SEE ALSO
* Flag of India
* Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir REFERENCES