HISTORY OF TURKEY
The history of Turkey , understood as the history of the region now forming the territory of the Republic of Turkey , includes the history of both Anatolia ( the Asian part of Turkey ) and Eastern Thrace ( the European part of Turkey ) .
For times predating the Ottoman period , a distinction must be made between the history of the Turkish peoples , and the history of the territories now forming the Republic of Turkey , essentially the histories of ancient Anatolia and Thrace .
The name Turkey is derived from Middle Latin Turchia , i.e. the " land of the Turks " , historically referring to an entirely different territory of Eastern Europe and Central Asia , which fell under the control of Turkic peoples in the early medieval period .
From the time when parts of what is now Turkey was conquered by Turks , the history of Turkey spans the medieval history of the Seljuk Empire , the medieval to modern history of the Ottoman Empire , and the history of the Republic of Turkey since the 1920s .
ANATOLIA AND THRACE IN ANTIQUITY
ANATOLIA Section::::Anatolia and Thrace in antiquity .
Section::::Anatolia .
The ancient history of Anatolia ( Asia Minor ) can be roughly subdivided into two prehistory , Ancient Near East ( Bronze Age and Early Iron Age ) , Classical Anatolia , Hellenistic Anatolia , with Byzantine Anatolia spanning the early medieval period to the age of the Crusades and the eventual Turkish ( Seljuk / Ottoman ) conquest of Anatolia by the 15th century .
The earliest representations of culture in Anatolia were Stone Age artifacts .
The remnants of Bronze Age civilizations such as the Hattian , Akkadian , Assyrian , and Hittite peoples provide us with many examples of the daily lives of its citizens and their trade .
After the fall of the Hittites , the new states of Phrygia and Lydia stood strong on the western coast as Greek civilization began to flourish .
They , and all the rest of Anatolia were relatively soon after incorporated into the Achaemenid Persian Empire .
As Persia grew in strength , their system of local government in Anatolia allowed many port cities to grow and to become wealthy .
All of Anatolia got divided into various satrapies , ruled by satraps ( governors ) appointed by the central Persian rulers .
The first state that was called Armenia by neighbouring peoples was the state of the Armenian Orontid dynasty , which included parts of eastern Turkey beginning in the 6th century BC , which became the Satrapy of Armenia under Achaemenid rule .
Some of the satraps revolted periodically but did not pose a serious threat .
In the 5th century BC , Darius I built the Royal Road , which linked the principal city of Susa with the west Anatolian city of Sardis .
Anatolia played a pivotal role in Achaemenid history .
In the earliest 5th century BC , some of the Ionian cities under Persian rule revolted , which culminated into the Ionian Revolt .
This revolt , after being easily suppressed by the Persian authority , laid the direct uplead for the Greco - Persian Wars , which turned out to be one of the most crucial wars in European history .
After Achaemenid Persian rule , the Greek Alexander the Great finally wrested control of the whole region from Persia in successive battles , proving victorious over the Persian Darius III .
After Alexander 's death , his conquests were split amongst several of his trusted generals , but were under constant threat of invasion from both the Gauls and other powerful rulers in Pergamon , Pontus , and Egypt .
The Seleucid Empire , the largest of Alexander 's territories , and which included Anatolia , became involved in a disastrous war with Rome culminating in the battles of Thermopylae and Magnesia .
The resulting Treaty of Apamea in ( 188 BC ) saw the Seleucids retreat from Anatolia .
The Kingdom of Pergamum and the Republic of Rhodes , Rome 's allies in the war , were granted the former Seleucid lands in Anatolia .
Roman control of Anatolia was strengthened by a ' hands off ' approach by Rome , allowing local control to govern effectively and providing military protection .
In the early 4th century , Constantine the Great established a new administrative centre at Constantinople , and by the end of the 4th century the Roman empire split into two parts , the Eastern part ( Romania ) with Constantinople as its capital , referred to by historians as the Byzantine Empire from the original name , Byzantium .
THRACE Section::::Thrace .
The Thracians ( , ) were a group of Indo - European tribes inhabiting a large area in Central and Southeastern Europe .
They were bordered by the Scythians to the north , the Celts and the Illyrians to the west , the Ancient Greeks to the south and the Black Sea to the east .
They spoke the Thracian language – a scarcely attested branch of the Indo - European language family .
The study of Thracians and Thracian culture is known as Thracology .
Starting around 1200 BC , the western coast of Anatolia was heavily settled by Aeolian and Ionian Greeks .
Numerous important cities were founded by these colonists , such as Miletus , Ephesus , Smyrna and Byzantium , the latter founded by Greek colonists from Megara in 657 BC .
All of Thrace , and the native Thracian peoples were conquered by Darius the Great in the late 6th century BC , and were re - subjugated into the empire in 492 BC following Mardonius ' campaign during the First Persian invasion of Greece .
The territory of Thrace later became unified by the Odrysian kingdom , founded by Teres I , probably after the Persian defeat in Greece .
By the 5th century BC , the Thracian presence was pervasive enough to have made Herodotus call them the second - most numerous people in the part of the world known by him ( after the Indians ) , and potentially the most powerful , if not for their lack of unity .
The Thracians in classical times were broken up into a large number of groups and tribes , though a number of powerful Thracian states were organized , such as the Odrysian kingdom of Thrace and the Dacian kingdom of Burebista .
A type of soldier of this period called the Peltast probably originated in Thrace .
Before the expansion of the Kingdom of Macedon , Thrace was divided into three camps ( East , Central , and West ) after the withdrawal of the Persians following their eventual defeat in mainland Greece .
A notable ruler of the East Thracians was Cersobleptes , who attempted to expand his authority over many of the Thracian tribes .
He was eventually defeated by the Macedonians .
The Thracians were typically not city - builders , the largest Thracian cities were in fact large villages .
and their only polis was Seuthopolis .
BYZANTINE PERIOD Section::::Byzantine Period .
The Persian Achaemenid Empire fell to Alexander the Great in 334 BC , which led to increasing cultural homogeneity and Hellenization in the area .
Following Alexander 's death in 323 BC , Anatolia was subsequently divided into a number of small Hellenistic kingdoms , all of which became part of the Roman Republic by the mid-1st century BC .
The process of Hellenization that began with Alexander 's conquest accelerated under Roman rule , and by the early centuries AD the local Anatolian languages and cultures had become extinct , being largely replaced by ancient Greek language and culture .
In 324 , Constantine I chose Byzantium to be the new capital of the Roman Empire , renaming it New Rome .
Following the death of Theodosius I in 395 and the permanent division of the Roman Empire between his two sons , the city , which would popularly come to be known as Constantinople became the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire .
This , which would later be branded by historians as the Byzantine Empire , ruled most of the territory of what is today Turkey until the Late Middle Ages , while the other remaining territory remained in Sassanid Persian hands .
Between the 3rd and 7th century AD , the Byzantines and the neighboring Sassanids frequently clashed over possession of Anatolia , which significantly exhausted both empires , thus laying the way open for the eventual Muslim conquests from both empires ' respective south .
EARLY HISTORY OF THE TURKS
Section::::Early history of the Turks .
Historians generally agree that the first Turkic people lived in a region extending from Central Asia to Siberia .
Historically they were established after the 6th century BCE .
The earliest separate Turkic peoples appeared on the peripheries of the late Xiongnu confederation about 200 B.C ( contemporaneous with the Chinese Han Dynasty ) .
The first mention of Turks was in a Chinese text that mentioned trade of Turk tribes with the Sogdians along the Silk Road .
It has often been suggested that the Xiongnu , mentioned in Han Dynasty records , were Proto - Turkic speakers .
The Hun hordes of Attila , who invaded and conquered much of Europe in the 5th century , may have been Turkic and descendants of the Xiongnu .
Some scholars argue that the Huns were one of the earlier Turkic tribes , while others argue that they were of Mongolic origin .
In the 6th century , 400 years after the collapse of northern Xiongnu power in Inner Asia , leadership of the Turkic peoples was taken over by the Göktürks .
Formerly in the Xiongnu nomadic confederation , the Göktürks inherited their traditions and administrative experience .
From 552 to 745 , Göktürk leadership united the nomadic Turkic tribes into the Göktürk Empire .
The name derives from gok , " blue " or " celestial " .
Unlike its Xiongnu predecessor , the Göktürk Khanate had its temporary khans from the Ashina clan that were subordinate to a sovereign authority controlled by a council of tribal chiefs .
The Khanate retained elements of its original shamanistic religion , Tengriism , although it received missionaries of Buddhist monks and practiced a syncretic religion .
The Göktürks were the first Turkic people to write Old Turkic in a runic script , the Orkhon script .
The Khanate was also the first state known as " Turk " .
It eventually collapsed due to a series of dynastic conflicts , but the name " Turk " was later taken by many states and peoples .
Turkic peoples and related groups migrated west from Turkestan and what is now Mongolia towards Eastern Europe , Iranian plateau and Anatolia and modern Turkey in many waves .
The date of the initial expansion remains unknown .
After many battles , they established their own state and later created the Ottoman Empire .
The main migration occurred in medieval times , when they spread across most of Asia and into Europe and the Middle East .
They also participated in the Crusades .
SELJUK EMPIRE Section::::Seljuk Empire .
The Seljuq Turkmens created a medieval empire that controlled a vast area stretching from the Hindu Kush to eastern Anatolia and from Central Asia to the Persian Gulf .
From their homelands near the Aral sea , the Seljuqs advanced first into Khorasan and then into mainland Persia before eventually conquering eastern Anatolia .
The Seljuq / Seljuk empire was founded by Tughril Beg ( 1016 - 1063 ) in 1037 .
Tughril was raised by his grandfather , Seljuk - Beg Seljuk gave his name to both the Seljuk empire and the Seljuk dynasty .
The Seljuqs united the fractured political scene of the eastern Islamic world and played a key role in the first and second crusades .
Highly Persianized in culture and language , the Seljuqs also played an important role in the development of the Turko - Persian tradition , even exporting Persian culture to Anatolia .
OTTOMAN EMPIRE Section::::Ottoman Empire .
The Ottoman beylik 's first capital was located in Bursa in 1326 .
Edirne which was conquered in 1361 was the next capital city .
After largely expanding to Europe and Anatolia , in 1453 , the Ottomans nearly completed the conquest of the Byzantine Empire by capturing its capital , Constantinople during the reign of Mehmed II .
Constantinople was made the capital city of the Empire following Edirne .
The Ottoman Empire would continue to expand into the Eastern Anatolia , Central Europe , the Caucasus , North and East Africa , the islands in the Mediterranean , Greater Syria , Mesopotamia , and the Arabian peninsula in the 15th , 16th and 17th centuries .
The Ottoman Empire 's power and prestige peaked in the 16th and 17th centuries , particularly during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent .
The empire was often at odds with the Holy Roman Empire in its steady advance towards Central Europe through the Balkans and the southern part of the Polish - Lithuanian Commonwealth .
In addition , the Ottomans were often at war with Persia over territorial disputes .
At sea , the empire contended with the Holy Leagues , composed of Habsburg Spain , the Republic of Venice and the Knights of St. John , for control of the Mediterranean .
In the Indian Ocean , the Ottoman navy frequently confronted Portuguese fleets in order to defend its traditional monopoly over the maritime trade routes between East Asia and Western Europe ; these routes faced new competition with the Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope in 1488 .
The Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 marked the beginning of Ottoman territorial retreat ; some territories were lost by the treaty : Austria received all of Hungary and Transylvania except the Banat ; Venice obtained most of Dalmatia along with the Morea ( the Peloponnesus peninsula in southern Greece ) ; Poland recovered Podolia .
Throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries , the Ottoman Empire continued losing its territories , including Greece , Algeria , Tunisia , Libya and the Balkans in the 1912–1913 Balkan Wars .
Anatolia remained multi - ethnic until the early 20th century ( see Rise of Nationalism under the Ottoman Empire ) .
Its inhabitants were of varied ethnicities , including Turks , Armenians , Assyrians , Kurds , Greeks , Frenchs , and Italians ( particularly from Genoa and Venice ) .
Faced with territorial losses on all sides the Ottoman Empire under the rule of the Three Pashas forged an alliance with Germany who supported it with troops and equipment .
The Ottoman Empire entered World War
I ( 1914–1918 ) on the side of the Central Powers and was ultimately defeated .
During the war , major atrocities were committed such as Genocide , mass murder and death marches intentionally denying food and water to the deportees by the Ottoman government against the Armenians , Assyrians and Pontic Greeks causing millions of deaths and resulting in the Armenian Genocide of 1915 .
Following World War I , the huge conglomeration of territories and peoples that formerly comprised the Ottoman Empire was divided into several new states .
On October 30 , 1918 , the Armistice of Mudros was signed , followed by the imposition of Treaty of Sèvres on August 10 , 1920 by Allied Powers , which was never ratified .
The Treaty of Sèvres would break up the Ottoman Empire and force large concessions on territories of the Empire in favour of Greece , Italy , Britain and France .
REPUBLIC OF TURKEY Section::::Republic of Turkey .
The occupation of some parts of the country by the Allies in the aftermath of World War
I prompted the establishment of the Turkish national movement .
Under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal , a military commander who had distinguished himself during the Battle of Gallipoli , the Turkish War of Independence was waged with the aim of revoking the terms of the Treaty of Sèvres .
By September 18 , 1922 , the occupying armies were expelled .
On November 1 , the newly founded parliament formally abolished the Sultanate , thus ending 623 years of Ottoman rule .
The Treaty of Lausanne of July 24 , 1923 , led to the international recognition of the sovereignty of the newly formed " Republic of Turkey " as the successor state of the Ottoman Empire , and the republic was officially proclaimed on October 29 , 1923 , in the new capital of Ankara .
Mustafa Kemal became the republic 's first President of Turkey and subsequently introduced many radical reforms with the aim of founding a new secular republic from the remnants of its Ottoman past .
The Ottoman fez was abolished , full rights for women politically were established , and new writing system for Turkish based upon the Latin alphabet was created .
According to the Law on Family Names , the Turkish parliament presented Mustafa Kemal with the honorific surname " Atatürk " ( Father of the Turks ) in 1934 .
Turkey was neutral in World War II ( 1939–45 ) but signed a treaty with Britain in October 1939 that said Britain would defend Turkey if Germany attacked it .
An invasion was threatened in 1941 but did not happen and Ankara refused German requests to allow troops to cross its borders into Syria or the USSR .
Germany had been its largest trading partner before the war , and Turkey continued to do business with both sides .
It purchased arms from both sides .
The Allies tried to stop German purchases of chrome ( used in making better steel ) .
Starting in 1942 the Allies provided military aid .
The Turkish leaders conferred with Roosevelt and Churchill at the Cairo Conference in November , 1943 , and promised to enter the war .
By August 1944 , with Germany nearing defeat , Turkey broke off relations .
In February 1945 , it declared war on Germany and Japan , a symbolic move that allowed Turkey to join the nascent United Nations .
Meanwhile , relations with Moscow worsened , setting stage for the start of the Cold War .
The demands by the Soviet Union for military bases in the Turkish Straits , prompted the United States to declare the Truman Doctrine in 1947 .
The doctrine enunciated American intentions to guarantee the security of Turkey and Greece , and resulted in large - scale U.S. military and economic support .
After participating with the United Nations forces in the Korean War , Turkey joined NATO in 1952 , becoming a bulwark against Soviet expansion into the Mediterranean .
Following a decade of intercommunal violence on the island of Cyprus and the Greek military coup of July 1974 , overthrowing President Makarios and installing Nikos Sampson as a dictator , Turkey invaded the Republic of Cyprus in 1974 .
Nine years later the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus ( TRNC ) was established .
Turkey is the only country that recognises the TRNC
The single - party period was followed by multiparty democracy after 1945 .
The Turkish democracy was interrupted by military coups d'état in 1960 , 1971 and 1980 .
In 1984 , the PKK began an insurgency against the Turkish government ; the conflict , which has claimed over 40,000 lives , continues today .
Since the liberalization of the Turkish economy during the 1980s , the country has enjoyed stronger economic growth and greater political stability .
SEE ALSO * History of Anatolia * History of the Ottoman Empire * History of Greece
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Ahmad , Feroz .
The Making of Modern Turkey ( Routledge , 1993 ) , * Barkey , Karen .
Empire of Difference : The Ottomans in Comparative Perspective .
( 2008 ) 357pp excerpt and text search
* Findley , Carter V.
The Turks in World History ( 2004 )
* Findley , Carter V. Turkey , Islam , Nationalism , and Modernity : A History ( 2011 )
* Finkel , Caroline .
Osman 's Dream : The History of the Ottoman Empire ( 2006 ) , standard scholarly survey excerpt and text search
* Freeman , Charles ( 1999 ) .
Egypt , Greece and Rome : Civilizations of the Ancient Mediterranean .
Oxford University Press . .
* Goffman , Daniel .
The Ottoman Empire and Early Modern Europe ( 2002 )
online edition
* Goodwin , Jason .
Lords of the Horizons : A History of the Ottoman Empire ( 2003 ) excerpt and text search
*
Hornblower , Simon ; Antony Spawforth ( 1996 ) .
The Oxford Classical Dictionary .
Oxford University Press .
* Hale , William .
Turkish Foreign Policy , 1774 - 2000 .
( 2000 ) .
375 pp .
* Inalcik , Halil and Quataert , Donald , ed .
An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire , 1300 - 1914 .
1995 .
1026 pp .
* Kedourie , Sylvia , ed .
Seventy - Five Years of the Turkish Republic ( 1999 ) .
237 pp .
* Kedourie , Sylvia .
Turkey Before and After Ataturk :
Internal and External Affairs ( 1989 ) 282pp * E. Khusnutdinova , et al .
Mitochondrial DNA variety in Turkic and Uralic - speaking people .
POSTER NO : 548 ,
Human Genome Organisation 2002
* Kinross , Patrick ) .
The Ottoman Centuries : The Rise and Fall of the Turkish Empire ( 1977 ) .
* Kosebalaban , Hasan .
Turkish Foreign Policy :
Islam , Nationalism , and Globalization ( Palgrave Macmillan ; 2011 ) 240 pages ; examines tensions among secularist nationalism , Islamic nationalism , secular liberalism , and Islamic liberalism in shaping foreign policy since the 1920s ; concentrates on era since 2003 * Kunt , Metin and Woodhead , Christine , ed .
Süleyman the Magnificent and His Age : The Ottoman Empire in the Early Modern World .
1995 .
218 pp .
* Lloyd , Seton .
Turkey :
A Traveller 's History of Anatolia ( 1989 ) covers the ancient period .
* Mango , Andrew .
Ataturk :
The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey ( 2000 ) * Mango , Cyril .
The Oxford History of Byzantium ( 2002 ) .
* Marek , Christian ( 2010 ) , Geschichte Kleinasiens in der Antike C. H. Beck , Munich , ( review : M. Weiskopf , Bryn Mawr Classical Review 2010.08.13 ) .
* Ostrogorsky , George .
History of the Byzantine State ( 1969 ) .
excerpt and text search
* Quataert , Donald .
The Ottoman Empire , 1700 - 1922 ( 2005 ) , standard scholarly survey excerpt and text search
* Shaw , Stanford J. , and Ezel Kural Shaw .
History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey .
Vol .
2 , Reform , Revolution , and Republic :
The Rise of Modern Turkey , 1808–1975 .
( 1977 ) .
excerpt and text search
* Thackeray , Frank W. , John E. Findling , Douglas A. Howard .
The History of Turkey ( 2001 ) 267 pages online
* Vryonis , Jr. , Speros .
The Decline of Medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor and the Process of Islamization from the Eleventh through the Fifteenth Century ( 1971 ) .
* Zurcher , Erik J. Turkey : A Modern History ( 3rd ed .
2004 )
excerpt and text search