LEMONADE MOUTH ( FILM )
Lemonade Mouth is a 2011 American teen musical drama television film , based on the 2007 novel of the same name by Mark Peter Hughes .
The film was directed by Patricia Riggen and written by April Blair , and stars Bridgit Mendler , Adam Hicks , Naomi Scott and Blake Michael .
The Disney Channel Original Movie tells the story of five high school students who meet in detention and form a band to stand up for their beliefs and to overcome their individual and collective struggles .
The film premiered on April 15 , 2011 , on Disney Channel .
It has been met with generally positive reviews , with some praising it for its many positive themes of honesty , integrity , and self - expression , and for its emphasis on the importance of the arts and of family and friendship .
Other reviews have described it as a " typically innocuous Disney Channel flick " .
The soundtrack was released on April 12 , 2011 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
High school students Olivia White ( Bridgit Mendler ) , Mohini " Mo " Banjaree ( Naomi Scott ) , Charles " Charlie " Delgado ( Blake Michael ) , Stella Yamada ( Hayley Kiyoko ) , and Wendell " Wen " Gifford ( Adam Hicks ) all meet after ending up in detention for different reasons .
Miss Reznick ( Tisha Campbell - Martin ) , the music teacher supervising detention , leaves to argue with the principal Mr. Brenigen ( Christopher McDonald ) about his decision to move all extracurricular activities to the basement to make room for a new gymnasium .
The five then tap out a beat and play instruments , and Olivia sings " Turn Up the Music . "
Miss Reznick returns and says that they would make a great band , and encourages them to enter a music competition called " Rising Star , " in which a popular band , Mudslide Crush , planned to enter .
The following day , Stella sends a text message to the members stating : " Fluke or Destiny ?
We need to talk .
" The group agrees to chat at Dante 's pizza where Stella reveals she signed the band up for Rising Star and the Halloween Bash .
The band forms with Olivia as lead vocalist , Stella as lead guitarist / backing vocalist , Mo as bassist / backing vocalist , Wen as keyboardist / keytarist / rapping vocalist , and Charlie as drummer .
At school , Olivia gets cornered by Ray Beech ( Chris Brochu ) , lead singer of Mudslide Crush .
Stella spits lemonade on Ray in defense .
Ray refers to Stella as " lemonade mouth " , giving the band its name .
The band later discovers the lemonade machine is being removed .
When Mo sees her boyfriend Scott Picket ( Nick Roux ) , the guitarist of Mudslide Crush , flirting with another girl , Jules ( Caitlin Ribbans )
she leaves him .
At the Halloween Bash , Lemonade Mouth performs " Determinate . "
After the performance , Stella makes a speech opposing Brenigen 's decisions and encouraging self - expression to the supportive crowd .
Angered , Principal Brenigen forbids them from playing at school .
The next day , the band sees posters and banners all around the school supporting Lemonade Mouth , raising their spirits .
Mo sings "
She 's so Gone " at the regular gig they have .
They also discover that " Determinate " is being played on the local radio .
Shortly after , however , things go downhill
: Mo gets sick , Charlie breaks his fingers , Wen injures his eye , and Olivia loses her voice .
And all that was left was Stella , who does n't have an injury .
Stella calls the band to the school , where she is protesting the removal of the lemonade machine .
The group gets into a heated argument with the men removing the lemonade machine .
Police arrive and they are brought to a holding cell to wait for their parents .
They slowly come together singing
" Turn up the Music .
" The band agrees to perform at Rising Star , after contemplating quitting .
At Rising Star , Mudslide Crush performs " Do n't Ya Wish U Were Us . "
Lemonade Mouth unsuccessfully performs " Determinate .
" The audience begins to sing " Determinate " in support of the band .
Fed up with Ray , Scott leaves Mudslide Crush and joins Lemonade Mouth .
Mo and Scott get back together , Charlie begins talking with a girl who likes him , Stella and her mother become close again , and Wen accepts his new stepmother .
At Wen 's father 's wedding , Stella recognizes the man sitting next to her as Mel , the owner of the lemonade company .
He donates a music hall to the school , which Mr. Brenigen accepts .
Olivia mails the entire story to her father , who is in prison .
The standard edition of the film closes with Lemonade Mouth performing " Breakthrough " at Madison Square Garden , with Scott as their new rhythm guitarist .
The extended edition includes an interview with Moxie Morris on " All Things Musical " , in which Mo and Scott 's relationship is nearly exposed by Moxie in front of Mo 's father , but is stopped by Olivia , who says that she and Wen are dating .
The band performs " Livin On A High Wire " .
CAST * Bridgit Mendler as Olivia White , the lead singer of the band
* Adam Hicks as Wendell " Wen " Gifford , the pianist and also a rapper of the band * Hayley Kiyoko as Stella Yamada , the lead guitarist of the band
* Naomi Scott as Mohini " Mo " Banjaree , the bassist of the band
* Blake Michael as Charles " Charlie " Delgado , the drummer of the band * Nick Roux as Scott Pickett , Mo 's boyfriend and rhythm guitarist for the band * Chris Brochu as Ray Beech
*
Tisha Campbell - Martin as Miss Jenny Reznick *
Christopher McDonald as Principal Stanley Brenigan
* Scott Takeda as Stella 's father * Ariana Smythe as Sydney * Judith Rane as Brenda * Isaac Kappy as Mel * Ryan Montano as Tommy Delgado * Lauren Poole as Moxie Morris * Bob Jesser as Mr. Gifford * Leedy Corbin as Georgie Gifford * Lance Capaldi as Ticket Taker * Shishir Kurup as Mr. Banjaree , Mo 's dad Section::::Cast .
Author Mark Peter Hughes makes a cameo appearance as an extra dressed as a bee at the Halloween Bash .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The movie was filmed in Albuquerque , New Mexico .
The names of eight characters in the book were changed for the film : the character of " Olivia Whitehead " was changed to " Olivia White , " " Wendel Gifford " was changed to " Wendell Gifford , " " Stella Penn " was changed to " Stella Yamada , " " Mohini Banerjee " was changed to " Mohini Banjaree , " and " Charlie Hirsh " was changed to " Charlie Delgado .
" Casting was announced in August 2010 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Family - oriented reviewers at Common Sense Media praised the film for its themes of honesty , empowerment , overcoming adversity , self - expression , standing up for what one believes in , and for its emphasis on the importance of the arts and of friendship and family .
Other reviews were not so kind , with some critics claiming that Lemonade Mouth is a " typically innocuous Disney Channel flick " that is a " hopelessly dumbed - down endeavor .
" The film holds a 6.7 rating , making " Fair " ( based on 17 votes ) on TV.com .
Lemonade Mouth was watched by 5.7 million viewers on its premiere night .
ranking as the No . 1 TV Telecast among Kids 7–11 ( 2.3 million/9.4 rating ) and Teens ( 2.1 million/8.5 rating ) , and cable 's No . 1 original movie of 2011 among Total Viewers .
With DVR viewing included , its total was 7.1 million viewers .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
A local premiere was held in the author Mark Peter Hughes 's town of Wayland , Massachusetts .
It was broadcast live by the town public access station , WayCAM.TV , by local students .
The premiere broadcast was directed and produced by technical student Jonah Camiel .
The cast from the film have performed on The View , Good Morning America , So Random !
and UK 's Daybreak .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The movie features ten original songs written by Aris Archontis , Maria Christensen , Ali Dee , Andy Dodd , Tom Leonard , Jeannie Lurie , Niclas Molinder , Chen Neeman , Joacim Persson , Lindy Robbins , Shridhar Solanki , Shane Stevens , Matthew Tishler , Bryan Todd , Reed Vertelney , Adam Watts , and Adam Hicks .
Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack on April 12 , 2011 .
CANCELLED SEQUEL
Section::::Cancelled sequel .
In 2011 , the author of Lemonade Mouth said that he had been working on a sequel .
Actor Blake Michael has said : " It 's all up to the fans , it 's in their hands .
If people enjoy it and they love it and they want more , they 'll get it .
I think Disney is just a great organization in general
and they 're always one step ahead of the game .
So you never really know what 's gon na happen . "
On June 15 , 2011 , it was announced during the 2011 Licensing International Expo that Lemonade Mouth 2 was in the works .
On April 6 , 2012 , Chris Brochu announced on his Twitter account , that the sequel was no longer going into production .
In interviews with Kidzworld Media and BSCKids in May 2012 , Bridgit Mendler also confirmed that a sequel would not be produced , noting that " they tried to figure something out for a sequel , but everyone at Disney felt like the movie had completed its story in the first movie . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS