CARD
NOT PRESENT TRANSACTION
A card not present transaction ( CNP , MO / TO , Mail Order / Telephone Order , MOTOEC ) is a payment card transaction made where the cardholder does not or can not physically present the card for a merchant 's visual examination at the time that an order is given and payment effected .
It is most commonly used for payments made over Internet , but also mail - order transactions by mail or fax , or over the telephone .
Card not present transactions are a major route for credit card fraud , because it is difficult for a merchant to verify that the actual cardholder is indeed authorizing a purchase .
If a fraudulent CNP transaction is reported , the acquiring bank hosting the merchant account that received the money from the fraudulent transaction must make restitution to the cardholder - this is called a chargeback .
This is opposed to a card present transaction , when the issuer of the card is liable for restitution .
Because of the greater risk , some card issuers charge a greater transaction fee to merchants who routinely handle card not present transactions .
The card security code ( commonly CVV2 ) system has been set up to reduce the incidence of credit card fraud arising from CNP .
MAIL - ORDER FRAUD Section::::Mail - order fraud .
If a card is not physically present when a customer makes a purchase , the merchant must rely on the cardholder , or someone purporting to be so , presenting card information indirectly , whether by mail , telephone or over the Internet .
Shipping companies may guarantee delivery of goods to a location , but they are normally not required to check identification and they are usually not involved in processing payments for the merchandise .
A common preventive measure for merchants is to allow shipment only to an address approved by the cardholder , and merchant banking systems offer simple methods of verifying this information .
Before this and similar countermeasures were introduced , mail order carding was rampant as early as 1992 .
A carder would obtain the credit card information for a local resident and then intercept delivery of the illegitimately purchased merchandise at the shipping address , often by staking out the porch of the residence .
Small transactions generally undergo less scrutiny , and are less likely to be investigated by either the card issuer or the merchant .
CNP merchants must take extra precaution against fraud exposure and associated losses , and they pay higher rates for the privilege of accepting cards .
Fraudsters bet on the fact that many fraud prevention features are not used for small transactions .
Merchant associations have developed some prevention measures , such as single - use card numbers , but these have not met with much success .
Customers expect to be able to use their credit card without any hassles , and have little incentive to pursue additional security due to laws limiting customer liability in the event of fraud .
Merchants can implement these prevention measures but risk losing business if the customer chooses not to use the measures .
FRAUD Section::::Fraud .
The United States Federal Trade Commission uncovered an operation running from 2006 to 2010 that netted more than $ 10 million in fraudulent charges on credit and debit cards .
The perpetrators used more than 100 merchant accounts that they had created to do the billing .
Each merchant account was attached to an Employer Identification Number belonging to a real merchant with a similar - sounding name .
Each merchant account was tied to an 800-number from CallMe800 .
Each account was also tied to a website they had created .
They also rented physical addresses from companies which rent virtual offices , such as formerly Regus , for each merchant account .
These virtual office companies , which did not know of and were otherwise not involved in the scam , would then forward any mail received at the virtual office to Earth Class Mail , a digital mailroom service that scanned mail from the physical address of the merchant account and forwarded it as a PDF to email accounts that the scammers had established .
The scammers also ensured that when they checked their online merchant accounts , that they used an IP address located near the billing address so as not to arouse suspicion .
A charge of $ 9 was processed on about one million credit cards over the four - year period .
Each card was billed a single time .
Credit card companies only investigate if the charge is more than $ 10 because it costs about that much to run an investigation .
Then the money was moved to bank accounts in Lithuania , Estonia , Latvia , Bulgaria , Cyprus , and Kyrgyzstan where the money could not be traced or recovered .
The perpetrators experimented with a 20-cent charge and that generated more suspicion than the $ 9 charge .
Only about 10 percent of the fraudulent charges were ever reported or contested by the card owner that was billed .
REFERENCES