THE VAMPIRE DIARIES ( SEASON 2 )
The Vampire Diaries , an American supernatural drama , was officially renewed by The CW for a full 22-episode season on February 16 , 2010 .
The first episode premiered on September 9 , 2010 , at 8 p.m. ET .
The season picks up immediately after the events of the season one finale .
All the series regulars returned .
Season two focuses on the return of Elena Gilbert 's ( Nina Dobrev ) doppelgänger , Katherine Pierce , the introduction of werewolves , the sun and moon curse , and the arrival of the original vampires .
Tyler Lockwood 's ( Michael Trevino ) uncle , Mason Lockwood ( Taylor Kinney ) , arrives in town searching for the moonstone , a family heirloom .
Tyler later learns of his family 's werewolf curse .
Meanwhile , Caroline Forbes ( Candice Accola ) is killed by Katherine while having Damon Salvatore 's ( Ian Somerhalder ) blood in her system , turning her into a vampire .
The arrival of the original vampires , Elijah ( Daniel Gillies ) and Klaus Mikaelson ( Joseph Morgan ) , also bring about complications .
Klaus is a vampire - werewolf hybrid , but his werewolf side had been forced into dormancy by witches , as nature would not stand for such an imbalance in power .
Therefore , Klaus arrives in town with plans to break the curse and unleash his werewolf side by channelling the power of the full moon into the moonstone , sacrificing a vampire and a werewolf , and drinking the blood of the doppelgänger .
The season is currently on air in Urdu on filmax channel in Pakistan .
It became available on DVD and Blu - ray on August 30 , 2011 .
CAST MAIN * Nina Dobrev as Elena Gilbert ( 22 episodes ) /
Katherine Pierce ( 18 episodes ) * Paul Wesley as Stefan Salvatore ( 22 episodes ) * Ian Somerhalder as Damon Salvatore ( 22 episodes ) * Steven R. McQueen as Jeremy Gilbert ( 17 episodes ) *
Sara Canning as Jenna Sommers ( 15 episodes ) * Kat Graham as Bonnie Bennett ( 17 episodes ) * Candice Accola as Caroline Forbes ( 20 episodes ) * Zach Roerig as Matt Donovan ( 15 episodes ) * Michael Trevino as Tyler Lockwood ( 15 episodes ) * Matt Davis as Alaric Saltzman ( 17 episodes ) RECURRING
* Susan Walters as Carol Lockwood ( 13 episodes ) * Daniel Gillies as Elijah Mikaelson ( Elijah Smith ) ( 12 episodes ) * Marguerite MacIntyre as Sheriff Elizabeth " Liz " Forbes ( 8 episodes ) * Taylor Kinney as Mason Lockwood ( 8 episodes ) * David Anders as John Gilbert ( 7 episodes ) * Bryton James as Luka Martin ( 7 episodes ) * Randy J. Goodwin as Dr. Jonas Martin ( 6 episodes ) * Michaela McManus as Jules ( 6 episodes ) * Lauren Cohan as Rosemary
" Rose " ( 5 episodes ) *
Dawn Olivieri as Andie Starr ( 4 episodes ) * Joseph Morgan as Klaus Mikaelson ( 4 episodes ) * Gino Anthony Pesi as Maddox ( 4 episodes ) GUEST
* Tiya Sircar as Aimee Bradley ( 3 episodes ) * Lisa Tucker as Greta Martin ( 3 episodes ) * Trent Ford as Trevor ( 3 episodes )
* Maiara Walsh as Sarah ( 2 episodes )
* Stephen Amell as Brady ( 2 episodes )
* Mia Kirshner as Isobel Flemming ( 2 episodes ) * Trevor Peterson as Slater ( 1 episodes )
* B.J. Britt as Carter ( 1 episode )
* Courtney Ford as Vanessa Monroe ( 1 episode )
* Simon Miller as George Lockwood ( 1 episode )
*
Natashia Williams as Lucy Bennett ( 1 episode ) * Bree Condon as Alice ( 1 episode )
* James Harvey Ward as Cody Webber ( 1 episode )
* Ahna O'Reilly as Jessica Cohen ( 1 episode ) * Arielle Kebbel as Alexia " Lexi " Branson ( 1 episode )
* Bianca Lawson as Emily Bennett ( voice only )
( 1 episode )
* Malese Jow as Annabelle " Anna " ( 1 episode )
* Kayla Ewell as Vicki Donovan ( uncredited ) ( 1 episode ) EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On February 16 , 2010 , The CW officially renewed The Vampire Diaries for a full 22-episode second season .
It premiered on Thursday September 9 , 2010 , at 8 pm ET .
The season finale aired on May 12 , 2011 .
CAST Section::::Cast .
On July 9 , 2010 , Entertainment Weekly announced Taylor Kinney would join the cast in a recurring role as Tyler 's uncle Mason , a werewolf who comes to town after his brother dies .
Katherine sends Mason to Mystic Falls to get the moonstone for her .
He succeeds , but Damon and Stefan find out that he works with Katherine , and Damon kills him .
Mason has been described as a " cool " uncle , sexy and athletic .
Lauren Cohan joined the cast as Rose , a 500-year - old vampire and possible love interest for Damon .
She kidnaps Elena to hand her over to Elijah , but Elena is saved by Stefan and Damon .
She then becomes their ally and even starts a small romantic relationship with Damon .
She dies after being bitten by werewolf Jules .
Michaela McManus joined the cast in a guest role as a werewolf who comes to town looking for answers about Mason 's death .
She helps Tyler deal with the discovery that he is a werewolf , but is later killed during the sacrifice .
Bryton James portrays warlock Luka Martin in season two .
He befriends Bonnie , but it is later revealed that he and his father work for Elijah .
When he tries to save Elijah invisibly , Damon burns him to death .
His father Jonas Martin , played by Randy J. Goodwin in season two , is introduced as a friend of Elijah .
He is a warlock who , in order to save his daughter Greta , is willing and able to help defeat Klaus .
He is later killed by Katherine , who is protecting the Salvatore brothers .
Gino Anthony Pesi portrays Maddox at the end of season two , a warlock who works for Klaus .
Matt shoots him to death when he tries to overcome Damon .
On February 18 , 2011 , it was announced that British actor Joseph Morgan had signed on to play original vampire Klaus .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
The second season focuses mainly on the arrival of Elena 's doppelgänger Katherine Pierce and on her reasons for returning to Mystic Falls .
It also introduces werewolves .
Tyler 's werewolf uncle , Mason Lockwood , arrives after the death of Tyler 's father and tells Tyler about the so - called " Lockwood curse " in their family .
To activate the werewolf gene , the person must kill someone .
Katherine turns Caroline into a vampire , so as to have a spy against Stefan and Elena .
Katherine 's main reason for returning to Mystic Falls is to find the moonstone , with the help of Mason , who is killed by Damon .
Katherine calls in a favor from a witch named Lucy to get the stone .
Lucy casts a spell so that when Katherine is hurt , it also affects Elena .
When Lucy finds out that another Bennett is at the party and that Katherine had deceived her , she puts a spell on the moonstone , injuring Katherine .
Damon then leaves her in the original tomb where she is trapped until the spell has been removed from the tomb .
She tells him that her reason for not killing Elena is that she is in danger .
Elena is later kidnapped by a masked individual and held hostage by vampires Rose and Trevor , who have been on the run from the Originals ( the first generation of vampires ) .
Rose reveals to Elena that she is the Petrova doppelgänger and needs to be sacrificed to break the sun and moon curse .
Katherine was also a Petrova doppelgänger , who used Trevor to help her escape from the Originals and Rose to turn her into a vampire to save herself .
Elena is rescued by Stefan and Damon by stabbing Elijah with a sharp wooden pole and they escape .
Klaus , one of the original vampires , arrives and is now hunting Elena .
His brother Elijah has made a deal with Elena to protect her loved ones , because he wants to use her as bait to lure Klaus and kill him .
Jules , a friend of Mason , tells the Lockwoods that Mason never came back to Florida and is missing .
Alaric is suspicious of Jules and calls Damon to the Grill ( local town hangout ) .
Jules reveals that she is a werewolf .
Damon tells Jules she wo n't find Mason and to leave town .
Jules breaks into the Salvatore mansion in wolf form and attacks Damon , but Rose pushes him out of the way , getting bitten on the shoulder instead ( werewolf bites are lethal to vampires ) .
As Rose succumbs to the effects of the bite , Damon stakes her in a glorious dream they share , giving her a peaceful death .
Uncle John returns to Mystic Falls and comes as an unpleasant surprise to Elena , Damon , Jenna , and Alaric .
John reveals to Damon that the only way to kill an Original is with a dagger dipped in white ash wood .
A boy named Luka settle in the town with his father ( they are both warlocks ) and reveals that they are working for Elijah because Klaus has his sister Greta and they want him ( Luka ) dead as well .
Luka becomes friends with Bonnie and tells her that Klaus will be weakened by the sacrificial ritual , meaning that Elena has to die so that Elijah can kill him and free his sister .
John gives Damon the special dagger to kill Elijah .
Elena finds out that if a vampire uses the dagger , that vampire will die .
Stefan warns Damon and Alaric stabs Elijah , but he pulls the dagger out and tells Elena their deal is off .
Elena stabs herself in the stomach , and Elijah begs her to let him heal her .
She stabs him with the dagger and leaves it in him .
Elijah 's death means that Katherine is no longer compelled to stay in the tomb .
She helps kill the Martin witches .
When Isobel returns to town , Katherine double - crosses the Salvatores by kidnapping Elena and stealing the moonstone for Klaus in exchange for her freedom .
But it is revealed that Klaus wanted Katherine and compelled Isobel to get her and the moonstone .
Klaus enters Alaric 's body and compels Katherine to stay in Alaric 's house .
Bonnie and Jeremy find the site of the a witch massacre and Bonnie channels all the power .
Alaric / Klaus blends with Stefan , Damon , and Elena and finds out that Bonnie has her powers .
Damon tells Bonnie to put on a protection spell and make Alaric / Klaus believe that she is dead .
Elena does not want Bonnie to die , so she pulls the dagger out of Elijah 's heart .
After Elijah comes to life , Elena learns the full history of Klaus .
The Aztec curse is fake and there is a curse on Klaus , as he is a vampire born in a werewolf bloodline .
There is a ritual that involves killing a vampire and a werewolf and a Petrova doppelganger , that will unearth the werewolf side of Klaus making him a hybrid .
Elena realizes that the real curse is on Klaus , who therefore wants to kill her .
But Elijah says he has an elixir that can save Elena from dying .
Elena believes Elijah , but Damon says that there is another way to save her life and feeds her his blood .
Stefan tries to stop him , but he stabs in the chest with the wooden dagger .
Elena then cries that she will be a vampire against her will .
Maddox kidnaps Tyler and Caroline .
Damon frees them and is bitten .
Then he goes to Klaus to tell him that he does not have a werewolf and witch , as he killed Maddox .
Klaus says that he has backups .
Klaus takes Elena from Stefan .
Elena sees Jenna , who thinks she is dead , but Greta tells her she is transitioning .
Damon asks Katherine about the vampire , and she says that Jenna is the backup vampire .
He then checks his arm and sees that Tyler has bitten him .
In the season 's finale , Klaus is working on the ritual out in the woods and is near completion when he is about to kill Elena , but Stefan tries to work a deal with him .
Klaus agrees to have Stefan work for him in exchange for Damon 's protection .
Elena is " killed " in the ritual but is shown to have survived .
Regardless , Klaus 's werewolf side is unleashed and he becomes the first hybrid , half vampire half werewolf .
Bonnie arrives and subdues Klaus with her powers , giving Elijah the opportunity to strike , but Klaus talks him down offering to help find their siblings .
Elena 's survival is revealed as John had Bonnie cast a spell that had him die in Elena 's place .
The next morning John succumbs and dies .
At his funeral , Elena reads a note from John saying he will always love her and she will always be his daughter , even if she becomes a vampire .
Damon also shows where he was bitten and walks away .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " The throbbing red heart of The Vampire Diaries remains the tension between Damon and Paul Wesley 's Stefan , and their mutual attraction to whomever Dobrev is embodying at the time . "
Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald said , "
The triangle – quadrangle ? – becomes more twisted by episode 's end .
It leads to shocking violence against outsiders that deepens the tragedy and the mythology at the core of the show .
" Game on " just might be the two most chilling words uttered this season . "
Matt Roush of TV Guide commented , " The Vampire Diaries is the sort of show where ' never say die ' is written into the mythology – a good thing for several of the opening hour 's apparent victims .
I do n't know how much longer The Vampire Diaries can keep churning stories at this feverish rate , but if this is your sort of guilty pleasure , you 'd be crazy not to bite . "
RATINGS DVR VIEWERS ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
For its second season
The Vampire Diaries won five Teen Choice Awards , one People 's Choice Award , and a nomination in Saturn Awards .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Vampire Diaries Season 2 was made available on DVD and Blu - ray on August 30 , 2011 .
In region B , it was released on August 22 , 2011 .
REFERENCES