LAW OF VATICAN CITY
The law of Vatican City State consists of many forms , the most important of which is the Fundamental Law of Vatican City State .
The Code of Penal Procedure governs tribunals and the Lateran Treaty governs relations with the Republic of Italy .
FUNDAMENTAL LAW Section::::Fundamental Law .
The Fundamental Law of Vatican City State , promulgated by Pope John Paul II on 26 November 2000 , consists of 20 articles and is the constitutional law of the Vatican City State .
It obtained the force of law on 22 February 2001 , Feast of the Chair of St. Peter , Apostle , and replaced in its entirety the Fundamental Law of Vatican City promulgated by Pope Pius XI on 7 June 1929
( Law n. I ) .
All the norms in force in Vatican City State which were not in agreement with the new Law were abrogated and the original of the Fundamental Law , bearing the Seal of Vatican City State , was deposited in the Archive of the Laws of Vatican City State and the corresponding text was published in the Supplement to the Acta Apostolicae Sedis .
JUDICIARY Section::::Judiciary .
The judicial system of Vatican City consists of : * a sole judge ( Giudice Unico ) with limited jurisdiction * a tribunal ( tribunale ) with four members * a Court of Appeal ( Corte d'Appello ) with four members * a Supreme Court ( Corte di Cassazione ) with three members Justice is exercised in the name of the Supreme Pontiff .
The sole judge has to be a Vatican citizen and he can simultaneously serve as a member of the tribunal .
The tribunal itself consists of a president and three other judges ( however , cases are heard in a curia of three judges ) .
A promoter of justice ( Promotore di Giustizia ) serves as attorney both at the tribunal and at the court of the sole judge .
The members of the tribunal , the sole judge and the promoter of justice are all lay jurists and are appointed by the pope .
On May 7 , 2015 , Pope Francis appointed as a Judge of the Ecclesiastical Court of Vatican City State , Lucio Banerjee , a cleric of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Treviso , in Treviso , Italy , and Paolo Scevola , of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Vigevano , to serve as Notary Actuary of the same court ; they are officials of the General Affairs Section of the Secretariat of State of the Holy See .
On September 30 , 2017 , Pope Francis named Denis Baudot , an official of the Apostolic Signatura and a clergy of the Archdiocese of Lyon in Lyon , France , Judicial Vicar of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal of Vatican City State .
The Court of Appeal consists of the president and three other judges ( similar to the tribunal , cases are heard in a curia of three judges ) .
The members of the Court of Appeal are appointed by the pope for a term of five years and are both clerics and lay persons .
The Promoter of Justice of the Court of Appeals of Vatican City is currently , since his appointment by Pope Francis on Wednesday , June 12 , 2013 , Professor Raffaele Coppola , Professor of the Law Faculty at the State University of Bari in Bari , Italy , and a member of the Bar for canon and civil law in the Holy See .
The Supreme Court consists of its president , who is by law the Cardinal Prefect of the Apostolic Signatura , currently Cardinal Dominique Mamberti since 2014 , and two other cardinals , who are appointed by the President on a yearly basis and who also have to be members of the Signatura .
All courts have their seat at the Palazzo del Tribunale at Piazza Santa Marta behind Saint Peter 's Basilica .
STATUTORY LAW Section::::Statutory law .
Most of the statutory law is based on the Italian code from 1889 .
It was outdated in many ways .
This was amended in a major fashion in 2013 to include a number of United Nations Conventions the state has signed over the years , as well as bringing it up to date .
The penal code now includes specifics defining money laundering , explicit listing of sexual crimes , and violating confidentiality .
Since life imprisonment was abolished by Pope Francis in 2013 , the maximum penalty is 30 to 35 years of imprisonment .
In 2008 , the Vatican announced that it will no longer automatically adopt new Italian laws , as many Italian laws diverge from Catholic doctrine .
The announcement came in the wake of conflict over right - to - life issues following the Eluana Englaro case .
Existing law provided that Italian laws were accepted automatically except on bilateral treaties or those that have a sharp divergence with basic canon law .
Under the new procedure , the Vatican would examine Italian laws before deciding whether to adopt them .
However , as the Vatican had not always accepted Italian laws under the old procedure little would change , with one newspaper commentator calling the announcement a " masked warning " to the Italian government .
SEE ALSO
* Crime in Vatican City
* Federico Cammeo
* Index of Vatican City - related articles
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Researching the Law of Vatican City State " * Law Library of Congress Guide to Law Online : Holy See