VISA POLICY OF BHUTAN Travel to the Kingdom of Bhutan is highly regulated under the policy " High Value , Low Impact Tourism " in order to minimize the impact on the country 's unique society and environment .
Bhutanese policy ensures that only a limited number of tourists enter the country at any one time , preventing it from being overwhelmed by mass tourism and thus altering its character , and that the tourists who do come get the most out of their visits .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA EXEMPTION
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT Section::::Visa exemption .
Section::::Freedom of movement .
Citizens of do not need a visa to enter Bhutan , because the 1949 Treaty between Bhutan and India allows for free movement of people between the two nations on a reciprocal basis .
Indian citizens can obtain entry into Bhutan by air and land , and may use any of the acceptable documents mentioned below to enter Bhutan : * Indian Passport * Voter ID card with photograph * Identification Slip issued by the Indian Consulate Office in Phuentsholing upon presenting proof of Indian citizenship .
VISA FREE Section::::Visa free .
Citizens of the following countries do not need a visa and a booking with a licensed tour operator to visit Bhutan , provided they have a passport valid for at least six months from the date of entry .
DIPLOMATIC , SERVICE AND OFFICIAL PASSPORTS Section::::Diplomatic , service and official passports .
Holders of diplomatic or official / service passports of the following countries do not require a visa to visit Bhutan for up to 90 days .
* ( 90 days )
* ( 90 days ) } RESTRICTED AREAS PERMIT Section::::Restricted areas permit .
Upon entering Bhutan , all foreigners are issued a 7 or 14 days " Entry Permit " by default , valid for Thimphu and Paro only .
The rest of Bhutan is considered a restricted area , and foreigners need a " Restricted - Area Permit " to enter .
Immigration checkpoints are located at important road junctions throughout the country , where police check the permits of all foreigners they find .
In addition , foreigners wishing to visit Buddhist temples must obtain a " Temple Permit " from the Ministry of Culture .
While these permits are typically arranged by the tour operators , Indian , Bangladeshi , and Maldivian visitors who did not book through a licensed tour operator must apply for them in person at the Immigration office in Thimphu .
The permits can also be extended at the Immigration office in Thimphu for a charge .
Citizens of Bangladesh , India , and Maldives are exempt from charges on issuance and extensions of permits .
VISA REQUIRED IN ADVANCE Section::::Visa required in advance .
All foreigners ( except for citizens of Bangladesh , India , and Maldives ) must obtain a visa before visiting Bhutan .
If approved , they are given a visa clearance letter , and must present it at the port of entry .
The visa is then stamped into their passport .
Foreign tourists must use a licensed Bhutanese tour operator or one of their international partners to pre - arrange their visa and book their holiday .
A daily fee is also charged for every day of stay .
For most foreign tourists , it amounts to $ 250 a day during tourist high season , and $ 200 a day for low season .
Discounts also apply for minors and larger groups while surcharges exist for groups smaller than 3 .
The minimum daily package required for visa processing covers accommodation , food , guide and vehicle with driver .
Part of it goes towards free education , free healthcare and poverty alleviation in Bhutan .
Licensed tour guides accompany tourists during their trips and arrange accommodations - independent tourism by foreigners ( except for citizens of Bangladesh , India , and Maldives ) is prohibited .
The only exceptions for having to book a tour as a condition for being allowed to visit are for those who receive a formal invitation to Bhutan from " a citizen of some standing " or a volunteer organization , and those who come as guests of the Bhutanese government .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
Most visitors arriving to Bhutan were from the following countries of nationality : !
Rank Country or territory 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Bhutanese citizens REFERENCES