PHONE HACKING Phone hacking is the practice of manipulating or gaining unauthorized access to mobile phones , such as by intercepting telephone calls or accessing voicemail messages .
When the unauthorized access is to the phone user 's conversation , it is more commonly referred to as phone tapping .
The term came to prominence during the News International phone hacking scandal , in which it was alleged ( and in some cases proved in court ) that the British tabloid newspaper the News of the World had been involved in the interception of voicemail messages of the British Royal Family , other public figures , and a murdered schoolgirl named Milly Dowler .
VICTIMS OF PHONE HACKING Section::::Victims of Phone Hacking .
Although any mobile phone users may be targeted , " for those who are famous , rich or powerful or whose prize is important enough ( for whatever reason ) to devote time and resources to make a concerted attack , it is usually more common , there are real risks to face . "
TECHNIQUES VOICEMAIL HACKING Section::::Techniques .
Section::::Voicemail hacking .
The unauthorised remote access to voicemail systems , such as exposed by the News International phone hacking scandal , is possible because of weaknesses in the implementations of these systems by telcos .
Some PABX systems have a distant voicemail feature , which is accessed by entering a password when the initial greeting is being played .
A hacker can call a direct dial number with voicemail , and then try to use the default password or guess it , or then select the " call back " function , and enter a premium rate number for the call back .
The PABX calls back the premium rate line , confirming the password for the hacker .
To stop this form of hacking , the call back feature on the PABX can be turned off , or a strong password used .
Mobile phone voicemail messages may be accessed on a landline telephone with the entry of a personal identification number ( PIN ) .
The service provider commonly sets a four digit default PIN that is rarely changed by the phone 's owner .
A hacker who knows both the phone number and the default PIN can access the voicemail messages associated with that service .
Even where the default PIN is not known , social engineering can be used to reset the voicemail PIN code to the default by impersonating the owner of the phone with a call to a call centre .
Many people also use weak PINs that are easy to guess .
To prevent subscribers from choosing PINs with weak password strength , some mobile phone companies now disallow the use of consecutive or repeat digits in voicemail PIN codes .
During the mid-2000s , it was discovered that calls emanating from the handset registered against a voicemail account would be put straight through to voicemail without the need of a PIN .
A hacker could use caller ID spoofing to impersonate a target 's handset caller ID and thereby gain access to the associated voicemail without a PIN .
Following controversies over phone hacking and criticism that was leveled at mobile service providers who allowed access to voicemail without a PIN , many mobile phone companies have strengthened the default security of their systems so that remote access to voicemail messages and other phone settings can no longer be achieved even via a default PIN .
For example , AT&T announced in August 2011 that all new wireless subscribers would be required to enter a PIN when checking their voicemail , even when checking it from their own phones , while T - Mobile stated that it " recommends that you turn on your voice mail password for added security , but as always , the choice is yours . "
HANDSETS Section::::Handsets .
An analysis of user - selected PIN codes suggested that ten numbers represent 15 % of all iPhone passcodes , with " 1234 " and " 0000 " being the most common , with years of birth and graduation also being common choices .
Even if a four - digit PIN is randomly selected , the key space is very small ( formula_1 or 10,000 possibilities ) , making PINs significantly easier to brute force than most passwords ; someone with physical access to a handset secured with a PIN can therefore feasibly determine the PIN in a short time .
Mobile phone microphones can be activated remotely by security agencies or telcos , without any need for physical access , as long as the battery has not been removed .
This " roving bug " feature has been used by law enforcement agencies and intelligence services to listen in on nearby conversations .
Other techniques for phone hacking include tricking a mobile phone user into downloading malware which monitors activity on the phone .
Bluesnarfing is an unauthorized access to a phone via Bluetooth .
OTHER Section::::Other .
There are flaws in the implementation of the GSM encryption algorithm that allow passive interception .
The equipment needed is available to government agencies or can be built from freely available parts .
In December 2011 , German researcher Karsten Nohl revealed that it was possible to hack into mobile phone voice and text messages on many networks with free decryption software available on the Internet .
He blamed the mobile phone companies for relying on outdated encryption techniques in the 2 G system , and said that the problem could be fixed very easily .
LEGALITY Section::::Legality .
Phone hacking , being a form of surveillance , is illegal in many countries unless it is carried out as lawful interception by a government agency .
In the News International phone hacking scandal , private investigator Glenn Mulcaire was found to have violated the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 .
He was sentenced to six months in prison in January 2007 .
Renewed controversy over the phone hacking claims led to the closure of the News of the World in July 2011 .
In December 2010 , the Truth in Caller ID Act was signed into United States law , making it illegal " to cause any caller identification service to knowingly transmit misleading or inaccurate caller identification information with the intent to defraud , cause harm , or wrongfully obtain anything of value . "
SEE ALSO
*
Mobile security * Telephone tapping *
Operation Weeting *
Phreaking
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
US
Today Has someone hacked your webcam , March 2 2018
*
Timeline : News of the World phone - hacking row , BBC News , 5 July 2011
* Full Q&A On The Phone Hacking Scandal , Sky News ,
5 July 2011 * Anatomy of the Phone - Hacking Scandal , The New York Times , 1 September 2010 * The Rise of Caller ID Spoofing , The Wall Street Journal , 5 February 2010 * Phone hacking : Are you safe ? , Rory Cellan - Jones , BBC News , 12 July 2011 * Should you cover your phone camera , BUSTLE Feb 16 2018