AIN'T
The word ai n't is a contraction for am not , is not , are not , has not , and have not in the common English language
vernacular .
In some dialects ai n't is also used as a contraction of do not , does not , and did not .
The development of ai n't for the various forms of to be not , to have not , and to do not occurred independently , at different times .
The usage of ai n't for the forms of to be not was established by the mid-18th century , and for the forms of to have not by the early 19th century .
The usage of ai n't is a continuing subject of controversy in English .
Ai n't is commonly used by many speakers in oral and informal settings , especially in certain regions and dialects .
Its usage is often highly stigmatized , and it can be used by the general public as a marker of low socio - economic or regional status or education level .
Its use is generally considered non - standard by dictionaries and style guides except when used for rhetorical effect .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Ai n't has several antecedents in English , corresponding to the various forms of to be not and to have not that ai n't contracts .
The development of ai n't for to be not and to have not is a diachronic coincidence ; in other words , they were independent developments at different times .
CONTRACTIONS OF
TO BE NOT Section::::Contractions of to be not .
Amn't
as a contraction of am not is known from 1618 .
As the " mn " combination of two nasal consonants is disfavoured by many English speakers , the " m " of amn't began to be elided , reflected in writing with the new form an't .
Are n't as a contraction for are not first appeared in 1675 .
In non - rhotic dialects , are n't lost its " r " sound , and began to be pronounced as an't .
An't ( sometimes a'n't ) arose from am not and are not almost simultaneously .
An't first appears in print in the work of English Restoration playwrights .
In 1695 an't was used as a contraction of " am not " , in William Congreve 's play Love for Love : " I can hear you farther off ,
I an't deaf " .
But as early as 1696 Sir John Vanbrugh uses an't to mean " are not " in The Relapse : "
Hark thee shoemaker !
These shoes an't ugly , but they do n't fit me " .
An't for is not may have developed independently from its use for am not and are not .
Is n't was sometimes written as in't or en't , which could have changed into an't .
An't for is not may also have filled a gap as an extension of the already - used conjugations for to be not .
Jonathan Swift used an't to mean is not in Letter 19 of his Journal to Stella ( 1710–13 ) :
It an't my fault , ' tis Patrick 's fault ; pray now do n't blame Presto .
An't with a long " a " sound began to be written as ai n't , which first appears in writing in 1749 .
By the time ai n't appeared , an't was already being used for am not , are not , and is not .
An't and ai n't coexisted as written forms well into the nineteenth century —
Charles Dickens used the terms interchangeably , as in Chapter 13 , Book the Second of Little Dorrit ( 1857 ) : " ' I guessed it was you , Mr Pancks " , said she , ' for it 's quite your regular night ; ai n't it ? ...
An't
it gratifying , Mr Pancks , though ; really ? ' " .
In the English lawyer William Hickey 's memoirs ( 1808–1810 ) , ai n't appears as a contraction of are n't ; " thank God we 're all alive , ai n't we ... " CONTRACTIONS OF
TO HAVE NOT Section::::Contractions of to have not .
Han't or ha'n't , an early contraction for has not and have not , developed from the elision of the " s " of has not and the " v " of have not .
Han't appeared in the work of English Restoration playwrights , as in The Country Wife ( 1675 ) by William Wycherley : Gentlemen and Ladies , han't you all heard the late sad report / of poor Mr. Horner .
Much like an't , han't was sometimes pronounced with a long " a " , yielding hain't .
With H - dropping , the " h " of han't or hain't gradually disappeared in most dialects , and became ai n't .
Ai n't as a contraction for has not / have not first appeared in dictionaries in the 1830s , and appeared in 1819 in Niles ' Weekly Register : Strike !
Why I ai n't got nobody here to strike ...
Charles Dickens likewise used ai n't to mean have n't in Chapter 28 of Martin Chuzzlewit ( 1844 ) : " You ai n't got nothing to cry for , bless you !
He 's righter than a trivet ! "
Like with an't , han't and ai n't were found together late into the nineteenth century , as in Chapter 12 of Dickens ' Our Mutual Friend : "
' Well , have you finished ? '
asked the strange man . '
No , ' said Riderhood , ' I ain't' ... 'You sir !
You
han't said what you want of me . ' " CONTRACTIONS OF
TO DO NOT Section::::Contractions of to do not .
Ai n't meaning did n't is widely considered a feature unique to African American Vernacular English , although it can be found in some dialects of Caribbean English as well .
It may function not as a true variant of did n't , but as a creole - like tense - neutral negator ( sometimes termed " generic ai n't " ) .
Its origin may have been due to approximation when early African Americans acquired English as a second language ; it is also possible that early African Americans inherited this variation from colonial European - Americans , and later kept the variation when it largely passed out of wider usage .
Ai n't is rarely attested for the present - tense constructions do not or does not .
LINGUISTIC CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Linguistic characteristics .
Linguistically , ai n't is formed by the same rule that English speakers use to form are n't and other contractions of auxiliary verbs .
Most linguists consider usage of ai n't to be grammatical , as long as its users convey their intended meaning to their audience .
In other words , a sentence such as " She ai n't got no sense " is grammatical because it generally follows a native speaker 's word order , and because a native speaker would recognize the meaning of that sentence .
Linguists draw a distinction , however , between grammaticality and acceptability : what may be considered grammatical across all dialects may nevertheless be considered not acceptable in certain dialects or contexts .
The usage of ai n't is socially unacceptable in some situations .
Functionally , ai n't has operated in part to plug what is known as the " amn't gap " – the anomalous situation in standard English whereby there are standard contractions for other forms of to be not ( are n't for are not , and is n't for is not ) , but no standard contraction for am not .
Historically , ai n't has filled the gap where one might expect amn't , even in contexts where other uses of ai n't were disfavored .
Standard dialects that regard ai n't as non - standard often substitute are n't for am not in tag questions ( e.g. , " I 'm doing okay , are n't I ? " ) , while leaving the " amn't gap " open in declarative statements .
PRESCRIPTION AND STIGMA Section::::Prescription and stigma .
Ai n't has been called " the most stigmatized word in the language " , as well as " the most powerful social marker " in English .
It is a prominent example in English of a shibboleth – a word used to determine inclusion in , or exclusion from , a group .
Historically , this was not the case .
For most of its history , ai n't was acceptable across many social and regional contexts .
Throughout the 17th , 18th , and 19th centuries , ai n't and its predecessors were part of normal usage for both educated and uneducated English speakers , and was found in the correspondence and fiction of , among others , Jonathan Swift , Lord Byron , Henry Fielding , and George Eliot .
For Victorian English novelists William Makepeace Thackeray and Anthony Trollope , the educated and upper classes in 19th century England could use ai n't freely , but in familiar speech only .
Ai n't continued to be used without restraint by many upper middle class speakers in southern England into the beginning of the 20th century .
Ai n't was a prominent target of early prescriptivist writers .
In the 18th and early 19th centuries , some writers began to propound the need to establish a " pure " or " correct " form of English .
Contractions in general were disapproved of , but ai n't and its variants were seen as particularly " vulgar " .
This push for " correctness " was driven mainly by the middle class , which led to an incongruous situation in which non - standard constructions continued to be used by both lower and upper classes , but not by the middle class .
The reason for the strength of the prescription against ai n't is not entirely clear .
The strong prescription against ai n't in standard English has led to many misconceptions , often expressed jocularly ( or ironically ) , as " ai n't ai n't a word " or " ai n't ai n't in the dictionary . "
Ai n't is listed in most dictionaries , including the Oxford Dictionary of English and Merriam - Webster .
However , Oxford states " it does not form part of standard English and should never be used in formal or written contexts " , and Merriam - Webster states it is " widely disapproved as non - standard and more common in the habitual speech of the less educated " .
Webster 's Third New International Dictionary , published in 1961 , went against then - standard practice when it included the following usage note in its entry on : " though disapproved by many and more common in less educated speech , used orally in most parts of the U.S. by many cultivated speakers esp .
in the phrase ai n't I. " Many commentators disapproved of the dictionary 's relatively permissive attitude toward the word , which was inspired , in part , by the belief of its editor , Philip Gove , that " distinctions of usage were elitist and artificial " .
REGIONAL USAGE AND DIALECTS Section::::Regional usage and dialects .
Ai n't is found throughout the English - speaking world across regions and classes , and is among the most pervasive nonstandard terms in English .
It is one of two negation features ( the other being the double negative ) that are known to appear in all nonstandard English dialects .
Ai n't is used throughout the United Kingdom , with its geographical distribution increasing over time .
It is also found throughout the United States , including in Appalachia , the South , New England , the Mid - Atlantic , and the Upper Midwest .
In its geographical ubiquity , ai n't is to be contrasted with other folk usages such as y' all , which is confined to the South region of the United States .
In England , ai n't is generally considered a non - standard usage , as it is used by speakers of a lower socio - economic class , or by educated people in an informal manner .
In the nineteenth century , ai n't was often used by writers to denote regional dialects such as Cockney English .
A notable exponent of the term is Cockney flower girl Eliza Doolittle from George Bernard Shaw 's play Pygmalion ; " I ai n't done nothing wrong by speaking to the gentleman " said Doolittle .
Ai n't is a non - standard feature commonly found in mainstream Australian English , and in New Zealand , ai n't is a feature of Māori - influenced English .
In American English , usage of ai n't corresponds to a middle level of education , although it is widely believed that its use establishes of lack of education or social standing in the speaker .
The usage of ai n't in the southern United States is distinctive , however , in the continued usage of the word by well - educated , cultivated speakers .
Ai n't is in common usage of educated Southerners .
In the South , the use of ai n't can be used as a marker to separate cultured speakers from those who lack confidence in their social standing and thus avoid its use entirely .
RHETORICAL AND POPULAR USAGE Section::::Rhetorical and popular usage .
Ai n't can be used in both speech and writing to catch attention and to give emphasis , as in " Ai n't that a crying shame " , or " If it ai n't broke , do n't fix it . "
Merriam - Webster 's Collegiate Dictionary gives an example from film critic Richard Schickel : " the wackiness of movies , once so deliciously amusing , ai n't funny anymore .
" It can also be used deliberately for what The Oxford Dictionary of American Usage and Style describes as " tongue - in - cheek " or " reverse snobbery " .
Star baseball pitcher Dizzy Dean , a member of the Baseball Hall of Fame and later a popular announcer , once said , " A lot of people who do n't say ai n't , ai n't eatin ' .
"
Although ai n't is seldom found in formal writing , it is frequently used in more informal written settings , such as popular song lyrics .
In genres such as traditional country music , blues , rock n ' roll , and hip - hop , lyrics often include nonstandard features such as ai n't .
This is principally due to the use of such features as markers of " covert identity and prestige " .
Ai n't is standard in some fixed phrases , such as " You ai n't seen nothing yet " .
NOTABLE
USAGE
*
" Ai n't I a Woman ? " , 1851 speech by abolitionist Sojourner Truth .
*
" If you want to know who we are " , from The Mikado lyrics by W. S. Gilbert " We figure in lively paint : Our attitude 's queer and quaint — You're wrong if you think it ai n't . "
( 1885 ) .
*
" Say it ai n't so , Joe " , apocryphal quote from a young baseball fan to Shoeless Joe Jackson after the fan learned about the Black Sox scandal involving throwing the 1919 World Series .
"
Say it ai n't so " was subsequently used as the title of a song by Weezer and an album by Murray Head , and an opera about the 2008 US vice presidential debate .
*
" You ai n't heard nothing yet ! "
spoken by Al Jolson in The Jazz Singer ( 1927 ) , the first feature - length motion picture with synchronized dialogue sequences .
That spoken line , and others in the film , introduced the " talkies " and revolutionized the movie industry .
*
" It Ai n't Necessarily
So " , song from Porgy and Bess ( 1935 ) ; music by George Gershwin , words by Ira Gershwin .
*
" He ai n't heavy , he 's my brother " has been used as the motto of Boys Town since 1943 , and inspired a song " He Ai n't Heavy , He 's My Brother " , written by Bobby Scott and Bob Russell , and recorded by The Hollies , Neil Diamond , and other artists .
* Winston Churchill , commenting on the 1954 portrait by Graham Sutherland said " It makes me look half - witted , which I ai n't " .
*
" Ai n't That a Shame " is a song written by Fats Domino and Dave Bartholomew , released by Imperial Records in 1955 , which went on to sell over a million copies and introduced Fats Domino to a wider audience .
*
" Ai n't No Mountain High Enough " is a 1967 song recorded by Marvin Gaye and Tammi Terrell .
*
It Ai n't Half Hot Mum , BBC television series written by Jimmy Perry and David Croft , broadcast between 1974 and 1981 *
" Ai n't No Grave " , a 1934/1953 American gospel song attributed to Claude Ely
* " You Ai n't Seen Nothing
Yet " , a 1974 rock song and album by Bachman - Turner Overdrive .
* " Ghostbusters ( song ) , " written by Ray Parker , Jr. , is the 1984 theme to the eponymous movie , containing the spoken tag line "
I ai n't afraid of no ghost . "
*
" Ai n't That a Kick in the Head ? , Dean Martin song .
SEE ALSO * English auxiliaries and contractions
* English usage controversies
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Anderwald , Liselotte .
Negation in Non - Standard British English .
Routledge .
2003 .
* " ai n't " , Merriam - Webster 's dictionary of English usage ( 1995 )
pp .
60–64
online