FRITO - LAY
Frito - Lay , Inc. is an American subsidiary of PepsiCo that manufactures , markets , and sells corn chips , potato chips , and other snack foods .
The primary snack food brands produced under the Frito - Lay name include Fritos corn chips , Cheetos cheese - flavored snacks ; Doritos and Tostitos tortilla chips ; Lay 's and Ruffles potato chips ; Rold Gold pretzels ; and Walkers potato crisps ( in the UK and Ireland ) .
Each brand has generated annual worldwide sales over $ 1 billion in 2009 .
Frito - Lay began in the early 1930s as two separate companies , The Frito Company and H.W. Lay & Company , which merged in 1961 to form Frito - Lay ,
Inc. Four years later in 1965 , Frito - Lay , Inc. merged with the Pepsi - Cola Company , resulting in the formation of PepsiCo .
Since that time , Frito - Lay has operated as a wholly owned subsidiary of PepsiCo .
Through Frito - Lay , PepsiCo is the largest globally distributed snack food company , with sales of its products in 2009 comprising 40 percent of all " savory snacks " sold in the United States , and 30 percent of the non - U.S. market .
In 2018 , Frito - Lay North America accounted for 25 percent of PepsiCo 's annual sales .
HISTORY
THE FRITO COMPANY Section::::History . Section::::The Frito Company .
In 1932 , Kansas City , Kansas - born Charles Elmer Doolin ( 1903–1959 ) , manager of the Highland Park Confectionery in San Antonio , Texas , purchased a corn chip recipe , a handheld potato ricer , and 19 retail accounts from a corn chip manufacturer for $ 100 , which he borrowed from his mother .
Doolin established a new corn chip business , The Frito Company , in his mother 's kitchen .
Doolin , with his mother and brother , produced the corn chips , named Fritos , and had a production capacity of approximately 10 pounds per day and roughly 30 cents per product .
Doolin distributed the Fritos in 5¢ bags .
Daily sales totaled $ 8 to $ 10 and profits averaged about $ 2 per day .
In 1933 the production of Fritos increased from 10 pounds to nearly 100 pounds due to the development of a " hammer " press ; by the end of the year , production lines were operating in Houston and Dallas .
The Frito Company headquarters also moved to Dallas to capitalize on the city 's central location and better availability of raw materials .
In 1937 The Frito Company opened its Research and Development lab and introduced new products , including Fritos Peanut Butter Sandwiches and Fritos Peanuts , to supplement Fritos and Fritatos Potato chips , which had been introduced in 1935 .
In 1939 , the company purchased Fluffs pork skins and incorporated the Dallas business .
Frito relocated the operation from Haskell Avenue to a new facility at 2005 Wall Street .
Alice Rupe , who was one of Fluffs ' original six all - woman crew , was placed in charge of operations .
In 1940 , she was named Assistant Treasurer and Manager ; in 1949 she was promoted to Treasurer .
In 1941 , the company opened its Western Division in Los Angeles with two sales routes , which would become the prototype for The Frito Company 's distribution system .
In 1945 , The Frito Sales Company was established to separate sales from production activities .
Expansion continued with the issue of six franchises through the Frito National Company in the same year .
In 1950 , Fritos were sold in all 48 states .
The Frito Company issued its first public stock offering in 1954 .
At the time of Doolin 's death in 1959 , The Frito Company produced over forty products , had plants in eighteen cities , employed over 3,000 people , and had sales in 1958 in excess of $ 50 million .
By 1962 , Fritos would be sold in 48 countries .
H.W. LAY & COMPANY Section::::H.W. Lay & Company .
In 1931 , Charlotte , North Carolina - born salesman Herman Lay ( 1909–1982 ) sold potato chips in the Southern United States out of his car .
In 1932 , he began a potato chip business in Nashville , Tennessee .
Lay was hired as a salesman for the Barrett Food Products Company , an Atlanta , Georgia manufacturer of Gardner 's Potato Chips , and eventually took over Barrett 's Nashville warehouse as a distributor .
Lay hired his first salesman in 1934 , and three years later had 25 employees and a larger manufacturing facility where he produced popcorn and peanut butter sandwich crackers .
A representative of the Barrett Food Company contacted Lay in 1938 , offering to sell Barrett 's plants in Atlanta and Memphis to Lay for $ 60,000 .
Lay borrowed $ 30,000 from a bank and persuaded the Barrett Company to take the difference in preferred stock .
Lay moved his headquarters to Atlanta and formed H.W. Lay & Company in 1939 .
He later purchased the Barrett manufacturing plant in Jacksonville , Florida , along with additional plants in Jackson , Mississippi ; Louisville , Kentucky ; and Greensboro , North Carolina .
Lay retained the Gardner trademark of Barrett Food Products until 1944 , when the product name was changed to Lay 's Potato Chips .
Lay expanded further in the 1950s , with the purchase of The Richmond Potato Chip Company and the Capitol Frito Corporation .
By 1956 , with more than 1,000 employees , plants in eight cities , and branches or warehouses in thirteen others , H.W. Lay & Company was the largest manufacturer of potato chips and snack foods in the United States .
MERGER FORMS FRITO - LAY , INC . Section::::Merger forms
Frito - Lay , Inc ..
In 1945 , the Frito Company granted the H.W. Lay & Company an exclusive franchise to manufacture and distribute Fritos in the Southeast .
The two companies worked toward national distribution and developed a close business affiliation .
In September 1961 , The Frito Company and H.W. Lay & Company merged to become Frito - Lay , Inc. , combining their headquarters in Dallas , Texas .
At this point , the company 's annual revenues totaled $ 127 million , largely generated from sales of its four main brands at the time : Fritos , Lays , Cheetos , and Ruffles .
DIVISION OF PEPSICO , INC .
Section::::Division of PepsiCo ,
Inc ..
In February 1965 , the boards of directors for Frito - Lay , Inc. and Pepsi - Cola announced a plan for the merger of the two companies .
On June 8 , 1965 , the merger of Frito - Lay and Pepsi - Cola Company was approved by shareholders of both companies , and a new company called PepsiCo , Inc. was formed .
At the time of the merger , Frito - Lay owned 46 manufacturing plants nationwide and had more than 150 distribution centers across the United States .
The merger was pursued for multiple factors , one of which was the potential for Frito - Lay snacks to be distributed outside of its initial markets of the United States and Canada — via Pepsi - Cola 's existing presence and distribution network in 108 countries at the time of the merger .
International distribution of Frito - Lay products expanded shortly following the 1965 merger , and its U.S. presence grew at the same time , resulting in Lay 's becoming the first potato chip brand to be sold nationwide ( in all 50 U.S. states ) in 1965 .
Also at this time , PepsiCo had envisioned marketing Frito - Lay snacks alongside Pepsi - Cola soft drinks .
In an interview with Forbes in 1968 , PepsiCo CEO Donald Kendall summarized this by noting that " Potato chips make you thirsty ; Pepsi satisfies thirst .
" Plans to jointly promote the soft drink and snack products were thwarted later that year , when the Federal Trade Commission ruled against it . 1965–1980 Section::::1965–1980 .
Upon the formation of PepsiCo , Frito - Lay soon began efforts to expand with the development of new snack food brands in the 1960s and 1970s , including Doritos ( 1966 ) , Funyuns ( 1969 ) , and Munchos ( 1971 ) .
The most popular new Frito - Lay product launched during this era was Doritos , which initially was positioned as a more flavorful tortilla chip .
At first the chip was perceived by consumers as being too bland .
In response , the company re - launched Doritos in Taco , and later Nacho Cheese , flavors .
The spicier composition proved successful , and Doritos quickly became the second most popular Frito - Lay product line , second only to Lay 's potato chips .
Frito - Lay faced increased competition in the 1970s , from competing potato chip brands such as Pringles , launched by Procter & Gamble , now owned by Kellogg 's , in competition with Lay 's .
Nabisco and Standard Brands also expanded in the 1970s to produce potato chips , cheese curls , and pretzels , which placed added pressure across Frito - Lay 's entire line of snack food brands .
1980–2000
Section::::1980–2000 .
Frito - Lay acquired Grandma 's Cookies in 1980 , which launched nationwide in the United States in 1983 .
In January 1978 , Frito - Lay 's product development group led by Jack Liczkowski completed development of Tostitos , a Mexican - style tortilla chip lineup .
Tostitos Traditional Flavor and Tostitos Nacho Cheese Flavor went into national distribution in the United States by 1980 and reached the sales of $ 140 million , making it one of the most successful new products introduction in Frito - Lay history .
Tostitos sales grew quickly , and in 1985 it had become Frito - Lay 's fifth - largest brand , generating annual sales of $ 200 million .
Ahead of Tostitos at the time were Doritos , Lay 's , Fritos , and Ruffles , each recording annual sales between $ 250 and $ 500 million .
While Tostitos became a long - term success , several other new products launched in the 1980s were discontinued after lackluster results .
These short lived Frito - Lay products included Stuffers pre - filled dip shells and Toppels crackers , which came pre - topped with cheese .
In the late 1980s , Frito - Lay acquired Smartfood , a brand of cheese - flavored popcorn which it began to distribute across the United States .
International sales began to increase significantly at this time as well , with annual revenues from sales outside of the U.S. and Canada accounting for $ 500 million in 1989 , contributing to total Frito - Lay sales of $ 3.5 billion in the same year .
Several new products were developed internally at Frito - Lay and launched in the 1990s , the most successful of which was Sun Chips , a multi - grain chip first sold in 1991 .
Sun Chips , along with new Baked ( instead of fried ) variants of Tostitos and Lay 's , represented Frito - Lay 's intent to capitalize on an emerging trend among adults in the U.S. , who were displaying a growing preference for healthier snack alternatives .
In 1994 , Frito - Lay recorded annual retail sales of nearly $ 5 billion , selling 8 billion bags of chips , popcorn , and pretzels during that year — outpacing competitors Eagle ( owned by Anheuser - Busch ) and Wise ( owned by Borden ) .
Up until the mid-1990s , Frito - Lay was represented in PepsiCo 's organizational structure as Frito - Lay , a single division of PepsiCo .
This changed in 1996 when PepsiCo merged its snack food operations into what was titled the " Frito - Lay Company " , made up of two subsequent divisions , Frito - Lay North America and Frito - Lay International .
In 1997 , Frito - Lay acquired the candied popcorn snack brand Cracker Jack , followed in 1998 by multiple international acquisitions and joint ventures , including Smith 's Snackfood Company ( Australia ) , as well as Savoy Brands ( Latin America ) .
RECENT HISTORY ( 2000 – PRESENT ) Section::::Recent history ( 2000 – present ) .
In the early 1980s , PepsiCo continued to grow its Frito - Lay brands in two ways — through international expansion and acquisition .
Through a joint - venture with Walkers , a UK chip and snack manufacturing company , Frito - Lay increased its distribution presence in Europe .
Similar joint - ventures were arranged in other regions of the world in the 2000s , including Smith 's in Australia , and Sabritas and Gamesa in Mexico .
As a result of these international arrangements , some global Frito - Lay products ( such as Doritos ) are branded under the same name worldwide .
Others maintain their original regional names .
For example , Lay 's chips are a similar product to Walkers Crisps in the UK and both share similar logo designs .
The Quaker Oats Company merged with PepsiCo in 2001 , resulting in Quaker snacks products , including Chewy granola bars , Gatorade , and Quaker rice cakes , becoming organized under the Frito - Lay North America operating division .
This operating structure was short - lived , and in 2003 , as part of a restructuring , the international operations of Frito - Lay ( formerly Frito - Lay International ) were brought within the PepsiCo International division , while Frito - Lay North America was maintained as its own division , comprising Frito - Lay business within the United States and Canada .
Frito - Lay continued to experiment with changes to the composition of its products , introducing Reduced Fat Lay 's and Cheetos in 2002 .
The " Baked " product line also expanded in 2002 to include Baked Doritos .
In 2003 , Frito - Lay introduced the first products in its " Natural " line , which were made with ingredients that had been organically produced .
The first of these included Organic Blue Corn Tostitos , Natural Lay 's Potato Chips ( seasoned with sea salt ) , and Natural Cheetos White Cheddar Puffs .
A new CEO , Irene Rosenfeld , was appointed in 2005 .
Under her management , Frito - Lay North America continued to expand its product lines with acquisitions such as Stacy 's Pita Chip Company , which represented " Frito - Lay 's desire to participate more broadly in the $ 90 billion macrosnack category " , particularly involving snack foods made with more natural ingredients , according to reports from within its industry at that time .
In 2010 , Frito - Lay reformulated Lay 's Kettle and Lay 's flavored chips into a new variant labeled as being made with all - natural ingredients .
Sales of Lay 's potato chips grew by 8 % following the change to all - natural ingredients .
As a result , Frito - Lay announced in 2010 its plans to convert approximately half of all Frito - Lay products , including Sun Chips , Tostitos , Fritos , and Rold Gold pretzels , to all - natural ingredients in 2011 .
CONTROVERSIES AND HEALTH CONCERNS STEREOTYPING IN 1960S
COMMERCIALS Section::::Controversies and health concerns .
Section::::Stereotyping in 1960s commercials .
In 1967 , the company introduced a cartoon spokesman , the Frito Bandito , which became the subject of criticism from Mexican - American groups , who expressed concerns that it portrayed a Mexican stereotype .
The Frito Bandito ( voiced by Mel Blanc ) wore a sombrero and bandoliers , had a handlebar moustache , and brandished pistols .
Protests from advocacy groups such as The National Mexican - American Anti - Defamation Committee ( NMAADC ) prompted some initial concessions , such as the removal of the pistols and a thinning of the accent .
The Frito Bandito was replaced in 1970 by The Muncha Bunch , and then again by a new cartoon called W.C. Fritos ( based on W. C. Fields ) .
GENETICALLY MODIFIED INGREDIENTS
Section::::Genetically modified ingredients .
In the late 1990s , the use of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) was rising as a farming practice , as it made for the growth of larger ( and thus less expensive to produce ) corn crops .
Environmental groups voiced concern over recent research evidence out of Switzerland , warning of the serious human health and environmental hazards involved with the production and consumption of products made with GMOs .
Frito - Lay , due in part to its leverage as one of the world 's largest purchasers of corn , became the target of lobbying efforts from both proponents and opponents of GMOs .
In late 1999 , Frito - Lay asked its suppliers not to use genetically engineered corn .
A similar announcement followed in early 2000 , when the company asked its farmers not to grow genetically modified potatoes .
Frito - Lay stated these requests were made in response to consumers ' worries , and not in response to protests by the OCA , Greenpeace or other groups .
A representative of Greenpeace expressed the perspective that this move was a positive step , stating , " Frito - Lay is about two - thirds of PepsiCo 's sales .
They realize the handwriting is on the wall and that people do n't want to eat GMOs " .
In 2012 , the policy as stated by Pepsico was : " Global Genetically - Modified Food And Ingredient Policy PepsiCo is dedicated to producing the highest quality , greatest tasting food and beverage products in every part of the world .
PepsiCo ensures all products meet or exceed stringent safety and quality standards and uses only ingredients that are safe and approved by applicable government and regulatory authorities .
Approval of genetically - modified foods differs from country to country regarding both use and labeling .
For this reason , PepsiCo adheres to all relevant regulatory requirements regarding the use of genetically - modified food crops and food ingredients within the countries it operates .
Where legally approved , individual business units may choose to use or not use genetically - modified ingredients based on regional preferences . "
TRANS FATS Section::::Trans fats .
Amid rising the concerns over fat intake and trans - fat , fat content was reduced and trans - fats were eliminated from Doritos , Tostitos , and Cheetos in 2004 .
The composition of Ruffles , Lay 's , and Fritos were not changed as these products had always been free of trans - fat . OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
As of 2010 , Frito - Lay operates production plants , distribution centers and regional offices in more than 40 countries , with its Frito - Lay North America headquarters residing in Plano , Texas .
Within North America , Frito - Lay owns ( and in some cases , leases ) approximately 1,830 distribution centers , warehouses and offices .
The division also maintains 55 production plants .
Its President and chief executive officer is Vivek Sankaran .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
PepsiCo Americas Foods consists of PepsiCo 's food and snack operations in North and South America .
This operating division is further segmented into Frito - Lay North America , Sabritas , Gamesa , and Latin America Foods .
It also contains Quaker Foods North America , although no Frito - Lay products are sold or distributed under that business unit .
Food and snack sales in North and South America combined made up 48 percent of PepsiCo 's net revenue as of 2009 .
Frito - Lay North America is the division which controls Frito - Lay product research and development , sales , and distribution within the U.S. and Canada .
Its primary brands include Lay 's and Ruffles potato chips , Doritos tortilla chips , Tostitos tortilla chips and dips , Cheetos cheese flavored snacks , Fritos corn chips , Rold Gold pretzels , Sun Chips , and Cracker Jack popcorn .
Products made by this division are sold to independent distributors and retailers , and are transported from Frito - Lay 's manufacturing plants to distribution centers , primarily in vehicles owned and operated by the company .
Sabritas and Gamesa are two of PepsiCo 's food and snack business lines headquartered in Mexico , and they were acquired by PepsiCo in 1966 and 1990 , respectively .
Sabritas markets Frito - Lay products , such as Cheetos , Fritos , Doritos , and Ruffles , in Mexico .
It also distributes local brands such as Poffets , Rancheritos , Crujitos , and Sabritones .
Gamesa is the largest manufacturer of cookies in Mexico , distributing brands such as Emperador , Arcoiris , and Marías Gamesa .
CENTRAL AND SOUTH
AMERICA Section::::Central and South America .
PepsiCo 's Latin Americas Foods sells Frito - Lay branded snack foods in Central and South America .
Its portfolio of brands includes Lay 's , Cheetos , Fritos , and Doritos , as well as local brands such as Lucky , Stiksy , and Baconzitos snacks in Brazil and ManiMoto in Colombia .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Frito - Lay snacks are distributed in Europe under the PepsiCo Europe operating division , previously PepsiCo International .
Products include : Walkers Crisps , Doritos , Paw Ridge , Smiths , Cheetos , Duyvis , Snack - a - Jacks , Looza , Twistos , and Solinki .
PepsiCo maintains manufacturing plants in Europe , the largest of which are two snack manufacturing and processing plants located in Leicester and Coventry in England .
ASIA , MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA Section::::Asia , Middle East and Africa .
Frito - Lay products sold under the PepsiCo Asia , Middle East & Africa division represent the smallest ( as of 2010 ) proportion on a revenue basis .
However , its distribution is growing more quickly than Frito - Lay 's primary markets .
While the primary global Frito - Lay brands are sold in some parts of these regions , many snack food products have been created to match local taste and cultural preferences .
In India , one of these is Kurkure Twisteez , a potato - based snack food produced in flavors popular in the country such as " Masala Munch " .
Frito - Lay has also employed alternate distribution means in these regions .
In South Africa , it hired delivery drivers who had grown up in their delivery areas , with the intent of " making the product seem less foreign " .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
Through Frito - Lay , PepsiCo is the largest globally distributed snack food company in the world , with sales of its products in 2009 comprising 40 percent of all " savory snacks " sold in the United States and 30 percent of the non - U.S. market .
While the product catalog varies significantly by country , PepsiCo divides its snack products into two primary brand categories : those produced within North America , and those produced outside of North America .
In certain regions of the world , the company 's snack food products are produced under regionally specific names such as Sabritas and Walkers .
The primary snack food brands and products produced under the Frito - Lay name include Fritos corn chips , Cheetos cheese - flavored snacks , Doritos and Tostitos tortilla chips , Lay 's potato chips , Ruffles chips , and Walker 's potato crisps ( distributed in the UK and Ireland under the Walker 's brand and in the rest of Europe under the Lay 's brand)—each of which generated annual worldwide sales over $ 1 billion in 2009 .
Frito - Lay also comprises multiple brands outside of the chip category , including Rold Gold pretzels , Cracker Jack popcorn snacks , and TrueNorth nut clusters and nut crisps .
In India , Frito - Lay uses its international brands as well as Uncle Chipps , a homegrown brand that it bought out in 2000 .
Kurkure , Indian snack developed and produced by PepsiCo India on March 31 announced that it was now available in Canada , UAE , and Gulf region as well .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Frito - Lay North America * Frito - Lay Canada * Frito - Lay company history and timeline * Smiths Snackfood Company ( Australia )
* Walkers Crisps ( UK )