2010
LÖRRACH HOSPITAL SHOOTING
The 2010 Lörrach hospital shooting rampage occurred on 19 September 2010 in the small town of Lörrach , Germany near the Swiss border .
Sabine Radmacher , a 41-year - old woman , killed her five - year - old son and the boy 's father , her ex - partner .
She then crossed the street to St. Elisabethen Hospital , where she shot and stabbed one nurse , killing him , and also injuring eighteen others , including a police officer .
Soon after , the woman was fatally shot by special police units .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
In March 2009 , a similar gun rampage had occurred in nearby Winnenden , when teenage gunman Tim Kretschmer killed twelve people at his former school before killing three civilians and then committing suicide in Wendlingen .
The incident triggered off a debate in Germany on tougher gun ownership laws .
On 16 September 2010 – only three days before the Lörrach rampage – the boy 's father had to appear in court on a charge of failure to securely store his gun .
THE KILLING SPREE Section::::The killing spree .
The hospital rampage took place at around 6:00 p.m. local time at the Catholic St. Elizabeth 's Hospital in Lörrach , a town close to the Swiss and French borders .
A female lawyer smothered her five - year - old son and then shot and stabbed the boy 's father , her ex - partner .
She then set fire to the flat , eventually causing an explosion .
She then crossed the street to St. Elisabethen Hospital and entered the Gynaecology Ward , where she stabbed and shot a nurse , killing him instantly .
Eighteen people , including a police officer who happened to be at the hospital , were also shot and wounded .
When the emergency services arrived fifteen minutes later , police exchanged fire with the shooter and fatally shot her .
It was revealed by the police that the woman , identified as 41-year - old Sabine Radmacher , was believed to have been involved in an incident earlier on the same day in a nearby building .
According to reports , she was seen leaving a burning apartment block opposite the hospital , with a gun in her hand , where two people had lost their lives in an explosion .
The police announced that a child was among the two who had been killed .
Radmacher was also described as a sporting markswoman and had used a .22 calibre Walther GSP during the rampage .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* St. Elizabeth 's website