NO STRINGS ATTACHED ( FILM )
No Strings Attached is a 2011 American romantic comedy film directed by Ivan Reitman and written by Elizabeth Meriwether .
Starring Natalie Portman and Ashton Kutcher , the film is about two friends who decide to make a pact to have " no strings attached " casual sex without falling in love with each other .
The film was released in the United States on January 21 , 2011 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After first meeting at a summer camp as teenagers , Emma ( Natalie Portman ) and Adam ( Ashton Kutcher ) run into each other a few times as young adults but never keep in touch .
Emma becomes a doctor in Los Angeles , Adam a production assistant for a musical television show .
Adam 's father Alvin ( Kevin Kline ) , the well - known star of a former hit television comedy series , has begun a romance with Adam 's ex - girlfriend , Vanessa ( Ophelia Lovibond ) .
Adam finds out , gets drunk and calls the women in his phone seeking a hookup .
The next morning , he wakes on a sofa wearing nothing but a small towel .
It turns out that he texted Emma and then came to the apartment she shares with some other residents — Patrice ( Greta Gerwig ) , Shira ( Mindy Kaling ) , and Guy ( Guy Branum ) .
Once there , he took off all his clothes and then passed out .
Emma leads Adam to her bedroom to retrieve his missing pants and they end up having sex .
The two have sex again at Adam 's house and before she leaves Adam agrees to her proposal for a casual relationship ( as she puts it , using each other for the dirty and nothing else ) .
Adam warns Emma about falling in love with him , but she dismisses the idea and sets ground rules to keep what they 're doing from becoming too serious .
At first things go well , but Adam becomes jealous when Sam ( Ben Lawson)—another resident — seeks her attention .
Adam brings Emma a gift ( a mix CD ) and she rebuffs him , saying they should stop for a while and hook up with other people .
But after being apart for two weeks
Emma returns to Adam and
they continue being sex friends only .
Adam 's birthday comes along a few months later .
He goes out for dinner with Alvin and Vanessa , who announce their plan to have a baby together .
Emma berates the other couple while defending Adam .
He persuades her to go out together on Valentine 's Day .
Things fall apart when she becomes too uncomfortable during the date .
An angry Emma advises Adam that he should find someone else who wo n't hurt him .
Adam tells Emma that he loves her — something she 's not at all receptive to hearing — they have a fight , ending their arrangement .
Six weeks later , a script Adam wrote is being filmed .
He gets a regular writing job on the show with the help of Lucy ( Lake Bell ) , the show 's assistant director , who is clearly attracted to Adam .
Meanwhile , Emma is depressed over not being with Adam .
The situation is compounded and complicated by her younger sister Katie 's ( Olivia Thirlby ) wedding the next day and her widowed mother ( Talia Balsam ) arriving for the event with a male companion ( Brian Dierker ) of her own .
Emma feels she is being strong for her mom by not letting herself get too close to anyone
so she wo n't become upset by seeing Emma get hurt if a relationship ends poorly .
Emma 's mom tells her to stop .
When Emma confesses that she ca n't stop thinking about Adam , Katie insists that she call him to put things right .
A nervous Emma phones Adam and tells him that she misses him .
He responds that they were never really together .
Realizing that she needs to speak with him in person , Emma leaves Santa Barbara where the wedding is taking place and drives to Adam 's house .
Her plans are ruined – and she has to hide to avoid being seen — when he arrives home with Lucy .
Emma assumes Adam has a new girlfriend and tearfully drives away .
Vanessa calls Adam before he and Lucy can have sex — Alvin has overdosed on a cough syrup - based drink called " Purple drank " .
Meeting Adam outside the hospital , Vanessa says that she is ending her relationship with Alvin and leaves for a party .
Adam goes in to visit Alvin who surprisingly gives him some tender advice about falling in love .
Shira tells Emma about Adam 's dad being admitted to the hospital .
As Adam leaves the building he calls Emma and tells her that she must be present if she is going to say that she misses him .
Emma gets out of her car as the call ends and Adam is stunned to suddenly find her there .
She tells Adam that she is sorry she hurt him and confesses that she really loves and cares about him and they reconcile .
After eating breakfast together the next morning — something that never happened before — they arrive in Santa Barbara just before Katie 's wedding is starting .
As they enter a room and pause Emma asks Adam what will happen next , and with a smile on his lips he silently intertwines her hand with his — for the first time they are holding hands together as a couple .
The end credits show an epilogue in which Alvin and Lucy are in a relationship , and are in a restaurant waiting for Adam to arrive to tell him .
Adam 's roommate ( Jake Johnson ) and Patrice are in a relationship and are shown meeting his two dads .
Vanessa had told Adam that old people scare her and she is ridden with anxiety when she is trapped in an elevator full of senior citizens .
Adam and Emma are seen kissing in the park .
Sam and Shira are in a relationship , but he wants his freedom and is n't pleased when she reveals that she 's already been seeing other men .
Katie is having a baby and Emma is the delivering doctor .
Guy lures a nervous - looking Sam into a hospital room .
At last , Adam and Emma are shown peacefully sleeping together .
CAST
* Natalie Portman as Dr. Emma K. Kurtzman .
She grew up in Ann Arbor and attended MIT .
* Stefanie Scott as young Emma
* Ashton Kutcher as Adam Franklin * Dylan Hayes as young Adam
* Kevin Kline as Alvin Franklin , Adam 's father .
He 's had two failed marriages .
* Cary Elwes as Dr. Steven Metzner , Emma 's boss * Greta Gerwig as Dr. Patrice , Emma 's friend * Lake Bell as Lucy - secretly loves Adam * Olivia Thirlby as Katie Kurtzman , Emma 's younger 22-year - old sister .
Her boyfriend is Kevin .
* Ludacris ( Chris Bridges ) as Wallace , Adam 's friend * Jake Johnson as Eli , Adam 's friend .
He has two gay dads .
* Mindy Kaling as Dr. Shira , Emma 's friend * Talia Balsam as
Sandra Kurtzman , Emma and Katie 's mother * Ophelia Lovibond as Vanessa , Alvin 's girlfriend * Guy Branum as Dr. Guy , Emma 's gay friend * Ben Lawson as Dr. Sam , a co - worker of Emma , who likes her * Jennifer Irwin as Megan , Adam 's boss * Adhir Kalyan as Kevin , Katie 's fiancé
* Brian H. Dierker as Bones , Sandra 's boyfriend * Abby Elliott as Joy * Vedette Lim as Lisa
* Nasim Pedrad as Writer * Mollee Gray as Sari * Matthew Moy as Chuck PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
No Strings Attached is directed by Ivan Reitman based on a screenplay by Elizabeth Meriwether titled Friends with Benefits .
The title was changed to avoid confusion with a different film with a similar premise that opened on July 22 , 2011 .
The Paramount Pictures film was first announced in March 2010 as an untitled project .
Actors Ashton Kutcher and Natalie Portman were cast in the lead roles , and Paramount anticipated a release date of , 2011 .
Reitman said of casual sex , " I noticed from my own kids that with this generation in particular , young people find it easier to have a sexual relationship than an emotional one .
That is how the sexes deal with each other today .
"
Principal photography began in May 2010 .
By November 2010 , the film was titled No Strings Attached with a new release date of , 2011 .
Though the timing was coincidental , Portman welcomed the chance to portray a dissimilar character to her role in Black Swan .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The soundtrack includes songs such as " Bossa Nova Baby " " I Wanna Sex You Up " * " Bang Bang Bang "
* " Love Lost " * Covers of " 99 Problems " and " Bleeding Love " RELEASE Section::::Release .
No Strings Attached had its world premiere on , 2011 , at the Fox Village Theater in Los Angeles , California .
The film was released in in the United States and Canada on , 2011 .
Its target demographic was women between 17 and 24 years old , and its primary competition was The Dilemma .
Interest tracking reflected the target demographic 's gaining interest in the film leading up to its release , and tracking also revealed " good early awareness " from Hispanic audiences .
The studio predicted for the film to gross in the " mid - to - high teens " millions in its opening weekend , similar to past romantic comedies rated " R " ( restricted to 17 years old and up ) by the Motion Picture Association of America .
With No Strings Attached as the only wide opener in the United States and Canada , it was uncertain if it would rank first at the box office above The Green Hornet , which opened the previous weekend in first place with .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Ultimately , No Strings Attached beat The Green Hornet with an opening weekend gross of .
70 % of the audience were women .
According to CinemaScore , audiences under the age of 25 gave the film an " A- " grade while audiences over the age of 25 gave it a " B " grade .
Future grosses were expected to be dependent on the younger demographic .
The film grossed in the United States and Canada and in other territories for a worldwide total of .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
No Strings Attached received mixed reviews .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 49 % , based on 167 reviews , with an average rating of 5.3/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : "
It benefits from the presence of Natalie Portman and director Ivan Reitman 's steady hand , but No Strings Attached does n't have the courage or conviction to follow through on its ribald premise . "
On Metacritic , the film received a score of 50 out of 100 , based on 36 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Critic David Edelstein described No Strings Attached as a film with " a supposedly feminist veneer ...
(that ) never makes the case for Emma 's point of view .
It 's almost a feminist backlash movie , and it did n't have to be .
There are plenty of reasons for brilliant young women , especially with the stress of a medical career , to approach time- and emotion - consuming relationships warily . "
He expressed disappointment on overuse of stock characters , as well as Reitman 's " heavy - handed " direction and a story that is ultimately " corny and contrived and conservative . "
A. O. Scott called the film " not entirely terrible ...
high praise indeed , given that this is a film aspiring to match the achievement of 27 Dresses , When in Rome , and Leap Year " ; according to Scott , the film is " Love & Other Drugs without the disease " , a film whose pleasures " are to be found in the brisk , easy humor of some of Ms. Meriwether 's dialogue and in the talented people scattered around Ms. Portman and Mr. Kutcher like fresh herbs strewn on a serving of overcooked fish .
" Scott considered " the film 's great squandered opportunity — and also the source of some of its best comic moments — is that Ms. Gerwig and Mindy Kaling in effect share the role of Emma 's zany sidekick .
How can this be ?
Why are these two entirely original and of - the - moment performers marginal players in this agreeable , lackluster picture and not stars of the year 's greatest girl - bromance ? ...
To imagine Ms. Kaling and Ms. Gerwig in a remake of Thelma and Louise or the Wedding Crashers is to experience an equal measure of frustration and hope .
Why ca n't we have a few movies like that and not quite so many like this ? "
British newspaper
The Telegraph named No Strings
Attached one of the ten worst films of 2011 , saying " No Strings Attached is nominally a raunchy romantic comedy , but Natalie Portman betrays so little indication of enjoying herself you 'd be forgiven for thinking we were watching deleted scenes from Black Swan . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
No Strings Attached was released on DVD and Blu - ray on May 10 , 2011 .
SEE ALSO * Friends with Benefits
* When Harry Met Sally * Befikre REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS