CITIZEN CARD ( PORTUGAL )
The Citizen Card ( Portuguese : Cartão de cidadão ) or CC is an identity card issued by the Portuguese government to its citizens .
The card replaces several previous documents , including the Bilhete de Identidade ( BI ; Identity Card ) , Social Security card , National Health Service card , Taxpayer card and voter registration card , in one secure card .
The Citizen Card was first issued in the Azores in mid-2006 .
However , BIs continued to be issued in some cases .
The Citizen card is a valid travel document within all of Europe ( except Belarus , Russia and Ukraine ) as well as Egypt , French overseas territories , Georgia , Montserrat ( max . 14 days ) , Turkey and on organised tours to Tunisia .
However , to enter to Egypt and Turkey visas are required through the e - visa system or upon arrival ( for Egypt passport photo is required on the arrival ) .
OBJECTIVES Section::::Objectives .
The main reason to introduce the new card was to reduce the number of separate documents required by citizens in dealings with the various institutions of the state .
The CC is a smart card with a data storage chip capable of storing encrypted personal data .
According to the Portuguese government , this device guarantees its privacy : for example , stored medical information can not be accessed by officials with access to the financial database of the citizen , to prevent abuse of power in obtaining data and protecting citizens ' privacy .
Another problem with the Bilhete de Identidade was that it was widely counterfeited .
In addition to introducing the newer , more secure , CC , from 2008 identity documents could no longer be issued by Portuguese consulates as previously ; identity documents could only be issued in Lisbon ( although applied for elsewhere ) .
OTHER IDENTITY DOCUMENTS
Section::::Other identity documents .
In many circumstances , a passport or driver 's license can still be used as an identification document .
However , the " identity card " or " citizen card " is required by the Portuguese authorities .
Foreigners , including European Union nationals , must carry a passport or valid identity card of their country of origin , and show it whenever required by officials .
In the near future however , as part of the Simplex + 2018 , a new " card of citizenship " ( cartão de cidadão ) for foreigners residing in Portugal will arrive , which will include tax identification , social security and the national health system .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
The card is of similar size and appearance to a credit card .
It contains a variety of information about the card holder .
The front of the card * Card holder 's photo * Pardes *
Given / Nezami * Gender
* Height * Nationality * 1 JUN 1987h
* Elements of civil identification , similar to the old Identity Card
* Document number * Expiry Date * Card holder 's signature
The back of the card
* Parents ' names
* Tax number
* Social Security number * National Health Service number * Optical reading area
On the chip * Digital certificates ( card 's authentication and electronic signature )
* Same data as the optical reading area but in digital format * Address and other information ( the system is expandable ) ISSUANCE TO BRAZILIAN NATIONALS Section::::Issuance to Brazilian nationals .
Since the conclusion of the Equality Statute between Brazil and Portugal ( Estatuto da Igualdade entre Brasil e Portugal ) between the two nations at Porto Seguro on 21 April 2001 , Portuguese and Brazilian citizens are considered to have identical rights and privileges across both countries .
Accordingly , a Brazilian national may apply for and be issued Citizen Card in the same style as would be issued to a Portuguese national , except that the " Nacionalidade " ( nationality ) field shows " BRA " to indicate the bearer 's Brazilian citizenship , and the back of the card carries the supplementary remark
" CIDADÃO BRASILEIRO AO ABRIGO DO TRATADO DE PORTO SEGURO - BRAZILIAN CITIZEN UNDER PORTO SEGURO AGREEMENT " .
Additionally , because Brazilian citizenship alone is not sufficient to allow a person to avail themselves of the European Union 's provisions for the freedom of personal movement , these Citizen Cards are marked " NÃO SERVE DE DOCUMENTO DE VIAGEM /
NOT VALID
AS A TRAVEL DOCUMENT " instead of the machine - readable zone that would be found on a Portuguese citizen 's card .
SEE ALSO * Bilhete de Identidade * National identity cards in the European Union REFERENCES
* Official government page for the Citizen Card in Portuguese