THE LOST VALENTINE
The Lost Valentine is a 2011 Hallmark Hall of Fame made - for - television drama film starring Jennifer Love Hewitt , Betty White and Sean Faris .
It is based on the novel by James Michael Pratt of the same name , previously titled The Last Valentine , a 1998 New York Times and USA Today bestseller .
In December 2011 , Betty White received a nomination for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie for her performance .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story follows the characters of a TV journalist , Susan Allison ( Hewitt ) , working on a profile of a woman , Caroline Thomas ( White ) , whose husband naval aviator Lt .
Neil Thomas was declared MIA sixty years ago during World War II .
Susan immediately clashes with Caroline 's grandson , Lucas Thomas ( Faris ) , when he overhears her referring to the potential story as a fluff piece , rather than the very personal story it is , since she herself doubts if pure and true love exists .
She apologizes , and manages to start the interview and starts spending time with both Caroline and Lucas .
Her developing friendship with Lucas makes her have doubts about her relationship with her almost fiance , Andrew Hawthorne , a photographer who is frequently absent overseas .
The interview with Caroline reveals that for sixty - six years she has had no information about her husband from the Department of the Navy .
She tells her story about how she and her husband met in 1943 , married , and then renovated a house they had bought from her uncle ( which is where Caroline still lives ) .
After a year , and despite a child forthcoming , Neil felt he should help his country more than just acting as a training officer , so he went into combat .
Their last moments together were at the Union train station , where she handed him a handmade valentine professing her everlasting love , as he departed on a train .
Caroline remained strong , and sent many letters to Neil .
On one occasion , Neil replied with a letter containing a small , handmade whittled wooden sculpture of a fighter plane for the baby .
After that Caroline stopped receiving letters .
Caroline , along with the entire neighborhood , dreaded the times when a Western Union deliveryman arrived in the neighborhood with a yellow telegram , since this meant that someone 's loved one was reported to be dead or missing in action .
Eventually , the moment where Caroline received one came , but the telegram stated that her husband was missing in action , so she refused to believe that he was dead .
Since then Caroline has returned every year on Valentine 's Day to the same train station to wait for him .
With the help of a United States Senator ( Susan did an unrelated story on the him ) who puts pressure on the Navy , they locate the Billings family , whose now deceased father Jeff was a gunner on Lt . Thomas ' airplane .
From a surviving letter by Jeff to his wife we hear the account of the crash and of Morang , a Filipino guerilla , who rescued two wounded crash survivors .
Susan turns to Andrew for help because he still has connections to the Philippines where Lt . Thomas was last seen alive .
Putting past hard feelings over his breakup with Susan aside , Andrew manages to locate the elderly Morang whilst in the Philippines and sets up a video conference between him and Caroline .
The story of the fate of Lt . Thomas , Morang says , is that he was badly wounded , but insisted his more seriously injured gunner , Jeff Billings , be evacuated first .
When Lt . Thomas had recovered , he joined the Filipino guerillas and fought the Japanese deep behind enemy lines .
During a patrol , Lt . Thomas was killed by a Japanese sniper while selflessly trying to rescue a little boy .
Morang reveals he knows where Lt .
Thomas 's body is buried .
The U.S. Navy goes to the grave site and returns Lt .
Thomas ' remains and personal effects to the United States .
Caroline is handed Neil 's dog - tags , watch , and wallet , which contains her valentine to him , now faded , which he always carried close to his heart .
In recognition of Lt .
Thomas 's bravery , courage , and meritorious service , he is to be posthumously awarded the Navy Cross , Silver Star and Purple Heart .
On Valentine 's Day Lt .
Thomas 's coffin is returned to Caroline at Union Station by the U.S. Navy with full military honors , conducted in front of well - wishers and TV cameras , with a tearful Caroline taking her last goodbyes from her beloved Neil to the sound of Taps .
Caroline is cheered when Lucas and Susan begin a romantic relationship .
The film ends with Caroline , who has found peace and closure , seeing that the rosebush Neil had planted long ago in their garden has a new single bloom , the first in a long time , signaling long - lasting love , as she remembers her romantic moments with Neil in the same garden , to the sound of Dream a Little Dream of Me playing on the radio .
CAST
* Jennifer Love Hewitt —
Susan Allison *
Betty White — Caroline Robinson Thomas
* Meghann Fahy — Caroline Robinson Thomas ( young ) * Sean Faris —
Lucas Thomas * Gil Gerard —
Neil Thomas Robinson Jr. * Billy Magnussen — Neil Thomas
* Will Chase — Andrew Hawthorne * Nadia Dajani — Julie Oliver
* Robert Pralgo — David Oliver
* Tom Prusinowski - Navy Chaplain * Victoria Loving — Maggie Thomas , Lucas 's mother PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The teleplay was written by Maryann Ridini Spencer & Barton Taney .
Spencer met the author of the book , James Michael Pratt , in 2001 and fell in love with the story line .
Her screenplay based on the novel , ultimately resulted in a contract with Hallmark .
Spencer is also co - producer of the project .
The producers did well in ' matching ' young and old Caroline .
White and Fahy 's facial features , including expressive blue eyes , are similar in most respects , though it would appear Fahy is slightly taller than White .
ANACHRONISMS Section::::Anachronisms .
Three versions of the song Dream a Little Dream of Me are heard in the film : sung by the Mills Brothers , as a duet by Ella Fitzgerald and Louis Armstrong , and by Doris Day .
The first two are ' out of time ' , as the Mills Brothers and the duet versions were set during the war , when in fact , the Mills Brothers version was recorded in 1964 and the duet in 1950 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film aired on January 30 , 2011 on CBS and was available to order from Hallmark after the film aired . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Lost Valentine earned mostly positive reviews , with White 's performance receiving high praise .
The film received a generally positive review from US Magazine , who said it was " Supercorny , though White tugs the heart " .
The film was a huge success which not only won its time period in viewers ( 14.53 million , beating out Fox 's second hour of coverage of the NFL Pro Bowl ) but represented the most - watched Hallmark movie in four years ( since the film Valley of Light aired in January 2007 ) .
The film won the Faith & Freedom Award for Television at the 2012 Movieguide Awards .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Stream The Lost Valentine at SpiritClips.com
* Jennifer Love Hewitt Official Website
* James Michael Pratt Official Website
* Maryann Ridini Spencer Official Website