BLACK AND YELLOW
" Black and Yellow " is a song by American rapper Wiz Khalifa from his third studio album , Rolling Papers .
It was released on September 14 , 2010 , as the lead single from the album .
The song was written by Khalifa , along with Stargate , who produced it .
It was released as a CD single in honor of Record Store Day .
The song peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Wiz Khalifa 's first number - one single in the US ; he would top the chart again in 2015 with " See You Again " .
The song is about Khalifa 's car , a yellow Dodge Challenger Hemi with black stripes .
He has stated that he got the car in those colors as a tribute to his hometown of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , whose official colors are black and gold , and its professional sports teams , most of whose colors are black and some variation of gold or yellow .
The song itself does not mention Pittsburgh or sports , although the song 's music video made the connection to Pittsburgh explicit , showing various iconic locations in the city , as well as apparel associated with the football team the Pittsburgh Steelers , the hockey team the Pittsburgh Penguins , and the baseball team the Pittsburgh Pirates .
In the year after it was released , " Black and Yellow " spawned dozens of remixes , parodies and remakes , both in the US and internationally , many of them made in tribute to a local sports team .
At Super Bowl XLV in 2011 , which featured the Steelers competing against the Green Bay Packers , the Steelers used " Black and Yellow " as their fight song , while the Packers used a remix by Lil ' Wayne called " Green and Yellow " , marking the first time both teams at the Super Bowl had used the same song .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
On the issue dated October 2 , 2010 , " Black and Yellow " debuted at No . 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
It then dropped out the following week and re - entered at No . 64 on the issue dated October 30 , 2010 .
On its eighteenth charting week , the song rose to No . 1 on the issue dated February 19 , 2011 , selling 198,000 digital copies that week . "
Black and Yellow " has sold 4,144,922 digital copies since release .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video was directed by Bill Paladino .
It was filmed in Pittsburgh and features sights of the city , including the U.S. Steel Tower , BNY Mellon Center , PPG Place , William Penn Hotel , Citizens Bank Tower , Union Trust Building , One PNC Plaza , K&L Gates
Center the Three Sisters and Smithfield Street bridges , Station Square , Shannon Hall of the Art Institute of Pittsburgh and the smoke stacks of the former U.S. Steel Homestead Works at The Waterfront adjacent to the city .
The video also prominently features city icons such as the Terrible Towel , a rally towel for the Pittsburgh Steelers , and city sports in general , as well as Pittsburgh Pirates apparel .
It was recorded in Chatsworth Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In a 2012 commercial for the video game Madden NFL 13 , Paul Rudd sings the song while playing the game as the Pittsburgh Steelers against Ray Lewis .
*
The song was featured in multiple trailers for The Lego Batman Movie .
*
On April 7 , 2014 , " Jimmy Kimmel Live ! "
held a skit called " American Sign Language Rap Battle .
" Khalifa performed the song as three ASL - certified interpreters competed .
REMIXES Section::::Remixes .
The official remix , " Black & Yellow ( G - Mix ) " features west - coast rapper Snoop Dogg , Juicy J and R&B singer T - Pain .
Wiz Khalifa has a new verse on the track .
The song leaked on December 12 , 2010 but was officially released on December 16 .
A video for the remix was shot and was released on January 8 , 2011 .
A remix by T - Pain , named " Black & Yellow ( T - Mix ) " , featured the verse that was later put on the official remix .
An anime version fan remix was also made combining the song and Hidamari Sketch 's opening music , Sketch Switch .
TRACK LISTING * Digital download *
" Black and Yellow " ( Explicit Album Version ) –
3:37 * * Digital download ( G - Mix ) * " Black and Yellow " ( G - Mix ) – 4:38 * REMAKES AND FREESTYLES Section::::Remakes and freestyles .
Many remakes have been made , mostly in tribute to other sports teams , referring to their respective pair of colors .
Some of the notable remakes include : *
" Purp & Yellow " by The Game , Snoop Dogg , and YG , representing the Los Angeles Lakers .
This version also had a remix produced by DJ Skee , with a rock - instrumented backing track ; a music video for the DJ Skee remix featured the artists as well as members of the Lakers .
An extended mix was released the next day , also featuring Kendrick Lamar , Joe Moses and Thurzday .
* " Rossonero ( Red and Black ) " by Denny La Home feat .
Jake La Furia - Italian version performed by two Italian rappers .
The colours refer to Italian football club AC Milan .
* " Eff Australia " by Rucka Rucka Ali - an anti - Australian song parody to the tune of the original .
* " Green and Yellow " by Lil Wayne , representing the Green Bay Packers , who defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers in Super Bowl XLV .
* " White and Navy " by Fabolous representing New York City , and the New York Yankees .
* " Black and Yellow ( Mike Tomlin )
" by Wale , in reference to the Steelers ' head coach Mike Tomlin .
*
" Yeah Carmelo " by Maino , in reference to Carmelo Anthony of the New York Knicks .
* " Black and Red " by Jermaine Dupri representing the Atlanta Falcons .
* " Black and Orange " by San Quinn representing the San Francisco Giants in their 2010 World Series victory .
* " White and Purple " by Chet Haze ( son of actor Tom Hanks ) , representing Northwestern University .
* " Black and Yellow " by Tyler Ward and Crew and Cobus , a rock version .
* " Black and Ghetto " by Serius Jones describing the lifestyle of being an African American gangster .
* " Green and Purple " by Kritikal which refers to marijuana and the culture surrounding it .
* " Black and Yellow " by Chris Cobbins * " Gold N Blue " by 6'6 240 about West Virginia University 's football team the West Virginia Mountaineers .
In addition , a number of freestyle versions have been released , of artists rapping over " Black and Yellow " 's instrumental track , without any overt reference to the song or to sports teams .
These include versions by Crooked I ( who included a chorus of " packing metal " ) , Donnis , Young Jeezy , Tyga , Novi Novak , and Layzie Bone and Flesh - n - Bone of Bone Thugs - n - Harmony .
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2010–11 ) !
Peakposition Australia ( ARIA Urban Singles )
align="left"German
Airplay Chart align="center"91 New Zealand ( RIANZ ) align="center"21
YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 2011 ) !
scope="col"Position
CERTIFICATIONS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS