LIST OF MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS
BY
FACEBOOK Facebook is a social networking company that has acquired other companies , including WhatsApp .
The WhatsApp acquisition closed at a steep $ 19 billion ; more than $ 40 per user of the platform .
Facebook also purchased the defunct company ConnectU in a court settlement and acquired intellectual property formerly held by rival Friendster .
The majority of the companies acquired by Facebook are based in the United States , and in turn , a large percentage of these companies are based in or around the San Francisco Bay Area .
Facebook has also made investments in LuckyCal and Wildfire Interactive .
Most of Facebook 's acquisitions have primarily been " talent acquisitions " and acquired products are often shut - down .
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has stated in 2010 that " We have not once bought a company for the company .
We buy companies to get excellent people ...
In order to have a really entrepreneurial culture one of the key things is to make sure we 're recruiting the best people .
One of the ways to do this is to focus on acquiring great companies with great founders .
"
The Instagram acquisition , announced on 2012 - 04 - 09 , appears to have been the first exception to this pattern .
While continuing with a pattern of primarily talent acquisitions , other notable product focused acquisitions include the $ 19 billion WhatsApp acquisition and the $ 2 billion Oculus VR acquisition .
ACQUISITIONS USDMike Matas and Kimon Tsinteris October 10 , 2011
data - sort - value="0 " undisclosed November 8 , 2011 data - sort - value="0 " undisclosed Mobile engineering team Founder and CEOOculus VR , Cork data - sort - value="0 " undisclosed November 11 , 2016
CrowdTangle Publisher analyticsComputer Vision , Machine Learning , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania data - sort - value="0 " undisclosed Carnegie Mellon UniversitytbhTel AvivY Combinator Randall Bennett , Justin Carter , Pauli Ojala , Hassan Salahuddin
SEE ALSO
* List of mergers and acquisitions by Alphabet
* List of mergers and acquisitions by Apple * List of_mergers and acquisitions by Amazon * List of acquisitions by eBay
* List of mergers and acquisitions by IBM * List of mergers and acquisitions by Microsoft
* List of mergers and acquisitions by Twitter
* List of mergers and acquisitions by Yahoo !
* Mergers and acquisitions REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Facebook Press Releases
* Facebook Blog