ROLLERCOASTER TYCOON
WORLD RollerCoaster Tycoon World is a theme park construction and management simulation video game developed by Nvizzio Creations and published by Atari for Microsoft Windows .
It is the fourth major installment in the RollerCoaster Tycoon series .
The game was released on November 16 , 2016 .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Players are able to build rides , shops and roller coasters , while monitoring elements such as budget , visitor happiness and technology research .
Unlike RollerCoaster Tycoon 4 Mobile , the game does not include any micro - transactions .
Similar to RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 , the game features 3D graphics instead of the 2D isometric style of the first two installments in the series .
When building roller coasters , the game makes use of a spline system instead of the old style of laying individual pieces .
Players are also allowed to " ride " the roller coasters they have created , and other rides they have placed in their park in the game , in either a first or third person view .
A new ' Park Pulse ' mechanic was also introduced , allowing players to quickly find out how their park is doing and the customers ' thoughts , similar to Zoo Tycoon titles .
The game contains several scenery and ride themes at launch , with more in development that will be released via free updates and paid expansion packs .
The game also introduces an " Architect mode " , allowing players to plan and layout the coaster 's model before constructing the coasters .
Similar to the past installments , there are four different types of coasters available to build : steel , inverted , wooden , and launch - track coasters .
In addition , there are ten roller coasters per type .
Coasters can be built freeform or the player can place pre - mode designs into their park .
Unlike in the previous games , the roller coaster train may fly off the tracks if the roller coaster is built incorrectly .
As a result , a new " safety - rating " option and medical staff has been added .
User - generated content ( including custom scenery ) was available from release , as well as Steam Workshop support .
While terrain and environments are randomly generated in a map , players can still gain access to a terrain editor .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
When Atari announced RollerCoaster Tycoon 4 Mobile , they also promised that a title for Windows was also being developed .
The game was officially announced during Gamescom 2014 with a teaser trailer , subtitled World .
The first screenshots and details of the game were revealed during PAX Prime 2014 .
Part way through development , Area 52 Games took over as the developer of the game from Pipeworks Software .
The reasoning behind this has not yet been published by Atari , who announced the change along with the relaunch of the RollerCoaster Tycoon website .
The game was due for release in early 2015 , although it was revealed that they would not announce an official launch date until closer to the release of the game .
A closed alpha was also in development .
A new trailer showing gameplay was uploaded on March 5 , 2015 , showing an intro featuring real life POV footage of Goliath and Colossus at Six Flags Magic Mountain .
Atari later revealed that a third developer had taken over from Area 52 Games , later confirmed to be Nvizzio Creations .
At the NVIDIA booth on PAX Prime 2015 , Atari unveiled interactive gameplay for the game showing off their development build that featured coaster building and sandbox mode .
On September 29 , 2015 , it was announced the release date would be December 10 , 2015 .
Two beta weekends preceded the release of the game .
The first beta weekend was the last weekend of October and this beta was focused on the new spline - based Coaster Builder .
The first beta weekend took place as planned .
However , feedback from this beta weekend led to Atari deciding to delay the game 's release to early 2016 .
The developer noted the additional development time would allow them to add requested items and features such as " predefined piece " coaster building , additional coaster test feedback , a robust fencing tool , improved on - demand grid , and various smaller improvements . "
Consequently , the second beta weekend was also delayed from November to December .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Atari had decided that its theme park game , RollerCoaster Tycoon World , would be launched into Early Access on 30 March , instead of going with a full release .
The early access release was met with negative reviews , mostly complaining about the poor graphics , coaster builder , lack of detail , and ride animations .
In November 2016 , Atari announced that the game will be released on November 16 , 2016 , one day before Planet Coaster 's release .
The game was available for both standard and deluxe editions .
The deluxe edition contained two additional maps , terrain texture additions , a digital art book , a gold park entrance , and the panda mascot from the previous games .
RECEPTION PRE - RELEASE Section::::Reception . Section::::Pre - release .
A trailer released by Atari containing gameplay of RollerCoaster Tycoon World was received poorly by critics and fans .
Some critics noted that the game appears graphically worse than 2004 's RollerCoaster Tycoon 3 and that it " looks little better than a basic mobile game . "
Atari later issued a statement that the game was still in " pre - alpha " stages , and that the graphics were not yet coded to their full resolution and would also receive a major overhaul when the game 's engine is upgraded from Unity 4.6 to Unity 5.0 .
They also promised that the new visuals would be of higher definition and higher level of realism .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The release of RollerCoaster Tycoon World was met with negative reactions by critics .
According to review aggregator Metacritic , the game holds a score of 43 out of 100 , based on seven reviews .
Eurogamer suggested to avoid the game , comparing the game to a " car - crash into an orphanage for bush - babies . "
TechRaptor rated the game a 1/10 , citing the large interface and variety of bugs and glitches within the game .
SEE ALSO
* Parkitect * Planet Coaster
* Theme Park Studio REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS