THE VOW ( 2012 FILM )
The Vow is a 2012 American romantic drama film directed by Michael Sucsy and written by Abby Kohn , Marc Silverstein , and Jason Katims , inspired by the true story of Kim and Krickitt Carpenter .
The film stars Rachel McAdams and Channing Tatum as the Collins , with Sam Neill , Scott Speedman , and Jessica Lange in supporting roles .
The Vow is the eighth highest - grossing romantic drama film since 1980 .
This was Spyglass Entertainment 's last film before MGM took over .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Paige Collins ( Rachel McAdams ) and her husband Leo ( Channing Tatum ) come out of a movie theater .
On their way home , at a stop sign , Paige unbuckles her seatbelt to lean over and kiss Leo .
At that very moment , a truck rams their car from behind and Paige crashes through the windshield .
Both of them are rushed to the emergency room , and as Leo , in a voice - over talks about how " moments of impact help in finding who we are " the movie cuts to how Paige and Leo first met .
The scenes of how they courted , became engaged and married at the Art Institute of Chicago and share a kiss under the Cloud Gate are interwoven with the present .
When Paige regains consciousness , she thinks Leo is her doctor , having lost all memories of the past few years .
When her wealthy parents , Bill and Rita Thornton , learn about this , they visit her .
This is the first time that Leo meets them , and they do not appreciate Leo taking their daughter , and not being informed .
Paige does not understand why he would not have met her parents , after having been married to her .
She finds it even stranger that he did not know why either .
Nor did she understand why she left law school , broke her engagement with her previous fiancé , Jeremy , and why she has not been in touch with her family and friends .
Her parents insist on taking her home with them and Paige agrees , thinking she might have married Leo for some mutual benefit .
She seeks evidence of the marriage .
Just as she is about to leave , Leo comes running to play her a voice message in which she sounds very happy and romantic .
Paige decides to go back with Leo , hoping it will help her regain her lost memory .
Paige is welcomed home with a surprise party by her friends , but as she is not able to remember any of them , she finds it overwhelming and is extremely confused .
The next day Paige ventures out to her regular café , but does not remember having been there and loses her way back .
She calls her mother because she does not know or remember Leo 's number .
That evening Leo and Paige are invited for dinner by her parents .
At the dinner and in the bar later , Leo does not fit in with her family and friends .
He persists in his attempts to help her regain her lost memory , but Paige is more driven to learn why she left law school and broke her engagement to Jeremy .
During the course of one encounter with Jeremy , she kisses him .
Her doctor advises her to fill the holes in her memory rather than be afraid of her past .
With her sister Gwen 's wedding approaching , Paige decides to stay with her parents until the wedding .
Though Leo asks her out on a date and spends a night with her , the relationship is further strained when Paige 's dad attempts to persuade Leo to divorce his daughter , and by Leo punching Jeremy for talking about chances to bed his wife .
Paige rejoins law school and Leo signs divorce papers .
At a store , she meets her old friend Diane who , unaware of her amnesia , apologizes for having had a relationship with Paige 's dad , thus alerting Paige as to why she had left her family .
When she confronts her mother about this , Rita tells her that she decided to stay with Bill for all the things he had done right instead of leaving him for one wrong act .
Paige then asks Leo why he never told her , and he replies he wanted to earn her love instead of driving her away from her parents .
Paige , while in class , starts sketching ; thus depicting why she first left law school .
She continues her interest in art , eventually returning to sculpting and drawing .
Though Jeremy confesses he broke up with his present girlfriend , hoping to be back with her , she turns him down stating she needs to know what life would be like without him .
As seasons change , Leo discusses his philosophy about " Moments of impact . "
" A moment of impact whose potential for change has ripple effects far beyond what we can predict .
Sending some particles crashing together , making them closer than before .
While sending others , spinning off into great ventures , landing where you never thought you 'd find them ...
" Back in her room , Paige finds the menu card on which she had written her wedding vows and is deeply moved .
The movie ends with Paige finding Leo at their regular Café Mnemonic and going with him to try a new place instead of their old haunts .
CAST
* Rachel McAdams as Paige Collins
* Channing Tatum as Leo Collins * Jessica Lange as Rita Thornton , Paige 's mother * Sam Neill as Bill Thornton , Paige 's father * Jessica McNamee as Gwen Thornton , Paige 's sister
* Wendy Crewson as Dr. Fishman * Tatiana Maslany as Lily * Lucas Bryant as Kyle
* Scott Speedman as Jeremy * Joey Klein as Josh
* Joe Cobden as Jim * Jeananne Goossen as Sonia * Dillon Casey as Ryan
* Shannon Barnett as Carrie * Lindsay Ames as Shana
* Kristina Pesic as Lizbet * Britt Irvin as Lina
* Sarah Carter as Diane
* Rachel Skarsten as Rose PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Rachel McAdams and Channing Tatum 's casting was announced by Variety in June 2010 .
Filming took place from August until November 2010 in Toronto and Chicago .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The Vow is based on the actual relationship of Kim and Krickitt Carpenter , who wrote a book about their marriage , also known as The Vow .
Ten weeks after their wedding on 18 September 1993 , the couple was involved in a serious car accident .
Krickitt suffered a brain trauma , which erased all memories of her romance with Kim as well as their marriage .
Kim was still deeply in love with his wife , although she viewed him as a stranger after the accident .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The soundtrack was released on February 7 , 2012 , through Rhino Records .
The film score , written and composed by Rachel Portman and Michael Brook , was released digitally on a separate album on February 7 , 2012 through Madison Gate Records .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
The digital version of the soundtrack also contains " England " by The National .
RELEASE CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 29 % based on 126 reviews and an average rating of 4.9/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " Channing Tatum and Rachel McAdams do their best with what they 're given , but The Vow is too shallow and familiar to satisfy the discriminating date - night filmgoer . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating to reviews , the film received an average score of 43 out of 100 based on 28 critics , which indicates " mixed or average reviews " .
Emma Dibdin from Total Film gave the film a three stars rating out of five , commenting , " there 's an essential sweetness at work here ,
thanks partly to McAdams and partly to an unusually chaste love story that ultimately keeps melodrama at bay .
"
Empire critic Helen O'Hara gave the film a three stars rating out of five , also .
She found McAdams " excellent " and Tatum " surprisingly heartbreaking " and concluded , " The few weaknesses in the plot can be overlooked as The Vow makes for a wonderful – if a bit teary – romance that is brilliantly acted .
"
The Washington Posts Stephanie Merry wrote , " It 's a shame things are so black and white , because the movie has more promise – and more laughs – than trailers suggest " .
She added " Tatum , while a bit deficient in the dramatic acting department , delivers some memorable quips .
He and McAdams also have chemistry . "
Giving the film a 2.5 stars out of 4 , Roger Ebert from the Chicago Sun - Times found it " pleasant enough as a date movie , but that 's all . "
USA Today wrote , " It may appeal to the most rabid fans of tearjerk romances like The Notebook , but it 's a hard - to - swallow , maudlin tale . "
Betsy Sharkey , film critic from the Los Angeles Times wrote , " Despite the sweet story , this is a movie that leaves you wanting more .
To care more , to cry more , to love more .
"
ReelViews ' James Berardinelli was very negative about the film .
He wrote , " with its would - be crowd - pleasing contrivances and rote adherence to formula , [ this film ] offers almost no redeeming characteristics .
[ ... ] This is for young women what Transformers is for young men .
He concluded describing the film as a " heartless , soulless product " .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Vow debuted at # 1 in its opening weekend , with $ 15.4 million on opening day and $ 41.2 million over the weekend .
On the Valentine 's Day the film grossed $ 11.6 million , breaking Hitchs record $ 7.5 million for the highest - grossing mid - week Valentine 's Day .
It also earned around $ 9.7 million internationally this weekend .
On the weekend lasting from February 24–26 , The Vow became the first film of 2012 in North America to cross the $ 100 million mark , and the third film to cross the $ 100 million mark worldwide behind and .
The film grossed $ 125 million in North America and $ 71.1 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 196.1 million .
It is the eighth highest - grossing romantic drama film since 1980 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
+ List of awards and nominations !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Recipient(s ) ! !
Result HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The DVD and Blu - ray Disc were released on May 8 , 2012 with a rating of PG-13 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS