RAKE ( AUSTRALIAN TV SERIES )
Rake is an Australian television program , produced by Essential Media and Entertainment , that first aired on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 's ABC1 in 2010 .
The fourth series started on ABC TV on 19 May 2016 .
It stars Richard Roxburgh as rake Cleaver Greene , a brilliant but self - destructive Sydney barrister , defending a usually guilty client .
The show airs in the United States on DirecTV 's Audience Network and is available on Netflix in the UK , Ireland , Canada , the United States , the Netherlands , India , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and Czech Republic .
A fifth and final series went into production in October 2017 and premiered on August 19 , 2018 .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Richard Roxburgh as Cleaver Greene , a brilliant but self - destructive criminal defence barrister .
The character is loosely based on a colourful Sydney barrister and author , Charles Waterstreet , and was named after Cleaver Bunton .
At the end of the fourth series , he successfully obtains a seat as an independent senator .
* Russell Dykstra as Barney " Barnyard " Meagher , Cleaver 's instructing solicitor and best friend .
After Cleaver sleeps with his wife Scarlet , Barney feels betrayed and his relationships with both Cleaver and Scarlet are disrupted .
In the second series , Barney begins an affair with Cleaver 's secretary , Nicole .
At the start of the third series , it is revealed that Barney and Nicole are having a child together , and that Barney is receiving treatment for testicular cancer .
* Danielle Cormack as Scarlet " Red " Engles SC , Barney 's Jewish wife , a criminal prosecutions barrister .
In the second series , she works part - time for Cal McGregor , the Attorney General , before returning to the bar as a criminal defence barrister in the third series .
In addition to this , during the third series she has a short - lived affair with David Potter , another barrister with political ambitions , who is prosecuting Cleaver for non - payment of taxes .
Scarlet succeeds in being promoted to Senior Counsel .
* Matt Day as David " Harry - Sorry , David " Potter , a tax lawyer prosecuting Cleaver Greene and attempting to get into politics with the help of Attorney General Joe Sandilands .
In series 2 , Potter is a Member of Parliament and of the Australian Labor Party and is Shadow Attorney General .
In the third series , he has become the Leader of the NSW Australian Labor Party , and is having a secret affair with Scarlet .
In the fourth series , he runs as a Senator for the Australian Greens .
* Adrienne Pickering as Melissa " Missy " Partridge , a former prostitute now studying law , caught up between being Potter 's girlfriend and helping Greene , a former client for whom she has developed feelings .
By the end of the first series , she reveals her true identity as Jane Tanner ( Turner ) to Cleaver and David , and travels to several European countries .
In series 2 , she writes a book based on her life in prostitution under the name of " J.M. Doolan . "
In series 3 , the book based on her life is made into a film .
In series 4 , she returns to Australia after a hiatus in America ; she is addicted to a multitude of drugs and has to go through the process of removing the addiction of ice .
In the end of series 4 she is pregnant with Finnegan Greene 's child .
* Caroline Brazier as Wendy Greene , Cleaver 's ex - wife , who is a psychologist in a hospital psychiatric ward .
At the end of the second series , she starts dating Roger , an osteopath , and at the beginning of the third series she and Roger are engaged .
* Keegan Joyce as Finnegan " Fuzz " Greene , Cleaver and Wendy 's teenage son , who often has sexual relationships with older women .
By the end of the second series , he has started dating Tara , an evangelical Christian , and during the third series is planning on doing aid work in the Congo .
* Kate Box as Nicole Vargas , Cleaver 's long - suffering secretary , who has a drunken one - night stand with Barney , days before her marriage .
In the third series , she and Barney have a child out of wedlock .
* Damien Garvey as Cal McGregor , the successor of Joe Sandilands as Attorney General of New South Wales .
He is corrupt and is sent to jail .
He hates Cleaver because of an affair Cleaver had with Cal 's ex - wife and former NSW Premier , Claudia McGregor , played by Toni Collette .
Cal is released on parole at the start of the third series , and becomes a current affairs journalist and popular bombastic TV pundit .
* Geoff Morrell as Joe Sandilands , Labor Party Attorney General of New South Wales .
After reports of himself being a regular customer of the brothel in which Missy worked , he commits suicide , and is replaced by corrupt Liberal politician Cal McGregor .
* Robyn Malcolm plays Kirsty Corella , wife of imprisoned crime boss Mick Corella , whom Cleaver defended .
Cleaver owes huge gambling debts to Mick and then to Kirsty , who takes over as boss while Mick is in prison .
During the second series , she briefly dates Cleaver , before falling in love with Col , her " enforcer , " who frequently pays Cleaver visits to " persuade " him to pay his gambling debts .
* Steve Le Marquand as Col , Mick and Kirsty 's henchman .
He is in love with Kirsty and eventually enters a relationship with her , thanks to Cleaver 's encouragement .
* Rhys Muldoon as Lincoln Lincoln , an incompetent solicitor who occasionally instructs on matters for Cleaver and Scarlet .
GUEST CAST Section::::Cast .
Section::::Guest cast . !
Episode ! !
Actor , role SERIES
OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2010 )
SEASON 2
( 2012 )
SEASON 3 ( 2014 )
SEASON 4 ( 2016 )
SEASON 5
( 2018 )
RATINGS
SEASON 1
( 2010 )
SEASON 2
( 2012 )
SEASON 3 ( 2014 )
SEASON 4 ( 2016 )
SEASON 5
( 2018 ) AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result !
Ref ASSG Awards
Best Achievement in Sound for a Tele - Feature or Short Run Series Series 1 – Chris Alderton , Todd Kirkness , Sue Kerr , Peter Hall , Trevor Harrison , Olivia Monteith , Ian Donato , Natalie Choo and Michol Marsh
Rake Best Television Drama Series Season 2 –
Ian Collie , Peter Duncan and Richard Roxburgh
Best Lead Actor in a Television Drama Richard Roxburgh Australian Screen Music Awards Best Music for a Television Series or Serial Season 2 , episode 8 ' Greene ' –
Michael Lira , David McCormack and Antony Partos AWGIE
Awards Television – Series Series 2 : " R v. Floyd " – Andrew Knight AWGIE Awards Television – Series Series 3 " Their Lordships v. Finnane " – Peter Duncan Australian Directors Guild Awards Best Direction in a TV Drama Series Series 2 , episode 2 – Peter Duncan Australian Screen Music Awards Best Music for a Television Series or Serial Series 3 ,
episode 1 – David McCormack , Antony Partos and Michael Lira ASSG Awards
Best Sound for a Television Drama Series Series 3 – Guntis Sics , Gerry Nucifora , Aron Dyer , Peter Hall , Leon Horrocks , Evan Horton and Michol Marsh
Best Television Drama Series Season 3 – Ian Collie , Peter Duncan and Richard Roxburgh
Best Screenplay in Television Series 3 , episode 1 –
Peter Duncan
Best Lead Actor in a Television Drama Richard Roxburgh Best Guest or Supporting Actor in a Television Drama Dan Wyllie Best Editing in Television Series 3 , episode 1 – Henry Dangar ASE Series 3 , episode 1 – Jessica Hobbs Series 3 , episode 5 – Rowan Woods AMERICAN REMAKE Section::::American remake .
The Fox Network in the US commissioned an American version , starring Greg Kinnear as the lead character , renamed Keegan Deane for American audiences .
It aired between January and April 2014 .
Richard Roxburgh was a producer on the American version alongside Kinnear .
DVD RATING Section::::DVD rating .
In Australia Rake was rated MA 15
+ .
In New Zealand the first two series received a rating of R16 for sex scenes , violence , drug use and offensive language ; series three was given a rating of R18 for violence , offensive language , drug use and sex scenes .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Original music for the show is composed and performed by David McCormack ( of Custard ) , Antony Partos and Michael Lira , at Sonar Music in Sydney .
A soundtrack album Rake :
Music from the TV Series was released through ABC Music in July 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Rake homepage , ABC TV * Rake at the Australian Television Information Archive