JOURNEY 2 : THE MYSTERIOUS ISLAND
Journey 2 :
The Mysterious Island is a 2012 American science fiction comedy adventure film directed by Brad Peyton and produced by Beau Flynn , Tripp Vinson and Charlotte Huggins .
It is the sequel to Journey to the Center of the Earth ( 2008 ) .
Following the first film , the sequel is based on another Jules Verne novel , this time The Mysterious Island .
The film stars Dwayne " The Rock " Johnson , Michael Caine , Josh Hutcherson , Vanessa Hudgens , Luis Guzmán , and Kristin Davis .
The story was written by Richard Outten , Brian Gunn and Mark Gunn , and the screenplay by Brian and Mark Gunn .
Journey 2 :
The Mysterious Island was released in cinemas on February 10 , 2012 by Warner Bros. Pictures , New Line Cinema and Walden Media to mixed reviews , but became a box office success with a worldwide gross of nearly $ 335 million , surpassing its predecessor .
Journey 2 :
The Mysterious Island was released on DVD / Blu - ray on June 5 , 2012 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
It has been years since the events of the first movie .
Seventeen - year - old Sean Anderson
( Josh Hutcherson ) is caught by the police after a brief chase on his dirtbike which ends with him driving into a swimming pool while trying to evade them .
Minutes later , his stepfather Hank ( Dwayne Johnson ) arrives when a police officer ( Stephen Caudill ) , who is friends with Hank tells him that Sean has illegally broken into a remote satellite research center and that he has talked Mr. and Mrs. McGillicutty ( the owners of the swimming pool ) out of pressing charges .
Hank takes Sean home where his mother Elizabeth ( Kristin Davis ) is not pleased with his actions and is unhappy that he and Hank do n't get along well .
Hank discovers that Sean trespassed in the satellite research center in order to boost the signal of a code Sean received from someone he suspects is Alexander Anderson , Sean 's grandfather who had been missing for two years .
Wanting to bond with his stepson , the next day Hank helps Sean decipher the code of Jules Verne characters which lead to three books : Treasure Island , Gulliver 's Travels , and Verne 's own Mysterious Island .
Using the books ' individual island maps , Hank suspects they are books about the same island and uses a backlight in order to make them all one completed land mass with the coordinates to its location .
Hank manages to convince Liz to let both of them go in search of the island , in the slight hope of proving Sean wrong , that there is no so - called mysterious island there .
They arrive in Palau where they need transportation to travel to this dangerous part of the ocean .
A Palauan helicopter tourism guide Gabato ( Luis Guzman ) and his daughter Kailani ( Vanessa Hudgens ) , whom Sean develops an immediate crush on , agree to fly them out to the island for $ 3,000 , but the helicopter gets caught in a hurricane and they crash into the Pacific , waking up on the island .
Moving into the island , they discover one of the laws of the Mysterious Island is that , traditionally small animals become large and large animals become small ( inspired by Lilliput from Gulliver 's Travels ) .
The crew discovers tiny elephants and giant butterflies , which are the first creatures they come across on the island .
The group decides to explore further into the island .
After leaving that part of the island they come across an egg clutch belonging to a giant frilled lizard , they are then saved by Sean 's grandfather Alexander ( Michael Caine ) who takes them to a large hut he 'd built from the wreckage of the ship that brought him to the island , called the Blue - Eyed Lucy .
He has a working radio , but due to the positioning of the communications satellite , it will be two weeks before they can call for help .
The next morning , Alexander leads the group to the lost city of Atlantis , which is periodically submerged in the ocean for extended times , and he also calculates that the island sinks once every 70 years .
However , Hank discovers the sea water appearing from the ground is the evidence that Alexander 's calculations are wrong , and that the island will sink in a couple of days .
Their only means of salvation seems to be the legendary Nautilus ( Captain Nemo 's submarine ) , hidden somewhere on the island .
Kailani enters Nemo 's crypt and finds his journal , which shows the whereabouts of the ship in a cave at Poseidon 's Cliffs .
They decide to go to that cave through the heart of the island .
They mount giant bees in order to fly over a high ridge and makeup time , but encounter large birds ( spectacular bee - eaters , to be specific )
that try to devour the bees .
After saving Kailani 's life , Sean crashes and dislocates his ankle .
Hank and Alexander patch up Sean 's ankle the best way they can .
Afterward , they have a bonding moment when Hank sings his rendition of " What a Wonderful World " to ease Sean 's pain .
The next morning , the water has risen greatly and Hank deduces that the island will sink in a matter of hours , not days .
Gabato is missing , having gone toward the island 's golden volcano ( inspired by Treasure Island ) in search of gold to give his daughter a better life .
While Alexander and Kailani go after him , Sean and Hank head for Poseidon 's Cliffs to look for the Nautilus .
Alexander also finally calls Hank by his preferred name , as up to that point he only called him " Henry " , and the family makes up .
To deal with the rising water after finding the Nautilus cave underwater , Sean and Hank create makeshift oxygen tanks and dive down fifty feet in order to get to the Nautilus and are nearly killed by a giant electric eel .
They are unable to power the ship , however , because the vessel 's batteries have run down due to being 140 years old .
They engineer a way to power the submarine from the electric eel 's electricity .
Meanwhile , Kailani and Alexander find Gabato and convince him to escape with them instead of trying for the golden volcano .
They head towards the shore as the island begins to suddenly and violently rip itself apart .
The golden volcano starts to erupt violently , pouring lava all over the area .
Highly flammable lava bombs are thrown from the golden volcano into the air and suddenly land on the sinking island 's debris .
Sean and Hank use a harpoon to get an electrical jump start from the electric eel swarming around them
and they are able to power the machine , just in time to pick up the others who had fallen into the water .
Gabato pilots the submarine out of harm 's way while Hank and Sean fire torpedoes into the path of falling island debris .
As they clear the dangers , Kailani finally kisses Sean for his bravery .
Six months later , Kailani and Gabato are well off .
Gabato is now running the most popular tourist attraction on Palau providing tours aboard the Nautilus and Kailani is attending college .
Kailani goes to visit Sean on his birthday .
While they are celebrating , Alexander shows up with a book for Sean 's birthday present .
Sean opens it to find Jules Verne 's From the Earth to the Moon , Alexander 's suggestion for a new adventure with the family , to which Liz protests .
Hank replies " What could possibly go wrong ?
It 's only the moon ! "
During the credits , the mini - elephants from the earlier scene are swimming underwater over Atlantis .
CAST * Dwayne Johnson as Hank Parsons Sean 's stepfather and a former Navy code breaker .
* Josh Hutcherson as Sean Anderson Hank 's stepson who wants to find his missing grandfather on the Mysterious Island .
Hutcherson is the only cast member to return from the first film .
* Michael Caine as Alexander Anderson Sean 's grandfather who is also the father of Max and Trevor Anderson .
* Vanessa Hudgens as Kailani Laguatan Gabato 's daughter whom Sean falls in love with and who is part of the father - daughter tour guide team .
* Luis Guzmán as Gabato " Gabby " Laguatan Kailani 's father , who is part of the father - daughter tour guide team .
* Kristin Davis as Elizabeth " Liz " Parsons Sean 's mother and Hank 's wife .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After the commercial success of the first film , Walden Media and New Line Cinema purchased Richard Outten 's spec script , Mysterious Travels , in March 2009 to serve as the basis for the film .
In the story , the characters embark on a journey to a mysterious uncharted island thought to have inspired the writing of three literary classics :
Robert Louis Stevenson 's Treasure Island , Jonathan Swift 's Gulliver 's Travels , and Jules Verne 's Mysterious Island .
Brian Gunn and Mark Gunn were chosen to revise Outten 's script .
Warner Bros. and New Line Cinema announced that Journey 2 : The Mysterious Island would be released on February 10 , 2012 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Brendan Fraser and Anita Briem did not return due to scheduling issues , but Josh Hutcherson reprised his role .
Jane Wheeler also did not return to play Elizabeth / Liz ( Sean 's mother ) and was replaced in the part by Kristin Davis .
Dwayne Johnson played Sean 's stepfather , who is forced to accompany Sean on the trip to find his missing grandfather Alexander ( played by Michael Caine ) on a mythical and monstrous island .
In October 2010 , it was announced that Vanessa Hudgens would play Hutcherson 's love interest , Kailani .
SHORT FILM Section::::Short film .
The theatrical release of the film was preceded by a Looney Tunes short film titled Daffy 's Rhapsody , featuring Daffy Duck and Elmer Fudd in the first CG or 3-D depiction of these specific Looney Tunes characters .
The short film 's director , Matthew O'Callaghan , noted that " Daffy Rhapsody was originally recorded in the early 1950s as part of a kids ' album .
" Unlike the earlier CG Looney Tunes shorts that appeared before Happy Feet Two and Yogi Bear , this short did not appear on the home video release of the film it accompanied .
RELEASE THEATRICAL RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical release .
Journey 2
: The Mysterious Island was released in cinemas on February 10 , 2012 by Warner Bros. Pictures , Walden Media and New Line Cinema .
INTERNATIONAL RELEASES
* Australia – January 19 , 2012
* Hong Kong – January 19 , 2012
* Singapore – January 19 , 2012
* South Korea – January 20 , 2012
* Taiwan – January 20 , 2012
* Malaysia – January 26 , 2012 * Indonesia – February 1 , 2012 * Brazil – February 3 , 2012 * India – February 3 , 2012 * Estonia – February 10 , 2012 * Paraguay – February 10 , 2012 * Romania – February 10 , 2012
* North America – February 10 , 2012
* Belgium – February 15 , 2012 * France – February 15 , 2012 * Italy – February 24 , 2012 * Portugal – March 8 , 2012 * Japan – March 31 , 2012 * Venezuela – May 11 , 2012
* United Kingdom − February 11 , 2012 HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
Journey 2
: The Mysterious Island was released on DVD / Blu - ray on June 5 , 2012 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Journey 2
: The Mysterious Island grossed $ 325,692,760 surpassing its predecessor .
In North America , the film earned a $ 6.54 million on its debut Friday , ranking fourth at the box office .
Over the weekend , it earned $ 27.3 million , coming in third place , much higher than the original 's $ 21.0 million debut .
Outside North America , Journey 2 began its run three weeks before its North American release .
It topped the box office outside North America for two consecutive weekends and three in total .
It surpassed the original 's total outside North America .
Its highest - grossing region after North America was China ( $ 58.4 million ) , followed by Russia and the CIS ( $ 17.6 million ) and Mexico ( $ 12.7 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 43 % based on 126 reviews with an average rating of 4.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Aggressively unambitious , Journey 2 might thrill teen viewers , but most others will find it too intense for young audiences and too cartoonishly dull for adults .
" On Metacritic , the film has a score of 41 out of 100 based on 27 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A- " on an A+ to F scale .
Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B grade , stating , " The movie flies by pleasantly , and is then instantly forgettable .
Perhaps Jules Verne can explain the science of that . "
Randy Cordova from the Arizona Republic said , " Johnson ca n't save the movie , directed by Brad Peyton , from being a sloppy skip from one seemingly unrelated idea to the next . "
Roger Ebert , who gave the first film two stars , gave the sequel two - and - a - half stars , stating , " It is n't a " good " movie in the usual sense ( or most senses ) , but it is jolly and goodnatured , and Michael Caine and Dwayne Johnson are among the most likable of actors . "
ACCOLADES Andrew Lockington Best
Animated Family Poster Choice Movie Actress :
Sci - Fi
/ Fantasy Vanessa Hudgens Choice Movie Actor :
Sci - Fi /
Fantasy
Josh Hutcherson
Best Family Film
Favorite Male Butt Kicker
Dwayne Johnson Favorite Movie Actress Vanessa Hudgens SOUNDTRACK
* Letterbomb - Performed by Green Day
* Sleep
Forever - Performed by Crocodiles
*
Aloha Oe - Performed by Dwayne Johnson
*
Hello
Again - Performed by Meta & The Cornerstones
* Three Little Birds - Performed by Bob Marley & The Wailers
* What a Wonderful World - Performed by Dwayne Johnson CANCELLED SEQUEL
Section::::Cancelled sequel .
In August 2014 , it was announced that Carey Hayes and Chad Hayes are writing the script for a third film .
In 2015 , it was announced that Brad Peyton and Dwayne Johnson would return to direct and star in the sequel , respectively .
It was later announced that there would be two sequels .
In January 2018 , Johnson stated that although a third Journey film , titled Journey from the Earth to the Moon , was intended , its development had been cancelled due to a lack of immediate interest and troubles in adapting the novel .
SEE ALSO
* Journey to the Center of the Earth ( 2008 film )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Journey 2 : The Mysterious Island Now Shooting ; Set Photos Surface at /Film