WINE SHIPPING LAWS IN THE UNITED STATES Wine shipping laws in the United States differ between states .
About half of the states permit some form of direct shipping from wineries to consumers , although various regulations apply to these cases , and laws in both the sender 's and receiver 's jurisdictions may apply .
For example , vendors are often limited to 24 nine - liter cases of wine shipped annually to any person for personal use , and shipment of wine to dry counties is illegal .
IMPORT LAWS
BY STATE
ALABAMA Section::::IMPORT Laws by state .
Section::::Alabama .
Direct shipments of wine are generally prohibited in Alabama .
However , individual consumers may receive such shipments by obtaining prior written approval from the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board .
The shipment must be consigned , with freight charges prepaid , directly to the individual in care of an ABC store .
ALASKA Section::::Alaska .
Wine can be shipped from Alaska to all states , except for certain boroughs in - state and certain counties in Massachusetts , Tennessee and West Virginia .
ARIZONA
Section::::Arizona .
Consumers in Arizona are limited to two cases shipped directly to them annually .
Effective September 18 , 2003 , Arizona has an " On - Site Law , " requiring any consumer accepting a direct shipment of wine to have physically visited the winery during the past calendar year , paying for all future orders in person .
However , wineries producing fewer than 20,000 gallons of wine per year can apply for a direct - to - consumer permit for unlimited on - site and off - site sales .
ARKANSAS Section::::Arkansas .
Direct shipment of wine is prohibited in Arkansas for off - site sales ; consumers may place on - site orders for shipment at wineries .
CALIFORNIA Section::::California .
Wine can be shipped from California to all states , except for certain counties in Alaska , Massachusetts , Tennessee and West Virginia .
The California Wine Export Program provides electronic reports and documentation on export markets , as well as general information on exporting wine .
COLORADO Section::::Colorado .
Since July 1 , 2006 , wineries shipping to Colorado are required to obtain a direct shipping permit .
There are no limits on the amount of shipments individuals can receive for personal use .
DELAWARE Section::::Delaware .
Direct shipment of wine is allowed in Delaware .
IDAHO Section::::Idaho .
Since July 1 , 2006 , wineries have been required have a permit and pay taxes to ship directly to consumers in Idaho .
Wineries must also register with the Idaho Tax Commission and abide by monthly reporting requirements .
KENTUCKY Section::::Kentucky .
Carriers refuse to ship wine directly to Kentucky consumers , due to the difficulty of distinguishing dry areas from " wet " ones .
Shipping wine to dry areas in Kentucky is a felony offense .
LOUISIANA Section::::Louisiana .
Wineries shipping directly to Louisiana consumers must pay sales tax and possess a direct - to - consumer permit from the Louisiana Department of Revenue .
In order to qualify for direct - to - consumer shipping , the wine(s ) in question must not be distributed by any wholesaler .
MARYLAND Section::::Maryland .
Governor Martin O'Malley signed legislation on May 10 , 2011 to legalize direct shipment of wine in Maryland .
The law went into effect on July 1 , 2011 .
MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Massachusetts .
On January 14 , 2010 , the case of FWC v. Jenkins in Boston struck down limits on wine shipments to Massachusetts .
Despite that ruling , wine shipments to Massachusetts were largely impossible until January 1 , 2015 , when direct shipping from wineries to Massachusetts became allowed by law .
Licensing is required for shippers and there is a yearly limit per customer of 12 cases from each winery .
MINNESOTA Section::::Minnesota .
Wineries may ship , for personal use and not for resale , not more than two cases of wine , containing a maximum of nine liters per case , in any calendar year to any resident of Minnesota age 21 or over .
Minnesota began allowing direct shipping by all licensed wineries in June 2005 .
MISSISSIPPI Section::::Mississippi .
Direct shipment of wine is prohibited in Mississippi .
MONTANA Section::::Montana .
Carriers FedEx and UPS do not ship wine to consumers in Montana , because as of October 1 , 2001 , state law requires consumers to have a connoisseur 's license to receive such shipments .
Buyers are limited to 12 cases from out of state wineries per year , and wineries must register with the state to ship to connoisseurs .
On April 12 , 2013 , the Governor of Montana signed Montana House Bill 402 into law .
The new law , which takes effect October 1 , 2013 , replaces the State 's flawed " Connoisseur License " system and allows registered wineries to sell and ship wine directly to Montana consumers .
NEW JERSEY Section::::New Jersey .
Wineries that make less than 250,000 gallons of wine annually , which includes all of the New Jersey 's wineries , are allowed to ship up to 12 cases of wine to per year to any person over the age of 21 in New Jersey or any other state that allows wine shipments .
However , this law prohibits 90 % of wine made in the United States from being shipped to New Jersey residents .
NEVADA Section::::Nevada .
Nevada adults are limited to receiving 12 cases of wine annually per household for personal use .
Wineries must register with the state , pay additional fees for shipments over 200 cases , and designate a wholesaler for any shipment of 25 cases or more .
NEW MEXICO Section::::New Mexico .
Consumers in New Mexico are limited to two cases shipped directly to them annually .
NORTH CAROLINA Section::::North Carolina .
Wineries with certain permits may ship no more than two cases of wine monthly to a resident of North Carolina for personal use .
Wineries are required to make shipments through a preapproved common carrier and supply a list of brands sold in the state .
OHIO Section::::Ohio .
Consumers in Ohio may receive up to 24 9-liter cases of wine per household per year , for personal consumption only , from wineries producing less than 250,000 gallons of wine annually .
The wineries must obtain the appropriate permit in order to ship to Ohio .
OKLAHOMA Section::::Oklahoma .
Direct shipment of wine is prohibited in Oklahoma for off - site sales ; consumers may place on - site orders for shipment at wineries .
On - site orders are limited to 1 liter of wine per month .
OREGON Section::::Oregon .
Wine can be shipped from Oregon to all states , except for certain counties in Alaska , Massachusetts , Tennessee and West Virginia .
PENNSYLVANIA
Section::::Pennsylvania .
Pennsylvania residents may receive up to 36 cases ( up to nine liters per case ) per year of wine shipped by a wine producer licensed by the PLCB as a direct wine shipper .
The 36-case annual limit is per direct wine shipper , and wine may be shipped to home or business addresses .
Direct - shipped wine must be for personal use , and anyone who resells direct - shipped wine is subject to fines and criminal penalties .
Direct - shipped wine is subject to state and local sales tax and a $ 2.50 per gallon wine excise tax .
Direct wine shippers are required to verify proof of age of the recipient of the wine prior to shipping .
As of August 8 , 2016 , direct - shipped wine need not be wines not otherwise available for sale by the PLCB .
SOUTH CAROLINA Section::::South Carolina .
Permit - holding wineries are allowed to ship no more than 24 bottles of wine monthly to an adult resident in South Carolina , and they must abide by annual reporting requirements .
TENNESSEE
Section::::Tennessee .
Wineries may ship no more than one case per month , nor three per year , directly to an individual consumer in Tennessee .
They must also register with the state .
TEXAS Section::::Texas .
Before shipping to a consumer in Texas , wineries must have permits from the state government .
Consumers are limited to receiving nine gallons monthly and no more than 36 gallons annually .
UTAH Section::::Utah .
Direct shipment of Wine to consumers in Utah is prohibited and classified as a felony .
Adult residents returning from foreign country are permitted to bring no more than one quart of wine with them .
Individuals moving to the state are not limited to the amount of wine they may bring , as long as the taxes have been paid and cleared by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control .
VIRGINIA Section::::Virginia .
Consumers in Virginia are limited to receiving up to two cases of wine per month .
Wineries must be licensed with the ABC and abide by monthly reporting requirements .
WASHINGTON Section::::Washington .
Wine can be shipped from Washington to all states , except for certain counties in Alaska , Massachusetts , Tennessee and West Virginia .
WEST VIRGINIA
Section::::West Virginia .
In order to ship to a resident of West Virginia , a winery must have a license from the state of WV , as well as a Letter of Good Standing from the winery 's own state .
Licensed wineries are limited to shipping two cases of wine to a consumer per month , and advertising the availability of shipment of wine to West Virginia consumers is prohibited .
WYOMING
Section::::Wyoming .
As of July 1 , 2001 , out of state shippers are permitted to ship a maximum of two cases of wine to a Wyoming household ; these wineries must also register with the Department of Revenue Liquor Division and abide by monthly reporting requirements .
SEE ALSO
* Granholm v. Heald * List of alcohol laws of the United States by state
* Wine law REFERENCES