BICYCLE HELMETS IN AUSTRALIA Australia was the first country to make wearing bicycle helmets mandatory .
The majority of early statistical data regarding the effectiveness of bicycle helmets originated from Australia .
Their efficacy is still a matter of debate .
Between 1990 and 1992 , Australian states and territories introduced various laws mandating that cyclists wear bicycle helmets while riding after a campaign by various groups including the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons ( RACS ) .
HISTORY :
LEAD - UP TO THE LAWS Section::::History : lead - up to the laws .
Modern varieties of bicycle helmet first became commercially available from 1975 .
Industry helmet standards were developed from the 1970s and are still under development .
In 1985 , the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Transport Safety recommended that cooperation of states and territories should be sought to " review the benefits of bicycle helmet wearing ... and unless there are persuasive arguments to the contrary introduce compulsory wearing of helmets by cyclists on roads and other public places " .
A federal parliament committee was set up in 1985 .
A 1986 report on child cyclist injuries from Redcliffe Hospital , Brisbane , detailed 93 % of cases were not life - threatening and from 18 admissions , they included nine with minor head injury for overnight observation .
In 1987 a report based on Brisbane hospitals detailed a majority of children aged five to seven years were in favour of wearing helmets , whereas older children were opposed .
In 1987 the Victorian Parliamentary Road Safety Committee tabled a report in the Parliament of Victoria which included a recommendation for mandatory wearing of helmets .
The terms of reference for the inquiry related to child pedestrians and child cyclists and to report on ' the use of safety helmets by child cyclists ' .
By 1989 , just before the government decided to introduce compulsory wearing of bicycle helmets , an officially - commissioned survey showed that public support for it was 92 % for children and 83 % for all riders .
Opposition was fragmented and ineffective ; no major cycling groups opposed the law in public .
INTRODUCTION OF THE LAWS :
LEGAL REQUIREMENTS Section::::Introduction of the laws : legal requirements .
In Part 15 of the Australian Road Rules .
It specifies that " the rider of a bicycle must wear an approved bicycle helmet securely fitted and fastened on the rider 's head , unless the rider is exempt from wearing a bicycle helmet under another law of this jurisdiction .
" The rules also require helmet use by certain bicycle passengers .
, the legally - required standard for a bicycle helmet is AS / NZS 2063 .
Mandatory helmet laws were first introduced in Victoria in July 1990 , followed in January 1991 by laws for adult cyclists in New South Wales and all age - groups in Tasmania .
In July 1991 , New South Wales extended the law 's reach to child cyclists .
In the same month , laws covering all cyclists were adopted in South Australia and in Queensland , where the law was not enforced until 1 January 1993 .
In January 1992 helmet laws were introduced in the Northern Territory ( NT ) and Western Australia and in July 1992 in the Australian Capital Territory .
In the NT since March 1994 there is an exemption for adults cycling along footpaths or on cycle paths .
The Queensland government announced in April 2013 that exemptions on religious grounds from mandatory bicycle helmet laws would be granted from 2014 .
ONGOING DEBATE :
AFTER THE LAWS Section::::Ongoing debate : after the laws .
Academics within and outside Australia continue to express professional opinions both supportive and in opposition of the laws .
One opposition to the legislation is centred on shared bicycles in Brisbane and Melbourne .
Shared bicycles are used about one tenth as much as is typical within areas without compulsory helmet laws .
Various factors may be responsible .
One response has been to improve the availability of helmets to users of bicycle - sharing schemes , while Brisbane City Council has suggested trialling helmet - free zones .
The Australian Senate has included the helmet issue as part of an Inquiry ( Personal choice and community impacts ) and received many submissions ( mainly opposed to the laws ) and heard from various witnesses giving evidence both for and against the helmet laws .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Studies of helmet use by injured cyclists were published from the late 1980s , some in Australia , both before and after helmet legislation .
These have concluded both for and against the encouragement of bicycle helmet wearing and/or bicycle helmet legislation – the debate continues , without consensus .
SEE ALSO
* Bicycle helmet laws
* Cycling in Australia
* Bicycle helmets by country
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Bicycle Helmet Research Foundation – Australia
* VicRoads :
Wearing a bicycle helmet * NSW Cycling Research