MISS FISHER 'S
MURDER MYSTERIES Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries is an Australian drama television series .
It was first broadcast on ABC on 24 February 2012 .
The series revolves around the personal and professional life of Phryne Fisher ( Essie Davis ) , a glamorous private detective in 1920s Melbourne .
Three series have been broadcast , beginning in 2012 .
Television stations in other nations have picked up the series , and Netflix has the series available in many countries .
PLOT AND SERIES Section::::Plot and series .
The series is based on author Kerry Greenwood 's novels and was created by Deb Cox and Fiona Eagger .
Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries revolves around the personal and professional life of Phryne Fisher ( Essie Davis ) , a glamorous private detective in late 1920s Melbourne .
In the first series , a running theme is the kidnapping and death of Phryne 's younger sister Janey when they were children watching a circus , a crime that still haunts Phryne , feeling she should have protected her sister .
The first thirteen - part series was filmed over a six - month period in and around Melbourne from July 2011 and each episode had a budget of A$ 1 million .
The drama has been bought by broadcasters in 120 countries and territories worldwide .
A second series was commissioned in August 2012 and filming began in February 2013 .
The series began airing from 6 September 2013 and concluded with a Christmas special on 22 December 2013 .
A third series was commissioned in June 2014 and began airing on 8 May 2015 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Essie Davis as The Honourable Phryne Fisher , an independent , glamorous private detective , who is determined to solve any crime .
* Nathan Page as Detective Inspector John " Jack " Robinson , a police detective who works reluctantly with Miss Fisher .
* Ashleigh Cummings as Dorothy " Dot " Williams , Miss Fisher 's paid companion .
Dot is a devout Catholic and has an ongoing relationship with Hugh Collins , a Protestant , and in late Series 3 marries him .
* Hugo Johnstone - Burt as Constable Hugh Collins , Inspector Robinson 's right - hand man and Dot 's boyfriend , and later husband .
* Richard Bligh as Mr. Butler , Miss Fisher 's loyal butler , an excellent household manager who provides good advice when needed , and a veteran of the Australian Imperial Force who can put up a fight if required to .
RECURRING
* Travis McMahon as Bert Johnson , a working - class devout communist who often assists in Miss Fisher 's investigations .
* Anthony Sharpe as Cec Yates , a friend of Bert and also working - class devout communist who often assists in Miss Fisher 's investigations .
* Tammy MacIntosh as Dr. Elizabeth " Mac " Macmillan , Miss Fisher 's close friend and doctor at a women 's hospital in Melbourne .
* Miriam Margolyes as Prudence Elizabeth Stanley , Miss Fisher 's aunt and a reputation - conscious society matron .
* Ruby Rees - Wemyss as Jane Ross , Miss Fisher 's ward who shares the same first name of Phryne 's deceased sister , " Janey " .
( Series 1 , 2 ) * Nicholas Bell as Murdoch Foyle , a former university lecturer imprisoned after the disappearance of Miss Fisher 's sister Jane .
( Series 1 )
* Pip Miller as The Baron of Richmond ( Henry George Fisher ) , Phryne 's father ( series 3 ) PRODUCTION BACKGROUND Section::::Production .
Section::::Background .
Head writer and producer of the series , Deb Cox , has said that she and Fiona Eagger were looking to adapt a crime novel for television and believed the Australian Broadcasting Corporation ( ABC ) were looking for a prime - time crime series for their network .
The producers were disappointed by what they initially found and Cox explained : " It takes so long to raise the finance and script and produce a television series , so you need to feel it 's worthwhile — both financially and philosophically .
It was hard to find a reason to bring stories about psychotic killers and serial murderers to the screen . "
Cox and Eagger then came across Kerry Greenwood 's Phryne Fisher murder mystery series and were drawn to them because of their diverse fan base .
Eagger said that they were curious to discover what made the series appeal to all generations .
Eagger told a writer for If Magazine , " We were a bit curious to know what it was about it that could appeal to a 16-year - old and a 70-year - old .
Phryne is one of the first feminists .
She chooses to live alone , she chooses not to get married .
She 's got many lovers .
She 's a bit of a James Bond action hero — she 's much better dressed than James Bond though . "
Cox and Eagger realised that the novels reflected their moral values and fit in with their style of storytelling , so they began adapting them .
Cox and Eagger initially thought adapting novels would be easier than writing an original screenplay , but soon discovered that it was not .
Speaking to Andrew Wrathall from Fancygoods.com.au , Cox stated , " It takes a whole new set of skills to preserve what 's most important in the stories , rationalise the impossible , gather what 's left into a cohesive whole and still reflect the boundless worlds of imagination encouraged in the readers ' minds by a few hundred words on paper — in a way that 's achievable in production terms ! "
She added that the restrictions tested their limits of creativity and inventiveness .
Greenwood was invited to the first brainstorming session for the series and provided the producers with answers to their questions and helped with the historical background to the novels .
The author would read the scripts and help make corrections .
Cox praised Greenwood 's ability to write for the screen and accept the changes they made to the novels .
In June 2011 , it was announced that the ABC had commissioned a thirteen - part series to air on their ABC1 channel the following year .
The drama was originally titled The Phryne Fisher Murder Mystery Series , but was changed on the advice of distributor All3Media , who wanted to avoid having to tell international broadcasters how to pronounce Phryne 's name .
SERIES 1
Section::::Series 1 .
The first series was filmed over a six - month period in and around Melbourne from July 2011 .
Greenwood had researched the history of the city " meticulously " for the novels , so the producers were keen to do the same .
While they used some real locations , others were recreated , including a Turkish bathhouse and the Eastern Market .
The interior of Phryne 's house was built on a sound stage at the ABC 's studio in Elsternwick .
The historic house Wardlow in Parkville , Victoria was used as the exterior to the house .
A number of National Trust houses provide settings including Rippon Lea Estate at Elsternwick , Labassa at Caulfield North and Como House in South Yarra .
Each episode had a budget of $ 1 million .
Eagger said " I wanted every cent on screen .
I wanted the steam train , I wanted the plane , I wanted the ocean liner and the Hispano - Suiza .
It stretched everyone , it really made people bleed .
" ABC TV , Film Victoria , Screen Australia and distributor All3Media funded the series .
SERIES 2
Section::::Series 2 .
The second series was approved for Screen Australia funding in July 2012 .
Filming began on 18 February 2013 in Melbourne .
The shoot wrapped on 9 August .
On 6 August 2012 , Michael Idato from The Sydney Morning Herald said that the ABC had commissioned a second series of Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries .
Idato reported the second series would go into production later in the year .
ABC 's Head of Fiction , Carole Sklan , stated " ABC TV is delighted to be bringing a second series of Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries to the screen .
The first series proved an instant hit with viewers and Every Cloud Productions has again assembled a stellar cast and team for 13 more exciting , intriguing , and unpredictable mystery stories . "
The second series is based on Greenwood 's novels Dead Man 's Chest , Unnatural Habits and various short stories .
Cox commented that she and Eagger were " thrilled " that many of the cast and crew from the first series were returning .
The second series premiered on 6 September 2013 .
SERIES 3
Section::::Series 3 .
In February 2014 , ABC TV channel controller Brendan Dahill told David Knox from TV Tonight that a third series of Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries had yet to be commissioned .
Dahill explainedThe position we are in is an embarrassment of riches — tons of successful series and at some point Carole ( Sklan , Head of Fiction ) and I need to sit down and work out how many of the successful shows we can afford to return , without standing still , and still doing new stuff .
Woven into that we obviously need to know how much money we think we 're going to have .
Knox added that there were fears funds to the broadcaster could be cut .
Colin Vickery , writing for news.com.au , reported that another reason Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries had not been green - lit for a third series was due to ABC wanting to attract a younger audience .
Vickery also said that if the show was given a third series it would not air until 2015 .
On 13 June 2014 , it was confirmed that Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries had been commissioned for a third series .
ABC renewed the series after a social media campaign run by fans of the show .
The third series began shooting in mid - October 2014 in Melbourne and wrapped on 23 January 2015 .
Eagger told If Magazines Emily Blatchford that all of the cast would be returning , and admitted that the writers wanted to add some magic to the series and include an episode set in the military .
She also hinted that there might be a wedding .
Eagger added " It 's a tough time for the ABC
so we are thrilled
they are able to bring us back , and to have that support from Film Victoria as well .
" The third series began airing from 8 May 2015 .
FILM ADAPTATION :
MISS FISHER AND THE CRYPT OF TEARS Section::::Film adaptation :
Miss Fisher and the Crypt of Tears .
A stand - alone action - adventure feature film , Miss Fisher and the Crypt of Tears will pick up the story from the end of the third series .
It began production in October 2018 and will star Essie Davis , Nathan Page , and other members of the original television series , along with new guest stars Rupert Penry - Jones , Daniel Lapaine and Jacqueline McKenzie .
The film is budgeted at $ 8 million and will be directed by Tony Tilse .
Since 2016 , there had been speculation on the possibility that the television series would be made into a feature film .
In May 2016 , Essie Davis acknowledged interest in playing Miss Fisher in a film . "
[ We 're ] just working out the ideas of how to make it bigger and better and more fabulous than the TV show , " she said .
Later that year , it was revealed that plans were afoot to produce a trilogy of Phryne Fisher films .
In April 2017 , a photo was published on the official Miss Fisher Murder Mysteries Instagram account showing Essie Davis and Nathan Page holding advance copies of a film script titled Miss Fisher and the Crypt of Tears .
On 14 September 2017 , a crowdfunding campaign was launched on Kickstarter in support of the film .
On 15 December 2017 , an additional ongoing crowdfunding campaign was begun through IndieGoGo
in order to allow fans to continue supporting the effort .
The original campaign reached its goal of $ 250,000 in less than 48 hours .
Filming began in October 2018 , and the Miss Fisher Facebook page announced on November 27 that the filming phase had completed .
TELEVISION SPIN - OFF Section::::Television spin - off .
A television spin - off , titled Ms Fisher 's MODern Murder Mysteries , was announced in July 2018 .
The new series will follow Phryne Fisher 's niece , Peregrine Fisher , in mid - sixties mod - era Melbourne , as she becomes a private detective in her own right .
The series will air on the Seven Network in Australia followed by an international release .
Geraldine Hakewill leads the cast as Peregrine Fisher .
Joel Jackson is Detective James Steed , while Catherine McClements portrays " Birdie , an ex - member of WW2 Special Forces who is the president and mastermind of The Adventuresses ' club " .
COSTUMES Section::::Costumes .
The costume designer for the series was Marion Boyce .
She told ABC 's Darren Smith that she loves the 20s and 30s and thought the opportunity to work on a show in her hometown ( Melbourne ) was " fantastic . "
Boyce had eight weeks ' pre - production , but she said that she began putting stuff together early on .
She stated " After those eight weeks , we had 16 days to complete the next two episodes .
It was a fast and furious process , and the series included circuses , bohemian nightclubs and the docks .
Each episode is quite different from the rest . "
The costume department included one cutter , one sewer , a costume coordinator and a buyer who was also an art finisher .
Boyce called the team " incredibly talented " , as they had to do a lot of different jobs .
The team , Mandy Murphy and Gareth Blaha , the head of the ABC 's Costume Department , along with two milliners , made some of the hats .
Boyce and her team created around 120 costumes for the series , including sleepwear , daywear , nightwear and special - occasion outfits .
Boyce explained that while vintage pieces were incorporated into the series , the department designed the majority of costumes .
Cox told Alexandra Spring from Vogue Australia that some of the costumes were sourced from eBay and vintage shops .
Cox said " Once you go back to the 1920s , things have either deteriorated or they are too small because the women were smaller , so it means a lot of it has to be made from scratch . "
The fabrics were taken from Boyce 's own collection and fabric stores in Melbourne and Sydney .
The designer admitted that parting with some of the fabrics was difficult , as she had had some of them for around 25 years .
Boyce told Smith that at the end of filming , the costumes that were hired were returned : those made from fabric bought by the ABC were sent back to them , and those made from fabrics out of Boyce 's own collection came back to her .
Boyce explained that Phryne is " completely fluid " and has " an extraordinary amount of energy " , so she wanted her outfits to move with her when she went from room to room .
When it came to Dot , Boyce designed her wardrobe with her religion and position in society in mind .
Dot 's clothes are more buttoned up , so she does not show off her body parts .
Boyce commented " She was a really nice contrast to Phryne and a lot more conservative .
Dot has nice tweeds and cardigans . "
EPISODES
BROADCAST INTERNATIONAL Section::::Broadcast .
Section::::International .
Distribution of Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries was acquired in 120 territories worldwide .
The Canadian broadcaster Knowledge Network began airing the series at 8:30 pm on 5 October 2012 .
The UKTV network acquired the broadcasting rights to Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries in the United Kingdom in September 2012 .
Series 1 premiered on the network 's Alibi channel on 11 February 2013 .
French broadcaster France 3 acquired Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries in January 2013 , while Alibi and the Knowledge Network renewed their deals to air Series 2 .
Alex Farber of Broadcast reported that Norway 's TVNorge , Poland 's Canal+ , and Eastern Europe 's Viasat networks had also picked up the show .
The series began airing on Italy 's Rai 1 channel on 31 July 2013 .
The series first became available in North America on Acorn TV only .
Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries premiered in the United States on PBS in August 2013 , with further stations broadcasting the series in the Autumn , and others more in 2014 .
Miss Fisher Uncovered , a behind - the - scenes special for American audiences featuring interviews with cast and crew , and author Kerry Greenwood , was broadcast in the U.S. in August 2015 .
Netflix holds broadcasting rights for all three series in several countries , including the United States , Denmark , United Kingdom , France , Germany , Italy , Japan and Canada .
It also currently hold rights for the first two series in the Australian market in association with ABC TV and ABC Commercial .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries - OST , a CD collection featuring various artists used as music on the show , was released in Australia by ABC Commercial on 27 April 2012 .
The compilation included the series ' theme music by Greg J. Walker .
The selections were made available simultaneously on iTunes .
The soundtrack for Series 2 was released on 15 November 2013 , and for Series 3 on 1 May 2015 .
The official soundtrack for the series featuring music composed by Greg J. Walker was released on iTunes on 10 June 2014 .
Episodes 1–7 were released on DVD in Region 4 on 3 May 2012 , while episodes 8–13 were released on 7 June 2012 .
The series was also released on Blu - ray .
Series 1 was released as a DVD box set by ABC Commercial in November 2012 .
Series 2 was released on DVD as a box set by Acorn Media on 27 May 2014 .
The complete series ( 1–3 ) was released as a DVD box set by ABC Commercial on 4 November 2015 .
Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries became available for streaming and VOD on Netflix in the U.S. in September 2014 .
It became available in the United Kingdom in June 2015 , in Canada in March 2016 , and in Australia / New Zealand in April 2017 .
The series became available on Amazon Video on 16 May 2016 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
While reviewing the first episode , David Brown from the Radio Times commented " Just when you thought that all variations of the amateur - detective genre had been explored , along comes Miss Phryne Fisher , who sashays through the jazz clubs of late 1920s Ballarat , tackling villains with her pearl - handled pistol .
The plot 's hardly revolutionary , but it is worth watching for lead actress Essie Davis , with her sleek bob and killer cheekbones , who runs bad guys to ground with both wit and raunch . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipients and nominees ! scope="col " Result !
scope="row " rowspan="4 " 2012 !
scope="row " rowspan="3 " 2013 !
scope="row
" rowspan="5 " 2014 ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " 2015 rowspan=25th AACTA Awards !
scope="row " rowspan="3 " 2016 rowspan=3Essie Davis REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Miss Fisher 's Murder Mysteries at PBS