ANTIOCH STATION ( BART ) Antioch ( or Hillcrest Avenue ) is a Bay Area Rapid Transit ( BART ) station on the Antioch –
SFO / Millbrae line served by diesel multiple unit technology .
It is located in the median of Highway 4 at Hillcrest Avenue in Antioch , California .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The station serves as the eastern terminus of the eastern Contra Costa extension known during construction as eBART and after construction as BART to Antioch .
BART to Antioch is a diesel multiple unit ( DMU ) line which extends from the Pittsburg / Bay Point station , passing through Pittsburg .
Antioch station serves the central area of Antioch in addition to commuters to job centers in San Francisco and other areas .
It is also expected to attract passengers from Oakley , Brentwood , and Discovery Bay cities that were envisioned as part of the original extension but could not be included due to cost .
BART plans to extend service southeast to Brentwood and upgrade the extension to full BART service while pushing the DMU portion further out .
SECURITY AND STAFFING CONCERNS Section::::Security and staffing concerns .
Preliminary designs called for a station without an agent present , nor restrooms or escalators .
This prompted concern from the community and the plans were redesigned to add these features , however the station will only have one employee present at any given time , one agent or one maintenance worker at a time .
An extra police beat will be added .
This caused concern among Antioch residents and the Antioch Police Department may have to cooperatively police the station .
START OF SERVICE Section::::Start of service .
Initially planned to open in 2016 , the station 's service date was delayed until May 26 , 2018 .
BART anticipated the station would serve 1,575 round trips per day based upon a supposed opening in 2015 .
Two weeks following the beginning of service in 2018 , ridership was observed to be about 3,000 round trips per day , overloading the station 's parking facilities and causing riders to illegally park nearby .
The station has 1,012 parking spaces .
Soon after opening , the agency began planning an additional 1,600 parking space facility north of the station site .
In October 2018 , BART announced plans for a $ 16.4 million , 800-space lot east of the station , which would open in 2020 .
TRANSIT CONNECTIONS Section::::Transit connections .
Local bus service will be provided by Tri Delta Transit with reconfigured lines that currently feed BART .
Rio Vista Delta Breeze commuter service to BART will run to this station instead of the Pittsburg / Bay Point BART terminal as it does currently and there may be commuter service from Stockton from the San Joaquin Regional Transit District .
SEE ALSO * Antioch - Pittsburg ( Amtrak station )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * BART - Antioch * BART - East Contra Costa Extension