JAKE AND THE NEVER LAND PIRATES Jake and the Never Land Pirates ( also known as Captain Jake and the Never Land Pirates in the fourth season and associated merchandise ) is an Annie Award - winning musical and interactive American children 's animated television series shown on Disney Junior .
It is based on Disney 's Peter Pan franchise , which in turn is based on the famous book and play by British author J. M. Barrie .
It is the first Disney Junior original show following the switch from Playhouse Disney .
It stars Sean Ryan Fox from Henry Danger , Megan Richie , Jadon Sand , David Arquette , Corey Burton , Jeff Bennett , Loren Hoskins and Dee Bradley Baker .
The title character Jake was previously voiced by Colin Ford , and then later by Cameron Boyce , while Izzy was voiced for the first three seasons by Madison Pettis and Cubby was voiced by Jonathan Morgan Heit .
The series is created by Disney veteran Bobs Gannaway , whose works include another Disney Junior series , Mickey Mouse Clubhouse , and films such as Secret of the Wings , The Pirate Fairy and .
The final episode aired on November 6 , 2016 .
The series focuses on a band of young pirates consisting of Jake , Izzy , Cubby , and their parrot Skully , who continuously spend their days competing against Captain Hook and Mr. Smee for treasure .
But Jake and his crew beat Hook and Smee , and throw them to the sea .
Captain Hook and Mr. Smee gets chased away by Hook 's fear nemesis , Tick - Tock the Crocodile and Jake and his crew wins for treasure .
They are often accompanied by several characters including their living pirate ship , Bucky , and their mermaid friend , Marina .
At the American International Toy Fair in New York City , Disney announced a film based on the series , premiered on September 19 , 2012 , entitled Jake and the Never Land Pirates : Bucky 's Great Race .
The film was later downgraded to a special episode renamed Jake and the Never Land Pirates :
Jake Saves
Bucky .
The series started its fourth and final season on September 14 , 2015 , which is titled Captain Jake and the Never Land Pirates .
The show ran until November 6 , 2016 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The show revolves around a group of three children ; Captain Jake , Izzy , and Cubby ( two boys and a girl ) who are pirates in Never Land , looking for treasure .
Their main obstacles are Captain Hook , Mr. Smee , and Tick - Tock
the Crocodile from Disney 's Peter Pan franchise .
Captain Hook usually sees Jake and his crew doing something fun and steals it from them , and Jake and his crew have to get it back .
After they succeed , Jake and his crew count their gold doubloons ( which they receive after solving puzzles , or " pirate problems " ) and put them in their treasure chest known as the " Team Treasure Chest " .
The first season of the series followed more " playful " conflicts , such as Jake and the crew getting their basketball back from Captain Hook , or Captain Jake and the crew taking back their stolen skateboard .
The second season gave a larger scale to the adventure in the show , now having the characters find a lost city of gold , and an ancient pirate pyramid .
Almost every episode contains two eleven - minute animated segments , followed by a live - action song by the Never Land Pirate Band .
The singing characters " Sharky " and " Bones " appear in both animated and live action forms .
EPISODES CHARACTERS MAIN * Captain Jake ( , episodes 1–36 , 38–40 , and 56 ; Cameron Boyce ( season 2 - 3 )
Sean Ryan Fox , episode 60 ; Riley Thomas Stewart , season 4 ; and Gabe Eggerling , season 4 ) : Jake is the protagonist of the series and leader of the Never Land Pirates .
He is Captain Hook 's main pirate rival .
One of his catchphrases is " Yo ho , let 's go ! " , and he is shown using a telescope and steering the ship in the opening .
He wears a red bandanna and later covers it with a blue captain 's hat .
He consistently wears brown boots and white shirts .
He wears blue pants and later black pants .
He had a wooden sword called the Forever Sword ( cut from the Forever Tree , which was given to him by Peter Pan .
He has also briefly used a transformable Mega - Mecha Sword and golden Destiny Sword .
As a captain he later uses a metal one called the Mighty Captain 's Sword .
It is able to cut through metal padlocks , heat up to cut through ice bars , shoot heat beams , and deflect cold or energy blasts .
Both cutlasses have a crossguard on the hilt , but his newer metal sword has a larger pommel and no knuckle - bow on the side .
Jake also acquires an invisibility ring , and has used Izzy 's pixie dust to fly .
His parents are never seen or mentioned .
He is 8 years old .
* Izzy ( , seasons 1–3 ; Chelsea Boyce , season 4 ) : Izzy is currently the only girl pirate in the main group and acts as second - in - command to Jake .
She has a small sack of pixie dust , which was given to her at an unknown point by the fairies ( Tinker Bell and her friends ) .
The team uses the pixie dust only for emergencies .
However , there had been episodes when pixie dust is not used at all especially in " No Returns " .
Her catchphrase is " Yay hey , no way ! "
She is 6 years old .
* Cubby ( , seasons 1–3 ; Jadon Sand ; season 4 ) : Cubby is the youngest of the group with his catchphrase , " Aww , coconuts ! "
He has the map of Never Land and is shown manning the crow 's nest in the opening .
Cubby is not a member of the " Lost Boys " , despite the fact he physically resembles the Cubby of the group .
Cubby 's personality is rather timid and he is not very confident in himself .
Sometimes , he can be clumsy , and is Jake 's best friend .
He is 5 years old .
*
Skully ( , speaking ; and Loren Hoskins , singing )
: Skully is a small , green parrot who acts like a guardian to the team .
He is usually shown wearing a black bandanna with white skulls on it .
He keeps a lookout for Captain Hook and Mr. Smee .
* Captain Hook ( ):
Captain Hook is Never Land 's resident pirate captain and Peter Pan 's nemesis .
Hook is commander of the galleon " The Jolly Roger " .
Legendary for his cruelty to his enemies as well as his own men , Captain Hook has trouble holding onto a permanent crew .
In fact , at the moment , he only has three members of crew , the rest of his crew was never seen or appeared in the show .
He speaks with an English accent .
* Mr. Smee ( ): Mr. Smee is Captain Hook 's first mate .
* Sharky and Bones (; and Kevin Hendrickson , singing ; and Jeff Bennett , speaking )
: Sharky and Bones are members of Captain Hook 's pirate crew .
They usually spend time performing musical numbers rather than advancing the plot , acting as troubadours .
Live action versions appear at the end of the show and they perform an original song .
* Marina the Mermaid ( ): A young mermaid who lives in the ocean around Never Land with the rest of her people .
Unlike some of her sisters , who tend to be snobbish , selfish , vain and downright cruel , Marina is sweet , gentle and kind to the young pirates .
She often shows them the secrets of the Never Sea she finds .
Marina and Izzy are very close friends , and may even be the same age .
Marina also has a little sister named Stormy , and has a crush on Jake .
* Tick - Tock the Crocodile ( ): The very same crocodile that devoured Captain Hook 's left hand after Peter Pan cuts it off in a sword fight some years ago .
Tick - Tock loved the taste of Captain Hook 's hand so well that he has followed the Jolly Roger ever since , licking his chops as he imagines the rest of his meal .
And he also swallowed an alarm clock that goes tick - tock to warn Captain Hook .
RECURRING
* Russi Taylor – Never Bird – A former sidekick of Captain Hook whom she soon betrays and joins forces with Jake and his crew .
* Loren Hoskins – Sandy the Starfish – Marina
the Mermaid 's singing pet starfish with the ability to heal with a special song .
* Tori Spelling –
Pirate Princess Patricia – A legendary pirate who was cursed and shipwrecked in a hidden grotto but was later rescued by Jake and his crew .
* Lisa Loeb – Winger – Skully 's close friend who reveals to be the princess of the Sky Bird Kingdom .
* Adam West –
Wise Old Parrot – An aged scarlet macaw and ruler of the Sky Bird Kingdom .
* Sharon Osbourne – Mama Hook –
Captain Hook 's mother .
* Jane Kaczmarek – Red Jessica – A swashbuckling pirate with whom Captain Hook falls in love .
*
Josh Duhamel – Captain Flynn – A pirate who became stranded on the Never Land desert with his ship The Barracuda but rescued by Jake and the Never Land Pirates .
* Adam Wylie –
Peter Pan –
Captain Hook 's nemesis and the leader of Never Land ( specifically the " Lost Boys " , who never appeared in the show ) .
He has been mentioned numerous times throughout the series , and made an appearance in the special episodes " Peter Pan Returns " , " Jake Saves Bucky " , " Never Land Rescue " , and " Battle for the Book " .
* Allisyn Ashley Arm – Stormy –
Marina 's lazy , yet , well - meaning younger sister .
She may or may not have feelings for Cubby .
*
Carol Kane – Sea Witch – An evil witch who wants to turn the Pirate Princess into gold , but when Izzy stops her , she later turns into a good witch .
* Tiffani Thiessen – Misty the Wonderful Witch – A good witch who tends to be the Pirate Princess ' neighbor .
* Jerry O'Connell – Pip the Pirate Genie – A genie who used to resided in a ship - in - the - bottle .
* Rhys Darby – Percy the Penguin – A penguin who Jake and his crew help to get his group to their colony .
* Teri Hatcher – Beatrice Le Beak – A sneaky pirate who steals things from Captain Hook .
* Dee Bradley Baker – Various animals of Neverland * Leigh - Allyn Baker – Queen Coralie – Mermaid ruler of Neptune City
* Jack McBrayer – Wander the Friendly Pirate Mummy
* Bill Farmer –
Ghostly Bob
* Maia Mitchell – Wendy Darling
– Wendy appears in " Battle for the Book " .
* Elliot Reeve – John Darling – John appears in " Battle for the Book " .
* Colby Mulgrew – Michael Darling – Michael appears in " Battle for the Book " .
* Estelle Harris –
Peg - Leg Peg appears in " Pirate Ghost Story " .
* David Tennant – Dread , an evil genie .
* Malcolm MacDowell – Lord Fathom , an evil Merwizard .
* Mark Hamill – ShiverJack , a villainous sorcerer with ice - themed powers .
* Tony Hale – Dr. Undergear , a mad inventor .
* Christian Slater – The Grim Buccaneer , a shadowy and swift pirate .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The show 's musical elements are handled by Loren Hoskins and Kevin Hendrickson , who were emailed by the show 's creator Bobs Gannaway , asking if they would be interested in creating songs for the show .
According to Hoskins , Gannaway " just wanted good music to listen to while he was writing the pilot " .
Gannaway searched " pirate music for kids " online and found his way to Captain Bogg and Salty , listening to their songs while working on the script .
He introduced the band to Jay Stutler , vice president of music at Disney Television Animation .
" We 're in charge of creating every note of music for the show .
We create the underscore .
We sit in the studio and record the background music that comes in and out .
" The music for the show has been praised for being enjoyable for both the children , and the adult caretakers .
Three soundtracks have been released featuring songs from the show .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series airs worldwide on Disney Junior .
It premiered on May 6 , 2011 in Canada , on May 7 , 2011 in the United Kingdom and Ireland , on May 29 , 2011 in Australia and New Zealand , on June 1 , 2011 in South Africa , on July 4 , 2011 in India , on July 11 , 2011 in Southeast Asia , and on April 29 , 2013 in Zimbabwe , with TVNZ in New Zealand and 7flix in Australia .
DVD RELEASES Section::::DVD releases . !
Collection !
Included episodes !
Release date
RECEPTION CRITICAL Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical .
The series has received generally mixed reviews .
A review in Variety called it " part video game , part interactive cartoon , part advertisement for ' Peter Pan ' merchandise " .
The Los Angeles Times gave a mixed review of the show 's portrayal of Captain Hook compared to the classic Peter Pan , stating that the character " has been laundered — reasonably enough , yet sadly as well — into a shell of his former self , too silly to be frightening , not even a decent bully , just a kind of ( much ) older boy who wants to steal your toys . "
Common Sense Media rated it " on " for ages 3 and older , praising the educational content , role models , and especially the messages of the show , and expressing only mild concern about the moderate violence .
As the flagship of the newly launched Disney Junior channel , the series was rated the most - watched program among boys ages 2–5 during its first few weeks on the air , with 2.9 million viewers , including 1.1 million ages 2–5 , and over 600,000 women ages 18–49 ( presumed to be mothers and other caregivers ) .
On July 27 , the series was awarded # 2 of the Best TV Shows 2011 list .
The character Jake has too received positive reviews .
The character has been thought of as a " classic Disney character " , lovable and entertaining addition .
He has quickly become an icon at Disney 's Hollywood Studios from the popular Disney Junior Live as well as being added on the park 's entrance drawings .
The atmosphere character can be seen at the Hollywood And Vine character breakfast and the Animation courtyard , while at Disney California Adventure , Jake can be found on Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood Land .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
Outstanding Pre - School Children 's Animated Program Rob LaDuca , Bradley Bowlen and Mark Seidenberg Abbie D'Andrea and Brian Mathias Outstanding Individual in Animation Jairo Lizarazu – background layout designer MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
Upon the initial release of the series onwards , there has been a high demand for toys , games , and other merchandise from the show .
At the American International Toy Fair in New York City , Disney announced a line of toys to be released in the summer of 2012 .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
On May 24 , 2012 , the Jake 's Never Land Pirate School app is released on the iPad and Android devices .
A variety of other video games are based on the series including : * Big Air Adventure a 5-series crossover of title characters from Doc McStuffins , Henry Hugglemonster , Miles from Tomorrowland , and Sofia
the First * * Bucky 's Never Sea Hunt
*
* Cave of Mystery
* * Go Bananas
* * Golden Pirate Pumpkin Patch *
* Hook Yer Pirate Name *
* Hook 's Merry Winter Treasure Hunt *
* Izzy 's Flying Adventure * * Jake and the Never Land Pirates Sand Pirates
* * Never Land Games * * Shadow Shenanigans * * Sharky and Bones Pirate Rock * * Super Pirate Powers
* * The Great Pirate Pyramid * * Rainbow Wand
Color Quest * * Jake 's Story Quest * SPIN - OFFS Section::::Spin - offs .
On July 27 , 2012 , Disney announced a spin - off series of shorts of the show centering Skully .
The series is titled Playing With Skully , and is a collection of short cartoons that aired on September 19 , 2012 .
Another short series entitled Jake 's Never Land Pirate School premiered on November 26 , 2012 .
The third spin - off , Mama Hook Knows Best !
premiered on September 29 , 2013 , starring Sharon Osbourne as Mama Hook .
The fourth spin - off entitled , Jake 's Buccaneer Blast premiered on October 26 , 2014 , as the first Lego Duplo adventure .
SEE ALSO
* Never Land Pirate Band
* Tree Fu Tom * Candle Cove REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Disney Channel information on Jake and the Never Land Pirates