YOU AND I ( LADY GAGA SONG ) " You and I " ( stylized as " Yoü and I " ) is a song written and recorded by American singer Lady Gaga , taken from her second studio album , Born This Way ( 2011 ) .
She also co - produced it with Robert John " Mutt " Lange .
The track samples
Queen 's " We Will Rock You " ( 1977 ) and features electric guitar by Queen 's Brian May. Gaga debuted " You and I " in June 2010 during her performance at Elton John 's White Tie and Tiara Ball .
Footage of the performance appeared on the Internet , and positive response encouraged her to include the song on her setlist for The Monster Ball Tour .
She later performed the song on Today to a record crowd in July 2010 , and on The Oprah Winfrey Show in May 2011 .
On August 23 , 2011 , Interscope released the song as the fourth single from the album .
" You and I " is a slow tempo song featuring instrumentation from electric guitars and piano , with Gaga and Lange providing background vocals .
The song received critical acclaim , with reviewers listing it as one of the highlights from Born This Way .
After the release of the parent album , " You and I " charted in Canada , United Kingdom and the United States , due to digital downloads from the parent album .
Season ten American Idol contestant Haley Reinhart performed " You and I " in May 2011 before its release , earning positive reviews .
Her studio recording was released to the iTunes Store as a single , and appeared on the compilation album , American Idol Top 5 Season 10 .
" You and I " was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Solo Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards , which was held on February 12 , 2012 .
The accompanying music video for " You and I " , shot by Gaga 's long - time collaborator Laurieann Gibson in Springfield , Nebraska , was released on August 16 , 2011 .
It features Jo Calderone , Gaga 's male alter ego , who also appears on the single 's cover , and Yüyi , her mermaid alter ego .
Gaga 's journey to be with her beloved one was the main concept behind the video .
She is displayed in an assortment of scenes as different avatars , including Calderone and Yuyi .
The video met with a positive reception after its release .
BACKGROUND AND RELEASE Section::::Background and release .
" You and I " , written by Lady Gaga and produced by Gaga and Robert John " Mutt " Lange , was one of the first songs previewed from the album .
Gaga said she wrote the song in New York , while she was busy playing her old piano .
The singer first played " You and I " at Elton John 's White Tie and Tiara Ball in June 2010 .
She said that the song was a bit of a " rock - and - roll tune " and , as such , was unlikely to be released as a single from Born This Way .
She said that it " is very dear " to her heart .
Footage of the performance appeared on the Internet soon after , and positive response encouraged Lady Gaga to perform the song during the first concert of the North American leg of The Monster Ball Tour in Montreal .
Gaga told MSNBC 's Meredith Vieira and Ann Curry that " ' You and I ' was written about the most important person that I ever met " , allegedly Lüc Carl , her ex - boyfriend .
Gaga announced " You and I " as the fourth single from Born This Way on July 22 , 2011 .
Its cover , released on August 5 , 2011 , via TwitPic , was accompanied by the line : " You will never find what you are looking for in love , if you do n't love yourself .
" It features two black - and - white images of Gaga 's male alter ego Jo Calderone smoking a cigarette and sporting sideburns .
The Calderone character made a previous appearance in June 2011 , when Gaga posed as him in London for a series of photos by photographer Nick Knight , arranged by stylist Nicola Formichetti .
One shot features him wearing a blazer and white T - shirt with his head down smoking a cigarette .
The other image is of Jo Calderone in silhouette exhaling a cloud of smoke .
A writer for Australia 's The Daily Telegraph described the images as having a moody and scruffy look , and felt that Gaga had become " bored with being an outrageous woman and has decided to switch gender instead .
" Rap - Ups David Jones commented that Gaga 's Calderone character appearing on the cover looked similar to musician Bob Dylan .
Although Steve Pond of Reuters did not like the song , he stated about the artwork : " Lady Gaga loves herself even when she 's dressed as a guy . "
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
" You and I " has rock and country music influences , and features British rock band Queen 's guitarist
Brian May. It was recorded by Tom Ware and Horace Ward at the Warehouse Productions Studio in Omaha , Nebraska , and Allertown Hill in the United Kingdom , respectively .
Along with May , Justin Shirley Smith also played guitars ; Gene Grimaldi mastered the track .
Olle Romo did additional recording and programming .
Gaga teased that " someone legendary " would be producing the track before production credits were announced in April 2011 .
Gaga , a Queen fan ( even taking her stage name from the Queen song " Radio Ga Ga " ) , admitted to " [ falling ] to the floor crying and laughing " when she found out that May agreed to the collaboration .
Lange asked Gaga to record a " rough lead vocal " for the track while she was touring .
Gaga later recalled : " I had about 30 cigarettes and a couple of glasses of Jameson and just put on a click track and sang my face off , thinking we 'd redo the vocals . "
However , Lange was satisfied with her recording and used it on the track .
Ware recalled that the song was recorded the night after Gaga 's March 17 , 2011 , concert for The Monster Ball Tour .
She welcomed his opinions and encouraged his input which he said helped make the four - hour session the best working experience he has had with a celebrity . "
She was flattering toward the studio — and Omaha , too , for that matter .
She is a bright young lady with remarkable music instincts who charts her own path , " he added .
According to the sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " You and I " is set in common time with a slow tempo of 60 beats per minute .
It is written in the key of A major .
During the song Gaga 's voice spans from the notes of E to C.
The song begins with an A – G – A chord progression , which changes to A
– Bm / A –
D / A – Bm during the chorus , and back to the former chords afterwards .
The opening lyrics—"It 's been a long time since I came around/
It 's been a long time , but I 'm back in town/
And this time , I 'm not leaving without you"—describe a whiskey - breathed lover for whom she is pining .
Gil Kaufman of MTV News described it as the " tune eschewed most of her dance flavor , right down to a rollicking barrel - house piano solo . "
Her voice sounded like growling during the main verses , where she sings the lines : " He said , ' Sit back down where you belong , in the corner of my bar with your high heels on , Sit back down on the couch where we made love the first time ... "
Noting the differences between live performances of the song and the studio version , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph observed that the piano parts were replaced mostly by " fizzing synths , a stomping beat sampled from
" We Will Rock You " , thundering electric guitars and backing vocals stacked into shimmering choral walls . "
Kitty Empire of The Guardian described the song as an " umlaut - toting digital country power ballad " with two Bruce Springsteen references : " born to run " and Nebraska .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
" You and I " received acclaim from music critics .
After hearing the White Tie and Tiara Ball performance , Entertainment Weekly Leah Greenblatt complimented the song for its " torchy , slow - burn cabaret quality " and for lacking " Auto - Tune , fancy production , or performance gimmicks .
" McCormick , noting the differences between Gaga 's live and studio versions of the song , described the studio version as " bigger , bolder and less quirkily emotive , a custom - built radio rock ballad to induce hand claps in packed stadiums .
This is not music for the underground : it is cheesy , high - gloss , pop rock for the mainstream middle , a kind of instant Eighties retro classic to seduce middle - aged rockers – possibly the last demographic to remain sceptical about her appeal . "
Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone called the song a confessional power ballad " with a torrid , Sturm und Drang vocal turn " .
In his review for The Guardian , Tim Jonze said the song " aims for a ' Hey Jude ' style singalong but – owing to its determination to have someone playing kitchen sink in the background – ends up as bloated as Oasis ' ' All Around the World ' . "
Dan Aquilante of The New York Post wrote a less - than - favorable review of Born This Way but complimented " You and I " and the " uniquely earthy quality " that Lange brought to the album .
Kitty Empire said the song is Gaga 's " unlikely heartland moment – a bid , perhaps , to locate herself as an all - American balladeer as well as an art - disco avatar with tent pegs under her skin " , referring to the implants featured in the music video for the song " Born This Way . "
The Dartmouth Kate Sullivan wrote that " You and I " may be Gaga 's most honest song to date .
Shirley Halperin of The Hollywood Reporter wondered whether pop radio would play the song , considering Gaga 's popularity .
Halperin felt that the track emoted " a sense of grandness that listeners do n't always get with Gaga 's RedOne - produced heavily - synthetic sounds . "
Conversely , she felt that the live piano and background vocals by Gaga and Lange added " an undeniably lush quality , while the lyrics drives the song home and potentially into hit territory . "
Kerri Mason of Billboard felt that the " country ballad " made no contextual sense .
Nekesa Mumbi Moody , while reviewing Born This Way for Florida Today , compared the song to " Speechless " , a similar tempo song included on The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) .
Robert Copsey , a writer for the website Digital Spy gave the song four out of five stars calling it a " torchy , retro - classic , all - American power ballad custom - built for the masses – and one we suspect Stefani would be proud to call her own . "
Amy Sciarretto of Artistdirect concluded that the song was " a bit bluesier than anything you 'd expect from the dance floor icon . "
AllMusics Stephen Thomas Erlewine chose the song as a highlight on Born This Way saying that Gaga shows her vulnerability in it .
" You and I " was nominated for Best Pop Solo Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards , which was held on February 12 , 2012 .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
In the United States , " You and I " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 36 on the June 11 , 2011 ,
chart having sold 83,000 downloads .
The song re - entered the August 27 , 2011 , Billboard Hot 100 at number 96 , while debuting on the Pop Songs chart at number 35 .
The following week , the song was the greatest gainer on the digital chart , entering at number 24 having sold 56,000 copies , while moving to number 35 on the Hot 100 .
It also gained airplay and became the highest debuting song on the Radio Songs chart , entering at number 58 with 22 million audience impressions .
Following her performance on the MTV Video Music Awards , " You and I " moved up to number 16 on the Hot 100 , with a 92 % increase in digital sales to 109,000 and a 50 % increase in airplay to 32 million , according to Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems .
The following week , it moved to number six on the Hot 100 with a 61 % increase in digital sales to 175,000 and a 32 % increase in radio play to 41 million audience impressions , reaching number four and number 23 on the Digital Songs and Radio Songs charts , respectively .
" You and I " became Gaga 's eleventh consecutive top ten single on the Hot 100 .
In October 2011 it became Gaga 's tenth song to sell 1 million in the U.S.
As of February 2018 , " You and I " has sold 2.4 million digital downloads in the US becoming Gaga 's tenth two - million seller .
In June 2012 , " You and I " received a double platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America .
In Canada , the song entered the Hot Digital Songs chart at number 14 , subsequently debuting on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 27 .
It entered the charts again at number 45 , and has reached a peak of number 10 .
Before the single was officially released in Australia , digital downloads were sold , consequently it entered the ARIA Singles Chart at number 56 on August 15 , 2011 .
The following week , the song moved up to number 34 , and has reached a peak of number 14 .
Following the album 's release on May 23 , 2011 , " You and I " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 89 , thanks to digital downloads from Born This Way .
The song jumped up to number 70 from its previous week 's position of number 187 , in the issue dated September 3 , 2011 , and has reached a peak of number 23 .
In Japan , the song had initially entered the digital chart at number 98 , but after the MTV Video Music Awards performance , it entered the Japan Hot 100 at number eight .
MUSIC VIDEO BACKGROUND Section::::Music video .
Section::::Background .
" You and I " 's music video was filmed in Springfield , Nebraska in July 2011 , and was directed by Lady Gaga 's choreographer Laurieann Gibson .
In the video , Gaga walks from New York City to Nebraska to get her boyfriend back .
According to Gaga : " I 'm walking with no luggage and no nothing
and it 's just me and my ankles are bleeding a little bit
and there 's grass stuck in my shoes
and I 've got this outfit on
and it 's real sort of New York clothing
and I 'm sprinting ...
And the [ video is about the ] idea that when you 're away from someone you love , it 's torture , " she continued .
" I knew I wanted the video to be about me sprinting back and walking hundreds of thousands of miles to get him back . "
She announced that the video would be the 1,000th tweet on her Twitter account .
Gaga confirmed to MTV News that the video would premiere on August 18 , 2011 on MTV .
However , two days before it was to air , parts of the clip leaked on the Internet , prompting Gaga to post three tweets which , together , read " FUCK THURS DAY " .
The messages were followed immediately by her 1,000th Twitter message : " You must love all + every part of me , as must I , for this complex + incomprehensible force to be true , " including a link to the full music video , uploaded to Gaga 's YouTube channel two days earlier than its scheduled première .
The video features Gaga 's two alter egos :
Jo Calderone , Gaga 's male ego , and Yüyi , a mermaid she had hinted would appear in the video in July 2011 .
Following the video 's premiere on MTV , Gaga explained some of the its scenes and her inspiration : " The video is quite complex in the way that the story is told , and it 's meant to be slightly linear and slightly twisted and confusing , which is the way that love is . "
Regarding the sexual intercourse scenes between actor Taylor Kinney and the singer as a mermaid , Gaga explained that it emphasized metaphorically that sometimes relationships did not work . "
No matter what you do , there 's this giant boundary between you and someone else .
So that 's what it 's about , perceiving in your imagination that there 's something magical inside of you that you can make it work , " she said .
After revealing that the wedding dress shown in the video belonged to her mother , Gaga explained the scenes involving the ice cream truck .
According to her , they represented the destruction of her youth , experiences she had shared in earlier interviews .
Explaining her decision to include them , Gaga said :
That 's how I wanted to open the video , because I think it really sets up the rest of the story .
It allows you to imagine you yourself are not just one person ; you 're so many .
That person has so many stories and memories to draw from , and they all affect your journey profusely .
I 'm battered quite brutally at the beginning of the video , but at the end , I 'm not battered ; I 'm a bit strange .
It 's not meant to be an answer video ; it 's meant to be a profuse number of the question .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
The music video begins with Gaga , dressed in black clothing , sunglasses , bloody feet , and seemingly bionic features , walking through a field in Nebraska ; having returned on foot after years of absence .
Gaga goes to buy ice cream from an ice cream truck , but she suddenly drops it as a toothless man with a doll in his hand grins at her .
She begins to have flashbacks to an earlier time spent in Nebraska as scenes of Gaga having a wedding , being tortured by a man inside a barn , and being inside a water tank appear in quick succession .
The song starts playing as the camera zooms slowly towards Gaga , who is standing bent forward as she begins singing .
The video continually switches to scenes where Gaga , with little make up , a simple gray - colored hair style , and a white dress , plays a piano in the middle of a cornfield , while her male alter ego , Jo Calderone , sits on top of the piano , smoking and drinking a beer .
As Calderone pulls up his sleeves , present day Gaga is still walking through the desert .
During the second verse , a mad scientist , portrayed by Kinney , seemingly tortures Gaga , who is wearing a yellow dress with glasses made of barbwire , as another version of the singer , with teal - colored hair , performs a dance routine with her backup dancers in a barn .
As the chorus begins for the second time , Gaga appears as Yüyi the Mermaid , with gills on her face and neck , as she lies in a tub filled with dirty water .
At the end of the chorus , the camera zooms to a brunette Gaga inside a water tank while she sings " You and I " in the desert scene , and in the cornfield with Calderone .
Interspersing scenes again show Gaga having her wedding , Yüyi in her tub , and Gaga seated on a chair with a conveyor belt .
During May 's guitar solo , Gaga dances in the cornfield with other dancers dressed in the same white dress , as Yüyi and the scientist kiss .
While singing the chorus for the final time , Gaga kisses Calderone in one sequence and runs across the field in another .
As the video reaches its conclusion , the tortured Gaga is being slid down as the conveyor belt turns on .
The video ends with Yüyi and the scientist together in the bath tub , as a depiction of their dream wedding flashes across , before a last shot of the barn as the screen turns black .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Following its premature release on the Web , the music video for " You and I " met with positive reviews .
Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone felt the video was an improvement over her earlier videos , Judas and The Edge of Glory , saying , " the best moments of the video put a distinctly Gaga - ish spin on the iconography of Americana and traditional love stories . "
Jillian Mapes of Billboard wrote the video has : " torture contraptions , mermaid sex , a wedding , bondage in a barn , an ice cream truck , and to top it all off , ' Children of the Corn ' and religious overtones thrown in for good measure , " and thought the video setting was the strangest representation of Nebraska .
Leah Collins of Dose felt the video was a " great opportunity for the singer to finally find out what it 's like to make out with herself . "
Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly noted of the scene in which Gaga plays a piano in a cornfield beside her male alter ego : "
She 's just Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta , playing a piano in the middle of a corn field — with a little making out on the side , of course .
" Gil Kaufman of MTV News believed that Gaga was not joking when she talked about the video being about the " torture " of being away from the one you love . "
And , man , based on the bruising final product , she was n't kidding , " Kaufman concluded .
Jocelyn Vena of MTV found influences of Gaga 's past videos in the various avatars she plays You and
I. She explained that : when [ Gaga ] stands at a crossroads in a big hat , the image is reminiscent of ' Telephone ' Gaga .
When she sits nearly makeup - free at her piano in the cornfields , there are touches of the teary - eyed makeup - less Gaga from the ' Bad Romance ' video .
Flashes of her wedding may remind fans of the wedding dress she wore in the ' Judas ' clip .
Robot Gaga 's facial structures recall some of the steampunk looks of her ' Alejandro ' video .
Those are only a few of the nods to past personae from her own videography .
Devin Brown of CBS News felt that Gaga had finally returned to form with the video . "
After some visually pleasing but generally lackluster videos , she has finally come out with something to write home about . '
You and I ' is arguably the best song on her sophomore release , Born This Way , and now has a video to match . "
A Slant Magazine writer commented that the publication had a mixed reaction to the video , saying that it " is essentially a collection of disconnected images we could n't make heads or tails of . " FASHION FILMS Section::::Fashion films .
On September 1 , 2011 , Gaga announced on her Twitter account that she had shot five " fashion films " related to the song 's music video with Dutch photographers Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin .
The characters for each of the videos are : Jo Calderone ( Gaga 's alter ego ) , Yuyi ( a mermaid ) , Nymph , Bride , and finally Barn Hooker and Mother .
After the tweet , Gaga released the first video , titled " Haus of Ü featuring Nymph " .
The two - minute black - and - white video featured Gaga with minimal make - up , wearing a short dress , performing ballet choreography .
As wind blows around her , the singer looks intently toward the camera , with the parting shot in color .
The second video featured her as the bride from the opening sequence of the music video .
The fashion film portrayed her in the same costume , gradually removing it and her wig .
At the end , she is topless with her hand covering her breasts .
Interspersed between are scenes portraying people dressed like Gaga , and appearances by Taylor Kinney , who was in the music video , and the singer 's stylist Nicola Formichetti .
The third fashion film portrayed the singer as the mermaid Yüyi .
She sits in a director 's chair , flopping her tail .
It also shows two crew members carrying Yuyi toward the barn , where the music video was filmed .
Formichetti also makes a cameo in this video .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
After the first performance of " You and I " at Elton John 's White Tie and Tiara Ball , Gaga performed the song live on the television program Today on July 9 , 2010 , before an estimated crowd of 18,000–20,000 people , the largest ever to pack Rockefeller Plaza .
It was next performed on the July 31 , 2010 , Phoenix stop of the Monster Ball Tour , where Gaga protested Arizona 's immigration law SB
1070—which mandates that state police officers " question any person they suspect to be an illegal immigrant and imprison any aliens not carrying one of four allowed forms of proper identification"—and dedicated her performance of " You and I " to a boy whose family had been affected by the law .
Gaga performed the album version of the track on The Oprah Winfrey Show on May 5 , 2011 , using a piano constructed from a wire high - heel structure while sitting on a high stool .
The " less organic " version for the final " Harpo Hookups " episode featured an electric guitar and modified lyrics to include Oprah 's name .
The song was on the set list of the HBO television special , , which aired originally on May 7 , 2011 , in the United States .
Gaga 's performance of " You and I " from the HBO special aired on American Idol , the night after she mentored the four remaining contestants , and the week following Haley Reinhart 's performance of the song .
She performed a jazz version of " You and I " at Radio 1 's Big Weekend in Carlisle , Cumbria on May 18 , 2011 .
The third performance of the album version of the song was on the Paul O'Grady Live show in London , on June 17 , 2011 .
Wearing a dress by the late Gianni Versace , Gaga perched atop a New York City - inspired fire escape , where she sang the song .
Ryan Love of Digital Spy had a preview of the show 's recording , and said that it was a " real treat " to hear Gaga sing the song .
In August 2011 , Gaga performed " You and I " on the American TV talk show program The View .
On August 28 , 2011 , Gaga attended the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards dressed as Jo Calderone .
As Calderone , she opened the show with a four - minute monologue , explaining his broken relationship with Gaga .
Following the monologue , joined on stage by Brian May , she performed " You and I " .
On October 6 , 2011 , she filmed a pre - recorded interview and performance for the single on The Jonathan Ross Show .
Later , on October 16 , 2011 , she performed the song during a concert at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles for the Clinton Foundation .
On the ABC special , A Very Gaga Thanksgiving , the singer performed the song backed by a " piano - and - trumpet arrangement " .
On November 30 , during the CBS special titled The Grammy Nominations Concert Live ! – Countdown to Music 's Biggest Night — where the nominations for the 54th Grammy Awards were revealed — Gaga performed " You and I " along with Jennifer Nettles of the country band Sugarland while Kristian Bush played the guitar .
During the performance , she changed the lyrics to fit the occasion : " With your high cowboy boots on .
Oh
Sugarland , it 's been six whole years . "
According to James Montgomery of MTV News , she performed a " husky , musky version " of " You and I " .
She performed the song on her 2012
Born This Way Ball tour by playing it on the piano before running around the stage .
Like previous concert tours , the piano , fused to a motorcycle , was an elaborate prop that tied into the theme of her show , in keeping with the hair metal theme of Born This Way .
In July 2016 , Gaga performed " You and I " at the " Camden Rising " concert at the BB&T Pavilion in Camden , New Jersey , which was part of the 2016 Democratic National Convention .
The performance of the song was later included in her documentary film , ( 2017 ) .
In 2017 , Gaga performed the song during both of her shows at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , and included it in her set at the Deep From the Heart :
The One America Appeal benefit concert in Texas , where she joined former US presidents and other performers in raising money to hurricane victims .
During the latter , she changed up the lyrics to address each president with the song .
COVER VERSIONS
Section::::Cover versions .
Prior to the release of Born This Way , season ten American Idol contestant
Haley Reinhart sang " You and I " as one of two performances for the " Songs from Now
and Then " episode .
Jimmy Iovine , head of Gaga 's record label , asked for the song and Reinhart received her permission before the performance .
Reviews of Reinhart 's performance were mostly positive .
Len Melisurgo of The Star - Ledger considered it a risky choice , since the song had not been released , but accepted that Reinhart " sounded amazing " by hitting " some really high notes " .
Brian Mansfield of USA Today described Reinhart 's performance as an " old - fashioned dance - hall groove , kind of like a mid-'70s Elton John number .
It 's perfectly suited to that slippery growl that such a distinctive part of Haley 's style .
By the end of the song , she turns it into a gospel - style rocker , and she takes it to the house . "
Mansfield also noted that the American Idol judges — Randy Jackson , Jennifer Lopez and Steven Tyler — reacted positively to it .
On the contrary , Jim Farber of the New York Daily News considered the choice risky and was thankful when Reinhart performed a more familiar song for her second round .
On May 5 , 2011 , Reinhart 's studio recording of " You and I " was released as a digital single to the iTunes Store , and appeared on the compilation album American Idol Top 5 Season 10 .
Mansfield , who initially had misgivings about Reinhart as a singer , complimented her studio recording of the track , feeling that if she could " get another 10 songs this good when it comes time to cut the record , then all my initial misgivings about this girl will vanish into thin air . "
British singer Amelia Lily covered the song in November 2011 during her time on UK talent show The X Factor .
On November 15 , 2011 , comedy - drama , musical TV series Glee featured a mash - up of Gaga 's " You and I " and Eddie Rabbitt and Crystal Gayle 's " You and I " , performed by Matthew Morrison and Idina Menzel ( as their respective characters Will Schuester and Shelby Corcoran ) in the episode " Mash Off " .
The mash - up sold 23,000 digital downloads , and debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 69 , in the issue dated December 3 , 2011 .
TRACK LISTING * Digital download
* " Yoü and I " ( Radio Edit )
( Main ) –
4:06 * * " Yoü and I " ( Mark Taylor Radio Edit ) – 3:55
*
* CD single
* " Yoü and I " ( Radio Edit ) – 4:07
* * " Yoü and I " ( Mark Taylor Radio Edit ) – 3:56
* * UK 7 " Picture Disc * " Yoü and I " ( Wild Beasts Remix ) – 3:51
* * " Yoü and I " ( Metronomy Remix ) – 4:20
*
* You and I – The Remixes
* " Yoü and I " ( Wild Beasts Remix ) – 3:51
* * " Yoü and I " ( Mark Taylor Remix ) – 5:02
* * " Yoü and I " ( 10 Kings Remix ) –
4:29 * * " Yoü and I " ( ATB Remix ) – 8:08
* * " Yoü and I " ( Metronomy Remix ) – 4:20
* * " Yoü and I " ( Danny Verde Remix ) – 7:48
* * " Yoü and I " ( Hector Fonseca Remix ) – 8:03 * CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Recording and management
* Recorded at Warehouse Productions ( Omaha , Nebraska ) and Allertown Hill ( United Kingdom )
* Mastered at Oasis Mastering ( Burbank , California )
* Contains elements of the composition
" We Will Rock You " , written by Brian May and sung by band Queen * Published by Stefani Germanotta P / K / A Lady Gaga , Sony / ATV Songs LLC , House of Gaga Publishing Inc. , GloJoe Music Inc. and Sony / ATV Music Publishing *
All rights on behalf of itself and Interscope Records , a division of UMG Recordings ,
Inc. * Brian May appears courtesy of Hollywood Records ( for US and Canada distribution ) and Universal International ( for worldwide distribution ) Personnel * Lady Gaga – lead vocals , songwriter , producer , background vocals , piano and keyboards * Robert John " Mutt " Lange – producer , background vocals ,
audio mixing * Tom Ware and Horace Ward – recording * Olle Romo – programming , recording * Brian May – guitar * Justin Shirley Smith –
guitar recording
* Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering Section::::Credits and personnel .
Credits adapted from Born This Way album liner notes .
CHARTS
CHARTS Section::::Charts .
Section::::Charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 2011–12 ) !
scope="col"Peakposition !
scope="row"Australian
Singles Chart
align="center"14 !
scope="row"Austrian Singles Chart
align="center"8 !
scope="row " Belgian Tip Chart ( Flanders ) ! scope="row " Belgian Tip Chart ( Wallonia ) ! scope="row " Brazil ( ABPD ) ! scope="row " Brazilian Hot 100 Airplay !
scope="row"Canadian Hot 100
align="center"10 !
scope="row"Czech Airplay Chart align="center"26 !
scope="row"French
Singles Chart
align="center"98 !
scope="row"German Singles Chart !
scope="row"Hungarian Airplay Chart
align="center"24 !
scope="row"Irish Singles Chart align="center"32 !
scope="row"Israeli Airplay Chart
align="center"5 !
scope="row"Italian Singles Chart align="center"19 !
scope="row
" Japan Hot 100 !
scope="row"Lebanese Singles Chart !
scope="row"Netherlands
Single Top 100 align="center"83 !
scope="row"New Zealand Singles Chart
align="center"5 ! scope="row " Russia Airplay ( Tophit ) align="center"172 !
scope="row"Scottish Singles Chart
align="center"18 !
scope="row"Slovak
Airplay Chart
align="center"18 !
scope="row"South
Korea International Singles ( Gaon ) !
scope="row"Swiss Singles Chart align="center"32 ! scope="row"UK
Singles Chart align="center"23 ! scope="row"US
Billboard Hot 100
align="center"6 ! scope="row"US
Adult Contemporary
align="center"15 ! scope="row"US
Adult Pop Songs
align="center"6 ! scope="row"US
Hot Dance
Club Songs
align="center"1 ! scope="row"US
Top 40
Mainstream align="center"7 !
scope="row " Venezuela Record Report YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 2011 ) !
scope="col"Position !
scope="row"Canadian Hot 100 align="center"65 ! scope="row"UK
Singles Chart align="center"170 ! scope="row"US
Billboard Hot 100
align="center"71 ! scope="row"US
Adult Pop Songs
align="center"41 ! scope="row"US Hot Dance Club Songs
align="center"45 ! scope="row"US
Pop Songs align="center"45 !
scope="col"Chart ( 2012 ) !
scope="col"Position ! scope="row"US
Adult Contemporary Songs
align="center"48
CERTIFICATIONS
RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col"Country !
scope="col"Date !
scope="col"Format !
scope="row " rowspan="2"United States ! scope="row " rowspan="2 " United Kingdom !
scope="row
" Germany SEE ALSO * List of number - one dance singles of 2011 ( U.S. ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS