SCAR ( THE LION KING )
Scar is a fictional character who appears in Disney 's The Lion King franchise .
Scar was created in 1989 by screenwriters Irene Mecchi , Jonathan Roberts , and Linda Woolverton , and animated by Andreas Deja .
The Pride Lands ' reclusive heir presumptive , Scar is introduced in the first film as Simba 's uncle and Mufasa 's younger brother .
Originally first - in - line to Mufasa 's throne until he is suddenly replaced by Simba , Scar decides to lead an army of hyenas in his plot to take the throne by killing Mufasa and exiling Simba , ultimately blaming his brother 's death on his nephew .
Loosely based on King Claudius , the main antagonist of William Shakespeare 's play Hamlet , Scar 's villainy was additionally inspired by Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin .
As the character 's supervising animator , Deja based Scar 's appearance on that of Irons himself , as well as the actor 's Academy Award - winning performance as Claus von Bülow in Reversal of Fortune ( 1990 ) .
Before Irons was cast , the directors had considered offering the role to actors Tim Curry and Malcolm McDowell .
As a character , Scar has garnered widespread acclaim from film critics , who greeted Irons 's vocal performance with equal enthusiasm .
However , Scar 's violence , dark color palette and allegedly effeminate mannerisms were initially met with mild controversy , perceived by some as racist and homophobic .
Nevertheless , Scar continues to be revered as one of Disney 's greatest villains by various media publications , topping The Huffington Posts list and ranking within the top ten of similar lists published by Yahoo !
Movies , the Orlando Sentinel , E ! and CNN .
Scar has also been ranked among the greatest villains in film history by Digital Spy and Entertainment Weekly .
DEVELOPMENT CONCEPTION AND INFLUENCES Section::::Development . Section::::Conception and influences .
The Lion King was first conceived in 1988 .
The film was eventually pitched to Disney executives , one of whom was among the first to observe similarities between author Thomas M. Disch 's treatment and William Shakespeare 's play Hamlet .
Although first citing these similarities as initially unintentional , director Rob Minkoff always felt it was essential " to anchor [ the film ] with something familiar " .
As directors , Minkoff and Roger Allers aspired to create " an animal picture based in a more natural setting , " describing the film as " More true - life adventure than mythical epic . "
Although not the first Disney film to have been inspired by Shakespeare 's work , The Lion King remains the studio 's most prominent example due to close parallels between its characters and Hamlet , while both stories revolve around main characters who struggle to come to terms with the reality that they must confront their treacherous uncles and avenge their fathers ' deaths .
Scar is based on King Claudius .
According to Slate , while Claudius is mostly " a second - rate schemer ... consumed by anxiety and guilt , " Scar very much " delight[s ] in his monstrosity ; " both characters are motivated by jealousy .
Meanwhile , The Week observed that although both characters ultimately die , Claudius is killed by protagonist Hamlet while Scar dies " at the hand of his former hyena minions , and not Simba himself . "
Additionally , the character shares similarities with Iago from Shakespeare 's play Othello ; both antagonists are skilled in exploiting their victims ' fears .
The original plot of The Lion King revolved around a rivalry between lions and baboons .
A baboon himself , Scar was their leader .
After this plot was abandoned , Scar was re - written into a rogue lion lacking any blood relation to both Mufasa and Simba .
The writers eventually decided that making Scar and Mufasa brothers would make the film more interesting .
An abandoned character , at one point Scar owned a pet python as a sidekick .
Because the film was originally intended to be much more adult - oriented , Scar was to have become infatuated with Simba 's childhood friend and eventual love interest Nala , wanting the young lioness to rule alongside him as his queen and consequentially banishing the character when she refuses .
This concept was to have been further explored during a reprise of Scar 's song " Be Prepared " , but both the idea and the song were ultimately completely removed from the film because they were deemed too " creepy " .
To further emphasize the character 's villainy and tyranny , the writers loosely based Scar on Adolf Hitler .
According to The Jerusalem Post , Scar 's song " Be Prepared " " features goose - stepping hyenas in a formation reminiscent of a Nuremberg rally .
" This idea was first suggested by story artist Jorgen Klubien .
According to the directors , " [ a ] patronizing quality " was vital to Scar 's role in the film .
Minkoff told the Los Angeles Times , " When Scar puts the guilt trip on Simba , that 's an intense idea ... probably something that is not typical of the other Disney pictures , in terms of what the villain does . "
Additionally , Scar serves as a departure from previous Disney villains because they " came off at least as buffoonish as they were sinister " .
Because Scar is the film 's main antagonist , supervising animator Andreas Deja believed that " villains work really well when they 're subtle " , explaining , " to see them think and scheme and plot is much more interesting than showing them beating somebody up .
" By blaming Mufasa 's death on an innocent Simba , Scar ultimately triggers " a cycle of guilt , flight , denial and redemption , as the hero goes into self - imposed exile before finally reconciling with his father 's memory , returning to face his wicked uncle and generally coming of age . "
The character 's first line in The Lion King " essentially summarizes the entire film , providing foreshadowing .
It reads , " Life 's not fair is it ?
You see I - well , I ... shall never be King .
And you ... shall never see light of another day , " subtly revealing the plot as well as " the reason why [ Scar ] decides to murder his own brother . "
VOICE Section::::Voice .
Tim Curry and Malcolm McDowell were originally considered for the role of Scar .
However , Curry left the role due to his commitment to appear in , and the role was ultimately won by Jeremy Irons because of his classical theater training ; the directors had deliberately wanted Scar " to come across as a Shakespearean character .
" Successfully recruiting Irons for the film was considered an unprecedented achievement for the studio because , at the time , it was rare for a dramatic actor of Irons ' caliber to agree to voice an animated character , especially immediately after winning an Academy Award .
In fact , the Oscar - winning actor nearly declined because , in fear of jeopardizing his successful career , he was " [ h]esitant to jump from a dramatic role to an animated feature . "
Prior to The Lion King , Irons was famous for starring as several villains and antagonists in live - action films " geared towards adults . "
Although he had starred in a children 's film before , the actor admitted that it did not mirror the success of The Lion King , a film that has since gained notoriety for its cast of well known , award - winning Hollywood actors , which animation historian Jerry Beck referred to in his book The Animated Movie Guide as " the most impressive list of actors ever to grace an animated film . "
As directors , Minkoff and Allers " work[ed ] very closely with the actors to create their performance .
"
Describing Irons as " a gentleman and a brilliant actor , " Allers revealed that the actor was constantly offering " extra interpretations of lines which were fantastic . "
Producer Don Hahn recalled that Irons " really wanted to play with the words and the pacing , " specifically referring to a scene in which Scar coaxes Simba onto a rock and tricks the young cub to stay there and await his father 's arrival alone , dubbing it " a father and son ... thing . "
According to Hahn , " The comedy in [ Irons 's ] inflection comes from Scar sounding so disdainful he can barely summon the will to finish the sentence .
" Irons 's physical appearance and mannerisms served as inspiration for Scar 's supervising animator Andreas Deja , namely his flicking his paw in disgust .
Critics have cited physical similarities between Irons and Scar .
In a reference to the role that earned Irons an Academy Award , Claus von Bülow in Reversal of Fortune ( 1990 ) , the writers gave Scar one of von Bülow 's lines , " You have no idea , " which is uttered by Irons in a similar tone .
According to author Rachel Stein of New Perspectives on Environmental Justice : Gender , Sexuality , and Activism , Irons relies " on his history of playing sexually perverse , socially dangerous male characters to animate his depiction of Scar . "
On the contrary , Irons revealed to Connect Savannah that the similarities between the voices of Scar and von Bülow were largely unintentional , explaining , " Whatever voice came was arrived at by looking at the initial sketches , and from the freedom the directors gave me to try anything . "
Irons concluded , " The fact that he may occasionally remind you of Claus , comes from the fact that they both share the same voice box . "
While recording Scar 's song " Be Prepared , " Irons encountered challenges with his voice .
The actor reportedly " blew out his voice " upon belting the line
" you wo n't get a sniff without me , " rendering him incapable of completing the musical number .
Consequently , Disney was forced to recruit American voice actor Jim Cummings , who had also been providing the voice of The Lion Kings laughing hyena
Ed at the time , to impersonate Irons and record the rest of the song .
Jim Cummings told The Huffington Post that " [ s]tunt singing " is actually something the actor continues to do regularly , having done the same for American actor Russell Means , voice of Chief Powhatan in Disney 's Pocahontas ( 1995 ) .
Critics observed that Irons " fakes his way ... through ' Be Prepared ' in the grand tradition of talk - singing , " drawing similarities between him and American actor James Cagney and English actor Rex Harrison .
Deja revealed that , during a recording session , Irons ' stomach was grumbling .
Deja joked , " The growling sound could be heard in his recording , so we had to record that part of his dialog all over again . "
As a result of Irons ' prominent British accent , critics have compared both the actor and Scar to Shere Khan , the villain of Disney 's The Jungle Book ( 1967 ) , voiced by English actor George Sanders .
Chiwetel Ejiofor was officially chosen on November 1 , 2017 for the role of Scar for the CGI live action remake , The Lion King ( 2019 ) directed by Jon Favreau , as he had impressed him after watching his antagonistic performance as Baron Mordo in the Marvel film Doctor Strange ( 2016 ) .
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Design and characterization .
The studio originally dismissed The Lion King as a risk because , at the time , it was believed that the greatest films starred people .
Concerned about the novelty of the film , Disney CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg decided to divide the studio into two separate animated films , The Lion King and Pocahontas , the latter of which was dubbed " the home run " because it was expected to be the more successful of the two projects .
Disney 's more seasoned and experienced animators gravitated towards Pocahontas , while the studio 's newer animators were relegated to working on The Lion King , dubbing themselves the " B - team " .
However , Allers received Katzenberg 's decision positively as an opportunity for " newer animators ... to step up to leadership roles " , among them Andreas Deja , who became Scar 's supervising animator .
Well known for animating several Disney villains , Deja summarized the experience as " more fun than drawing heroes " because " You have so much more to work with in terms of expressions and acting and drawing - wise than you would have with a nice princess or a prince ... where you have to be ever so careful with the draftsmanship " .
Before becoming involved with The Lion King , Deja had already developed a reputation for animating Disney villains .
Prior to animating Scar , Deja had just recently served as the supervising animator of Gaston and Jafar , the villains in Disney 's Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) and Aladdin ( 1992 ) , respectively .
Initially , Deja had been considering the idea of animating a hero as opposed to a villain for a change , contemplating taking on the task of animating Simba instead .
However , Deja soon relented upon learning that Scar would be voiced by Irons , feeling that it would be " fun " to animate a character voiced by such a prestigious actor .
Meanwhile , Minkoff and Allers had already had Deja in mind for animating Scar long before the animator approached the directors about the position .
The level anthropomorphism used in The Lion King exceeded that of any Disney animated film by which it was preceded .
Because Scar is an animal as opposed to a human , Deja and the animators experienced certain challenges and limitations when it came to instilling movement in the character , and thus experimented with manipulating Scar 's facial expressions , specifically the way in which he tilts his head condescendingly , raises his eyebrows and lifts his chin .
The animals were each drawn with certain human - like attributes and characteristics in order to help convey emotions and tell the story .
Meanwhile , the studio recruited live lions for the animators to study while drawing .
As the film 's villain , Scar is the only lion drawn with claws .
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described Scar as " a figure of both pity and evil , and of treacherous comedy " with " Irons ... filling this devious coward with elegantly witty self - loathing .
" As an animator , Deja believes that " If you have a great voice to work with , your work is half done . "
Enjoying the way in which Irons " has a way with words and phrasing , " Deja deliberately based much of Scar 's appearance on the actor himself , specifically the shape of his mouth and facial expressions .
Several of the actor 's physical attributes were incorporated into Scar 's design , with Irons admitting to recognizing his own baggy eyes in his character .
Additionally , Deja studied Irons ' performances in the films Reversal of Fortune ( 1990 ) and Damage ( 1992 ) for inspiration , while refusing to watch Disney 's The Jungle Book while working on The Lion King in order to avoid being influenced by the film 's villain - Shere Khan , a tiger .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Scar sings the musical number "
Be Prepared , " written by songwriters Elton John and Tim Rice , while contemplating Mufasa 's death plot and bringing the hyenas along .
Described as the film 's " darkest " song , a " pompous , " " fascistic paean to usurpers , " the musical sequence depicts the lion " as a big - cat fascist . "
According to Business Insider , in addition to loosely basing the character on Adolf Hitler to further emphasize Scar 's tyranny , the filmmakers very much directly based his song "
Be Prepared , " which references Nazism by having Scar 's army of hyenas goose step while addressing them from a high ledge – similar to the way in which Hitler would have from a balcony – in the Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will ( 1935 ) , a film that documents Nazi Germany during 1934 .
According to Entertainment Weekly , the concept originated from a sketch by story artist Jorgen Klubien , in which Scar was depicted as Hitler .
Although hesitant that then - Disney Animation chief Jeffrey Katzenberg would approve , the filmmakers ultimately decided to pursue it , describing the sequence as a " Triumph of the Will - style mock - Nuremberg rally . "
The St. Louis Post - Dispatch reviewed , " those goose - stepping hyenas seem a little much in hindsight , " while Film School Rejects coined it a " hellish gathering . "
APPEARANCES FILM Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Film .
Scar debuted in The Lion King ( 1994 ) .
The jealous younger brother of Mufasa , Scar was next - in - line to take the throne until his nephew Simba , Mufasa 's son , was born , replacing him .
Determined to regain his birthright , Scar devises a plan to kill both Simba and Mufasa .
Cleverly trapping Simba in a vast gorge , Scar signals his hyena minions , Shenzi , Banzai and Ed , to trigger a wildebeest stampede .
Although Mufasa saves Simba , the king is weakened , and unable to climb out of the gorge to safety .
When Mufasa begs Scar for help , Scar instead throws his brother to his death below .
Convincing Simba that he is to blame for Mufasa 's death , Scar advises the prince to run away and never return , then orders the hyenas to pursue and kill him .
With his brother murdered and his nephew presumed dead , Scar returns to Pride Rock and tells the pride that both father and son died in the stampede before becoming king and allowing the hyenas into the Pride Lands .
Years go by as Scar squanders the kingdom 's resources and allows his army of hyenas to wreak havoc upon the Pride Lands , which turn barren .
Meanwhile , an alive and adult Simba is visited by Mufasa 's ghost , who encourages him to return to the Pride Lands and take his rightful place as king .
Aided by his friends Nala , Timon and Pumbaa , Simba arrives at Pride Rock and witnesses Scar striking his mother Sarabi and confronts Scar , who demands that Simba admit to the pride that he killed Mufasa .
As he prepares to throw Simba off Pride Rock and have him meet a similar fate to that of his father , Scar whispers that he was the one who killed Mufasa ,
Confident that the secret would die along with him .
Enraged , Simba tackles Scar and forces his uncle to admit the truth to the pride , initiating a ferocious battle between the pride , Timon , Pumbaa , Zazu , Rafiki and Scar 's hyenas .
Scar tries to escape , but is cornered by Simba on the top of Pride Rock ; Scar begs for mercy and even attempts to blame his crimes on the hyenas , unaware that they are listening nearby .
Simba ignores Scar and gives him one last chance to run away and never return .
When Simba 's back is turned , Scar attacks him and they fight .
Simba overpowers Scar and throws him over the cliff ledge to the base of Pride Rock .
Scar survives the fall , but is attacked and killed by the vengeful hyenas .
BROADWAY MUSICAL Section::::Broadway musical .
The success of The Lion King spawned a Broadway musical based on the film , directed by Julie Taymor with a book written by The Lion King co - director Roger Allers and screenwriter Irene Mecchi .
American actor John Vickery originated the role of Scar .
In one scene in the musical , Scar , during the song " The Madness of King Scar " , tries to seduce a young adult Nala and make her his queen and mother of his children .
Nala however , rejects Scar 's advances and leaves Pride Rock .
THE LION KING II :
SIMBA 'S PRIDE
Section::::The Lion King II :
Simba 's Pride .
Having been killed during the end of The Lion King , Scar 's appearance and presence in its sequel ( 1998 ) is limited .
Story - wise , however , his role remains vital .
Upon Scar 's demise , a rivaling pride of lions known as the Outsiders decide to remain loyal to him .
The pride is led by Scar 's most faithful follower Zira .
Since Scar had no children of his own , Zira 's son Kovu is chosen to serve as Scar 's heir .
Simba banishes the Outsiders to the Outlands , and forbids his daughter Kiara from going there .
She goes there anyway , however , and meets and befriends Kovu .
Meanwhile , Zira trains Kovu to murder Simba , but when he becomes a young adult , he has a change of heart as he begins to develop feelings for Kiara .
Scar makes a brief cameo appearance in the film in Simba 's nightmare .
In the nightmare , Simba runs down the cliff where his father died , attempting to rescue him .
Scar intervenes , however , and then turns into Kovu and throws Simba off the cliff .
Scar makes another cameo appearance in a pool of water , as a reflection , after Kovu is exiled from Pride Rock .
MISCELLANEOUS Section::::Miscellaneous .
Scar makes a brief cameo in Disney 's animated feature film Hercules ( 1997 ) in the form of a limp lion skin coat worn by Hercules , parodying the Nemean lion .
This is also likely a reference to Zazu 's remark ( in the first film ) that Scar would " make a very handsome throw rug " .
Scar 's supervising animator Andreas Deja also served as the supervising animator of Hercules .
The character appears in the 1994 video game The Lion King .
According to AllGame , Scar appears towards the end of video game as Simba finally " must defeat his Uncle Scar " and " stop Scar and reclaim what is rightfully his . "
Scar plays a similar role in the video game ( 2000 ) ; Simba 's climactic " battle with Scar concludes the first six levels of the game . "
According to IGN , the video game features the voices of the film 's cast , including Jeremy Irons as Scar .
Voiced by James Horan , Scar appears as a non - player character in Disney 's Extreme Skate Adventure ( 2003 ) and Kingdom Hearts II as a villain who ultimately transforms into a Heartless as a result of the character 's own " hatred and jealousy . "
Scar also makes a brief non - speaking cameo appearance in an episode of Timon & Pumbaa , despite that he is deceased at that time .
THE LION GUARD Section::::The Lion Guard .
Scar is portrayed in paintings throughout season 1 of The Lion Guard television series , which explains some of his backstory .
When Scar was younger — as per tradition to all second born children of the current reigning " Lion King"—he led the Lion Guard who protected The Pride Lands and defended " The Circle of Life " from all enemies before his great - nephew Kion led the Guard .
Like Kion , Scar was also gifted with The Roar of the Elders , which causes the lions of the Pride Lands ' past to roar with the user .
However , the power went to Scar 's head and he vainly believed that with this power , he should be the king instead of Mufasa , but when his fellow Lion Guard members refused to aid him in his plan to dethrone Mufasa , Scar furiously destroyed them with the Roar .
As a result , Scar lost the Roar forever , as it is only meant to be used for good , not evil .
Scar appears as a fiery spirit in a volcano in season 2 ( voiced by David Oyelowo ) starting in the one - hour long special The Rise of Scar , when Kion unknowingly summons him after using the Roar of the Elders in anger when Janja the hyena provokes him .
After being summoned , Scar conspires with Janja and the other animals in the Outlands to take over the Pride Lands and defeat the new Lion Guard and Simba , who were initially unaware that Scar had returned .
Later in the season , the Lion Guard finds out that Scar has returned while they are in the Outlands getting volcanic ash needed to cure Simba from a scorpion sting .
Upon returning to the Pride Lands , Kion acknowledges to his team that they have a tough fight ahead , but remains confident that they will be able to defeat Scar .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Scar has garnered widespread acclaim from film critics , some of whom praised him as a better character than Simba .
Author Peter M. Nichols wrote in his book New York Times Essential Library : Children 's Movies : A Critic 's Guide to the Best Films Available on Video and DVD that Scar " is the most interesting character in the film , " describing Simba and Mufasa " bores in comparison . "
Janet Maslin of The New York Times called Scar a " delectably wicked " villain .
Maslin went on to praise Irons 's voice acting , writing that the actor " slithers through the story in grandiose high style , with a green - eyed malevolence that is one of film 's chief delights . "
Leah Rozen of People described Scar as " a flawless realization of Irons 's special talent . "
Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune lauded Scar as the film 's " best character , " jokingly describing him as " Irons ' Claus von Bulow with fur . "
Similarly , ComingSoon.net 's Joshua Starnes hailed Scar as " the best part of the film . "
Praising both Scar and Irons 's acting , Starnes continued , " He switches so quickly and easily from campy to deadly its like a showcase for how to do an over - the - top villain right . "
Concluding that " Villains are often the most memorable characters in a Disney animated film , " Roger Ebert described Scar " one of the great ones . "
James Berardinelli of ReelViews reviewed , " Gone is the buffoonery that has marked the recent trio of Ursula , Gaston , and Jafar , " writing , " Scar is a sinister figure , given to acid remarks and cunning villainy . "
Berardinelli concluded , " The cold - hearted manner in which he causes Mufasa 's death lets us know that this is not a lion to be trifled with . "
A film that features the voices of several well - known A - list actors , namely Irons as Scar , Matthew Broderick as Simba , James Earl Jones as Mufasa and Whoopi Goldberg as Shenzi , The Lion King has since gone on to be acclaimed as " one of the most impressive arrays of voice talents ever utilized in an animated film . "
Critics have repeatedly singled out Irons 's performance , praising it extensively : Cindy White of IGN called Irons 's performance " deliciously smarmy , " while Andy Patrizio of IGN wrote that Irons voices Scar " in perfect Shakespearean villain mode . "
Rolling Stones Peter Travers hailed Irons for " deliver[ing ] a triumphantly witty vocal performance that ranks with Robin Williams ' in Aladdin . "
Peter Stack of the San Francisco Chronicle commended Disney for " nail[ing ] the voice talents , " specifically Irons .
The Philadelphia Daily News Bill Wedo described Irons 's voice as " silken , " while Graham Young of the Birmingham Mail hailed the actor 's performance as " magnificent . "
Radio Times Tom Hutchinson wrote , " Jeremy Irons [ is ] a vocal standout as the evil uncle Scar . "
Annette Basile of Filmink echoed Hutchinson 's statement , writing that Scar is " voiced with relish by stand - out Jeremy Irons .
" The Guardians Philip French opined , " Jeremy Irons is excellent as the suavely villainous lion Scar . "
David Sterritt of The Christian Science Monitor exalted Irons 's acting , describing him as " positively brilliant . "
Also hailing the film 's cast as " incredible , " Desson Howe of The Washington Post highlighted Irons as a " standout . "
Praising the film for successfully combining " grand - opera melodrama and low - comedy hi - jinks , " the Orlando Sentinels Jay Boyar concluded that " One reason they work so well together is that even most of the serious sections contain an undercurrent of humor , provided ... by the deliciously droll voice - performance of Jeremy Irons as Scar . "
Mathew DeKinder of the St. Louis Post - Dispatch felt that Irons successfully " handle[s ] all of the dramatic heavy lifting . "
Even film critics who generally disliked the film tended to enjoy Scar 's characterization and Irons 's performance .
Terrence Rafferty of The New Yorker wrote , " Among the celebrity voices on the soundtrack , two performances stand out , " namely , " Jeremy Irons , as the villainous lion Scar " who " does an elegant , funny George Sanders impersonation . "
( Sanders himself had voiced Shere Khan for Disney in their 1967 version of The Jungle Book ) .
Stephen Hunter of The Baltimore Sun described Irons 's voice as " plummy - rich with rancid irony . "
Television Without Pitys Ethan Alter admitted to enjoying Scar , praising the character as " a fantastic villain and easily the most fully realized of the film 's characters , thanks both to Jeremy Irons 's marvelously wicked vocal performance and some clever character flourishes on behalf of the animators . "
David Denby of New York , who otherwise criticized the film , felt that " Irons ... sounds like he 's having a better time than he 's ever had in movies before . "
In a rare lukewarm review , Anthony Quinn of The Independent felt that Irons 's performance was too campy : " more Liberace than George Sanders . "
ACCOLADES AND LEGACY Section::::Accolades and legacy .
According to IGN , Scar , Simba and Mufasa have since become " household names thanks to the [ film 's ] enormous popularity ... but back in 1994 who could have predicted that these characters would enter the lexicon of Disney 's most popular creations ?
" Scar is considered to be among Disney 's greatest villains .
Desmond Ryan of The Philadelphia Inquirer reviewed Scar as " the most vivid villain in Disney features in generations .
" On a broader scale , Scar is often revered as one of the greatest animated villains of all - time .
Entertainment Weekly included the character in the article " 10 Over - the - top Animated Movie Villains " , explaining , " you could only expect over - the - top when you pair such a grasping , conniving character with Jeremy Irons ' seductive voice . "
Likewise , Digital Spys Alex Fletcher wrote of Scar in his article " Who is Disney 's greatest ever villain ? "
that " The scene in which he lets Mufasa ... fall into a stampede of wildebeests left lasting emotional trauma on an entire generation . "
The Huffington Post ranked Scar first in its " Definitive Ranking Of 25 Classic Disney Villains " countdown .
Similarly , BuzzFeed also ranked Scar first in the website 's " Definitive Ranking Of The Top 20 Disney Villains " list , with author Javi Moreno accusing the character of removing " the innocence of an entire generation . "
Scar also topped About.com 's " Top 10 Disney Villains " countdown ; author David Nusair concluded , " There are few figures within Disney 's body of work that are as deliciously reprehensible and vile as Scar ... heightened by Jeremy Irons ' gloriously smug voice work . "
Nusair also included Irons among the " Top 5 Celebrity Voice Performances in Animated Films " , acknowledging the fact that although the actor " has played a lot of villains over the course of his career ... none have had the lasting impact as Scar from The Lion King .
"
The Orlando Sentinel ranked Scar the sixth " greatest Disney villain of all time " .
Similarly , Babble.com also placed the character at number six .
Included in the website 's " 12 most famous Disney villains from worst to best " countdown , Yahoo !
Movies ranked Scar second best , while Moviefone ranked the character sixth .
E ! ranked Scar fifth , with author John Boone writing that the character " plotted one of the most painful deaths in Disney history , so you know he 'll never be forgotten . "
Animation World Network ranked Scar the sixth best animated villain .
CNN considers Scar one of " Disney 's scariest characters . "
While ranking the character fifth , The Stanford Daily wrote , " From his habit of sadistically toying with his prey to his dumb hyena coven to the way he leads the kingdom of Pride Rock into a period of starvation and sorrow , he 's a backstabbing dictator of an uncle . "
Richard Crouse of Metro cited Scar 's " Long live the King " as the character 's " Most evil line . "
Additionally , " Be Prepared " is often revered as one of the greatest Disney villain songs .
Official Disney Blogs wrote that the song , with its " hyena backup singers , and the best bone - rattling percussion of all the villains ' songs , " Scar proves himself " an expert crooner of villainous plots . "
Aside from Disney and animation , Scar is often revered as one of the greatest movie villains of all - time .
Digital Spy featured the character who , according to author Simon Reynolds , " underlined the sheer blackness of his heart by ruthlessly killing Simba 's father , " among the " 25 greatest movie villains " .
Similarly , in 2012 , Entertainment Weekly ranked the character the twenty - fifth " Most Vile Movie Villain " ever , while Total Film ranked Scar sixty - seventh in 2014 .
To - date , Deja remains best known for animating several of Disney 's most famous villains , admitting to preferring animating villains over heroes .
However , after The Lion King , Deja finally decided to take a break from animating villains in order to avoid repeating himself , subsequently refusing to animate villain Judge Claude Frollo in The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) in favor of working on Hercules from Hercules ( 1997 ) , along with Mickey Mouse in the animated short Runaway Brain ( 1995 ) .
Comparing Scar to other villains that he has played , Irons said that he " measures very highly , " having " charm , " " Machiavellian qualities " and being " iconic in some of the things he says .
" CRITICISM AND CONTROVERSY Section::::Criticism and controversy .
Scar became the first Disney villain to successfully explicitly kill someone .
Like Disney 's Bambi before it , The Lion King – dubbed the studio 's " darkest " film at the time of its release – was unprecedented in terms of its serious themes , namely guilt , murder , treachery , revenge and death , specifically the on - screen assassination of one of the film 's heroes .
According to IGN , " The film 's story concepts of morality and mortality ... was new for Disney , " with
The Washington Post predicting that " the death of the heroic Mufasa will be the most widely debated aspect of The Lion King , with people taking sides as to whether such things are good or bad for kids just as they did over the killing of Bambi 's mother . "
Similarly , Variety opined , " a generation that remembers the death of Bambi 's mother as traumatizing should bear that experience in mind when deciding who goes to The Lion King . "
Film critics and parents alike expressed concern that Scar 's violent ways would frighten and disturb younger viewers .
Referring to Scar murdering Mufasa , The New York Times questioned " whether this film really warranted a G rating . "
Critics also cautioned Scar 's death ; Movieline warned audiences that the film " shows a fairy tale 's dark sense of justice , " for example when " Scar was eaten by his hyena allies after betraying them . "
ReelViews James Berardinelli commented : The Los Angeles Times warned that " The on - screen death of Mufasa and a violent battle at the finale may disturb small children , " echoed by The Philadelphia Inquirer .
However , film critics also felt that Disney 's treatment of Scar was at times too light - hearted and comedic , with the Deseret News complaining , " a climactic battle between Simba and his evil Uncle Scar ... is [ a ] very bad choice near the end , as Simba and Scar battle in slow - motion , a serious moment that seems unintentionally comic . "
According to The Seattle Times , " Some critics have complained that the movie is too funny and good - natured to accommodate the rather grim story it 's telling . "
Considered " an odd mix of deadly seriousness and slapstick humor ...
Simba fights Scar to the death " while " intercut with ...
Poomba [ sic ] ... doing a parody of Travis Bickel .
[ sic ] "
Although universally acclaimed , Scar has sparked considerable controversy regarding the character 's appearance and personality , specifically his darker - colored fur and alleged sexuality .
The general public , however , appears to have remained largely oblivious to such concerns according to David Parkinson , author of The Rough Guide to Film Musicals .
The Washington Post felt that " Scar clearly is meant to represent an evil African American because ' while Simba 's mane is gloriously red , Scar 's is , of course , black . "
Meanwhile , Scar 's mannerisms and voice which , according to Nightmare on Main Street : Angels , Sadomasochism , and the Culture of Gothics author Mark Edmundson , resemble " a cultivated , world - weary , gay man , " has been deemed homophobic by some commentators because , according to The Independent , " the arch - villain 's gestures are effeminate " while , in addition to the film being " full of stereotypes , " the character " speaks in supposed gay cliches . "
Susan Mackey - Kallis , author of The Hero and the Perennial Journey Home in American Film , observed that Scar is " more effeminate [ and ] less brawny ... than " both Mufasa and Simba .
Additionally , " Even though [ Scar ] would be expected to mate with one of the lioness , he is never seen intimated by any .
" These allegations are inconsistent with the facts about real lions : dark manes indicate higher testosterone levels , and experiments show that male lions accordingly find dark - maned models more intimidating while lionesses find them more attractive .
While Disney executives ignored these accusations , Slant Magazine defended the studio , explaining that Scar 's black mane is simply an example of " the animators ' elementary attempts to color - code evil for the film 's target audience . "
Similarly , author Edward Schiappa wrote in his book Beyond Representational Correctness : Rethinking Criticism of Popular Media that Scar 's voice was simply meant " to convey the sort of upper - class snobbishness evinced by George Sanders ' performance as Shere Khan in The Jungle Book .
" More recently , the possibility of an incestuous relationship involving Simba , his mate Nala , Scar and Mufasa has surfaced .
According to Johnson Cheu , author of Diversity in Disney Films : Critical Essays on Race , Ethnicity , Gender , Sexuality and Disability , the fact that Mufasa , Scar , and Simba appear to be the only male lions present in The Lion King suggests the possibility that either Mufasa or Scar is Nala 's father , which would in turn make Nala either Simba 's half - sister or cousin .
However , The Lion Guard identifies Nala 's father as a red - maned unnamed lion who - in his youth - resembled his grandson ( and Scar 's great - nephew ) Kion .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS