THE ICEMAN ( FILM )
The Iceman is a 2012 American biographical crime thriller film based on the true story of longtime notorious hitman Richard Kuklinski .
Released in 2012 at the Venice Film Festival , the film was directed by Ariel Vromen , and stars Michael Shannon as Kuklinski , Winona Ryder , Chris Evans , and Ray Liotta .
The Iceman showed at the 2012 Telluride Film Festival and the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival before receiving a limited release in cinemas in the United States on May 3 , 2013 .
It expanded into more cinemas in the USA on May 17 .
It was released to DVD on September 3 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the 1960s , Richard Kuklinski ( Michael Shannon ) marries Deborah ( Winona Ryder ) and the couple have two daughters .
Kuklinski keeps secrets from his family .
He works dubbing pornographic films , which he then supplies to a mob operated syndicate , but he tells his family that he dubs Disney cartoons .
Kuklinski is also deeply troubled .
As a boy he was the subject of brutal beatings from his immigrant Polish father , shaping Kuklinski into an emotionally disturbed and intensely violent man .
A man insults him after a game of pool
so Kuklinski follows the man to his car and murders him by quickly slashing his throat .
Another secret Kuklinski keeps is that his younger brother Joseph ( Stephen Dorff ) is serving a life sentence for raping and murdering a twelve - year - old girl .
Roy DeMeo ( Ray Liotta ) , a powerful mob boss , shuts down the pornographic film business in which Kuklinski was involved and brings him on board to work as a contract killer after Kuklinski passes an impromptu audition : killing a homeless man with Roy 's gun .
During the killing of Marty Freeman ( James Franco ) due to his knowledge of Josh Rosenthols ' ( David Schwimmer ) whereabouts ( who had been using DeMeo 's name too freely in his business dealings ) , Kuklinski meets Robert Pronge ( Chris Evans ) , another hitman for the mob .
After DeMeo puts Kuklinski on suspension for allowing a teenage girl to live after witnessing a hit ( Kuklinski reveals that he never kills children ) , he teams up with Pronge , who is a freelancer , and splits the contract payments with him in return for helping him on contract assassinations for DeMeo 's boss Leo Marks ( Robert Davi ) .
During his suspension , Kuklinski begins to show more of his anger and rage , to the extent of destroying his own kitchen while having an argument with Deborah .
Kuklinski also shows paranoia when he looks at a moving ice cream truck and instantly thinks of Pronge .
While distracted , Kuklinski bumps his car into another vehicle , the man he hit gets out of his car and insults Kuklinski and his family .
This causes Kuklinski to enter such a raging fit that he then initiates a high speed chase after the man through three neighborhoods , again putting his family in danger .
DeMeo eventually finds out about all of this unauthorized employment after Kuklinski murders one of his associates on Leo 's orders , and at the same time demands that Kuklinski sever all ties with him .
Meanwhile , Kuklinski attempts to collect his $ 50,000 pay for the hit from Leo , but is denied the payment , prompting him to kill the mobster when he threatens his family .
Kuklinski 's daughter is later seriously injured by a hit - and - run car accident .
Kuklinski suspects Pronge and shoots him in a public park .
Following an undercover sting operation , Kuklinski is arrested in the year 1986 .
Neither his wife nor his daughters have ever suspected him of being a cold - blooded killer .
Kuklinski admits to having committed over 100 vicious murders , both for personal reasons and for profit , in his 22-year career .
After being sentenced to two life terms in prison he never sees his wife and daughters again .
In real life , Barbara ( Deborah 's name in real life ) and his daughters visited him in the hospital shortly before he died .
As the movie ends , Kuklinski 's only regret is hurting his family through the crimes he committed , and the dangers he put them in .
In 2006 , he dies in a prison hospital , from a rare inflammatory disease , just before he is to testify against a Gambino crime family underboss .
CAST
* Michael Shannon as Richard Kuklinski
* Winona Ryder as Deborah Kuklinski ( based on Barbara Kuklinski )
* Chris Evans as Robert ' Mr. Freezy ' Pronge ( based on Robert " Mister Softee " Pronge )
* Ray Liotta as Roy DeMeo * James Franco as Marty Freeman * David Schwimmer as Josh Rosenthal * Stephen Dorff as Joseph Kuklinski * Erin Cummings as Ellen
* Robert Davi as Leonard Marks * Weronika Rosati as Livi
* John Ventimiglia as Mickey Scicoli * Christa Campbell as Adele
* Eduardo Yanez as Dominick Provenzano * Vincent Fuentes as JC * Ashlynn Ross as Alex * Steven Hinckley as Prison Guard PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming took place in Los Angeles , California , New York City and Shreveport , Louisiana .
Shannon 's portrayal of Kuklinski includes the authentic voice Kuklinski had , as evidenced by his interviews with HBO in their 1993 documentary Conversations with a Killer .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Iceman screened out of competition at the 69th Venice International Film Festival in August 2012 .
The film screened at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival in September that year .
It was released in the United States on May 3 , 2013 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The Iceman currently has a score of 66 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote that while the film is not " a great crime movie ...
it is an indelible film that clinches Mr. Shannon 's status as a major screen actor .
"
Tomas Hachard of Slant Magazine gave the film 1.5 out of 4 stars .
Meanwhile , Ben Kenigsberg of The A.V. Club gave the film a C+ rating .
David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter noted that " the film 's chief asset is without question its performances . "
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film 3 out of 5 stars , describing it as " Zodiac meets Goodfellas " .
Larushka Ivan - Zadeh of Metro also gave it 3 out of 5 stars .
Michael Phillips of Chicago Tribune gave it 3 out of 4 stars , commenting that the film is " sleek , purposeful and extremely well acted " .
Oliver Lyttelton gave the film a C rating .
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B- rating .
Betsy Sharkey of Los Angeles Times criticized the film : " The great failing of The Iceman is not in giving us a monster , but in not making us care " , she wrote .
Jason Gorber of Twitch Film wrote : " Like a stiff mixed drink that does n't live up to the quality of its ingredients , The Iceman proves to be an unpalatable , underwhelming crime drama . " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS