INVESTMENT FUND
An investment fund is a way of investing money alongside other investors in order to benefit from the inherent advantages of working as part of a group .
These advantages include an ability to : * hire professional investment managers , which may potentially be able to offer better returns and more adequate risk management ;
* benefit from economies of scale , i.e. , lower transaction costs ;
* increase the asset diversification to reduce some unsystematic risk .
It remains unclear whether professional active investment managers can reliably enhance risk adjusted returns by an amount that exceeds fees and expenses of investment management .
Terminology varies with country but investment funds are often referred to as investment pools , collective investment vehicles , collective investment schemes , managed funds , or simply funds .
The regulatory term is undertaking for collective investment in transferable securities , or short collective investment undertaking ( cf .
Law ) .
An investment fund may be held by the public , such as a mutual fund , exchange - traded fund , special - purpose acquisition company or closed - end fund , or it may be sold only in a private placement , such as a hedge fund or private equity fund .
The term also includes specialized vehicles such as collective and common trust funds , which are unique bank - managed funds structured primarily to commingle assets from qualifying pension plans or trusts .
Investment funds are promoted with a wide range of investment aims either targeting specific geographic regions ( e.g. , emerging markets or Europe ) or specified industry sectors ( e.g. , technology ) .
Depending on the country there is normally a bias towards the domestic market due to familiarity , and the lack of currency risk .
Funds are often selected on the basis of these specified investment aims , their past investment performance , and other factors such as fees .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first ( recorded ) professionally managed investment funds or collective investment schemes , such as mutual funds , were established in the Dutch Republic .
Amsterdam - based businessman Abraham van Ketwich ( also known as Adriaan van Ketwich ) is often credited as the originator of the world 's first mutual fund .
LAW Section::::Law .
The term " collective investment scheme " is a legal concept deriving initially from a set of European Union Directives to regulate mutual fund investment and management .
The Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities Directives 85/611 / EEC , as amended by 2001/107 / EC and 2001/108 / EC ( typically known as UCITS for short ) created an EU - wide structure , so that funds fulfilling its basic regulations could be marketed in any member state .
The basic aim of collective investment scheme regulation is that the financial " products " that are sold to the public are sufficiently transparent , with full disclosure about the nature of the terms .
In the United Kingdom , the primary statute is the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 , where Part XVII , sections 235 to 284 deal with the requirements for a collective investment scheme to operate .
It states in section 235 that a " collective investment scheme " means " any arrangements with respect to property of any description , including money , the purpose or effect of which is to enable persons taking part in the arrangements ( whether by becoming owners of the property or any part of it or otherwise ) to participate in or receive profits or income arising from the acquisition , holding , management or disposal of the property or sums paid out of such profits or income . "
GENERIC INFORMATION —
STRUCTURE CONSTITUTION AND
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Generic information — structure . Section::::Constitution and terminology .
Collective investment vehicles may be formed under company law , by legal trust or by statute .
The nature of the vehicle and its limitations are often linked to its constitutional nature and the associated tax rules for the type of structure within a given jurisdiction .
Typically there is : * A fund manager or investment manager who manages the investment decisions .
* A fund administrator who manages the trading , reconciliations , valuation and unit pricing .
* A board of directors or trustees who safeguard the assets and ensure compliance with laws , regulations and rules .
* The shareholders or unitholders who own ( or have rights to )
the assets and associated income .
* A " marketing " or " distribution " company to promote and sell shares / units of the fund .
Please see below for general information on specific forms of vehicles in different jurisdictions .
NET ASSET VALUE Section::::Net asset value .
The net asset value or NAV is the value of a vehicle 's assets minus the value of its liabilities .
The method for calculating this varies between vehicle types and jurisdiction and can be subject to complex regulation .
OPEN - END FUND Section::::Open - end fund .
An open - end fund is equitably divided into shares which vary in price in direct proportion to the variation in value of the fund 's net asset value .
Each time money is invested , new shares or units are created to match the prevailing share price ; each time shares are redeemed , the assets sold match the prevailing share price .
In this way there is no supply or demand created for shares and they remain a direct reflection of the underlying assets .
CLOSED - END FUND Section::::Closed - end fund .
A closed - end fund issues a limited number of shares ( or units ) in an initial public offering ( or IPO ) or through private placement .
If shares are issued through an IPO , they are then traded on an exchange or directly through the fund manager to create a secondary market subject to market forces .
If demand for the shares is high , they may trade at a premium to net asset value .
If demand is low they may trade at a discount to net asset value .
Further share ( or unit ) offerings may be made by the vehicle if demand is high although this may affect the share price .
For listed funds , the added element of market forces tends to amplify the performance of the fund increasing investment risk through increased volatility .
GEARING AND LEVERAGE Section::::Gearing and leverage .
Some collective investment vehicles have the power to borrow money to make further investments ; a process known as gearing or leverage .
If markets are growing rapidly this can allow the vehicle to take advantage of the growth to a greater extent than if only the subscribed contributions were invested .
However this premise only works if the cost of the borrowing is less than the increased growth achieved .
If the borrowing costs are more than the growth achieved a net loss is achieved .
This can greatly increase the investment risk of the fund by increased volatility and exposure to increased capital risk .
Gearing was a major contributory factor in the collapse of the split capital investment trust debacle in the UK in 2002 .
AVAILABILITY AND ACCESS Section::::Availability and access .
Collective investment vehicles vary in availability depending on their intended investor base : * Public - availability vehicles — are available to most investors within the jurisdiction they are offered .
Some restrictions on age and size of investment may be imposed .
* Limited - availability vehicles — are limited by laws , regulations , and/or rules to experienced and/or sophisticated investors and often have high minimum investment requirements .
* Private - availability vehicles — may be limited to family members or whomever set up the fund .
They are not publicly traded and may be arranged for tax- or estate - planning purposes .
LIMITED DURATION
Section::::Limited duration .
Some vehicles are designed to have a limited term with enforced redemption of shares or units on a specified date .
UNIT OR SHARE CLASS Section::::Unit or share class .
Many collective investment vehicles split the fund into multiple classes of shares or units .
The underlying assets of each class are effectively pooled for the purposes of investment management , but classes typically differ in the fees and expenses paid out of the fund 's assets .
These differences are supposed to reflect different costs involved in servicing investors in various classes ; for example : * One class may be sold through a stockbroker or financial adviser with an initial commission ( front - end load ) and might be called retail shares .
*
Another class may be sold with no commission ( load ) direct to the public called direct shares .
* Still a third class might have a high minimum investment limit and only be open to financial institutions , and called institutional shares .
In some cases , by aggregating regular investments by many individuals , a retirement plan ( such as a 401(k ) plan ) may qualify to purchase " institutional " shares ( and gain the benefit of their typically lower expense ratios ) even though no members of the plan would qualify individually .
These also include Unit Trusts .
GENERIC INFORMATION —
ADVANTAGES DIVERSITY AND RISK
Section::::Generic information — advantages . Section::::Diversity and risk .
One of the main advantages of collective investment is the reduction in investment risk ( capital risk ) by diversification .
An investment in a single equity may do well , but it may collapse for investment or other reasons ( e.g. , Marconi ) .
If your money is invested in such a failed holding you could lose your capital .
By investing in a range of equities ( or other securities ) the capital risk is reduced .
* The more diversified your capital , the lower the capital risk .
This investment principle is often referred to as spreading risk .
Collective investments by their nature tend to invest in a range of individual securities .
However , if the securities are all in a similar type of asset class or market sector then there is a systematic risk that all the shares could be affected by adverse market changes .
To avoid this systematic risk investment managers may diversify into different non - perfectly - correlated asset classes .
For example , investors might hold their assets in equal parts in equities and fixed income securities .
REDUCED DEALING COSTS
Section::::Reduced dealing costs .
If one investor had to buy a large number of direct investments , the amount this person would be able to invest in each holding is likely to be small .
Dealing costs are normally based on the number and size of each transaction , therefore the overall dealing costs would take a large chunk out of the capital ( affecting future profits ) .
GENERIC INFORMATION —
DISADVANTAGES COSTS Section::::Generic information — disadvantages .
Section::::Costs .
The fund manager managing the investment decisions on behalf of the investors will of course expect remuneration .
This is often taken directly from the fund assets as a fixed percentage each year or sometimes a variable ( performance based ) fee .
If the investor managed their own investments , this cost would be avoided .
Often the cost of advice given by a stockbroker or financial adviser is built into the vehicle .
Often referred to as commission or load ( in the U.S. )
this charge may be applied at the start of the plan or as an ongoing percentage of the fund value each year .
While this cost will diminish your returns it could be argued that it reflects a separate payment for an advice service rather than a detrimental feature of collective investment vehicles .
Indeed , it is often possible to purchase units or shares directly from the providers without bearing this cost .
LACK OF CHOICE Section::::Lack of choice .
Although the investor can choose the type of fund to invest in , they have no control over the choice of individual holdings that make up the fund .
LOSS OF OWNER 'S RIGHTS Section::::Loss of owner 's rights .
If the investor holds shares directly , he has the right to attend the company 's annual general meeting and vote on important matters .
Investors in a collective investment vehicle often have none of the rights connected with individual investments within the fund .
STYLE INVESTMENT AIMS AND BENCHMARKING Section::::Style .
Section::::Investment aims and benchmarking .
Each fund has a defined investment goal to describe the remit of the investment manager and to help investors decide if the fund is right for them .
The investment aims will typically fall into the broad categories of Income ( value ) investment or Growth investment .
Income or value based investment tends to select stocks with strong income streams , often more established businesses .
Growth investment selects stocks that tend to reinvest their income to generate growth .
Each strategy has its critics and proponents ; some prefer a blend approach using aspects of each .
Funds are often distinguished by asset - based categories such as equity , bonds , property , etc .
Also , perhaps most commonly funds are divided by their geographic markets or themes .
Examples
* The largest markets — U.S. , Japan , Europe , UK and Far East are often divided into smaller funds e.g. US large caps , Japanese smaller companies , European Growth , UK mid caps etc .
* Themed funds — Technology , Healthcare , Socially responsible funds .
In most instances whatever the investment aim the fund manager will select an appropriate index or combination of indices to measure its performance against ;
e.g. FTSE 100 .
This becomes the benchmark to measure success or failure against .
ACTIVE OR PASSIVE MANAGEMENT Section::::Active or passive management .
The aim of most funds is to make money by investing in assets to obtain a real return ( i.e. better than inflation ) .
The philosophy used to manage the fund 's investment vary and two opposing views exist .
Active management — Active managers seek to outperform the market as a whole , by selectively holding securities according to an investment strategy .
Therefore , they employ dynamic portfolio strategies , buying and selling investments with changing market conditions , based on their belief that particular individual holdings or sections of the market will perform better than others .
Passive management
— Passive managers stick to a portfolio strategy determined at outset of the fund and not varied thereafter , aiming to minimize the ongoing costs of maintaining the portfolio .
Many passive funds are index funds , which attempt to replicate the performance of a market index by holding securities proportionally to their value in the market as a whole .
Another example of passive management is the " buy and hold " method used by many traditional unit investment trusts where the portfolio is fixed from outset .
Additionally , some funds use a hybrid management strategy of enhanced indexing , in which the manager minimizes costs by broadly following a passive indexing strategy , but has the discretion to actively deviate from the index in the hopes of earning modestly higher returns .
An example of active management success
*
In 1998 Richard Branson ( head of Virgin ) publicly bet Nicola Horlick ( head of SG Asset Management ) that her SG UK Growth fund would not beat the FTSE 100 index , nor his Virgin Index Tracker fund over three years , nor achieve its stated aim to beat the index by 2 % each year .
He lost and paid £ 6,000 to charity .
ALPHA , BETA , R - SQUARED AND STANDARD DEVIATION
Section::::Alpha , Beta , R - squared and standard deviation .
When analysing investment performance , statistical measures are often used to compare ' funds ' .
These statistical measures are often reduced to a single figure representing an aspect of past performance :
* Alpha represents the fund 's return when the benchmark 's return is 0 .
This shows the fund 's performance relative to the benchmark and can demonstrate the value added by the fund manager .
The higher the ' alpha ' the better the manager .
Alpha investment strategies tend to favour stock selection methods to achieve growth .
*
Beta represents an estimate of how much the fund will move if its benchmark moves by 1 unit .
This shows the fund 's sensitivity to changes in the market .
Beta investment strategies tend to favour asset allocation models to achieve outperformance .
* R - squared is a measure of the association between a fund and its benchmark .
Values are between 0 and 1 .
Perfect correlation is indicated by 1 , and 0 indicates no correlation .
This measure is useful in determining if the fund manager is adding value in their investment choices or acting as a closet tracker mirroring the market and making little difference .
For example , an index fund will have an R - squared with its benchmark index very close to 1 , indicating close to perfect correlation ( the index fund 's fees and tracking error prevent the correlation from ever equalling 1 ) .
* Standard deviation is a measure of volatility of the fund 's performance over a period of time .
The higher the figure the greater the variability of the fund 's performance .
High historical volatility may indicate high future volatility , and therefore increased investment risk in a fund .
TYPES OF RISK Section::::Types of risk .
Depending on the nature of the investment , the type of ' investment ' risk will vary .
A common concern with any investment is that you may lose the money you invest — your capital .
This risk is therefore often referred to as capital risk .
If the assets you invest in are held in another currency there is a risk that currency movements alone may affect the value .
This is referred to as currency risk .
Many forms of investment may not be readily salable on the open market ( e.g. commercial property ) or the market has a small capacity and investments may take time to sell .
Assets that are easily sold are termed liquid therefore this type of risk is termed liquidity risk .
CHARGING STRUCTURES AND FEES FEE TYPES Section::::Charging structures and fees .
Section::::Fee types .
For an open - end fund , there may be an initial charge levied on the purchase of units or shares this covers dealing costs , and commissions paid to intermediaries or salespeople .
Typically this fee is a percentage of the investment .
Some vehicles waive the initial charge and apply an exit charge instead .
This may be gradually disappearing after a number of years .
Closed - end funds traded on an exchange are subject to brokerage commissions , in the same manner as a stock trade .
The vehicle will charge an annual management charge or AMC to cover the cost of administering the vehicle and remunerating the investment manager .
This may be a flat rate based on the value of the assets or a performance related fee based on a predefined target being achieved .
Different unit / share classes may have different combinations of fees / charges .
PRICING MODELS Section::::Pricing models .
Open - ended vehicles are either dual priced or single priced .
Dual priced vehicles have a buying ( offer ) price and selling or ( bid ) price .
The buying price is higher than the selling price , this difference is known as the spread or bid - offer spread .
The difference is typically 5 % and may be varied by the vehicle 's manager to reflect changes in the market ; the amount of variation may be limited by the vehicles rules or regulatory rules .
The difference between the buying and selling price includes initial charge for entering the fund .
The internal workings of a fund are more complicated than this description suggests .
The manager sets a price for creation of units / shares and for cancellation .
There is a differential between the cancellation and bid prices , and the creation and offer prices .
The additional units are created are place in the managers box for future purchasers .
When heavy selling occurs units are liquidated from the managers box to protect the existing investors from the increased dealing costs .
Adjusting the bid / offer prices closer to the cancellation / creation prices allows the manager to protect the interest of the existing investors in changing market conditions .
Most unit trusts are dual priced .
Single priced vehicles notionally have a single price for units / shares and this price is the same if buying or selling .
As single prices vehicle ca n't adjust the difference between the buying and selling price to adjust for market conditions , another mechanism , the dilution levy exists .
SICAVs , OEICs and U.S. mutual funds are single priced .
A dilution levy can be charged at the discretion of the fund manager , to offset the cost of market transactions resulting from large un - matched buy or sell orders .
For example , if the volume of purchases outweigh the volume of sales in a particular trading period the fund manager will have to go to the market to buy more of the assets underlying the fund , incurring a brokerage fee in the process and having an adverse effect on the fund as a whole ( " diluting " the fund ) .
The same is the case with large sell orders .
A dilution levy is therefore applied where appropriate and paid for by the investor in order that large single transactions do not reduce the value of the fund as a whole .
INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNISED COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS
* Exchange - traded funds or ETFs — a closed - end fund traded by listed shares on major stock exchanges .
* Real Estate Investment Trusts or REITs — a close - ended fund that invests in real estate .
* Sovereign investment funds US - SPECIFIC
COLLECTIVE
INVESTMENTS Section::::US - specific collective investments .
( Click here for US SEC description of investment company types ) .
* Mutual Funds — Open - ended with a corporate or trust structure .
* Closed - end funds — Closed - ended with corporate structure .
* Unit Investment Trusts — Open - ended with a trust structure and limited duration .
* Exchange - traded funds ( ETFs)—Structured as mutual funds or unit investment trusts , but publicly traded .
UK - SPECIFIC COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS
* Exchange - traded funds ( ETFs)—Open - ended with a corporate structure .
* Investment Trusts — Introduced 1868 .
Closed - ended with corporate structure .
* Tax transparent funds — Introduced 2013 .
* Open - ended investment companies ( OEICs or ICVCs)—Introduced 1997 .
Open - ended with a corporate structure .
*
Unit Trusts — Introduced 1931 .
Open - ended with a trust structure .
* Unitised Insurance Funds — Introduced 1970s .
Open - ended with a life policy structure .
* With - profits policy — Open - ended with a life policy structure .
CANADIAN COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS
* Income Trusts
* Labour Sponsored Funds
* Mutual funds IRELAND SPECIFIC COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS * Common contractual fund ( " CCF " ) * Irish Collective Asset - Management Vehicle ( commonly referred to as an " ICAV " )
* Qualifying investor alternative investment fund ( QIAIF )
* Retail Investor Alternative Investment Fund
* Loan Originating Alternative Investment Fund ( L - QIAIF )
EUROPEAN COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS
* SICAVs * UCITS FRANCE AND LUXEMBOURG * Investment funds
* FCP ( Fonds commun de placement ) ( unincorporated investment fund or common fund ) * SICAF ( Société d'investissement à capital fixe )
( Investment company with fixed capital )
* SICAV ( Société d'investissement à capital variable )
( Investment company with variable capital ) NETHERLANDS AND BELGIUM
* BEVAK ( Investment company with fixed capital )
* BEVEK ( Investment Company with variable capital ) * PRIVAK ( Closed - end investment company ) UKRAINE
* Instytut spilnogo investuvannya , ISI ( Investment Funds )
* Private investment fund ( Payovyi investytsiyny fond )
* Public investment fund ( Korporatyvny investytsiyny fund )
Both funds are run by Investment Company ( KUA - kompania z upravlinnya actyvami).Funds
and companies regulated and supervised by DKTsPFR ( Securities and stock market state commission )
GREECE
Section::::European collective investments .
Section::::Greece .
We could say that a mutual fund is a pool of money which belongs to many investors .
Otherwise a M / F is the common cashier of many investors who trust a third party to operate and manage their wealth .
Moreover , they order this third party which in Greece is called A.E.D.A.K.
( Mutual Fund Management Company S.A. ) to spread their money in many different investment products such as shares , bonds , deposits , repo etc .
Those companies in Greece may provide services according to article 4 of Law 3283/2004 .
People who own units ( shares ) of a mutual fund are called unitholders .
In Greece co - unitholders , which are persons participating in the same units of M / F have exactly the same rights as the unitholder ( according to the Law for the deposits in common account 5638/1932 ) .
The unitholders have to sign and accept the document which describes the purpose of the Mutual Fund , how it operates , and anything concerning the Fund .
This document is the regulation of
the M / F. The property of each M / F by law have to be under the control of a bank legally operating in Greece ( Greek or foreign ) .
The bank is the custodian of the M / F and except of the custody of the fund also controls the lawfulness of all movements of the management company .
The Supervisory and Regulatory Body of M.F. Management Companies and Portfolio Investment Companies is the Greek Capital Market Commission .
It comes under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Economy and controls the operation of all M / Fs available in Greece .
All investors have to be very careful and about the risk they undertake .
They have to have in mind that all investments have a certain degree of risk .
Risk – free investments does not exist .
You can find more about Greek Mutual Funds in the site of the Association of Greek Institutional Investors or the site of Greek ( Hellenic ) Capital Market Commission .
SWITZERLAND
* open - ended
* Anlagefonds ( unincorporated investment fund or common fund ) * SICAV ( Société d'investissement à capital variable ) ( Investment company with variable capital ) * closed - ended
* Kommanditgesellschaft für Kapitalanlagen ( Limited Partnership )
* Société d'investissement à capital fixeSICAF ( Société d'investissement à capital fixe )
( Investment company with fixed capital )
AUSTRALIAN COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS
* Listed investment company or LIC .
Closed - ended collective investment either corporate or trust based .
Available since 1928 .
* Managed Investment Vehicle per s 9 of the Corporations Act ( Cth ) 2001 .
* Unit trusts open - ended trust based investments often called Managed funds , managed investment vehicles .
or unlisted managed funds .
If the managed investment vehicle is open for retail investors , the managed investment vehicle must be registered with ASIC .
An unregistered vehicle has an Trustee whilst a registered vehicle has an Responsible Entity .
OFFSHORE COLLECTIVE INVESTMENTS * Segregated portfolio company a corporate entity for holding various investments under a single legal entity .
SEE ALSO * Closed - end fund * Collective trust fund * Common fund * Fund derivative * Fund governance * Global assets under management * Independent financial adviser
* Investment management
* Mutual fund * Offshore investment * Open - end fund * Separately managed account
* Specialized investment fund
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Answers U.S. SEC Investment Companies , Consumer Information
* Investments UK FSA Consumer Information