COMMANDER - IN - CHIEF OF THE BRITISH ARMED FORCES
The Commander - in - chief of the British Armed Forces , also referred to as commander in chief of the armed forces of the Crown , is a position vested in the British monarch , currently Queen Elizabeth II , who as sovereign and head of state is the " Head of the Armed Forces " .
Long - standing constitutional convention , however , has vested de facto executive authority , by the exercise of Royal Prerogative powers , in the prime minister and the Secretary of State for Defence .
The Prime Minister ( acting with the support of the Cabinet ) makes the key decisions on the use of the armed forces .
The Queen however , remains the ultimate authority of the military , with officers and personnel swearing allegiance only to the monarch .
A new constitutional convention appears to have become enshrined since the 2003 war in Iraq , whereby the UK will only take military action ( other than in circumstances of having to immediately react defensively ) with the consent of the House of Commons .
Ultimately however The Queen can exercise such at will .
As well as the Military the UK Police forces also swear allegiance only to the Monarch , not the Government .
This is to ensure that Government Officials ( including the Prime Minister ) can be arrested for committing indictable offences just as any normal citizen , and are therefore not ' above the law ' unlike the Monarch .
THE CROWN AND GOVERNMENT Section::::The Crown and Government .
The Ministry of Defence is the Government department and highest level of military headquarters charged with formulating and executing defence policy for the Armed Forces ; it employed 103,930 civilians in 2006 .
The department is controlled by the Secretary of State for Defence ( or " the Defence Secretary " ) and contains three deputy appointments : Minister of State for the Armed Forces , Minister for Defence Procurement , and Minister for Veterans ' Affairs .
Responsibility for the management of the forces is delegated to a number of committees : the Defence Council , Chiefs of Staff Committee , Defence Management Board , and three single - service boards .
The Defence Council , composed of senior representatives of the services and the Ministry of Defence , provides the " formal legal basis for the conduct of defence " .
The three constituent single - service committees ( Admiralty Board , Army Board , and Air Force Board ) are chaired by the Secretary of State for Defence .
The Chief of the Defence Staff is the professional head of the Armed Forces and is an appointment that can be held by an Admiral , General or Air Chief Marshal ( four - star officers ) .
Before the practice was discontinued in the 1990s , those who were appointed to the position of CDS ( professional head of the Armed Forces ) had been elevated to the most senior rank in their respective service ( a five - star officer ) .
The CDS , along with the Permanent Under Secretary , are the principal advisers to the departmental minister .
The three services have their own respective professional chiefs ( likewise four - star officers ) : the First Sea Lord who is also Chief of Naval Staff , the Chief of the General Staff and the Chief of the Air Staff .
HISTORIC OFFICE OF COMMANDER - IN - CHIEF Section::::Historic office of Commander - in - Chief .
From 1660 until 1904 the professional head of the Army was known as the Commander - in - Chief and as such had significant independence and power .
Under the Commonwealth Government , the Commander - in - chief was a de facto head of state .
NAVAL , MILITARY AND AIR COMMANDS Section::::Naval , Military and Air commands .
Until 2012 each of the three services also had one or more commands with a ( four - star ) commander - in - chief in charge of operations .
These were , latterly : Commander - in - Chief Fleet ( CINCFLEET – sharing a Command HQ with Commander - in - Chief Naval Home Command ( CINCNAVHOME ) ) , Commander - in - Chief , Land Forces ( CINCLAND ) and Commander - in - Chief Air ( CINCAIR ) .
( At one time there were many more Naval , Military and Air Commands , each with (
in many cases ) their own Commanders - in - Chief . )
Since 2012 , however , full operational command has been vested in the three Chiefs of Staff , and the appointment of distinct Commanders - in - Chief has been discontinued .
This change was implemented in response to the 2011 Levene report , which advised that it would serve to " streamline top - level decision - making , simplify lines of accountability ... , remove duplication between the posts and also provide impetus to the leaning of the senior leadership " .
New three - star appointments ( Fleet Commander , Commander Land Forces ) mirror the old ones , but these are subordinate officers with delegated command responsibility , rather than Commanders - in - Chief .
Command runs from the Ministry of Defence to the Permanent Joint Headquarters which executes operations , excluding NATO - le operations .
COLONIAL GOVERNORS Section::::Colonial Governors .
In the colonies of the English Empire , and subsequently the British Empire , the duties of Lords Lieutenant were generally performed by the Commander - in - Chief or the Governor .
Both offices may have been occupied by the same person .
By way of an example , this is still the case in Britain 's second , and oldest remaining , where the Royal Navy 's headquarters , main base , and dockyard for the North America and West Indies Station was established following independence of the United States of America .
The colony had raised Militia and Volunteer forces since official settlement in 1612 ( with a troop - of - horse added later ) , and a small force of regular infantry from 1701 to 1783 .
A large regular army garrison was built up after 1794 , and the reserve forces faded away following the conclusion of the American War of 1812 as the local government lost interest in paying for their upkeep .
From this point until the 1960s , Governors were almost exclusively senior officers of the Royal Artillery or Royal Engineers who were also military Commanders - in - Chief ( and initially also Vice Admirals ) .
Attempts to rekindle the militia without a Militia Act or funds from the colonial government were made throughout the century under the authorisation of the Governor and Commander - in - Chief , but none proved lasting .
The colonial government was finally compelled to raise militia and volunteer forces ( the Bermuda Militia Artillery and the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps by act in the 1890s ( the Bermuda Cadet Corps , Bermuda Volunteer Engineers , and Bermuda Militia Infantry were added at later dates ) , and these fell under the Governor and Commander - in - Chief , as well as under operational control of his junior , the Brigadier in charge of the Bermuda Command ( or Bermuda Garrison , which included the regular as well as the part - time military ( as opposed to naval ) forces in the colony .
Although the Royal Naval and the regular army establishments have been withdrawn from Bermuda , the Governor of Bermuda remains the Commander - in - Chief ( though most recent office holders have not been career army officers ) of the Royal Bermuda Regiment ( a 1965 amalgam of the BMA and BVRC , which had both been re - organised in line with the Territorial Army after the First World War ) .
SEE ALSO
* Colonel - in - Chief * Commander - in - chief * British Empire REFERENCES