COAST GUARD BEARS
The United States Coast Guard Academy 's intercollegiate sports teams are called the Bears and they compete in NCAA Division III as members of the New England Women 's and Men 's Athletic Conference .
Through the 2016 season , the Bears played football in the New England Football Conference , but after that season moved their football program into the NEWMAC , which started sponsoring the sport in 2017 .
They field 26 varsity teams .
ORIGIN OF THE NAME Section::::Origin of the name .
The academy nickname is the Bears , after the USRC Bear , which made a dramatic rescue in Alaska in 1897 , shortly after the opening of the academy .
In 1926 , then - Cadet Stephen Evans ( a future superintendent of the academy ) brought a live bear to the academy and named it Objee for " Objectionable Presence .
" The tradition of keeping a live bear as the mascot was continued until the City of New London petitioned for its removal in 1984 .
FACILITIES Section::::Facilities .
The athletic facilities have been undergoing major upgrades since 2004 , when the state - of - the - art FieldTurf synthetic surface was installed at Cadet Memorial Field ( home of the football and lacrosse teams ) .
RIVALRIES Section::::Rivalries .
The Bears have an unofficial rivalry with neighboring Connecticut College .
The rivalry is most evident during the Coast Guard – Connecticut College biannual club hockey game which draws large numbers of spectators from both schools .
The Bears also play for the Secretaries Cup , an annual rivalry trophy in football against the Mariners the United States Merchant Marine Academy .
The Bears ' longest - standing football rivalry game is with the Norwich University Cadets , a private military college in Vermont .
Since 1931 , the schools have played for " The Mug , " with a break in the series having taken place between 2005 and 2017 .
VARSITY TEAMS Section::::Varsity teams . !
Men 's !
Women 's SAILING
Section::::Sailing .
The academy boasts a strong sailing tradition and maintains a fleet of over 150 vessels to support the offshore and dinghy teams , in addition to the summer sail training programs .
In 2007 , a USCGA cadet , then a freshman sailor from the class of 2011 , Krysta Rohde , was featured in the " Faces in the Crowd " section of the 27 December edition of Sports Illustrated .
That year Rohde gained recognition by being the first academy cadet and second freshman ever to win the ICSA Women 's Singlehanded National Championship .
In 2016 , the Bears would win the Sperry Women 's National Championship , the schools first team championship in the sport .
CLUB SPORTS Section::::Club sports .
The Coast Guard Academy has five club sports such as men 's and women 's rugby , boxing , men 's ice hockey and triathlon .
RUGBY Section::::Rugby .
In 2006 , the men 's rugby club won the Division II National Championship at Stanford , California , after defeating the University of Northern Colorado .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS