HIT AND RUN
In traffic laws , a hit - and - run is the act of causing a traffic accident and not stopping afterwards .
It is considered a supplemental crime in most jurisdictions .
ADDITIONAL OBLIGATION Section::::Additional obligation .
In many jurisdictions , there may be an additional obligation to exchange information about one 's financial responsibility ( including any applicable insurance ) or to summon emergency services if they are needed .
There may also be requirement to leave a note containing pertinent information if the property owner is not present .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Hit - and - run laws arose from the difficulties that early traffic collision victims faced in identifying perpetrators so that they could be brought to justice .
Apart from the obvious ability of an automobile to flee the scene quickly ( if still driveable ) , drivers often wore driving goggles , vehicles at the time did not have license plates , and roads were unpaved and thus quite dusty .
LEGAL CONSEQUENCES Section::::Legal consequences .
Legal consequences of hit - and - run may include the suspension or cancellation of one 's driver 's license ; lifetime revocation of a driver 's license is possible in certain jurisdictions .
It is frequently considered a criminal offense which can be punished by fines and imprisonment .
Insurance companies often raise the insurance costs or even void the policies of drivers involved in this offense .
Attempts to understand the mental state of the hit and
run driver began soon after the offense became codified and more recently has been explored in an article titled " The Psychology of Hit and Run " ( 2008 ) .
COUNTRY - SPECIFIC
PENALTIES AUSTRALIA Section::::Country - specific penalties .
Section::::Australia .
Under Australian law , a driver involved in a crash must stop at the scene and give their information to all other drivers involved and anyone injured , as well as the owner and driver of any property damaged , and a police officer if : *
Anyone is killed or injured ; * A vehicle involved in the crash is towed or otherwise carried away from the crash by another vehicle ; *
Any other driver involved in the crash does not stop to exchange information ; *
A police officer asks for any of the information .
The demerit point system is used for the commission of traffic offenses in Australia ; for each offense committed , a certain number of points are given , and the accumulation of points can lead to fines and license suspension or revocation .
When a driver fails to stop at the scene and provide the required information to the necessary people , he or she is guilty of a hit and run , which carries a maximum penalty of 20 points .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Hit and run is defined in Canada as failure to stop at the scene of an accident under the Criminal Code and is subject to a penalty of up to 5 years in prison .
If bodily harm or death is caused in the crash and the prosecution can prove that the accused was aware of the bodily harm or death , the maximum penalties are up to 10 years in prison or up to life imprisonment , respectively .
For a person to be convicted of failure to stop at the scene of an accident , the prosecution must prove that the accused was aware of the crash , the accused voluntarily failed to stop and render assistance and the intent for failing to stop was to evade civil or criminal liability .
While the prosecution bears the traditional criminal burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt , the accused is presumed to have intended to evade civil or criminal liability if the prosecution can prove the other elements of the offence .
This reverse onus has been held to be a justified limit under section 1 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .
Canadians are also required to provide their name , address and license number in writing according to the Sec .
252 ( 1 ) of the Criminal Code .
Depending on the provincial law other pieces of information may be requested like : insurance number and license plate .
Car Insurance is mandatory in Canada .
If the accused is also convicted of other offences in relation to the crash , then courts will often make the sentence for hit and run consecutive to the penalties for the other offences , the rationale being that hit and run is often committed with the intent of evading criminal or civil liability .
CHINA Section::::China .
Article 101 of the Road Traffic Safety Law of the People 's Republic of China provides that in a major crash , a hit and run results in revocation of the offender 's driving license , and up to a lifetime ban from obtaining one again .
Article 133 of the Criminal code as of 1997 provides that hit and run after an incident resulting in death , grievous bodily harm or major property damage is punishable with 3 to 7 years ' imprisonment , and fixed - term imprisonment of 3 to 7 years if there was an attempt at escaping the scene of crash or is involved in other especially flagrant circumstances , and fixed - term imprisonment of not less than 7 years if the act of attempted escape results in death .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
Anyone who has caused a traffic crash , or contributed to it , has the duty to identify themselves to the victims or to other contributors .
If the victim is not present ( such as in the case of damage of a parked car ) the one who caused the crash has to wait a certain time .
If the victim does not appear , he has to report the crash at the next police station without delay .
Violation of these rules ( " illicit leaving of the scene of a crash " ) is punishable with prison up to three years or a fine ( article 142 of the Strafgesetzbuch ) .
Different in that it applies to not only to those directly involved in a crash , article 323c states that anyone who fails to provide necessary help in an emergency can be punished with prison up to one year or a fine .
This applies only if providing help is a " reasonable burden"—when it can take place " especially without putting yourself in substantial danger or neglecting other important duties " .
Not being explicitly asked to help is not an acceptable reason not to do so .
In a traffic crash , for example , the actions expected would be securing the site against follow - up crashes , calling emergency services , and providing first aid to your ability until professional help arrives .
HONG KONG Section::::Hong Kong .
Where , owing to the presence of a vehicle on a road , a crash occurs whereby- MACAU Section::::Macau .
Abandoning the victim of a crash is criminally imprisoned for up to 3 years or fined .
SOUTH KOREA Section::::South Korea .
Hit - and - run is outlined in Article 5 - 3 of the Act on the Aggravated Punishment , etc .
of Specific Crimes .
There are two sections to this Act .
If the driver runs away after killing or causing the death of a victim , Section 1 proscribes the minimum sentence as five years in prison ( with a possible 5 million-30 million won fine ) with the maximum being life imprisonment .
If the driver removes the victim from the accident scene and runs away after abandoning the victim , Section 2 proscribes a minimum of three years imprisonment if the victim survives .
If the victim dies , the penalty is either life imprisonment or the death penalty .
TAIWAN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
Section::::Taiwan .
Section::::Administrative penalties .
Article 62 of the Act Governing the Punishment of Violation of Road traffic Regulations proclaimed on 28 December 2005 and effective on 1 July 2006
provides the following administrative penalties : Section 1 :
Without personal injury and death , hit - and - run drivers of motor vehicles are subject to administrative fines of 1000 to 3000 new Taiwan dollars and suspension of their driver licenses for 1 to 3 months .
Section : 4 :
With minor personal injury , hit - and - run drivers of motor vehicles are subject to revocation of their driver licenses , for 1 year pursuant to Section 3 of Article 67 .
With serious personal injury or death , hit - and - run drivers of motor vehicles are subject to revocation of their driver licenses , for lifetime pursuant to Section 1 of Article 67 , but Article 67 - 1 allows a possible waiver after serving the revocation for 12 years if the revocation involved personal death , or 10 years if involving serious personal injury .
CRIMINAL PENALTY Section::::Criminal penalty .
With personal injury or death , hit - and - run drivers of motor vehicles are also subject to imprisonment of 6 months to 5 years pursuant to Article 185 - 4 of the Criminal Code of the Republic of China .
Hit and Run , although illegal , is seldom prosecuted on Taiwan .
Drunk driving has a much more severe penalty so drunk drivers involved in crashes rarely stop to be tested .
CASE LAW Section::::Case law .
On 13 September 1991 in the Taiwan Area , the Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China in its Interpretation 284 considered that revoking a driver license for vehicular hit and run involving personal injury or death would not violate the Constitution of the Republic of China .
On 19 October 2001 in the Taiwan Area , the Judicial Yuan of the Republic of China in its Interpretation 531 further considered that lifetime revocation of a driver license for vehicular hit and run involving personal injury or death would not violate the Constitution of the Republic of China .
However , this Interpretation also suggested relevant authorities in charge to reconsider the lifetime revocation and consider reinstatement for rehabilitated drivers .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The penalties ( and the definition ) of hit - and - run vary from state to state in the United States .
For example , in Virginia , the crime is a felony if the crash causes death , injury , or damage to attended property in excess of a certain dollar amount ; otherwise , it is a misdemeanor .
In California the crime can be an infraction , a misdemeanor , or a felony depending on whether there is property damage or bodily injury .
In Texas , the crime is a third degree felony if the collision involves a fatality or serious bodily injury .
Collisions causing less serious injuries are punishable by imprisonment in the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for not more than five years , or confinement in the county jail for not more than one year , a fine not to exceed $ 5,000 , or both .
Collisions causing $ 200 or more in total damages without injuries are punishable by a class B misdemeanor , and collisions causing less than $ 200 in total damages are a class C misdemeanor .
In New York , leaving the scene of an incident without reporting it is a traffic infraction , and if personal injury is involved , then it becomes a misdemeanor .
There are also significantly higher fines if an animal is injured in the hit and run crash .
REFERENCES