SPRITE ( SOFT DRINK )
Sprite is a colorless , caffeine - free , lemon and lime - flavored soft drink created by The Coca - Cola Company .
It was first developed in West Germany in 1959 as Fanta Klare Zitrone ( " Clear Lemon Fanta " ) and was introduced in the United States under the current brand name Sprite in 1961 as a competitor to 7 Up .
Bottles of Sprite are usually transparent green in color , with a green and yellow label , whereas cans are colored silver , green , and blue , and aluminum bottles have a solid lime green color .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
Sprite advertising often makes use of the portmanteau word lymon , a combination of the words " lemon " and " lime " .
By the 1980s , Sprite had developed a large following among teenagers .
In response , Sprite began to cater to this demographic in their advertisements in 1987 .
" I Like the Sprite In You " was the brand 's first long - running slogan , and many jingles were produced around it before its discontinuation in 1994 .
In 1994 , Sprite revamped their marketing logo , and slogan , as well .
The new , more vibrant logo stood out more on packaging , and featured a blue - to - green gradient with silver " splashes " and subtle white " bubbles " in the background .
The product name , " Sprite " had a blue backdrop shadow on the logo .
The words ; " Great Lymon Taste ! " which had been present on the previous logo , were removed .
This logo was used in the United States until 2006 , and similar variants were used in other countries until this year as well .
The brand 's slogan was changed to ; " Obey Your Thirst " , and jingles containing it became urban - oriented , featuring a hip - hop theme .
One of the first lyrics for the new slogan were : " never forget yourself 'cause first things first , grab a cold , cold can , and obey your thirst . "
Under the new slogan , Sprite tapped into hip - hop culture by leveraging up and coming , as well as underground rap artists including ; LL Cool J , A Tribe Called Quest , KRS - One , Missy Elliott , Grand Puba , Common , Fat Joe , Nas and others in television commercials .
Sprite expanded its urban connections in the late 1990s by featuring both amateur and accomplished basketball players in their advertisements .
To this day , NBA players and hip - hop artists such as LeBron James and Lil Yachty frequently appear in Sprite adverts .
In 1998 , one commercial poked fun at products which featured cartoon mascots in the style of a horror film .
In it , the mascot for a fictitious orange juice drink called " Sun Fizz " comes to life , terrifying the kids and mother , and starts to chase them .
This commercial is also notorious for ending on a cliffhanger which still remains unresolved to this day .
In the 1990s , one of Sprite 's longest - running ad campaigns was " Grant Hill Drinks Sprite " ( overlapping its " Obey Your Thirst " campaign ) , in which the well - liked basketball player 's abilities , and Sprite 's importance in giving him his abilities , were humorously exaggerated .
In 2000 , Sprite commissioned graffiti artist Temper to design limited edition art , which appeared on 100 million cans across Europe .
In 2004 , Coke created Miles Thirst , a vinyl doll voiced by Reno Wilson , used in advertising to exploit the hip - hop market for soft drinks .
In 2006 , a new Sprite logo , consisting of two yellow and green " halves " forming an " S " lemon / lime design , made its debut on Sprite bottles and cans .
The slogan was changed from its long running " Obey Your Thirst " to just " Obey " in the United States and was outright replaced with " Freedom From Thirst " in many countries .
This was the decade 's first major shift in advertising themes .
The " Sublymonal " campaign was also used as part of the alternate reality game the Lost Experience .
This also resurrected the " lymon " word .
Sprite redesigned their label in 2009 , removing the " S " logo .
In France in 2012 , the drink was reformulated removing 30 % of the sugar and replacing it with the sweetener Stevia .
This led to the drink containing fewer calories .
This soon spread to Ireland , the UK and the Netherlands in 2013 .
A further formula change happened in the UK in 2018 .
This formula replaces Stevia with Aspartame and Acesulfame K and has less sugar than before .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations . !
Name ! !
Launched ! !
Notes
The original variety
Sprite without the sugar .
It was originally produced in the United States as " Sugar Free Sprite " in 1974 , then was renamed to " Diet Sprite " in 1983 , with some countries having the drink known as " Sprite Light " ( " Sprite Lite " in the United Kingdom ) .
In September 2004 , it was rebranded as " Diet Sprite Zero " in the US and " Sprite Zero " ( " Sprite Z " in the United Kingdom , until rebranding as Sprite Zero ) in Argentina , Australia , Bolivia , Brazil , China , Colombia , Europe , India , Paraguay , Peru , Uruguay , New Zealand and the UK .
" Diet " was dropped from the product 's name , to become simply " Sprite Zero , " when new logos debuted in June 2006 .
The " Zero " designation for low - calorie sodas from the Coca - Cola Company was first used on Diet Sprite Zero before being used on the flagship Zero product , Coca - Cola Zero .
Sprite with a herb taste .
Only known to be sold in Germany .
Sprite with a more dry taste , which was made exclusively for Japan .
It was marketed alongside the regular variety ( which was known as " Sprite Sparkling Lemon " ) over there .
A Sprite Energy Drink variant sold in Australia until 2006 .
The drink was also turquoise in color , different to how Sprite is usually clear .
Sprite with a minty aftertaste .
Originally released as " Sprite Blue " in Korea in 2002 , and has been released under various names , such as " Sprite Ice " in various countries like Canada , ' " Sprite Ice Cube " in Belgium , " Sprite Ice Blue " in Italy and Chile , " Sprite Icy Mint " in Mainland China , and " Sprite Mynta " in Sweden and Norway .
Sprite with Tropical Flavors , and the first in the Sprite Remix series of sodas sold in the United States .
It was sold from 2003 to 2004 , until being replaced with the " Berryclear " variety .
A Slurpee Variant of Sprite , released in Hong Kong in 2003 .
Sprite with a ginger flavor , which was marketed as having a burning sensation .
It was introduced in Hong Kong in 2003 , and later debuted in China in 2004 .
Sprite with Berry flavors , and the second in the Sprite Remix series of sodas sold in the United States .
It was sold from 2004 to 2005 , until being replaced with the " Aruba Jam " variety .
Sprite with Fruit Flavors , and the last in the Sprite Remix series of sodas sold in the United States .
It was sold from 2005 to 2006 .
A Sprite energy drink variant originally launched in the United Kingdom in 2005 .
Ingredients include glucose , caffeine from green coffee beans and guarana .
It was also released in various other countries , but was discontinued in the UK in 2007 due to poor sales , and that Coca - Cola wanted to focus more on Relentless .
A variant with less carbonation and extra lemon juice .
Was released exclusively in Spain in Spring 2007 .
Chinotto
The name Sprite is known as in some South American countries .
Expected as early as 2008 , special packaging and vending machines were to produce ice in the bottle when it was opened .
Sprite Green
A variant sweetened with Truvia ( a natural zero - calorie sweetener made from stevia ) .
It however , was n't a success and was discontinued not long after being released .
Sprite ( Stevia Formula )
In France in 2012 , Sprite was reformulated removing 30 % of the sugar and replacing it with the sweetener Stevia .
This led to the drink containing fewer calories .
This reformulation soon spread to Ireland , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands in 2013 .
Sprite Cranberry
Sprite
6 Mix Sprite with additional Cherry and Orange Flavors in addition to the Lemon and Lime .
It was released as a collaboration between Sprite and LeBron James in the United States in 2014 .
It was sold again as " Sprite LeBron 's Mix " in 2015 .
Sprite Blast
Sprite with sweet and sour Flavors .
It was released for the Summer of 2014 in the United States , exclusive to 7-Eleven stores ( at time of sale ) and was sold only in 7.5 ounce single cans .
The variety was also released in New Zealand in summer 2017 , and was sold in all sizes .
Sprite Tropical
A Re - Release of Sprite Remix Tropical , it was sold for a limited time in 2015 , and again as " Sprite Tropical Mix " in 2016 .
Sprite Cucumber Sprite with a Cucumber flavor .
Launched in 2017 in Russia and in June 2018 in Romania .
A Zero variety was introduced in the UK in 2018 .
Sprite Cherry Sprite with a Cherry flavor .
Launched in 2017 in the United States as a permanent variety , alongside its Zero counterpart .
MIX by Sprite : Tropic Berry Sprite with a tropical berry flavor .
Similar to Sprite Tropical Mix , and is sold exclusively at McDonald 's .
Sprite Fiber+
SEE ALSO
* Soft drink * Coca - Cola
* J - Hope
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Sprite - Coca - ColaCompany.com