SALMON FISHING IN THE YEMEN Salmon Fishing in the Yemen is a 2011 British romantic comedy - drama film directed by Lasse Hallström and starring Ewan McGregor , Emily Blunt , Kristin Scott Thomas and Amr Waked .
Based on the 2007 novel of the same name by Paul Torday , and a screenplay by Simon Beaufoy , the film is about a fisheries expert who is recruited by a consultant to help realize a sheikh 's vision of bringing the sport of fly fishing to the Yemen desert , initiating an upstream journey of faith to make the impossible possible .
The film was shot on location in London , Scotland , and Morocco from August to October 2010 .
The film premiered at the 2011 Toronto International Film Festival .
The film received generally positive reviews upon its release , and earned $ 34,564,651 in revenue worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Fisheries expert Alfred Jones ( Ewan McGregor ) receives an email from financial adviser Harriet Chetwode - Talbot ( Emily Blunt ) , seeking advice on a project to bring salmon fishing to the Yemen — a project being bankrolled by a wealthy Yemeni sheikh and supported by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office .
Alfred dismisses the project as " fundamentally unfeasible " because Yemen can not provide the necessary environment for salmon .
Meanwhile , the British Prime Minister 's press secretary Patricia Maxwell ( Kristin Scott Thomas ) suggests the salmon fishing story to the Prime Minister 's office as a positive story to help improve relations between Britain and the Islamic world .
Alfred meets with Harriet to discuss the project , but despite Harriet correcting his misconceptions of the Yemen environment , Alfred is convinced that the project is foolhardy .
Alfred 's boss , pressured by Patricia , forces Alfred to accept a position on the project .
Alfred considers resigning rather than ruin his reputation in the scientific community , but is convinced by his wife that they need his income and pension .
Harriet arranges for Alfred to meet the sheikh ( Amr Waked ) at his estate in the Scottish Highlands .
The sheikh is excited to meet Alfred , the inventor of the " Woolly Jones " fishing fly .
While the sheikh acknowledges that the project may sound crazy , he still believes that fishing is a noble pursuit that promotes harmony and requires immense faith .
After his wife accepts a position in Geneva , Alfred devotes himself to the salmon project .
Although painfully shy , he enjoys working with Harriet and they begin to make progress .
Their enthusiasm is interrupted , however , when Harriet learns that her new boyfriend , British special forces captain Robert Meyers ( Tom Mison ) , is missing in action .
Devastated , Harriet withdraws to her apartment .
When Alfred visits her , she gets upset , thinking he just wants her to return to work , but then she realizes he has come to comfort her , and the two embrace .
Meanwhile , the sheikh continues his work , despite radicals who accuse him of introducing Western ways to their region .
Patricia informs the sheikh that because of opposition to removing salmon from British rivers they will need to use farmed salmon .
The sheikh does not believe that salmon bred in captivity will survive and rejects Patricia 's offer , ending the British government 's involvement in the project .
Alfred resigns his government job to continue with the project .
After a confrontation with his wife in which he realizes that their marriage is over and that he is in love with Harriet , Alfred convinces the sheikh to give the farmed salmon a try .
As the two are fishing , a Yemeni radical attempts to assassinate the sheikh , who is saved by Alfred casting his fishing line towards the assassin .
Soon after , they return to the Yemen , where Harriet and Alfred continue to grow closer .
After a moonlight swim , he asks her if there was a " theoretical possibility " of the two of them ending up together .
She accepts with a kiss on his cheek , but says she will need some time .
At a press conference in Yemen with the Foreign Secretary , Patricia reunites Harriet and Robert , who survived the antiterrorism operation .
The PR stunt leaves Alfred heartbroken .
That night , Harriet realizes her feelings for Robert have changed , and when Alfred gets a text message from his wife asking him to return , he declines .
The following day the fish are released from their holding tanks .
The fish swim upstream and everyone celebrates the success of the project .
While Robert and the foreign minister fly - fish for the photographers , terrorists break into the dam upstream and open the flood gates .
Although most people survive the resulting flash flood , the valley is left in ruins .
The sheikh blames himself for the tragedy , and vows to rebuild — this time with the support of the local community .
The next day , as Harriet prepares to leave with Robert , she approaches Alfred to say goodbye .
Just then they see a salmon jumping from the water , indicating that some fish survived .
Alfred tells Harriet he will stay and help them rebuild .
Harriet asks if he will need a partner — and Alfred realizes she is talking about herself .
They embrace , and then hold hands while looking out over the river .
CAST
* Ewan McGregor as Alfred " Fred " Jones * Emily Blunt as Harriet Chetwode - Talbot * Kristin Scott Thomas as Patricia Maxwell
* Amr Waked as Sheikh Muhammed bin Zaidi
bani Tihama
* Rachael Stirling as Mary Jones * Catherine Steadman as Ashley
* Tom Mison as Robert Mayers * Hugh Simon as Foreign Secretary * Conleth Hill as Bernard Sugden * Tom Beard as Peter Maxwell * Steven Blake as Cabinet Minister *
Nayef Rashed as Rebel Leader
* Waleed Akhtar as Essad * Pippa Andre as Intern * Simone Liebman as Tourist
*
Colin Kilkelly as Journalist * James Cutting as Journalist
* Wadah Almaqtari as Tribes Man * Mohammed Awadh as Tribes Man
* Hamza Saeed as Tribes Man * Wail Hajar as Tribes Man * Hamish Gray as Malcolm * Abdul Alhumikani as Tribes Man PRODUCTION SCREENPLAY Section::::Production .
Section::::Screenplay .
The screenplay for Salmon Fishing in the Yemen was written by Simon Beaufoy , based on the novel by Paul Torday .
The epistolary novel won the 2007 Bollinger Everyman Wodehouse Prize , and the 2008 Waverton Good Read Award .
Through a series of letters and documents , Torday creates a political satire that focused more on the " art of political spin " than on the force of the human spirit .
Beaufoy enjoyed the challenge of transforming a fairly complex novel written in an unusual format — a series of emails , text messages , interviews , and testimony extracts — into a film .
Beaufoy acknowledged , " I just love adapting material that allows room for creativity and allows room for me to be very present in the process , I suppose .
Sometimes when you 're adapting something classic and famous you have to adopt a different attitude , to something like Salmon Fishing where it had such an unusual narrative and such an unusual structure , that you got quite a to do interesting things with it . "
Beaufoy integrated the emails , text messages , and chat texts into the film 's narrative .
Beaufoy 's screenplay is decidedly different from the novel in several respects .
The most obvious difference is that his press secretary is a woman , played by Kristin Scott Thomas , whereas in the novel , the character is a man , Peter Maxwell .
Where the novel focuses on political satire , the film is more about a man who decides to change direction in his life .
In the novel , Jones is noticeably older than the film character , and the romantic subplot with Harriet is kept in the background because of the political satire .
By making Jones younger , Beaufoy added a " quirky flair " to the character that gives the audience a " completely different experience in watching a man overcome himself to achieve happiness . "
Beaufoy noted , " That 's the difference when reading the book .
You can perceive specific conflicts , but when it 's onscreen you have to create something different , something the audience can see and feel and root for . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
For director Lasse Hallström , Ewan McGregor and Emily Blunt were his " first choices " to play the leading roles .
" They brought the lightness and the humour to the material , " Hallström later observed .
He also felt fortunate to get Kristin Scott Thomas to play the role of the bossy press secretary , Patricia Maxwell , recalling , " I knew she could be funny , as most actors can , but she brought that seriousness combined with a bit of heart . "
For Hallström , it was that combination of humour and seriousness that allowed the actress to capture the balance between the film 's sentiment and political satire .
Egyptian actor Amr Waked was cast in the role of the sheikh .
Waked has enjoyed major success and fame in his own country and throughout the Arabic - speaking world .
English - speaking audiences may recognize him as the fundamentalist Muslim cleric in the 2005 film Syriana and the HBO series House Of Saddam .
FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
Salmon Fishing in the Yemen was shot on location in London , Scotland , and Morocco .
Scenes set in Yemen were filmed in Ouarzazate in the Moroccan Atlas Mountains .
The restaurant scene in London was filmed at the Oxo Tower .
The Sheikh 's house in Scotland was filmed at Ardverikie House .
Reshooting and water tank work was filmed at Black Hangar Studios in the UK .
Principal photography started on 6 August 2010 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Music for the film was composed and orchestrated by Dario Marianelli .
The score features Leo Abrahams ( guitar ) , Dirk Campbell ( woodwind ) , Giles Lewin ( oud ) , and the BBC Concert Orchestra , conducted by Benjamin Wallfisch .
The original soundtrack album was released on 20 March 2012 by Lakeshore Records .
The Scottish folksong " Mairi 's Wedding " by The Clancy Brothers , which is played over one scene , and " Where You Go " by The Young Romans , the song played over the end credits , are not included on the album .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film received generally favourable reviews from critics .
In his review in the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Turan called the film a " pleasant fantasy " and a " charming film whose few attempts at seriousness are best forgotten or ignored . "
Turan praised the performances of Emily Blunt and Ewan McGregor , concluding In her review for The Washington Post , Ann Hornaday gave the film two and a half out of four stars , calling the film an " absurdist but gently winning romantic comedy " that " works a strange kind of wonder " .
Hornaday praised the director 's " assured hand and feather - light touch " , as well as the acting performances by Ewan McGregor and Emily Blunt , who finds " an easygoing rhythm with her leading man " .
Hornaday continued : Hornaday found Salmon Fishing in the Yemen a " surprisingly lush , endearing little film , in which a swelling sense of romanticism thoroughly banishes even the most far - fetched improbabilities . "
In his review for The Telegraph , Robbie Collins gave the film three out of five stars , calling it " cinema at its most easily digestible " with a cast that is as " unthreateningly attractive as its sense of humour is cosily inclusive .
"
Collins concluded that Salmon Fishing in the Yemen is a " disarmingly nice hour and three quarters of gentle romance and even gentler comedy . "
The film received some negative reviews .
Peter Bradshaw from The Guardian , who gave the film two out of five stars , wrote that it " feels as if you 've seen it many times before " .
According to Bradshaw , the weakest scenes of the film involve the ferocious government PR chief ( Kristin Scott Thomas ) , with " much lip - pursing and eye - rolling , but nothing funny or believable in the script for her to say .
" On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a 67 % positive rating among critics , based on 139 reviews .
The film holds a score of 58 on Metacritic , based on 35 reviews .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
As of June 2012 , the film has grossed $ 34,564,651 .
The film opened in 18 cinemas so in the United States on 9 March 2012 , taking in $ 225,000 for the three - day weekend .
The film expanded to 483 cinemas by the end of March , when it had grossed over $ 3 million .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
In 2012 , the film was nominated for the European Film Awards People 's Choice Award .
The film was also nominated for 3 Golden Globe Awards including Best Motion Picture - Comedy or Musical , Best Actor - Comedy or Musical for McGregor , and Best Actress - Comedy or Musical for Blunt .
SEE ALSO * Water supply and sanitation in Yemen
REFERENCES Notes Citations EXTERNAL LINKS