METRO :
LAST LIGHT Metro
: Last Light is a post - apocalyptic - themed , first - person shooter video game with stealth and survival horror elements .
It was developed by Ukrainian studio 4A Games , published by Deep Silver , distributed by Square Enix in North America for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in May 2013 .
A remastered version of the game was released for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One in August 2014 as Metro :
Last Light Redux within the Metro Redux package .
A sequel to the video game Metro 2033 , its story follows Artyom , a Ranger living in Moscow 's metro system after a destructive nuclear war .
Tasked with finding the mysterious Dark Ones , Artyom must venture to different parts of the metro system , and the surface filled with radiated gases , and fight against different factions and mutated monsters .
The game improves on various gameplay mechanics of 2033 , and introduces elements such as weapon customization .
Developed by a team of about 80 people , Last Light is a direct sequel to 2033 , with franchise creator Dmitry Glukhovsky writing the game 's dialogue and main story outline .
Multiplayer modes were planned but were eventually scrapped in order to focus on single - player , which the developers hoped would " rekindle memories of Half - Life 2 " .
Originally set to be published by THQ , which provided a very limited budget for the game 's development , Koch Media acquired it after THQ 's bankruptcy .
A Wii U version was planned but was ultimately canceled .
The game received generally positive reviews from critics .
Praise was focused largely on its atmosphere , world design , tone , graphics , and gameplay , while criticism was directed particularly at the artificial intelligence and technical issues .
The pre - order bonus Ranger mode , marketed as the definitive way of playing the game , triggered controversy .
The game was a commercial success , with its first - week retail sales in the US surpassing the lifetime retail sales of 2033 .
A sequel , is set to be released in 2019 .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Like its predecessor Metro 2033 , Metro : Last Light is played from the perspective of Artyom , the player - character .
The story takes place in post - apocalyptic Moscow , mostly inside the metro system , but occasionally missions bring the player above ground .
Combat alternates between the player fighting mutants and hostile humans .
Areas are larger in Last Light compared to 2033 , and the game encourages exploration by having multiple routes .
The game offers more freedom to players , allowing them to utilize different tactics to combat enemies .
It features destructible environments , in which certain objects , such as pillars , collapse after being shot .
Numerous diary entries , written by Artyom , providing additional insight regarding the game 's story , are scattered throughout environments for players to collect .
As a first - person shooter , Metro : Last Light features a variety of firearms , some fictional and some based on real weapons , which the player uses in combat .
The game 's protagonist , Artyom , also has the ability to kill an enemy directly with his melee weapon .
Artyom has three weapons slots .
Players can put any weapon into these slots without restriction .
Players have access to four different secondary weapons , including throwing knives , claymores , incendiary grenades , and hand grenades .
Mutants do not possess weapons and tend to physically attack the player in swarms , while humans fight with the same firearms available to the player .
The player can knock out or kill most human enemies instead of shooting them , using stealth to avoid detection .
As enemies are inefficient in spotting the player character in darkness , players can turn off oil lamps and light bulbs to gain an advantage over their opponents .
In the post - apocalyptic environment , ammunition is a rare and essential commodity .
Pre - apocalypse , military - grade ammunition is used as currency .
Players can avoid consuming all the valuable currency by using lower quality bullets made within the Metros .
Due to the scarcity of ammunition , a crucial aspect of gameplay is scavenging .
The player can loot corpses and the environment for spare ammunition , as well as weapons and other items .
The military - grade ammunition can be used to purchase other ammunition , weapons , and items within most of the Metro stations .
Weapon attachments , such as scopes and silencers , which improve weapon efficiency , can be purchased with these bullets .
The game 's locations reflect the dark atmosphere of real metro tunnels , with added survival horror elements .
Paranormal phenomena , such as shadow figures , hallucinations , and unexplained noises are present , and , for the most part , the player has to rely on their lighter and rechargeable flashlight to navigate the darkness .
Locations ' layout is often intricate , and the game lacks any form of map or objective marker , leaving the player to try finding their objectives with only a compass .
The surface is more lethal than the metro system .
Featuring a day - night cycle , and a dynamic weather system , these sections are severely irradiated and a gas mask must be worn at all times because of the toxic air .
The player must collect air filters for the gas mask .
These last several minutes each , and are automatically replaced provided the player has more in reserve .
Players are also tasked to wipe off the dirt and blood splatter that collects on the gas mask .
There is no head up display indicator to tell how long the player has until the gas mask 's filters begin to fail — rather , a timer on the character 's wristwatch shows how long until the current filter expires .
The watch also serves to indicate to a player if they have been exposed to enemy attention .
With every weapon , the bullets are ( partly ) visible , informing the player that their weapon is about to run out of ammunition and they have to reload .
Instead of head up display the game makes use of audio and visual cues to present information to players .
There are certain subtle moral choices in the game that provide karma .
Good karma can be acquired by good actions , such as rescuing people from enemy characters , or sparing enemy soldiers .
Bad karma can be acquired from evil actions , such as killing people randomly or stealing things .
Karma affects the ending that the player experiences .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Metro :
Last Light takes place in 2034 , one year after the events of Metro 2033 , following the ending of the original novel in which Artyom 's missile strike against the Dark Ones — mysterious beings that seemingly threatened the survivors of a nuclear war living in the Moscow Metro — occurred .
The Rangers , a neutral peacekeeping force that operates throughout the system , have since occupied the D6 military facility Artyom visited during the first game .
This is a huge , and not fully explored pre - war bunker , and Artyom , now a Ranger himself , remains unsure whether killing the Dark Ones was the correct decision .
Rumors of D6 's discovery and its great riches have spread around the Metro ; rival factions , such as the Soviet Red Line and Nazi Fourth Reich , hope to seize the bunker and its contents .
Khan , a wandering mystic , informs Artyom and the Rangers that a single Dark One survived the missile strike .
Khan believes that it is the key to humanity 's future , and wants to communicate with it ; Colonel Miller , the Ranger 's leader , wants to eliminate it as a potential threat .
Miller sends Artyom to the surface , accompanied by Miller 's daughter Anna , the Rangers ' best sniper , to kill the Dark One .
Artyom finds the Dark One , a child , but is captured by soldiers of the Fourth Reich .
Pavel Morozov , a captured Red Line soldier , and Artyom escape through the Metro tunnels and across the devastated surface .
When they reach the Red Line , however , Pavel is revealed to be a high - ranking officer ; he detains Artyom to learn more about the Rangers and the Dark One .
Artyom escapes and races Pavel 's forces to locate the Dark One and Anna , who has been kidnapped by Lesnitsky , an ex - Ranger and Red Line spy .
En route , he finds a contingent of Red Line forces massacring the inhabitants of a station , supposedly to contain a mysterious epidemic .
It was the Red Line that introduced the virus to the station – weaponized Ebola acquired from the D6 vault by Lesnitsky .
Artyom finds Anna and frees her
but they are exposed to the virus and are quarantined after the rescue .
Afraid that she will die , Anna , seduces Artyom .
After they test negative for the virus , Artyom again encounters Khan .
They locate the young Dark One , and in a series of hallucinatory flashbacks , Artyom recalls that he was saved by a Dark One as a child ; he was psychically linked to the Dark Ones , intended to form a bridge between their species and his .
Artyom vows to make amends by protecting the little Dark One , and the two travel to Polis , the Metro 's central area , where a peace conference regarding D6 between the Rangers , Red Line , the Reich , and neutral Hansa is taking place .
Artyom defeats Lesnitsky and Pavel during the trip .
Along the way , the little Dark One senses that there is a group of hibernating Dark Ones in D6 .
After arriving at Polis , the little Dark One uses his telepathic abilities to make the Red Line leader , Chairman Moskvin , publicly confess that the peace conference is a diversion to enable General Korbut to seize D6 .
Artyom and the rest of the Rangers rush to the bunker to make a final stand against Korbut 's army but are incapacitated by an armored train ramming into their station .
Red Line soldiers surround and prepare to execute Artyom and Miller .
The karma the player has acquired determines the ending .
In the " bad " ending , Artyom destroys D6 to prevent Korbut from using the facility to wipe out the remnants of the other factions and possibly humanity , resulting in the deaths of himself , the surviving Rangers , and the Red Line forces .
Later , Anna is shown telling their son of Artyom 's bravery .
In the " good " ending , later revealed as the canonical ending , Artyom prepares to destroy the bunker but is stopped by the little Dark One , who , along with the awakened Dark Ones , defeats Korbut 's army .
Artyom calls the little Dark One humanity 's " last light of hope " .
In both endings , the young Dark One leaves with the surviving Dark Ones to find safety , while promising that they will come back in the future to help rebuild the world .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The Ukraine - based lead developer 4A Games made the game with a team of more than 80 people .
A sequel to Metro 2033 written by Russian author Dmitry Glukhovsky , Last Light , is not related to his next book Metro 2034 .
Instead , it serves as a direct sequel to the first game , with the majority of the ideas created by 4A Games .
According to Huw Beynon , head of communications for of THQ , the team chose not to make a video game adaption of 2034 as they thought 2034s tone was drastically different from its predecessor .
He described it as an " art - house thriller " , and believed that , unlike the first game , it could not be converted successfully into a video game .
However , Glukhovsky offered creative input to the project and wrote a brief outline of the game 's story , as well as the game 's dialogue , which used 3,000 spreadsheet cells in Excel .
The team chose the bad ending of 2033 , as they believed that it offered an interesting beginning for Last Light , and is consistent with the novel 's dark and depressing tone .
Glukhovsky claimed that the story would explore the theme of redemption , people repeating their mistakes , and the idea of having a " second chance " .
The Artyom character also shifted to become more mature and experienced .
However , he remained a silent character as the team thought that having him speak would not contribute to his character development and would interfere with the atmosphere and morality system .
One of the key goals of 4A Games was to improve and refine numerous aspects of 2033 which THQ described as a " flawed masterpiece " .
The strong focus on atmosphere was retained , but the team overhauled numerous gameplay mechanics .
The game 's shooting mechanics were improved , and the firearms featured in the game were no longer underpowered .
The animation system was reworked and more visual effects were added .
The game 's artificial intelligence was also refined to become more responsive to players ' actions .
After hearing from players about 2033s bullet - based economic system , the team decided to keep the feature in Last Light but improve the explanation about how it worked so that players would not be confused by it .
In addition , the team revealed that they would not westernize the franchise to attract a larger audience .
Instead , they would overhaul the game 's controls to make it more accessible .
The team also drastically improved the game 's stealth sections .
The core philosophy in designing these sections was " fun " ; players would not be punished too harshly if they made any mistakes , such as making too much noise .
As a result , the alertness of the artificial intelligence features several different levels , making the game more realistic .
A competitive multiplayer mode was originally planned that was said to be unique to the Metro series , and would not simply include typical multiplayer modes like team deathmatch or Capture the Flag .
However , it was eventually cancelled ; but the possibility of having a multiplayer mode remained , and it could be developed after the game 's release .
Another of the team 's goals was to make players feel unsettled after playing the game , and present gameplay moments that would make them worry and feel vulnerable .
The team incorporated survival horror elements into the game , which were also used in the first game .
The game was described by THQ as their own " bid to combat shooter fatigue " using its heavy single - player story focus .
According to Beynon the game 's philosophy is the complete opposite of the Call of Duty franchise , which was described as short , linear , and filled with " filler content " that would only be a tutorial for the multiplayer content .
The team hoped to have most moments featured in the game " narrative - driven " , and that all the enemy encounters in the game are designed to be different from each other .
They hoped that by offering a unique experience with each encounter , they would be remembered by players .
They hoped that the game would " rekindle memories of Half - Life 2 " .
The world is created to be believable .
Glukhovsky included numerous side stories in the game , and different kinds of dramas surrounding the game 's four factions .
He hoped that through this approach , the game would have more depth than typical first - person shooters , and make the game feel genuinely realistic .
Moral choices return in the game .
According to 4A , these choices are very subtle , so that they would not " gamify " the concept .
It is a method carried out by 4A to create a sense of verisimilitude to the world , which will then make the decision more " genuine " .
To achieve naturalism , Andrey Prokhorov , the game 's creative director , intentionally removed most aspects of a typical head up display as they considered it a barrier preventing players from immersing themselves into the world , and that having it would destroy the game 's atmosphere .
Prokhorov noted that adding numerous graphical and audio cues required additional time and effort , but he claimed that should they have sufficient time , the team may not make any head up display at all .
Last Light is powered by 4A Games ' own in - house engine , 4A Engine .
Beynon claimed that with the engine it was the best looking game currently available on the market , especially for personal computers .
The team also worked to improve the game 's lighting and destruction system and introduced a larger variety of color palette .
The game was originally set to be released for Nintendo 's Wii U , and the title was included in the Wii U show - reel , though THQ has since stated that the game may not be released for that platform .
Regarding the possibility of the game coming to the Wii U , 4A Games chief technical officer Oles Shishkovtsov said the Wii U has a " horrible , slow CPU " .
His colleague , Huw Beynon , reiterated the sentiment , telling NowGamer that there would not be a Wii U version of Metro :
Last Light , because the studio " could n't justify the effort required " and they " just figured it was n't worth pursuing at this time " .
According to THQ , 4A experimented with the Wii U development kit , but later gave up this version of the game during its early stages of development .
THQ was the publisher of the first game , but the studio put little effort into helping the game 's development , leading to numerous technical issues and a lack of polish .
However , the game 's sales surprised THQ , and as a result , the publisher considered the first game a missed opportunity , and began to treat Metro as a franchise .
Danny Bilson , then CEO of THQ , promised that the company would offer 4A more support and dedicate more resources in both the game 's actual development and its marketing .
Former THQ President Jason Rubin offered details of extremely difficult working conditions and demands put on the 4A Games team while completing the game .
Their office was freezing due to frequent power failures , and the team was forced to smuggle computer equipment into the offices to avoid corrupt customs officials .
Rubin added that the publisher offered an unreasonably small budget to the development team , accounting for only 10 % of its competitor 's budget and that their workspace was so crowded and small that he compared it to " a packed grade school cafeteria " , and an " [ underutilized ] gym at EA Los Angeles " .
Rubin praised the team for producing a game that successfully achieved high critical praise in spite of the harsh working conditions .
According to Andrew Prokhorov , Rubin was the only THQ president that to visit the studio .
He noted that the team " deserve the ratings [ they ] get " and " need no indulgence " from consumers who do not care about their working conditions .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
Last Light title was first leaked as Metro 2034 , a name used by 4A Games internally .
THQ officially revealed the actual title in May 2012 .
In November 2012 , THQ announced that it had delayed the game 's release until March 2013 in order to give the development team more time to polish the game further .
In December 2012 , the game 's original publisher , THQ , entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy .
Metro :
Last Light , along with other THQ properties and studios , went to auction on 22 January 2013 .
GameStop temporarily removed the game from its store to prevent customers from being misled by the game 's uncertain release , The auction did not affect the progress of the game 's development significantly .
Clearlake and Koch Media , the latter of which was originally set to distribute the title in Italy and Spain , participated in the auction .
Koch Media eventually acquired the rights to the Metro franchise for $ 5.9 million .
Koch was interested in the title as the game was already playable at the time and they were familiar with the development team , whose members worked on , a game published by Koch Media 's label Deep Silver .
After the auction , Deep Silver announced that the title would be released on 14 May 2013 in North America , 16 May 2013 in Australia and New Zealand , and 17 May 2013 in Europe for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 .
It was released for OS X on 10 September 2013 ,
Linux on 5 November 2013 , and the title was bundled with Valve Corporation 's prototype of Steam Machine .
Players who purchased the game via Steam got a free digital copy of Metro 2033 the novel .
A digital graphic novel titled The Gospel According to Artyom , which tells the events that take place between 2033 and Last Light , was published by Dark Horse Comics and was a pre - order exclusive .
A novelization of the game , written by Glukhovsky , was released as Metro 2035 .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
Those who pre - ordered the game received a limited edition of Metro :
Last Light that featured a code for the downloadable content ( DLC )
Ranger Mode , a setting for greater game difficulty , as well as a unique gun and in - game currency .
Ranger Mode encompasses the same campaign , but with the lack of a HUD or cross hairs , while the plethora of ammunition and resources has been reduced severely , making the player feel fully immersed in the game 's world .
It was marketed as " the way [ the game ] was meant to be played " .
The game 's implementation of Ranger Mode caused negative reactions in the gaming community .
Deep Silver responded by saying that they were required by retailers to provide pre - order exclusive game content , and that Ranger Mode was the best choice as only the most loyal fans would likely pre - order the game .
Additionally , four DLC packs were released .
The first pack , the Faction Pack , was to be available in June 2013 , however the release date was pushed back to July 2013 .
This pack contains three bonus single - player missions , with the player playing as a Red Line Sniper , a Fourth Reich ' Heavy ' soldier , and a Polis Ranger in training , with new weapons not found in the main storyline .
The other three packs were released within 60 days of releasing the Faction Pack .
The second pack , the Tower Pack , gives single - player challenge missions that have online leaderboards .
The third pack , the Developer Pack , features a shooting gallery , a combat simulator , an in - game museum , and a single - player mission titled " The Spiders ' Nest " .
Finally , the fourth pack , the Chronicles Pack , features three additional single - player missions that contain three characters from the main storyline , Khan , Pavel , and Anna , adding in extra background story information about the world .
Players can buy a season pass , which gives them all 4 DLCs at a discounted price .
It also contains a limited edition , in - game automatic shotgun called the Abzats , and a light machine gun that was previously only available via pre - order from select retailers , the RPK .
REDUX VERSION Section::::Redux version .
A new version of the game for the eighth generation of consoles was not originally planned .
However , on 22 May 2014 , a remastered version of the game was announced .
It was released on 26 August 2014 in North America , 29 August 2014 in Europe , and 4 September 2014 in Australia for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One .
Redux adds all the DLC and graphical improvements .
The compilation package , titled Metro Redux , included both the remastered versions of 2033 and Last Light .
A demo of the Redux version , which allows players to play through the first third of the game , was released for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on 2 June 2015 .
Last Light Redux was released as a DRM - free game on GOG.com in May 2015 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Metro :
Last Light received positive reviews from critics , with most complimenting the graphics and world design , but criticizing the linear sequences .
The game was nominated for Best Shooter for Spike 's 2013 VGX game awards , and Xbox 360 Game of the Year by GameSpot .
The gameplay was generally well received .
Critics praised 4A Games for fixing the apparent gameplay missteps featured in its predecessors , and noted that the combat was improved , satisfying and riveting .
Jeff Marchiafava noted that the gameplay is on par with its competitors .
However , some noted that the game lacked innovation and was generally too conservative .
Many applauded the game for allowing both stealth and a more aggressive approach towards missions , and that stealth and gunplay were described as tense and challenging respectively .
The game 's more accessible nature received mixed reviews .
Some thought that it removed the frustration featured in the first game , while some criticized it for being too simple .
Rich Stanton in particular criticized the game for compromising in order to attract a wider audience , though Patrick Klepek from Giant Bomb thought that the charm of the first game remained undiminished in Last Light .
Many critics considered stealth the definitive way to play the game as it matches the overall tone .
The bullet economy system was praised for being " unique " .
Some journalists also noted several technical problems with the game , singling out the Windows version , and many criticized the artificial intelligence for being unrefined .
The boss battles were also criticized for being frustrating .
The monster characters attracted criticism for not being threatening in terms of their appearance , and too difficult to defeat , with Rich Stanton from Eurogamer describing them as creatures from " a poor man 's Doom " .
Some critics criticized the presence of invisible walls and inaccessible paths , which led to frustration and annoyance .
The game 's audio was also praised for being coherent with its graphics , gameplay , and atmosphere .
The story received mixed critical reviews .
Some critics believed that the story was excellently - written , with interesting characters , and meaningful character interactions , which added additional depth to the game 's world .
According to Phillip Kollar from Polygon , the game successfully allows players to have " real sympathy " towards its characters , but Artyom was described as an " empty shell " by PC Gamers Marsh Davies .
Some felt that the story was intricate , compelling , engaging , and interesting , with some genuinely touching moments , while others criticized it for being predictable and uneven .
The ambient dialogue was described as the game 's " best stories " by Stanton , though he noted that they are easily missed .
The voice - acting received mixed reviews .
Some critics called it " top - notch " , while some called it " bad " .
The game 's world design and atmosphere received great critical reviews .
Many critics agreed that the game had successfully built up tension through the game 's conversations between characters and the resource management mechanics , which enables players to feel threatened by the state of the world .
The world was thought to be more " alive " than its predecessor , and critics praised the development team for creating distinct locations , and turning typical gritty colors featured in many games into something refreshing and stunning .
The depiction of the world and 4A 's vision of an apocalypse was applauded for delivering a sense of sadness and desperation .
The game 's attention to detail was widely praised , and the surface area , in particular , was applauded .
Critics thought that these sequences offered visual variety , and some " genuine terror " moments .
Jim Sterling from Destructoid singled out the game 's multiple flashback scenes , which he described as " harrowing " .
The Redux version received positive reviews from critics .
They praised the game 's overall atmosphere and gameplay , but criticized the graphical update , which was considered insignificant .
According to Mikel Reparaz , the game 's visual update was disappointing as it did not look better than the original PC version .
Nevertheless , it was described as the " definitive version " of Last Light to play because of the inclusion of all of the previously - released downloadable content .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Metro :
Last Light was the best - selling retail video game in the UK in its week of release , but it failed to outpace the week one sales of 2033 .
The first - week retail sales of the game in the US surpassed the lifetime retail sales of 2033 .
It was the sixth best - selling retail game in the US in its month of release according to NPD Group .
While the exact sales of the game have not been revealed , Deep Silver announced that the Metro Redux collection sold more than 1.5 million copies .
SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
Metro Exodus was announced on 11 June 2017 at Microsoft 's press conference during E3 2017 .
The game is scheduled to be released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on February 22 , 2019 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS