CHARLOTTE METROPOLITAN AREA
The Charlotte metropolitan area ( also Metrolina , Charlotte Metro , or Charlotte USA ) is a metropolitan area / region of North and South Carolina within and surrounding the city of Charlotte .
Located in the Piedmont , it is the largest in the Carolinas , and the fourth largest metropolitan area in the Southeastern region of the United States behind , Miami , Atlanta , and Tampa .
The Charlotte metropolitan area is well known for its auto racing history ( especially NASCAR ) .
The region is headquarters to 8 Fortune 500 and 7 Fortune 1000 companies including Bank of America , Duke Energy , Sealed Air Corporation , Nucor Steel , and Lowe 's Home Improvement Stores .
Additional headquarters include Harris Teeter , Food Lion , Cheerwine and Sundrop .
It is home to one of the world 's busiest airports , Charlotte Douglas International Airport , and is also the Carolinas ' largest manufacturing region .
The Charlotte – Concord – Gastonia Metropolitan Statistical Area ( MSA ) is defined as seven counties in North Carolina and three counties in South Carolina .
The population of the MSA was 2,474,314 according to 2016 Census estimates .
Charlotte is the 17th largest city and 22nd largest metro area in the United States .
Charlotte is the 2nd largest city in the Southeast .
The Charlotte – Concord Combined Statistical Area ( CSA ) is a regional population area including parts of North Carolina and South Carolina with a population of 2,632,249 according to the 2016 Census estimates .
The aforementioned MSA is the only metropolitan area ( as defined since 2012 ) included in the CSA , but there are two included micropolitan areas : Albemarle and Shelby .
NICKNAMES AND REGIONAL
IDENTITY Section::::Nicknames and regional identity .
The regional area around the city was at one time called Metrolina , a portmanteau of Metropolis and Carolina .
The term has fallen out of widespread general use , though it still maintains a presence and is used by the North Carolina Department of Transportation .
The term does retain a marketing value , and is thus also used by many businesses in the area .
Metrolina refers to the region that includes the cities of : Charlotte , Concord , Gastonia and Rock Hill .
The name Metrolina came into fashion when North Carolina 's other two large metropolitan areas took on nicknames — the Triangle for Raleigh / Durham / Cary / Chapel Hill and the Triad for Greensboro / Winston - Salem / High Point .
( The Triad now goes by the name Piedmont Triad to distinguish it from other tri - cities . )
Charlotte is also sometimes referred to as the Queen City , or the Q.C.
The term " Charlotte USA " refers to the 16-county region , which includes 12 counties in North Carolina and 4 counties in South Carolina .
The term is championed by the Charlotte Regional Partnership , a non - profit organization made up of both private- and public - sector members from throughout the Charlotte region .
This organization represents one of seven officially designated economic development regions in North Carolina .
Region J of the North Carolina Councils of Government , of which a majority of the Charlotte area municipalities and counties belong , uses the term Centralina in its body 's name , Centralina Council of Governments .
This term , however , is used only sparingly among locals .
AREA COUNTIES Section::::Area .
Section::::Counties .
The official Charlotte metropolitan area includes the Charlotte – Concord – Gastonia MSA ( Cabarrus , Gaston , Iredell , Lincoln , Mecklenburg , Rowan , and Union counties in North Carolina ; Chester , Lancaster and York counties in South Carolina ) .
The Charlotte CSA includes all the MSA counties along with the following micropolitan areas in North Carolina : Albemarle ( Stanly County ) and Shelby ( Cleveland County ) .
( Census Bureau definition for CSA )
The Charlotte Regional Partnership also identifies four additional counties to the what they refer to as the ' Charlotte Region'-Alexander , Anson and Catawba counties in North Carolina , and Chesterfield County , South Carolina .
Catawba and Alexander counties are currently part of the Hickory – Lenoir – Morganton Metropolitan Statistical Area or ' The Unifour ' , and Anson County was once part of the MSA and CSA , until it was removed in 2011 .
+
The Charlotte Combined Statistical Area !
County !
2017
Estimate !
2010
Census !
Change Mecklenburg County York County Union County Gaston County Cabarrus County Iredell County Rowan County Cleveland County Lancaster County Lincoln County
Stanly County Chester County class =
sortbottom + Charlotte Region !
County !
2017
Estimate !
2010
Census !
Change Catawba County Chesterfield County Alexander County Anson County Total for Alexander , Anson , Catawba , and Chesterfield counties class =
sortbottom LARGEST CITIES AND TOWNS Section::::Largest cities and towns . !
Rank !
City / town !
County !
2017 estimate !
2010
Census !
Change 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 CITIES AND TOWNS : 5,000 TO 10,000 IN POPULATION Section::::Cities and Towns : 5,000 to 10,000 in Population . !
Rank !
City / Town !
County !
2017
Estimate !
2010
Census !
Change 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 SUBURBAN TOWNS AND CITIES
UNDER 5,000 IN POPULATION Section::::Suburban towns and cities under 5,000 in population .
valign =
top * Ansonville , Anson
* Badin , Stanly * Belwood , Cleveland * Boiling Springs , Cleveland * China Grove , Rowan
* Cleveland , Rowan * Cramerton , Gaston * Dallas , Gaston * Earl , Cleveland * East Spencer , Rowan
* Fairview , Union * Faith , Rowan
* Fallston , Cleveland
* Fort Lawn , Chester * Granite Quarry , Rowan * Great Falls , Chester * Grover , Cleveland
* Harmony , Iredell * Heath Springs , Lancaster * Hemby Bridge , Union * Hickory Grove , York * High Shoals , Gaston
* Kershaw , Lancaster * Kingstown , Cleveland * Lake Park , Union * Lake Wylie , York
* Landis , Rowan *
Lattimore , Cleveland
* Lawndale , Cleveland
* Lilesville , Anson * Locust , Stanly & Cabarrus * Love Valley , Iredell * Lowell , Gaston * Lowrys , Chester
* Marshville , Union
* McAdenville , Gaston * McConnells , York
* McFarlan , Anson
* Midland , Cabarrus * Mineral Springs , Union * Misenheimer , Stanly * Mooresboro , Cleveland
* Morven , Anson
* Mount Pleasant , Cabarrus
* New London , Stanly * Norwood , Stanly * Oakboro , Stanly * Patterson Springs , Cleveland
* Peachland , Anson
* Polkton , Anson
*
Polkville , Cleveland * Ranlo , Gaston * Richburg , Chester
* Richfield , Stanly * Rockwell , Rowan
* Sharon , York
* Smyrna , York
* Spencer , Rowan * Spencer Mountain , Gaston
* Stanfield , Stanly
* Stanley , Gaston
* Troutman , Iredell * Waco , Cleveland
* Wesley Chapel , Union * Wingate , Union UNINCORPORATED COMMUNITIES Section::::Unincorporated communities .
valign =
top * Boger City , Lincoln * Denver , Lincoln * Elgin , Lancaster * Enochville , Rowan * Eureka Mill , Chester * Frog Pond , Stanly * Gayle Mill , Chester * India Hook , York * Indian Land , Lancaster * Irwin , Lancaster * JAARS Union
* Lancaster Mill , Lancaster
*
Lesslie , York * Light Oak , Cleveland
* Lowesville , Lincoln * Newport , York * Riverview , York * South Gastonia , Gaston
* Westport , Lincoln Changes in house prices for the area are publicly tracked on a regular basis using the Case – Shiller index ; the statistic is published by Standard & Poor 's and is also a component of the S&P 20-city composite index of the value of the U.S. residential real estate market .
TRANSPORTATION MASS
TRANSIT
Section::::Transportation . Section::::Mass transit .
The Charlotte Area Transit System ( CATS ) is the local public transit agency that operates bus service that serves Charlotte and its immediate suburban communities in both North and South Carolina .
CATS also operates a light rail line and is also building a commuter rail network as a supplement to its established bus transit throughout the region .
Plans are for it to stretch initially to Mooresville , Pineville , Matthews , the University of North Carolina at Charlotte .
Charlotte - Douglas International Airport will be connected to the system by streetcar .
ROADS Section::::Roads .
The Charlotte region is also served by 2 major interstate highways ( I-85 and I-77 ) , and their 2 spurs ( I-277 , and I-485 ) . I-40 also passes through the center of Iredell County , which is the northern region of the Charlotte metro .
Other major freeways include Independence Boulevard ( east Charlotte to I-277 ) , a portion of US 321 between Hickory and Gastonia , and the proposed Monroe Connector / Bypass , each projected to cost over $ 1 billion per project .
Other important US highways in the region include : US 74 ( east to Wilmington , west to Asheville and Chattanooga ) , US 52 ( through the far eastern part of the region ) , US 321 ( through Chester , York , Gastonia , Dallas , Lincolnton and Hickory ) , US 601 ( passing east of Charlotte ) and US 70 ( through Salisbury , Statesville and Hickory ) .
Primary state routes include NC / SC 49 , NC 16 ( which extends north to West Virginia ) , NC 73 , NC 150 , NC 18 , NC 24 , NC 27 , SC 9 and SC 5 . AIR Section::::Air .
Charlotte Douglas International Airport is the main airport in the Charlotte area and the 6th busiest in the country .
In April 2007 , Charlotte was the fastest growing airport in the US .
The airport went on to surpass its sister US Airways hub in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania as one of the 30 busiest airports in the world in terms of passenger traffic .
A new terminal to the northwest of the center of the airport will be built in the near future , possibly as a Caribbean / Latin America international terminal .
CLT is also supplemented by regional airports in Concord , Gastonia , Hickory , Monroe , Statesville , in North Carolina , as well as Rock Hill in South Carolina .
HIGHER EDUCATION
* Barber – Scotia College * Belmont Abbey College * Carolinas College of Health Sciences
* Catawba College * Catawba Valley Community College
* Charlotte School of Law *
Central Piedmont Community College *
Cleveland Community College *
Clinton Junior College * Davidson College
* Gardner – Webb University * Gaston College * Appalachian Center at Hickory
* Johnson & Wales University * Johnson C. Smith University
* King 's College
* Lenoir - Rhyne University
*
Livingstone College * Mitchell Community College *
Montreat College * Pfeiffer University
* Queens University of Charlotte * Rowan – Cabarrus Community College * South Piedmont Community College *
Stanly Community College * Strayer University * University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* University of South Carolina - Lancaster * Wingate University * Winthrop University * York Technical College ATTRACTIONS NATURE AND GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Attractions .
Section::::Nature and geography .
The foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains begin along the western edge of the region ; the descent ( the Fall Line ) to the coastal plain begins along the eastern edge .
Amid this varied topography , the Daniel Stowe Botanical Garden and several state parks ( Morrow Mountain , Crowders Mountain , South Mountains , Duke Power , Landsford Canal , Andrew Jackson ) offer recreational possibilities , along with the Uwharrie National Forest just east and northeast of Albemarle , and the Sumter National Forest at the southwest corner of the area .
Kings Mountain National Military Park is partially located in York County and in Cherokee County near Blacksburg , South Carolina .
CULTURAL ATTRACTIONS Section::::Cultural attractions .
Attractions in Charlotte include the Harvey B. Gantt Center for African - American Arts + Cultural , Discovery Place , Spirit Square , NASCAR Hall of Fame , the North Carolina Blumenthal Performing Arts Center , Children 's Theatre of Charlotte , Actor 's Theatre of Charlotte , Carolina Actors Studio Theatre , Theatre Charlotte , the Charlotte Museum of History , Levine Museum of the New South , the McGill Rose Garden , and the Wing Haven Gardens .
The Bechtler Museum of Modern Art and the Mint Museum in Uptown Charlotte are expanding the art venues in Charlotte .
Other places of interest in the surrounding area include the Schiele Museum ( in Gastonia ) , Carowinds Theme Park ( in Mecklenburg County , North Carolina and York County , South Carolina ) , Charlotte Motor Speedway ( in Concord ) , the Carolina Raptor Center ( in Huntersville ) , Daniel Stowe Botanical Garden ( in Belmont ) , Latta Plantation ( in Huntersville ) , Brattonsville Historic District ( in McConnells ) , the North Carolina Transportation Museum ( in Spencer ) , Fort Dobbs historical site ( in Statesville ) , Catawba County Firefighters Museum ( in Conover ) , the Arts & Science Center of Catawba Valley / Millholland Planetarium ( in Hickory )
the Museum of York County ( in Rock Hill ) , James K. Polk historical site ( in Pineville ) , the Catawba Cultural Center ( in York County ) , the Museum of the Waxhaws ( in Waxhaw ) , Glencairn Gardens ( in Rock Hill ) , and the Reed Gold Mine ( in Locust ) .
ENTERTAINMENT Section::::Entertainment .
The PNC Music Pavilion is located in the University City area of Charlotte .
The performing arts amphitheatre has hosted many popular music concerts .
The U.S. National Whitewater Center ( USNWC ) is the world 's premier outdoor recreation and environmental education center .
Alongside mountain - biking and running trails , a climbing center , and challenge course , the park 's unique feature is a multiple - channel , customized whitewater river for rafting and canoe / kayak enthusiasts of all abilities .
The USNWC is only 10 minutes from downtown Charlotte and provides roughly of woodlands along the scenic Catawba River .
Olympic - caliber athletes , weekend warriors and casual observers share this world - class sports and training center .
Inspired by the successful Penrith
Whitewater Stadium built for the 2000 Olympics and the stadium built for the 2004 Athens Games , the USNWC is the world 's largest multi - channel recirculating whitewater river .
The USOC has designated the USNWC an official Olympic Training Site .
SHOPPING Section::::Shopping .
SouthPark Mall is one of the Southern United States ' most upscale malls , including stores such as Louis Vuitton , Tiffany & Co. , Burberry , Hermès , Neiman Marcus , and American Girl .
SouthPark mall is also the largest mall in the Carolinas and one of the most - profitable malls in the United States .
Other large regional - scale Shopping malls include Northlake Mall , Carolina Place Mall , Concord Mills , Charlotte Premium Outlets
( Exit 4 , I-485 ) , Phillips Place ( across from SouthPark ) , RiverGate , Westfield Eastridge , Rock Hill Galleria , Plaza Fiesta , Carolina Mall , Monroe Crossing Mall , Signal Hill Mall , and Valley Hills Mall .
Concord Mills is unique in that it does not feature the typical anchor stores found at other malls ; it focuses more on attracting outlet store tenants .
The mall is visited by over 15 million annually .
Alongside enclosed malls and strip centers are several other shopping districts .
Several downtowns can claim an abundance of shopping options , along with restaurants and other entertainment , and a few other specific districts have emerged : Central Avenue , especially in the Plaza - Midwood area ; the NoDa area of North Charlotte ; and the Arboretum in southeast Charlotte ( geographically , south ) , to offer a handful of examples .
Several of these areas are at the center of the area 's growing immigrant business communities .
SPORTS
Section::::Sports .
In addition to Charlotte Motor Speedway , there are plenty of other sports venues , including the BB&T Ballpark ( home of the Charlotte Knights , the Triple - A affiliate of the Chicago White Sox ) , Bank of America Stadium ( home of the NFL 's Carolina Panthers ) , and Spectrum Center ( home of the NBA 's Charlotte Hornets , and the American Hockey League 's Charlotte Checkers ) .
The Charlotte Eagles of the United Soccer Leagues call the area home , and the Kannapolis Intimidators and Hickory Crawdads are Single - A Minor - League Baseball teams located in this region .
ECONOMY
Section::::Economy .
Among the largest employers in the area ( listed in order by number of local employees ) are : *
Wells Fargo *
Atrium Health
* Charlotte - Mecklenburg Schools
* Bank of America * City of Charlotte * US Airways
* Duke Energy
* Presbyterian Healthcare
* Lowe 's * University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* AT&T
* Belk * Family Dollar
* Food Lion * Offices in University Research Park
* Advance Auto Parts
* TIAA Companies with headquarters in the region include Bank of America , Belk , BellSouth Telecommunications , Bojangles ' , The Compass Group , Carolina Beverage Corporation Inc.
( makers of Sun Drop and Cheerwine ) , Duke Energy , Family Dollar , Food Lion , Harris Teeter , Lance , Inc , LendingTree , Lowe 's , Meineke Car Care Centers , Muzak , Nucor , Chiquita Brands International Transbotics , Royal & SunAlliance ( USA ) , SPX Corporation , Time Warner Cable ( a business unit of Fortune 500 company Time Warner ) , and Wells Fargo . Charlotte has gained fame as the second largest banking and finance center in the U.S. , and the area 's orientation towards emerging industries is seen in the success of the University Research Park ( the 7th largest research park in the country ) and the redevelopment of part of the Pillowtex site in Kannapolis as a biotech research facility featuring the participation of University of North Carolina at Charlotte , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Duke University and North Carolina State University .
Reflections Studios in Charlotte played an important role in the emergent late-20th - century American musical underground – R.E.M. , Pylon , Let 's Active , Don Dixon and Charlotte 's Fetchin Bones ( among many others ) all recorded influential and acclaimed albums there .
Charlotte - based Ripete and Surfside Records maintain important catalogs of regional soul and beach music , and the area has also played a role in the history of gospel , bluegrass and country music .
The Milestone , one of the first punk clubs in the South , is located in west Charlotte , and in the past hosted legendary appearances from the likes of R.E.M. , Black Flag , Nirvana , The Minutemen , D.O.A. , Bad Brains , Charlotte 's Antiseen , and many others .
NOTABLE RESIDENTS * Artists – Romare Bearden
* Astronauts – Charles Duke and Susan Helms
* Religious figures – Billy Graham and Steven Furtick
* Musicians – Earl Scruggs , George Clinton , Fred Durst , Prairie Prince , Blind Boy Fuller ,
Randy Travis
* Independent filmmakers – Tim Kirkman and Ross McElwee * Actors – Randolph Scott , Berlinda Tolbert
* Politicians – Sue Myrick , Harvey Gantt , Elizabeth Dole and Jesse Helms , Andrew Jackson and James K. Polk
* Professional wrestlers – Ric Flair * NASCAR driver –
Dale Earnhardt
* R&B singers Fantasia , Anthony Hamilton and K - Ci & JoJo of Jodeci
* Writers – Carson McCullers
GOVERNMENT
Section::::Government .
A majority of the municipalities and counties in the North Carolina parts of the Charlotte metropolitan area belong to the Centralina Council of Governments .
Cleveland County belongs to the Isothermal Planning and Development Commission and Alexander and Catawba counties belong to the Western Piedmont Council of Governments .
SEE ALSO * Catawba Nuclear Station *
Interstate 85 * Piedmont
Atlantic Megaregion *
Piedmont Crescent *
Upstate South Carolina
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Charlotte Chamber of Commerce * Charlotte USA –
The Charlotte Regional Partnership * NC SmartLink Metrolina traffic cameras