GUN LAWS IN OKLAHOMA Gun laws in Oklahoma regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Oklahoma in the United States .
Oklahoma is generally a gun - friendly state , and has mostly less - restrictive gun laws .
Being part of the Southern United States and Western United States , Oklahoma is home to a strong gun culture , which is reflected in Oklahoma 's gun laws .
On May 15 , 2012 , Oklahoma State Senate Bill 1733 was signed into law by Governor Mary Fallin , which authorized open and concealed carry of handguns by permit holders .
This law took effect November 1 , 2012 , and made Oklahoma the 25th state of the United States to allow licensed open carry .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes
Shall Certify ?
Yes
Yes ยง 21 - 1289.30 Shall certify within 15 days .
} BUYING , SELLING , AND OWNING
FIREARMS PRIVATE SALES
Section::::Buying , selling , and owning firearms .
Section::::Private sales .
In Oklahoma ( under state law ) , private sales of firearms are legal .
However , knowingly selling a firearm to a person who can not legally purchase or possess the firearm ( such as a convicted felon or drug addict ) is illegal , and punishable by up to 180 days in jail .
Under state law , one must be 18 to buy a firearm of any type from a private seller .
PROHIBITED PERSONS
Section::::Prohibited persons .
Felons , mentally ill persons , drug addicts , and certain juvenile offenders are prohibited from buying or owning firearms .
One must be 18 years of age to possess or own firearms , with a few exceptions for special circumstances .
When purchasing a firearm from a dealer , one must complete a federal background check .
This process ( passing the background check ) usually only takes a few minutes , but the government has up to three days to complete the background check .
After three days , the dealer has the right to proceed or deny the transfer .
There is no limit to the number of firearms that a person may buy or own under state law .
MINORS AND FIREARMS Section::::Minors and firearms .
Minors may own firearms that are given to them by their parents , relatives , or legal guardians .
However , they may not generally possess firearms unsupervised until they are 18 years of age .
There are exceptions to this rule , such as when a minor possessing a hunting license ( and having passed a hunter 's safety course ) is hunting , possession of firearm(s ) on certain types of private property , and possession of firearm(s ) in one 's own home .
NFA FIREARMS Section::::NFA firearms .
Owning or possessing a short - barreled shotgun or rifle is illegal and a felony under state law , unless the short - barreled firearm is registered under the National Firearms Act .
Owning or possessing a fully automatic firearm is not illegal under state law , but is still illegal under federal law unless the automatic firearm is registered under the National Firearms Act .
Local and State authorities are not obligated to enforce federal firearms law or notify federal authorities of federal firearms law violations , however they may , or may not , choose to do so .
CARRYING FIREARMS IN PUBLIC Section::::Carrying firearms in public .
Carrying a handgun in public circumstances or on public land requires a valid handgun carry permit , issued by the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation .
Individuals must pass an extensive background check , meet certain requirements , be at least 21 years of age , and pass a firearms handling and safety course to be issued a permit .
Carrying on public buses was legalized on November 1 , 2017 .
RESTRICTIONS ON CARRYING HANDGUNS Section::::Restrictions on carrying handguns .
Individuals possessing handgun carry permits may not carry handguns of greater than .45 caliber .
Individuals with handgun carry permits may not carry in an establishment whose primary purpose is the serving of alcoholic beverages .
Handgun carry permit holders may not consume alcoholic beverages while carrying .
Doing so will result in revocation of carry permit and possible criminal charges .
Carry with permit is allowed in an establishment that serves alcoholic beverages ( such as a restaurant that serves alcoholic beverages ) as long as that is not the primary purpose of said establishment .
Handgun carry permit holders can not carry into schools or government buildings .
Unless carry is allowed by the property owner or event holder , it is illegal to carry into a sports venue during a professional sporting event or in any place where gambling is authorized ( such as a casino ) .
Handgun carry permit holders must have their license and a valid driver license or state - issued ID on their person while they are carrying .
PENALTIES FOR CARRYING WITHOUT PERMIT Section::::Penalties for carrying without permit .
Carrying a firearm in public , loaded or unloaded , without a permit is generally illegal and a misdemeanor under state law .
Penalties for a first time offense are a maximum of 30 days in jail , confiscation of the firearm(s ) illegally carried , and a $ 250 fine .
Repeat offenses may be punished by up to 90 days in jail , with an increased fine .
HANDGUN CARRY RECIPROCITY Section::::Handgun carry reciprocity .
Oklahoma recognizes and legally respects all and any out of state handgun carry permits , even if the issuing state does not recognize an Oklahoma carry permit .
Additionally , anyone who resides in a state where carrying a handgun does not require a license and who is legally eligible to carry in their state may carry a handgun in Oklahoma .
Oklahoma ยง 21 - 1290.26 .
reads
" The State of Oklahoma hereby recognizes any valid concealed or unconcealed carry weapons permit or license issued by another state .
Any person entering this state in possession of a firearm authorized for concealed or unconcealed carry upon the authority and license of another state is authorized to continue to carry a concealed or unconcealed firearm and license in this state ; provided the license from the other state remains valid .
The firearm must either be carried unconcealed and in plain view or fully concealed from detection and view , and upon coming in contact with any peace officer of this state , the person must disclose the fact that he or she is in possession of a concealed or unconcealed firearm pursuant to a valid concealed or unconcealed carry weapons permit or license issued in another state . "
TRANSPORTING FIREARMS
Section::::Transporting firearms .
Individuals with hunting licenses may open carry loaded long arms and handguns when hunting during hunting season .
Outside of this and a few other limited exceptions , Open carry of handguns in a public setting requires a valid carry permit .
Carry of unloaded , cased firearms without a permit is allowed while on foot , just as it is allowed while traveling in a vehicle .
Firearms that are not handguns ( long arms ) carried by pedestrians generally must be both completely unloaded and cased .
However , any person eligible to legally possess firearms may openly carry unloaded firearms that are not cased specifically " When going to or from the person 's private residence or vehicle or a vehicle in which the person is riding as a passenger to a place designated or authorized for firearms repairs or reconditioning , or for firearms trade , sale , or barter , or gunsmith , or hunting animals or fowl , or hunter safety course , or target shooting , or skeet or trap shooting or any recognized firearms activity or event and while in such places " .
Only under these circumstances may individuals carry unloaded firearms publicly that are not cased .
Generally , when carrying firearms in a motor vehicle ( when traveling on public land or roads ) they must be out of reach of the driver , unloaded , and cased .
Persons possessing a handgun carry license may carry a loaded handgun inside their vehicle on their person , just as they are permitted to do so on foot .
Persons possessing a handgun carry license may transport a loaded handgun in a motor vehicle under their control , and store a loaded handgun in a locked , secure motor vehicle .
They may also transport loaded magazines for both handguns and long guns , however , they can not legally transport loaded long guns .
Firearms being improperly transported in any way may be immediately confiscated by police without compensation .
CARRY ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY Section::::Carry on private property .
Open or concealed carry of a firearm on privately owned land or inside a residence ( such as a backyard , in one 's own home , or a large farm ) is legal for persons 18 years and older who can legally possess firearms , and no permit is required .
However , if a disturbance is caused , such carry could be construed as Disturbing the peace by law enforcement .
Additionally , brandishing a firearm without good , legal cause ( such as self defense , defense of another , or lawful defense of property ) is illegal .
Carrying a firearm on private property generally requires the consent / permission of the property owner .
PROHIBITED PLACES AND AUTHORIZED
PERSONS
Section::::Prohibited places and authorized persons .
Carrying of any firearms or weapons in a government building or on school grounds is illegal , even if the citizen carrying possesses a concealed carry permit .
The only exceptions to this law are for licensed government or security personnel , such as state police officers , agents of the federal government , and certain security guards .
Security guards of at least 21 years of age may receive a license to possess firearms during the course of their official duties if they meet certain requirements .
Security guards are not authorized to carry firearms outside of their official duties .
Police officers and qualified retired police officers are allowed to carry a handgun when off - duty ; however , they are subject to many of the same restrictions and conditions on carry as a private citizen with a handgun carry license when not performing their official duties .
Parking lots are also exempt from prohibited places such as schools , public or private , government buildings , and colleges .
CONCEALED CARRY
ON
CAMPUS Section::::Concealed carry on campus .
Concealed carry permit holders are not allowed to carry on college campuses .
Doing so will usually result in serious criminal charges , and permanent permit revocation .
There is an exception to this rule , but it is very specific , and rarely utilized .
In order for a concealed carry permit holder to carry on a college campus in complete legality , they must obtain written permission from the president of the specific college where they wish to carry .
The president may issue restrictions or conditions on the permission to carry on campus .
Also , a physical copy of the written authorization must be carried by the permit holder while they are carrying concealed on campus .
Very few , if any , concealed carry permit holders ever receive authorization to carry a concealed firearm on any college campus in the state , due to these restrictions .
House Bill 1652 would allow licensed students , teachers and visitors to keep their guns in their locked vehicles on CareerTech campuses .
HB 1652 alters current legislation , which outlaws weapons on CareerTech campuses .
The legislation , by Rep. John Enns , passed the committee 11 - 4 on 3 March 2011 , and passed the full House by a vote of 84 - 14 on 17 February 2011 .
The new law took effect on 1 November 2011 .
SPECIFIC CRIMES WITH FIREARMS Section::::Specific crimes with firearms .
Carrying a firearm while substantially intoxicated by alcohol or another drug is a gross misdemeanor , punishable by several weeks to months in jail and possibility of revocation .
Carrying a firearm in a bar without a permit is a felony .
Being in possession of a firearm or imitation firearm while committing a crime of violence is a felony , regardless of whether or not the firearm or imitation firearm is used in the commission of the said crime of violence .
Intentionally discharging a firearm in the commission of a crime of violence is a felony .
Carrying a firearm or dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime of violence is a felony .
Intentionally discharging a firearm into , or at , any dwelling , or any building used for public or business purposes , is a felony , regardless of whether or not the dwelling or building is occupied .
Except for self - defense , intentionally pointing a firearm , loaded or unloaded , at a person , is a misdemeanor usually punished by several months in jail , and may be prosecuted as a felony , with additional penalties , if the purpose of such pointing was to cause fear , emotional distress , or to intimidate .
It is unlawful for any person to " engage in reckless conduct " while possessing a firearm , if such actions create ' a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another " and demonstrate " a conscious disregard for the safety of another person " .
It is a felony to possess , use , attempt to use , carry , manufacture , cause to be manufactured , import , advertise for sale , or sell ammunition which has " a core of less than sixty percent ( 60 % ) lead " and also " has a fluorocarbon coating , which is capable of penetrating body armor " .
The State of Oklahoma preempts almost all local regulation of firearms .
Municipalities may prohibit discharging a firearm within city limits , even on private property .
State - licensed or recognized shooting ranges are exempt from city ordinances against discharging firearms .
Other than prohibiting firearm discharge , municipalities may not have any laws or ordinances pertaining to firearms , firearm parts , or ammunition that are more restrictive than state law .
RIGHT TO KEEP AND BEAR ARMS IN STATE CONSTITUTION
Section::::Right to keep and bear arms in state constitution .
Section 26 of the bill of rights to the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma states , "
The right of a citizen to keep and bear arms in defense of his home , person , or property , or in aid of the civil power , when thereunto legally summoned , shall never be prohibited ; but nothing herein contained shall prevent the Legislature from regulating the carrying of weapons . "
SEE ALSO
* Gun laws in the United States ( by state ) REFERENCES