BULLSNAKE
The bullsnake ( Pituophis catenifer sayi ) is a large non - venomous colubrid snake .
It is currently considered a subspecies of the gopher snake ( Pituophis catenifer ) .
The bullsnake is one of the largest / longest snakes of North America and the United States reaching lengths up to 8 ft long .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The subspecific name , sayi , is in honor of American naturalist Thomas Say .
Bullsnakes are endemic species of Mexico and there are called cincuate , ( /sentli/
; Náhuatl : corn , /coatl/ ; Náhuatl : snake ) .
GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Section::::Geographic range .
Bullsnakes can be found throughout the Great Plains and central United States ( CO , IA , MO , MT , ND , NE , NM , OK , SD , TX , WY ) , central and northern Mexico , and southern Canada in Saskatchewan , Alberta , and desert regions of British Columbia .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Adult bullsnakes average about in total length , and specimens of up to have been recorded .
Possibly being the largest subspecies of gopher snake on average , mature specimens can have an average weight in the range of , though the heavier known specimens can attain , larger specimens being quite bulky for a colubrid snake .
This makes the bullsnake among the largest snakes native to Canada and the United States , although it is generally not as long as indigo snakes nor as heavy or as large in diameter as rattlesnakes .
They are usually yellow , with brown , white , black or sometimes reddish blotching .
The blotching pattern is as follows : large blotches on top , three sets of spots on the sides , and bands of black on the tail .
Many color variations have been found , including albinos and white varieties .
A scale count is required to distinguish juvenile bullsnakes from other juvenile gopher snakes .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Bullsnakes are very powerful constrictors who eat small mammals , such as mice , moles , rats , pocket gophers , ground squirrels , and rabbits , as well as ground nesting birds , birds ' eggs and lizards .
Their climbing proficiency enables them to raid bird nests ( and birdhouses ) to eat the nestlings or sitting mother .
One snake can eat five small birds within 15 minutes .
Juvenile bullsnakes depend on small lizards , frogs , and baby mice .
The idea that bullsnakes occasionally eat rattlesnakes is sometimes given as a reason for humans not to harm bullsnakes when encountering them in the wild .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Though some bullsnakes can be docile , and with some time become accustomed to handling , most bullsnakes are quite defensive and known for their perceived " bad attitude " .
When bullsnakes detect live objects too big to be prey they seem to perceive the object as a predator and take defensive action .
Their first action is to remain quiet , not moving .
Then when they feel they are able to move away from the object their next line of defensive is to move away as quickly as possible .
Bullsnakes , however , are not fast movers and often have to take other defensive actions .
When threatened by anything as large as a human , a bullsnake 's next defensive action is to rear up and make itself look as large as possible while at the same time hissing at the perceived threat .
It typically then begins lunging and retreating at the same time to escape .
Bullsnakes are sometimes mistaken for rattlesnakes and killed .
Owing to its coloration , dorsal pattern , and semikeeled scalation , the bullsnake superficially resembles the western diamondback rattler ( Crotalus atrox ) , which is also common within the same range .
The bullsnake capitalizes on this similarity by performing an impressive rattlesnake impression when threatened .
First , it hisses , or forcibly exhales through a glottis or extension of the windpipe .
The end of the glottis is covered by a piece of cartilage known as the epiglottis which flaps back and forth when air is exhaled from the right lung , producing a convincing rattling sound .
It also adopts a rattlesnake - like " S - curve " body posture as though about to strike .
It commonly vibrates its tail rapidly in brush or leaves , and flattens its head to resemble the characteristic triangular shape of the rattlesnake .
These defensive behaviors are meant to scare away threats , however , and not to sound an attack .
In contrast to rattlesnakes , which usually keep their tails elevated to sound the most efficient rattle , bullsnakes tend to keep their tails in contact with the ground , where they can be vibrated against something .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Bullsnakes breed in March or April (
depending upon their location ) and usually lay their eggs in April , May or June ( again , depending upon when the snakes breed . )
They lay on average a dozen eggs in sand or other protected areas and leave the eggs to incubate unprotected .
Clutches of five to 22 eggs have been observed .
The eggs are elliptical , leathery , rough , sticky , and up to long .
The eggs typically hatch in August or September .
Baby bullsnakes are at hatching .
Their color is grayish until after their first shed .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Schlegel H ( 1837 ) .
Essai sur la physionomie des serpens , Volume II .
, Partie Descriptive .
Amsterdam : M.H. Schonekat .
606 +
xv pp .
( Coluber sayi , new species , pp .
157–158 . )
( in French ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Animalspot.net :
Bull Snake * IowaHerps.com
: Pituophis catenifer sayi ( Iowa Bullsnake )