BOLOGNESE SAUCE Bolognese sauce ( , ; known in Italian as ragù alla bolognese , , ragù bolognese , or simply ragù ) is a meat - based sauce originating from Bologna , Italy , hence the name .
In Italian cuisine , it is customarily used to dress tagliatelle al ragù and to prepare lasagne alla bolognese .
In the absence of tagliatelle , it can also be used with other broad , flat pasta shapes , such as pappardelle or fettuccine .
Genuine ragù alla bolognese is a slowly cooked sauce , and its preparation involves several techniques , including sweating , sautéing and braising .
Ingredients include a characteristic soffritto of onion , celery and carrot , different types of minced or finely chopped beef , often alongside small amounts of fatty pork .
White wine , milk , and a small amount of tomato concentrate or tomatoes are added , and the dish is then gently simmered at length to produce a thick sauce .
The earliest documented recipe of an Italian meat - based sauce ( ragù ) served with pasta comes from late 18th century Imola , near Bologna .
A recipe for a meat sauce for pasta that is specifically described as being " bolognese " appeared in Pellegrino Artusi 's cookbook of 1891 .
The ragù alla bolognese that is now traditionally associated with tagliatelle and lasagne is somewhat different from Artusi 's recipe .
Many traditional variations currently exist .
In 1982 the Italian Academy of Cuisine registered a recipe for authentic ragù alla bolognese with the Bologna Chamber of Commerce ( incorporating some fresh pancetta and a little milk ) .
In Italy , ragù alla bolognese is often referred to simply as ragù .
Outside Italy , the phrase " Bolognese sauce " often refers to a tomato - based sauce to which minced beef ( or pork ) has been added ; such sauces typically bear less resemblance to ragù alla bolognese being more similar in fact to the ragù alla napoletana from the tomato - rich south of the country .
Whereas in Italy ragù is not used with spaghetti , so - called " spaghetti bolognese " has become a popular dish in many other parts of the world .
ORIGIN AND HISTORY Section::::Origin and history .
The earliest documented recipe for a meat - based sauce ( ragù ) served with pasta comes from late 18th century Imola , near Bologna .
Pellegrino Artusi published a recipe for a meat sauce characterized as being bolognese in his cookbook published in 1891 .
Artusi 's recipe , which he called Maccheroni alla bolognese , is thought to derive from the mid 19th century when he spent considerable time in Bologna ( maccheroni being a generic term for pasta , both dried and fresh ) .
The recipe only partially resembles the ragù alla bolognese that is traditionally associated with tagliatelle .
The sauce called for predominantly lean veal filet along with pancetta , butter , onion , and carrot .
The meats and vegetables were to be finely minced , cooked with butter until the meats browned , then covered and cooked with broth .
Artusi commented that the taste could be made even more pleasant by adding small pieces of dried mushroom , a few slices of truffle , or chicken liver cooked with the meat and diced .
As a final touch , he also suggested adding half a glass of cream to the sauce when it was completely done to make it taste even smoother .
Artusi recommended serving this sauce with a medium size pasta ( " horse teeth " ) made from durum wheat .
The pasta was to be made fresh , cooked until it was firm , and then flavored with the sauce and Parmigiano cheese .
EVOLUTION AND VARIATIONS Section::::Evolution and variations .
In the century - plus since Artusi recorded and subsequently published his recipe for Maccheroni alla bolognese , what is now ragù alla bolognese has evolved with the cuisine of the region .
Most notable is the preferred choice of pasta , which today is widely recognized as fresh tagliatelle .
Another reflection of the evolution of the cuisine over the past 150 years is the addition of tomato , either as a puree or as a concentrated paste , to the common mix of ingredients .
Similarly , both wine and milk appear today in the list of ingredients in many of the contemporary recipes , and beef has mostly displaced veal as the dominant meat .
In 1982 , the Italian Academy of Cuisine ( Accademia Italiana della Cucina ) , an organization dedicated to preserving the culinary heritage of Italy , recorded and deposited a recipe for " classic Bolognese ragù " with the Bologna Chamber of Commerce
( La Camera di Commercio di Bologna ) .
A version of the academy 's recipe for American kitchens was also published .
The academy 's recipe confines the ingredients to beef cut from the plate section ( cartella di manzo ) , fresh unsmoked pancetta ( pancetta di maiale distesa ) , onions , carrot , celery , passata ( or tomato purée ) , meat broth , dry white wine , milk , salt and pepper .
Nowadays , there are many variations of the recipe even among native Italian chefs , and the repertoire has been further broadened by some American chefs known for their expertise in Italian cuisine .
Ragù alla bolognese is a complex sauce which involves various cooking techniques , including sweating , sautéing and braising .
As such , it lends itself well to interpretation and adaptation by professional chefs and home cooks alike .
Common sources of differences include which meats to use ( beef , pork or veal ) and their relative quantities , the possible inclusion of either cured meats or offal , which fats are used in the sauté phases ( rendered pork fat , butter , olive or vegetable oil ) , what form of tomato is employed ( fresh , canned or paste ) , the makeup of the cooking liquids ( wine , milk , tomato juices , or broth ) and their specific sequence of addition .
The numerous variations among recipes for ragù alla bolognese have led many to search for the definitive , authentic recipe .
Some have suggested the recipe registered by the Accademia Italiana della Cucina in 1982 as the " most authentic " .
However , this would be inconsistent with the academy 's own beliefs and statements about remaining faithful to tradition in documenting and preserving Italy 's culinary heritage .
Prominent Italian chef Mario Caramella stated , " In Italy , there are several traditional recipes of tagliatelle al ragù alla bolognese with more or less slight variations " .
According to UK cookbook author and food writer Felicity Cloake , " The fact is that there is no definitive recipe for a bolognese meat sauce , but to be worthy of the name , it should respect the traditions of the area " , a view that is consistent with that often expressed by the Italian Academy of Cuisine .
The many variations tend to be based on a common theme .
For instance , garlic is absent from all of the recipes mentioned above , as are herbs other than the parsimonious use of bay leaves by some .
Seasoning is limited to salt , pepper and the occasional pinch of nutmeg .
In all of the recipes , meats dominate as the principal ingredient , while tomatoes , in one form or another , are only an auxiliary ingredient .
TRADITIONAL SERVICE AND USE Section::::Traditional service and use .
In Bologna ragù alla bolognese is customarily paired and served with tagliatelle made with eggs and northern Italy 's soft wheat flour .
Acceptable alternatives to fresh tagliatelle include other broad flat pasta shapes , such as pappardelle or fettuccine , and tube shapes , such as rigatoni and penne .
While the main complaint of traditionalists is against the use of spaghetti rather than fresh tagliatelle for the pasta , native Bolognese Piero Valdiserra has argued that " spaghetti could be considered traditional in Bologna " , even though tagliatelle is the " most suitable " pasta .
Ragù alla bolognese along with béchamel is also used by many Italian chefs to prepare traditional baked lasagna in Bolognese style .
INTERNATIONAL DAY OF ITALIAN CUISINES 2010 Section::::International Day of Italian Cuisines 2010 .
Gruppo Virtuale Cuochi Italiani ( GVCI ) , an international organization and network of culinary professionals dedicated to authentic Italian cuisine , annually organizes and promotes an " International Day of Italian Cuisines " ( IDIC ) .
In 2010 tagliatelle al ragu alla bolognese was the official dish for IDIC .
The event , held on 17 January 2010 , included participation by 450 professional chefs in 50 countries who prepared the signature dish according to " an authentic " recipe provided by chef Mario Caramella .
Media coverage was broad internationally , but reports often incorrectly identified the recipe followed as that of l'Accademia Italiana della Cucina , and some included stock photographs of spaghetti Bolognese .
SPAGHETTI BOLOGNESE Section::::Spaghetti bolognese .
" Spaghetti bolognese " ( sometimes called spaghetti alla bolognese , or colloquially " spag bol " or just " spaghetti " ) is a pasta dish that is commonly served outside Italy .
It consists of spaghetti served with a sauce made from tomatoes , minced beef , garlic , wine and herbs ; sometimes minced beef can be replaced by other minced meats .
In this sense it is actually more similar to Neapolitan ragù from the south of Italy than the northern Bolognese version of Ragu .
Often accused of ' inauthenticity ' when encountered by Italians abroad , it may be served with a larger proportion of sauce to spaghetti than is common in some Italian spaghetti dishes , and the sauce may be laid on top of the spaghetti ( rather than being mixed in , in the Italian manner ) or even served separately from it ( leaving diners to mix it in themselves ) .
It is often served with grated parmesan on top , but local cheeses , such as grated cheddar are also often used .
The sauce is commonly referred to as " Bolognese sauce " or just " spaghetti sauce " , but is actually closer to a Southern or Central Italian style of pasta dish , as true Bolognese sauce is generally served in Italy with tagliatelle ribbons , and not with spaghetti .
Although so - called " spaghetti bolognese " is a very popular dish outside Italy ( such as in Northern , Western and Central parts of Europe , North America , Brazil , Australia and New Zealand ) , it is not part of traditional Bolognese or Italian cuisine .
The origins of the dish are unclear , but it may have evolved in the context of early twentieth century emigration of southern Italians to the United States or UK as a sort of fusion with local cuisines to produce a hybrid version of ragù alla bolognese more influenced by the southern tomato - rich style of Neapolitan ragù .
In countries where it is common , this sort of sauce is often used for lasagna , whereas in Bologna ( and elsewhere in Italy )
ragù alla bolognese is used .
SEE ALSO
* List of pasta * List of pasta dishes * Makarony po - flotski
* Neapolitan ragù
* Spaghetti with meatballs
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Hazen , Marcella
The Classic Italian Cookbook Knopf .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Accademia Italiana della Cucina ( Italian Academy of Cuisine ) * CIBO - Culinary Institute of Bologna original Ragu Bolognese sauce recipe