I DO NOT CHOOSE TO RUN
" I do not choose to run " is President Calvin Coolidge 's statement to the press on his decision not to run for the 1928 presidential election .
The statement was ambiguous , and led to considerable debate as to the intentions of its language .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Coolidge was at his " Summer White House " in the Black Hills when he gave his secretary , Everett Sanders , a piece of paper that said , " I do not choose to run for president in 1928 .
" Sanders endorsed Coolidge 's declaration , and the announcement was scheduled for the 9 a.m. press conference on Tuesday August 2 , 1927 .
However , to avoid an overreaction by the stock market on the east coast , the announcement was moved to midday .
At 11:30 , Coolidge cut out strips of paper with his statement on it , and at the conference , handed each reporter a strip .
Without providing any further information , Coolidge remarked , " There will be nothing more from this office today . "
REACTION PUBLIC Section::::Reaction .
Section::::Public .
Upon Coolidge 's announcement , the gathered media were stunned .
The public , too , were shocked by the announcement .
Many felt Coolidge could easily win a second full term , based on " Coolidge Prosperity , " the booming economy , and a more than $ 300 million surplus .
FAMILY AND COLLEAGUES Section::::Family and colleagues .
As early as 1924 , Coolidge had made it clear he would not run again after his 1924 campaign .
He relayed this to his father after his son Calvin Jr. , died .
After the election , Theodore Roosevelt , Jr. " clearly remembered " Coolidge mentioning his desire not to run again , a conversation Coolidge also reportedly had with Frank Stearns at the same time .
Also , Secret Service Agent Edmund Starling , who served at the White House for thirty years , and protected five presidents , recounted that Coolidge decided " long ago " not to run again for office .
While some close to Coolidge knew he would n't run for another term , others were stunned by his announcement , including Sanders , his personal secretary .
Later in the day on August 2 , Grace Coolidge found out of her husband 's announcement from visiting senator Arthur Capper .
She remarked , " Is n't that just like the man .
He never gave me the slightest intimation of his intention .
I had no idea . "
REASONS FOR THE STATEMENT Section::::Reasons for the statement .
After Coolidge 's announcement there was much debate as to what he meant in his choice of words .
Some took the language as a definitive statement that he was not willing to be president any longer .
Others thought that he was hoping to be drafted by the party as a candidate .
HOPE TO BE DRAFTED Section::::Hope to be drafted .
Some close to the president took the view that Coolidge was looking to be drafted by the party for the 1928 election .
Vice President Charles G. Dawes believed that he " ardently " wanted the nomination .
Commerce secretary Herbert Hoover , himself considering a 1928 election bid , asked Coolidge if his decision was " absolutely conclusive , " and the president made no direct reply .
Even one of Coolidge 's closest friends , Senator Butler , said of the decision , " I do not know what he wants . "
As for being drafted as the party 's candidate , Coolidge stated that he " was determined not to have that contingency arise . "
DESIRE FOR PRIVATE LIFE Section::::Desire for private life .
Others saw Coolidge 's message as a desire to get back to private life .
As early as 1924 , Coolidge decided he would not run for the presidency a second time .
The death of his son , Cal Jr. , in 1924 , took a heavy toll on the president , which some say led to clinical depression .
" When he died , the power and the glory of the Presidency went with him , " Coolidge later wrote in his autobiography .
He also noted that another term would put him in the White House longer than any other man had been there , and ten years is more time than any man should spend there .
Also , Coolidge took some steps to make sure he was not drafted for the nomination .
He said , " I do not approve the circulation of a petition , such as has been reported in the morning press , requesting me to run for president in 1928 .
I do n't see that anything good could come from it .
I hope it will be discontinued . "
He also announced in December 1927 , " My statement stands .
No one should be led to suppose that I have modified it .
My decision will be respected .
"
Informed that some Massachusetts Republicans were mounting a campaign to have him win their state 's presidential primary , Coolidge informed the Republican state chairman " Such an action would be most embarrassing to me …
I request that it not be done . "
While the language was open for debate , some pointed out that it was the language of a Vermont Yankee .
" The Yankee language is founded on understatement and not overstatement , " said publisher Charles Thompson .
HONORING TWO - TERM TRADITION
Section::::Honoring two - term tradition .
Some feel that Coolidge was honoring the two - term tradition set by President Washington .
Coolidge held the opinion that a vice president who succeeded to part of another president 's term would not violate the rule by then running twice for election in his own right .
This tradition was continued in 1952 and 1968 , when Presidents Harry S. Truman and Lyndon B. Johnson chose not to seek another term after disappointing showings in the New Hampshire primary .
Both had succeeded to the presidency after the death of their predecessors and had been elected only once .
Theodore Roosevelt also did not run in 1908 after his succession to the presidency in 1901 and his election in 1904 .
However , he ran unsuccessfully in 1912 , against his successor , William Howard Taft .
Within the Republican party , there was talk that the " no third term tradition " could damage Coolidge 's , and thus the party 's , chances come election day .
This led to some party members calling for him not to run for a third term , though most scholars feel their opinion had little effect on Coolidge 's reasoning .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
The phrase entered popular culture of the era .
The tune " I Do Not Choose to Run " , credited to Kenny & Dennis was recorded in March 1928 by Harry Reser 's jazz band for Brunswick Records .
The humorous lyrics tell the story of a watch which , rather than ticking and telling time , utters Coolidge 's famous phrase .
In the Seinfeld episode , " The Race " , Jerry tells a story about how he won a high school race , and has been branded as a fast runner because he inadvertently got a head start .
When asked to race again in order to confirm the results , Jerry responds by saying , " I choose not to run . "
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY