ROCK OF AGES ( 2012 FILM )
Rock of Ages is a 2012 American musical comedy - drama film directed by Adam Shankman and based on the 2009 rock jukebox Broadway musical Rock of Ages by Chris D'Arienzo .
Starring country singer Julianne Hough and Diego Boneta leading an ensemble cast that includes Russell Brand , Alec Baldwin , Paul Giamatti , Catherine Zeta - Jones , Malin Åkerman , Mary J. Blige , Bryan Cranston and Tom Cruise , the film features the music of many 1980s Rock and Glam Rock artists including Def Leppard , Journey , Scorpions , Poison , Foreigner , Guns N ' Roses , Pat Benatar , Joan Jett , Bon Jovi , Twisted Sister , Whitesnake , REO Speedwagon , and others .
The film 's score was composed and conducted by Cliff Eidelman .
Originally scheduled to enter production in summer 2009 for a 2011 release , it eventually commenced production in May 2011 and was released on June 15 , 2012 .
The film received mixed critical reviews and grossed only $ 59 million worldwide .
However , Cruise was particularly lauded for his performance of " Pour Some Sugar on Me " and " Wanted Dead or Alive " .
The related film soundtrack also did critically well , certified Gold in Canada .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1987 , Sherrie Christian ( Julianne Hough ) arrives in Los Angeles from Oklahoma with dreams of becoming a singer .
Meanwhile , barback Drew Boley ( Diego Boneta ) prepares for another night of work at The Bourbon Room ( " Sister Christian /
Just Like Paradise / Nothin ' But a Good Time " ) .
As Sherrie approaches The Bourbon , her suitcase is stolen .
Drew tries to catch the robber , but fails .
He comforts Sherrie and , upon learning of her situation , gets her a job at the Bourbon Room as a waitress .
The club 's owner , Dennis Dupree ( Alec Baldwin ) , and his right - hand man , Lonny Barnett ( Russell Brand ) , are trying to find a way to pay off a tax debt that threatens the club .
Hoping to raise enough money , Dennis and Lonny decide to book Stacee Jaxx ( Tom Cruise ) , a detached and self - indulgent rock star preparing for his final gig with his band , Arsenal .
That night , Drew tells Sherrie about his dreams of becoming a rock star , but that he has stagefright (
" Juke Box Hero / I Love Rock ' n ' Roll " ) .
Upon hearing of Stacee 's upcoming concert , Patricia Whitmore ( Catherine Zeta - Jones ) , the religiously conservative wife of the mayor ( Bryan Cranston ) , organizes a protest with other ladies in front of the Bourbon Room ( " Hit Me with Your Best Shot " ) Drew and Sherrie 's relationship starts with their first date at the Hollywood Sign where Drew admits he has started writing a song for Sherrie ( " Waiting for a Girl Like You " ) .
On the night of Arsenal 's final show , Dennis learns that their opening act has cancelled .
Sherrie convinces him to use Drew and his band , Wolfgang Von Colt , as the replacement opener ( " More Than Words / Heaven " ) .
Meanwhile , Stacee 's manager , Paul Gill ( Paul Giamatti ) , schedules an interview between Stacee and Constance Sack ( Malin Åkerman ) , a reporter for Rolling Stone .
During the interview , she mentions the rumors that Stacee is difficult to work with and implies that he was actually kicked out of Arsenal , a charge Stacee denies ( " Wanted Dead or Alive " ) .
Stacee asks Sherrie if she could bring him a bottle of scotch from his limo and she agrees .
After the interview , Constance lashes out at him , claiming that he was once a great musician but now is on the verge of becoming a has - been .
Stacee orders everyone out of the dressing room so he can settle things with Constance privately .
Both recognize their attraction to each other and are about to have sex when Stacee sings ( " I Want to Know What Love Is " ) .
As Constance leaves the room ashamed of what she has done , Sherrie enters to give Stacee his scotch .
Sherrie and Stacee collide and the bottle of scotch shatters on the floor .
Drew is getting ready to open Arsenal 's show when he sees Sherrie exit Stacee 's room , where he infers that they had sex .
Drew becomes angry at this and is inspired to sing ( " I Wanna Rock " ) for the opening act .
After he sings , Drew and Sherrie break up and Sherrie quits her job at the Bourbon Room .
Drew attempts to run after Sherrie but Paul tells him to let her go and offers Drew a record deal since he was impressed with his performance as Arsenal sings their last song of the night
( " Pour Some Sugar on Me " ) .
An unemployed Sherrie takes refuge at a strip club bar known as the Venus Club , where she has no other choice but to work there
( " Harden My Heart " ) .
The club 's owner , Justice Charlier ( Mary J. Blige ) offers Sherrie a job as a dancer ( " Shadows of the Night / Harden My Heart " ) , but Sherrie instead chooses to wait tables .
Sherrie soon realizes that she is n't making enough money as a waitress as Drew signs to Gill 's record label ( " Here I Go Again " ) .
Back at the Bourbon Room , Dennis worries that the place will close and that he has " let everyone down . "
Lonny comforts him and proceeds to confess his love for him , learning that Dennis reciprocates .
They kiss ( " Ca n't Fight This Feeling " ) .
Drew is disappointed in realizing that he has to be part of a hip - hop boy band called " The Zee Guys " as Joshua Zee and not a rock band as part of his record deal while Sherrie decides to be a dancer in the Venus Club ( " Any Way You Want It " ) .
Sherrie visits the Hollywood sign , where she finds Drew .
They both reveal to each other their current occupations and realize things did n't turn out the way they 'd planned .
Sherrie tells Drew that she did n't have sex with Stacee and that she is going home to Oklahoma .
As they part ways , Sherrie and Drew both lament the situation ( " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " ) .
Stacee realizes he has feelings for Constance and calls the Rolling Stone office in an attempt to find her , but the receptionist tells him that " she is covering Stacee Jaxx 's show at The Bourbon Room " and Stacee , unaware that he was supposed to perform that night , rushes to the venue , where Lonny leads the patrons of the club against Patricia and her protest group
( " We 're Not Gon na Take It
/
We Built This City " ) .
When Stacee arrives at the club , he recognizes Patricia and greets her .
Lonny discovers that Patricia was once a groupie for Arsenal as displayed on their album cover , and exposes this to the public , ruining her reputation .
Meanwhile , Drew has found all of Sherrie 's stolen records at the Tower Records they first visited together .
He buys them back and drops them off for her at the strip club .
The Zee Guys start the show , but the rocker crowd rejects them , and Drew , spotting Sherrie in the audience , leaves the stage .
The two reconcile and Drew also dismisses Gill , telling him rock ' n ' roll will never die .
Sherrie reunites Wolfgang Von Colt for the opening act , where she and Drew perform the song he wrote for her ( " Do n't Stop Believin ' " ) .
Meanwhile , while Stacee and Constance are having sex in the bathroom , Stacee hears the song and is moved by it .
Eight months later , Stacee , who has rejoined Arsenal , performs the song with Drew and Sherrie , who is now part of Wolfgang Von Colt , in a concert at Dodger Stadium in front of a crowd that includes Dennis , Lonny , Justice , a pregnant Constance , and Patricia , who has returned to her rock ' n ' roll persona .
CAST
* Julianne Hough as Sherrie Christian
* Diego Boneta as Drew Boley * Russell Brand as Lonny Barnett
* Paul Giamatti as Paul Gill
* Catherine Zeta - Jones as Patricia Whitmore
* Malin Åkerman as Constance Sack
* Mary J. Blige as Justice Charlier
* Alec Baldwin as Dennis Dupree
* Tom Cruise as Stacee Jaxx * Bryan Cranston as Mayor Mike Whitmore
* Will Forte as Mitch Miley Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Kevin Nash and Jeff Chase starred as Jaxx 's bodyguards .
Constantine Maroulis , who played Drew in the original Broadway cast , appears as the Capitol Records executive during " Any Way You 'll Want It " .
Several musicians also made cameo appearances throughout the film , including Kevin Cronin of REO Speedwagon , Sebastian Bach of Skid Row , Deborah " Debbie " Gibson , Nuno Bettencourt , Joel Hoekstra of Night Ranger and Porcelain Black .
Eli Roth makes an appearance as Stefano , the Z - Guyeezz music video director , and T. J. Miller cameos as a Rolling Stone receptionist .
MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers . !
# !
Title !
Performed by !
Original artist !
Notes
These songs appear in the film as sung by the original artists .
These do not appear on the official soundtrack . !
Title !
Artist !
Notes
SCORE PRODUCTION AND CHANGES Section::::Score production and changes .
In bringing the musical from stage to screen , many of the songs used in the original musical were either moved around , shortened , or removed , while some new songs were added to the film .
" Cum On Feel
the Noize / We're Not Gon na Take It ( Reprise ) " ,
" The Final Countdown " , " High Enough "
, " I Hate Myself for Loving You / Heat of the Moment " , " Keep on Loving You " , " Oh Sherrie " , "
The Search Is Over " , and " Renegade " were completely cut from the film , although the version of " Cum on Feel the Noize " by Quiet Riot was used as music for the end credits , and the intro to " Oh Sherrie " is heard briefly .
Similarly , many songs from the musical became mash - ups in the film or had sections of their original mash - up version removed in their film versions .
"
Just Like Paradise " , " Nothin' but a Good Time " , and " Sister Christian " all become one long mash - up instead of two individual songs ( " Just Like Paradise / Nothin ' but a Good Time " and " Sister Christian " ) .
"
Too Much Time on My Hands " , originally mashed - up with " We Built This City " , was removed , with " We 're Not Gon na Take It " , originally a full - length song in the musical , being mashed - up with " We Built This City " instead . " To Be with You " was removed from the mash - up that included " More Than Words " and " Heaven " .
The " I Wanna Rock ( Reprise ) " section originally mashed - up with " Any Way You Want It " was removed , with " Any Way You Want It " instead being the original full - length song .
Also , many songs from the musical were reordered in the film , mostly to accommodate character and storyline changes .
" We Built This City " , in its original mash - up form , and " We 're Not Gon na Take It " were originally much earlier in the musical , giving depth to Regina .
They were replaced with " Hit Me with Your Best Shot " , another song sung by Regina in the musical , which now served to give more background to new character Patricia ( as Regina was cut from the film ) , with both songs ( in an abridged form ) instead added to the climax of the film , as part of an anthem between Lonny and the rockers and Patricia and her conservative church group .
" I Wanna Rock " , originally the fourth song of the musical , was moved to after "
I Want to Know What Love Is " ( which in itself was changed from a duet between Sherrie and Jaxx to Jaxx and new character Constance ) , with the song now representing Drew 's anger toward what he wrongly perceives to be Sherrie 's infidelity .
" Waiting for a Girl Like You " and " More Than Words / Heaven " switched order in the film version , in order to accommodate the changes in the relationship storyline between Drew and Sherrie . " Ca n't Fight This Feeling " was also placed before " Any Way You Want It " due to the restructure of storylines .
New songs added to the film include a mash - up of " Juke Box Hero /
I Love Rock ' n ' Roll " , which replaced the original purpose of " I Wanna Rock " in the musical , " Undercover Love " , which was used for Drew 's short - lived boy band , and " Pour Some Sugar on Me " , " Paradise City " , and " Rock You Like a Hurricane " replacing "
I Hate Myself for Loving You / Heat of the Moment " and serving as Arsenal 's discography .
PRODUCTION
EARLY
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production .
Section::::Early development .
After the success of the original Off - Broadway production , the film rights were sold to Warner Bros. and New Line Cinema .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Tom Cruise played Stacee Jaxx in the film .
Shankman knew Cruise was in when he heard him on the first go around of his voice lesson , confirming he " actually has a fantastic voice .
" Cruise had been singing five hours a day to prepare for his work as musician Stacee Jaxx .
" It 's this brilliant mashup , it seems , of Axl Rose , Bret Michaels , Keith Richards and Jim Morrison , " Shankman said of what to expect from Cruise .
All of the actors sing their own parts in the film .
Cruise told People Weekly Magazine that he had always wanted to appear in a musical but he found the idea frightening because he was uncertain whether he could actually pull it off .
With Rock Of Ages , he told the interviewer , he had finally received his chance .
On February 14 , 2011 , it was announced that Mary J. Blige had signed on to play Justice Charler in the film .
On March 3 , 2011 , it was confirmed that Julianne Hough ( of the 2011 remake of Footloose ) would play the role of Sherrie , Drew 's love interest .
On March 6 , 2011 , it was confirmed that Alec Baldwin would play the role of Dennis Dupree in the film .
On March 24 , 2011 , it was announced that Paul Giamatti would be in the film , playing the manager of Stacee Jaxx .
Pretty Little Liars star Diego Boneta was confirmed to play the male protagonist , Drew Boley , on April 5 , 2011 .
Not wanting an older actor to act like he is 23 , Shankman thought it better to go as authentic as possible , " and Diego is absolutely that .
He is [ a ] kid who came to Los Angeles with a dream and who sings and has an amazing voice , and drive .
And he 's also as honest and sweet as you can possibly make him and he 's authentically the age .
It creates a piece of something on screen that I do n't have to fabricate . "
Of Boneta 's audition , Shankman said , " It 's that feeling you get when you realized you 've discovered lightning in a bottle .
It reminds me of when Zac Efron auditioned for Hairspray , Channing Tatum for Step Up , and Liam Hemsworth auditioned for The Last Song .
When the guy walks in , the guy walks in ! "
Shankman also said he did not know that Boneta was a Latin music star until after he auditioned .
" I have since seen him on stage and in his concerts , and he totally owns the room , " Shankman said .
Constantine Maroulis ( Drew Boley from the musical ) made a cameo appearance in the film like Ricki Lake did for Hairspray .
On April 13 , Russell Brand was confirmed to portray Lonny .
Both Anne Hathaway and Amy Adams declined to play a journalist who interviews Jaxx during the song " Wanted Dead or Alive " and is easily seduced by him .
The two declined due to scheduling conflicts , with Hathaway filming The Dark Knight Rises and Adams filming Man of Steel .
Catherine Zeta - Jones joined the cast on April 20 , and portrayed an original character added to the story line .
The unnamed character is described as " the Villainess of the movie " who " wants to shut down rock'n roll in the great city of Los Angeles . "
On May 1 Bryan Cranston joined the cast as the Mayor of Los Angeles , who is the husband of Catherine Zeta - Jones 's character , and Malin Åkerman completed the cast when she was added on May 3 , 2011 , taking the role initially offered to both Hathaway and Adams .
Singer Porcelain Black made a cameo in the film , playing a 1980s hair metal singer .
She performed one of the sole original tracks for the film , " Rock Angels " .
" Rock Angels " was written and composed by Adam Anders and Desmond Child .
Professional wrestler Kevin Nash played Stacee 's bodyguard .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began at Revolution Live , a small music venue in Fort Lauderdale , FL .
There was also filming in a Dania Beach Boomers .
On July 18 , filming took place at the Hard Rock Casino in Hollywood , Florida , for a concert scene with " Do n't Stop Believin ' " and " Wanted Dead or Alive " .
The scenes at the iconic Hollywood Sign were filmed at the Monarch Hill Renewable Energy Park , known to locals as " Mount Trashmore " , in Pompano Beach .
In June 2011 , a full six - block section of N.W. 14th Street in Downtown Miami was decorated as a late 1980s version set of the Hollywood , California Sunset Strip complete with the Whisky - a - Go - Go , Frederick 's of Hollywood , Tower Records , Angelyne Billboard along with other landmarks .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film is distributed by New Line Cinema under the rule of Warner Bros. , and was released theatrically on June 15 , 2012 .
The first official trailer was released on December 11 , 2011 , attached to .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
On its opening weekend in theaters , the film grossed $ 14,447,269 , ranking third place , behind the previous week 's holdovers and Prometheus .
The film did , however , do slightly better business than the other newcomer
, That 's My Boy .
Rock of Ages was a box office bomb , grossing $ 38,518,613 in North America and $ 20,900,000 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 59,418,613 , failing to bring back its $ 75 million budget .
However , the film still has the seventh - highest opening ever for a musical .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film received mixed reviews from critics , and has a critical evaluation of 41 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 215 reviews , with an average rating of 6/10 .
The site 's consensus states : " its exuberant silliness is almost enough to make up for its utter inconsequentiality , but Rock of Ages is ultimately too bland and overlong to justify its trip to the big screen . "
Metacritic reports a 47 out of 100 rating , based on 42 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
However , most critics praised the performance by Cruise as Stacee Jaxx .
For example , Rolling Stone critic Peter Travers wrote : " Rock of Ages is pretty fun despite a terrible script , bland leads and awful wigs ,
mainly thanks to a performance by Tom Cruise as fictional hair metal rocker Stacee Jaxx .
"
ACCOLADES HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Rock of Ages was released on DVD and Blu - ray on October 9 , 2012 .
An extended cut is available on the Blu - ray , however there is a 2-disc DVD set featuring the extended version ( 136 minutes ) ; the film is then rated R for " some sexual violence " , as opposed to the theatrically released PG-13 .
This extended cut includes 13 additional minutes of footage , including " Rock You Like a Hurricane " edited back into the film , more risque humor from Russell Brand , and a few additional verses on " Waiting for a Girl
/ Boy Like You " .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The cover and track listing of the soundtrack was confirmed by Entertainment Weekly on April 30 , 2012 .
The soundtrack was released on June 5 , 2012 .
It debuted at No . 15 on Billboard 200 , and peaked at No . 5 on that chart in its third week .
It also debuted at No . 1 on the Top Soundtracks chart .
It sold 267,000 copies in the US in 2012 , making it the second best - selling soundtrack album of the year .
It has sold 320,000 copies as of May 2013 .
The film 's score was composed and conducted by Cliff Eidelman .
* " Paradise City " –
Tom Cruise * * " Sister Christian " /
" Just Like Paradise " /
" Nothin' but a Good Time " – Julianne Hough , Diego Boneta , Russell Brand ,
Alec Baldwin * * " Juke Box Hero " / "
I Love Rock ' n ' Roll " – Diego Boneta , Alec Baldwin , Russell Brand , Julianne Hough
* * " Hit Me With Your Best Shot " –
Catherine Zeta - Jones
*
* " Waiting for a Girl Like You " –
Diego Boneta , Julianne Hough
*
* " More Than Words " / " Heaven " – Julianne Hough , Diego Boneta * *
" Wanted Dead or Alive " –
Tom Cruise , Julianne Hough
*
*
" I Want to Know What Love Is " –
Tom Cruise , Malin Åkerman
*
* " I Wanna Rock " –
Diego Boneta *
* " Pour Some Sugar on Me " –
Tom Cruise *
*
" Harden My Heart " – Julianne Hough ,
Mary J. Blige * * " Shadows of the Night " /
" Harden My Heart " – Mary J. Blige , Julianne Hough
*
*
" Here I Go Again " –
Diego Boneta , Paul Giamatti , Julianne Hough , Mary J. Blige , Tom Cruise
*
* " Ca n't Fight This Feeling " – Russell Brand ,
Alec Baldwin
* * " Any Way You Want It " – Mary J. Blige , Constantine Maroulis , Julianne Hough
* * " Undercover Love " –
Diego Boneta
* * " Every Rose Has Its Thorn " – Julianne Hough , Diego Boneta , Tom Cruise ,
Mary J. Blige * *
" Rock You Like a Hurricane " – Julianne Hough , Tom Cruise
* * " We Built This City " /
" We 're Not Gon na Take It " –
Russell Brand , Catherine Zeta - Jones
*
* " Do n't Stop Believin ' " –
Julianne Hough , Diego Boneta , Tom Cruise , Alec Baldwin , Russell Brand ,
Mary J. Blige * Certifications REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS