DRAFT - CARD BURNING Draft - card burning was a symbol of protest performed by thousands of young men in the US and Australia in the 1960s and early 1970s .
The first draft - card burners were American men taking part in the opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War .
The first well - publicized protest was in December 1963 , with a 22-year old conscientious objector , Eugene Keyes , setting fire to his card on Christmas Day in Champaign , Illinois .
In May 1964 , a larger demonstration , with about 50 people in Union Square , New York , was organized by the War Resisters League chaired by David McReynolds .
By May 1965 it was happening with greater frequency around the US .
To limit this kind of protest , in August 1965 , the United States Congress enacted a law to broaden draft card violations to punish anyone who " knowingly destroys , knowingly mutilates " his draft card .
Subsequently , 46 men were indicted for burning their draft cards at various rallies , and four major court cases were heard .
One of them , United States v. O'Brien , was argued before the Supreme Court .
The act of draft card burning was defended as a symbolic form of free speech , a constitutional right guaranteed by the First Amendment .
The Supreme Court decided against the draft card burners ; it determined that the federal law was justified and that it was unrelated to the freedom of speech .
In Australia following the 1966 troop increases directed by Prime Minister Harold Holt , conscription notices were burned at mass demonstrations against Australian involvement in Vietnam .
In June 1968 , the government reacted by strengthening penalties for infractions of the Menzies Government 1964 National Service Act , including the burning of registration cards .
War protest ceased in 1972 when Australia 's new Labor government withdrew troops from Vietnam and abolished conscription .
From 1965 to 1973 , very few men in the US were convicted of burning their draft cards .
Some 25,000 others went unpunished .
Before 1965 , the act of burning a draft card was already prohibited by US statute — the registrant was required to carry the card at all times , and any destruction of it was thus against the law .
Also , it was entirely possible for a young man to destroy his draft card and still answer his country 's call to service by appearing at an induction center and serving in the military .
And it was possible for a registrant to faithfully keep his card on his person but fail to appear when called .
The draft card was not an essential part of the government 's ability to draft men into the military .
Thus draft - card burning was an act of war resistance more than it was draft resistance .
The image of draft card burning was a powerful one , influential in American politics and culture .
It appeared in magazines , newspapers and on television , signaling a political divide between those who backed the US government and its military goals and those who were against any US involvement in Vietnam .
Richard Nixon ran for president in 1968 on a platform based partly on putting an end to the draft , in order to undercut protesters making use of the symbolic act .
As president , Nixon ended the draft in 1973 , rendering unnecessary the symbolic act of draft - card burning .
BACKGROUND UNITED STATES Section::::Background .
Section::::United States .
From 1948 , under the Selective Service Act , all American men aged 18 through 25 were required to register with a local draft board .
In case of war , the able - bodied ones among them could be drafted to serve in the military .
The law required the men to carry their draft cards with them at all times .
These were small cards bearing the registrant 's identifying information , the date and place of registration , and a unique Selective Service number .
In an amendment sponsored by Congressmen L. Mendel Rivers and William G. Bray , on August 31 , 1965 , the law was augmented with four words , to include penalties for any person who " knowingly destroys , knowingly mutilates " the card , under 50 U.S.C. § 462(b)(3 ) .
Strom Thurmond moved the bill through the Senate , calling draft - card burning " contumacious conduct " which " represents a potential threat to the exercise of the power to raise and support armies .
" At the time , many observers ( including the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ) believed that Congress had intentionally targeted anti - war draft - card burners .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Following the 1964 National Service Act , legislated in response to the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation , 20-year - old Australian men were subject to military service based on a birthday lottery .
In April 1965 , Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies sent a battalion of Army regulars to Vietnam , beginning an overseas involvement in that country which lasted for seven years and provoked deeply divisive debate back home .
In early 1966 , Menzies retired and Harold Holt became Prime Minister .
In March 1966 , Holt announced troop increases bringing the total commitment to 4,500 men in Vietnam , a tripling of effort .
Significantly , conscripts could now be sent into combat .
Protests broke out , including a draft - card burning demonstration outside of Holt 's home .
In late June 1966 with President Lyndon B. Johnson listening , Holt spoke in Washington , D.C. in support of American policy .
In his speech he closed by saying that Australia was a " staunch friend " of America , willing to go " all the way with LBJ " .
This statement was widely criticized in Australia .
Marxist writer and draft - card burner Andy Blunden said in July that , " by following America into Vietnam , Holt 's Australia is playing the role of Mussolini 's Italy . "
In December the government bolstered the Vietnam presence with 1,700 more troops .
John Gorton took the Prime Minister position in January 1968 .
In June 1968 , the government doubled the penalty for the burning of registration cards .
In 1971 , the government committed to a gradual but total withdrawal from Vietnam — following both Australian opinion and America 's new policy .
In 1972 , all troops including the advisory team were ordered home from Vietnam .
Draft resisters in jail were freed .
The final birthday lottery was held September 22 , 1972 .
US COURT CASES
EARLY CASES Section::::US court cases .
Section::::Early cases .
On October 15 , 1965 , David J. Miller burned his draft card at a rally held near the Armed Forces Induction Center on Whitehall Street in Manhattan .
He spoke briefly to the crowd from atop a sound truck and then tried but failed to burn his card with matches — the wind kept blowing them out .
A lighter was offered by the crowd and it worked .
Miller was arrested by the FBI three days later in Manchester , New Hampshire while setting up peace literature on a table .
The 24-year - old pacifist , member of the Catholic Worker Movement , became the first man convicted under the 1965 amendment .
In April 1966 with his wife and breast - feeding baby in attendance , he was sentenced to 30 months in prison .
The case was argued in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in June .
Miller 's attorney held that " symbolic speech is protected by the First Amendment ; burning a draft card is a most dramatic form of communication , and there is a constitutional right to make one 's speech as effective as possible .
" The court did not agree .
The case was decided later that year in October : Miller 's conviction was confirmed and his sentence upheld .
Loudon Wainwright , Jr. wrote in Life magazine that Miller , " without really knowing it , might be embarking on a lifelong career of protest . "
Miller remained free on bail until June 1968 at which time he served 22 months in federal prison .
At an anti - war rally at the Iowa Memorial Union in Iowa City , Iowa , on October 20 , 1965 , 20-year - old Stephen Lynn Smith , a student at the University of Iowa , spoke to the crowd and burned his draft card .
He said , " I do not feel that five years of my life are too much to give to say that this law is wrong . "
He had previously alerted newspaper reporters and two television stations , and they were present to record his act .
Smith said he was against the involvement of the US in Vietnam , and that he was against the system of conscription .
In November 1966 he was found guilty and placed on probation for three years .
In June – July 1967 , United States v. Edelman was argued and decided in the US Second Circuit .
Tom Cornell , Marc Paul Edelman and Roy Lisker had burned their draft cards at a public rally organized by the Committee for Non - Violent Action in Union Square , New York City , on November 6 , 1965 .
A fourth man older than 36 also burned his card at the rally but was not indicted .
Edelman , Cornell and Lisker were convicted and sentenced to six months .
UNITED STATES
V. O'BRIEN Section::::United States v. O'Brien .
On the morning of March 31 , 1966 , David Paul O'Brien and three companions burned their draft cards on the steps of the South Boston Courthouse , in front of a crowd that included several FBI agents .
After the four men came under attack from some of the crowd , an FBI agent ushered O'Brien inside the courthouse and advised him of his rights .
O'Brien made a confession and produced the charred remains of the certificate .
He was then indicted for violating § 462(b)(3 ) and put on trial in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts .
O'Brien argued that the four words ( " knowingly destroys , knowingly mutilates " ) added to the draft card law were unconstitutional , that they were an abridgment of the freedom of speech .
He argued that the amendment served no valid purpose because the Selective Service Act already required draft registrants to carry their card on their persons at all times , thus any form of destruction was already a violation .
He explained that he burned the draft card publicly as a form of symbolic speech to persuade others to oppose the war , " so that other people would reevaluate their positions with Selective Service , with the armed forces , and reevaluate their place in the culture of today , to hopefully consider my position . "
On January 24 , 1968 , the Supreme Court determined that the 1965 amendment was constitutional as enacted and as applied , and that it did not distinguish between public or private destruction or mutilation of the draft card .
They determined that there was nothing necessarily expressive in the burning of a draft card .
Chief Justice Earl Warren said , " we can not accept the view that an apparently limitless variety of conduct can be labeled ' speech ' whenever the person engaging in the conduct intends thereby to express an idea . "
O'Brien 's previous sentence of six years was upheld .
The Supreme Court 's conclusion was criticized by legal observers such as Dean Alfange Jr for its " astonishingly cavalier " treatment .
Many saw in O'Brien 's act a clear communicative element with the " intent to convey a particularized message " , an intent to which the court did not give much weight .
Instead , the court weighed as greater the government 's interest " in assuring the continued availability of issued Selective Service certificates . "
In 1975 , legal scholar John Hart Ely found fault with O'Brien .
He pointed out that the draft - card - burning question was not decided in relation to the similar one surrounding the act of flag burning ; an issue which the court had avoided for years .
Ely 's analysis was aided by that of Thomas Scanlon in 1972 , in A Theory of Freedom of Expression , which interpreted the freedom of speech broadly , including such public and political acts as self - immolation .
In 1990 O'Brien was analyzed again by critics following the case United States v. Eichman which determined that flag burning was a form of free speech , and some made comparisons to the earlier 1984 case Clark v. Community for Creative Non - Violence which determined that sleeping at a protest rally location in a downtown park was valid as a symbolic expression intended to bring attention to the plight of the homeless .
These expansive interpretations of the freedom of speech appeared large enough to include draft - card burning .
The position taken in O'Brien was that the individual 's right to freedom of speech did not limit the government in prohibiting harmful conduct .
However , the harmful conduct of burning a draft card did not have the normal test applied : it was not determined to be a case of " clear and present danger " .
In 1996 , future Supreme Court Justice Elena Kagan pointed out that the O'Brien court did not appear to be concerned whether the law as enacted or enforced " matched , or even resembled " the asserted government interest of stopping draft resistance protests .
Kagan noted that the law prohibiting the destruction of the draft card " interfered " with only one point of view : that of the anti - war protester .
She allowed as how a successful challenge to O'Brien might come from focusing on such skewed constraints .
RALLIES Section::::Rallies .
On Armed Forces Day in the United States ( Saturday , May 16 , 1964 ) , in New York , 12 students at a rally burned their draft cards .
At the University of California , Berkeley , on May 5 , 1965 , amid a protest march of several hundred people carrying a black coffin to the Berkeley draft board , 40 men burned their draft cards .
One of them told reporters the act was symbolic — he said " we can get new cards if we apply for them . "
On May 22 , 1965 , the Berkeley draft board was visited again , with 19 men burning their cards .
President Lyndon B. Johnson was hanged in effigy .
In August 1965 , Life carried a photograph of a man demonstrating in front of the Armed Forces Induction Center on Whitehall Street in Manhattan , July 30 , 1965 .
Like David J. Miller a few months later , he was a member of the Catholic Worker Movement .
He was not arrested .
Antiwar activist Abbie Hoffman burned his draft card privately in the Spring of 1967 .
Hoffman 's card classified him as 4F — unfit for service — because of bronchial asthma .
His act was purely symbolic ; he would never be drafted .
However , Hoffman supported those registrants who were burning their cards .
On April 15 , 1967 , at Sheep Meadow , Central Park , New York City , some 60 young men including a few students from Cornell University came together to burn their draft cards in a Maxwell House coffee can .
Surrounded by their friends who linked arms to protect them , the men began burning their cards .
Others rushed in to join them , holding their burning cards up in the air .
Watching this were police , FBI men , newsreel cameramen , reporters , photographers and passers - by .
Uniformed Green Beret Army reservist Gary Rader walked to the center and burned his draft card .
The 23-year - old was arrested by FBI agents several days later at his home in Evanston , Illinois .
Time magazine estimated 75 total cards ; participant Martin Jezer wrote that there were about 158 cards burnt in all .
Future Youth International Party leader Hoffman was in attendance .
The reports of this large protest were discussed by the leaders of the Spring Mobilization Conference , a march of 150,000 people led by Martin Luther King Jr and Dr. Benjamin Spock starting from Sheep Meadow .
The May conference developed into the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam , known as The Mobe .
In January 1968 , Spock was indicted on charges of encouraging draft evasion , with the Boston 5 .
He was convicted on July 10 , 1968 .
The charges were overturned on appeal in July 1969 .
In May 1967 in response to the Sheep Meadow demonstration , 56-year - old anarchist intellectual Paul Goodman published a piece in The New York Review of Books sympathetic to both public and private draft card burning .
The editors printed a salvo of responses .
One from Ann D. Gordon , a doctoral student of American history , said that private , individual acts of card burning were useless in stopping the war .
Jezer wrote a letter thanking Goodman for his support and , as an eye witness , corrected him on certain details .
Jezer said the FBI arrested only Rader ; other participants were merely visited by FBI agents .
Goodman 's article exhorted his readers to massive direct action in draft resistance ; in response , folk singer Robert Claiborne wrote to the Review to say that Goodman 's plan would " check the growth of the peace movement and markedly reduce prospects for ending the war . "
Claiborne asserted that the " great majority " of Americans were " squares " over 30 and not in favor of war protest even though they were likely interested in " ending the slaughter of their sons and other people 's sons . " October 16 , 1967 , was a day of widespread war protest organized by The Mobe in 30 cities across the US , with some 1,400 draft cards burned .
At the Unitarian Arlington Street Church in Boston , draft registrants were given the opportunity to turn in their draft cards to be sent as a package to Selective Service as an act of civil disobedience against the war .
Those offering their draft cards split into two groups : a group of 214 turned in their cards , and 67 chose to burn their cards .
These 67 used an old candle from prominent Unitarian preacher William Ellery Channing to supply the flame .
One woman , Nan Stone , burned a draft card belonging to Steve Paillet — the 1965 law allowed for anyone to be punished for draft - card burning , even someone who was not registered for the draft .
Stone later typed up the information from the 214 turned - in cards to serve as a database of war resisters .
She found that the average and median age of the men was 22 , and that three out of four came from Harvard , Yale , or Boston University .
At San Francisco 's Federal Building on December 4 , 1967 , some 500 protesters witnessed 88 draft cards collected and burned .
About 1,000 draft cards were turned in on April 3 , 1968 , in nationwide protests organized by The Mobe .
In Boston , 15,000 protesters watched 235 men turn in their draft cards .
War protesters were increasingly choosing the more profound act of turning in their draft cards , an act which gave the government the name and address of the protester .
Burning the draft card destroyed the evidence , and by this time was seen as less courageous .
REACTIONS
WITHIN THE ANTI - WAR MOVEMENT Section::::Reactions .
Section::::Within the anti - war movement .
Even some supporters of the anti - war movement , such as William Sloane Coffin , expressed concern that the tactic was " unnecessarily hostile . "
HIGH MEDIA
EXPOSURE Section::::High media exposure .
Many in America were not happy with the draft - card burners , or with the frequent depiction of them in the media .
Joseph Scerra , national commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars , spoke against what he saw as too much news coverage : " All of our young people are not burning up their draft cards .
All of our young people are not tearing up the flag .
All of our youth are not supporting North Vietnam and carrying Viet Cong flags . "
In October 1967 at a rally in support of the government a news photograph was snapped of a man kissing his draft card , his girlfriend smiling at his side .
In Playboys November 1967 issue , Playboy Playmate Kaya Christian wrote that her " turn - offs " were " hypocrites " and " draft card burners " .
Leftist Ramparts magazine showed four draft cards being burned on the December 1967 cover .
The Saturday Evening Post , a conservative publication , put an image of draft card burning on their cover , January 27 , 1968 .
In 1967 off - Broadway and 1968 on Broadway and in London 's West End , the musical Hair featured a climactic scene in Act I of a group of men in a hippie " tribe " burning their draft cards while the main character Claude struggles with the decision to join them .
Later , when the musical was staged in Yugoslavia , the draft - card burning scene was removed , as the local protesting youth viewed their army positively as a vehicle to fight for independence against the Soviet Union .
FRAMING THE MOVEMENT Section::::Framing the movement .
President Johnson spoke strongly against the draft - card protesters , saying in October 1967 that he wanted the " antidraft movement " investigated for Communist influences .
Reporting on his reaction , The New York Times presented the protests as being against the draft rather than the war .
Many commentators focused on draft resistance as an explanation rather than the more challenging war resistance : the main concern of the protesters .
POLITICAL IMPACT
Section::::Political impact .
In 1968 when Richard Nixon was running for President , he promised to make the military into a purely volunteer force .
In this he was following others who had suggested such a strategy , including Donald Rumsfeld of the Republican Wednesday Group the year before .
At the beginning of his second term as President , Nixon stopped the draft after February 1973 .
The last man to be drafted entered the US Army on June 30 , 1973 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Associated Press photograph of a December 4 , 1967 , protest in San Francisco , involving 88 draft cards burned