SONG BENEATH
THE SONG
" Song Beneath the Song , " also known as Grey 's Anatomy : " The Music Event , " is the eighteenth episode of the seventh season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the one - hundred forty - fourth episode overall .
It was named after a song initially performed by American singer Maria Taylor .
Written by series creator Shonda Rhimes and directed by Tony Phelan , it premiered on ABC in the United States on March 31 , 2011 .
It is the series 's first musical episode , and features the cast performing songs previously featured within the program .
It is accompanied by a soundtrack album , titled Grey 's Anatomy : The Music Event , also released on March 31 , 2011 .
The episode revolves around Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) and Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) , just after they are involved in a vehicular collision .
Various songs are performed by the cast members , as they attempt to save the life of Torres .
Rhimes originally idealized the episode at the conception of the drama , while the show remained untitled .
The episode opened to mixed reviews from television critics , and it was the second most watched program of the night . "
Song Beneath the Song " was ranked in several " best and worst " lists , and the soundtrack was included on the Billboard 200 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
En route to a weekend getaway , surgeons Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) are involved in a vehicular collision , moments after Robbins proposes marriage .
Torres suffers severe injuries , which endanger both her life and the life of her unborn child .
She and Robbins are taken to Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital , the institute at which they both work .
Their colleagues attempt to save Torres , while Robbins and Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , the father of Torres 's baby , stand by .
Torres 's many injuries include neurological trauma .
While barely conscious , she hallucinates an uninjured version of herself standing beside her .
The hallucinatory Torres begins to sing , and is gradually joined by the doctors treating her .
This singing continues throughout the episode , as Torres 's projection of herself attempts to reach out to Robbins .
Torres goes into cardiac arrest and is taken into an operating room she is temporarily stabilized , pending further surgery .
She is moved into intensive care , while neonatal surgeon Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) is flown in by helicopter in case the baby has to be delivered prematurely .
Robbins and Sloan argue over Torres 's treatment ; Robbins believes that Torres would not risk endangering the baby , but Sloan argues for saving Torres at all costs .
The attending surgeons devise a treatment plan , led by trauma surgeon Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) .
As they do so , Torres dreams about the moments preceding the accident .
Her dream self sings to Robbins , interspersed with shots of the hospital staff singing and dancing with their own partners .
Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) suggests treating Torres with a high - risk but potentially effective cardiothoracic procedure she learned from her old mentor , Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) .
Her current mentor , Teddy Altman ( Kim Raver ) , refuses to perform it , but when Torres 's condition deteriorates and she is rushed back into surgery , Hunt agrees that Yang should attempt the procedure .
When Torres again goes into cardiac arrest , Montgomery delivers her daughter at twenty - three weeks 's gestation .
The baby is initially unable to breathe , so with Sloan 's support , Robbins steps in and is able to revive her .
Across the operating room , Torres 's condition begins to improve .
Once the surgery is complete , the doctors deal with their own affairs ; Sloan 's former partner Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) commits to her new relationship with resident Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) ;
Lexie 's sister ( and series main character )
Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo , primary series star ) confesses that she was jealous of Torres 's pregnancy , which prompts her husband Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) to promise that they will have a child together ; Altman tells Yang that she can no longer teach her ; Sloan and Robbins bond over their shared parenthood .
Later , as Robbins keeps a vigil by Torres 's bedside , the hallucinatory Torres is able to rouse her recovering self .
As she regains consciousness , Torres accepts Robbins 's proposal .
PRODUCTION CONCEPTION Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception .
Since Grey 's Anatomy began , series creator Shonda Rhimes had planned to produce a musical episode .
She first discussed the idea during filming of the pilot episode , when the program was as yet untitled .
Rhimes felt that seasons six and seven were the right time for the crew to " try anything and everything [ they had ] always wanted to do , " and explained that she " finally [ had ] the right idea and the right talent to make [ a musical episode ] happen . "
Filming began seven and a half years after Rhimes initially raised the idea .
The episode was shot in approximately two weeks .
Though cast member Dempsey jokingly referred to the episode as Glee M.D. , Rhimes intended for it to differ from other .
She called it the opposite of " Once More , with Feeling , " the " all - out , show - stopping , " musical episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , as she aimed to " do something that was musical without being a musical . "
Rhimes said she had difficulty getting the network 's permission .
She added : " I begged the studio people .
I begged the network people .
I took these people to dinner and begged .
I jumped out at these people in bathrooms and begged .
And they all smiled politely but what they were clearly really thinking was , ' This woman is an idiot . ' "
Rhimes also told about delays in producing this episode :
The script was written by Rhimes in November 2010 .
She centered the episode around Ramirez 's character , Callie , and stated that the storyline would have developed regardless of whether it involved musical performances .
Sara Ramirez used the opportunity to launch her career as a singer - songwriter ; an alternate version of " The Story " is included on her debut EP , released four days prior to the episode 's premiere .
In this episode , Mark and Arizona improve their relationship .
Capshaw said , " The traumatic circumstance leads to them having a greater understanding of each other and then appreciation , and then need for each other and desire to be in each other 's lives .
They come to care , I think , for one another . "
MUSICAL PERFORMANCES
Section::::Musical performances .
Rhimes , executive producer Betsy Beers and director Tony Phelan selected songs that had become well - known by their use in Grey 's Anatomy , and chose " the most iconic ones , the ones that best suited [ their ] singers , and the ones that made the most sense .
" The multiple cover versions include the program 's theme tune , " Cosy in the Rocket " by Psapp .
The primary vocalists are cast members Ramirez , McKidd , Leigh and Chandra Wilson .
The soundtrack also includes " How to Save a Life " by The Fray and " Running on Sunshine " by Jesus Jackson , performed as ensemble pieces by Ramirez , McKidd , Wilson , Leigh , Daniel Sunjata , Scott Foley , Ellen Pompeo , Justin Chambers , Raver , Dane , and Capshaw .
Ramirez , McKidd and Wilson also perform together on Snow Patrol 's " Chasing Cars . "
Ramirez is the lead vocalist on " The Story " by Brandi Carlile , and " Grace " by Kate Havnevik , which also features the other female cast members , including Leigh and Sarah Drew on the chorus .
Capshaw duets with Ramirez on KT Tunstall 's " Universe & U.
" Wilson is the lead vocalist on " Wait " by Get Set Go , McKidd on " How We Operate " by Gomez , and Leigh on Anna Nalick 's " Breathe ( 2 AM ) . "
Leigh said that some actors were not " excited " about singing but still could participate in the episode .
" There were certain ways in which the scenes were written , even if there was a song in there , that perhaps a line was spoken instead of sung , " she said .
A vocal coach was enlisted to help the cast .
Music director Chris Horvath was recruited to arrange the selected songs for the cast .
The arrangements took around two months , with vocals recorded over four days in February 2011 .
Horvath praised the cast 's response to the episode , noting that only four performers had " serious vocal talent , " while some had " barely sung in the shower " before .
Those with professional singing experience include Ramirez , who won a Tony Award for her role in the musical Spamalot , and Wilson , who appeared in the Broadway production of Caroline , or Change .
Cast members 's reactions toward the episode varied .
Pompeo initially deemed the idea " crazy , " but changed her mind following the first read - through .
Recurring cast member Sunjata stated that singing was " a bit out of [ his ] comfort zone , " but found it an " interesting challenge , " and McKidd deemed it " very exciting to do something that 's completely out on a limb for the show . "
RECEPTION PRE - BROADCAST COMMENTARY Section::::Reception .
Section::::Pre - broadcast commentary .
Critical response prior to broadcast was mixed .
TVLine Michael Ausiello assessed that the episode would " either be a show - stopping triumph or a spectacular failure , " with no possible middle ground .
William Keck of TV Guide initially had " serious doubts , " which were allayed by a visit to the set , during which he listened to the soundtrack .
Keck likened it to the " much - beloved early seasons of Grey , when music played a vital role on the show . "
Entertainment Weekly Dan Snierson predicted heavy use of Auto Tune , though fellow EW writer Jennifer Armstrong was optimistic that the episode would be a success , commenting : " I have faith .
I like musicals , I like Grey .
I 'm rooting for this to work . "
RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
During its original broadcast , " Song Beneath the Song " was watched by an average of 13.09 million American viewers .
It attained a 4.9/13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18–49 demographic , making it the second highest - rated program of the night , behind only American Idol on the Fox network .
The rating was the second highest of the seventh season until that point , and a 30 percent increase from the previous episode , " This is How We Do It , " which was watched by 2.4 million fewer viewers .
In Canada , where the episode also aired on March 31 , 2011 , it was watched by 3.18 million viewers .
Viewership again increased on "
This is How We Do It , " which attained 2.63 million viewers .
However , while the preceding episode was the most - viewed scripted show for the week of its original broadcast , " Song Beneath the Song " ranked second , behind The Big Bang Theory .
POST - BROADCAST COMMENTARY Section::::Post - broadcast commentary .
Following the first minutes of the drama , reactions on Twitter were mixed .
Nicole Golden from TV Fanatic gave the episode 4.5 stars out of 5.0 .
She found that " overall , the concept worked since music really has always played a big part in the show .
Some songs were more appropriate and/or better performed than others , though . "
She also wrote the concept worked in part because it was new but noted " the format would probably not have the same effect if used in future episodes .
" Even though Boston Heralds critic Mark Perigard was not a fan of the concept , saying " the Grey 's Anatomy event proved how tricky it is for an established show , especially a drama , to pull off a musical episode , " he did like several actors 's performances .
He wrote : " Chandra Wilson and Chyler Leigh ( whom I never have anything good to say about ) delivered some impressive vocal work .
Eric Dane did some of his best acting of his career last night as an anxious father - to - be terrified he would lose his best friend . "
Lyneka Little of The Wall Street Journal wrote , " If Glee and ER had a baby it would be tonight 's episode of the medical drama Grey 's Anatomy titled " Song Beneath the Song . "
" In his review of the episode Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote " Like Grey 's Anatomy as a whole , some parts were unintentionally silly , others were surprisingly powerful , and it was rarely dull , at least . "
Patrick Dempsey admitted that the musical episode might not have been showrunner Shonda Rhimes 's best idea .
He explained : " It 's very difficult to keep it fresh when you 're doing 24 episodes a year .
Shonda Rhimes has a lot of ideas , and she is in a position where she can take more chances .
Sometimes that works , sometimes it does not .
Last year we had the singing episode , which I think was a big mistake .
But you have to try . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In 2011 , the episode was ranked number 19 on the TV Guide Network special , 25 Biggest TV Blunders 2 .
It was included in TV Guides list
" The Worst of 2011 " saying , " Sara Ramirez has powerhouse pipes , but what this episode desperately needed was a better playlist .
"
BuddyTV , however , ranked it number 43 on its list of 2011 's 50 Best TV Episodes and it also appeared on Digital Spy 's shortlist of " TV 's Best Musical Episodes . "
Supervising Music Editor Jennifer Barak and Music Editors Carli Barber and Jessica Harrison were nominated in the Best Sound Editing : Short Form Musical in Television category at the 2012 Golden Reel Awards for their work on the episode .
SOUNDTRACK TRACK LISTING
CHART HISTORY Section::::Soundtrack .
Section::::Chart history .
Grey 's Anatomy : The Music Event debuted at number 24 on the Billboard 200 , with 19,000 copies sold .
It reached number 2 on the U.S. Soundtracks chart , and was the number 5 Independent Album .
"
The Story " entered the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart at number 69 , and the Canadian Hot 100 at 72 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Song Beneath the Song " at ABC.com