PAN AM ( TV SERIES )
Pan Am is an American period drama television series created by writer Jack Orman .
Named for the iconic Pan American World Airways , the series features the pilots and stewardesses of the airline as it operated in the early 1960s at the beginning of the commercial Jet Age .
Pan Am premiered on ABC on September 25 , 2011 , and ended on February 19 , 2012 .
ABC canceled the series on May 11 , 2012 .
In May 2012 , Sony Pictures Television had conversations with Amazon about picking up the series for a second season because of its international success .
It won the " Best Series " at the Rose d'Or TV awards , Europe 's equivalent of the Emmys .
Unable to reach a deal with Amazon , the producers officially ended the series on June 20 , 2012 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Mike Vogel as Dean Lowrey , a Boeing 707 pilot recently promoted to captain on Pan Am 's international routes and one of the youngest airline captains in the industry .
A former Air Force pilot , he had been romantically involved with the crew 's former purser , Bridget , and is now pursuing a relationship with Colette .
Dean also finds himself in a secret relationship with Ginny , the mistress of a Pan Am vice president .
* Michael Mosley as Ted Vanderway , the crew 's first officer ( co - pilot ) .
A former United States Naval Aviator and test pilot , he was honorably discharged from the navy after a naval tribunal blamed him for the crash of an aircraft he was piloting even though his father ( whose company manufactured the aircraft ) admits to Ted in private that there was a mechanical problem .
Though he is engaged to his childhood friend , Amanda , Ted slowly develops a relationship with Laura .
* Christina Ricci as Margaret " Maggie " Ryan , the flight crew 's idealistic and liberal - minded purser , who is not afraid to test the rules and her Pan Am superiors .
Originally from Tacoma , Washington , Maggie worked as a waitress in a seedy diner after dropping out of college during her freshman year .
She joined Pan Am by creating the impression that she was fluent in Portuguese because her former employer was from Brazil .
* Margot Robbie as Laura Cameron , a stewardess newly out of training , and Kate Cameron 's younger sister .
Laura appears on the cover of Life magazine in her Pan Am uniform , making her a minor celebrity and a source of irritation for her older sister .
Having run away from her own wedding in New Haven , Connecticut , several months prior , she struggles to grow up and prove to her sister that she can stand up on her own two feet .
* Kelli Garner as Catherine " Kate " Cameron , an experienced , trilingual stewardess and Laura Cameron 's older , head - strong sister .
During the pilot episode , Kate is recruited by the CIA and starts taking early assignments as a covert operative .
She demonstrates a flair for espionage that impresses her handlers .
In the final episode , she is promoted from courier to agent .
* Karine Vanasse as Colette Valois , a French Pan Am stewardess .
Orphaned during the German occupation of France during World War II , she still harbors resentment toward the German people .
It is later on revealed that her parents were French Jews who had been killed at Dachau shortly after she was left at an orphanage .
Furthermore , she has a brother who was placed for adoption ; by the end of the series , Colette plans to search for him .
RECURRING
* Colin Donnell as Mike Ruskin , a columnist for The Village Voice who befriends Maggie on his trip to Berlin and publishes her scathing article on Congressman Rawlings .
* David Harbour as Roger Anderson , a British MI6 agent and Kate 's covert intelligence operations contact in London .
It is revealed in the season finale that Anderson is a double agent for the KGB .
* Jeremy Davidson as Richard Parks , Kate 's CIA handler and mentor , based in New York .
In the season finale , he recommends that Kate be sent to Langley for training as one of the CIA 's first female field officers .
* Scott Cohen as Everett Henson , a Pan Am vice president whose mistress , Ginny , has a secret affair with Dean .
* Chris Beetem as Congressman Christopher Rawlings , a Republican congressman who briefly has an affair with Maggie , despite their political differences ; Rawlings is a right - wing conservative and Maggie is a left - wing liberal .
* Darren Pettie as Captain George Broyles , a veteran Pan Am pilot who smuggles alcohol and tobacco during his flights on the side .
Despite being punched by Dean for this activity , he lures Maggie into becoming his business partner .
He also saves Dean from termination by giving the investigating board an endorsement from Juan Trippe
* Kal Parekh as Sanjeev , the crew 's Indian flight engineer .
* Jay O. Sanders as Douglas Vanderway , Ted 's father and president of a major aeronautics firm .
After Ted is discharged from the US Navy , Douglas has Juan Trippe hire him into Pan Am .
* Goran Visnjic as Niko Lonza , a Yugoslavian diplomat attached to the United Nations , serving in the United States .
He becomes involved with Kate , and finds himself torn between his love of his homeland and the advantages of his new country .
Visnjic appeared in a three - episode arc beginning with the season 's fifth episode .
* Piter Marek as Omar , a Wahran prince who befriends Colette after boarding a flight to Rome with no money or luggage .
On the rebound from her relationship with Dean , Colette accepts Omar 's advances and nearly becomes engaged to him ; however , he reluctantly breaks things off after Colette consents to a background check which reveals her Jewish heritage ( something which Omar 's family would not accept ) .
* Annabelle Wallis as Bridget Pierce , an English stewardess and former Pan Am purser .
She was dating Dean Lowrey before she resigned from Pan Am and vacated her flat in London following her deactivation as an MI6 courier .
She recommends that Richard recruit Kate into the CIA as a courier .
After Kate kills the intelligence dealer who was planning to sell a list of CIA / MI6 assets , Bridget reclaims her job at Pan Am and hopes to reclaim Dean as well .
* Veanne Cox as Miss Havemeyer , an uptight , authoritarian Pan Am supervisor who is always at odds with Maggie .
* Erin Cummings as Ginny Saddler , a mistress of Pan Am vice president Everett Henson .
She becomes romantically involved with Dean behind Henson 's back ; however , Maggie exposes her secret affair to the vice president .
When Dean urges Ginny to end their affair , she takes it hard enough to smash her face through a window in Rome .
* Ashley Greene as Amanda Mason , Ted 's childhood friend and later , love interest and fiancée .
At a party , she unexpectedly kisses a desolate Maggie .
When Ted later confronts Amanda , she admits that she feels more comfortable around women , and Ted refuses her proposal of an open marriage .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Sony licensed the rights to use the Pan Am name and logo from Pan Am Systems , a New Hampshire – based railroad company that acquired the Pan Am brand in 1998 .
The pilot episode cost an estimated $ 10 million .
The series was produced by Sony Pictures Television , and was optioned by ABC in May 2011 for the 2011–2012 schedule .
ABC commissioned five more scripts in November 2011 .
The broadcaster later added a fourteenth episode to the series .
In the middle of the first season , Steven Maeda was hired as Pan Ams new showrunner , with the mandate to " serialize and embrace the soap aspect " of the show .
In November 2011 , there was media speculation that the series had been canceled by ABC , based on a comment from Karine Vanasse about the future of Pan Am and its absence from the mid - season schedule .
The network denied the rumors ; it planned to complete fourteen episodes and delay any announcement regarding a second season to a later date .
The series was canceled on May 11 , 2012 .
Although its episodes depict the characters in various cities around the world , the show was filmed at the Brooklyn Navy Yard and other locations around New York City .
The pilot was filmed partly at Gold Coast Studios in Bethpage on Long Island .
According to Entertainment Weekly magazine , a life - size recreation of a Pan Am 707 jet is " the biggest star of the series — in all senses " .
The 707 model is kept in a hangar near the Brooklyn waterfront .
Nancy Hult Ganis , a Pan Am stewardess from 1968 to 1976 , was one of the show 's executive producers and is credited as the series developer ; she researched for the series at the Pan Am Historical Foundation and at Pan Am 's archives at the University of Miami .
In addition , Ganis advised the actors , props department , production designers , and costumers in making details for the show as accurate as possible .
The program featured the trademark , sky - blue Pan Am uniforms worn by stewardesses .
Costume design was overseen by Anne Crabtree , who ensured attention to detail .
The department made the replicas based on an old uniform which was thoroughly studied .
Twenty craftsmen worked to produce each outfit .
The technique was the same used by Pan Am in the sixties , and Crabtree said the process was very " old school " .
At the time , girdles were mandatory to improve posture ; some of the cast members found them " extremely restricting " during filming .
Crabtree said that male costumes were inspired by James Dean and Steve McQueen .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
The September 12 , 2011 , edition of TV Guide 's Fall Preview issue included an advertisement on the back of the magazine , tilted upside down , featuring Ricci , Garner , Vanasse , and Robbie appearing as their characters for a fictional cover for TV Guide , using the magazine 's 1960s logo .
Between December 20 , 2011 , and January 5 , 2012 , the first nine episodes of the series were made available free of charge on Internet download sites in an effort to increase viewer interest in the series .
Canadian Karine Vanasse responded to a question on her Twitter account by saying that the promotion was only available in the United States .
EPISODES BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series aired in Canada on CTV on the same night as the ABC broadcasts , but was shown in different time slots by region .
It also aired on CTV 's sister cable channel Bravo !
on Saturdays .
The series premiered in Brazil and Panama on Sony Entertainment Television on March 18 , 2012 .
In Costa Rica the channel Teletica aired Pan Am on October 15 , 2012 .
In Ireland , the show premiered on RTÉ Two on October 17 .
The series premiered in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 16 , 2011 .
The BBC suspended its broadcast after eight episodes and stated that further episodes would return on January 28 , 2012 .
Canal+ began broadcasting the series in Spain on October 29 , 2011 .
In Catalonia , TV3 started broadcasting it on February 10 .
The series premiered in Sweden on TV3 on October 16 , 2011 .
On November 6 , 2011 , the series premiered on SIC in Portugal .
On December 26 , 2011 , the series premiered in the Netherlands on NET 5 .
In Australia the series was broadcast on the Nine Network in 2012 .
In the Flemish part of Belgium , the airing started on Vijf on February 15 , 2012 .
, In the French part of Belgium the airing started on BeTV on May 7 , 2012 .
In Finland the show premiered in January 2012 on Yle TV2 .
In Denmark , Pan Am was aired on TV3 ( Danmark ) , TV3 Puls & TV3
+ ( Denmark ) .
In Catalonia , TV3 started broadcasting the series on February 10 , 2013 .
In South East Asia , the channel beTV ( a Sony Pictures Entertainment Networks Asia , SPENA television ) airs the TV Show from February 4 , 2012 , every Saturday at 9:00 p.m.
It started airing on STAR World India from February 11 , 2012 .
In New Zealand the show premiered on November 24 , 2012 with TVNZ , which rescheduled episode " Romance Languages " into chronological order to maintain series flow .
It was shown every Saturday at 9:35pm on their TV One channel before being moved to a later time slot after episode 9 due to lower than expected viewing numbers .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The complete series is available on DVD on January 29 , 2013 from Sony Pictures Home Entertainment .
RECEPTION CRITICAL AND INDUSTRY RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical and industry reception .
The show was given a 67 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 28 reviews , indicating generally favorable reception .
Heather Hogan of AfterEllen rated the show highly , saying , " I continue to be impressed by the unapologetic way Pan Am pushes the women to the forefront of every story ...
I do n't think Pan Am really knows what kind of show it wants to be just yet .
But I also do n't think that 's a problem because every variation — Cold War drama , nostalgic soap opera , feminist — has something to offer . "
Later episodes , however , received lower reviews for the loss of focus on the women and the addition of romantic storylines .
Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe gave the show a " B " grade , commenting , " Next to The Playboy Club it 's the better network 1960s drama .
The romance and the attractively stylized innocence of the era is addictive , but the espionage plot , with its link to political history , is absurd .
And the female empowerment message grows feeble .
"
The Insider included Pan Am in its list of " 10 Best New Fall TV Shows " .
Media coverage has noted that no major characters smoke , although the practice was common on flights and in the terminal during the 1960s .
ABC and its parent , Disney , banned tobacco use by the show 's stars .
Citing " an enormous impressionable element " , Thomas Schlamme called the anachronism " the one revisionist cheat " , and said he had encountered a similar restriction directing a previous show for ABC .
Other characters will be seen holding cigarettes in the background .
In the UK , Melissa Whitworth of The Daily Telegraph said that Pan Am chose to " airbrush " the sixties because it depicts a " romanticised " view of the period .
Colin Kennedy and Sharon Lougher of the Metro said the series is " irritatingly in love with its own sense of style " .
Though they said the storylines made it a " soapy guilty pleasure " and included it in their " pick of the day " television feature .
Euan Ferguson from The Guardian praised Ricci 's casting as a positive indicator of the quality of acting , but criticized the overall casting , saying similar looks and identical uniforms make it difficult for viewers to learn the characters .
Emma Brockes from the Guardian said that Pan Am is " bubble gum bright " and praised the whole cast for putting in " strong performances " .
In Ireland , Pat Stacey of the Evening Herald said the series portrays " silly storylines " and " cheesy dialogue , " calling it " mile - high mediocrity " .
Scott McCartney of The Wall Street Journal noted that the show highlights the " elegance and excitement " of air travel during the early 1960s .
He said that former employees of the airline thought the series is an accurate portrayal , aside from some " Hollywood glamorization " .
The Association of Flight Attendants - CWA , the world 's largest flight attendant union , released a statement following the premiere of Pan Am .
It said that the show is a reminder of the progress of flight attendants in relation to previous social injustices : VIEWERSHIP Section::::Viewership .
The series premiere attracted 11.06 million viewers , but viewership declined thereafter .
The second episode attracted 7.76 million , and by the sixth episode , ratings were less than half of the show 's premiere .
By the season 's 12th episode , audiences had fallen to 3.74 million .
Following ABC 's announcement of its mid - season schedule in November 2011 , TV by the Numbers called Pan Am " defacto canceled " , given its ratings and the fact that ABC had ordered only one further episode .
A tweet by cast member Karine Vanasse ( " Well , we received THE call , # PanAm is only coming back for one more episode after Christmas .
But up to the end , we 'll give it our all !
") appeared to confirm the cancellation , though weeks later Vanasse told The Hollywood Reporter " what I was saying is that we would come back to shoot one more episode after Christmas . "
In a Los Angeles Times interview published just before the season finale , showrunner Steven Maeda said that Pan Am has a " good upscale core of viewers " both live and DVR ; the season finale , " tie[s ]
up some loose ends but ... also add[s ]
some new threads in there to explore later .
But , should [ the show ] not get picked up , it 's a sendoff to the show viewers will be happy with . "
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Awards and accolades .
In 2012 , the show 's cinematographer , John Lindley , earned a nomination for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in One - Hour Episodic / Pilot Television by the American Society of Cinematographers .
Pan Am 's pilot episode was nominated for Best One - Hour Single Camera Television Series at the ADG Excellence in Production Design Awards .
The series received recognition from gay critics with a Dorian Award nomination for Unsung TV Show of the Year .
In May 2012 , Pan Am won the Golden Rose Award for Best Series at the international Rose d'Or TV awards , beating Martina Cole 's The Runaway and The Jury .
SEE ALSO
* Come Fly with Me , a 1963 British comedy film about three beautiful international air hostesses looking for romance and excitement .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS