RULES OF NETBALL Netball is a ball sport for two teams of seven players ; its rules are published in print and online by the International Netball Federation .
Games are played on a rectangular court divided into thirds , with a raised goal at each short end .
The objective of the game is for teams to score goals , by passing a ball and shooting it into the opposite team 's goal ring .
Players are assigned " positions " that define their role within the team and restrict their movement on court .
During general play , a player with the ball can take no more than one step before passing it , and must pass the ball or shoot for goal within three seconds .
Goals can only be scored by the assigned shooting players .
Netball games are 60 minutes long , divided into 15-minute quarters , at the end of which the team with the most goals scored wins .
OBJECTIVE
Section::::Objective .
The objective of a game of netball is to score more goals than the opposition .
Goals are scored when the ball is passed to team members in the goal circle who then shoot the ball through the goal ring .
COURT AND DIMENSIONS Section::::Court and dimensions .
Netball is played on either a hard or soft court with scoring hoops or " rings " at both ends .
The court is slightly larger than a basketball court , being long and wide .
The longer sides are called " side lines " and the shorter sides are called " goal lines " or " back lines " .
The two lines dividing the court into thirds are called " transverse lines " .
Court markings are no more than wide .
The court is divided into thirds which regulate where individuals of each position are allowed to move .
A -diameter " centre circle " is located in the centre of the court .
At each end of the court there is a -radius semi - circular " shooting circle " or " goal circle " from within which all scoring shots must be taken .
The goal posts are high from the top of the ring to the ground and have no backboards .
The rings have an internal diameter of , and are located forward from the post and are made of diameter steel .
BALL Section::::Ball .
The ball is made of leather , rubber or similar material , measures in circumference and weighs .
For INF sanctioned competitions , Gilbert is the official supplier of netball balls .
PLAYING TIME
Section::::Playing time .
A game is played in four quarters , each lasting fifteen minutes .
There are intervals of three minutes between the first and second quarters and between the third and fourth quarters , and an interval of five minutes at half time .
If an umpire or player calls time , the time keeper pauses the timer .
When play resumes , the timer is restarted .
A maximum of two minutes is allowed for an injury .
Overtimes , in elimination games , consist of two straight seven - minute periods ; if still tied after fourteen minutes , whoever is up two points will win .
POSITIONS Section::::Positions .
There are seven players on each team , who are given nominated , named positions .
Each player must wear a " bib " showing one of the abbreviations below , indicating that player 's position .
Each player is only allowed in certain areas of the court : a player in a section of the court that is not part of their playing area is deemed " offside " .
The positions are described below : !
Position name !
Abbreviation !
Allowed in !
Notes STARTING AND RESTARTING PLAY Section::::Starting and restarting play .
When a goal is scored or at the start of a quarter / overtime , play is resumed from the centre of the court using a " centre pass " .
These passes alternate between the teams , regardless of which team scored the last goal .
A centre pass is made by a player in the Centre position who must have one foot grounded within the centre circle .
As the game restarts , only the two Centre players are allowed in the centre third : when the umpire blows the whistle to restart play , the Goal Attack , Goal Defence , Wing Attack and Wing Defence players can move into the centre third to receive the pass .
The centre pass must be caught or touched in the centre third .
If the ball touches the ground outside the court boundaries , then a member of the team that was not the last to touch the ball before it went out is able to throw the ball back into the court to restart play .
STEPPING , FOOTWORK , AND PASSING
Section::::Stepping , footwork , and passing .
Netball rules do not permit players to let their landing foot touch the ground again if it is lifted at all while in possession of the ball , so players can take 1.5 steps while holding the ball .
Pivoting does not count as a step .
Players are entitled to balance on the other foot if the landing foot is lifted .
An infraction of this rule is usually called stepping or travelling , as in the similar rule in basketball .
Consequently , the only way to move the ball towards the goal is to throw the ball to a teammate .
The ball can be held by a player for less than three seconds at any time .
A player may tap or deflect the ball , let it bounce and then take possession and throw it .
The player can not catch the ball with both hands , drop it and pick it up again ; this is called a replayed ball .
The duration before it is called a drop is determined by the umpire .
These rules , combined with the restrictions on where one player of a particular position can move , ensure that everyone on the team is regularly involved in play .
PASSING Section::::Passing .
Netball strategy involves several types of passes , including centre passes , penalty passes and short passes .
A centre pass occurs after a goal has been scored , when the Centre passes the ball .
A short pass is a pass between two players on the same team , where the length of the pass is so short that a defensive player can not get between the two opposing players to intercept the ball .
A penalty pass is a pass where the ball is returned from the sideline into play .
This pass occurs after a penalty has been called .
There are several styles of passing the ball , including one - handed shouldered passes , two - handed passes ( chest - passes ) ,
overhead passes , bounce passes , lob passes , drop passes , bullet passes and underarm passes .
The one - handed shoulder pass involves holding the ball in one hand behind the shoulder with the elbow bent , and weight on the back foot .
The passer then shifts the weight to the forward foot , while moving the ball with their hand forward and extending the elbow , and releasing the ball as the elbow fully extends at shoulder height .
The purpose of the one - handed shoulder pass is to throw the ball a long distance while throwing the ball hard , fast and direct .
The two - handed pass is sometimes called a chest - pass .
It is executed by holding the ball at chest height with the passer having their elbows bent next to the body at chest height .
The passer then moves the ball forward , extending their elbows forward while they step forward and release the ball .
The purpose of the two - handed pass is to accurately deliver the ball to another player who is in motion .
It is used because it ensures accuracy , both for long and short distances .
The overhead pass is executed similarly to the two - handed pass .
The difference is that it is executed over the passer 's head .
The overhead pass may also be executed similarly to the one - handed shoulder pass , with the difference being that the movements are done overhead , instead of at shoulder height .
The bounce pass is executed by getting low to the ground , holding the ball with one or two hands at hip height , and stepping forward while releasing the ball .
The ball should be aimed low at the ground and released with a great deal of force .
The purpose of the bounce pass is to move the ball around an opponent .
It is used when a player is in a confined space , with limited passing options .
The lob pass is executed by throwing the ball in a high arc , with the ball initially being held behind the head and being released above the head .
The drop pass is similar to the lob pass .
The major difference is with the catcher : a lob pass is for a catcher who is stretching to get away from a defender , while a drop pass is for a catcher who will move into free space to receive the ball .
These two passes are sometimes referred to as throw - up passes .
The purpose of the lob and drop passes is to get around a defender and reach a teammate who is moving away from the passer .
The lob pass is used because it is very accurate and covers both long and short distances .
The side pass is a two - handed pass .
It is used in situations requiring quick , straight throws .
The bullet pass is a one - handed pass .
It is used as a short or medium pass .
The pass is fast and direct .
The underarm pass is a one - handed pass .
This short pass style is used in situations where an element of surprise is required .
Different positions require different passing skills .
The fake pass should be mastered by every position .
The centre pass should be mastered by the Centre .
The Centre should also master any pass that must be made on the run .
Both the Goal Attack and Wing Attack should be familiar with the long passes and the lob and drop pass .
The Goal Attack should also be familiar with all styles of passing .
The Goal Shooter should know how to do penalty passes .
The Wing Defence should also be comfortable making lob passes .
The Goal Defence should know how to make goal - line passes .
The Goal Keeper should be comfortable making penalty passes and inbounding the ball .
CONTACT AND OBSTRUCTION Section::::Contact and obstruction .
Contact is only permitted provided it does not impede with an opponent or the general play and players must be at least away from a player with the ball while attempting to defend .
If impeding contact is made , a penalty is given to the team of the player who was contacted , and the player who contacted must stand " out of play " , meaning they can not participate in play until the player taking the penalty has passed the ball .
SCORING GOALS Section::::Scoring goals .
Only the Goal Attack and Goal Shooter are able to score goals directly , and this may only be done from the inside of the semicircle .
The job of the Goal Defence and Goal Keeper is to block the Goal Attack and Goal Shooter from shooting ; however , they must be three feet or more away from the landing foot of the shooter , otherwise it is called an obstruction .
In this penalty situation , the Goal Keeper or Goal Defence must stand by the shooter 's side for a penalty pass or shot , and must remain out of play until the ball is thrown .
A ball that passes through the hoop , but has been thrown either from outside the circle or by a player other than the two shooters , is deemed a " no goal " .
Furthermore , a shooter ( GA or GS ) may not shoot for a goal if a " free pass " has been awarded for an infringement such as stepping , offside , or using the post .
If a player completely misses a shot , the player may not catch it ; if she does , it is called a " replay " , and a free pass is awarded to the other team .
If the ball is deflected off the goal keeper or goal defence and goes through the goal ring , it is a no goal and play continues .
HISTORY OF THE RULES Section::::History of the rules .
In 1893 , Martina Bergman - Österberg informally introduced one version of basketball to her female physical training students at the Hampstead Physical Training College in London , after having seen the game being played in the United States .
The rules of this game were modified at Madame Österberg 's college over several years .
Substantial revisions were made during a visit in 1897 from another American teacher , Miss Porter , who introduced rules from women 's basketball in the United States ; the game also moved outdoors onto grass courts , the playing court was divided into three zones , and the baskets were replaced with rings that had nets .
By 1960 , the rules of netball were standardised internationally .
An international governing body was formed to oversee the sport globally , now called the International Netball Federation ( INF ) .
At the INF Congress 2013 in Glasgow , the INF announced that the Rules of Netball would be freely available online for individual use to assist the growth and development of the sport .
SEE ALSO * Rules of basketball * History of netball * Variants of netball
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official rules published by the International Netball Federation in several languages * Official rules as reformatted by Netball Australia