HIGH - RISE ( FASHION )
A high - rise or high - waisted garment is one designed to sit high on , or above , the wearer 's hips , usually at least 8 centimetres ( 3 inches ) higher than the navel .
In western cultures , high - rise jeans were especially common in the 1970s , in competition with low - rise pants .
MODERN FASHION Section::::Modern fashion .
In western culture , high - waisted pants tend to have long zippers , ranging from about 7 - 10 inches long , and leave the navel either completely covered or barely shown .
Zipper lengths are not to be confused with rises .
High - waisted pants have rises typically 10 inches long or longer .
In European menswear , pants sat level with the navel until the 1950s , and were held up by a pair of suspenders .
During the 1940s , Zoot suiters wore pants with a waistband so high that they often reached the chest .
1960S
TO 1990S Section::::1960s to 1990s .
Low - waisted drainpipe jeans and flared trousers were a counterculture statement among the Mods and hippies of the late 1960s and early 1970s , in contrast to the higher waisted Levi Strauss jeans teenagers had worn previously .
During the late 1970s , however , there was a backlash against disco and hippie fashions , and members of Generation X opted for higher rise pants .
These straight leg acid wash jeans remained popular throughout the 1980s and 1990s , until hip hop fashion went mainstream and it became fashionable for teenagers to sag their baggy pants .
REVIVAL
Section::::Revival .
During the mid and late-2010s , high waisted pants underwent a revival among younger women , in reaction to the low - rise skinny jeans that were popular during the previous decade .
Female celebrities who were seen in high - rise clothing included Lady Gaga , Rihanna , Pixie Lott , Kim Kardashian , and Selena Gomez .
During the 2000s and 2010s , male celebrities who wore high - rise jeans , including President Barack Obama , Simon Cowell , and Top Gear presenter Jeremy Clarkson , were ridiculed by the press .
INDIAN CULTURE Section::::Indian culture .
In ancient India , some Indian philosophers opposed saris that expose the midriff .
They considered it to be a symbol of adultery .
The Dharmasastra writers stated that women should be dressed such that the navel would not become visible .
Still today , some corporate offices in India have strict dress codes for women , requiring high - rise saris to be worn to avoid navel exposure .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO * Empire silhouette * Hip - huggers
* Low - rise pants
* Mom jeans
* Midriff REFERENCES