JESSIE ( 2011 TV SERIES )
Jessie is an American comedy television series created by Pamela Eells O'Connell that aired on Disney Channel from September 30 , 2011 to October 16 , 2015 .
The series stars Debby Ryan , Peyton List , Cameron Boyce , Karan Brar , Skai Jackson , and Kevin Chamberlin .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series follows Jessie Prescott ( Debby Ryan ) , a young woman from a small town with big dreams who , rebelling against her strict father , decides to leave the military base in Texas where she grew up and moves to New York City .
She accepts a job as a nanny and moves into a multimillion - dollar penthouse on the Upper West Side with the wealthy Ross family which includes jet - setting parents Morgan and Christina and their four rambunctious children : Emma Ross , Luke Ross , Ravi Ross , and Zuri Ross , along with the family pet , Mr. Kipling , a seven - foot Asian water monitor lizard , that was later revealed to be a female .
With a whole new world of experiences open to her , Jessie embarks on new adventures in the big city as she grows to rely on the love and support of the children in her care .
Assisting her are Bertram ( Kevin Chamberlin ) , the family 's lazy and sarcastic butler , and Tony ( Chris Galya ) , the building 's 20-year - old doorman .
CHARACTERS MAIN * ( Debby Ryan ) is an idealistic and resourceful girl from the military base of Fort Hood , Texas .
As a recent high school graduate rebelling against her strict father who wanted her to join the army , Jessie moved to New York City to realize her dreams of stardom , but due to an unexpected turn of events , ends up becoming a nanny to the four Ross children .
Even though at times both Jessie and the Ross kids can annoy each other , they all deeply care for one another and Jessie is even shown to be sometimes overprotective .
Later her last name is revealed to be Prescott .
In the episode " Make New Friends , but Hide the Old " , she reveals that she is an only child of her family .
Jessie also has a complicated love life .
Her boyfriend stories are frequently mentioned , and only in " The Rosses Get Real " are they called something other than boring and pathetic .
Her mother has never been seen , but is mentioned in " G.I. Jessie " .
* ( Peyton List ) is a diva , somewhat ditsy , cynical girl , eager to reorder the world to the way she sees it .
Emma is the oldest child of the Ross family , and Morgan and Christina 's only biological child .
Emma spends most of her time with Zuri and does n't appreciate her brother Luke .
In the second season , she acts as Kitty Couture .
She is into fashion and starts to get along with Luke more .
She and Ravi also spend time together as brother and sister .
It is revealed in the episode titled Karate Kid - tastrophe that her full name is Emma Evangeline Ross .
* ( Cameron Boyce ) is a laid back , flirty , crafty boy who was born in Detroit and has a passion for video games , break - dancing , and causing mischief around the penthouse while also being sarcastic at times .
He considers himself a " ladies ' man " , having taken a liking to Jessie in particular .
Luke even tried to date her in the first few episodes .
Luke is the second oldest of the Ross children .
In " The Kid Whisperer " , his full name is revealed to be Lucas .
He spends a lot of time with his brother , Ravi , and has a close bond with Bertram as well .
In " Lizard Scales and Wrestling Tales " , his middle name is revealed as Philbert , named after his grandpa .
* ( Karan Brar ) is a gentle , intelligent and courteous boy , born and raised for ten and a half years in West Bengal , India , and the newest addition of the Ross family .
He is imbued with the culture of his beloved homeland , but is thrilled with his new life in the United States .
He is the third oldest of the Ross children and also the most intelligent .
He spends most of his time with Luke , but appreciates his sisters all the same .
He also spends time with his lizard Mr. Kipling — later revealed as Mrs. Kipling — which he brought from India .
*
( Skai Jackson ) is a sassy , strong - willed , quick - witted and talkative girl who was brought to NYC from her birth country of Uganda .
She is highly creative with a penchant for rainbows , unicorns , mermaids , and country music , and has many stuffed animals and imaginary friends .
She is the youngest of the Ross children .
She has close bonds with Jessie , Emma , and her imaginary friends .
Zuri later lets go of all of her imaginary friends , hinting that she 's becoming a mature adolescent .
* ( Kevin Chamberlin ) is the Ross family 's butler .
He is grouchy and often very lazy , though begrudgingly helps Jessie navigate her job as nanny to the four Ross children .
In " The Kid Whisperer " , his hoarding obsession is revealed .
In " Tempest in a Teacup " , it is revealed that Bertram is claustrophobic .
He also has a passion for opera music and boy bands .
Even though the Ross kids , as well as Jessie , get on his nerves sometimes , he deeply cares about them .
In " One - Day Wonders " , it is revealed that his last name is Winkle .
RECURRING
* Christina Ross ( Christina Moore ) is the mother of the four Ross children and a former supermodel turned business magnate .
* Tony ( ) is the doorman in the building where the Ross family lives who has strong feelings for Jessie and helps her navigate her adventures in the big city .
He also starts to date Jessie in " The Princess and the Pea Brain " .
They later break up in " Break - Up and Shape - Up " .
In " The Trouble with Tessie " , it is revealed that his last name is Chiccolini .
His parents own a restaurant in Little Italy .
A recurring joke on the show has Jessie and Bertram asking the kids where they found some strange , but needed , things , and the response is invariably " Tony knows a guy " .
* Morgan Ross ( Charles Esten ) is the father of the four Ross children and a famous movie director .
The pilot episode reveals he is friends with George Lucas .
In " Gotcha Day " , he thought that a chili slip ' n ' slide was a great idea .
* , formerly Mr. Kipling ( Frank ) is the Ross family 's house pet , a seven - foot Asian water monitor lizard , that Ravi brought from India when he came to America .
In " The Secret Life of Mr. Kipling " , it is revealed that he is actually a female monitor lizard and has laid twelve eggs .
The names of Mrs. Kipling 's twelve babies are Mowgli , Sanjay , Gupta , Slumdog , Kumar , Ravi Jr. , Scooter , Rikki , Tikki , Tavi , Mohandas , and Padma .
* Rhoda Chesterfield ( Carolyn Hennesy ) is the cold - hearted head of the city condominium board in the building where the Ross family lives .
Her first spat with Jessie and the Ross clan involved Mrs. Kipling tearing her clothes up in the elevator .
She dislikes anyone who is not rich , who is under 20 , or who is less self - absorbed than herself .
This sadly does n't stop her from repeatedly hitting on Bertram , lavishing too much affection on her chihuahua , Zeus , or constantly calling Jessie by the wrong name .
In " 101 Lizards " , it is revealed that she has a daughter , Cassandra , and owns a lizard sanctuary .
It is also revealed in " Between the Swoon and New York City " that she has a son named Brooks .
It is also revealed that she has been married more than once .
She had no romantic feelings toward her first husband and married him for his money .
Despite her rivalry against the Ross family , it is shown in " 101 Lizards " that she seems to have a soft spot for Emma .
* Stuart Wooten ( J.J. Totah ) is a quick - witted , yet love - struck , kid .
He has a huge crush on Zuri and is a good friend to the Ross brothers .
In " Quitting Cold Koala " , he and Zuri go on a romantic picnic , implying that they have a relationship .
Stuart is usually nice and kind , but he 's able to show a blunt side when he wants to , like Zuri does , as seen in later episodes .
In " Quitting Cold Koala " , he attempts to make Zuri jealous and hint that she likes him back .
In " Panic Attack Room " , he addresses the Ross brothers as neanderthals , annoyed that they interrupted his board game date with Luke and Ravi 's younger sister .
He also seems to own a pair of pants for every single occasion , such as " picnic pants " and " panic room pants " .
In " Acting with the Frenemy " , he is jealous when Zuri has a crush on Shane , Luke 's new member , and they have a dance - off for Zuri .
He stands up for her , creating romance between the two .
In " Where 's Zuri ? " , after undergoing transformation from Stuart to Stu - Dog by his new nanny , Zuri falls for him .
* Officer Petey ( Joey Richter ) is a police officer who is strangely obsessed with the performing arts .
He is not a very good police officer .
In fact , he wanted to be an actor .
In " Pain in the Rear Window " , it is revealed that he has very little physical strength and can not tolerate the sight of bruised skin , let alone blood .
It is also revealed that he did not go to a police academy .
* Rosie ( Kelly Gould ) is Emma 's best friend who lives in a crime - ridden area of the city , but is actually a nice girl .
She used Emma to lampoon a nasty girl in " Make New Friends , but Hide the Old " ; however , since Emma and Rosie both hate the bully , they become friends by the end of the episode .
In " Trashin ' Fashion " , she is Emma 's camera girl for their blog .
Their friendship is threatened when Rosie stands up for Bryn in " Kids Do n't Wanna Be Shunned " .
* Agatha ( Jennifer Veal ) is an unattractive , arrogant British nanny who frequently locks horns with Jessie and the Ross children .
During their first meeting , she attempts to ban Zuri and Jessie from Central Park .
Zuri and Jessie ignore Agatha and keep coming back , so Agatha starts posting mean things , saying that Jessie is a bad nanny on her website " Toddler Tattler " .
Zuri , Jessie , and Christina stand up to Agatha and Agatha shuts down her website .
Agatha has a twin sister , Angela , revealed in " Evil Times Two " , who is even more dishonest and tries to steal Jessie 's job , but Jessie and the Ross kids stand up to her
and she goes back to England .
This was the only time Agatha , who despises the long - favored Angela , was on the same side as Jessie .
Officer Petey met Agatha at a fair in the park , and thought she was cute until he learned her mole and snaggle - tooth were not part of her costume .
* Connie Thompson ( Sierra McCormick ) is an insane girl with an obsessive crush on Luke .
In " Creepy Connie Comes a Callin ' " , she tutors Luke , but also tries to flirt with him .
In " Creepy Connie 's Curtain Call " , she auditions for the school play written by Jessie .
She causes " accidents " to the female lead and understudies , so she can get the lead role and kiss Luke .
In " Creepy Connie 3 : The Creepening " , she hires an actress , Mackenzie ( G. Hannelius ) , to pretend to be obsessed with Luke so he 'll like Connie .
In " Creepy Connie 's Curtain Call " , she starts dating Ravi , but pretends to not remember him in " Creepy Connie 3 : The Creepening " .
She is also an avid fan of Harry Potter .
* Boomer ( Lombardo Boyar ) is Emma 's new boss and Connie 's uncle .
He is shown as a hardworking and easily persuaded man .
* Brooks Wentworth ( Pierson Fode ) is Jessie 's new boyfriend who later becomes Jessie 's fiancé .
He got a job in Africa and asked Jessie to get married as soon as possible .
She decides to go with him , but the kids find out and are extremely upset .
On their wedding day , Jessie realizes she is not ready to be married and breaks up with Brooks .
Jessie stays in New York and Brooks leaves for Africa .
They later meet up and Jessie is surprised to learn Brooks has moved on .
GUEST STARS
* Bryn Breitbart ( Katherine McNamara ) appeared in " Kids Do n't Wanna Be Shunned " , where she attempts to steal Emma 's friends by pretending she is of Danish royalty .
In " Diary of a Mad Newswoman " , Emma forgives Bryn and they become coworkers on Ravi 's school news show .
She tries to ruin Emma by feeding her a fake story , but Emma , Luke , and Ravi catch her in her act .
Luke had a crush on her before her plot was revealed .
* Shaylee Michaels ( Maia Mitchell ) is a successful Australian actress who befriends Jessie , casting her as her stunt double in her latest film in " Jessie 's Big Break " .
Her boyfriend McD ( John DeLuca ) , who is also the director of the movie , attempts to flirt and kiss Jessie and later turn Shaylee against Jessie by claiming Jessie was lying to her .
Jessie ultimately proves her innocence with Luke 's camera footage proving that McD had indeed flirted with Jessie .
Shaylee is the only girl in the series whom Luke has had a crush on big enough to rival his crush on Jessie .
* Ms. Falkenberg ( Cheri Oteri ) always get Zuri in trouble , as shown in " Teacher 's Pest " .
* Chris Bosh appeared as himself in " Say Yes to the Messy Dress " .
He keeps his stinky white socks from the tenth grade as a sign of good luck , even though Luke disagrees with him and tries to sabotage his chance to win a basketball game against the New York Knicks .
* Adam Sandler appeared as himself in " Punched Dumped Love " , making spare change .
He claims he wants to go by his nickname " Thunder " .
*
Ted ( Spencer Boldman ) appeared in " Break - Up and Shake - Up " as one of Jessie 's old boyfriends .
According to Jessie , he was ugly when she dated and dumped him and is now a male model .
Jessie attempts to use him to make Tony jealous .
In the end , he goes off with Victoria ( Lulu Antariksa ) , and Tony and Jessie break up .
*
Vic ( Lulu Antariksa ) appeared in " Break - Up and Shake - Up " , where Tony trains her to become a door - woman , causing Jessie to become jealous of them .
In the end , Vic goes off with Ted .
* Max Bauer ( Matthew Timmons ) is Jessie 's young agent who appears in " Caught Purple Handed " , where he says that he is living in his mother 's basement and has to pay her rent .
He gets Jessie her first infomercial job as a hand model , but he is fired with her after Jessie botches the job .
Jessie later thanks Max for his faith in her and agrees to let him stay as her agent .
* Earl ( Garrett Clayton ) appeared in " The Blind Date , the Cheapskate , and the Primate " , where he is the garbage man in the apartment building .
* Maybelle ( Stefanie Scott ) is the new girl in the Ross 's apartment building .
She appears in " Hoedown Showdown " , where she hog - ties Emma 's new " soul mate " after he asks her out knowing Emma likes him .
* Mackenzie ( G. Hannelius ) is another creepy girl in school along with Connie .
She appears in " Creepy Connie 3 : The Creepening " , where she has a psycho crush on Luke just like Connie .
She is very creepy by making a bracelet of baby teeth for Luke and also wanting Luke to date her just like Connie .
However , Connie and Mack wrestle after they find out they both like Luke .
Later , it is revealed that Mack was an actress and really did not have a crush on Luke .
* Mrs. Arthur ( Jo Anne Worley ) is Nana Banana in " Zuri 's New Old Friend " .
* Michelle Obama appeared as herself in " From the White House to Our House " , where she is called by Zuri because Zuri wants her friend Taylor 's mother to be home for Taylor 's tenth birthday .
* Mr. Moseby ( Phill Lewis ) appeared in " Karate Kid - tastrophe " , where it is revealed he became the New York Tipton 's hotel manager after the events of The Suite Life on Deck .
Jessie accidentally runs into him while Emma is holed up in a room .
Mr. Moseby later gives Jessie advice on how to deal with teenagers like Emma .
* Madeline ( Francesca Capaldi ) appeared in What A Steal .
She reveals herself to be a thief with her brother Scott .
* Chris Paul as himself appeared in Basket Cases .
He was coaching Ravi how to play basketball .
* The Vamps as Themselves appeared in Dance , Dance , Resolution as they performed at the school dance .
* Kim / Delpina ( Meaghan Martin from Camp Rock ) appeared in Rossed at Sea Part 1 .
She appeared to be a mermaid .
Later , she was revealed to have a memory loss in the water and revealed herself as Kim , not a mermaid .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The series was created by Pamela Eells O'Connell , who had had previous experience with the " nanny " sitcom formula , starting her career as a writer on the series Charles in Charge and serving as co - executive producer on The Nanny , before working with Debby Ryan on The Suite Life on Deck .
O'Connell is said to have developed Jessie specifically to showcase Ryan 's talent .
In an interview with the Star - Telegram , Ryan explained how the concept originated : " ( O'Connell ) and I were throwing ideas back and forth when The Suite Life was coming to an end , and she came up with this .
I was absolutely captivated .
Then Disney looked at the script and the show runner ( O'Connell ) and myself
and they were like : ' Awesome .
We like it .
You 're on in the fall ' " .
In interviews with Variety and Disney CEO , Gary Marsh spoke of working with Ryan again : " It 's been thrilling to watch Debby grow from an unknown actress to one of our top stars .
Debby is a talented young actress who connects to a wide fanbase because she 's genuine , relatable and aspirational all at once .
Our viewers have followed her from The Suite Life on Deck to 16 Wishes , and we 're pleased to be working with her again . "
Jessie was the first main character to be engaged on the Disney Channel .
There was a four - part episode about the engagement .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
With Ryan signed on , Disney Channel began the search to cast the Ross family in May 2011 .
Before casting was finalized , there were numerous differences in the original concept for several of the characters .
The role of the mother to the Ross children was originally a photographer named " Pandora " , the role of the oldest daughter , Emma , was originally named " Anabel " , the role of Luke was originally a boy adopted from Korea named " Hiro " , and the role of Ravi was originally a boy adopted from South America named " Javier " who had a pet capybara instead of a water monitor .
Some have speculated that Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie , as a prominent celebrity couple with a multi - cultural adoptive family , may have been one possible inspiration for the series .
In an interview with the Boston Herald , O'Connell described her inspiration , saying : " I thought the celebrity parents and gorgeous penthouse would be glamorous , and a nice contrast to Jessie 's more modest Texas roots .
That fish out of water element makes for good stories , and I was inspired by many families who have adopted children of different ethnicities .
" The Ross parents are only shown in a few episodes throughout the series . FILMING Section::::Filming . After casting was finalized and changes were made to several of the characters to suit the actors chosen , the series skipped the pilot phase and was put directly into production .
Filming began in June 2011 on Stage 3/8 at Hollywood Center Studios which , prior to start of production , served as the sound stage where the Disney Channel series Wizards of Waverly Place was taped .
13 episodes were originally ordered for the first season , but while the show 's first season was in production , Disney Channel ordered an additional seven episodes , bringing the total number of episodes for the first season to 20 .
When asked about the atmosphere on set during an interview with MSN TV , Ryan described her relationship with the young cast : " I definitely feel like a nanny !
They are smart kids , but they 're real kids .
They like to have fun .
My policy is : We can play hard , as long as we work hard , and because we work hard , we need to play hard . "
Filming on the series wrapped on February 22 , 2015 .
On March 28 , 2013 , the series was renewed for a third season , with production resuming in July 2013 .
Season 3 premiered on October 5 , 2013 .
On April 16 , 2014 , it was announced that Jessie would get engaged in a four - episode arc that would conclude the season in the fall , marking the first time a Disney Channel lead character has gotten engaged .
The series was renewed for a fourth season on May 20 , 2014 .
Production began in August 2014 for a January 9 , 2015 premiere .
On October 1 , 2014 , Peyton List stated that the fourth season would be the last season of Jessie .
On January 9 , 2015 , Debby Ryan said that the fourth season will see the show go past its 100th episode and also see its fifth crossover with another Disney Channel show .
She also stated that Jessie will end in early 2016 .
On February 25 , 2015 , Disney Channel officially announced the series would end after its fourth season , bringing the series to a total of 101 episodes .
On the same day , Disney ordered the first season of a spin - off titled BUNK'd , which stars Peyton List , Karan Brar , and Skai Jackson in their respective roles .
98 episodes were eventually aired in the series as 6 of the 101 produced episodes were combined into 3 extended length specials for broadcast and video sales .
EPISODES CROSSOVERS AUSTIN & JESSIE & ALLY
ALL STAR
NEW YEAR
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Crossovers .
Section::::Austin & Jessie & Ally
All Star New Year .
In November 2012 , Disney Channel announced that the show would crossover with Austin & Ally as a one - hour special episode titled " Austin & Jessie & Ally All Star New Year " .
The episode aired December 7 , 2012 .
GOOD LUCK JESSIE :
NYC CHRISTMAS
Section::::Good Luck Jessie : NYC Christmas .
In October 2013 , Disney Channel announced a crossover episode of Jessie and Good Luck Charlie called " Good Luck Jessie : NYC Christmas " .
In the episode , PJ ( Jason Dolley ) and Teddy ( Bridgit Mendler ) go to New York for Christmas Eve and stay with Jessie for Christmas due to a snowstorm .
The episode aired on November 29 , 2013 .
ULTIMATE SPIDER - MAN : WEB - WARRIORS
Section::::Ultimate Spider - Man : Web - Warriors .
The series crossed over with the Marvel / Disney XD series Ultimate Spider - Man : Web Warriors for a Halloween episode titled " Halloween Night at the Museum " on October 10 , 2014 .
JESSIE 'S ALOHA - HOLIDAYS WITH PARKER AND JOEY
Section::::Jessie 's Aloha - Holidays with Parker and Joey .
On November 28 , 2014 , Jessie shared its fourth crossover with the series Liv and Maddie in a special episode titled " Jessie 's Aloha - Holidays with Parker and Joey " , featuring Joey Bragg as Joey Rooney and Tenzing Norgay Trainor as Parker Rooney .
This crossover put Jessie into a tie with Hannah Montana and as the Disney Channel shows to have had the most crossovers .
This was counted as a single one - hour episode of Jessie with Liv and Maddie characters , and was not a Liv and Maddie episode .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Disney Channel did not broadcast " Quitting Cold Koala " on its originally scheduled date of May 17 , 2013 , and showed a rerun of " Kids Do n't Wanna Be Shunned " instead .
The episode did , however , appear on the Disney Channel website , " WATCH Disney Channel " , and on " Disney Channel on Demand " , the channel 's video - on - demand service .
On Facebook , Disney Channel announced , " We are removing this particular episode from our regular programming schedule and will re - evaluate its references to gluten restrictions in the character 's diet " .
The edited version of " Quitting Cold Koala " aired on July 5 , 2013 , as part of a two - episode spectacular , with all gluten jokes having been removed in the revised version .
SPIN - OFF Section::::Spin - off .
On February 25 , 2015 , Disney Channel stated that a Jessie spin - off titled Bunk'd would begin production in the spring .
The spin - off would star Peyton List , Karan Brar , and Skai Jackson .
The show premiered on July 31 , 2015 , right after the Disney Channel original movie Descendants .
INDIAN ADAPTATION
Section::::Indian adaptation .
An Indian adaptation of the show , titled Oye Jassie , premiered on Disney Channel on October 13 , 2013 .
Like most adaptations , the episodes and characters are similar to the original .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The pilot episode of Jessie was released as a free download via the iTunes Store one week prior to its Disney Channel premiere .
Making its official debut on the Disney Channel on September 30 , 2011 , the series became the network 's most - watched premiere on a Friday since September 2008 , when The Suite Life on Deck debuted .
The premiere of Jessie ranked as the number - one telecast at 9:00 PM with a total of 4.6 million total viewers in the target demographics , scoring 2.3 million viewers among kids 6–11 and 1.8 million viewers among tweens and teens 9–14 , with an average of 887,000 viewers among adults 18–49 .
The most watched episode of Jessie is " Star Wars " with 7.32 million viewers and the least watched episode is " Basket Case " with 1.38 million viewers .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series airs worldwide on Disney Channel .
The series premiered on September 30 , 2011 , in Canada , on November 25 , 2011 , in Australia and New Zealand , and on December 17 , 2011 , in Singapore .
It later previewed on January 29 , 2012 , and premiered on February 17 , 2012 , in the United Kingdom and Ireland , and in South Africa on April 1 , 2012 .
In Canada , the series premiered on Disney Channel on September 1 , 2015 , and will be one of two series that Peyton List will introduce along with Bunk'd .
RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col "
SOUNDTRACK
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS