NEED FOR SPEED :
THE RUN Need for Speed : The Run is a racing video game , the eighteenth title in the long - running Need for Speed franchise , and developed by Canadian EA subsidiary EA Black Box and published by Electronic Arts .
The Wii and 3DS versions were developed by Firebrand Games , the team behind
and ( both DS versions ) .
It was released in North America on November 15 , 2011 and November 18 , 2011 in Europe .
The game was described as an " illicit , high - stakes race across the country .
The only way to get your life back is to be the first from San Francisco to New York .
No speed limits .
No rules .
No allies .
All you have are your driving skills and sheer determination " .
Producers Jason DeLong and Steve Anthony stated during an interview that Black Box aimed to obtain critical acclaim after their received universally mixed to poor ratings .
The Run was in production for three years , though previous Black Box titles had much shorter development periods .
The Run was Black Box 's last game before its restructuring in 2013 .
GAMEPLAY PS3 , XBOX 360 , WINDOWS Section::::Gameplay .
Section::::PS3 , Xbox 360 , Windows .
Need for Speed
: The Run is a racing video game and the eighteenth title in the Need for Speed series .
Players take part in street racing across real world locations in the United States .
There are over of road , three times more than , making it the biggest Need For Speed game on release .
Most event types require the player to overtake opponents to win the race .
There are also time attack events and survival events where the players must prevent their vehicle from being destroyed while under attack .
Cars are divided into tiers based on performance .
During a race , the player can enter a gas station to change the vehicle they are using and make visual customisations .
Unlike previous Need for Speed titles , The Run features sections where the player exits their car and is travelling on foot .
Gameplay in these sections is restricted to quick time events .
The driving model of the game is described as " sit somewhere between and Hot Pursuit " , not as arcade - styled as Hot Pursuit , but neither as simulator - styled as Shift .
The Run employs a large range of real - world vehicles , seemingly taking in the usual mix of muscle cars , street racers and refined exotics , described as " each car presents a different driving challenge for the player " .
Exclusively digitized for the game is the 2012 Porsche 911 Carrera S and the Pagani Huayra .
The damage system is similar to that seen in Hot Pursuit .
The cars can be altered with performance upgrades and visual upgrades , such as paint colors and body kits .
There are cosmetic body kits known as Style Pack kits and Aero Pack kits , which affect aerodynamics as well as performance .
An experience points
( XP ) system is used for unlocking cars and events in multiplayer and Challenge Series races .
The game also feature a Rewind option to allows the player to restart an event to their last checkpoint if they wreck their vehicle or rewind their vehicle from a collision or missed opportunity .
Rewinds are only available in limited quantities as their amount dependent on the difficulty level that the player has selected ; Easy have 10 Rewinds , Normal have 5 Rewinds , Hard have 3 Rewinds and Extreme have 1 Rewind as well as the most difficult AI opponents .
Additionally , Need for Speed Autolog , the Need for Speed franchise 's social competition functionality , which was introduced in Hot Pursuit and was previously used in , is also back as it continues to track career progression and compare game stats .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
Up to 8 players can participate in a single online match .
Players are able to party with friends , pick a playlist of their favorite challenges and compete for supremacy across every stage of game .
In addition to this , players never have to wait in a lobby again even if they are joining a race in progress .
The multiplayer matches are split into differing game type playlists , such as Supercar Challenge , NFS Edition Racing , The Underground , Mixed Competition , Exotic Sprint , and Muscle Car Battles .
Most of these modes pertain to different car varieties for each race , but the Supercar Challenge is meant entirely for the fastest cars on the fastest tracks .
The player can select an event and vote towards the race course where the multiplayer game should be taking place on .
Players also take part in a reward system known as " The Bonus Wheel " , which randomly selects a reward and required goal criteria for it .
WII , 3DS VERSIONS Section::::Wii , 3DS versions .
The game is similar to Need for Speed : Hot Pursuit .
Players race down freeways until they meet a police car .
The police then try to chase them down and wreck their car .
They also encounter other objectives such as a straight - up race .
There is another mode where players ' duel ' a rival .
They can also race to toll booths that double as checkpoints .
The 3DS version also features Autolog , which is integrated throughout the career mode and uses 40 in - game challenges scattered throughout the campaign .
The game also takes advantage of StreetPass , letting players upload their best Autolog scores to other Nintendo 3DS devices .
In multiplayer , the game features a straight race mode where eight people compete .
There is also a four - on - four Cops vs. Racers mode .
The game supports Wi - Fi and local wireless connections .
However , the Wii version lacks online play , yet it has split - screen multiplayer .
PLOT PS3 , XBOX 360 , WINDOWS STORYLINE Section::::Plot .
Section::::PS3 , Xbox 360 , Windows storyline .
Jackson " Jack " Rourke is a fearless street racer and a mechanic , who owns a garage in San Francisco .
He is indebted to the mob as he is unable to repay them the money for starting his business .
He attempts to hide , but they manage to locate and kidnap him .
He escapes from a car crusher after being tied with the steering wheel of a Porsche 911 Carrera 4S and steals an Audi RS4 .
The mob notices Jack and starts to chase him .
Jack escapes from the mob after crossing the railway nearly before a train runs across , blocking the road between Jack and the mob .
Jack , in desperation , goes to his former girlfriend and his current business partner Sam Harper at a restaurant in Chinatown .
She recommends a way out : a massive illegitimate street racing event named " The Run " , which is a 3000-mile ( 4828 km ) journey across the continental USA , starting in San Francisco and ending in New York City .
Sam manages Jack 's $ 250,000 entrance fee for the race and promises him a 10 % cut of the $ 25 million jackpot , but he has to defeat 210 other racers to win .
To complicate things , he is in debt to both the police and the criminal organization , and both want to make sure that he never finishes the race .
Jack pulls out a car from his garage .
Sam informs him to get to Nob Hill to begin the race .
Then , the police begin to shut down the city after noticing many racers .
After escaping from San Francisco by driving off the unfinished replacement span of the Eastern San Francisco - Oakland Bay Bridge , Jack passes through Altamont Pass , Yosemite National Park , Tioga Pass , and Death Valley , before making it to Las Vegas in the top 150 .
Upon arrival , two female team racers , Nikki Blake and Mila Belova ( who drive modified Nissan 370Zs ) , compete with him , and he is nearly apprehended after police shut down the city .
However , he manages to escape out of Fremont Street , but is nearly crushed by a semitrailer truck .
He manages to acquire a new vehicle , and heads to Chicago to make it in the top 50 .
On the way , he passes through Zion National Park , Million Dollar Highway , and up into the Rocky Mountains .
At the Independence Pass , Colorado , where the mountain slopes are going to detonate with dynamite to remove excess snow for the year , Jack has to race against the Audi R8 5.2 FSI Quattro in the terrifying mountain pass with the falling snow and rocks .
After the race at the Rocky Mountains , Jack races through Denver and the Badlands , where he races against his rival , Calvin Garret ( who drives a heavily modified Mercedes - Benz SLS AMG ) , who he and Sam saw at the Chinatown restaurant , across the Mississippi River .
Upon arrival in Chicago , Marcus Blackwell , Jack 's biggest rival and the main antagonist of the game , uses his connections with the mob to organise a " welcome committee " .
Jack is then forced out of his car and pursued on foot by the mob 's machine gun - mounted helicopter .
After Jack temporarily escapes from the helicopter , he acquires a stolen Ford Taurus Police Interceptor , but is pursued by the helicopter again down Lower Wacker Drive and along the river .
He tries to stay out of the spotlight of the helicopter to avoid getting the vehicle shot and destroyed , but ends up crashing the car in a train yard , flipping it over .
Jack escapes from the overturned police car seconds before a freight train runs it down .
Escaping Chicago and entering Cleveland , he drives through an industrial train yard filled with high explosives , trying to escape the mob .
Crashing through the window of a warehouse , Jack wrecks the helicopter by slamming into its tail and sending it into the side of a building .
Afterwards , Jack is directed by Sam to meet a man named Uri for a new car .
On the final leg to New York , Jack races through rural Pennsylvania , Garrett State Forest , where he races again against Mila Belova ( who still drives her modified Nissan 370Z ) , through the Appalachians , Big Run State Park and New Jersey , defeating the final racers in the process .
Jack makes it to New York in the top 2 .
He races Marcus Blackwell ( who drives a heavily modified Aston Martin One-77 ) through the crowded morning streets of Manhattan and Brooklyn .
Marcus uses a dirty technique at Jack by shooting his gun at Jack 's car , causing Jack to enter the subway tunnel with many Metro Trains , but Jack escapes and on the final stretch , Marcus is killed after he flips his car .
As a result , Jack wins The Run and claims the $ 25,000,000 jackpot .
Later on , Jack meets with Sam in Brooklyn , who gives him the key to the deposit box at the Grand Central Station .
She also informs him about another job , which he happily accepts .
The credits roll , which during which Jack is then shown on a desert road in his 1969 Ford Mustang RTR - X. Sam calls up and asks , " How 's it goin' down there ?
Havin' a good time , Jack ? "
to which Jack responds , " There 's no place I 'd rather be . "
Smiling , he looks in his rear - view mirror , as the camera pans overhead to reveal a number of police cars chasing him .
WII , 3DS STORYLINE Section::::Wii , 3DS storyline .
The Nintendo 3DS and Wii versions features a different storyline than its contemporaries .
The plot unfolds through graphic novel - esque cut scenes that also contain mini games , though they are not the same as the quick - time event game - play of the console version .
The story is divided into five acts ( which is further divided into 26 " episodes " ) .
The protagonist of the 3DS / Wii version is not Jack , but rather a down - on - his - luck stock car racer named " Matt " .
The premise remains mostly unchanged ( a coast - to - coast race , from San Francisco to New York City , with a large pot at stake ) , but introduces a female character who takes the story in a different direction .
She does n't say her name until the run is completed .
she also appears to know him while he does n't know her .
When the game begins , in San Francisco , two unknown guys push a 1969 Ford Mustang Boss 302 into the bay from a port .
Inside of the Mustang , there 's a person whose name is Matt .
He wakes up , and realises that he 's trapped in the car underwater .
He manages to escape .
When Matt swims to the surface and goes to the port , he meets a woman whom he does n't know .
She offers Matt a cost - to - cost race , from San Fran to New York City , and with high rewards , and tells him that they have to get to the bridge at a certain time .
Matt tells her that he does n't have any cars because his Mustang is underwater unless someone 's tow truck comes to rescue the car .
But she tells that she has her car , which reveals to be a Lotus Exige .
She tells that she will be Matt 's co - driver .
They go to Golden Gate Bridge , where the race will start in a few minutes .
When the race starts , Matt and unknown woman races through the forests , where they encounter police .
Then , someone , probably their rival , in a 2012 Ford Mustang Boss 302 hit their Exige .
They chase the Mustang .
The Mustang stops .
They also stop nearby .
Matt goes to the Mustang , and finds out that there 's no driver .
Matt tells the unknown female to swap the car from her Exige to the Mustang .
After driving the Mustang for a few minutes , they hit the broken glass bottle , flatting one of the tires .
Matt fix the tires .
The unknown woman tells that they 've nearly drifted off the race course by 100 miles .
She also tells that they have to go to Las Vegas for Qualification in time .
They continue racing , and enter Death Valley National Park , where they encounters their rival again in a Dodge Challenger SRT8 .
This time , the rival shoots his gun at Matt and the unknown female 's car .
They lose their rival .
Then , they stop at the gas station to refill the fuel .
Matt opens the Mustang 's trunk , only to find a golf clubs bag .
The unknown woman tells that if they follow the tolls route , they will manage to get to Las Vegas before the Qualification deadline .
Matt asks the unknown woman 's identity , but she tells to leave the gas station without any answers to Matt .
They finally arrive at Las Vegas .
They have to find a place to rest .
When they arrive at a motel , they see their rival 's Challenger .
Matt takes a golf club , trying to hit the Challenger , then , the owner of the car comes .
When Matt sees him , he knows him , and leaves him .
The next day , when the race will start 2nd time , the unknown woman gets Matts a new car , which is a 2013 Chevrolet Camaro .
They get to the start line .
When the race starts , they leave Las Vegas , and encounter the police .
After escaping the police , the unknown woman tells Matt to stop and tell her about the person or the rival who chased them .
Matt tells that he was his teammate and his friend .
Matt also tells that he dated with his friend 's younger sweet sister whose name is Wynona .
She was a racing freak .
She hung around the pits all day , made people laugh and pestered them to let her drive their car .
They promised to take care of Wynona .
But one night , when Matt was sleeping , Wynona took the car key from him , took his car and pulled off .
She crashed .
The car burned , killing her instantly .
Matt was suspended from the entire race , Wynona 's brother always blamed him for this
and he comes for a revenge by entering the same race .
After talking , Matt 's former friend and Wynona 's brother comes to them with his Challenger .
He opens the door , takes Matt out of the driver seat , and they have a fight together .
When they get back to the car , Matt tells the unknown female that they will duel to the rock pile .
Who get to there first , win .
Then , Matt wins , his rival disappears , and a lot of police pursuit them .
This time the police has their gun - installed helicopter .
They get to Colorado and snowy Rocky Mountains .
Matt takes another golf club , throws to the helicopter , destroying it .
Then , his rival with his Challenger appears against and they race .
Matt 's rival drives his car into the snow and stuck .
Matt and the unknown female rescue him .
He tells that when they reach Denver for the next Qualification , he 'll leave them , so Matt and the unknown woman let him go with them .
Matt finds a road , which he thinks it 's a shortcut .
But it reveals to be a cliff .
Luckily , they stop early and almost crash into the ground below .
Matt 's friend tells that he is crazy that he should have taken a bus .
When they reach Denver , they find a motel for resting .
Matt 's friend find out that the Camaro 's suspension is beat .
He also knows some 24 hour cars dealerships in Denver .
Then , they go to bed .
The next day , where the race will start 3rd time , Matt gets a new car by the unknown woman again .
This time , it is a Nissan GT - R.
When the race starts , they leave Denver , and encounter some chasers which are not cops .
The chasers are driving black cars with a large logo on the side of the cars .
still chasing Matt and the unknown woman .
They head towards Mount Rushmore to shake their chasers off the road .
They finally lose the chasers .
Matt finds out that the large logo is " Di Marco Trading " .
He asks the female if she knows about this .
Then , they encounter the chasers again .
But this time , they have rocket launchers in their Multi - stop trucks .
They escape from the chasers by jumping into the cargo train .
This wrecks their GT - R.
But luckily , they find an Aston Martin One-77 .
So they take it into the race .
The female tells that they have to get to Chicago for the next Qualification .
Matt finds out that the chasers are " the Mob " .
He wonders why they 're chasing them .
And they find a problem , which is the Aston Martin is running out of the fuel .
They have to find a nearest gas station .
When they finally arrive at the gas station and refill the fuel , they continue racing , and finally catch up other racers .
When they reach Chicago , they find a motel for resting , and go to bed .
The next day , where the race will start 4th time .
In the morning , Matt finds out that someone took the key from him and take the Aston Martin .
Then , his friend , with his Porsche 918 RSR .
Matt enters the Porsche , and they follow the Aston Martin .
When they arrive at the factory , they find out that the driver is the unknown woman .
She takes the briefcase to the uniformed people and they take her into the Limousine , drive away .
Matt finds out that he has been used by her and should go back to the race .
Then the FBI unit appears and chases them .
They escape to someone 's house , respray put the fake license plate onto the Porsche which will make the police forget them .
They arrive at Matt 's friend 's used cars dealership .
He tells that he had his dealerships in 20 states .
Then they both get their new cars
: Matt gets a [ Shelby MustangFord Shelby GT500 Super Snake ] and his friend gets a [ Lamborghini Sesto Elemento ] , they also install scanners in both cars to contact and communicate each other , like the regular police officers .
Matt asks his friend why he helps him .
His friend answers Matt that he does n't want to see a guy who has been fooled and used by a woman , and Matt is just his decent opponent in the race and he will be his rival .
When the race starts , they leave Chicago , entering Philadelphia and encounter some cops .
But this time , the cops get their Lamborghini Gallardo LP 550 - 2 Valentino Balbonies to chase .
They lose the cops .
Matt tells his friend that he will find a motel to hide out and rest .
Matt checks in and rest until the next day .
The next day , in the morning , Matt wakes up and opens the television .
The television program he 's watching is the news about Chicago Police Department announcing the details of the suspect with the suspect 's picture .
The suspect turns out to be Matt .
The police describe that he is one of the FBI 's most wanted .
They and some FBI also surround the motel where Matt is hiding out .
They will also enter the building in a few minutes .
This shocks Matt , so that he has to escape from the motel and drive his Shelby out , but still the police notice him and start chasing him .
His friend saw the news .
Then he gets the truck to rescue Matt and drives ahead of Matt .
He tells Matt by the radio that Matt must park his Shelby in the back of the truck and they will escape easily .
Matt drives his Shelby into the back of the truck .
They escape from the cops .
They see the Mob 's truck .
Matt tries pick up the Mob 's phone call by using the truck 's scanner , They hear that the mob member in the truck is talking to his boss .
The boss tells his member that he has to take the unknown woman , who Matt and his friend followed to the factory and has been used Matt , to Dickson Farm , New Jersey , where it 's far North from Atlantic City just 15 miles , His member is still struggling about her identity .
The boss tells that because of the unknown woman 's identity and the orders from the top , she must die .
Matt tells his friend that he will rescue her , even though she 's done to him like that .
His friend tells that he will get his new car in Trenton and when Matt comes , they will race to the finish line together .
Matt pulls out his Shelby out of the truck and goes to Dickson Farm .
When he arrives , the group of people and the unknown female are there .
They shoot their guns at Matt and tells that they 're FBI and they 've surrounded him .
They push the woman into their Charger and drive away .
Matt 's Shelby 's tires are flatted , so Matt has to find a new car .
He goes to the barn , find a car with fabric covers .
He pulls the fabric , and he surprises .
The car turns out to be a Pagani Huayra .
He follow the Chargers to highway sections .
Matt rams the Charger into the sea .
Matt dives into the sea for rescuing the unknown woman , hoping she 's not drowning .
Matt finds that there 's no woma .
And when he goes to the surface , the unknown woman is already on land .
She jumped out of the car before Matt rammed into the sea .
The unknown woman tells Matt to go back to Dickson Farm to get her briefcase back .
She admits that she has been used Matt to avoid the FBI by using the race as cover , which is the best way to avoid .
She tells that she was more of an " informant " .
She tells that the briefcase contains the Di Marco Mob accounts for the last ten years which is the evidence for FBI to take down the Mob .
But the unknown woman ca n't give it to FBI without a way of escaping the Mob .
So she has to arrange the briefcase to the Mob in return for case to disappear .
The Mob betrayed her and was about to kill her but Matt showed up .
When they arrive at the Farm , Matt unlocks the handcuffs at the woman 's hands , and they take the briefcase .
But the Mob shows up and starts chasing them .
Matt and the unknown female lose the Mob .
She informs Matt to get to New York City in 1st place to win the race .
When they arrive at New York City , the unknown woman tells that the finish line is in Times Square .
She also tells that if they take Lincoln Tunnel , they will make it .
They also see one racer ahead of them .
Then they race to the finish line .
And when they cross the finish line in Times Square they finish 1st and win the race , but there 's very quiet with no people except Matt and the unknown female .
The 2nd racer to finish the race is Matt 's friend in his Lamborghini Sesto Elemento .
They all confuse to this .
Then , the Mob , New York City Police Department officers and the FBI arrive .
They 're trapped .
But they manage to escape from Times Square and New York City .
Matt and the unknown woman are still being chases by the Mob , the NYPD cops and the FBI .
The unknown woman then throws her briefcase to the road .
The Mob , the cops and the FBI stop chasing Matt and the unknown female .
Then , they have a shooting and fighting for a briefcase .
Matt and the unknown woman escape .
Matt tells that he has a plan to go to Canada .
Matt asks the unknown woman for her identity , and finally , she answers Matt that her name is " Sophia Di Marco " .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Since the release of , Black Box had been working on another entry to the franchise , presumably continuing the action focused street - racing gameplay of Black Box 's previous titles .
This game had an extended development window to give the developers a chance to create a game that " could really blow the doors off the category " .
It was confirmed that the game would feature a fictional storyline and characters .
The game was first hinted early in November 2010 by Senior Vice President of EA Games Europe , Patrick Söderlund in an interview with Eurogamer , before the release of .
Söderlund stated he wanted to alternate developers to give them time to make a good game .
Eurogamer 's Robert Purchese asked , " You say there will be an arcade NFS game every year in November , but next year 's game wo n't be developed by Criterion .
Is it Black Box ?
" , Söderlund stated " You can assume that , yes .
Yes .
I would say so , yes . "
The game was originally set to be revealed at E3 2011 , however , on April 28 , 2011 , a listing for Need for Speed : The Run appeared on UK retailer site ShopTo .
Later , EA released the teaser trailer for all to see .
On April 29 , the firm confirmed the game 's details .
EA Games Label president , Frank Gibeau stated that Need for Speed : The Run would offer " an edgier experience " than previous entries in the racing series .
The Run 's lead development platform was the PlayStation 3 .
At E3 2011 , it was announced that the PlayStation 3 version of the game includes seven exclusive cars , including the Bugatti Veyron Super Sport , Hennessey Venom GT , Lexus LFA , Gumpert Apollo Sports , Lamborghini Countach 5000QV , Koenigsegg Agera R and Porsche Carrera GT .
EA Black Box stated that the Frostbite 2 engine allowed The Run to look stunning , stating that Frostbite 2 was not only the best engine it had used in a game to date , but " the most versatile " too .
According to designer Alex Grimbley , it apparently took a year to re - purpose the tech for driving rather than shooting .
The EA Black Box team , especially the artists , coders and designers , for the first time , worked collaboratively in small groups on The Run .
Executive producer Jason DeLong stated that the Frostbite engine provided a more detailed cinematic environment and experience to the game .
The Run was the first non - DICE game to use Frostbite 2 , but Black Box did collaborate with DICE to make certain that the engine was used properly , with DeLong commenting that the collaboration allowed for a " very deep racing mechanic of handling physics into the game " .
Executive producer Jason DeLong claimed that the studio used DICE 's Frostbite 2 engine for The Run as it was intent on making a " Hollywood " experience and to give the game a more cinematic feel than past story - based Need for Speed titles .
The Run 's producer Alex Grimbley confirmed that The Run would not feature any form of vehicle customization , stating : " We decided against customization because that is not what The Run is about .
It is an understandable stance given that is a whole new direction for the franchise .
We want to focus on the story and the race itself . "
However , this statement was retracted after some trailers and screenshots of the game featured visually modified vehicles .
A GameSpot trailer released on November 2 , 2011 officially confirmed that body kits and selectable body paints can be placed on vehicles .
When asked why The Run is from San Fran – New York rather than LA – New York ,
game 's producer Brian Lindley replied : " That 's a good question .
I think we were maybe looking for more of a direct route .
It 's more of a straight line route rather than being sort of corner to corner .
But also , San Fran has some iconic landmarks and things like the bridge and the downtown .
Also , what we can do with the environment with things like fog , it makes it of a bit cooler place to drive than LA .
And my experiences driving in LA are largely being stuck in traffic !
So that 's the primary reason , it 's just a cooler looking start for the game . "
Black Box PR Manager Dana Sissons stated that The Run was going to be more exciting , more varied , and bigger than ever .
The race from San Francisco to New York was full of new race modes , tons of different terrain , and a few " Michael Bay movie moment " avalanches to keep you on your toes .
The Run is powered by DICE 's Frostbite 2 engine , making the game the first non - shooter and one of the first console titles to use the engine .
MARKETING AND RELEASE Section::::Marketing and release .
Prior to its release , Need for Speed : The Run was marketed and promoted heavily through the use of numerous Internet and TV trailers .
Famed Hollywood action director Michael Bay directed a TV advertisement for the game .
The advertisement features explosions , car crashes , supercars and police vehicles .
In addition to the standard edition , a Limited Edition of the game was announced , which was available through pre - order .
The Limited Edition features numerous bonuses over the standard edition , including exclusive packaging , three exclusive cars ( the Lamborghini Aventador , Chevrolet Camaro ZL1 and Porsche 911 Carrera S ) and five exclusive challenges with bonus rewards and achievements .
There were three pre - order offers through several retail outlets .
Each pre - order consisted of two bonus cars and three events inspired by the " exclusive " Challenge Series , which depended on the outlets the player pre - ordered the game .
The three " exclusive " Challenge Series on offer were inspired by EA Black Box previous Need for Speed games , and .
The Underground Edition Nissan 370Z ( Z34 ) and Underground Edition Nissan Skyline GT - R ( R32 ) are included in the Need for Speed
The Run Underground Challenge Series as bonus cars , while the Most Wanted Edition BMW M3 GTS and Razor 's Mustang Boss 302 are included in the Need for Speed
The Run Most Wanted Challenge Series as bonus cars , and the Carbon Edition Corvette Z06 ( C6 ) and Darius ' Audi R8 V10 are included in the Need for Speed
The Run Carbon Challenge Series as bonus cars .
Buying the game through Origin came with two special offers .
Those who pre - ordered the game received a PC Digital download for one of five past Need for Speed titles ( Hot Pursuit , Shift 2 : Unleashed , Shift , Undercover and Prostreet ) .
The Need for Speed
The Run Carbon Challenge Series was also included as a pre - order bonus .
This offer was only available until November 14 , 2011 .
Those who bought the game after November 14 through Origin received a discount on seven EA racing titles , which included The Run , Shift 2 :
Unleashed , Shift , Hot Pursuit , Undercover , Prostreet and Burnout Paradise .
This offer was available until December 31 .
To promote the game in Europe , EA and Need for Speed conducted the 2011 Need for Speed European Spokesmodel Search .
This continent wide search was set to discover two women with boundless energy , an outgoing personality and an edgy style fused with a passion for cars and gaming .
The winners acted as Need for Speed ambassadors at events throughout 2012 , including representing Need for Speed products at high - profile gaming events across Europe and the Team Need for Speed racing team in the prestigious FIA GT3 European Championship and Euro Drift program .
Models searches were being conducted in five territories : France , Germany , Norway , Russia and the United Kingdom .
Finalists was selected from each territory with the final two winners being announced in November 2011 in conjunction with the release of Need for Speed : The Run .
To promote the game in US , Canada and UK , EA announced a competition , giving away one 2012 Porsche Carrera S.
All the competitions had to do was enter by logging in with the EA account , or register for free .
Electronic Arts and Sports Illustrated announced a marketing partnership for the Need for Speed franchise , " bringing together the worlds of fashion , video games , cars and beauty in a first - of - its - kind partnership .
" EA announced that the likenesses of 2011 Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue cover model Irina Shayk and model Chrissy Teigen appears in the game as part of a promotional deal struck between the game publisher and popular sports magazine .
The cross promotion is n't limited to the models appearance in the game .
Sports Illustrated is a featured advertiser on billboards that appear in the gamescape .
Sports Illustrated offered a bundle that saw buyers receive a six - month " All Access " subscription to Sports Illustrated , a copy of Need for Speed : The Run for PlayStation 3 or Xbox 360 , and a Making of Need for Speed : The Run documentary DVD starring the two swimsuit models .
EA also collaborated with Adidas to produce 100 pair of shoes tied into Need for Speed : The Run .
The first 50 pair of shoes was available at the Adidas Originals Chicago store on October 10 , with another 50 available at the San Francisco store on October 22 .
The first to purchase the shoes was invited to " exclusive kick - off " events at the stores a few days later .
A demo of the game was released on Xbox Live first on October 18 ( expired on November 1 ) and PlayStation Network on October 19 ( also expired on November 1 ) , a month ahead of the game 's launch .
The demo featured two levels : Desert Hills , California and Independence Pass , Colorado in a Lamborghini Gallardo LP 550 - 2 Valentino Balboni , and supported a " refer a friend to download the demo " feature giving players access to a 2012 Porsche 911 Carrera S. Autolog also implemented in the demo , allowing the player to compare best times with friends across the two tracks .
Need for Speed teamed up with HP and Vagrant Records to let fans decide which of the favorite bands they would like to see in The Run .
The fans got a choice to vote for their favorite song and artist , which includes the song " Mama Taught Me Better " by Black Rebel Motorcycle Club , " Solar " by MonstrO and " Tropical Depression " by The Night Marchers , on The Run 's official website .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
The first post - launch downloadable content ( DLC ) package , titled " Signature Edition Booster Pack " , features nine new cars , all modified to insane levels ranging from a " Venom " Nissan 370Z to a " Falken " Porsche 911 GT3 RS 4.0 .
The second post - launch DLC package , titled " Italian Pack " , features seven new cars ( Alfa Romeo 8C Competizione , Lancia Delta HF Integrale Evoluzione , Lamborghini Diablo SV , Lamborghini Gallardo LP 570 - 4 Superleggera , Pagani Zonda R , Maserati GranTurismo MC Stradale , Maserati MC12 ) and ten new challenge events added into Challenge Series .
The third DLC is the Heroes and Villains pack which features all the pre - order vehicles available for download .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Need for Speed : The Run was met with mixed reviews .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Wii version 64/100 , the Xbox 360 version 68/100 , the Nintendo 3DS version 65/100 , the PlayStation 3 version 64/100 and the PC version 69/100 .
The first review was published by Game Informer , which gave the game 7.75 out of 10 , saying that " Need for Speed : The Run is by no stretch a bad game ; it just fails to capitalize on its chances .
San Francisco to New York is a long haul , and it 's even longer when not enough happens in between . "
A couple more positive reviews include GameTrailers , which gave it an 8.4 out of 10 , writing " Need for Speed : The Run falters with its high - profile but underdeveloped plot as well as some awkward design choices .
However , it overcomes these potholes with courses that are a blast to drive and simple multiplayer that keeps you hooked in . "
Gaming Nexus which gave it an A- , and stated " The Run takes the venerable franchise in a startling new direction while preserving all of the aspects that have made the series so successful .
This one is definitely worth taking a look at . "
IGN gave it a 6.5 " Okay " rating , stating " All this awesome racing action gets somewhat lost amid the nonexistent story , the dumb / scripted AI , the lack of options , and the overall shortness of the game .
The Run is not a marathon racing game , it 's a quick and dirty drag race .
"
1UP gave it a C+ , stating " The Run takes an awkwardly serious approach to its story , eschewing the over - the - top fun and wackiness of its clear inspirations -- movies like the Cannonball Run series and classic arcade games like Cruis'n USA --to deliver a cross - country campaign that 's sometimes exhilarating , but often frustrating and surprisingly banal . "
Eurogamer gave it 5 out of 10 , saying " The worst of the game 's technical sins is performance , with appallingly low frame rates in our patched PS3 retail version when you brake suddenly or drift through many a corner . "
GamesRadar was more positive to the game , which gave it 8 out of 10 , and stated " It 's possible Need for Speed
The Run wo n't provide as many hours of entertainment as previous NFS games , but then it packs in unique events and some incredibly exciting chase sequences , meaning it packs a lot of entertainment - per - hour .
It 's not very forgiving of mistakes , but then it provides greater rewards as a result . "
VideoGamer gave it 6 out of 10 , saying " The Run certainly is n't terrible , and a big improvement on Black Box 's previous effort , Undercover , but it needed more moments like the avalanche and less monotonous freeways .
With the campaign over in an afternoon and the rest of the package failing to offer anything to keep you playing , The Run is some decent throwaway fun that will be forgotten as soon as you move on to something else . "
GamePro gave it 6 out of 10 , writing " The journey across America is beautifully rendered , capturing the varied landscapes spectacularly as you travel over the Sierra , across the Great Plains , and head towards the East Coast .
The quality of the movies is very good too , and the characters ' faces are nicely rendered to convey emotion .
But the story and the gameplay just do n't hold up their side of the bargain , and the game ends up falling short of its considerable potential . "
Edge gave it one of its lowest scores , a 3 out of 10 , saying " The notion that playing games is a waste of your time is nonsense , of course , but ... stuffed with a procession of long - winded loading sequences , protracted menu flipping and unskippable cutscenes , it often feels like there 's as much watching as there is playing .
Time wasted , in other words .
" They criticized the many technical and graphical glitches , saying " sometimes the lighting effects mix textures into strange oily swirls , while at other times it feels like you 're driving one big polygon . "
However , in the post script , they did concede that , while flawed , the game does have a clever concept and occasionally delivers those rare feelings of escapism that many arcade - style racers strive for : " The Run may not have much else going for it , but in its unusual approach to the genre it at least tries to do something new . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS