WII U
The Wii U ( ) is a home video game console developed by Nintendo , and the successor to the Wii .
The console was released in November 2012 and was the first eighth - generation video game console , as it competed with Microsoft 's Xbox One and Sony 's PlayStation 4 .
The Wii U is the first Nintendo console to support HD graphics .
The system 's primary controller is the Wii U GamePad , which features an embedded touchscreen , and combines directional buttons , analog sticks , and action buttons .
The screen can be used either as a supplement to the main display ( either providing an alternate , asymmetric gameplay experience , or a means of local multiplayer without resorting to a split screen ) , or in supported games , to play the game directly on the GamePad independently of the television .
The Wii U is backward compatible with all Wii software and accessories – games can support any combination of the GamePad , Wii Remote , Nunchuk , Balance Board , or Nintendo 's more traditionally designed Classic Controller or Wii U Pro Controller for input .
Online functionality centers around the Nintendo Network platform and Miiverse , an integrated social networking service which allows users to share content in game - specific communities .
The Wii U was met with a generally positive reception , including praise for its GamePad controller , improvements to online functionality over the Wii , backwards compatibility with existing Wii software and controllers , affordability in comparison to other eighth - generation consoles , and non - reliance on a subscription for online functionality .
However , the Wii U received criticism in several areas , including the GamePad 's battery life and issues with the console 's user interface and functionality , along with a weak lineup of launch titles and a lack of clear vision .
The Wii U was met with slow consumer adoption , with low sales primarily credited to a weak lineup of launch titles , third - party support , and marketing reasons .
Wii U production officially ended in January 2017 .
On March 3 , 2017 , Nintendo released a new flagship home console , the Nintendo Switch , although the Wii U was noted for pioneering several concepts that were refined in the Switch .
HISTORY DEVELOPMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Development .
The system was first conceived in 2008 , after Nintendo recognized several limitations and challenges with the Wii , such as the general public 's perception that the system catered primarily to a " casual " audience .
With Wii U , Nintendo wished to bring back " core " gamers .
Game designer Shigeru Miyamoto admitted that the lack of HD and limited network infrastructure for Wii also contributed to the system being regarded in a separate class to its competitors ' systems , the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 .
It was decided that a new console would have to be developed to accommodate significant structural changes .
Ideas on which direction to take for the new console led to a lot of debate within the company , and the project started over from scratch on several occasions .
The concept of a touchscreen embedded within the controller was originally inspired by the blue light on the Wii disc tray that illuminates to indicate new messages .
Miyamoto and his team wanted to include a small screen to provide game feedback and status messages to players ( similar to the VMU for Sega 's Dreamcast ) .
Much later in development , this was expanded to a full screen that could display the game being played in its entirety , a concept which was suggested but not financially viable earlier in the project .
Public rumors surrounding the console began to appear in 2010 , with speculation of an upcoming revision of the Wii scheduled for 2011 known as the " Wii HD " , that would support high definition video and have a Blu - ray disc drive .
However , Nintendo president Satoru Iwata later stated that he saw " no significant reason " to include HD into the Wii and that such an addition would be better suited for a successor .
Miyamoto also expressed Nintendo 's interest in working with HD graphics , but clarified that the company is primarily focused on gameplay .
In October 2009 , Miyamoto said that Nintendo had no concrete plans about its next console , but thought that the new system would continue to feature motion controls and also expected its interface to be " more compact " and cheaper .
Iwata also mentioned that the Wii 's successor might be 3D - compatible but concluded that the adoption rates of 3D televisions should increase to at least 30 % first .
In 2010 , Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils - Aimé commented that he felt " confident the Wii home entertainment console has a very long life in front of it " and declared that a successor would not be launched in the near future .
After its E3 2010 presentation , Iwata revealed to the BBC that Nintendo would begin announcing a new console once it ran " out of ideas with the current hardware and can not give users any more meaningful surprises with the technology " .
Later , at an investor 's meeting , he disclosed that Nintendo was " of course studying and developing the next console to Wii " , but it was simultaneously keeping its concepts secret because it was " really important for [ his ] business to positively surprise people . "
Fils - Aimé also stated that Nintendo 's next home console would likely not feature stereoscopic 3D , based on the 3D technology Nintendo had experimented with .
In April 2011 , an uncredited source indicated that Nintendo was planning to unveil a successor to the Wii known as " Project Café " at its E3 2011 presentation .
Café was claimed to be a high definition console , also would have backward compatibility with Wii software .
Conflicting reports also surrounded the console 's new controller , with reports suggesting a tablet - like device with an embedded touchcreen and the ability to stream games from the console directly to the screen , while others reported that the controller would be similar to the GameCube controller and feature dual analog sticks , shoulder buttons , and triggers .
ANNOUNCEMENT Section::::Announcement .
On April 25 , 2011 , Nintendo released an official statement announcing a system to succeed the Wii to be released during 2012 , and that playable console units would be present at E3 2011 .
Speaking at an investor 's conference , Iwata stated the Wii successor would " offer something new for home game systems . "
He also confirmed that the device would not launch in fiscal year 2012 , meaning that it would release after April 2012 .
In early June , Nikkei issued a report confirming earlier rumors that the new console would feature a controller with a 6-inch touchscreen that would give tablet - like controls to games , as well as a rechargeable battery and camera .
Project Café was officially unveiled as the Wii U during Nintendo 's press conference at E3 2011 by Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils - Aimé ; he explained that the Wii U would be " a system we will all enjoy together , but also one that 's tailor - made for you " .
The rumored tablet controller was also shown at this time .
No first - party titles for the Wii U were officially announced during the presentation , but several major third - party studios announced planned titles for Wii U in a pre - recorded video , the possibility of a new Super Smash Bros. game was teased , and Electronic Arts ' then - CEO John Riccitiello appeared on - stage to discuss the company 's prospective plans for products on the Wii U. Prototype hardware and a series of tech demos were available to attendees , showcasing gameplay concepts and the technological capabilities of the console — including a The Legend of Zelda - themed graphics demo , and New Super Mario Bros. Mii .
In the two days following the unveiling of the Wii U , Nintendo 's stock fell nearly 10 % to levels not seen since 2006 .
Some analysts expressed skepticism in regards to the addition of a touch - screen , expressing concern that the controller would be less affordable and less innovative than the original Wii Remote .
When asked about whether or not the Wii U was going to support stereographic 3D via 3D televisions , Iwata stated that it was " not the area we are focusing on . "
On January 26 , 2012 , Iwata announced that the Wii U would be launched by the end of the 2012 shopping season in all major regions , and that its final specifications would be revealed at E3 2012 .
He also stated that the console would feature a unified online system known as Nintendo Network , which would feature user account support as opposed to the use of friend codes .
Nintendo Network would also provide the framework for online multiplayer interactions , add - on content , as well as online distribution of applications and video games .
Iwata mentioned that the Wii U GamePad would support NFC , which would allow the system to wirelessly interact with figurines and cards .
It would also allow for microtransactions to take place wirelessly using credit cards with NFC support .
On September 13 , 2012 , Nintendo announced that the Wii U would launch in Japan on December 8 , 2012 .
Later that day , Nintendo announced that the North American launch date would be November 18 , 2012 .
Nintendo of Europe and Nintendo Australia also announced that the Wii U would be released in both regions on November 30 , 2012 .
In an interview with GameSpot the next day , Nintendo of America 's Senior Product Marketing Manager Bill Trinen admitted that Nintendo 's pre - launch marketing and presentations of the Wii U had focused too much on the GamePad , to the extent that some consumers mistook the device as an accessory for the existing Wii rather than a component of an entirely new platform .
Trinen ensured that future promotional material for the console , including its packaging , would emphasize both the Wii U console and GamePad .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Wii U was originally released in two bundles : the Basic bundle and the Deluxe / Premium bundle .
The Basic bundle contains a white Wii U with 8 GB of storage , a white Wii U GamePad and stylus and an HDMI cable , while the Deluxe / Premium contains a black Wii U with 32 GB of storage , a black GamePad and stylus , an HDMI cable , and adds a Nintendo Network Premium subscription , the Nintendo Land game ( except Japan ) , as well as stands for the console and controller and a sensor bar ( except Japan ) .
The Wii U launched in North America priced at US$ 299.99 for the Basic Set and US$ 349.99 for the Deluxe Set .
The system launched in Europe , Australia and South Africa , with European pricing set by retailers .
The system launched in Japan priced at ¥ 26,250 for the Basic Set and ¥ 31,500 for the Premium Set .
RETAIL CONFIGURATIONS
Section::::Retail configurations .
On July 13 , 2013 , Nintendo released a white version of the Premium Pack in Japan , as well as an official battery pack and charger dock for the Wii Remote .
The battery pack is capable of about 3 hours of gameplay before needing to be recharged .
On July 25 , the company released an improved battery pack for the Wii U GamePad .
In contrast to the standard 1500mAh battery bundled with the console , the new 2550mAh battery pack increases longevity to between five and eight hours before needing to be recharged .
On August 28 , 2013 , Nintendo announced that the Deluxe / Premium 32 GB model would drop in price from US$ 349.99 to US$ 299.99 in North America .
The price drop took effect on September 20 , 2013 .
In Europe , Nintendo did n't confirm a formal price cut since individual retailers set their own prices .
However , starting October 4 , 2013 , the company reduced the wholesale price of the system to retailers .
Coinciding with the system 's price cut , Nintendo released a limited edition Wii U Deluxe Set bundle .
The bundle included a black Wii U console with 32 GB of storage , a black Wii U GamePad decorated with a golden Triforce and other thematic symbols , a download code for the game and , in North America , a digital copy of , a collector 's book about The Legend of Zelda series .
In Europe , Nintendo also released a limited edition
Lego City Undercover Wii U Premium Pack bundle .
Both European bundles featured a 7-day trial of the Wii Karaoke U service .
Nintendo did not cut the price of the Wii U in Australia or New Zealand nor did it release any of the previous bundles in the regions .
On October 31 , 2013 , Nintendo introduced two new Wii U Premium Pack bundles in Japan , called Family Set .
The first included either a black or white Wii U console with 32 GB of storage , a black or white Wii U GamePad , New Super Mario
Bros. U and Wii Party U preloaded , a black or white Wii Remote , a Wii Sensor Bar , and a 30-day trial of the Wii Karaoke U service .
The second bundle included all of the previous one 's contents , additionally preloaded with Wii Fit U and including Nintendo 's official Fit Meter pedometer ( with the Wii Balance Board available separately ) .
On November 1 , 2013 , Nintendo released a Mario & Luigi Deluxe Set in North America with the intention of replacing the original Wii U Deluxe Set , which included a copy of Nintendo Land .
The Mario & Luigi bundle contains both New Super Mario
Bros. U and New Super Luigi U packaged as a " 2 in 1 " disc alongside a black Wii U console with 32 GB of storage and black Wii U GamePad controller .
The bundle was later released in Europe on November 8 .
On November 14 , Nintendo released a Just Dance 2014 Basic Pack bundle in Australia and New Zealand .
It contains a white Wii U console with 8 GB of storage , a white Wii U GamePad and Wii
Remote Plus controllers , a Sensor Bar , and disc versions of both Ubisoft 's Just Dance 2014 and Nintendo Land .
The bundle was later released in Europe on November 22 .
On November 15 , Nintendo released a Wii Party U Wii U Basic Pack bundle in Europe .
It features a white Wii U console with 8 GB of storage , a white Wii U GamePad and Wii
Remote Plus controllers , a Sensor Bar , and disc versions of both Wii Party U and Nintendo Land .
On November 15 , Nintendo also released a Wii U Basic Set bundle in North America .
It contains white Wii U with 8 GB of storage , Activision 's Skylanders Swap Force game , a Portal of Power , three Skylanders figures , a collector poster , trading cards and sticker sheets , and a Nintendo Land game disc .
The bundle was released in Australia and New Zealand on November 21 .
On November 26 , 2013 , the Wii U was released in Brazil .
However , the system is only available in the black Deluxe Set in the region .
On January 10 , 2015 , Nintendo announced that it would cease selling consoles and games in Brazil due to the high cost of doing business in the country .
On May 30 , 2014 , Nintendo released a Mario Kart 8 Deluxe / Premium Set bundle in Europe and North America .
It features a black Wii U console with 32 GB of storage , a black Wii U GamePad , a copy of Mario Kart 8 , a Sensor Bar , and special edition red Wii Wheel ( North America only ) .
Additionally , registering the game on Club Nintendo before July 31 , 2014 presents the buyer a free Wii U game from a selection of four in North America and ten in Europe .
The bundle was released in Australia and New Zealand on May 31 .
In June 2015 , the basic Wii U was discontinued in Japan , and replaced by a 32 GB " Premium " set that includes white hardware and a Wii
Remote Plus .
HARDWARE Section::::Hardware .
The Wii U uses a custom multi - chip module ( MCM ) developed by AMD , IBM and Renesas in co - operation with Nintendo IRD and Nintendo Technology Development .
The MCM combines an " Espresso " central processing unit ( CPU ) and a " Latte " graphics chip ( GPU ) , as well as a SEEPROM memory chip .
The Espresso CPU , designed by IBM , consists of a PowerPC 750-based tri - core processor with 3 MB of shared L2 cache memory and clocked at approximately 1.24 GHz .
Despite belonging to the PowerPC family , the Espresso also shares some architectural concepts with the POWER7 architecture , such as the use of eDRAM cache and being manufactured at a 45 nm node .
The Latte graphics chip contains both a " GX2 " GPGPU , which runs Wii U applications , and a " GX " GPU , which enables backward compatibility with Wii games .
The GX2 , designed by AMD , is based on the Radeon R600 / R700 architecture and is clocked at approximately 550 MHz .
It is manufactured at a 40 nm node and contains 32 MB of eDRAM cache memory , which can also act as L3 cache for the CPU .
The GX , originally designed by ArtX , contains a 1 MB and a 2 MB banks of eSRAM cache memory .
The Latte chip also includes a secondary custom ARM9 processor with 96 KB of SRAM memory that handles system tasks in the background during gameplay or while the system is in sleep mode , and dedicated hardware audio DSP module .
The console contains 2 GB of DDR3 system memory consisting of four 512 MB DRAM chips with a maximum bandwidth of 12.8 GB / s .
This is 20 times the amount found in the Wii .
Of this , 1 GB is reserved for the operating system and is unavailable to games .
The memory architecture allows the CPU and GPU to access both the main DDR3 memory pool and the eDRAM cache memory pool on the GPU , removing the need for separate , dedicated memory pools .
The console includes either an 8 GB ( Basic ) or 32 GB ( Deluxe / Premium ) internal eMMC flash memory , expandable via SD memory cards up to 32 GB and USB external hard disk drives up to 2 TB .
The Wii U features 802.11 b / g /n wireless network connectivity and support for Fast Ethernet with an accessory , Bluetooth 4.0 , a total of four USB 2.0 ports , and an SD / SDHC memory card slot .
An additional power port is also included to power the Wii Sensor Bar , an auxiliary infrared emitter used by Wii Remote peripherals for motion tracking .
Video output options include 1080p , 1080i , 720p , 576i , 480p and 480i , through HDMI 1.4 and component video ( , D - Terminal and RGB SCART ) or 576i , 480i anamorphic widescreen through composite video .
Audio output options include six - channel 5.1 linear PCM surround sound or analog stereo .
The console also supports stereoscopic ( 3D ) images and video .
CONTROLLERS Section::::Controllers .
The Wii U GamePad is the console 's primary controller : its main feature is a built - in 6.2 inch ( 15.7 cm ) resistive touchscreen , which can be used as a companion to games being played on a television , or as a means of playing games on the GamePad itself without a television .
The GamePad is designed to enable a concept referred to by Nintendo as " asymmetric gaming " : in multiplayer games , a player using the GamePad may have a different gameplay objective and experience than other players .
The GamePad 's display contents are rendered on the Wii U itself , and streamed wirelessly as video to the GamePad .
The GamePad also supports near field communications ; cards and specially - designed figurines , such as Nintendo 's Amiibo line , can be used with the GamePad to interact with games .
In Japan , it can also be used for contactless payments from eShop with Suica cards .
A new Wii U Pro Controller was released alongside the Wii U.
The Wii U Pro Controller is an updated version of the Wii 's Classic Controller that is designed to appeal to " hardcore " players , with a more traditional gamepad design that resembles those used by the PlayStation and Xbox lines ( and in particular , the Xbox 360 's controller ) , and a claimed 80-hour battery life .
The Wii U Pro Controller is compatible with supported Wii U games , but is not supported by Wii games .
The Wii U is compatible with existing Wii Remote and Wii
Remote Plus controllers , along with their Nunchuk and Classic Controller attachments .
A combination of up to four Wii Remotes or Pro Controllers can be used simultaneously , and the console can theoretically support up to two GamePads .
Most software requires a Wii Sensor Bar in order to use Wii Remotes with the system , though some aspects , such as Off - TV Play and the Wii Mode , allow the Wii U GamePad to detect Wii Remotes .
The Wii U does not natively support GameCube controllers .
While a USB adapter accessory allows GameCube controllers to be used on the console in Super Smash Bros. for Wii U , it is not compatible with any other software .
SOFTWARE
Section::::Software .
The Wii U 's main menu has two main components :
by default , the GamePad displays a home screen consisting of a grid with shortcuts to games and apps , while the television screen displays a lobby ( WaraWara Plaza ) populated by other users ' Miis .
The two displays can be switched between the television screen and GamePad .
Pressing the controller 's " Home " button suspends the current game or app and opens the Home Menu : it shows basic information ( such as the current time , controller battery levels , and notifications ) , and allows access to several " multitasking " functions , including the Nintendo eShop , Miiverse , download manager , a web browser , and the user 's friends list .
To play Wii games , the user must enter " Wii Mode " , a legacy mode that emulates the Wii 's system software and Wii Menu interface .
Initially , Wii Mode could only be used on the television screen , but the October 2013 firmware update enables Wii Mode to be used off - TV .
Either way , Wii controllers must be used .
ONLINE SERVICES Section::::Online services .
The Wii U uses the Nintendo Network platform for online services ( replacing the friend code system of the Wii ) , enabling online multiplayer , downloading and purchasing games or apps via Nintendo eShop , video chat using the GamePad 's camera and the Wii U Chat service , and other services .
Up to twelve accounts can be created per console .
A social networking service known as Miiverse is integrated into the Wii U 's system software ; it allows players to interact and share content in game - specific communities using their Mii as an avatar .
Miiverse allows users to share accomplishments , screenshots , drawings and hand - written notes .
Select games are integrated with Miiverse , where social interactions can also occur within the game , or appear within their content ( such as in Splatoon , where drawn posts can appear as graffiti on walls in its settings ) .
Miiverse is moderated through software filtering as well as a human resource team in order to ensure that the content shared by users is appropriate and that no spoilers are shared .
In order to facilitate this , it was initially stated that comments posted could take up to 30 minutes to appear on Miiverse .
MULTIMEDIA INTEGRATION
Section::::Multimedia integration .
The Wii U supports online video services through apps , such as Amazon Video , Crunchyroll , Hulu , Netflix , and YouTube .
The Wii U does not support playback of DVD or Blu - ray Disc ; Iwata explained that the decision to exclude these formats was motivated primarily by patent licensing fees , and the fact that such functionality would be redundant to DVD and Blu - ray players that users may already own .
The Nintendo TVii service allowed program listings from a user 's television provider to be aggregated with online video on demand services into an electronic program guide with recommendations and search functionality , and the ability to use the GamePad 's infrared functionality to tune a set - top box to a particular program .
The app also provided integration with IMDB , Rotten Tomatoes , and Wikipedia to provide additional information , and social connectivity through Facebook , Twitter , or Miiverse .
TVii was made available with the Wii U 's release in Japan on December 8 , 2012 , and in North America on December 20 , 2012 .
Following delays , a European launch was cancelled , and the service was discontinued in North America on August 11 , 2015 .
The service remains active in Japan only .
GAMES Section::::Games .
Wii U games can be downloaded digitally through Nintendo eShop , or at retail on physical media .
Retail copies of Wii U games are distributed on Wii U Optical Disc , a proprietary high - density optical disc format co - developed with Panasonic .
The format is similar in design and specifications to Blu - ray Disc , with a capacity of 25 GB per layer , but the discs themselves have a soft , rounded rim .
Unlike previous Nintendo consoles , game manuals are only available digitally .
The console is region locked ; software purchased in a region can be only played on that region 's hardware .
New games in Nintendo 's flagship franchises ( including Super Mario , Donkey Kong and The Legend of Zelda ) , as well as several Wii series games ( including Wii Sports Club , Wii Fit U and Wii Party U ) have been released , in addition to many original titles and third - party - developed games .
Nintendo has received third - party support from companies such as Ubisoft , Sega , Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment , Activision Blizzard and Capcom , and various independent developers such as Two Tribes .
As of late July 2016 , there have been 39 first - party and 118 third - party Wii U games physically released in the United States ; both figures are the lowest for any Nintendo console .
A total of 102.53 million Wii U games have been sold worldwide , with ten titles surpassing the million - unit mark .
The highest selling game is Mario Kart 8 at 8.42 million units , followed by Super Mario 3D World at 5.80 million units , and
New Super Mario Bros. U at 5.77 million units .
Super Smash Bros. for Wii U is the fastest selling Wii U game .
LAUNCH TITLES Section::::Launch titles .
The Wii U was launched with 23 games in North America , 26 games in Europe , 25 games in Australia , and 11 games in Japan .
Some download - only games were also available on launch day for the Wii U via Nintendo eShop .
An additional 30 games were announced for release during the system 's launch window , which included the three months after the system 's launch date .
Key :
* North America * Europe
* Japan * Australasia !
colspan="5 " List of Wii U launch titles by region released !
Launch title !
Region(s ) released on launch day
VIRTUAL CONSOLE Section::::Virtual Console .
In January 2013 , Nintendo announced that NES and Super NES titles would be made available for the Virtual Console service on the Wii U in April 2013 and would include the option to use Off - TV Play on the GamePad .
On March 26 , 2014 , Game Boy Advance titles were confirmed and started to appear on the eShop the following month .
Nintendo 64 and Nintendo DS games were added in April 2015 .
BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY Section::::Backward compatibility .
The Wii U is compatible with all Wii games and Wii accessories such as the Wii Remote ( Plus ) , Wii Nunchuk , and the Wii Balance Board .
It is possible to migrate most downloaded software and save files from a Wii to a Wii U.
Although Wii games can be displayed on the GamePad 's screen , they can only be controlled using a Wii controller , and not the GamePad 's controller .
The Wii U is not compatible with GameCube discs or accessories , although a homebrew application for Wii Mode exists that enables GameCube support .
A USB GameCube controller adapter with four ports was released exclusively for use with Super Smash Bros. for Wii U , and does not support any other titles .
DEVELOPERS Section::::Developers .
The Nintendo Web Framework , unveiled in 2013 , is a toolset that uses modern web technology ( WebKit , HTML5 , and JavaScript ) to simplify the process of porting games to the Wii U 's GamePad and TV .
It was designed to make web - based games easier to port to the system than it would to code specifically for the Wii U. RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
John Teti of The A.V. Club 's Gameological Society considers the Wii U a compelling video game system which lacks focus , citing Nintendo Land as " ideas act[ing ] in service of the technology " .
Ben Gilbert of Engadget states that Nintendo delivers on its promise of releasing " a modern HD gaming console " but notes that " there are also some major missteps and half - baked ideas : a befuddling Friends List / Miiverse connection , a complete lack of many system - wide console standards ( group chat , achievements , the ability to play non - game disc - based media ) and a game controller that lasts only 3.5 hours " , and stated that he could not give a complete assessment of the console with online components such as Nintendo TVii missing at launch .
Similarly , TechRadar praised the system 's GamePad functionality and HD graphics , but criticized the limited battery power on the GamePad , and the insufficient number of top - tier launch titles .
Some industry figures do not consider the Wii U to be an eighth - generation console , with many citing the hardware 's processing speed .
However , Fils - Aimé has noted that similar comments were made in 2006 when the Wii first launched .
Following the launch of other eighth - generation consoles , the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , in November 2013 , some critics suggested that the Wii U would continue to struggle as it lacked the third - party support of its rivals .
In December 2013 article , Chris Suellentrop of The New York Times argued that the Wii U was the only new console with a video game worth playing — Super Mario 3D World — which he described as being " the best Mario game in years " .
Despite the praise , he noted that " one great game wo n't save a console " , and although other good games exist on the Wii U , he admitted that its lineup " [ was ] still pretty thin " .
Time writer Matt Peckham said that the Wii U was the system of choice to pick up during that Christmas season , praising the console 's game lineup , affordable price , Off - TV Play , the absence of subscription fees for its online services , backward compatibility and media features .
However , he noted that the system still needs a price cut and an improved first and third - party software lineup .
CNET also noted that the Wii U had a better lineup of games and lower price in comparison to its competitors , mainly due to its one - year head start .
SALES Section::::Sales .
+ Life - to - date number of hardware and software units shipped , in millions !
rowspan="2 "
Date !
colspan="2
" Japan ! colspan="2
" Americas
! colspan="2 " Other ! colspan="2 " Total ! scope="row " Hardware !
scope="row " Software ! scope="row " Hardware !
scope="row " Software ! scope="row " Hardware !
scope="row " Software ! scope="row " Hardware !
scope="row " Software ! 2012 - 12 - 31 !
3.06 !
11.69 !
2013 - 03 - 31 !
3.45 !
13.42 !
2013 - 06 - 30 !
3.61 !
14.44 !
2013 - 09 - 30 !
3.91 !
19.71 !
2013 - 12 - 31 !
5.86 !
29.37 !
2014 - 03 - 31 !
6.17 ! 32.28 !
2014 - 06 - 30 ! 6.68 !
36.67 ! 2014 - 09 - 30 !
7.29 !
41.67 ! 2014 - 12 - 31 !
9.20 !
52.87 !
2015 - 03 - 31 !
9.54 !
56.68 !
2015 - 06 - 30 !
10.01 !
61.23 !
2015
- 09 - 30 !
10.73 !
69.05 !
2015 - 12 - 31 !
12.60 !
79.30 !
2016 - 03 - 31 !
12.80 !
84.04 !
2016 - 06 - 30 !
13.02 !
88.72 !
2016
- 09 - 30 !
13.36 !
92.35 !
2016 - 12 - 31 !
13.56 !
96.52
By December 2016 , Nintendo reported life - time sales of 13.56 million Wii U console units and 96.52 million software units worldwide .
LAUNCH Section::::Launch .
During its first week of release in the United States , Nintendo sold its entire allotment of over 400,000 units and sold a total of 425,000 units for the month of November , according to the NPD Group .
It also sold over 40,000 consoles in the UK in its first weekend .
In Japan , over 600,000 Wii U units were sold during December 2012 .
Nearly 890,000 Wii U units were sold in the United States after 41 days on the market .
From the Wii U 's launch till December 31 , 2012 , Nintendo reported that 3.06 million consoles and 11.69 million software units had been shipped worldwide .
In January 2013 , Nintendo sold 57,000 Wii U units in the US .
By comparison , the original Wii sold 435,000 in January 2007 , also two months after launch .
Initial sales numbers in the U.S. and other territories were lower than expected , resulting in Nintendo cutting sales projections for fiscal year 2013 by 17 % , from 5.5 million to 4 million ; the system actually ended up selling 3.5 million units .
During the first quarter of 2013 , Nintendo reported that 390,000 consoles and 1.73 million software units were shipped worldwide .
From March to June 2013 , the system sold approximately 160,000 units , which was down 51 % from the three months prior .
During the second quarter of 2013 , Nintendo reported that 160,000 consoles and 1.03 million software units were shipped worldwide .
LOSS OF SUPPORT Section::::Loss of support .
In May 2013 , Electronic Arts announced that it was reducing support for the Wii U and had no games in development for it , but then partially reconsidered this decision a few days later , with EA 's CFO announcing that " We are building titles for the Nintendo console , but not anywhere near as many as we are for PlayStation or Xbox " .
At E3 2013 , Ubisoft revealed that it was not going to make any more exclusives for the Wii U until sales of the console improved , though it stated shortly thereafter that it was still a " big supporter " of the Wii U , and planned to release as many Wii U games in 2013 as it did in 2012 .
In July 2013 , Bethesda Softworks announced that it had no games in development for the Wii U , with Bethesda VP of PR and marketing Pete Hines explaining : " It depends on the games that we are making and how we think it aligns with that console , and how the hardware aligns with the other stuff we are making " .
This explanation was later refined to being largely due to the hardware .
Contrarily , Activision has stated that it will " do everything they can " to support the system .
At the end of July 2013 , Asda , the second - largest supermarket chain in the UK , confirmed that it had no plans to stock the Wii U , but would still stock games " on a title by title merit basis " .
Despite this , many specialist retailers continued to emphasize their support , with Game CEO Martyn Gibbs saying " We fully support all Nintendo products , including Wii U. " PRICE CUT AND FIRST - PARTY TITLES Section::::Price cut and first - party titles .
Following the system 's $ 50 price cut and the release of on September 20 , 2013 , Wii U sales in North America saw a 200 % rise over August .
From July to September 2013 , the system sold approximately 300,000 units , which was up 87 % from the three months prior .
Despite only having sold 460,000 consoles since April , Nintendo maintained its 9 million Wii U sales forecast for the fiscal year through March 2014 .
Wii U software showed improvement in the Q2 period , reaching 5.27 million units , a 400 % jump on the previous quarter .
Nintendo credited the software growth to key first - party releases like Pikmin 3 and The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker HD .
During the third quarter of 2013 , Nintendo reported that 300,000 consoles and 5.27 million software units were shipped worldwide .
In October 2013 , online retailer Play.com announced that its Wii U sales saw a 75 % sales increase .
The company also predicted that the Wii U would be more popular than its competition , the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , among children during the holiday season .
Following the release of Wii Party U on October 31 in Japan , weekly Wii U sales spiked to 38,802 units sold .
On November 29 , 2013 , Nintendo of France deputy general manager Philippe Lavoué announced that the Wii U had sold approximately 175,000 units in France since launch .
During the first two weeks of December , the Wii U was the top performing home console in Japan , with 123,665 units sold .
After one year in the market , the Wii U had sold approximately 150,000 units in the United Kingdom .
According to the NPD Group , Wii U sales in November increased by 340 % over sales in October in North America , selling approximately 220,700 units sold in that month .
According to several publications , including NPD Group , December 2013 was the best - selling Wii U month in the US since its launch , selling around 481,000 units .
Independent estimates put the number of Wii U consoles sold by the end of 2013 between 4.5 and 5.2 million .
During the fourth quarter of 2013 , Nintendo reported that 1.95 million consoles and 9.96 million software units were shipped worldwide .
In January 2014 , citing lower - than - expected sales during the 2013 holiday season , Nintendo announced that Wii U sales forecasts for fiscal year 2014 had been cut from 9 million units to 2.8 million .
In light of this announcement , the Wii U 's long - term viability has been called into question .
In February 2014 , Nintendo revealed that the Wii U had improved about 180 % in year - over - year sales in the United States due to the launch of , which sold 130,000 copies .
By February 26 , Wii U sales had surpassed those of the Xbox 360 in Japan .
In March 2014 , Nintendo sold just over 70,000 Wii U units , tracking it down 50 % less than the GameCube and 90 % less than the Wii during equivalent time periods .
During the month , total worldwide sales of the PlayStation 4 surpassed those of the Wii U. During the first quarter of 2014 , Nintendo reported that 310,000 consoles and 2.91 million software units were shipped worldwide .
During an annual investors ' meeting , Satoru Iwata revealed Nintendo 's projection of 3.6 million Wii U unit sales during the fiscal year ending .
On May 22 , 2014 , Nintendo France announced that sales were 50 % higher compared to the last year .
With Mario Kart 8 being Nintendo 's biggest game launch , Wii U console sales reportedly increased by 666 % in the United Kingdom , with the Mario Kart 8 console bundle representing 82 % of the region 's Wii U console sales for the week .
NPD Group reported that in the United States , when comparing the month of June 2013 to the same month in 2014 , Wii U software sales were up 373 % and console sales were up 233 % .
The record would be surpassed in November 2014 by Super Smash Bros. for Wii U , which sold 490,000 copies in the United States during its first three days of availability .
According to Nintendo of America , December 2014 was Wii U 's biggest month in terms of sales in the United States .
Hardware sales increased 29 % , and software sales increased 75 % in comparison to December 2013 .
In July 2015 , Nintendo announced that as of the end of fiscal third quarter 2015 , and nearly three years following its launch , it had shipped over ten million Wii U units worldwide .
However , sales of Wii U units during this quarter were down in comparison to the same quarter in 2014 , with 470,000 units sold ( in comparison to 510,000 in 2014 ) .
In comparison , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One had each yielded sales of ten million units after approximately one year from their respective launches .
IMPACT OF NINTENDO SWITCH
Section::::Impact of Nintendo Switch .
The future of the Wii U was left unclear with Nintendo 's announcement of a new console platform codenamed NX , which was scheduled to be launched worldwide in March 2017 .
Nintendo stated that NX would have a " brand - new concept " , and not be a direct successor to the Wii U or 3DS product lines ; in an interview with the Asahi Shimbun , company president Tatsumi Kimishima reiterated this position and stated that while he thinks that the Wii U business would " slow " after the release of NX , he felt that the console would " have a larger impact than the Wii U " .
The announcement that was in development for both Wii U and NX further supported Nintendo 's view of the console as being a new product line , rather than a replacement for its existing hardware .
In a shareholders report in July 2016 , Kimishima and Miyamoto stated that they had expected the Wii U to sell one hundred million units , comparable to the success of the Wii , but with only thirteen million units sold worldwide , they would now need to rely on NX to make up for losses on Wii U sales .
The new platform , now known as Nintendo Switch , was officially announced on October 20 , 2016 ; it is a tablet - like hybrid video game console with detachable controllers , and the ability to be placed in a docking station with an output to allow games to be played on a television .
Although it is a hybrid device capable of being used as both a portable and home console , Nintendo officially positioned the platform as " a home gaming system first and foremost " .
Following the unveiling , a Nintendo spokesperson confirmed that the company would slow production of Wii U hardware , stating that " as we prepare for the launch of Nintendo Switch in March of 2017 , Nintendo will ship 800,000 Wii U hardware units to the global market for this fiscal year . "
In mid - November 2016 , Nintendo announced that Japanese production of the Wii U would be ending " in the near future " , and that shipments to the North American and European markets for the year had already been sent out .
In an interview with Time Magazine in January 2017 , Reggie Fils - Aimé commented that the system was " a necessary step , in order to get to Nintendo Switch . "
Fils - Aimé also compared the system to the GameCube , claiming that the Wii U will be remembered fondly despite its relatively poor sales .
Fils - Aimé stated that the commercial failure of the Wii U , specifically the lack of clarity of the Wii U GamePad 's function , and the lack of support from third - party publishers to build out its software library , led to how they changed the marketing and promotion for the Switch .
He said the Switch 's promotion was developed " to make it crystal clear what the proposition is " for the systems , and that they had " strong support " from large and small software developers and publishers to support the new console .
In mid - January 2017 , Fils - Aimé told Polygon that Breath of the Wild , which would ship at launch with the Switch in March 2017 , would be Nintendo 's final first - party title for Wii U. Nintendo formally announced that production of the Wii U had ended worldwide on January 31 , 2017 .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS