SAN FRANCISCO STATE GATORS FOOTBALL
The San Francisco State Gators football team represented San Francisco State University ( formerly San Francisco State Teacher 's College ) from the 1931 through 1995 seasons .
The Gators originally competed as an independent prior to World War II , then as a member of the Far West Conference from 1946 until the conference changed its name to become the Northern California Athletic Conference , where they remained through the 1994 season .
San Francisco State played its home games at multiple stadiums throughout their history with the most recent being Cox Field in San Francisco .
San Francisco State was known as the " Cradle of Coaches " , having produced coaching greats such as Mike Holmgren , Andy Reid , Bob Toledo , and many others .
HISTORY EARLY YEARS Section::::History .
Section::::Early years .
San Francisco State Teachers College was first coached by Dave Cox , who had previously coached at Polytechnic High , starting in the 1931 season .
Dave Cox coached the team- then known as the " Golden Gaters"- for four seasons before announcing his resignation due to ill health on August 31 , 1935 .
He was replaced by his two assistants , Dan Farmer who had played and coached at Chico State , and Hal Hardin from Oregon State .
Farmer coached the backs while Hardin worked with the linemen .
Farmer took over the head coaching position and was described in the Berkeley Daily Gazette as " one of the greatest athletes ever to graduate from Chico , " He also coached the " Gaters ' " basketball team .
During the 1935 season , veteran halfback Ralph Nathan was injured for two weeks but returned to the backfield to join quarterback Keith Cox against San Francisco Junior College .
In most newspaper accounts from 1935–1940 , the team was referred to as the " Staters " .
Farmer was later honored by Golden Gater rival Chico State , his alma mater , with a trophy bearing his name that was contested between the two schools .
After spending six seasons coaching the football team , Farmer was be replaced by former St. Mary 's All - American halfback Dick Boyle in October 1938 .
During the 1940 season , Boyle 's Staters scrimmaged throughout the week in preparation for matches against military sides like the Moffett Field Air Corps Eleven , and over half of his playbook consisted of passing plays to make use of " capable tossers " including Reno Cardoni , John Verducci , Dick Chin , and Fred Hinze .
The outbreak of World War II caused a flurry of change for the " Staters " football program .
By this time , publications were referring to the team as the " Gaters " .
Dick Boyle became a lieutenant in the navy after the 1941 season and was replaced by Ray Kaufman in June 1942 ..
Kaufman 's tenure was to be a short one , however , as it was announced that Dan Farmer would return to replace Kaufman , who entered the Navy as a gunnery officer , in October of the same year .
San Francisco State did not field a team in 1943 or 1944 and played a limited schedule at the " Gators " in 1945 .
While Farmer remained with the State College through the decade in various capacities including head coach of the basketball program , he stepped down from football upon Boyle 's return from service in the Navy for the 1946 season .
Boyle 's second stint as head coach in the late 1940s is remembered by his successful protest of the " deadman " trick play , which was outlawed in a " gentlemen 's agreement " between Far Western Conference schools after used by Southern Oregon to defeat State College 13–7 in the 1947 season .
THE FRUIT BOWL Section::::The Fruit Bowl .
San Francisco State met the Southern University Jaguars in the Fruit Bowl in San Francisco , finding themselves completely outclassed on a muddy field and shut out 30–0 in front of 5,000 fans .
The Fruit Bowl game is noteworthy for being the first interracial bowl game played in the United States .
THE VERDUCCI ERA Section::::The Verducci era .
The arrival of Joe Verducci to San Francisco State from St. Mary 's College was rather unexpected ; after all , St. Mary 's was a team that had defeated Texas Tech in the Cotton Bowl in 1939 , and followed it up with appearances in the Sugar Bowl and the Oil Bowl in 1946 and 1947 .
San Francisco State was coming off a shutout loss to Southern .
Verducci must have made a difference , as St. Mary 's did not return to another bowl while SF State became a Far West powerhouse in the next decade .
Verducci 's time with the Gaels was indeed short , having replaced " Irish Jimmy Phelan " ( who became the mentor of the Los Angeles Dons of the All - America conference ) , in April 1948 .
Verducci had been a quarterback with the University of California , and had coached Polytechnic High to a record of 35–6–6 from 1938–1943 .
The 1950 season , Verducci 's first , was successful for the Gators .
This was the first winning season in San Francisco State football history , as the team went through the regular season with only a single loss ( to on October 13 ) .
They met the Pioneers of in the Pear Bowl at Medford on Thanksgiving day , losing by a score of 7–61 .
Verducci 's San Francisco State team went undefeated in 1959 , then had only one loss in 1960 .
He was named Northern California Coach of the Year in November 1960 , angering fans of Humboldt State whose coach Phil Sarboe had taken the Lumberjacks to a 9–0 record and an 18-game winning streak , including handing Verducci and the Gators their lone loss in 1960 .
Students at Humboldt State college burned three dummies representing sports writers in effigy .
Verducci had announced his retirement from coaching on May 27 , 1960 , effective at the end of the 1960 season .
He remained at San Francisco State as athletic director .
College President Glenn S. Dumke named Vic Rowen , line coach for the previous six seasons , as his successor .
In eleven years under Verducci , the Gators had a record of 74–31 , for a winning percentage of .704 .
Verducci 's teams won the conference title six times .
THE ROWEN ERA Section::::The Rowen era .
Vic Rowen coached the team for the next 29 seasons .
Under Rowen the Gators compiled a record of 130–165–10 , a .443 winning percentage .
His teams won the conference championship five times ( 1961 , 1962 , 1963 , 1965 , & 1967 ) , and they appeared in one bowl game during his tenure ( the 1967 Camelia Bowl ) .
The 1985 season showed promise behind quarterback Rich Strasser , who was described by the coach of the opposing Santa Clara Broncos as " the Division II Doug Flutie " .
In an early season matchup in September against Cal Lutheran , the combination of Strasser and receiver Ron Teitel could not overcome the clock in the final seconds , but managed to impress the Los Angeles Times staff writer nonetheless .
AFTER ROWEN Section::::After Rowen .
Dennis Creehan came to San Francisco State after a turmoil - filled day in March 1990 when Creehan was named the linebackers coach for the Pittsburgh Steelers , only to have the team rescind the appointment
the next day once Steelers coach Chuck Noll discovered that Creehan was the headman at SFSU , instead of an assistant coach at UC Berkeley as he had been led to believe .
The Steelers hired Bob Valesente for the position and Creehan remained at San Francisco State , but argued that his opportunity to work in the National Football League ( NFL ) was stolen by the newspapers in Pittsburgh , claiming to have had his career ruined and his family humiliated by reporters at the Post - Gazette .
Following Hamilton , Creehan , and Rowan as the fourth coach in as many years was Dick Mannini , announced for the position on July 21 , 1992 .
Mannini had served as the defensive coordinator at Stanford from 1984–1988 , and had been the head coach of the St. Mary 's Gaels from 1977–1983 .
He coached the Gators for their final three seasons until president Robert A. Corrigan killed the program on March 8 , 1995 .
San Francisco State Football did not have a winning season after 1973 , and only a single winning season after 1967 ; but they won eight conference titles between 1954 and 1967 and had a run of 11 straight winning seasons .
HEAD COACHES RECORDS
ALL - TIME BOWL RESULTS GATORS IN THE PROS IN THE NFL Section::::Gators in the pros .
Section::::In
the NFL .
San Francisco State University has 14 alumni who were drafted into the National Football LeagueFloyd Peters would go on to become a standout defensive tackle for the Baltimore Colts , earning a bid to the Pro Bowl three times .
Likewise , Elmer Collett had a ten - year career with the San Francisco 49ers as well as the Baltimore Colts , making it to the Pro Bowl in the 1969 season .
Another NFL figure , Bill Baird , was drafted into the American Football League and started for the New York Jets from 1963 to 1969 .
Baird was a part of the oft - remembered Jets team that played in Super Bowl III in 1969 , giving the AFL their first Super Bowl victory .
Several NFL coaches were on the staff of San Francisco State .
Dirk Koetter , current head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , was the Gators ' offensive coordinator in 1985 and Andy Reid , current head coach of the Kansas City Chiefs and former head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles , was the Gators ' offensive line coach from 1983 - 1985 .
* Carl Kammerer did his undergraduate work at College of the Pacific , but his graduate work at San Francisco State while a player for the San Francisco 49ers .
IN OTHER PROFESSIONAL LEAGUES Section::::In other professional leagues .
In addition to the players that competed in the NFL , there have been several former Gators that have made careers in other professional football leagues .
Former Gator defensive end Nick Kukilica earned a place among the All - Stars of the short - lived Continental Football League in 1969 , playing for the Sacramento Capitols .
Likewise , several Gators found success with the Canadian Football League ; Doug Parish had a career with the Edmonton Eskimos , while Ken Hailey played for the Winnipeg Blue Bombers .
REFERENCES