7TH HEAVEN ( SEASON 11 )
The eleventh and final season of 7th Heaven — an American family - drama television series , created and produced by Brenda Hampton .
It premiered on September 25 , 2006 , on The CW , and concluded on May 13 , 2007 ( 22 episodes ) .
It is the final season of the series .
Stephen Collins , Catherine Hicks , Beverley Mitchell , and Mackenzie Rosman are the only cast members to star in all eleven seasons of the series , along with Happy the dog .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Stephen Collins as Eric Camden
* Catherine Hicks as Annie Camden ( episodes 1,2 and 5 - 22 )
* Beverley Mitchell as Lucy Camden - Kinkirk * Mackenzie Rosman as
Ruthie Camden ( 16 episodes ) * Nikolas and Lorenzo Brino as Sam and David Camden * George Stults as Kevin *
Kinkirk
* Tyler Hoechlin as Martin Brewer * Haylie Duff as Sandy Jameson
* Happy as Happy the Dog RECURRING
* Colton James as Theodore " T - Bone " Jr ( 18 episodes ) * Sarah Wright as Jane ( 18 episodes ) * Andrea Morris as Margaret ( 18 episodes ) * Kyle Searles as Mac ( 10 episodes ) PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After much deliberation within the now - defunct WB network , it was made public in November 2005 that season ten would be the program 's final because of high costs , which were revealed to be due to a poorly negotiated licensing agreement by the WB network a few years earlier .
The program 's future was hanging in the balance
and it was entirely in the hands of the newly established CW network whether to renew it for an additional season .
In March 2006 , the main cast of characters were approached about the possibility of returning for another season .
After further consideration by the CW network , it was decided three days after the airing of its " series finale " , that 7th Heaven would be picked up for an eleventh season , which would air on their network in the Monday - night slot that had helped make it famous .
Originally the show was renewed for thirteen episodes , but on September 18 , 2006 , the renewal was extended to a full twenty - two episodes .
Along with the show 's unexpected and last - minute , renewal came some changes .
The show 's already - low budget was moderately trimmed , forcing cuts in the salaries of some cast members and shortened taping schedules ( seven days per episode instead of the typical eight ) .
Furthermore , Mackenzie Rosman , who played youngest daughter Ruthie , did not appear in the first six episodes .
Catherine Hicks missed three episodes in season 11 , as another cost - cutting move .
Additionally , George Stults was absent for a few episodes at the beginning of season 11 .
Also , after airing Monday nights at 8/7c for ten seasons , plus the first two episodes of season 11 , the CW unexpectedly moved 7th Heaven to Sunday nights as of October 15 , 2006 .
The Sunday / Monday lineup swap was attributed to mediocre ratings of shows on both nights .
While 7th Heaven did improve in numbers over the CW 's previous Sunday night programming , it never quite hit its Monday - night momentum again , and the shows that replaced it in its slot on Monday night never matched what it had achieved in that time slot .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
REFERENCES