HOW DO YOU ROLL ?
How Do You Roll ?
was a franchise fast - casual sushi restaurant , headquartered in Austin , Texas .
The first How Do You Roll ?
location opened in October 2008 and the company began franchising in early 2010 .
As of April 2016 , it had stores operating in California and Florida .
but had gone out of business by January 30 , 2017 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Yuen Yung and his brother Peter Yung grew up in Chinatown , Manhattan .
Yuen received his finance degree from the University of Texas and worked as a partner at Kenty , Yung , Ozias & Associates , a financial services firm .
Peter started in the restaurant business at the age of 8 by helping in his parents ' restaurant after school .
He grew to become an expert in Japanese cuisine .
Before beginning the How Do You Roll ?
venture , Peter was Head Sushi Chef at Azuma Restaurant in Houston , Texas . NAME , OWNERSHIP , AND CONCEPT CHANGES Section::::Name , Ownership , and Concept changes .
The first HDYR location was originally named Maki but in September 2009 , changed its name to How Do You Roll ? .
Maki Maki , L.L.C. continues to be operated by Yuen and Peter Yung as a provider of training , equipment , and supplies to franchisees .
HDYR was acquired by a private restaurant group in June , 2015 .
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES Section::::Products and services .
HDYR primarily offers made - to - order maki rolls .
They offer different types of meats , fishes , vegetables , fruits , and fillings .
Along with both white and brown rice , they also offer eight proprietary sauces and six toppings .
In addition to rolls , HDYR also provides seaweed salad , cucumber salad , squid salad , edamame and miso soup .
Some franchises carry tempura goods or local specialties , yet this practice is not universal .
Their stated emphasis is on high - quality , fast and affordable food .
To this end , HDYR uses proprietary maki machines to mix the rice , press the rice , and cut the rolls .
Customer feedback , according to the company , is what led to the introduction of provisions such as brown rice and sake .
CRITICAL ACCLAIM Section::::Critical acclaim .
As a result of its unique approach and layout , HDYR has been the recipient of a great deal of praise and award .
Darren Tristano , restaurant analyst for Technomic Inc. in Chicago , called HDYR " the nexus of the two hottest trends among restaurant chains : Asian and fast - fresh casual , in which fresh ingredients are prepared quickly for people on the go . "
Matthew Mabel , president of Surrender , Inc. , a Dallas , Texas based management hospitality and consulting firm , noted that How Do You Roll ?
" could be revolutionary , not just for those in the sushi industry but all fast - casual chains .
" It has also been called the " most unique sushi restaurant you will ever visit .
"
A local news station reported that there is " nothing like it in the rest of the country . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How Do You Roll ?
Official website