THE RIVER ( U.S. TV SERIES )
The River is a 2012 American found - footage supernatural adventure horror television series that debuted during the 2011–12 television winter season on ABC as a mid - season replacement .
Eight episodes were produced for the first season .
The series ran from February 7 , 2012 to March 20 , 2012 .
On May 11 , 2012 , ABC officially canceled the series .
After The River was officially canceled by ABC due to its sub - par ratings , Netflix was in talks with ABC Studios about possibly continuing the series on its video - on - demand digital distribution service , though they ultimately passed .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Famed explorer Dr. Emmet Cole ( Bruce Greenwood ) went looking for " magic " deep in the uncharted Amazon basin and never returned .
The shocking truth about his disappearance is out there , somewhere , just waiting to be discovered .
To the millions of children who grew up watching his nature show , Dr. Cole was a hero .
To his own son , Lincoln ( Joe Anderson ) , he was more of an enigma .
Now , six months after he vanished , Lincoln is finally ready to bury the past when Dr. Cole 's emergency beacon suddenly goes off .
At the urging of his mother , Tess ( Leslie Hope ) , Lincoln reluctantly joins her on a search for his father .
To fund the rescue , they agree to let Dr. Cole 's cagey ex - producer , Clark ( Paul Blackthorne ) , film the mission documentary - style .
The mixed crew of old friends and new acquaintances includes the missing cameraman 's daughter , Lena Landry ( Eloise Mumford ) , ship 's mechanic Emilio Valenzuela ( Daniel Zacapa ) , and private security bodyguard Captain Kurt Brynildson ( Thomas Kretschmann ) .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Bruce Greenwood as Dr. Emmet Cole , a famed explorer and TV personality
* Joe Anderson as Lincoln Cole , a medical student and Emmet 's son * Leslie Hope as Tess Cole , Emmet 's wife and Lincoln 's mother
* Eloise Mumford as Lena Landry , Lincoln 's childhood friend and Russ ' daughter * Paul Blackthorne as Clark Quietly , Emmet 's producer * Thomas Kretschmann as Capt .
Kurt Brynildson , a private security bodyguard hired to protect Clark 's group * Daniel Zacapa as Emilio Valenzuela , the ship 's mechanic and Jahel 's father * Shaun Parkes as A.J. Poulain , Clark 's lead cameraman * Paulina Gaitán as Jahel Valenzuela , Emilio 's daughter GUEST
* Scott Michael Foster as Jonas Beckett , the second cameraman of Emmet 's expedition * Katie Featherston as Rosetta " Rabbit " Fischer , a camera operator in Emmet 's expedition * Lee Tergesen as Russ Landry , Emmet 's longtime lead cameraman and Lena 's father
* Jeff Galfer as Sammy Kirsch , Clark 's second cameraman * Jose Pablo Cantillo as Manny Centeno , a camera operator in Emmet 's expedition
* Don McManus as Patrick , the leader of crew trapped on a ghost ship * Karen LeBlanc as Annabele , a crew member trapped on the ghost ship * Walter Perez as Soup , a crew member trapped on the ghost ship * Kelemete Misipeka as Malosi , a crew member trapped on the ghost ship * Lili Bordán as Hanna , Kurt 's fiancée PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Oren Peli and Michael R. Perry created the series about a documentary crew searching the Amazon for a beloved scientist - explorer - television host .
Peli told The Hollywood Reporter that producer Steven Schneider " became obsessed with this idea of nature run [ amok ] and animals taking over humans . "
Peli stated , " I started developing the idea of a missing documentary reporter who went to this weird place in the rainforest where strange things would happen " .
He added , " We were developing it as a low budget movie , but ... I had a meeting with Steven Spielberg " .
Spielberg suggested doing a television show with Peli .
Perry added his thoughts , saying , " Why waste [ the idea for The River ] on a movie , when you can do a TV show where every season they go to a different place " .
Then , they pitched the whole pilot to Spielberg .
In September 2010 , ABC won a bidding war against NBC for the rights to the project .
In February 2011 , after a re - write by Michael Green , ABC green - lit the production of the pilot .
In May 2011 , ABC committed to produce eight episodes , announcing that the show would premiere in the 2011–12 mid - season .
The pilot episode was filmed in Puerto Rico and the next seven episodes were produced in Hawaii .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The River premiered in the U.S. and Canada ( on CTV ) on February 7 , 2012 .
The series aired in South Africa on DStv on February 21 , 2012 .
In India the series started airing on STAR World on March 3 , 2012 .
In the United Kingdom the series has been picked up by Syfy on October 9 , 2012 after being premiered on iTunes on February 8 , 2012 .
On May 22 , 2012 , ABC and DreamWorks / Amblin released the first season of The River in DVD format on to the United States and its territories , Canada , and Bermuda .
Entitled " The River – The Complete First Season " , the package includes all eight episodes in their entirety and features deleted scenes and episode audio commentaries .
EPISODES BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The River premiered in the U.S. and Canada ( on CTV ) on February 7 , 2012 .
The series aired in South Africa on DStv on February 21 , 2012 .
In the United Kingdom the series was not initially picked up by a traditional broadcaster and instead premiered on iTunes on February 8 , 2012 .
However , Syfy announced that it would air The River starting October 9 , 2012 at 10 pm . CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The show has been met with generally favorable reviews , with a collective score of 64/100 from Metacritic from 27 critics .
Matt Roush of TV Guide called the show " a terrifying heart - stopper , a cleverly cinematic supernatural adventure that takes us on a wild ride into an exotic heart of darkness .
"
USA Today 's Robert Bianco stated , " There are moments when The River , with its curse - around - every - corner setup , threatens to topple over into farce .
But a strong cast and that things - that - go - bump - in - the - night shooting style so far keep the show on course " .
However , Mike Hale of The New York Times rated the show poorly , saying " The mixture of Lost storytelling and Paranormal Activity style is neither intriguing nor particularly scary , and it does n't help that there 's hardly a glimmer of humor " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS