INDIANA TOLL ROAD
The Indiana Toll Road , officially the Indiana East – West Toll Road , is a tolled freeway that runs for east – west across northern Indiana from the Illinois state line to the Ohio state line .
It has been advertised as the " Main Street of the Midwest " .
The entire toll road is designated as part of Interstate 90 , and the segment from Lake Station east to the Ohio state line is a concurrency with Interstate 80 .
The toll road is owned by the Indiana Finance Authority and operated by the Indiana Toll Road Concession Company , which is owned by IFM Investors .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
The Indiana Toll Road is part of the U.S. Interstate Highway System which runs through Indiana connecting the Chicago Skyway to the Ohio Turnpike .
The toll road is long , and is signed with Interstate 90 for its entire length , as well as Interstate 80 east of Lake Station , after having run concurrently with I-94 . Exit points are based on the milepost system , with exits starting at 0 at the Illinois state line , and increasing to exit 153 at the Eastpoint toll barrier near the Ohio state line ( technically , not an exit , as the only road accessible from there is the Ohio Turnpike , but toll tickets issued at the barrier are marked " Entry 153 " ) .
The Toll Road opened in 1956 with sequential exit numbering , which was converted to the current mileage - based scheme in 1981 .
The original number sequence was amended slightly in 1964 with the opening of the then - Burns Harbor , now Lake Station exit .
The farthest it gets from the Michigan state line or Lake Michigan is about .
Looking north at exit 121 ( State Road 9 ) allows one to see the " Welcome to Michigan " sign in the distance .
At one point in northern Indiana , in Greenfield Township in LaGrange County at mile 132 , the toll road comes within about , or , from the Michigan border .
Control cities on guide signs are Chicago and Ohio .
Originally they were " Chicago and West " and " Ohio and East " .
In December 2006 , ITR Concession Company announced that a South Bend student , Andrea Hebster , would " receive $ 5,000 toward her educational expenses for being selected as the grand prizewinner of the Indiana Toll Road logo design contest " .
The new ITRCC logo roll out occurred in the spring of 2007 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Indiana Toll Road was publicly financed and constructed during the 1950s .
It opened in stages , east to west , between August and November 1956 .
The formal dedication ceremony was held on September 17 , 1956 .
The final course of the Toll Road was the northern of four planned alignments .
In addition to the east – west toll road , a north – south toll road was planned , roughly along the path of today 's I-65 , but the plan was dropped after the Federal - Aid Highway Act of 1956 was passed .
Originally the I-94 designation was applied to the highway west of where the current interchange with I-94 was eventually built , with I-90 following I-80 to the west along the Borman Expressway as I-94 does now , the completed portions of the Borman being designated as I-80 , I-90 , and I-294 .
The current routing became effective around 1965 , to avoid the confusion that had resulted from I-80 , I-90 , and I-94 all changing roadways there .
As a result , a stretch of I-94 is actually farther south than I-90 , and I-90 runs the entire length of the Indiana Toll Road .
I-294 was also cut back to the Tri - State Tollway at that time , and thus no longer enters Indiana .
Several interchanges on the Toll Road were constructed between 1980 and 1985 as part of a bond sale in October 1980 .
The Indiana Toll Road Commission operated the toll road from its inception until 1981 .
The Indiana Department of Transportation operated the toll road between 1981 and 2006 .
On April 1 , 1983 , the State of Indiana established the Indiana Toll Finance Authority , which was renamed the Indiana Transportation Finance Authority in April 1988 .
It was consolidated with several other state financial agencies and renamed the Indiana Finance Authority in May 2005 .
From its inception in 1983 , the Indiana Finance Authority has maintained ownership of the Toll Road ( and other state - owned highways in Indiana ) , while its operations and maintenance have evolved over time , starting with the Indiana Department of Transportation until transitioning to the Indiana Toll Road Concession Company in 2006 .
CINTRA - MACQUARIE AND MAJOR MOVES Section::::Cintra - Macquarie and Major Moves .
Upon taking office in 2005 , Governor Mitch Daniels began looking for ways to fund a backlog of Indiana highway maintenance and construction .
Working with Goldman Sachs & Co. , who was reported to have earned some $ 20 million in fees , the state requested bids to lease the Toll Road in exchange for the right to maintain , operate , and collect tolls for the following 75 years .
A consortium made up of the construction firm Cintra of Spain and Macquarie Atlas Roads ( MQA ) of Australia , the same firms that had taken over the Chicago Skyway in 2004 , submitted the winning bid of $ 3.8 billion .
Their bid was $ 1 billion more than the next highest bid ..
The deal was completed on June 29 , 2006 , and the two companies formed the Indiana Toll Road Concession Company to operate the road .
Opponents of the proposal filed a lawsuit in St. Joseph County in late April 2006 .
Following roughly two weeks of arguments , Judge Michael Scopelitis ruled in favor of the State of Indiana , declaring the lawsuit brought by opponents a public lawsuit and therefore requiring the plaintiffs to post a bond of $ 1.9 billion for the case to proceed .
The plaintiffs appealed Scopelitis ' ruling to the Indiana Supreme Court , which on June 20 , 2006 , in a 4–0 decision , upheld Scopelitis ' earlier decision , allowing the lease of the Indiana Toll Road to proceed as scheduled .
The proceeds funded a portion of the extension of I-69 through southwestern Indiana as well as a number of other highway projects throughout the state .
The legislation also authorized the governor to establish a similar public - private partnership agreement for design , construction , and operation of the proposed Southern Indiana Toll Road ( SITR ) , which would make up of the planned extension of I-69 from Indianapolis to Evansville .
On November 9 , 2006 , Daniels announced the I-69 extension would not be tolled .
In lieu of the SITR , I-69 was built using $ 700 million of the Major Moves payout for the section from the I-64 / I-164 interchange to Crane Naval Surface Warfare Center .
Some elected officials and candidates for office in the toll road counties expressed concerns that projects in and around Indianapolis would receive too large a share of the lease proceeds to the detriment of northern Indiana .
Pat Bauer , a Democratic state representative from South Bend and minority leader in the Indiana House of Representatives , issued a written statement the day before funding was distributed to the counties mocking Major Moves .
" Now that the deal is done , the governor and officials in his administration have traveled the state to claim that the sale has financed every major road project scheduled over the next decade , " Bauer said .
" The fact is that most of these projects already were on course to be completed , without any assistance from the sale of the toll road . "
On September 15 , 2006 , funds were distributed to the seven counties through which the toll road runs .
The list below details each county 's total share in the Major Moves money .
Some of the funds from each county 's distribution were directed to the cities and towns within that county .
* Elkhart County : $ 40 million * La Grange County : $ 40 million * Lake County : $ 15 million * La Porte County : $ 25 million * Porter County : $ 40 million * Steuben County : $ 40 million * St. Joseph County : $ 40 million IFM PARTNERS Section::::IFM Partners .
The Cintra - Macquarie consortium filed for bankruptcy in September 2014 , citing lower than projected traffic volumes and revenues .
Democratic U.S. Senator Joe Donnelly urged Republican Governor Mike Pence to return the road to public control .
However , Pence instead ordered a tender process to replace the operator , and ultimately approved the purchase of the road by IFM Partners , an Australia - based firm .
TOLLS Section::::Tolls .
Between the Westpoint barrier toll , near the Illinois state line , and the Portage barrier at milepost 24 , tolls are collected by fixed - amount tolls at exit and entrance ramps .
Between the Portage barrier , east to the Eastpoint barrier toll , near the Ohio state line , it is operated as a closed ticket system toll road , where one receives a ticket upon entering and pays a pre - calculated amount based on distance traveled when exiting .
As of July 2018 , standard passenger cars are charged a toll of $ 8.73 for E - ZPass users and $ 8.70 for cash users along the section from Portage to Eastpoint , with an extra $ 2.39 for E - ZPass users and $ 2.40 for cash users at the Westpoint barrier .
Originally the entire toll road was on a closed ticket system , with Westpoint at current exit 5 , roughly under the East 141st Street overpass .
This changed after the Indiana Department of Transportation ( INDOT ) takeover in 1981 .
Effective June 25 , 2007 , the Indiana Toll Road began electronic toll collection with the i - Zoom system .
i - Zoom was fully compatible with the E - ZPass and I - Pass electronic toll collection systems .
Indiana became the 12th state to use the E - ZPass system .
The i - Zoom brand name was retired starting in September 2012 to take advantage of the already - existing E - ZPass brand and to avert confusion with the upcoming Ohio River Bridges Project in the Louisville metro , which is managed by the Louisville - Southern Indiana Bridge Authority and uses the E - ZPass system .
SERVICE AREAS Section::::Service areas .
Like all other toll highways built in the 1950s , the Indiana Toll Road has had service areas ( called travel plazas ) since its opening .
Originally , there were eight pairs of travel plazas located approximately every .
Of these , five featured sit - down restaurants operated by Hosts International while the other three had only snack bars .
Each travel plaza was named after a prominent Indiana native or resident .
Gasoline and other auto services were available at all travel plazas .
Originally , various oil companies including Standard Oil , Sinclair , Pure , Gulf , Texaco and Citgo operated each of the travel plazas .
Later , Standard Oil , later Amoco and now BP , assumed operations at all travel plazas .
Currently BP operates the three western travel plazas while Mobil operates the two easternmost pairs .
The westernmost snack bar at milepost 37.5 remained open until the mid-70s and is now used as a " Truck Only Parking " rest area with no facilities .
The other two at mileposts 72.9 and 108 were closed in 1972 , although the one at 108 was also converted into a truck parking area without facilities .
All were demolished except for one , the former Benjamin Harrison snack bar on the eastbound side at milepost 72.9 .
It presently serves as a state police station and has no public facilities .
The restaurant interiors were remodeled into short - order cafeterias in the late 1970s when Gladieux Food Services took over operations and have since been remodeled once again for fast food service .
However , the original buildings remain relatively unchanged from the outside .
On June 17 , 2015 , Ken Daley , the new CEO of the Indiana Toll Road Concession Company , announced that all of the original 1955 travel plazas will be demolished and replaced within the next five years .
As of October 2015 , the Booth Tarkington service area , the easternmost in Indiana , was permanently closed .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
Part of the agreement to privatize operations of the Indiana Toll Road is to invest $ 600 million in the ITR during the first nine years of the lease .
This is above and beyond the $ 3.8 billion being invested by the State of Indiana in Major Moves projects .
More than $ 300 million has already been invested in improving the Indiana Toll Road .
Some examples include : third - lane expansion project at $ 250 million ; electronic toll collection ( i - Zoom ) at $ 40 million ; and Toll Plaza expansions ( MP 1 , 23 , 156 ) at $ 9 million total .
Included in the plans is adding a third lane in each direction in the most congested area of the Indiana Toll Road : from MP 10–15.5 .
The third - lane expansion was completed in December 2011 .
The 10-year Bridge Capital Improvement plan is also under way , which will repair and rehabilitate nearly every structure on the ITR over the next 10 years .
The lease agreement also requires ITRCC to maintain or improve the condition of the Toll Road to standards set forth by state and federal law .
EXIT LIST
SEE ALSO * Illinois State Toll Highway Authority
* New York Thruway * Pennsylvania Turnpike REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS * Indiana Toll Road
* Includes a 1954 photograph of the Toll Road under construction .
* ITR , Chicago , Indianapolis , Harrisburg and other public entities ' experiences with privatization , in a national context .