AS I LAY DYING ( THE VAMPIRE DIARIES )
" As I Lay Dying " is the 22nd episode and last of the second season of The CW television series , The Vampire Diaries and the 44th episode of the series overall .
It originally aired on May 12 , 2011 .
The episode was written by Turi Meyer , Al Septien and Michael Narducci and directed by John Behring .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Elena ( Nina Dobrev ) tries to deal with Jenna 's ( Sara Canning ) death while Damon ( Ian Somerhalder ) asks for her forgiveness for feeding her his blood .
He admits that he was wrong for doing this but Elena tells him that she needs her time .
Damon returns to the Salvatore house and tries to kill himself but Stefan ( Paul Wesley ) stops him and locks him at the basement telling him that they will find a cure for the werewolf bite .
Elijah ( Daniel Gillies ) demands from Klaus ( Joseph Morgan ) to keep his word and tell him where the bodies of their family are but Klaus is not willing to reveal him that info right away .
In the meantime , Stefan calls Alaric ( Matt Davis ) to inform him that Damon is dying and he asks for his help .
Then Stefan goes to Bonnie ( Kat Graham ) so they can ask the dead witches how they can cure Damon .
Emily Bennett ( Bianca Lawson ) talks via Bonnie and tells Stefan that there is nothing he can do but through their conversation , Stefan can see that she is lying .
Bonnie comes back and tells Stefan that she heard the witches saying Klaus ' name .
Elena , Caroline ( Candice Accola ) and Jeremy ( Steven R. McQueen ) try to have a normal day after everything that happened but Stefan comes to tell Elena about Damon and that he needs to go and find Klaus for the cure .
In the meantime , Damon starts having illusions because of the werewolf bite .
Stefan gets to Alaric 's apartment to find Klaus and ask for his help .
Klaus arrives with Elijah and while Elijah waits for Klaus to tell him where the rest of his family is , Klaus stabs him with the dagger to " reunite " him with the family .
While Stefan tries to get the cure , Alaric keeps Damon company when Liz ( Marguerite MacIntyre ) arrives wanting to talk to Damon .
Alaric warns her that it is not a good time to do so
but she does not listen .
Liz gets into the basement cell but Damon knocks her down and escapes searching for Elena .
Alaric calls Jeremy , Bonnie and Caroline to find Damon before he finds Elena because he is in bad shape and he will hurt her .
Jeremy finds him and the moment he tries to call Alaric , Liz comes and shoots him in her attempt to shoot Damon .
Caroline and Bonnie arrive and try to help Jeremy but he is gone .
Bonnie takes him to the cave and asks from the dead witches to help her bring him back to life .
The witches are angry with her and tell her that there will be consequences if she brings him back to life , but they eventually help her and Jeremy comes back to life .
Caroline tells Liz that Jeremy is fine and she also tells her that she is still her daughter and nothing changed even if she is a vampire now .
Klaus shows Stefan that his blood ( hybrid blood ) is the cure to the werewolf bite but he wants to make a deal with Stefan first before give it to him ; if Stefan wants to save his brother he has to do whatever Klaus tells him for ten years .
Stefan agrees to the deal even if he does not want to .
After the agreement , Klaus starts feeding him human blood to make him a ripper again and when he is sure that Stefan will follow him , he gives Katherine the cure and compels her to take it to Damon letting her go .
In the meantime , Elena finds Damon wandering and tries to help him but he bites her thinking that she is Katherine .
He stops in time before he kills her and Elena takes him back to the Salvatore house .
Damon admits that he loves her and Elena kisses him when Katherine arrives with Klaus ' blood .
Damon drinks it and gets healed while Katherine informs them that Stefan sacrificed everything to save his brother and he will leave town with Klaus .
The episode ends with Jeremy seeing Vicky ( Kayla Ewell ) and Anna 's ( Malese Jow ) ghosts .
FEATURE MUSIC Section::::Feature Music .
In " As I Lay Dying " we can hear the songs : * " Ship of Fools " by Jamie Dunlap , Marc Ferrari , Molly Pasutti and Scott Nickoley *
" Turn To Stone " by Ingrid Michaelson
* " Speakers " by Days Difference *
" Holding A Heart " by Girl Named
Toby
* " I Should Go " by Levi Kreis RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
In its original American broadcast , " As I Lay Dying " was watched by 2.86 million ; slightly up by 0.02 from the previous episode .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
" As I Lay Dying " received positive reviews .
Emma Fraser from TV Overmind gave the episode an A+ rating saying that the season finale was epic .
"
After last weeks bloodbath it was hard to see how The Vampire Diaries team would top that level of emotion and tension , and leave us with a finale that was as epic as last years .
I 'm pretty sure they just did that
and then some .
[ ... ] There is still much to process from this finale including the all round terrific performances and excellent work from all of The Vampire Diaries team .
I thought it would be hard to top
last weeks episode and the season 1 finale
but I think they did it . "
E. Reagan of The TV Chick gave the episode an A rating saying that it was a great finale and set up for the next season .
" The last few episodes have been stellar for sure .
[ ... ] There were some great moments in this episode that tugged the heart strings : Stefan 's sacrifice for his brother ( a little questionable though ) ,
Caroline and her mom , Bonnie and Jeremy , Alaric as a caregiver , everything Elena and Damon .
Really good stuff . "
Carrie Raisler from The A.V. Club gave the episode a B+ rating saying that having The Sun Also Rises as the penultimate episode of the season was a big risk since the epic confrontation paid off all of the fan anticipation before the finale . "
Although not everything in the finale worked , there was a heck of a lot of good .
[ ... ]
Overall , I think this was a really good episode of The Vampire Diaries , if not quite as powerful as last season 's finale or even last week 's episode .
There are two main ways to approach a finale : the wrap up or the set up .
This , unquestionably , was a set up episode , which makes perfect sense considering the show thrives on forward momentum . "
Matt Richenthal of TV
Fanatic rated the episode with 5/5 saying that the season finale was all about choice . "
And the answer [ to how Damon would be saved ] was an exchange I never saw coming , just one of many choices that highlighted " As I Lay Dying . "
"
Robin Franson Pruter from Forced Viewing rated the episode with 4/4 saying that it was another excellent season finale .
" What makes The Vampire Diaries a strong show is that the characters do n't seem as if they 're being manipulated by a behind the scenes puppet - master to create drama .
The drama stems naturally from the characters themselves .
[ ... ] The Vampire Diaries also manages to maintain its premise without becoming stale .
The love triangle is still there , but , with Stefan as a Ripper , the dynamics will be different .
Consistently having character - driven plots and keeping a premise fresh are two qualities great shows often fail at achieving .
That The Vampire Diaries does show these qualities is rarely appreciated . "
Diana Steenbergen of IGN rated the episode with 9/10 saying that the episode seemed almost calm compared to last week 's .
" To judge just by the death count would be a mistake however ; the bombs that were dropped in the season finale may not have resulted in any ( permanent ) deaths , but the consequences promise to be far - reaching . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS