BERNIE TIEDE Bernhardt " Bernie " Tiede II (; born August 2 , 1958 ) is an American mortician and convicted murderer .
Tiede confessed to the shooting of a wealthy 81-year - old widow , Marjorie " Marge " Nugent , in Carthage , Texas on November 19 , 1996 .
The murder is the subject of the 2011 film Bernie , directed by Richard Linklater and starring Jack Black as Tiede .
FAMILY AND EARLY LIFE Section::::Family and early life .
Bernhardt Tiede II is the son of Bernhardt Tiede ( 1912–1973 ) , a native of Olgenow , Russia ( previously Ukraine ) of German descent who had immigrated with his family to the United States in 1926 .
Bernhardt Tiede ( Sr . ) had served as a professor of music and choral director at Our Lady of the Lake College ( now Our Lady of the Lake University ) in San Antonio , Texas ( 1946–1948 ) , at Southern Methodist University ( SMU ) in Dallas , Texas ( 1948–1957 ) , at Kilgore College in Kilgore , Texas ( 1957–1968 ) , and then at McMurry College ( now McMurry University ) in Abilene , Texas , where he served as director of the McMurry Chanters , the position he held until his death in 1973 .
In addition to his work as a university professor , the elder Tiede also served as church music director and as a vocal performer .
Bernie Tiede 's mother was Bernhardt Tiede Sr . 's first wife , Lela Mae Jester ( 1933–1960 ) .
They were married in 1957 , and Bernie was born in the next year .
But Bernie 's mother died in an automobile accident when he was two years old .
In 1963 his father married Clara Kathryn Wiley ( b. 1938 ) , who became Bernie 's stepmother .
His father died in Abilene , Texas when Bernie was fifteen .
Bernie Tiede graduated from Cooper High School ( Abilene , Texas ) in 1976 .
MARJORIE NUGENT Section::::Marjorie Nugent .
Tiede met Nugent in March 1990 at her husband 's funeral , with which Tiede helped while assistant director at Hawthorn Funeral Home .
The two eventually became inseparable .
In 1991 , Nugent altered her will and disinherited her son , leaving her entire $ 10 million estate to Tiede .
By 1993 , Bernie left his job to work for her full time as her business manager and travel companion .
In November 1996 Tiede killed Nugent by shooting her in the back four times with a .22 rifle .
He then placed Nugent 's body in a freezer used to store food at her Carthage home .
According to the Amarillo Globe - News , Nugent 's estranged son , Amarillo pathologist Rod Nugent , traveled from Amarillo to Panola County nine months after her death , where he declared Nugent a missing person .
After entering Marjorie 's residence , Rod and his daughter found his mother 's body in the freezer , wrapped in a white sheet .
Tiede was taken in for questioning , and he admitted to Nugent 's murder to police in August 1997 .
Tiede stated that after the murder , he cleaned the body and placed Nugent in a freezer .
After this , Tiede admits , he had given gifts to several friends in Carthage using Nugent 's money , which she had previously given him power of attorney to use .
A jury sentenced Tiede to 50 years in prison for Nugent 's murder .
Tiede appealed his sentence and the appellate courts ruled that there was sufficient evidence for the jury to have found premeditation .
Tiede filed a post - conviction writ of habeas corpus , in which Tiede alleged that his constitutional rights were violated in the first trial because of newly discovered evidence .
He alleged in the writ that the 81-year - old Nugent was controlling and emotionally and verbally abusive toward him , driving him to murder her in a dissociative state brought on by years of sexual abuse from his uncle .
The Texas Criminal Courts of Appeal approved the writ .
According to the deceased 's estranged son , Rod Nugent , Tiede alienated Nugent from her family , friends and the business associates of her late husband .
Nugent told the Globe - News : " It appears this Bernie Tiede kind of systematically estranged my mother from all these people one at a time ...
At some point they became angry with my mother . "
When interviewed , Panola County , Texas District Attorney
Danny " Buck " Davidson said that the town of Carthage was " split up " in regards to their opinion of Tiede .
Davidson told the Longview News - Journal , " People remember him ( Tiede ) as being real nice and doing nice things , and they 'd like my office to go real easy on him .
And then , there 's a group that wants no mercy . "
Tiede was convicted of the murder and sentenced to life in prison .
Rod Nugent filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Tiede , claiming Tiede had embezzled more than $ 3 million from Marjorie Nugent .
IMPRISONMENT AND RELEASE Section::::Imprisonment and release .
Shortly after entering the Texas Department of Criminal Justice in 1999 Tiede was attacked by fellow inmates .
During his imprisonment , Bernie was described by a prison official as " a model prisoner , " teaching health classes and participating in the prison 's choir .
He had been , until May 2014 , serving a life sentence .
However , District Attorney Danny Buck Davidson and a visiting Judge Diane DeVasto of Tyler , Texas , allowed him to be released from his life sentence that month on $ 10,000 bail , after the appeals attorney for the case , Jodi Cole , discovered that Tiede had been sexually abused as a child for multiple years .
Cole alleged that Tiede shot Nugent while in a brief dissociative episode brought on by his abusive relationship with her , a theory backed by forensic psychiatrist Richard Pesikoff .
It 's also been suggested that Tiede 's handwritten confession ( a major factor in the murder being considered first - degree ) was heavily influenced by threats of leaking private video tapes of Tiede .
When presented with the new evidence , Davidson agreed that had he known this information in the original trial he would have sought a lighter sentence .
Nugent 's family heard about the release through media reports .
Her granddaughter expressed shock that the release was granted and claimed that Richard Linklater 's 2011 film Bernie had influenced the legal system .
The Nugent family created a website to honor Nugent 's memory , posting photos of her and articles relating to her murder .
Between the time of his release in 2014 and his resentencing in April 2016
Tiede resided in Austin , Texas , in filmmaker Richard Linklater 's garage apartment , which was a condition of his release .
The resentencing trial began on April 6 , 2016 .
During the resentencing trial , Marjorie 's granddaughter Shanna Nugent spoke directly to Bernie saying " You are nothing to me . "
Shanna and Rod Nugent both asserted that Marjorie was in fact a kind woman on good terms with her family ( unlike the film 's portrayal ) whom Tiede conned to spend her fortune without her knowledge .
This differs greatly from other witnesses ' testimonies as
Gregg County Commissioner Darryl Primo testified that in a conversation he had with Marjorie between 1991 and 1996 that she spoke well of Bernie 's spending , stating , " I 'll spend every dime [ of my money ] before I leave it to my family . "
Additionally Merrell Rhodes , the victim 's sister , spoke of her feelings toward Marjorie saying " I was always afraid of her ...
I never forgot that she was my sister ...
I always loved her as a sister , actually , even when she did ugly things , and she did . "
Merrel 's son , Joe Rhodes , attested to the movie 's accurate portrayal and mentioned several acts of his aunt 's abuse toward him in the New York Times article " How My Aunt Marge Ended Up in the Deep Freeze " .
Despite this , On April 22 , 2016 , a jury of 10 women and two men deliberated and issued a new sentence of 99 years or life for Tiede .
After three weeks of testimony , the jurors deliberated for just over four hours .
Tiede was the subject of the 48 Hours episode " The Mortician , the Murder , the Movie " outlining his crime as well as his brief re - entry to society and resentencing .
FOOTNOTES REFERENCES * http://www.mystatesman.com/news/news/local/bernie-tiede-appeal-hinges-on-new-abuse-claim/ngWCC/
* http://marjorienugent.com/content/nugent-family-files-full-brief-opposing-bernie-tiedes-release * http://www.cbs19.tv/story/27147808/nugent-family-releases-checks-allegedly-forged-by-bernie-tiede-argues-they-are-evidence-of-motive-in-murder * http://www.dallasnews.com/news/state/headlines/20141030-bernie-victims-family-wants-killer-back-in-prison.ece *
http://dallasmorningviewsblog.dallasnews.com/2014/11/financial-documents-show-the-extent-of-bernie-tiedes-criminal-behavior-before-he-murdered.html/
*
http://www.cbs19.tv/story/27390720/nugent-family-reveals-full-scope-of-bernie-tiedes-alleged-scam
* http://marjorienugent.com/content/nugent-family-files-full-brief-opposing-bernie-tiedes-release EXTERNAL LINKS