THE OFFICE ( U.S. SEASON 8)
The eighth season of the American television comedy
The Office commenced airing on NBC in the United States on September 22 , 2011 , and concluded on May 10 , 2012 , consisting of 24 episodes .
The series is an American adaptation of the British comedy series of the same name , and is presented in a mockumentary format , portraying the daily lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictitious Dunder Mifflin Paper Company .
The eighth season of The Office aired on Thursdays at 9:00 p.m. ( Eastern ) in the United States as part of the " Comedy Night Done Right " television block .
This was the first season without Steve Carell as Michael Scott in the lead role and the only one to not feature the character in any capacity .
The eighth season largely centers on Andy Bernard 's ( Ed Helms ) ascension to regional manager , as well as the antics of Robert California ( James Spader ) , the new CEO of Sabre , a fictional printer company that owns Dunder Mifflin .
Halfway through the season , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson)—along with Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) , Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) , Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) , and Cathy Simms ( Lindsey Broad)—travel to Florida to help set up a Sabre Store , where Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) is introduced .
Eventually , former CFO of Dunder Mifflin David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) buys back the company , firing California .
Despite debuting with moderate viewing figures , the departure of Carell affected the show 's ratings , which fell as the season progressed .
The season ranked as the eighty - seventh most watched television series during the 2011–12 television year and saw a dramatic decrease in ratings from the previous season .
Critical reception was polarized .
Many critics argued that the series should have ended after the departure of Carell ; many also felt that the season recycled storylines from past episodes .
Other critics were more positive , complimenting various actors and their characters .
It marked the first time since season one that the show did not receive any Emmy nominations .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The eighth season of the show was produced by Reveille Productions and Deedle - Dee Productions , both in association with NBC Universal Television Studios .
The show is based on the British comedy series of the same name , which was created by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant for the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) .
In addition , the two are executive producers on the show .
This season of The Office was produced by Greg Daniels and Paul Lieberstein , the latter of whom serves as the showrunner .
Returning writers from the previous season included Lieberstein , Charlie Grandy , Justin Spitzer , Carrie Kemper , Daniel Chun , Robert Padnick , Aaron Shure , Steve Hely , Amelie Gillette , Mindy Kaling , and B. J. Novak ; the latter two were both also credited as executive producers .
It was previously unknown whether Kaling would write for the series any longer .
Kaling herself confirmed via her Twitter page that she would write the Christmas - themed episode , " Christmas Wishes " .
Three new writers joined the staff beginning in season eight : Owen Ellickson , Allison Silverman and Dan Greaney .
The season also saw the directorial debuts of cast members Ed Helms and Brian Baumgartner ; Helms directed the episode " Christmas Wishes " , and Baumgartner directed " After Hours " .
The series was renewed for an eighth season on March 17 , 2011 , began filming on July 25 , 2011 , and the season concluded filming on March 9 , 2012 .
Jenna Fischer 's pregnancy was written into the show , and Pam was again pregnant at the start of the season with a boy as she was in real life .
Unlike the sixth season , there was no episode focusing on the baby 's birth ; it was instead announced on a blog .
In an interview , executive producer Lieberstein stated that , with the departure of Michael Scott , the writers would explore further into the other characters on the show , such as centering on a specific character for an episode .
On January 25 , 2012 , news broke that NBC was planning a spin - off series starring Rainn Wilson as Dwight Schrute , that would be set at Schrute Farms , Dwight 's bed - and - breakfast and beet farm .
The spin - off would be created by Wilson and executive producer Paul Lieberstein , but Office developer Greg Daniels would not be involved .
Due to his initial involvement in the spin - off , Lieberstein stepped down as showrunner of The Office .
On October 29 , 2012 , it was revealed that NBC was not going forward with the proposed spin - off , although the original backdoor pilot , " The Farm " aired later in the ninth season .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The Office employs an ensemble cast .
Most of the main characters , and some supporting ones , are based on characters from the British version of The Office .
While these characters normally have the same attitudes and perceptions as their British counterparts , the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show .
The show is known for its large cast size , many of whom are known particularly for their improvisational work .
Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who , based upon Gareth Keenan , is the Assistant to the Regional Manager , although the character frequently fails to include " to the " in his title .
John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a sales representative and prankster , who is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is married to Pam Halpert , the office administrator .
Pam ( Fischer ) , who is based on Dawn Tinsley , is shy , but is often a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight .
B. J. Novak portrays Ryan Howard , who is a temporary worker .
Helms plays Andy Bernard , the preppy manager — who was previously a salesman — and boastful Cornell alumnus whose love for a cappella music and awkward social skills generates mixed feelings from his employees .
Andy is an original character , meaning he has no English equivalent from Gervais 's series .
Reprising his guest - starring role of Robert California , James Spader joined the regular cast to replace Kathy Bates 's character as the CEO of Sabre .
Cody Horn , who guest starred in the seventh season as Jordan Garfield , was originally supposed to be featured as a recurring character this season , but she did not return .
The eighth season introduced several new characters .
Stephen Collins , Dee Wallace and Josh Groban were cast as Andy 's father , mother and brother , respectively , and appeared in the episode " Garden Party " .
From the episodes " Pam 's Replacement " to " Last Day in Florida " , Lindsey Broad had a recurring guest star spot as Cathy Simms , Pam 's temporary replacement while she was on maternity leave , and who remained employed at the company for a while after .
Maura Tierney appeared in " Mrs. California " , playing California 's wife .
Catherine Tate returned to reprise her role as Nellie Bertram , in a major arc starting in the episode " Tallahassee " .
Despite reports that she would also get romantically involved with Robert , this never occurred .
Two writers for the animated comedy series
The Simpsons , Matt Selman and Matt Warburton , appeared in the Kaling - scripted episode " Test the Store " , and Simpsons star Dan Castellaneta appeared in the episode " Turf War " .
While , it was initially announced that the season would introduce Stanley Hudson 's " other daughter and a new male addition to the accounting department " , these new characters never appeared .
At the time , this season marked the final year that some cast members — notably Helms , Fischer , Novak , and Krasinski — were signed on for the show , as their contracts expired at the end of the season ; this caused speculation that several members of the main cast would leave the series following this season .
The eighth season was Novak 's last as a series regular , although he made a few recurring appearances in the ninth season .
It was also Kaling 's final full season , due to her pilot , The Mindy Project , being picked up by Fox ; Kaling portrayed customer service representative Kelly Kapoor .
On February 28 , 2012 , it was announced that Spader would not return for a ninth season of the show .
There was initial speculation that following the eighth season , Daniels was considering rebooting the series due to the possible departures of main cast members .
However , a new deal was negotiated with NBC , and all the main cast members , sans Spader , Novak , and Kaling , would return for the ninth season , although several new characters would be brought on board for a " mini reboot " .
NBC also announced that Catherine Tate would become a series regular .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The series aired on Thursdays at 9:00 p.m. as part of " Comedy Night Done Right " television block .
The season premiere , " The List " received a 3.9/10 percent share in the Nielsen ratings among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 3.9 percent of viewers aged 18 to 49 watched the episode , and 10 percent of viewers watching television at the time watched the episode . "
The List " was the highest rated episode of the season .
Despite this , it became the lowest season premiere of the series since the series premiere .
The rest of the season was unable to receive more than seven million viewers .
The twenty - second episode , " Fundraiser " received only 4.17 million viewers , making it , at the time , the lowest - rated episode of The Office to ever air ( although it was later beaten by several ninth - season episodes the following year ) .
The season finale , " Free Family Portrait Studio " , was viewed by 4.49 million viewers , making it the lowest finale for The Office to air , beating the first - season finale " Hot Girl " , which was viewed by 4.8 million viewers .
The drop in ratings led to a lower ad - price for the series , with an average cost of $ 178,840 per-30 second commercial .
Despite this , the show was still one of NBC 's highest rated shows and ranked as the most expensive ad - cost for any NBC scripted series during the year it aired .
Despite the lower live ratings , Nielsen Soundscan announced that The Office added up to 44 percent to its next - day " live plus same day " 18–49 rating when additional time - shifted viewing was added , such as DVRing .
The season ranked as the eighty - seventh most - watched television series during the 2011–12 season , with an average of 6.506 million viewers .
The season also ranked as the thirty - second most - watched television series in the 18- to 49-year - old demographic .
In this category , the show was viewed by an estimated 4.376 million viewers per episode and received a 3.42 rating/9 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 .
This means that , on average , the season was viewed by 3.42 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds watching television at the time of the broadcast .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The eighth season of The Office received mixed reviews .
While some critics felt that the show was still humorous in its eighth year , many others argued that the program should have ended after the departure of Steve Carell .
The A.V. Club reviewer
Myles McNutt criticized Robert California 's role , noting that he is a character that " the narrative reacts to as opposed to something actually involved in the narrative " .
Alan Sepinwall of HitFix criticized Ed Helms ' comedic performance as manager ( calling him " a softer version of Michael Scott " ) , as well as the toning down of Robert California from his appearance in the show 's seventh season 's finale , " Search Committee " .
Sepinwall also expressed disappointment that many of the supporting characters were seemingly transformed into mere caricatures of their former selves .
He stopped reviewing a majority of the Season 8 episodes since " Pam 's Replacement " , due to his distaste for the series .
Time writer James Poniewozik also criticized the choice of Andy as manager , instead arguing that Jim should have gotten the job so the series could have been more ensemble - oriented .
New York named Andy Bernard one of the most annoying TV characters of 2011 .
Matt Zoller Seitz from New York wrote , " Fact is , the show 's first post – Steve Carell year has been a mess , at times bordering on a disaster " , although he did write , " Nevertheless , I still adore these characters , even when the writing does n't do them justice . "
McNutt gave the season a " C " grade overall , writing that the season finale , " Free Family Portrait Studio " was " a disheartening conclusion to the show 's worst season , offering little optimism to sustain our already dwindling enthusiasm over the summer months . "
Bret Fetzer of Amazon.com wrote that " it 's best to approach this season as if it were a completely new series " .
He felt that it is unfair to compare the quality of this season to that of past seasons because " the series ' previous heights were so very high " .
However , he called the year " uneven " , because episodes would range from putting " Andy into Michael Scott - ish situations " to " seek[ing ] out new angles on the well - established web of interpersonal conflicts " .
This vacillation between extremes meant that the episodes " sometimes " work .
Matt Zoller Seitz of Salon considered the post - Michael Scott era of The Office " warmer and more reflective " .
He also praised the decision of Andy as a manager , and he highlighted Ed Helms and Craig Robinson 's performances in " Lotto " , arguing that they represented the " subtlest , deepest acting to date [ on The Office ] " .
He also selected " Lotto " as the best episode of the season .
Hank Stuever of The Washington Post named the series the tenth best series of 2011 , specifically praising the actors ' ability in " Mrs. California " to deliver cringe humor without Carell .
TV Guide named it an honorable mention on their list of the best TV shows of 2011 .
Price Peterson from TV.com called the series " still one of the best shows on TV " and argued that , while " Season 8 definitely was n't the show 's best " , the season " sneaked in some genuinely great jokes , new characters , and affecting plotlines .
" Despite the lackluster reviews many of the episodes received , many critics praised Ellie Kemper 's performance as Erin Hannon .
McNutt noted that " regardless of how down I was on this or any other episode , Ellie Kemper really has been tremendous all season . "
In addition , Kemper 's performance in the episodes " Spooked , " " Christmas Wishes , " " Pool Party , " and " Special Project , " in particular , were praised by critics .
In retrospect , many members of the cast and crew felt that the season was not the show 's best .
Rainn Wilson said that the season made some mistakes " creatively " ; for instance , he argued that the chemistry between Spader and Helms was " a bit dark " and that the show should have gone for a " brighter and more energized " relationship .
Brian Baumgartner felt that the show " stayed status quo [ with the previous year ] , but without a key piece " and " did n't make a firm decision " on the direction it was headed .
Ben Silverman , one of the show 's producers , said that " it did n't have the sense of purpose and focus " that the next season would have .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
In the following table , " U.S. viewers ( million ) " refers to the number of Americans who viewed the episode on the night of broadcast .
Episodes are listed by the order in which they aired , and may not necessarily correspond to their production codes .
HOME MEDIA RELEASE
* 24 episodes
* 5-disc set
* 1.78:1 aspect ratio
* Subtitles : English , Spanish * English ( Dolby Digital ) colspan="4 " align="left
" width="400 " * Deleted scenes from every episode * Producer 's cuts of : * The Girl Next Door webisodes *
Blooper reel
* Super Bowl XLVI Promos
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS * Episode guides at NBC.com