DON'T TRUST THE B---- IN APARTMENT 23
Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 is an American television sitcom created by Nahnatchka Khan and starring Krysten Ritter that aired on ABC for two seasons from April 11 , 2012 to January 15 , 2013 .
Originally airing as a midseason replacement , ABC renewed the series for a second season with some episodes from its first season aired as part of its second , without regard for continuity .
The series starred Ritter as Chloe , an irresponsible party girl who searches for roommates by asking for rent up front and then behaving outrageously until they leave .
Her latest roommate , June Colburn ( Dreama Walker ) , however , proves to be harder to drive away , and the women end up forming an unlikely friendship .
James Van Der Beek co - starred as a fictionalized version of himself , one of Chloe 's friends who is desperate to revive his withering acting career .
Liza Lapira , Michael Blaiklock , Eric Andre , and Ray Ford led the supporting cast .
The series was originally in development to air on Fox in 2009 , but was ultimately green - lit and picked up by ABC in 2011 .
Although it was the subject of positive reviews from television critics , Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 struggled significantly in ratings and was cancelled by ABC in January 2013 .
The network subsequently removed the series from its programming immediately , leaving eight episodes of its second season unaired .
While the series was rumored to return the following summer to burn off the remaining episodes , ABC chose instead to make the last eight episodes available for streaming on their official website as well as on iTunes and Hulu .
While the remaining episodes did not air on ABC , they were broadcast on Arena in Australia from March 25 to May 13 , 2013 .
Logo TV later acquired the rights to Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 in the United States , and broadcast the remaining episodes from July 19 to September 6 , 2014 .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
The series follows June Colburn as she moves from Indiana to New York City to pursue her dream job – until she finds out that it no longer exists .
She ends up moving in with a bon vivant party girl named Chloe .
Chloe keeps her apartment by inviting roommates to move in , asking for rent up front , and then behaving outrageously until they leave .
June proves more difficult to dislodge than expected , and when June reverses Chloe 's latest attempt to eject her in an unexpected fashion , they end up forming an unlikely friendship .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* Krysten Ritter as Chloe , the titular " Bitch in Apartment 23 " .
She is a hard - partying , irresponsible , freeloading , sexually adventurous con artist described as having " the morals of a pirate , " who becomes June 's roommate .
After first attempting to run her " roommate scam " by convincing June to pay several months ' rent in advance before driving her out of the apartment , Chloe , who usually finds other women boring and catty , discovers that she genuinely likes June and tries to be both protective and helpful in her own borderline sociopathic ways ( such as slipping June illegal Chinese pharmaceuticals to help her " loosen up " and turning June 's small homemade jam business into a lucrative internet erotica site when June is in danger of being unable to pay her share of rent ) .
Chloe comes from a rocky background hinted at in several episodes : as a child , she attended a camp for sociopathic children ( until it burned down ) , an experience she remembers fondly .
She relates to her father as a friend , once even hooking him up with June , but resents her mother for never being involved with her as a child ( only later do we learn that Chloe 's mother is paraplegic and that all the events Chloe complains of were ones her mother could not participate in , such as ice skating and horseback riding ) .
Chloe 's only steady work is " providing entertainment " to diplomats at the United Nations once a year , during which she pays her share of rent for the year , meanwhile running day - to - day scams to provide her with free food , free drinks , and spending money .
* Dreama Walker as June Colburn , who moves to New York from Richmond , Indiana when her dream job at a mortgage company provides her with a huge apartment .
However , on her very first day , the company is shut down when the owner is arrested for embezzling millions of dollars in a Ponzi scheme and the apartment building is sealed .
Too ashamed to return to Indiana and face her overbearing parents , June ends up moving in with Chloe and tries to find her place in the big city .
She is both horrified by Chloe 's recklessness and lack of morals and envious of how effortlessly cool , popular , and exciting Chloe is .
June 's efforts to keep up with Chloe 's partying often end disastrously , once with a trip to the ER for alcohol poisoning and a stomach pumping .
June is optimistic , trusting , and tries to be honest and friendly with everyone she meets , which often lead her to be taken advantage of by more cynical New Yorkers , including her own roommate .
Gradually she learns to hold her own against Chloe , earning Chloe 's friendship and respect .
She works as a barista at a local coffee shop for most of the series , but is eventually hired as a junior analyst for a Wall Street firm .
* James Van Der Beek as a fictionalized version of himself , the former TV star of Dawson 's Creek , who is a close friend of Chloe 's and desperate to revamp his sagging acting career .
As a parody of himself , he is arrogant , self - centered , and shamelessly self - promoting as he takes on increasingly bizarre roles to revitalize his career , culminating in a stint on Dancing with the Stars .
He uses his influence amongst the now - thirty - something demographic of female Dawson 's Creek fans to get ahead personally and professionally , and he allows Chloe to name - drop him to advance her own scams .
In spite of this , he is the person who seems to know Chloe best , and he seems genuinely invested in seeing Chloe and June 's friendship succeed , often giving them both advice on how to handle one another 's quirks .
* Eric Andre as Mark Reynolds , who would have been June 's supervisor at the mortgage company .
He becomes manager of a local coffee shop within four hours of losing his job and hires June .
He lives with a domineering , unseen girlfriend who takes advantage of his good - natured meekness .
At one point in Season Two , Mark manages to break up with his girlfriend and kick her out of his apartment , but he quickly becomes depressed and untethered without someone to tell him what to do .
Mark has a hopeless crush on June and occasionally tries to approach her , but a combination of his girlfriend 's emotional control and June 's obliviousness always gets in his way .
At one point , he and June admit their attraction to one another and attempt to hook up , only to learn that the two of them are completely sexually incompatible .
Their lovemaking is so embarrassing that they vow to pretend it never happened in order to resume their previous friendship .
* Ray Ford as Luther Wilson ( season 2 ; recurring previously ) , James Van Der Beek 's fussy , effeminate personal assistant .
He is extremely devoted to James and believes wholeheartedly in James ' inevitable comeback .
To that end he gladly micromanages James ' life to the smallest detail , even as James takes advantage of him .
Luther and Chloe have a rocky relationship : Luther feels Chloe 's wild lifestyle and manipulations get in the way of James ' career and tries to limit her access to him ( and his checkbook ) , while Chloe finds Luther boring and uptight and resents when Luther keeps her from James .
At one point Chloe states that Luther is 78 years old and only retains his youthful appearance due to illegal panda - fat face cream ; Luther does not deny either claim .
Luther also demonstrates a stronger moral center than most of the main cast , leading him to become closer to June as the seasons progress .
* Michael Blaiklock as Eli Webber , the peeping - tom next - door neighbor who spies on the girls through a window across an alleyway .
He works as a city health inspector .
In spite of being a self - proclaimed pervert , Eli is hard - working and successful in his own limited field , often offers solid advice to June from his window across the alley , and is grateful for Chloe 's casual lack of concern for his peeping - tom tendencies .
* Liza Lapira as Robin ( main cast season 1 ; recurring season 2 ) , one of Chloe 's former roommates , who was swindled like the others and now lives in the apartment down the hall , where she tries to warn potential roommates " do n't trust the bitch in apartment 23 " before they make the same mistake .
In spite of this , she is still obsessed with Chloe to the point of stalking her .
Robin works as a nurse in a local hospital and is quite wealthy as she has no outside interests other than being near Chloe .
To this end she is willing to participate in any schemes Chloe invites her into ; she also secretly buys all Chloe 's groceries and sneaks them into the apartment ( June assumes Chloe buys them and Chloe does not bother finding out ) , delivers her mail , and pays for her cable and wifi .
RECURRING CAST
* Tate Ellington as Steven , June 's ex - fiancé .
* Eve Gordon as Connie Colburn , June 's mother , whom June , then James , occasionally turns to for advice .
* Peter MacKenzie as Donald Colburn , June 's father .
* Katherine Tokarz as Nicole , a nurse with whom Steven cheats on June .
* Jennie Pierson as Pepper , June and Mark 's socially awkward co - worker at the coffee shop .
* Rosalind Chao as Pastor Jin , the pastor at the First Korean Baptist Church where June attends worship services .
* Teresa Huang as Hillary , June 's co - worker at Harkin Financial .
GUEST CAST
* Michael Landes as Scott , Chloe 's father , who has a brief relationship with June .
* Marin Hinkle as Karen , Chloe 's paraplegic mother .
* David Krumholtz as Patrick Kelly , the creator of the graphic novel
Shitagi Nashi ( Tall Slut , No Panties ) , based on Chloe .
* Ben Lawson as Benjamin Lovett , an Australian director , who is friends with James and becomes a love interest for Chloe .
* Keith Allan as Peter , an employee at People magazine .
* Missi Pyle as Angie Beckencort , a lousy pro dancer who ends up paired with James on Dancing with the Stars .
* Jonny Cruz as James Martinez , June and Luther 's yoga instructor .
* Meg Chambers Steedle as Emily , a girl who briefly dates James .
* Sarah Wright Olsen as Trish , Chloe 's first New York roommate .
* Meagen Fay as Katherine , James ' mother .
SPECIAL CAMEOS Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Special cameos .
These guest stars made special cameo appearances as themselves in the series :
* Kiernan Shipka , as James ' costar in a poorly conceived father / daughter body - swap film .
* Kevin Sorbo , as Chloe 's unwitting wedding date .
* Dean Cain , as James ' Dancing With The Stars rival .
* Busy Philipps , as James ' former Dawson 's Creek costar .
* Frankie Muniz , as a hapless shopper .
* Mark - Paul Gosselaar , who gives James a pep - talk about fleeting fame .
* Karina Smirnoff , as James ' Dancing With The Stars partner .
* Charo , as Chloe 's muse .
* Richard Dean Anderson , as one of the potential candidates for James ' biological father .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
The series was originally titled Do n't Trust the Bitch in Apartment 23 and was developed at Fox as a 2009 fall contender , but was eventually passed on .
In January 2011 , ABC green - lit the production of a pilot episode .
In February and March 2011 , Dreama Walker , Krysten Ritter , and James Van Der Beek were cast as the three leads .
On May 13 , 2011 , ABC picked up the project to series under the shortened title Apartment 23 .
A few days later , ABC announced that the show would most likely debut in the 2011–12 mid - season .
On October 11 , 2011 , ABC again renamed the show , this time to a bowdlerized version of its original name , censoring the word " Bitch " and replaced with " B---- " .
The first two episodes were made available on iTunes , Hulu , ABC.com , and on Xfinity in the United States before the premiere on April 11 , 2012 .
In Canada , the first episodes were made available on Rogers on Demand and on Citytv.com , also before the April 11 , 2012 premiere .
On May 11 , 2012 , Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 was renewed for a second season , with the remaining six episodes of season one airing as a part of it .
The second season premiered on October 23 , 2012 .
On May 11 , 2012 , ABC renewed Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 for a second season .
The remaining six episodes of season one ( with production codes beginning 1A in the table ) aired as part of season two bringing the total to 19 episodes for the season .
ABC elected to air these episodes out of order , interspersing first and second - season episodes without regard to continuity .
As a result , some multi - episode plot arcs ( particularly James ' appearance on Dancing with the Stars and June 's travails at a new job outside the coffee shop ) are almost incomprehensibly jumbled in the original broadcast order .
Ray Ford , who plays Luther , was promoted to a series regular for season two .
Liza Lapira was originally announced as having been demoted to a recurring role ; ultimately she appeared in only one episode ( " Dating Games ... " ) that was produced for the second season .
Although series star Krysten Ritter originally stated in February 2013 that ABC was committed to airing the eight unaired episodes in the summer of 2013 , she later confirmed that the show would not return to ABC 's schedule , but that all eight episodes would be made available on ABC.com , iTunes and Hulu starting May 17 , 2013 .
The additional episodes have since been removed from Hulu , without announcement .
It was later announced that the episodes would air on Logo TV Network in July 2014 .
ABC announced on January 22 , 2013 , that it was removing Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 from its schedule immediately .
The next day , the cast of the show confirmed its cancellation .
On April 18 , 2013 , ABC announced that the remaining eight unaired episodes would be streamed online beginning May 17 and ending June 2 .
In July 2014 , it was announced that Logo TV had acquired the full run of the series — including the eight episodes that were previously unaired in the United States — and would air it in the correct order beginning July 19 . EPISODES SERIES
OVERVIEW
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Series overview .
Each episode is styled as " ...
in Apartment 23 " .
SEASON 1 ( 2012 )
SEASON 2
( 2012–13 )
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In addition to premiering on ABC , the show has since been sold to various international markets .
!
scope="col " Country / region ! scope="col " Network !
scope="col " Premiere date ! scope="col " References RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In June 2011 , Apartment 23 , as it was called at the time , was one of eight honorees in the Most Exciting New Series category at the Critics ' Choice Television Awards , voted by journalists who had seen the pilots .
The series received positive reviews from critics , with many critics praising Ritter for her performance in what could be called her first " leading role " .
The first season getting a score of 71 on Metacritic based on 29 critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the first season holds a 91 % and the second season has a score of 75 % .
The site 's consensus states : " An odd couple sitcom with a modern twist , Do n't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 is sleeker and smarter than expected , thanks to strong acting and snappy dialogue . " RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . ! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipients ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " Ref . NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS