HART OF DIXIE Hart of Dixie is an American comedy - drama television series that aired on The CW from September 26 , 2011 to March 27 , 2015 .
The series , created by Leila Gerstein , stars Rachel Bilson as Dr. Zoe Hart , a New Yorker who , after her dreams of becoming a heart surgeon fall apart , accepts an offer to work as a general practitioner in the fictional Gulf Coast town of Bluebell , Alabama .
The show also stars a pet alligator named Burt Reynolds .
On September 26 , 2011 , Hart of Dixie premiered .
The show was scheduled to move back to Mondays in the fall for its third season having been paired with Beauty & the Beast .
The show 's third season premiered on October 7 , 2013 .
On May 8 , 2014 , the CW renewed the show for its fourth season .
On July 18 , 2014 , CW president Mark Pedowitz announced that Hart of Dixie would have ten episodes for its fourth season , which premiered on December 15 , 2014 .
On March 14 , 2015 , Leila Gerstein revealed that season four of Hart of Dixie would be its last .
The CW officially cancelled the show on May 7 , 2015 .
PLOT SEASON 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season mostly revolves around Zoe Hart adjusting to life in the small town of Bluebell , Alabama and the practice she inherited from the father she never knew , with whom Zoe 's mother had an affair while she was engaged to the man Zoe knew as her dad .
She struggles to bring in 30 % of the patients to her practice , a clause she needs to adhere to if she wishes to keep half of the practice from Brick Breeland .
She finds this difficult , as she is at odds with most of the local residents due to her city persona .
Zoe also struggles with her growing feelings towards local attorney George Tucker , feelings of which his fiancée , Lemon Breeland is fully aware , leading her to make it her mission to ensure Zoe leaves Bluebell .
Other storylines include Wade 's feelings for Zoe ( which may or may not be returned ) ; Zoe 's friendship with the mayor , Lavon , and his past with Lemon ; and Zoe 's unresolved issues regarding her family .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The season begins with Zoe confused with her feelings for both George and Wade ( she slept with Wade the night of George and Lemon 's aborted wedding at the end of season one ) .
She later decides that George is n't ready for another relationship yet and decides to see Wade .
Lavon 's former high school sweetheart Ruby Jeffries ( played by Golden Brooks ) returns to Bluebell and reveals she is opposing for mayor .
George begins dating again , first seeing newcomer Shelby Sinclair ; however , he later dumps her , and Shelby begins dating Brick Breeland .
George later starts a relationship with Wade 's ex - wife , Tansy Truitt .
As the season progresses , Ruby leaves after Lemon 's jealousy destroys her and Lavon .
Wade and Zoe continue to date , though they face their share of setbacks .
At the end of the season , Zoe is faced deciding between a summer in New York working at a hospital at her dream job - only to have confessed his feelings for her , and she unable to return them .
Meanwhile , Annabeth begins having feelings for Lavon , and later the two sleep together , leaving Lemon devastated by her best friend 's betrayal .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The season begins with Zoe returning to Bluebell after a summer in NYC - along with her new boyfriend Joel ( played by Josh Cooke ) .
George struggles to rebuild his life following his break up with Tansy but finds love with Lavon 's younger cousin .
Lemon finds herself in a scandalous relationship , while Annabeth hopes her relationship with Lavon will grow into something more .
Zoe learns more about her family roots in Bluebell , breaks up with Joel , and reunites with Wade .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
The final season deals with Zoe 's pregnancy and her relationship with Wade .
George , Lemon , Lavon , and Annabeth enter a tumultuous love affair , while Brick has to deal with his past in order to move forward as Lemon and Magnolia meet their half - sister from their estranged mother who left the family .
In the end , George and Annabeth move in together , George changes careers to become a music manager , Zoe and Wade get married ( in a rushed ceremony , due to Zoe 's inhibitions about marriage and having gone into labor - they recite their vows while rushing towards the delivery room - delivering a baby boy ) , Lemon and Lavon get married .
The final scene shows the town in harmony in the town square , Wade and Zoe with their son - and an old love triangle re - fueled between 3 elderly members of the community ; Zoe asks if all small towns are like Bluebell , to which Wade answers that they probably are n't .
Zoe agrees , and they get up to walk their son and join their friends .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Rachel Bilson as Zoe Hart , a medical doctor ; Zoe aspired to become a heart surgeon like her father , however after four years of residency at a New York hospital she is refused a position at the hospital and told she needs more experience dealing with patients and their families .
Zoe moves to Bluebell , Alabama after learning her biological father was really a respected physician in the small town .
She inherits his half of a general medical practice , and constantly bumps heads with the co - owner of the practice , Brick Breeland .
However , she becomes a regular in helping the town through its never - ending dilemmas .
In season 2 , she begins dating Wade Kinsella ...
However , he ends up cheating on her when he loses Battle of the Bands , and she ends their relationship .
In the season 2 finale , Zoe sleeps with Wade , and she decides to go back to New York to get over everything .
In the season 3 premiere , six months have passed and Zoe returns to Bluebell with her new boyfriend Joel , who is a writer and moves with her to Bluebell .
For the rest of season 3 , she remains in a relationship with Joel until one of his books is made into a movie and he moves to Los Angeles , California to assist with the production of the film .
In the season 3 finale , Zoe realizes she is still in love with Wade and tells him that she is going to do everything she can to win him back .
In the season 4 premiere , Zoe is still trying to prove to Wade that they should be together , and she seduces him , resulting in her getting pregnant .
They eventually get back together and get married in the series finale as Zoe is giving birth to their son .
* Scott Porter as George Tucker ; A local lawyer in Bluebell that starts out engaged to Lemon Breeland ( season 1 ) but calls off their wedding after learning about Lemon 's affair with Lavon , combined with his own romantic feelings for Zoe .
Zoe turns him down , and George starts to date other women and ends up with Wade 's ex - wife Tansy in season 2 .
In season 3 , he begins dating Lavon 's cousin Lynly .
George goes into partnership with his former fiance , Lemon , by helping her invest in Fancie 's Restaurant , but eventually pulls out his part of the restaurant when it burns down .
Although he is the town lawyer , George seems to have a lot of time to experience in other opportunities , such as touring for a summer , as a singer with Lily Ann , and becoming the Talent Manager for both The Truitt Brothers and Meatball .
George lives on a houseboat owned by Annabeth , who he finally starts dating during season 4 .
George has parents that tend to meddle in his life when they come for the occasional visit .
* Jaime King as Lemon Breeland , the daughter of town physician Brick Breeland .
She was engaged to George Tucker but had a relationship with Lavon while George was living in New York .
Prideful , conservative and somewhat uptight , Lemon begins a deep rivalry with Zoe when they first meet , because she feels that Zoe is interfering in her " perfect " life , and they often clash , owing to their different ways of thinking .
Over the course of seasons 2–4 , although she would n't admit it to anyone , she does seem to come around to being civil with Zoe .
During season 2 , she becomes co - owner of Rammer Jammer with Wade .
She later becomes the owner of Fancie 's , the town 's " best " dinner restaurant .
Lemon has a reputation of being persistent and somewhat scheming when it comes to getting what she wants .
After her wedding to George is called off , she finds herself without a true profession and a place to live .
At one point , in order to move out of her father 's house , she accepts the opportunity to live on AnnaBeth 's houseboat , only to discover she suffers from seasickness .
She eventually trades living arrangements with her former fiance , George , trading him living on the houseboat , for living in what was once his apartment in town .
Throughout the series , Lemon is seen having issues with her mother who abandoned her and her sister Magnolia ( whom she raised like her own daughter ) .
However , in season 4 , she finally confronts her mother , with whom she remains hostile , but she does come around to accept that she has a little maternal half - sister , Scarlett , and makes extra efforts to come to know her .
* Cress Williams as Lavon Hayes , Mayor of Bluebell and a former linebacker for ten years in the NFL ; He is best friends with Zoe Hart .
He has a pet alligator named Burt Reynolds .
It is revealed in season 1 that Lavon had an intimate relationship with Lemon , who was engaged to George .
Lavon develops a close friendship with Zoe and often gives her meaningful advice on the town 's traits .
During seasons 2–3 , he has relationships with his former high school sweetheart , Ruby , and with Annabeth , although , during each of these , he still has true feelings for Lemon .
He has close friendships with Wade and George , although at times his and George 's relationship is strained due to his love for George 's former fiance , Lemon .
Lavon is a big fan of the television personality , Don Todd , and eventually gets to closely know him .
The knowing of Don Todd helps him later on when it comes to negotiations with rival Fillmore Mayor , Todd Gainey , Sr .
* Wilson Bethel as Wade Kinsella , a bartender and Zoe 's neighbor .
He has an eccentric personality .
Initially , he appears to be an immature , unambitious , womanizing and sarcastic bartender who does n't care about anyone but himself .
But slowly it is revealed that he cares deeply about the people around him ( though he always puts his best efforts into hiding his feelings ) .
He falls deeply in love with Zoe and tries to change his lifestyle and ambitions for her .
For the most of season 2 , he is in a monogamous relationship with Zoe until he is caught cheating on her .
Wade has always dreamed of owning his own bar and eventually gets that chance , by becoming co - owner of the local Rammer Jammer , with Lemon Breeland .
During season 3 , he has a serious relationship with Vivian Wilkes , Zoe 's cousin , who finally breaks his heart by reconciling and moving away with her estranged husband .
At the beginning of season 4 , he sleeps with Zoe , which leads to her becoming pregnant , causing him to finally come around and do his best to mend his " flirtatious " ways and grow up , in preparation of his new role as a family man with Zoe .
In episode 10 Zoe goes into labor , and at the hospital , she and Wade get married before their baby is born .
Eventually , Zoe gives birth to a baby boy in the series finale .
* Tim Matheson as Dr. Bertram " Brick " Breeland ( recurring , episodes 1–14 ; starring , episodes 15–76 ) , Magnolia and Lemon 's father , who is also a doctor , and shares half of the local Bluebell practice with Zoe .
He is often very critical of Zoe 's medical diagnoses and inexperience of Southern hospitality .
Also , he is portrayed as an antagonist when he attempts to buy out Zoe 's share of the business .
Brick eventually has a close on again , off again , on again , relationship , with local talent personality , Shelby , who at one time , actually dated his daughter 's former fiance , George .
One of Brick 's main goals is to be voted as " Man of The Year ( MOTY ) , an honor bestowed upon outstanding male town personalities , by the local Fraternal Order of The Owl .
Brick is also well known as the repeated winner of the annual town Gumbo competition .
* Kaitlyn Black as Annabeth Nass ( seasons 3–4 ; recurring , seasons 1–2 ) ; a member of the Belles and best friends with Lemon .
She is occasionally nicknamed " A.B. " as an abbreviation of her first name .
In season 2 , she develops feelings for Lavon but decides not to pursue a relationship with him because of Lemon .
Lemon gives her blessing , so Annabeth and Lavon start dating .
She is also a good friend to Zoe .
During season 3 , she dates the nephew , of the rival town 's mayor , Davis , who proposes to her , but she declines , telling Lemon she did so because she is still in love with Lavon .
During season 4 , she realizes she no longer loves Lavon and starts dating George Tucker .
In season 3 and the beginning of season 4 , she becomes the receptionist to Brick 's and Zoe 's medical practice , which eventually leads to her wish to go to nursing school .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
On February 1 , 2011 , it was announced that The CW had ordered a pilot for Hart of Dixie .
On May 17 , 2011 , the network officially picked up Hart of Dixie to series , set to air in fall 2011 .
The series marks the second time executive producer , Josh Schwartz , and series star , Rachel Bilson , have worked together on television .
The first time the duo worked together was on the Fox teen drama The O.C. , created by Schwartz .
The show 's executive producer , Josh Schwartz , compared the show to The WB classics such as Felicity , Everwood , and Gilmore Girls .
With the reveal of The CW 's fall 2011 schedule , it was announced that Hart of Dixie would air on Monday at 9:00 pm Eastern/8:00 pm Central , following Gossip Girl .
It premiered on Monday , September 26 , 2011 .
On October 12 , 2011 the series was picked up for a full season , which will consist of twenty - two episodes .
Along with pick - up for all other CW dramas , Mark Pedowitz said " We believe in the creative strength of these dramas , and by giving them back nine orders we can give our audience the chance to enjoy complete seasons of all three of them . "
On May 11 , 2012 , The CW renewed the show for a second season , which premiered on October 2 , 2012 .
The CW renewed the show for a third season on April 26 , 2013 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On February 8 , 2011 , TVLine reported that Rachel Bilson was nearing a deal to star in the series .
Her role was later confirmed by The CW in a press release .
Soon after , Wilson Bethel joined the cast as Wade Kinsella , Zoe 's " gorgeous bad - boy " neighbor .
Scott Porter was later cast as good - looking lawyer George Tucker , a potential love - interest for Bilson 's character .
On May 20 , 2011 , it was announced that Nancy Travis would not continue with the series due to her commitments with the 20th Century Fox - produced ABC sitcom
Last Man Standing .
Travis was written out after the first two episodes .
Meredith Monroe appeared in one episode as Lemon 's estranged mother .
JoBeth Williams appeared in three episodes as Candice Hart , the mother of Bilson 's character .
On July 26 , 2013 , it was announced that Kaitlyn Black was upgraded to series regular status for season three .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Hart of Dixie first season has received mixed reviews , scoring a 43 out of 100 on the review aggregator Metacritic .
TVGuide.com described the show as " Southern Exposure " and , in a later review , stated that the actors are better than the " cutesy " material , although Bilson is not convincing as a heart surgeon .
Both TVGuide.com and Robert Bianco of USA Today stated that the show is potentially offensive to the South .
Bianco also wrote that the show is shallow and far - fetched , with Bilson giving an unconvincing performance , such as acting surprised when calling herself a doctor .
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter stated that the series is predictable and superficial , but " surprisingly touching " .
Goodman and Brian Lowry of Variety stated that Bilson does not look like a doctor , with Goodman writing that she looked too much " like a high - priced call girl " and Lowry writing that she looked like she belonged in " Barbie 's medical dream house . "
Writing for The New York Times , critic Neil Genzlinger wrote , " ...
the premiere , at least , does n't find a convincing way to balance the clashing strands : the city - mouse disorientation , the medical emergencies , the girlfights , the daddy issues , the young - pretty - and - available stuff . "
Los Angeles Times reviewer Mary McNamara described the show as , " a stack of familiar scenarios stitched together to form a pretty if not terribly substantial quilt . "
TVLine described the show as " Everwood - esque " .
TVLine later said : " Beautifully filmed with warm , cozy tones , the Southern setting utterly envelops the glowing Bilson " , adding that Porter 's appearance " wins us over and makes you forget that clunky intro " and despite the " rom - coms clichés , the pilot is super - efficient at introducing us to those who will be the key players in Zoe 's story , laying the framework for storytelling places to go . "
Tv Times magazine gave Hart of Dixie its lowest score of 2011–2012 : 12 out of 100 .
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES E !
Golden Tater
Awards
New Fall Show
You 're Most Excited For Hart of Dixie rowspan="2"2012
People 's Choice Awards
Favorite New TV Drama
Hart of Dixie ASCAP Award Top Television Series ( Composers and Songwriters )
Jeremy Adelman 2013 ASTRA
Awards
Favourite Program – International Drama Hart of Dixie
rowspan="3"2014
ASTRA Awards
Favourite Program – International Drama Hart of Dixie rowspan="2"Teen Choice Awards
Choice TV Show :
Drama Hart of Dixie Choice TV Actress :
Drama Rachel Bilson RATINGS ET INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTS Section::::International broadcasts . ! scope="col " Country ! scope="col " Network(s ) ! scope="col "
Series premiere ! scope="col " Timeslot ! scope="col " Source(s ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS