ONE TREE HILL ( SEASON 9 )
The ninth and final season of One Tree Hill , an American television series created by Mark Schwahn for The WB Television Network .
The series was officially renewed by The CW for a ninth season on May 17 , 2011 ; two days later , the network announced that the ninth season would serve as the series ' final season .
Premiering on January 11 , 2012 , the series aired its 13 episodes uninterrupted .
Series leads Bethany Joy Lenz and Sophia Bush continue as full - time regulars , while James Lafferty returned as a part - time regular .
Paul Johansson and Tyler Hilton
both return to the show for the final season as regulars , whilst former series regulars Chad Michael Murray , Antwon Tanner , Barbara Alyn Woods , and Craig Sheffer guest star .
The season opened to 1.75 million viewers and a 0.9 Adults 18–49 rating , up 26 % in viewers compared to its season eight finale .
The final episode aired on April 4 , 2012 , concluding the series with 1.43 million viewers .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The ninth and final seasons deals with the disappearance and ransom of Nathan Scott .
Clay battles a drug addiction and later learns of a secret that turns his life upside down .
Brooke faces a demon from her past while struggling to reconnect with her father .
Dan 's search for Nathan brings back old faces to Tree Hill .
Haley battles with the prospect of being a single mother of two .
CAST AND CHARACTERS REGULAR
* Sophia Bush as Brooke Davis ( 13 episodes ) * James Lafferty as Nathan Scott ( 8 episodes ) * Bethany Joy Galeotti as Haley James Scott ( 13 episodes ) * Austin Nichols as Julian Baker ( 13 episodes ) * Robert Buckley as Clay Evans ( 13 episodes ) * Shantel VanSanten as Quinn James ( 13 episodes ) * Jackson Brundage as Jamie Scott ( 9 episodes ) * Lee Norris as Mouth McFadden ( 7 episodes ) * Jana Kramer as Alex Dupre ( 2 episodes ) * Lisa Goldstein as Millicent Huxtable ( 7 episodes ) * Stephen Colletti as Chase Adams ( 11 episodes )
* Tyler Hilton as Chris Keller ( 11 episodes )
* Paul Johansson as Dan Scott ( 11 episodes ) RECURRING *
Michael May as Chuck Scolnik ( 8 episodes ) * Pierce Gagnon as Logan Evans ( 7 episodes ) * Richard Burgi as Ted Davis ( 6 episodes ) * Antwon Tanner as Skills Taylor ( 5 episodes ) * Chelsea Kane as Tara Richards ( 5 episodes ) * Daphne Zuniga as Victoria Davis ( 5 episodes ) * Devin McGee as Xavier Daniels ( 5 episodes ) * Bradley Evans as Jerry ( 4 episodes ) * Allison Munn as Lauren ( 2 episodes )
* Barbara Alyn Woods as Deb Lee ( 2 episodes ) * Kelley Davis as Mrs. Scolnik ( 2 episodes ) * Bevin Prince as Bevin Mirskey ( 1 episode )
* Chad Michael Murray as Lucas Scott ( 1 episode ) * Craig Sheffer as Keith Scott ( 1 episode ) * Cullen Moss as Junk Moretti ( 1 episode )
* Vaughn Wilson as Fergie Thompson ( 1 episode ) * Katherine Landry as Madison ( 1 episode ) EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The CW officially renewed One Tree Hill for a ninth season on May 17 , 2011 .
On May 19 , 2011 , Dawn Ostroff confirmed that the 13 episodes for season nine will be the last for the series .
In the official announcement of The CW 's schedule , they confirmed the series stars and the executive producers for the final season .
Mark Schwahn , Joe Davola , Greg Prange , Mike Tollin , and Brian Robbins will all continue in their roles on the show .
Deadline reported that the final season will begin mid - season and air its 13 episodes uninterrupted , leading into the series finale .
Production for the season began on July 7 , 2011 at the Screen Gems Studios , Wilmington , North Carolina .
While further scenes are shot in downtown Wilmington , including Wallace Park and Pure Gold Gentlemen 's Club .
The Corning manufacturing site on North College Road is also being used as the location for some scenes based in Tree Hill 's hospital , police station and TV studio .
A two - day shoot for some scenes in the season was also held at Kinston Regional Jetport .
Paul Johansson will direct at least one episode in the season .
At the Television Critics Association summer press tour , president of entertainment at The CW , Mark Pedowitz said " At this point it 's the final 13 , " about the possibility of extending the season .
He added , " You never want to say never , " revealing that he did speak to executive producer Mark Schwahn and that they agreed that 13 episodes is the best number to close the series with .
One Tree Hill filmed its final scenes on November 16 , 2011 .
The season aired Wednesdays at 8:00 pm Eastern/7:00 pm Central as a lead - in to new reality series , " Remodeled " .
It premiered on January 11 , 2012 , with an encore following immediately after .
There was no opening credit sequence during the final season as producers did n't want to waste time that could potentially be used for story .
Gavin Degraw will perform in the series finale .
The series 's final epilogue was sports - themed .
In an interview with Carina Mackenzie of Zap2it , Sophia Bush revealed she was the first person to be approached for season nine , and the first to sign on .
" The idea that we would do this as 13 final episode[s ] and almost shoot like it a miniseries really appealed to me , " she says .
" On a professional level , if we had shot 22 episodes , it would be one more year we 'd be shooting through pilot season and unavailable for other things . "
When discussing the shows series finale and she being upset about the end , she said , " On the same side of the coin , most shows do n't last this long .
Most shows do n't make it 6 years let alone 9 , so I really feel like it 's all just been a gift . "
In another interview , Bethany Joy Galeotti revealed her own reasons for returning , " It was a really tough decision , but I have a few friendships here that I was n't ready to walk away from yet .
Season 8 ended with like a booze - on - stage-8 kind of party .
I was kind of like
' This ca n't be how we say goodbye .
At least let 's come back for 13 more episodes . ' "
Sophia Bush directed the penultimate episode of the series .
The CW has given more promotion for the launch of the final season than it has since the fifth season .
Mark Pedowitz said , " I 'm a big believer in giving shows a proper sendoff . " It deserves a proper sendoff .
Not many shows last nine years .
Mark , his team and the cast deserve a really good sendoff .
I think we did a good job for them this year . "
After backlash from fans about whether Sophia Bush had asked not to work with Murray during his episode , she cleared up the matter in an interview with Zap2it : " When I got the script and saw that Lucas was back , I called Mark , and I told him that if he wanted to write scenes where the whole gang gets together at Haley 's house and talks about how they 're going to find Nathan , then he should write that .
I 've never asked not to work with any former cast mates , and I 'm certainly not going to start now , in the final season .
This show is too important to me , and these characters are too important to me , and the fans are too important to me . "
The series finale aired on Wednesday , April 4 , 2012 , 8:00—10:00 p.m. , as a special two - hour event .
It featured interviews with the series ' stars as they look back at the shows most memorable moments .
CAST Section::::Cast .
Before season eight had finished filming , original cast members Bethany Joy Lenz and Sophia Bush signed on for a final season , while James Lafferty was expected to return part - time .
Austin Nichols , Robert Buckley , Lisa Goldstein , Jana Kramer , Shantel Vansanten and Stephen Colletti are also contracted through season nine .
The regulars for season nine — as listed on a press release from The CW — are Sophia Bush , Bethany Joy Lenz , James Lafferty , Austin Nichols , Robert Buckley , Shantel VanSanten and Jackson Brundage .
Though , others later signed on .
At The CW upfront presentation , the network expressed confidence that Chad Michael Murray and Hilarie Burton would return .
Mark Pedowitz said , that with everyone knowing season nine will be the last , it makes it more possible for old cast members to return .
On July 11 , 2011 , it was announced that Tyler Hilton would reprise his role as Chris Keller .
Ten years have passed since he was last seen .
He is rumored to return to help Haley run Red Bedroom Records as Peyton is still away .
It was later reported that Hilton would return in the season premiere as a series regular .
Kristin Dos Santos revealed that Paul Johansson will be returning to the series full - time as a regular .
TV Line revealed that James Lafferty will appear in half of the season .
Zap2it later reported that he will remain a series regular , and revealed he will appear in exactly seven episodes .
Chelsea Kane has been cast in a recurring role as Tara , a rival café owner to Haley and Brooke .
Lisa Goldstein will continue on the series as a regular .
Jana Kramer will only appear in the first two episodes , due to the actress ' musical commitments .
Barbara Alyn Woods will be reprising her role as Deb Lee after taking a break from season six to spend time with her kids .
Zap2it later reported that she will return for two episodes .
Describing the circumstances around her return , they said she has n't always been the most maternal person , but will prove she can still be " mom " when the situation demands it .
The CW announced on their official website that Chad Michael Murray will return as Lucas Scott for a guest appearance .
Lucas returns to Tree Hill when Haley reaches out to him for help .
Murray later revealed he will return for one episode .
He will appear in the seventh episode of the season .
Murray revealed in an interview his reasons for returning , " The fans have loved this show and rooted for every character throughout its run .
I know how important Luke 's return is for our fans and wanted to give them one last ' Lucas Scott ' moment .
Luke 's return is for them . "
Former Desperate Housewives actor Richard Burgi , has been cast as Brooke 's father , in a recurring role .
Allison Munn and Scott Holroyd will return during season nine as Miss Lauren and David Fletcher , respectively .
They will return as a couple , and she will be carrying his child .
Devin McGee — who portrayed Brooke 's attacker and Quentin 's murderer , Xavier Daniels during season six — will also return during the season .
James Lafferty has signed on for one extra episode , which will be the series finale .
Bevin Prince will return as Bevin Mirskey in the series finale .
Antwon Tanner will also be a part of the final episode .
Mark Schwahn revealed in an interview with Zap2it that they did reach out to Hilarie Burton to return with Murray , " We would have liked to include Hilarie as well
but she has a [ son ] now , and she has a job , and she 's doing well
and she just felt like her free time away from work
she wanted to spend with her [ son ] , which is a completely plausible , nice answer , " he said .
STORYLINES
Section::::Storylines .
Before the series was renewed , Mark Schwahn said that if they decide to air the ending for season eight that will satisfy as a series finale , he could introduce the unaired cliffhangers in the season nine premiere .
In regard to her contract renewal , Sophia Bush tweeted , " The writers have GREAT plans ! " .
The season will have Brooke and Haley balancing family life with running a busy Karen 's Cafe , while Nathan travels more as an agent .
A possible wedding may occur with Mouth and Millie , or Clay and Quinn .
Lucas will take Lydia to stay with him after he comes to visit .
The series finale will have another time jump and will see the characters lives five years in the future .
Zap2it said that fans of Nathan and Haley 's relationship can look forward to " plenty of shared scenes between Lafferty and Bethany Joy Lenz " , despite his reduced role in the season .
Nathan will be kidnapped during the season , and Haley and Dan will be searching for him .
According to a promotional video shown at the end of an evening of events—"An Evening with One Tree Hill " ; the opening moments of the seasons first episode is narrated by Nathan .
He speaks over scenes of a burning building whilst viewers also see Dan and Chris Keller seemingly plot a murder — in addition to this , opening shots include Chase in the back of a police car .
Both Clay and Quinn are seen arguing alongside Brooke vandalising a rival cafe .
Other scenes shown during the sequence include Julian being beaten up and Haley identifying a body in the morgue .
Towards the end of the season , the Burning Boat Festival will return to Tree Hill .
It was last seen in the third episode of season one .
Discussing the possibility of the death of one of the characters , Robert Buckley said : " The One Tree Hill family , as we know it , is going to change by season 's end .
The people we start the season with [ are ] not the same group we end it with . "
During the season , Mouth will gain around 60 pounds .
Lee Norris has said of the storyline , " He 's undergone a physical transformation ...
but what is really going to interest
the audience is why this transformation happened . "
He also revealed he was " adamant " about handling the topic with respect , " I did n't want it to be one of the broader comedic things on the show ; I wanted it to be an issue that people identify with , " he said .
Regarding Haley 's direction for season nine , Bethany Joy Galeotti said , " Haley 's trying to deal with having Dan around and deciding whether she 's going to let this person back in her life and into her family 's life .
And Nathan is away , and that 's taking a huge toll on their relationship .
It 's a lot about Haley finding out what her limits are . "
Mark Schwahn has said we 'll see a lot of the strength of Nathan and Haley 's relationship and why they 're destined to be together .
Regarding the friendship between Dan and Chris Keller he said , " villains understand villains . "
Chris Kellar will develop a " bromance " with Chase this season as they begin to spend a lot of time together as he will be working next door to TRIC .
James Lafferty believes this is the worst year for Nathan , but revealed that he is happy with where he left the character and the pay - off at the end is worth it .
Sophia Bush revealed Tree Hill High would be seen again before the series ended .
The sets for the school were re - built for the final episodes , with Bush describing walking in them as " incredibly emotional " .
Regarding the series finale , Bush said " it 's perfect " .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The season premiered to 1.7 million viewers , a 0.9 Adults 18–49 rating , 1.2 in Adults 18–34 and a 1.8 rating in The CW 's target of Women 18–34 .
It gave the network its best numbers in the time - slot since Spring , 2011 and was higher than the average for season eight of the series .
Compared to the early episodes of season eight , the season declined 18 % in the 18–49 demographic .
However , it tied as the second - highest rated show on the network ( with The Secret Circle ) .
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release .
The " An Evening with One Tree Hill " event in Wilmington was filmed and will be included on the DVD release .
Series stars Sophia Bush , Bethany Joy Lenz , Antwon Tanner and Lee Norris have done a DVD commentary for the series finale .
The DVD box - set is currently scheduled for release on April 10 , 2012 .
However , several people who pre - ordered the set received it in late March , before the finale aired , causing the finale to be leaked online including temporarily onto YouTube .
The box - set features over two hours of extra content , including five featurettes , audio commentary , unaired scenes and a gag reel .
" Knowing this was to be our last year , we made sure to document it , which made for some excellent behind - the - scenes footage that we 've included here , along with our last , explosive , emotional season of One Tree Hill , " said Mark Schwahn .
* 13 episodes * 555 minutes ( Region 1 ) ; 555 minutes ( Region 2 ) ; 555 minutes ( Region 4 )
* 3-disc set * 1.78:1 aspect ratio
* Languages : * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 )
* Subtitles : * English , Spanish French ( Region 1 )
* Audio commentaries * " One Tree Hill " – with creator / executive producer / writer Mark Schwahn .
* Deleted scenes
* Episodes : " Do n't You Want to Share the Guilt ? " , " Last Known Surroundings " , "
Every Breath Is a Bomb " , " Danny Boy " * Gag reel * " An Evening with One Tree Hill " * " The Story of One Tree Hill " * " The Music of One Tree Hill " * " The Fans of One Tree Hill " * " Crew Cameras with Sophia " REFERENCES