CHIONOECETES OPILIO Chionoecetes opilio , also known as snow crab , is a predominantly epifaunal crustacean native to shelf depths in the northwest Atlantic Ocean and north Pacific Ocean .
It is a well - known commercial species of Chionoecetes , often caught with traps or by trawling .
Seven species are in the genus Chionoecetes , all of which bear the name " snow crab " .
C. opilio is related to C. tanneri , commonly known as the tanner crab , and other crab species found in the cold , northern oceans .
ANATOMY Section::::Anatomy .
Snow crabs have equally long and wide carapaces , or protective shell - coverings , over their bodies .
Their tubercles , or the bodily projections on their shells , are moderately enclosed in calcium deposits , and they boast hooked setae , which are rigid , yet springy , hair - like organs on their claws .
Snow crabs have a horizontal rostrum at the front of the carapace ; the rostrum is basically just an extension of the hard , shell covering of the carapace and it boasts two flat horns separated by a gap .
They have triangular spines and well - defined gastric and branchial regions internally .
Snow crabs also have little granules along the border of their bodies , except their intestinal region .
Concerning their walking legs , their first three are compressed ; their chelipeds , or pincers , are usually smaller , shorter , or equal to their walking legs .
Snow crabs are iridescent and range in color from brown to light red on top and from yellow to white on the bottom , and are bright white on the sides of their feet .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Snow crabs are native to the Northwest Atlantic and the North Pacific .
In the Northwest Atlantic , they are found in the areas near Greenland , Newfoundland , in the Gulf of St. Lawrence , and on the Scotian Shelf .
In the North Pacific , this crab is found in areas ranging from Alaska to northern Siberia , and through the Bering Strait to the Aleutian Islands , Japan , and Korea .
In 1996 , they were recorded in the Barents Sea for the first time .
They are considered an invasive species there , but how they arrived there is unclear .
Another commercially important species , introduced deliberately to the same region , the red king crab , already has established itself in Barents Sea .
Similarly , snow crabs likely will have an adverse effect on the native species of the Barents Sea .
Snow crabs are found in the ocean 's shelf and upper slope , on sandy and muddy bottoms .
They are found at depths from , but average is about .
In Atlantic waters , most snow crabs are found at depths of .
Where male and female snow crabs are found in the ocean , depths may vary .
Small adult and senescent adult males occur mainly at intermediate depths over much of the year , while large and hardy adult males are found mostly at depths greater than .
Adult females are gregarious and congregate at depths of .
Snow crabs mainly reside in very cold waters , between , but can be found at temperatures up to .
DIET Section::::Diet .
C. opilio crabs eat other invertebrates in the benthic shelf , such as crustaceans , bivalves , brittle stars , polychaetes , and even phytobenthos and foraminiferans .
Snow crabs also are scavengers , and aside from preying on other benthic shelf invertebrates , they prey on annelid worms and mollusks .
Males typically prove to be better predators than mature females , and prey type depends upon predator size , with the smallest crabs feeding mainly on amphipods and ophiuroids , while the largest crabs feed mainly on annelids , crustacean decapods , and fish .
Cannibalism is practised at times among snow crabs , most frequently by intermediate - sized females .
SIZE AND POPULATION STRUCTURE Section::::Size and population structure .
The snow crab grows slowly and is structured according to its size .
At least 11 stages of growth for male crabs are recognized .
Usually , the male crabs are almost twice the size of the female crabs .
Males can grow up to in carapace width , while females can grow up to .
Male carapaces are usually about in width and length , with the female carapace usually close to in width and length .
Males caught in commercial fisheries generally weigh and females generally about .
Off the coast of Newfoundland , two amphipod species – Ischyrocerus commensalis and Gammaropsis inaequistylis – have been found to live on the carapace of the snow crab .
BREEDING PATTERNS Section::::Breeding patterns .
Snow crabs have a very high reproductive potential ; each year , every female carries eggs .
Females are fertilised internally and can carry up to 150,000 eggs under their abdomens after mating .
Females usually lay their eggs in very deep areas of the ocean , such as in deposits of phytodetritus .
Males also are capable of mating at both immature and mature stages of their lives .
Adult snow crabs usually live to 5 - 6 years .
Before their deaths , they usually moult , mate a final time , and die .
New snow crab offspring hatch along with the late spring phytoplankton bloom , so they have an ample food source to take advantage of upon hatching .
When they hatch , they are in the zoeal stage , meaning that they are developing larvae that can swim on their own .
Then , they metamorphose into the megalopa stage and settle to the ocean floor among the phytodetritus .
COMMERCIAL IMPORTANCE Section::::Commercial importance .
This species of crab was commonly caught by trappers in the 1980s , but trapping has decreased since then .
Much of the trapping has been in Canada for commercial use .
The first commercial fishing for the species in the Bering Sea ( where not native ) began in 2013 , and the stock of this region likely will reach levels similar to eastern Canada in the future .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The species was first described by Otto Fabricius in 1780 , under the name Cancer phalangium , a name that was invalid due to Johan Christian Fabricius having used it previously for the species now known as Inachus phalangium .
The first valid scientific name was provided by Otto Fabricius in 1788 , when he redescribed the species as Cancer opilio .
The type locality is Greenland .
As the genus Cancer was divided up , the species C. opilio was transferred to a new genus , Chionoecetes by Henrik Nikolai Krøyer in 1838 .
C. opilio was the only species in the genus at first , so it is the type species .
Mary J. Rathbun described a subspecies , C. o. elongatus , in 1924 .
This is now generally recognised as a full species , Chionoecetes elongatus .
GALLERY
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
*
Top and Bottom Views of the Opilio , Snow Crab , Chionoecetes opilio - Dana Point Fish Company