ALEX
UDINOV Alexandra " Alex " Udinov is one of the main characters on the television series Nikita , portrayed by Lyndsy Fonseca .
Many fans of " Team Nikita " ( consisting of Nikita , Michael , Birkhoff , Sean , Ryan , and Owen ) consider Alex as the baby of the " family , " this is because Alex , being the youngest of the group , when her walls are down , can behave childlike and callow .
CHARACTER ARC
BACKGROUND Section::::Character arc .
Section::::Background .
Alex is the daughter of the late Russian oligarch Nikolai Udinov and his wife who were murdered by Division , on orders of Sergei Semak , when Alex was a child .
Udinov owned the billion - dollar company Zetrov , of which Alex was the sole heir .
Alex was to inherit the Zetrov company , which flashbacks show her as never really wanting in the first place .
She was saved by Nikita , after Nikita killed her father , as she watched the rest of her family perish in a fire .
Nikita was powerless to save Alex from anything else as she had to return to Division , and she gave Alex to one of Udinov 's associates for safe - keeping .
Instead , Alex was sold into sex slavery by her father 's associate since he needed money and thought no one would recognize her if he did .
To keep her from fighting against them , the slavers kept Alex high and eventually forced her to become a drug addict .
She escaped the slavers by herself , though she remained a user and was shown in flashbacks to be living as a junkie , living from hit to hit .
Alex brings this part of her past up to Amanda , saying that the slavers " had the decency to keep [ her ] high " as they held her captive , comparing this to Division .
After Nikita escapes Division , she finds Alex again and rescues her before she is about to get raped and forces her to get clean , much to Alex 's irritation .
It is revealed in a flashback that it was Alex 's idea to infiltrate Division , and that if Alex had n't tried to kill herself in front of Nikita , Nikita would never have told Alex the truth about Division .
After Nikita succeeds in helping Alex past the worst part of her withdrawal , she starts to train her both mentally and physically to stay one step ahead of Division once she is inserted there .
Nikita makes it clear to Alex that once she gets in , she will be on her own and Nikita wo n't be able to be there if something goes wrong .
Alex also suffers panic attacks when certain things trigger somewhat suppressed memories of her past , such as being under a car ( reminds her of being under a bed as she watched her family die ) .
Alex was shown to also have nightmares about her deceased family , often speaking Russian and screaming for her father .
Amanda and Nikita also do n't allow Alex to drink alcohol , because if she were she would go back to doing drugs .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
At the beginning of season one , Alex was arrested while robbing a drug store with her abusive boyfriend Ronnie ; Ronnie shoots the store owner and runs away as the police arrive , leaving Alex , covered in blood , with the stolen drugs .
Alex was blamed for the murder and sent to prison – soon after ; Alex wakes up in Division , officially having committed suicide in prison , and meets with Michael , who brings her into Division as a new recruit .
This was revealed as a ploy set by Nikita who was actually portraying Ronnie in the robbery , so Alex could get into Division as a mole .
Amanda originally thinks that Alex is Ukrainian , yet Alex is originally from Russia .
As the season went on , more was revealed of Alex and her relationship with Nikita .
Saving Alex was the first time Nikita defied her orders from Division , which were to kill her entire family .
As a result , Nikita and Alex share a very close bond that is always being tested .
Amanda and Percy both think Alex reminds them of Nikita .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
Alex was working with Division to gather the intel and resources she needed to reclaim her birthright .
She claimed that she was merely using Division ( although Amanda would argue otherwise ) , she had gone on a number of missions for them , although only if they provided vital information on Semak .
Percy only agreed to feed information to Amanda if Alex was the one sent to talk to him .
In the first half of season two , Amanda and Alex 's relationship took an interesting turn .
Although they agreed to be " business partners " , it ran a lot deeper than that .
Since Alex was away from Nikita , given that she was in Division and Nikita was n't , Alex turned to Amanda for council .
Alex disobeyed Amanda by assassinating Anton Kochenko , they tried to make Alex abort the mission after Nikita messed up their plans .
Alex said , " So , Nikita wins again , " and then fired her sniper rifle , killing Kochenko .
When Alex returned , Amanda was disappointed and angry that Alex disobeyed a direct order .
However , unlike any other recruit who would have been punished severely , she went unpunished .
Alex , through a series of events , was also being manipulated by Percy .
At one point , through blackmail , Percy seemed to have his claws around Alex .
Where Alex was once a mole for Nikita , she appeared to be becoming one for Percy instead , though unknowingly .
Eventually she managed to reconcile with Nikita and was able to betray Amanda and Ari .
She inevitably retook her father 's empire and rescued her mother .
For the rest of season two she worked with Nikita in bringing down Division .
She later assisted Nikita in her raid on Division , which ended successfully with the deaths of Percy and Roan , and with Ryan Fletcher placed by the US government to be Division 's Director .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Alex reprises her alter ego , the spoiled Russian princess Alexandra Udinov , in a unique way for a couple episodes this season .
Liza 's abduction brings up painful old memories for Alex , who tries to get closer from Liza 's mother .
Nikita , Michael and Sean attempt to stop a terrorist attack but are one man down after Alex is shot .
She saves Nikita by taking a bullet to the shoulder , Nikita goes to kill Mia for revenge .
In season 3 episode 4 , Alex starts to unravel .
It appears Alex is starting to relapse into drugs ; however , it is just taking pain pills .
She takes them after a heated argument with Sean in the medical facility , and because her bullet wound was causing her so much pain , she gave in and took one pill .
After Alex gets sick of waiting at Division and hurt after her and Sean 's conversation , she tells Nikita she 's going on the mission to Amanda 's house with her .
Nikita allows her reluctantly , which results in Alex taking a heavy beating from a man twice her size and leaving her in immense pain .
When she gets back to Division she secretly takes more pills , and it appears she is slowly starting to get addicted to them .
However , her apparent addiction was not full blown , she would only take them when her arm was in pain .
Michael eventually confronted her in season 3 episode 7 , and she told Nikita the truth .
Nikita was disappointed and mad at Alex , however , later she told Alex that they would handle her addiction together .
When Alex was addicted to drugs , Amanda told her that she becomes anger , and tells her she can use it to her advantage ( Alex usually vents by boxing a punching bag very intensely ) .
In episode 10 , Ryan allows Alex to go back out into the field .
Sean becomes jealous of Alex 's relationship with Owen .
She tells things about her past to Owen that she ca n't tell to Sean because Sean grew up in a regular American family , and she is afraid of him judging her or not understanding her .
Amanda holds Alex hostage and tells Nikita she will release Alex in exchange for Ari .
Amanda " brainwashes " Alex with " the chair " by forming bridges where they are n't supposed to .
Such as Alex 's sex slave past is linked with Division and their current predicament , Alex is still Alex and has good intentions , but she is irrational and mentally unstable .
However , as far as Alex knows she is still herself and everything she is doing is because she wants to .
Alex recruits Birkoff to dig up secrets on Danforth to use as leverage in case things get messy with the government .
They are shocked when they find out the president has made a kill house and was ready to wipe out all of Division with the marines that were trained .
Alex and Sean are tasked with investigating who , inside Division , is behind a mutiny that ends in bloodshed .
It is revealed Alex is , but only the mutineers and Ryan knows .
Ryan is in a coma because Alex shot him , not with evil intentions though .
Alex confesses her desire to leave Division to Birkhoff and almost gets him aboard until Sean interrupts them .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
Alex is known for her complex personality , she is a very debatable and complicated character , she is neither black or white , nor good or bad ; she is a gray character .
She has many sides to her that some do n't see .
On the outside , she can appear tough and snarky , but on the inside she is a damaged girl .
She is known to have a dangerous streak about her .
She is very unpredictable and has a sneaky attitude with a strong determination that constantly gets her into trouble .
Alex is known to have many walls that protect herself from being caught emotionally off guard .
Amanda even has trouble getting through to the real Alex .
Amanda claims that " ... the girl 's like one of those Russian dolls , you open one version of her , only to find there 's another hidden inside her . "
Birkhoff also claims Alex is a bunch of small " why " dolls stacked inside bigger
" why " dolls
She does not talk about herself or her past much .
When she does , she talks to Nikita and Amanda , or it is shown through flashbacks .
Despite Alex and Nikita 's closeness , she sometimes lies to Nikita to hide what she 's really feeling , sometimes it may be because she is afraid that Nikita may become disappointed or overprotective .
Alex also has a hard time conveying her emotions , she is also sometimes oblivious if a guy is hitting on her .
She is emotionally close to a few people , her distinctively tragic past has caused her to close off herself from many people .
Sean once jokingly said " Wow , those walls you got there are tough . "
" What do you Russians build with anyway ?
Field stone ... petrified potatoes ? "
He claims that sometimes , when he 's with her , he can see a crack in her wall , and he can see a look she gives him that shows him she does treasure her relationship with him .
Many people remark how much Alex reminds them of Nikita , which is both true and not .
Alex has a mature and condescending exterior .
Sometimes when she opens herself up , she appears to still be an immature kid that never had the chance to be a child .
She also thinks that she can take care of herself and does n't always need Nikita to help her .
However , she is fiercely loyal to Nikita , and she is Alex 's only meaningful family .
Alex on many occasions proves how much she loves Nikita , however , their relationship is very complex .
Alex does n't build many emotionally charged bonds with men .
Michael , Sean , and Birkoff are some of the few closest male relationships she has .
Alex leans towards the mother figures , like Amanda and Nikita , to give her comfort and support .
Despite that Amanda and Nikita are enemies , Amanda shows her way of affection to Alex .
Although Alex can for the most part control herself from taking drugs or alcohol , she is n't allowed to take any type of drugs , such as pain pills , due to the fact that she might relapse .
Therefore , if Alex gets shot , breaks an arm , or is seriously injured , she is n't allowed to take morphine that will help her with her pain .
After Alex takes a bullet to the arm for Nikita , she is n't allowed to go on missions because she is still healing .
Since Alex no longer has a reason to do something , it forces her to remain still and recollect her thoughts .
However , Alex is not the type of person to throw down a towel and bathe in the sun .
Division is her life , and it 's all she knows and what she considers home .
Her dark past is something she rarely talks about , and some repressed memories are starting to come back to her as she has time to think about it .
Alex mostly plays the physical and emotional punching bag of others .
She can be cool headed in one moment , then fierce and passionate in the next .
She is playful and snippy with many people such as Amanda and Owen .
But then she can be gravely serious and no nonsense if it is a topic that affects her emotionally .
Birkhoff makes a note that Alex is so fired up and ready to put her life on the line , that she would do drugs just to get back out into the field .
This greatly conflicts him , Alex , and Nikita ; Nikita told Alex , in order for her to get clean , she must find the reason why she feels the need to put her life is to confront her suppressed past .
Alex 's traumatic past has made her a survivor .
She does n't understand why she is always the one to live ; such as when her family was murdered , when she escaped her sex slavers , and when she was a junkie .
TATTOOS Section::::Tattoos .
Alex has a butterfly tattoo on her back , it has been shown and brought into the storyline from season one to season three .
In season one , when Alex first arrives at Division , Amanda asks Alex in Russian what her butterfly tattoo means when in transformation .
Alex did n't answer her , but it was brought up many more times throughout the seasons .
Such connections have been made with the fact that when Alex was a little girl , her mother and father would take her to their cabin out in the woods and they would catch butterflies every time they were there .
While speaking to a sex worker she met while attempting to enter Russia , Alex told her " Butterflies are God 's proof we can have a second chance at life . "
In season 3 episode 11 , Sean persists in Alex telling him the story behind her tattoo .
Alex was reluctant and asked if they were just gon na tell each other their stories now that they are together .
It finally comes to a head in season 3 episode 12 , Sean kept pestering Alex about why she got her tattoo .
Owen catches wind of their conversation while making his way over to Alex .
Owen told Sean that it was private and that he should stop bothering Alex about what it meant , Owen also has a butterfly tattoo , as well as many other tattoos .
He told Sean that when Alex was ready she would tell him , but since she obviously is n't he should lay off .
While Alex and Owen are partnered with each other , Owen brings up a past conversation he had with Alex towards the beginning of the episode .
It leads him to talking about how he got his tattoo ; Emily always used to say how you can have a second chance at life .
Alex then brings up that she knew someone who used to say that all the time .
She reveals that she knew a girl , when she first came to America who worked in the same brothel Alex did .
Alex said she shared a room with the girl and she told Alex that she would dream about escaping from the roof and flying off the roof on butterfly wings , and one day she got high and decided to " try and fly .
"
Alex claims she was just like the people in the elevator , innocent .
RELATIONSHIPS NIKITA AND ALEX Section::::Relationships .
Section::::Nikita and Alex .
During Nikita 's time in division , she was once on an operation were they raided the Udinov .
Knowing that one of the targets was a child , Nikita could n't bring herself to kill a child .
So , during the raid Nikita rushed to Alex 's room , but killed the father on self - defense , saving Alex at the cost of her father 's life .
Forced to return to division , she left Alex under the care of one of her father 's associate .
However , he sold her to sex traffickers .
Eventually Alex escaped her captors but remained addicted to the drugs they had given to her to keep her high .
After fleeing division , Nikita kept searching for Alex for two years , until she found Alex , who was trying to buy " Smack " from a local crackhouse for a fifty .
However , her dealers tried to rape her , saying " you make us feel good , we make you feel good " .
Nikita saved her , and took Alex .
In her lair , she put Alex in a portable Sauna until she was unaddicted , a process she had experienced first - hand .
Afterwards , she took care of Alex .
One day , Nikita found Alex unconscious on the floor after shopping for clothes .
Seeing the pill bottle nearby and realizing Alex had a weak pulse , Nikita put two and two together and saved her by inducing vomiting .
However , Alex was ungrateful and told Nikita " I have nothing to live for .
All the people I love are dead .
" At that point , Nikita revealed o
Alex she had been looking for her for 2 years and that she knew who killed her parents , assuring her she had something to live for .
Nikita explained to Alex about Division and Alex joined Nikita in her crusade to take down division .
Nikita trained Alex , teaching her everything to prepare her for her infiltration of Division .
Alex is fiercely loyal to her and willing to do anything for her more than just taking a bullet .
Nikita has even accused herself of being Alex 's " Fairy God Mother " .
The two shared the same ideals to bring down Division from the inside until the episode " Betrayals " .
Nikita is a former recruit and the only one ( at the start of the first season ) to have escaped .
Nikita attempted to rescue Alex after Nikita killed Alex 's father .
Nikita rescued Alex from being raped , after she escaped the human traffickers , and helps her become clean , despite Alex 's protests .
Alex tried to kill herself in front of Nikita , Nikita revived her and told Alex she had a reason to live .
She told Alex of her plans to defeat Division and pledged to help avenge her family 's murderers .
During season one , it is brought to light that Alex and Nikita are lying to each other .
Alex lies about what 's happening in Division emotionally to her , and Nikita , on the outside , is lying about situations that happened and keeping secrets from Alex .
At the end Season One , Alex refuses to run off with Nikita and Michael , due to Nikita lying about murdering her father , instead she takes Amanda 's advice and tries to forge her own path .
When Alex is revealed to be the mole , Alex shoots Nikita for the Division cameras , but it is revealed that she has shot her with a drug that stops vital signs , but does not kill .
Nikita quickly awoke when Roan was about to " clean " her body and escaped .
Alex goes back to Nikita 's safe house to grab some things , and she happened upon Nikita .
They startle each other and point their guns at each other , Alex says she does n't want any trouble .
Nikita says she should have thought of that before Alex shot her .
Alex claims it was to save her life
, Nikita says she 's not gon na hurt Alex .
Alex tells her to put her gun down , but Nikita says to put her gun down .
Alex keeps her gun raised and Nikita says they should talk about her father 's murder .
They do and Alex wonders why Nikita did n't just tell her the truth , Nikita says it was never the right time .
But Alex says it was because Nikita did n't trust her enough to handle it , and now Alex ca n't trust her .
Alex says she 's going to get her own revenge , she tries to leave , but Nikita grabs her and tells her she will end up somewhere
she does n't want to be .
Alex says it is her decision and tries to rip away from Nikita .
Division attacks them , and while Nikita escapes , Alex finds a different way off the roof , not following Nikita .
In season 2 , Alex is not completely hostile towards Nikita , yet does not want to have anything to do with her since Alex no longer trusts her .
In season 2 episode 1 , they get into a fight where they are expressing their anger without having to kill each other .
Nikita breaks Alex 's arm and shoots her in her leg , leaving her injured , wearing casts , and going through therapy for many episodes .
She tells Alex she did it because she cares , and tells her to get out of Division before it 's too late .
While they no longer have a close relationship , they are not enemies .
They run into each other a bit and have short awkward conversations , but they help each other out a bit , slowly mending their relationship .
As of " Sanctuary , " Alex and Nikita live together at Birkoff 's house , after Alex needs a place to stay after attempting to reveal more about her own past .
Nikita comforts Alex
when she has a hard time dealing that her mother is alive , had an affair with Semak , and all of her childhood memories of her home are n't what they seemed .
Alex and Nikita became friends again , she had the chance to settle down in Greece with her mother and live in peace , however , she said it 's not who she wants to be and wanted to help Nikita since it is her fight too .
They continued to provide support and information to each other throughout the rest of season 2 .
Eventually defeating Percy and Division , though while Alex was in a medical facility for another broken arm , inflicted by Roan , Nikita tells Alex " Here we go again , " ( Nikita said " here we go " before Alex infiltrated Division ) .
As of the start of season 3 , Alex and Nikita are in a good place .
They seemed to have matured increasingly since the last season .
Alex saved Nikita 's life by taking a bullet to the arm , in an attempt to push her out of the way .
After Nikita returns to Division with a disoriented Alex , anxious Division members awaited to see what their fate would be , her personality changes noticeably .
Without getting mad at the recruits , everyone seemed anxious around her , Ryan , Birkoff , and Michael even seemed concerned .
Before , Nikita was going to bring in the rogue agent with no force .
However , her mission shifted after she shot Alex .
Ryan asks Nikita,"Why do you think she turn ? "
Nikita says , " She shot Alex , I do n't care . "
She then coldly leaves the room to go kill the rogue agent .
Nikita is always concerned for Alex 's welfare , when she heard Alex scream at a Division member , suspected of being a mole , Nikita heard her and quickly went into panic mode trying to find her ( season 3 episode 5 ) .
When she learns of Alex taking pills , she is heartbroken and disappointed that Alex did n't come to her ; however , she eventually tells Alex that they will work through her addiction together .
In one of the episode in season 3 Alex had said then Nikita is the most important person in her life .
AMANDA AND ALEX Section::::Amanda and Alex .
Amanda has a complicated relationship with Alex .
Amanda 's relationship with Alex largely echoes that of Nikita 's , most notably without Amanda being completely heartbroken , for what Nikita did to her .
Mostly because Alex was mentored by Nikita , and much of Alex resembles Nikita .
Amanda found it hard to uncover Alex 's motives and claims that " ... the girl 's like one of those Russian dolls , you open one version of her , only to find there 's another hidden inside her .
"
Amanda finds it particularly hard to get into Alex 's head , mostly from her training with Nikita
and some of it from her traumatic childhood that built up walls .
Amanda finds Alex sometimes unpredictable and she is , at the beginning of the series , mystified about Alex 's past .
She spends most of her time in season one trying to figure out what Alex is hiding from her .
Not the fact that she was Nikita 's mole , but her past that she rarely ever talks about .
Although Amanda recommended that Percy cancel Alex in the beginning of the first season , Amanda was not necessarily out to get Alex .
She saw brilliance in Alex , but at the same time , if there was any weakness or doing something she should n't be doing , Amanda would take the chance to tell her to stay inline .
However , Alex 's relationship is more rare with Amanda compared to the other recruits .
They share a deep connection that does n't appear on the surface .
But Alex often tries to exert her power over Amanda in front of the recruits , something they would n't dare to do .
Also , Alex often back talks to Amanda , which Amanda usually blows down with ease .
When Alex sneers or banters to Amanda , she seems to be amused with Alex , and her thoughts , and she calmly retorts back .
Even though Alex did n't like Amanda nor wanted to like her , they are connected and show their unique version of empathy with each other .
In the beginning of season one , Alex does not like Amanda nor want to like her , yet Amanda and Alex seem to have a unique understanding of each other .
When Amanda first met Alex , she instantly was reminded of Nikita and wanted her cancelled in fear of another " Nikita " situation happening again .
It was later revealed that it was n't because Amanda was afraid there would be another rogue on the loose , but the fact that she could n't stand to lose another " Nikita " that she spent so long perfecting and transforming .
When Amanda was trying to figure out Alex 's past , she did n't find what she was looking for .
Therefore , was stumpped , which Percy note rarely happens .
In the season one finale , when Amanda kills Alex with her kill chip , after 25 seconds of Alex being dead , Amanda uses adrenaline to bring her back to life .
She states that Alex does n't need Nikita , nor should she go back to Nikita , and tells Alex that she wo n't hang on to her like she did to Nikita , and lets Alex go free .
In season two , Amanda 's relationship with Alex changed drastically .
Although Alex claimed they were just " business partners " , Amanda comforted Alex on many occasions when Alex needed guidance for her past and future .
Amanda found it harder to control Alex because she was getting impatient with Amanda , who prefers to move at a slow pace ( in contrast to Alex , who at this time was impulsive and passionate about her revenge ) .
Amanda would n't allow Alex to leave Division without an armed escort to protect her from Gogol .
Amanda keeps it in her best interest to keep Alex under her control and convince her she needs Division , while giving Alex intelligence to kill Semak , the person who ordered her father 's murder .
Alex and Amanda would often take the roles of teenage rebellious daughter and mother .
Alex would often back talk to Amanda , something the recruits in Division would never dare to do .
Alex once uses it as a remark when Sean steps up to Amanda , Alex snarkly says , "
Ca n't remember the last time someone spoke to Amanda like that ,
oh well , yes I can
, that was me " ( " Looking Glass " ) .
Amanda sometimes finds Alex rather amusing and challenging .
Whenever Alex sneers or banters to Amanda , she seems to enjoy the intellectual challenge and she calmly retorts back .
In season 2 episode 1 , Percy asks why Alex is always looking for mother figures and names Amanda as one of them .
Amanda , throughout the season , acts as a mother figure and business partner , as it appears Amanda deeply cares for what happens to Alex .
Ari said the only way he and her could be together , with some money , would be a way that she would n't approve of .
He tries to persuade Amanda that the only way for Amanda to get what she wants , is if she kills Alex and blames her death on Semak .
Amanda was distraught with this decision and said that Alex has worked so hard and does n't deserve such a fate .
Though they never went through with the plan , as Alex said she was taking over Zetrov , Amanda was happy that she was going back to her original plan .
After Alex finds her mother , Amanda wants to make a deal .
Alex can have her mother , as well as a big sum of money from Zetrov , if Alex hands over everything in the name of it .
Alex was thinking of handing it over to Amanda , until she says it is n't fair to Nikita if she just gives Amanda Zetrov .
Amanda complained that Alex should think for herself and not Nikita .
Alex says Amanda does n't deserve to win , Amanda says if Alex leaves the building ( the place her mother was staying at ) that Amanda will hunt Alex down .
Alex tells Amanda not to worry , she will come to her .
Amanda is now on the run and hunted by Division , Alex and Nikita had done this to both Ari and Amanda .
The plan would have not gone through if it were n't for Alex pulling through for Nikita .
Amanda showed Alex empathy and her version of kindness , and Amanda feels utterly betrayed by Alex .
In season three , Alex went on the mission to get Amanda , however , their cover is quickly blown thanks to Alex 's altercation with Amanda 's henchman that was twice her size , and the raid became a free - for - all .
Alex reinjured her arm , but she and Michael recover the key .
They have had no interaction so far in season three , however , Amanda knows the way to hurt Nikita is to go after Alex .
On " Black Badge , " Alex and Amanda had their first interaction since they last met .
Amanda calls the phone she left behind for Nikita .
Alex asks what lesson Amanda is trying to teach them now .
Amanda responds by say , "
Alex ?
So nice to hear your voice .
" Before the conversation is over on the phone Amanda mentions that Alex was right , the lesson is that every operative is expendable .
In 3x13 , Nikita and Amanda talk about Alex at length .
Amanda compares Alex , herself , and Nikita .
She claims she made Nikita , like Nikita made Alex ; and that in the end , Alex will betray Nikita ( like Nikita betrayed Amanda ) .
This may be what Amanda intends to do to Alex , turn her against Nikita .
At the end of the episode , Nikita goes to retrieve Alex ( who had surrendered to the police to by time for Stefan and Krieg to escape ) before the police can process Alex .
Another police car approaches and sirens Alex 's police driver to pull over , Alex smiles at the notion thinking Nikita has come to get her .
The officer leaves the car to talk to the other officer .
Alex hears a shot from the police car and it is shown the officer has shot Alex 's police driver .
Alex is in shock as the person appears to get closer to her car , after shooting the police officer again .
Amanda appears behind the glass in a police officers uniform , Alex then trembles to get out of the car .
But it is no use , as it is a police car .
Amanda gets in the car as Alex trembles in shock , Amanda then smirks at Alex and says , " Looks like I wo n't be leaving Geneva empty handed after all . "
She then proceeds to say , " Let 's see how well she taught you , " and speeds off with Alex in the back ( effectively capturing her ) .
SEAN AND ALEX Section::::Sean and Alex .
Alex 's past love interest .
Though they had a very rough start from the beginning they eventually started to soften towards each other .
Sean has a hard time getting Alex to bring down her walls .
Alex herself tries not to get emotional and Sean sometimes gets Alex to recognize that he likes her .
Despite Sean giving many signs of attraction to Alex , she either ignored them or she was oblivious to them since she was emotionally not ready to commit to a relationship with all the things happening in her life .
He and Alex share a first kiss in a car with Birkoff driving and Ryan in the passenger seat .
In the second - season finale , he tries to ask her out on a date four times , but Alex never lets him finish due to being in action , criticizing that he said that she was a goal , Alex passing out due to a broken arm and being electrocuted , and
Nikita interrupting Sean right before he was going to ask Alex while she was in a Division medical facility .
At the start of season 3 , it appears Alex and Sean are in a relationship .
However , by episode 3 it is revealed that Sean is only at Division for Alex , because he loved her .
But Alex is at Division because it is the only place she knows as home , where she can be herself , and where her " family " ( Nikita ) is .
After a toxin is released in the lab , Sean returns to ask Alex why she 's not returning his calls , and asks her again why she 's still there .
" I ca n't tell you what to do , Alex , but I 'm not going to stand by and watch this place destroy another person that I love , " he says before he kisses her .
" I love you , but if that 's not enough of a reason for you to leave , I 've got no reason to stay . "
After he leaves , she pops a pill and heads for the operations floor , insisting that she ought to be included in the hunt for Amanda .
They eventually make up after an emotional scene in a medical room , they then entered a storage closet and make love , for the first time .
In " Black Badge " , Amanda framed Sean for the death of the head of the CIA .
As a result , they faked his death and Sean was officially welcomed into Division by Alex .
Sean died in season 3 episode 18 , as a result of a bullet nicking his artery .
They shared their last moments together in where they met , operations .
When Nikita enters OPS , she finds Birkoff near Sean and Alex gone .
She presumably went to get revenge for the current events .
Sean later died in Alex 's arms towards the end of season 3 .
OWEN AND ALEX Section::::Owen and Alex .
Once Owen is brought to Division , Ryan wants him interrogated in order to find out where he 's been and assigns Alex to do the job , since he has n't met Alex before .
When Alex introduces herself Owen puts the pieces together that she is the Alex that Nikita would talk to him about .
They exchanged witty banter and Alex asks him questions about what he has been doing .
Owen tells Alex about Anne breaking him out of the Russian prison .
When they first meet , they do n't initially click under the circumstances .
However , in episode 5 they partner up to find the mole after he figures out Ryan tasked her with this objective .
They connect on a partnership level and at the end of the episode they joke about how sexy his scars are and Alex asks him about his butterfly tattoo .
He says he likes to keep some of his memories to himself , she says she has to go and tells him to stay out of trouble .
As she leaves , he notices she has a butterfly tattoo , on her back , too and smiles .
Sean is jealous of the relationship Alex shares with Owen , Alex can share her past easier with Owen than she can with Sean , who was raised in a regular American family .
Alex and Owen bond over their rough childhood and conflicted thoughts about Amanda and Division .
SEYMOUR AND ALEX Section::::Seymour and Alex .
In the first season , while Alex was still in Division as a recruit , Birkhoff would often yell at her and make her stay after class to get the computer sets right .
Though she was faking to make it appear like it was new to her .
In the second season , Alex and Birkhoff have a cute brother - sister relationship , as they both like to crack a couple of jokes at each other .
Birkhoff and Alex often get snippy with each other when they are on a mission , Alex complains that Birkhoff takes too long to do his nerdy stuff and Birkhoff complains Alex takes too long to set things up for him to do his nerdy stuff .
Small things like this happen in about every mission they do together , sometimes it ends up in Nikita having to get them back on track .
Though Alex does trust Birkhoff and has shown to care for him and Birkhoff shows he cares for Alex .
An example would be when Alex first stayed with Nikita , Birkhoff noticed Alex stole some of his pills for his pain , as he believed that she was going back to drugs after a shaky encounter with her mother .
He told Nikita and Nikita confronted Alex about her emotional state .
Alex also saved Birkhoff 's life many times , even while she was working with Division in season 2 .
When Alex took a bullet for Nikita , Birkoff and Sonya missed the guard where the rogue agent got a gun from .
Birkoff was initially scared that Alex would believe it was all his fault because of what Sonya would have told her .
However , Alex says she was shot and sweetly whispers what ever problems he and Sonya have , he has to fix it .
They are almost always on good terms , despite their witty banter and outward appearance of annoyance with each other at times .
MICHAEL AND ALEX Section::::Michael and Alex .
Alex 's relationship with Michael largely echoes that of Nikita 's when she first met him , although rather noticeably with the romantic element .
It was heavily implied before Echoes that Michael has figured out that Alex is Nikita 's mole , and even does not say so when Thom is killed and blamed for this .
Alex was highly suspicious of his and Nikita 's relationship , and was not surprised when she imagined them kissing in Echoes .
Michael has always protected Alex and she even accused him of being her guardian angel .
He found out she was using pain pills and confronted her before she became fully addicted to them .
NATHAN AND ALEX Section::::Nathan and Alex .
Alex 's neighbor and love interest in the second half of the first season .
Alex fell in love with Nathan because he was normal , and that was what she wanted , an escape from Division .
After he killed Jaden , while protecting Alex , he scattered to the wind after Alex told him to .
He has n't been seen since .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Lyndsy Fonseca has received generally positive reviews for her portrayal of Alex .
Jonah Krakow of IGN called Alex " a beautiful young woman " and said that " Alex 's story was my favorite part of the show " .
Episodes such as " 2.0 " and " Alexandra " were praised by critics for the look into Alex 's past and background .
Gabrielle Compolongo of TV Fanatic said that " Alex plays the clueless trainee perfectly " and she does " every intelligent thing " not to be caught .
Luke Holland of Den of Geek also praised Alex 's abilities , saying that Fonseca showed " breadth in her abilities " .
REFERENCES