DAYS OF OUR LIVES Days of Our Lives ( also stylized as Days of our Lives ; often abbreviated to DOOL or Days ) is an American daytime soap opera broadcast on the NBC television network .
It is one of the longest - running scripted television programs in the world , airing nearly every weekday since November 8 , 1965 .
It has since been syndicated to many countries around the world .
Until the network 's closure in 2013 , Soapnet rebroadcast episodes of Days on a same - day basis each weeknight at 8:00 and 10:00
( Eastern and Pacific Time ) .
The series was created by husband - and - wife team Ted Corday and Betty Corday .
Irna Phillips was a story editor for Days of Our Lives and many of the show 's earliest storylines were written by William J. Bell .
Due to the series ' success , it was expanded from 30 minutes to 60 minutes on April 21 , 1975 .
The series focuses on its core families , the Hortons and the Bradys .
Several other families have been added to the cast , and many of them still appear on the show .
Frances Reid , the matriarch of the series ' Horton family remained with the show from its inception to her death on February 3 , 2010 .
Suzanne Rogers celebrated 40 years on Days of Our Lives in 2013 , appearing on the show more or less since her first appearance in 1973 .
Susan Seaforth Hayes is the only cast member to appear on Days of Our Lives in all six decades it has been on air .
Days of Our Lives aired its 10,000th episode on February 21 , 2005 , and its 12,000th episode aired on January 11 , 2013 .
The soap was given the title of most daring drama in the seventies due to covering topics other soaps would not dare to do .
The show 's executive producer is Ken Corday , and co - executive producers are Greg Meng and Albert Alarr .
In 2018 , NBC renewed the serial through fall 2019 .
Days of Our Lives is the most widely distributed soap opera in the United States .
The show has been parodied by SCTV ( as " The Days of the Week " ) and the television sitcom Friends , with some cast members making crossover appearances on the show , including Kristian Alfonso , Roark Critchlow , Matthew Ashford , Kyle Lowder , and Alison Sweeney .
The show has had high - profile fans such as actress Julia Roberts and Supreme Court justice Thurgood Marshall .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Cordays and Bell combined the " hospital soap " idea with the tradition of centering a series on a family , by making the show about a family of doctors , including one who worked in a mental hospital .
Storylines in the show follow the lives of middle- and upper - class professionals in Salem , a middle - America town , with the usual threads of love , marriage , divorce , and family life , plus the medical story lines and character studies of individuals with psychological problems .
Former executive producer Al Rabin took pride in the characters ' passion , saying that the characters were not shy about " sharing what 's in their gut . "
Critics originally praised the show for its non - reliance on nostalgia ( in contrast to shows such as As the World Turns ) and its portrayal of " real American contemporary families .
" By the 1970s , critics deemed Days of Our Lives to be the most daring daytime drama , leading the way in using themes other shows of the period would not dare touch , such as artificial insemination and interracial romance .
The January 12 , 1976 cover of Time magazine featured Days of Our Lives Bill Hayes and Susan Seaforth Hayes , the only daytime actors ever to appear on its cover .
The Hayeses themselves were a couple whose on - screen and real - life romance ( they met on the series in 1970 and married in 1974 ) was widely covered by both the soap opera magazines and the mainstream press .
In the 1990s , the show branched out into supernatural story lines , which critics immediately panned , as it was seen as a departure from more realistic storylines for which the show had originally become known .
However , these storylines did have the desired effect , making Days of Our Lives the most - watched daytime soap among young and middle - aged women , also becoming one of NBC 's five most profitable shows in any time slot .
In 2006 , when asked about his character , Jack Deveraux , " coming back from the dead"—for the third time — actor Matthew Ashford responded , " It is hard to play that because at a certain point it becomes too unreal ...
actors look at that and think , ' What is this — the Cartoon Network ' ? "
In addition to receiving critical acclaim in print journalism , the series has won a number of awards , including a Daytime Emmy for Best Drama in 1978 and 2013 and a Writers Guild of America , East Award for Best Drama in 2000 and 2013 .
Days of Our lives actors have also won awards :
Macdonald Carey ( Dr. Tom Horton ) won Best Actor in 1974 and 1975 .
Susan Flannery ( Laura Horton ) and Eileen Davidson ( Kristen DiMera ) won Best Actress in 1975 and 2014 , respectively .
Suzanne Rogers ( Maggie Horton ) , Leann Hunley ( Anna DiMera ) , and Tamara Braun ( Ava Vitali ) won Best Supporting Actress for , respectively , 1979 , 1986 , and 2009 and Billy Warlock ( Frankie Brady ) won Best Younger Actor for 1988 .
In 2009 , Darin Brooks ( Max Brady ) took home the Emmy for Best Younger Actor " , and Tamara Braun ( Ava Vitali ) won for Best Supporting Actress , the show 's first acting victories in over 21 and 23 years , respectively As with all other network programming , Days of Our Lives ratings have declined somewhat since the 1990s .
In January 2007 it was suggested by NBC that the show " is unlikely to continue [ on NBC ] past 2009 .
"
In November 2008 , in an eleventh - hour decision , it was announced the show had been renewed through September 2010 .
The 18-month renewal was down from its previous renewal , which was for five years .
The show made somewhat of a comeback in 2009 , with ratings increasing as the year progressed .
In March 2010 , the show was renewed once again through September 2011 ; then again on November 8 , 2010 , its 45th anniversary , the show was renewed for two more years through September 2013 , with an option for an additional year which would keep the soap on through 2014 , its 49th year on the air .
The series received a two - year renewal in January 2014 that is set to last until September 2016 .
Beginning on November 8 , 2010 , which marked Days of Our Lives ' 45th anniversary , the show began airing in high definition .
The show was officially " rebooted " on September 26 , 2011 , in an effort to gain back its lapsed audience , appeal to long - term loyal fans , begin new stories , and boost ratings .
Former fan favorite characters were reintroduced as part of the reboot .
These included Jack Deveraux ( Matthew Ashford ) , Carrie Brady ( Christie Clark ) , and Austin Reed ( Patrick Muldoon ) .
All three , including actress Sarah Brown , were fired from the show in an effort to lower production costs .
The reboot was met with mixed reviews from critics .
Head writers hired to handle the reboot , Marlene McPherson , and Darrell Ray Thomas Junior were subsequently fired due to declining ratings .
Chris Whitesell , and former Days executive producer Gary Tomlin were rehired after being fired as part of the show 's revamp .
Daytime Emmy award winner Lorraine Broderick was hired as a member of the breakdown writing team in April 2012 .
Days of Our Lives is noted as the fourth longest running soap opera in the United States .
On November 30 , 2014 , NBC launched a new logo for Days of Our Lives at the 2014 Hollywood Christmas Parade , in celebration of the series ' fiftieth anniversary On February 11 , 2016 , NBC renewed Days of Our Lives for one - year , with the option of an additional year .
In January 2017 , while discussion the potential of a renewal for the soap , NBC chairman Bob Greenblatt stated : " We do n't make a decision for another couple months .
[ ... ] But I do n't think it 's over yet . "
In February 2017 , NBC officially renewed Days of Our Lives for an additional year .
Jennifer Salke , President of NBC Entertainment , said in a statement : " We feel so privileged to be able to continue the remarkable legacy of Days of our Lives .
[ ... ] We thank [ exec producer ]
Ken Corday and his team for their incredible accomplishments and look forward to all the stories from Salem that will continue to unfold .
"
In March 2018 , NBC announced their decision to renew Days of Our Lives through fall 2019 .
STORYLINE Section::::Storyline .
When Days of Our Lives premiered in 1965 , the show revolved around the tragedies and triumphs of the suburban Horton family .
Over time , additional families were brought into the show to interact with the Hortons and serve as springboards for more dramatic storylines .
Originally led by patriarch Dr. Tom Horton and his wife , homemaker Alice , the Hortons remain a prominent fixture in current continuity .
One of the longest - running story lines involved the rape of Mickey Horton 's wife Laura by Mickey 's brother Bill .
Laura confides in her father - in - law
Dr. Tom , and the two agree that her husband Mickey should never know .
The secret , involving the true parentage of Michael Horton ( a product of the rape ) and Mickey 's subsequent health issues as a result of the revelation , spanned episodes from 1968 to 1975 .
This plotline was made even more complex with the presence of Linda Patterson ( originally Margaret Mason for many years , later Elaine Princi ) who claimed that her daughter Melissa had been fathered by Mickey .
When Mickey married the lovely Maggie Simmons ( Suzanne Rogers ) , Linda became even more involved in the story line as the show 's main villainess , marrying the wealthy Bob Anderson ( Mark Tapscott ) and taking over the running of Anderson Manufacturing when he became ill .
The story line involving Mickey , Laura and Bill was the first to bring the show to prominence , and put it near the top of the Nielsen daytime ratings .
Another love triangle , between lounge singer Doug Williams , Tom and Alice 's daughter Addie , and Addie 's own daughter , Julie , proved to be very popular around the same time .
The storyline culminated in the death of Addie in 1974 and the marriage of Doug and Julie in 1976 .
In the early 1980s , the Brady and DiMera families were introduced , and their rivalry quickly cemented their places as core families in Salem beside the Hortons .
Around the same time , with the help of head writers Sheri Anderson , Thom Racina , and Leah Laiman , action / adventure story lines and supercouples such as Bo and Hope , Shane and Kimberly , and Patch and Kayla reinvigorated the show , previously focused primarily on the domestic troubles of the Hortons .
Since the 1990s , with the introduction of writer James E. Reilly , Days of Our Lives has moved from traditional plots to some supernatural and science - fiction - themed stories , in conjunction with the rivalry of good vs. evil , in a Hatfield / McCoy feud style the Bradys versus the DiMeras .
Under the tenure of Reilly , ratings rose to number two , and stayed there until he left in 1999 to start his own creation of Passions .
Despite the introduction of new head writer Hogan Sheffer in 2006 , ratings failed to revive , which led the show 's producers to hire a few past fan favorites to stop the ratings hemorrhage .
BEST - REMEMBERED STORIES Section::::Best - remembered stories .
In addition to the love triangles of Bill / Laura / Mickey and Addie / Doug / Julie , other memorable storylines include the 1968 story of amnesiac Tom Horton , Jr. , who returns from Korea believing he is someone else and then proceeds to romance his younger sister Marie ; the 20-year tragic love triangle when John Black has an affair with Marlena Brady , who is married to Roman ; the 1982 " Salem Strangler " ( Jake Kositchek , who was nicknamed " Jake the Ripper " ) who stalks and murders women ; the 1984 Gone with the Wind story line in which Hope Williams Brady and Bo Brady hide out on a Southern plantation and dress up as Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler ( devised to keep viewers tuned in while rival network ABC 's soaps were preempted due to the 1984 Summer Olympics ) ; and " The Cruise of Deception " in 1990 , when madman Ernesto Toscano invites all his enemies aboard a ship , the S.S. Loretta , and holds them captive .
In 1992 , the show received a reboot with additions such as refurbished sets , the debut of the Brady Pub , the addition of new characters such as Vivian Alamain , Lisanne Gardner , Billie Reed , and Kate Roberts .
Later that same year , Days of Our Lives introduced its highly popular teen scene with new characters such as Carrie Brady , played by Tracy Middendorf , and then back to Christie Clark again ; a SORASed Sami Brady , played by Alison Sweeney ; Lucas Roberts played by Bryan Dattilo ; Austin Reed portrayed by Patrick Muldoon and later , Austin Peck ; Abe Carver 's younger brother Jonah Carver , played by Thyme Lewis ; Jamie Caldwell , played by Miriam Parish ; and Wendy Reardon played by Tammy Townsend .
These additions were to appeal to younger viewers .
By 1997 , the romantic dilemmas of Carrie , Austin , Mike , and Sami , and the Will Horton paternity issue and custody battle storylines had become a focal point of the series .
The shocking and ratings - grabbing 1993 plot when Vivian Alamain buried Dr. Carly Manning alive ( the first controversial storyline from head writer Reilly ) ; and the 1994–1995 story line in which the town 's Christmas tree burns down and Marlena becomes possessed in Exorcist fashion .
From 1993 to 1998 , actress Eileen Davidson portrayed several characters from the same family on the series .
Her main character , the villainous Kristen DiMera , suffers a miscarriage in secret , and in a panic to keep her love John Black away from Marlena , Kristen pretends to still be pregnant with John 's child .
Stefano hires a doppelganger , Susan Banks to conceive and bear a child for her ( which resulted in the birth of EJ DiMera ) .
Eileen Davidson portrayed the entire Banks family clan , four in total ( including one male ) , as well as her main character .
The year 2000 saw the departures of cast members , Louise Sorel as Vivian Alamain and Jensen Ackles as Eric Brady .
Ken Corday and NBC announced plans to re - introduced a SORAS Brady Black , immediately following the conclusion of Eric 's storyline .
That spring , Kyle Lowder was cast as the new Brady Black , who would now be aged to his early 20s , first appearing on August 21 , 2000 , a month following Eric 's exit .
Brady was romantically linked to the character of Chloe Lane .
The pair married and left town in 2005 , when Lowder 's contract was not renewed .
2003–2004 's " Melaswen " , saw several characters purportedly die at the hands of a masked psychopath ; they are later revealed to have been kidnapped to the secret island of Melaswen ( New Salem spelled backwards ) .
2007 's " Bradys and DiMeras : The Reveal " , told the story regarding how the Brady / DiMera feud started .
Past characters returned in June 2010 to honor the passing of matriarch Alice Horton , whose character died on June 23 , 2010 .
On June 23 , 2011 , Days of Our Lives introduced Sonny Kiriakis , the show 's first contract gay character onto the canvas to be featured in the show 's first gay story line .
Freddie Smith ( Sonny ) said in an interview , " He 's very confident and mature , he 's traveled the world and is very open - minded .
I 'm very excited to portray him . "
Subsequent to Sonny 's arrival , Will Horton investigates his own sexuality , and reveals himself to be gay .
He later starts a romantic relationship with Sonny .
They eventually marry .
On January 26 , 2012 , episode 11765 was a tribute to soldiers who have served in Afghanistan and previous wars with a PTSD therapy group for Jack Deveraux to talk over his time held captive there .
This was also when the inline Next On promos were discontinued in favor of an external weekly promo .
CAST Section::::Cast .
When Days of Our Lives debuted the cast consisted of seven main characters ( Tom Horton , Alice Horton , Mickey Horton , Marie Horton , Julie Olson , Tony Merritt , and Craig Merritt ) .
When the show expanded to one hour in April 1975 , the cast increased to 27 actors .
By the 25th anniversary in 1990 , 40 actors appeared on the show in contract or recurring roles , which is the approximate number of actors the show has used since then .
Original cast member Frances Reid , who played Alice Horton , remained on contract with Days of Our Lives until her death on February 3 , 2010 , though she last appeared on the show in December 2007 .
Original cast member John Clarke , who played Mickey Horton , left the series in 2004 .
Suzanne Rogers , who plays Maggie Horton has been on the show since 1973 , and Susan Seaforth Hayes has played Julie Olson Williams since 1968 with a few breaks in between , and also her husband Bill Hayes , who has played Doug Williams since 1970 , though neither Seaforth Hayes nor Hayes is employed with the serial on contract .
In recent years , Days of Our Lives has hired back many former cast members .
Twenty of the current contract cast members have been with the show , off - and - on , since at least 1999 .
Since 2005 , cast members from the 1980s and 1990s , such as Christie Clark ( Carrie Brady ) , Stephen Nichols ( Steve Johnson ) , Austin Peck ( Austin Reed ) , Mary Beth Evans ( Kayla Brady ) , Joseph Mascolo ( Stefano DiMera ) , and Thaao Penghlis ( Tony DiMera ) have been brought back to Days of Our Lives .
More additions to the show include the returns of Crystal Chappell ( Dr. Carly Manning ) , and Louise Sorel ( Vivian Alamain ) .
In June 2010 , characters such as Jennifer Horton , Bill Horton , Shane Donovan , and Kimberly Brady returned for a short time and were featured heavily in a tribute to Alice Horton .
Guest cast members have included Elizabeth Alley .
In late 2012 , the show reintroduced actress Eileen Davidson in the role of Kristen Blake DiMera after a fourteen - year absence .
In mid 2013 , the show debuted new characters such as JJ Deveraux and Theresa Donovan to appeal to younger viewers .
In celebration of the soap 's fiftieth anniversary in 2015 , several cast members returned to the soap , including Peter Reckell , Stephen Nichols and Penghlis .
EXECUTIVE PRODUCING AND HEAD WRITING TEAM
Section::::Executive producing and head writing team .
The co - creator and original executive producer , Ted Corday , was only at the helm for eight months before dying of cancer in 1966 .
His widow , Betty , was named executive producer upon his death .
She continued in that role , with the help of H. Wesley Kenney and Al Rabin as supervising producers , before she semi - retired in 1985 .
When Mrs. Corday semi - retired in 1985 , and later died in 1987 , her son , Ken , became executive producer and took over the full - time , day - to - day running of the show .
In 2018 , Ken Corday continues helming the show – with Greg Meng and Albert Alarr as co - executive producers .
The first long - term head writer , William J. Bell , started writing for Days of Our Lives in 1966 and continued until 1975 , a few years after he had created his own successful soap , The Young and the Restless .
He stayed with the show as a story line consultant until 1978 .
During the late 1970s and early 1980s , many writing changes occurred .
In the early 1980s , Margaret DePriest helped stabilize the show with her serial killer story line .
Later head writers , such as Sheri Anderson , Thom Racina , and Leah Laiman , built on that stability and crafted story lines of their own , temporarily bringing up ratings .
Many writing changes occurred after Laiman left the series in 1989 and would not become stable again until James E. Reilly started with the show in 1993 .
His tenure , which lasted for four - and - a - half years , was credited with bringing ratings up to the second place spot in the Nielsens .
Other writers who succeeded him , such as Sally Sussman Morina and Tom Langan , failed to keep the ratings success , and another writer turnover continued until Reilly returned to the series in 2003 .
Five - time Daytime Emmy winner Hogan Sheffer was named head writer with great fanfare in October 2006 , but lasted less than 16 months with the show , with his last episode airing in January 2008 .
Former head writer Dena Higley 's first episode aired on April 23 , 2008 .
Her co - head writer was Christopher Whitesell until February 2011 .
On May 18 , 2011 , Dena Higley was fired .
The new head writers were Marlene McPherson and Darrell Ray Thomas Jr.
In April 2012 , it was confirmed that McPherson and Thomas Jr. were fired from their positions as co - head writers .
Gary Tomlin and Christopher Whitesell were hired for the position .
It was later confirmed that former All My Children headwriter Lorraine Broderick would join Tomlin and Whitesell as a breakdown writer on the series .
In February 2015 , Soap Opera Digest confirmed that both Tomlin and Whitesell had been ousted in their roles as head - writers ; they further confirmed that former head writer Higley would return , alongside former The Young and the Restless head writer Josh Griffith .
The change took effect on February 16 , 2015 .
In August 2015 , reports stated that Higley would be taking a leave of absence from the show .
In her place , Sony would be sending a writer from The Young and the Restless to help Griffith with the transition .
The writer was later revealed to be former head writer Beth Milstein .
In February 2016 , several days after the show was renewed for another year , Soap Opera Digest exclusively reported that Griffith has departed the show as head writer with Higley remaining ; they further revealed that script writer Ryan Quan has been promoted to replace Griffith .
On January 23 , 2017 , Soap Opera Digest broke news that both Higley and Quan had been let go from their positions as co - head writers .
According to the report , Quan was given a new title of Creative Consultant , while Higley was let go all - together .
Former One Life to Live and
General Hospital head writer Ron Carlivati was named as Higley 's replacement , " effective immediately " .
In addition to Carlivati 's appointment , it was also announced that Anderson would return to the soap , sharing the role of Creative Consultant with Quan .
Carlivati will receive his first episodic credit as head writer on July 19 , 2017 .
Days of Our Lives won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Writing Team in June , 2012 and April , 2018 .
It also won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in June , 2013 and April , 2018 .
DOMESTIC BROADCAST Section::::Domestic broadcast .
According to Variety , Days of Our Lives is the most widely distributed soap opera in the United States , with episodes not just broadcast via NBC , but also via cable ( SOAPnet ) , and as of June 2007 , episodes are offered via iTunes .
For its first three years on the air , Days of Our Lives was near the bottom of the Nielsen ratings , and close to cancellation .
However , its ascent to the top was rapid ; as the 1969 TV season ended , it became an effective tool of NBC , which attempted to dethrone daytime leader CBS .
By 1973 the show , pitted against CBS ' popular Guiding Light and ABC 's The Newlywed Game at 2 p.m. ( ET)/1
p.m. ( CT ) , had matched the first - place ratings of As the World Turns and sister NBC soap Another World .
Due to the success of the program , it expanded from a half - hour to one hour on April 21 , 1975 .
This expansion had followed the lead of Another World , which became TV 's first - ever hour - long soap on January 6 , three and a half months earlier .
Further , Days of Our Lives ' new starting time of 1:30 p.m./12:30 finally solved a scheduling problem that began in 1968 when NBC lost the game
Let 's Make a Deal to ABC , and in its wake , eight different shows were placed into the slot ( Hidden Faces , You 're Putting Me On , Life with Linkletter , Words & Music , Memory Game , Three on a Match , Jeopardy ! , and How to Survive a Marriage ) .
However , this first golden period for NBC daytime proved to be short - lived , as Days of Our Lives ' ratings began to decline in 1977 .
Much of the decline was due to ABC 's expansion of its increasingly popular soap All My Children to a full hour , the last half of which overlapped with the first half of Days of Our Lives By January 1979 , the network , in a mode of desperation more than anything else , decided to jump headlong against AMC and moved the show ahead to the same 1:00 p.m./12 Noon time slot .
In exchange to its affiliates for taking away the old half - hour access slot at 1:00 / Noon , NBC gave them the 4 p.m./3 slot , which many ( if not most ) stations had been preempting for years anyway .
By 1986 , ABC and CBS followed suit , under the intense pressure of lucrative ( and cheap ) syndicated programming offered to affiliates .
By 1980 , Days of Our Lives had displaced Another World as NBC 's highest - rated soap .
However , the entire NBC soap lineup was in ratings trouble .
In fact , by 1982 , all of its shows were rated above only one ABC soap ( The Edge of Night ) and below all four CBS soaps .
The " supercouple " era of the 1980s , however , helped bring about a ratings revival , and the 1983–1984 season saw Days of Our Lives experience a surge in ratings .
It held onto its strong numbers for most of the 1980s , only to decline again by 1990 , eventually falling back into eighth place .
In the mid-1990s , however , the show experienced a resurgence in popularity and the show reached number two in the ratings , where it remained for several years before experiencing another ratings decline beginning in 1999 , the year that Days of Our Lives became NBC 's longest - running daytime program ( upon the cancellation of Another World ) .
Throughout the 2000s ( decade ) , Days of Our Lives and all the other remaining network daytime serials have witnessed a steady erosion of viewers , mainly due to vastly altered viewing habits induced by cable networks and alternative genres such as reality and talk shows on minor network affiliates .
On January 17 , 2007 , NBC Universal Television president Jeff Zucker remarked that Days of Our Lives would most likely not " continue past 2009 .
" This contributed to an immediate ratings decline for Days of Our Lives .
The show , which was averaging a 2.4 rating prior to the announcement , dropped to a 2.2 average household rating in the months after .
In an April 2007 interview with Soap Opera Digest , executive producer Ken Corday commented on the ratings decline of the previous months , " If I do n't pay attention to the ratings and what the viewers are saying , I 'm an ostrich .
I have not seen a decline in the ratings on the show this precipitous — ever .
I 've never seen this much of a percentage decline . "
Days of Our Lives had finished the 2008 - 2009 television season with a substantial increase in viewers ( 3.0 million vs. 2.8 million ) and had risen to the # 3 spot behind The Young and the Restless and The Bold and the Beautiful , respectively .
It was the # 2 daytime program behind The Young and the Restless in the much coveted 18 - 49 demographic .
During the first few months of the 2009 - 2010 season , Days of Our Lives increased its average household rating to 2.4 , and averaged consistently over 3,000,000 viewers .
It was only one point behind the # 2 daytime drama The Bold and the Beautiful , and has beat that soap on several days during the season .
In 2010 , Days of Our Lives continued to increase viewership , reaching as high as 3.6 million viewers on several days .
A substantial increase in viewership such as Days of Our Lives has had lately also bucks the viewership trend in daytime dramas , which had declined since the 1990s for all other daytime drama series .
Days of Our Lives was the only daytime drama series to increase in viewers between 2008 and 2010 and had reduced its operating budget , making it a profitable asset to NBC 's broadcast line - up .
However starting in 2011 , Days of Our Lives started to lose ground significantly to the point that it sometimes occupied the last position among all soaps for both total viewership and the 18 - 49 women demographic .
The cancellation of All My Children on ABC combined with the return of several cast members allowed a brief resurgence of Days of Our Lives in October 2011 , but ratings soon declined again .
In December 2011 before the cancellation of One Life to Live , Days of Our Lives recorded three consecutive weeks of new lows in the 18 - 49 women key demo category , and again another consecutive three weeks of low ratings in the same demographic during March – April 2012 .
As of 2012 , Days of Our Lives generally ranks # 3 among the four daytime soap operas on the air when it comes to the total number of viewers ( surpassing only General Hospital ) .
However , Days of Our Lives is last among all soap operas for the numbers of viewers in the targeted demographic of women aged between 18 and 49 years old .
LOCAL SCHEDULING VARIATIONS
Section::::Local scheduling variations .
Since January 1993 , after the cancellation of Santa Barbara , WPXI - TV in Pittsburgh has aired Days weekdays during its 3:00 p.m. time slot while some stations such as WJAC - TV in Johnstown , Pennsylvania air the program during the 2:00 p.m. timeslot , and most stations continue to air Days at its 1 p.m. time slot .
Some Central Time Zone affiliates carry it at noon with the main Eastern feed , such as Green Bay , Wisconsin 's WGBA - TV , which uses it as an alternative to programming what would likely be a low - rated local newscast against long - established local competition .
However , the program received schedule and station shifts with the start of the 2013 - 14 television season .
One NBC station , KSNV - DT in Las Vegas , stopped carrying the show on August 19 , 2013 due to a long - term move to an all - news schedule outside of network news and primetime programming ; the program moved to the market 's CW affiliate KVCW , where it aired at its traditional 1:00 p.m. time slot until an ownership change saw the show return to KSNV in late December 2014 as part of a change in the all - news plans .
With the cancellation of Passions , Days is now NBC 's last remaining daytime soap opera , as well as the network 's last remaining daytime program .
Salt Lake City 's KSL - TV moved the show to the late night 1:05 a.m. slot three weeks later on September 9 for unknown reasons , though a romantic plot line between two gay characters was theorized to have been a reason for the move ; the station is owned by the broadcasting arm of the LDS Church .
NIELSEN RATINGS HISTORY Section::::Nielsen ratings history .
End of season number of metered viewers ( listed as a Nielsen share in millions ) and ranking ( against other soap operas ) from the first broadcast to the reporting week of August 24 to August 28 , 2015 . !
Season ! !
Share ! !
Ranking !
Season ! !
Share ! !
Ranking !
Season ! !
Share ! !
Ranking !
Primetime Episode ! !
Share ! !
Ranking INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST AMERICAS Section::::International broadcast .
Section::::Americas .
Throughout Canada , Days of Our Lives currently airs either at 1:00 PM or 2:00 PM depending on location on Global Television Network .
Episodes are aired in sync with the NBC broadcast to take advantage of simultaneous substitution regulations .
It also airs on NTV in Newfoundland and Labrador .
In Barbados the show was very popular , though it ran several years behind the U.S. ( the series began in Barbados in 1980 from the very first episode ) , and was aired on the island 's lone television broadcaster , CBC TV 8 .
In 2014 , the channel dropped the series .
Belize 's Tropical Vision Limited features Days of Our Lives as an afternoon staple .
Currently it airs at 3:00 pm UTC-6 Central Time , though it previously aired as early as 1:00 pm or as late as 5:30 pm as a lead - in to the news .
OCEANIA
Section::::Oceania .
In Australia , Days of Our Lives was initially broadcast on the Nine Network from March 25 , 1968 , until April 26 , 2013 , when the network axed the show based on a commercial decision .
During its run on the Nine Network in the early 2000s , episodes ended up being nearly five years behind the United States , due to the network 's coverage of cricket each summer .
In an attempt to get viewers up to date with the US , Nine aired a one - hour special on September 13 , 2004 , titled , Days of Our Lives : A New Day , which summarized four years of storylines and caused mixed feelings among regular viewers .
This special was followed by episodes airing at the same pace as the US .
However , the show ended up being behind the US again , and by April 2013 , episodes were airing at a delay of 16 months .
On June 17 , 2013 , Days of Our Lives resumed to Australian viewers free and on - demand through Sony 's Crackle service , as well as across Crackle 's web apps on mobile devices , connected TVs and game consoles .
Crackle picked up where the Nine Network left off with 10 new episodes in its first week and seven new episodes every Monday thereafter .
From January 20 , 2014 , Crackle began releasing five episodes each week .
Days of Our Lives returned to Australian television on Foxtel 's channel Arena in April 2014 .
It airs weekdays before The Young and the Restless at 12:00 pm AEST .
In order to bring TV viewers up to date , Arena screened ten catch up episodes , each presented by Days of Our Lives cast members , from April 1 to April 14 , 2014 , featuring key story lines missed during the 11-month Australian television hiatus .
Then on April 15 , 2014 , Arena began airing episodes at the same pace as the US .
Arena also re - airs the last five aired episodes shown as an omnibus catch up edition each Sunday around 7:00 am AEST .
New Zealand has aired Days of Our Lives along with The Young and the Restless since 1975 , debuting on Television New Zealand ( TVNZ ) .
Originally airing weekdays on TV2 was shifted to TV One in 2003 , where it was put in a 2 pm time slot .
The soap was approximately five seasons behind the NBC season due to being preempted by holiday and sporting programming .
During October 2009 , TVNZ announced that they were ending their exclusive contract with Sony Pictures .
Despite a national petition from fans Days of Our Lives ended on May 19 , 2010 .
On February 27 , 2013 , nearly three years the series ' final broadcast on TVNZ , ChoiceTV announced their decision to pick up the series ; the series began broadcasting on March 11 , 2013 , weekdays at 1:30pm .
Broadcasting began with the series ' 46th season ( 2011–12 ) , meaning the show would be only 18 months behind the current NBC season in the US .
ChoiceTV
also re - airs the last five aired episodes shown as an omnibus catch up edition each Sunday , beginning at 9 AM NZST , when due to government broadcasting restrictions are shown without advertisements .
By December 20 , 2013 , ChoiceTV had removed the show from their schedule for summer hiatus .
However , the series resumed airing on February 10 , 2014 from episode 11,880 .
As of April 25 , 2014 , New Zealand viewers are up to episode 11,933 , as ChoiceTV decides on if they will renew the show .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Channel 5 aired episodes of Days of our Lives in the United Kingdom from March 2000 to April 2001 , eventually pulling it off the air ; network executives deemed its audience of 200,000 viewers as too low a figure .
Days had previously aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on the Sky Soap channel between 1994 and 1999 ; episodes were three years behind U.S. telecasts .
Days of Our Lives became available to viewers again in the United Kingdom in 2007 - 2010 ; CBS Drama ended the run after relegating the show from daytime to 1.00am .
AFRICAN / EASTERN Section::::African / Eastern .
In South Africa , the soap aired on SABC 1 for ten years , from 1996 until March 2006 , weekdays at 17:10 to 18:00 local standard time .
As of April 2005 , the soap airs on SABC 3 , each weekday from 17:00 to 17:50 .
Beginning September 4 , 2017 , the show moves to ETV at 17:30pm according to promos posted online .
OPENING TITLE SEQUENCES AND THEME SONG
Section::::Opening title sequences and theme song .
Almost unmodified since the show 's debut in 1965 , the title sequence of Days of Our Lives features an hourglass , with sand slowly trickling to the bottom against the backdrop of a partly cloudy sky , as well as the trademark voiceover , " Like sands through the hourglass , so are the Days of Our Lives . "
From the show 's debut in 1965 until March 1966 , announcer Ed Prentiss spoke the phrase , adding " Days of Our Lives , a new dramatic serial starring Macdonald Carey . "
Since April 1966 , the voice has been that of Macdonald Carey , who played Dr. Thomas Horton from the show 's premiere until the actor 's 1994 death from lung cancer .
From 1966 to 1994 , he would add " This is Macdonald Carey , and these are the Days of Our Lives . "
After Carey 's death in 1994 , this second part was removed out of respect for Carey and his family .
At intermission ( between 1975 and 2011 ) , his voice would also say " We will return for the second half of Days of Our Lives in just a moment " .
The theme that regularly accompanies each sequence was composed by Charles Albertine , Tommy Boyce , and Bobby Hart .
The theme has only been modified a few times since Days of Our Lives premiered : in 1972 ; in 1993 , when the opening titles were changed to computerized visuals ( designed by Wayne Fitzgerald and Judy Loren ) ; in 2004 , with an orchestral arrangement that was only used in eight episodes , after which time the theme was reverted to the 1993 arrangement ; and in 2009 , when the theme was edited for time and shortened .
Beginning with the November 8 , 2010 episode , there were slight changes to the coloring of the sky background in the sequence now being displayed in widescreen .
However , there was very little change in the sequence 's appearance from the 1993 version .
PARODIES * SCTV had a recurring soap opera sketch called " Days of the Week " which featured Martin Short and Andrea Martin .
* Days of Our Lives was somewhat satirized ( or perhaps merely referenced ) on the hit NBC sitcom Friends when series regular Joey Tribbiani ( Matt LeBlanc ) was cast as " Dr. Drake Ramoray " on the show , despite Joey living in New York when Days of Our Lives is shot in California .
Subsequent episodes featured pseudo - Days of Our Lives storylines invented for the sitcom , and included some guest appearances by real - life cast members from the soap opera .
Joey 's stint on the show ended when he angered the show 's writers ; his character was killed after falling down an elevator shaft .
Later , his character was brought back to life thanks to a brain transplant from the character Jessica Lockhart , played by Susan Sarandon .
Alison Sweeney ( Sami Brady ) appeared on Friends as faux Days character " Jessica Lockhart " , Kristian Alfonso as Hope Brady , and Roark Critchlow as Mike Horton .
In an episode in which Joey hosts a " soap opera party " on the roof , Matthew Ashford and Kyle Lowder make appearances as his co - stars .
In the spin - off sitcom Joey , Joey is nominated for " best death scene " after his character is stabbed while performing surgery .
*
The show was also parodied as " Light of Our Love " , or " LOOL " , in the Nancy Drew video game Stay Tuned for Danger .
*
The Simpsons episode " Pygmoelian " features a fictional soap opera ,
" It Never Ends " , based on Days of Our Lives .
* Days of our Mornings is a long - running radio parody , broadcast weekday mornings on 5FM in South Africa .
*
The Fairly OddParents episode " Add a Dad " features a parody named " Dads of our Lives " .
* Totally Spies !
episode " Starstruck " features a television set of a parody show " Days of Our Spies " .
* House episode " Gut Check " features House hiring a kid who plays a fictional character of the fictionalized version of the show .
* Blue Collar TV featured a sketch as a parody of the show called " White Trash Days of Our Lives " with the opening epitaph slightly changed . "
Like beer through a redneck , so flows the white trash days of our lives . "
* Gilmore Girls : Just after Emily goes to walk after her and Richard 's fight , Lorelai says Like sands through the hourglass , so are the Gilmores of Our Lives .
This happened at season 2 in episode 10 ( " The Bracebridge Dinner " ) .
FANS Section::::Fans .
The show has had many high - profile fans .
In 1976 , TIME magazine reported that then - Justice of the Supreme Court Thurgood Marshall would call a recess around the 1 p.m. hour to watch Days of Our Lives .
Actress Julia Roberts admitted at the 2002 People 's Choice Awards that she was a fan of Days of Our Lives , asked to be seated near the cast , and upon winning her award stated , " I 'm very nervous because the cast of Days of Our Lives is here . "
In 2004 , during the show 's Melaswen storyline , Roberts ' interest was considered notable enough that Entertainment Weekly quoted her saying that " the show has gotten a little wacko . "
A 1998 TIME article mentioned that Monica Lewinsky was a passionate fan of Days of Our Lives , so much so that she wrote a poem about the series in her high school yearbook .
The article compared her whirlwind experiences in the White House to a story on Days of Our Lives .
Best - selling novelist Brian Keene has stated in interviews that he has watched the show since 1983 , and pauses from writing each day during the hour it is on .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS SEE
ALSO
* List of Days of Our Lives cast members
* List of Days of Our Lives characters * Minor characters of Days of Our Lives REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Days of Our Lives - SoapCentral.com