MAJOR CRIMES Major Crimes is an American television police procedural series starring Mary McDonnell .
It is a continuation spin - off of The Closer , set in the same police division .
It premiered on TNT August 13 , 2012 , following The Closer finale .
In January 2017 , during Major Crimes fifth season , TNT renewed the series for a 13-episode sixth season .
On October 3 , the network announced the sixth season would be its last .
Series star McDonnell commented on Instagram , " as many of you have stated , this was not a surprise .
The writing was clearly on the wall .
Trying to make sense of TNT 's choices is an activity that James Duff and Mike Robin and all of us have been engaged in for a long time .
"
The final season premiered on October 31 , 2017 , and ended on January 9 , 2018 , wrapping the series with 105 episodes .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Following the departure of Deputy Chief Brenda Leigh Johnson from the Los Angeles Police Department , Captain Sharon Raydor is selected as the new head of its Major Crimes Division .
Throughout Season 1 , she faces the challenge of earning the trust and loyalty of her officers , who are still in shock over Johnson 's exit , while trying to close the department 's highest - profile cases .
Ambitious young detective
Amy Sykes also joins the Major Crimes Division .
Raydor decides to house Rusty Beck , the key witness for the Philip Stroh ( Billy Burke ) case , in her own home , paying for him to attend the Catholic high school her grown children once attended .
In Season 2 , Deputy District Attorney Emma Rios is introduced as part of the prosecution team on the Stroh case .
The series stars numerous cast members continuing in their roles from The Closer , including actors Mary McDonnell , G.W. Bailey , Tony Denison , Michael Paul Chan , Raymond Cruz , Phillip P. Keene , Robert Gossett , Jonathan Del Arco and Jon Tenney .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Mary McDonnell as Captain , later Commander Sharon Raydor , commanding officer of the Major Crimes Division .
Prior to transferring to Major Crimes , Raydor was already a Captain in the Force Investigation Division .
* G. W. Bailey as Detective Lieutenant Louie Provenza , second - in - command of Major Crimes .
* Tony Denison as
Detective Lieutenant Andy Flynn
* Michael Paul Chan as Detective Lieutenant Michael Tao * Raymond Cruz as Detective Julio Sanchez
* Kearran Giovanni as Detective Amy Sykes
* Phillip P. Keene as Civilian Surveillance Coordinator Buzz Watson ( later Reserve Officer / Reserve Detective ) * Graham Patrick Martin as Russell " Rusty " Beck , Sharon Raydor 's adoptive son * Jonathan Del Arco as Dr. Fernando Morales , Los Angeles County Deputy Medical Examiner ( season 2–6 ;
recurring season 1 )
* Robert Gossett as Assistant Chief Russell Taylor , Assistant Chief of Operations ( seasons 2–5 ; recurring season 1 ) * Jon Tenney as Deputy Chief Fritz Howard , retired FBI Special Agent ; currently Deputy Chief of the LAPD Special Operations Bureau , who served temporarily as the Acting Assistant Chief of Operations ( season 3–6 ; recurring seasons 1–2 )
* Leonard Roberts as Assistant Chief Leo Mason , Taylor 's replacement as Assistant Chief of Operations ( season 6 ; recurring season 5 )
* Daniel Di Tomasso as Detective Wes Nolan , an undercover detective on temporary duty with Major Crimes ( season 6 ; recurring season 5 ) * Jessica Meraz as Detective Camila Paige ( season 6 ) RECURRING CAST AND CHARACTERS * Kathe Mazur as Deputy District Attorney Andrea Hobbs * Nadine Velazquez as Deputy District Attorney Emma Rios ( seasons 2–3 , 6 ) * Ransford Doherty as Medical Examiner 's Investigator Kendall * Billy Burke as Phillip Stroh , a cunning lawyer and serial killer who resurfaces periodically ( season 3 , 6 )
* Malcolm - Jamal Warner as Lieutenant Chuck Cooper , head of the LAPD 's Special Investigation Section ( season 2–5 )
* Ever Carradine as Sharon Beck , Rusty 's biological mother ( season 3–5 )
* Bill Brochtrup as Dr. Joe Bowman , Rusty 's therapist , an occasional consultant with the Major Crimes unit ( seasons 2–6 ) * Rene Rosado as Gustavo Wallace , Rusty 's boyfriend ( seasons 4–6 ) DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
On December 10 , 2010 , TNT announced that the upcoming seventh season of The Closer would be the show 's last .
The channel said the decision to retire the show was made by Kyra Sedgwick .
On January 30 , 2011 , it was announced the final season would add six episodes to the usual 15-episode order , the final six being the build toward a possible spin - off series .
On May 18 , 2011 , TNT announced the spin - off , entitled Major Crimes and starring Mary McDonnell as Captain Sharon Raydor , had been picked up for a 10-episode season .
Following an average of over 7 million viewers for its first season , TNT renewed Major Crimes for a 15-episode second season on September 27 , 2012 , which the network increased to 19 episodes in April 2013 .
Season 2 premiered on June 10 , 2013 .
The series was renewed for a third season of 15 episodes on August 15 , 2013 , which aired from June 9 , 2014 , through January 12 , 2015 .
On July 18 , 2014 , TNT renewed Major Crimes for a 15-episode fourth season , later expanded to 23 episodes , which aired from June 8 , 2015 , to March 14 , 2016 .
On December 15 , 2015 , TNT renewed the series for a 13-episode fifth season , On June 22 , 2016 , TNT ordered eight additional episodes for season five , bringing the total to 21 .
On January 18 , 2017 , the series was renewed for a 13-episode sixth season , clarified in October as the final season , which aired from October 31 , 2017 , to January 9 , 2018 .
EPISODES RECEPTION
Section::::Reception .
Major Crimes received a score of 65/100 and " generally favorable " reviews based on 17 critics at Metacritic .
Newsdays Verne Gay gave the series a B+ grade , calling it " sharply written , acted and directed " , adding " producers now have to turn an ( occasional ) antagonist into a full - time protagonist .
Let the metamorphosis begin . "
Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times called the series a " nice balance between the tragic and comic " , citing Mary McDonnell 's performance as " modulated and cool , but with a blue - flame intensity " .
Entertainment Weeklys Ken Tucker thought there were " fundamental distinctions " between The Closers Brenda Leigh Johnson and Major Crimes Sharon Raydor that " render the shows very different " , adding " I 've always found Raydor 's serene assurance a palliative to the twitchy eccentricity of Kyra Sedgwick 's Johnson . "
Mike Hale of The New York Times thought the series " [ made ] the dullest character from the old show the central figure of the new one , " adding " Major Crimes feels like a reasonably sharp black - and - white copy of The Closer , but fans of the franchise are likely to miss the color provided by Ms. Sedgwick 's vivid performance . "
The first episode , helped by the final episode of The Closer airing beforehand , had 9.5 million viewers , the largest viewership for a series premiere on basic cable .
Its first season ratings were the highest for any new show on cable .
BROADCASTS Section::::Broadcasts .
Major Crimes airs on TNT in the United States .
In Canada , it was aired on Super Channel from August 22 , 2012 to 2016 .
In Australia it airs on 9Gem .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , Major Crimes began airing on Universal Channel on March 18 , 2013 .
In late 2016 , Major Crimes entered broadcast syndication in the United States .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS