HASTINGS INSURANCE Hastings Insurance Services Ltd is a UK personal lines insurance broker servicing customers online and by phone .
The company provides car , bike , van and home insurance , as well as a range of ancillary products and services such as breakdown cover , personal accident , substitute vehicle and key and legal cover .
It is part of the Hastings Group , a UK public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 250 Index .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The company was established , based on business plan prepared by David Gundlach and Andrew Bowen , as " Hastings Direct " in 1997 .
It was acquired by Insurance Australia Group in 2006 and then by its management in 2009 .
In 2011 the company announced that 150 new posts would be created , with the first 60 to be recruited in January in the Bexhill , Hastings , Eastbourne , Brighton and Hove areas .
Goldman Sachs acquired a 50 % interest in the company in 2013 .
The company was the subject of an initial public offering in October 2015 .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
The company trades under the Hastings Direct , Hastings Premier , Hastings Essential , SmartMiles , People 's Choice and InsurePink brands .
In 2012 , the company launched a usage - based insurance product under the Hastings Direct SmartMiles brand .
The SmartMiles product requires a telematics device to be fitted to the insured vehicle .
The company is known for its mascot , Harry Hastings , an animated figure dressed in armour from the Battle of Hastings in 1066 .
Based in Bexhill - on - Sea , the company is one of the largest employers on the South Coast .
The company also has a second call centre in Leicester .
Toby van der Meer became the CEO of Hastings Group on 1 March 2018 .
The previous CEO , Gary Hoffman , became non - executive chairman .
SPONSORSHIP Section::::Sponsorship .
The company sponsored the Eastbourne International tennis tournament between 2003 and 2007 in a deal worth £ 350,000 per year .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS