CASE HISTORIES ( TV SERIES )
Case Histories is a British crime drama television series based on the Jackson Brodie novel series by Kate Atkinson .
It stars Jason Isaacs , who had also narrated the abridged audiobook adaptation , as protagonist Jackson Brodie .
The series is both set and filmed in Edinburgh .
Initially each episode was aired in two 60 minute sections .
The first series premiered on 5 June 2011 , on BBC1 in the United Kingdom , and in October 2011 on PBS in the United States .
A second series aired in 2013 .
Initially commissioned as two feature - length episodes , in September 2012 , the BBC reported that the format of series two would be different , encompassing three stories , each self - contained , at a running time of ninety minutes per episode .
The first episode was revealed to be an adaptation of Atkinson 's novel Started Early , Took My Dog .
Filming for the second series commenced in October 2012 .
The second and third episodes of the series are original stories , written exclusively for television .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Private investigator Jackson Brodie ( Jason Isaacs ) , a former soldier and policeman , hides a deeply empathetic heart under his tough - guy exterior .
He is unable to resist coming to the rescue and is a magnet for the bereaved , the lost and the dysfunctional .
Intriguing , moving and funny , the character - driven stories conjure up a richly imagined world in which Brodie attempts to bring resolution to the victims of unexplained mysteries and comfort to the survivors of personal tragedies .
He is the ultimate survivor himself — a bruised optimist , compelled to help others .
Assisted by his faithful colleague Louise Munroe ( Amanda Abbington ) , Jackson attempts to provide answers to those without hope of ever finding them any other way .
CAST
* Jason Isaacs as Jackson Brodie * Amanda Abbington as D.C.
Louise Munroe
* Zawe Ashton as Deborah Arnold * Millie Innes as Marlee Brodie * Natasha Little as Julia Land * Kirsty Mitchell as Josie Brodie * Edward Corrie as Marcus Stewart * Martin Stevenson as Archie Munroe * Rory Barraclough as Young Jackson Brodie *
Allan Linsday as Francis Brodie * Paterson Joseph as Patrick Carter * Tessa Titterington as Young Amelia * Morven Christie as Michelle Moore EPISODE LIST SERIES 1 ( 2011 )
SERIES 2 ( 2013 )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Case Histories on PBS , as part of Masterpiece Mystery !