HARRY POTTER AND THE DEATHLY HALLOWS –
PART 2 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 is a 2011 fantasy film directed by David Yates and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures .
It is the second of two cinematic parts based on J. K. Rowling 's 2007 novel of the same name .
The film , which is the eighth and final instalment in the Harry Potter film series , was written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman , David Barron , and Rowling .
The story continues to follow Harry Potter 's quest to find and destroy Lord Voldemort 's Horcruxes in order to stop him once and for all .
The film stars Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter , alongside Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as Harry 's best friends , Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger .
Principal photography began on 19 February 2009 , and was completed on 12 June 2010 , with reshoots taking place in December 2010 , more than ten years after filming started on the first instalment of the series .
Part 2 was released in 2D , 3-D and IMAX cinemas worldwide from 13–15 July 2011 , and is the only Harry Potter film to be released in 3-D.
The film became a commercial success and was critically acclaimed , and one of the best reviewed films of 2011 , with the acting , Yates 's direction , musical score , visual effects , cinematography , action sequences , and satisfying conclusion of the saga earning notable praise .
At the box office , Part 2 claimed the worldwide opening weekend record , earning $ 483.2 million , as well as setting opening day and opening weekend records in various countries .
, the film is the tenth - highest - grossing film of all time .
It became the highest - grossing film of 2011 , the highest - grossing film in the Harry Potter series , and the ninth film to gross over $ 1 billion .
The Blu - ray and DVD sets were released on 11 November 2011 in the United States and on 2 December 2011 in the United Kingdom .
The film was also released in the Harry Potter :
Complete 8-Film Collection box set on DVD and Blu - ray , which included all eight films and new special features .
Part 1 and Part 2 were released as a combo pack on DVD and Blu - ray on 11 November 2011 in Canada .
The film won several awards and was nominated for many more , including three nominations at the Academy Awards for Best Art Direction , Best Makeup and Best Visual Effects .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After burying Dobby , Harry Potter asks the goblin Griphook to help him , Ron Weasley , and Hermione Granger break into Bellatrix Lestrange 's vault at Gringotts bank , suspecting a Horcrux may be there .
Griphook agrees in exchange for the Sword of Gryffindor .
Wandmaker Ollivander tells Harry that two wands taken from Malfoy Manor belonged to Bellatrix and Draco Malfoy , though Malfoy 's has changed its allegiance to Harry .
In the vault , Harry discovers the Horcrux is Helga Hufflepuff 's cup .
He retrieves it , but Griphook snatches the sword and abandons the trio , leaving them cornered by security .
The three release the dragon guardian and flee on its back .
Harry sees a vision of Lord Voldemort killing goblins including Griphook , and learns Voldemort is aware of the theft .
Harry also realises there is a Horcrux at Hogwarts somehow connected to Rowena Ravenclaw .
The trio apparate into Hogsmeade , where Aberforth Dumbledore reluctantly instructs the portrait of his deceased younger sister Ariana to fetch Neville Longbottom , who leads the trio through a secret passageway into Hogwarts .
Severus Snape hears of Harry 's return and warns staff and students of punishment for aiding Harry .
Harry confronts Snape , who flees after Minerva McGonagall challenges him to a duel .
McGonagall gathers the Hogwarts community for battle .
At Luna Lovegood 's insistence Harry speaks to Helena Ravenclaw 's ghost , who reveals that Voldemort performed " dark magic " on her mother 's diadem , located in the Room of Requirement .
In the Chamber of Secrets , Hermione destroys the Horcrux cup with a Basilisk fang .
In the Room of Requirement , Draco , Blaise Zabini and Gregory Goyle attack Harry , but Ron and Hermione intervene .
Goyle casts a Fiendfyre curse ; unable to control it , he is burned to death while Harry and his friends save Malfoy and Zabini .
Harry stabs the diadem with the Basilisk fang and Ron
kicks it into the Room of Requirement to be destroyed .
As Voldemort 's army attacks , Harry , seeing into Voldemort 's mind , realises that Voldemort 's snake Nagini is the final Horcrux .
After entering the boathouse , the trio witness Voldemort telling Snape that the Elder Wand can not serve Voldemort until Snape dies ; he then orders Nagini to kill Snape .
Before dying , Snape tells Harry to take his memories to the Pensieve .
Meanwhile , Fred Weasley , Remus Lupin , and Nymphadora Tonks are killed in the chaos at Hogwarts .
Harry learns from Snape 's memories that while Snape despised Harry 's late father James , who bullied him , he loved his late mother Lily .
Following her death , Snape worked with Albus Dumbledore to protect Harry from Voldemort due to his love for Lily .
Harry also learns that Dumbledore was dying and wished for Snape to kill him , and that the Patronus doe he saw in the woods that led him to the sword was conjured by Snape .
Harry discovers that he himself became a Horcrux when Voldemort originally failed to kill him ; he must die to destroy the piece of Voldemort 's soul within him .
Harry surrenders himself to Voldemort in the Forbidden Forest .
Voldemort casts the Killing Curse upon Harry , who finds himself in limbo .
Dumbledore 's spirit meets him and explains that the part of Voldemort within Harry was killed by Voldemort 's curse .
Harry returns to his body , determined to defeat Voldemort .
Voldemort announces Harry 's apparent death to everyone at Hogwarts and demands their surrender .
As Neville gives a defiant response and draws the sword from the Sorting Hat , Harry reveals he is still alive ; the Malfoys and many Death Eaters abandon Voldemort .
While Harry confronts Voldemort in a duel throughout the castle , Molly Weasley kills Bellatrix in the Great Hall and Neville decapitates Nagini , making Voldemort vulnerable .
Harry and Voldemort 's fight ends with Voldemort 's own Killing Curse rebounding and obliterating him .
After the battle , Harry explains to Ron and Hermione that the Elder Wand recognised him as its true master after he disarmed Draco , who had earlier disarmed its previous owner , Dumbledore .
Harry destroys the Elder Wand rather than claim it .
Nineteen years later , Harry , Ginny Weasley , Ron , Hermione , and Draco proudly watch their own children leave for Hogwarts at King 's Cross station .
CAST
* Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter * Rupert Grint as Ron Weasley , Harry 's best friend .
* Emma Watson as Hermione Granger , Harry 's other best friend , and the brain of the trio .
* Matthew Lewis as Neville Longbottom , Harry 's friend and roommate * Helena Bonham Carter as Bellatrix Lestrange , a Death Eater and Sirius Black 's cousin and murderer .
* Robbie Coltrane as Rubeus Hagrid , Harry 's half - giant friend and a former member of the staff of Hogwarts .
* Warwick Davis as Filius Flitwick , the Charms master and Head of the Ravenclaw house at Hogwarts ; and Griphook , a goblin and former employee at Gringotts Bank .
* Tom Felton as Draco Malfoy , Harry 's former school rival , a former Death Eater , and son of Lucius and Narcissa Malfoy ( Helen McCrory ) .
* Ralph Fiennes as Lord Voldemort , a twisted , evil , power - hungry , powerful wizard , and the founder and supreme leader of the Death Eaters .
* Michael Gambon as Albus Dumbledore , the late headmaster of Hogwarts
* John Hurt as Mr. Ollivander , a wandmaker abducted by the Death Eaters .
* Jason Isaacs as Lucius Malfoy , Draco Malfoy 's father and a disgraced Death Eater .
* Kelly Macdonald as Helena Ravenclaw , the ghost of Ravenclaw at Hogwarts .
* Gary Oldman as Sirius Black , Harry 's late godfather .
* Alan Rickman as Severus Snape , former Head of the Slytherin House and Potions and Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher and the new headmaster of Hogwarts .
* Maggie Smith as Minerva McGonagall , the Transfiguration teacher and the Head of the Gryffindor house at Hogwarts .
* David Thewlis as Remus Lupin , a member of the Order of the Phoenix and a former Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts .
* Julie Walters as Molly Weasley , the Weasley matriarch CASTING Section::::Cast .
Section::::Casting .
The roles of several minor characters were recast or replaced for this film .
For example , Ciarán Hinds assumed the role of Aberforth Dumbledore , Albus Dumbledore 's brother and bartender of the Hog 's Head inn .
In the book , a significant number of characters who have not appeared since some of the earlier novels , reappear to defend Hogwarts in the large , final battle .
Director David Yates said , " I want to get them all back " , referring to his desire to bring back as many actors who have appeared in the franchise as possible for the climactic battle sequence in the film .
Sean Biggerstaff , Jim Broadbent , Gemma Jones , Miriam Margolyes , and Emma Thompson reprise their roles from earlier films briefly during the battle scene .
For the final scene in the film which is set nineteen years after the film 's main story , the actors playing the main characters were made to look older through the use of makeup and special effects .
After the initial look of the actors ' aged appearances leaked onto the Internet , some fans reacted by opining that Radcliffe and Grint looked too old , while Watson did not appear significantly different at all .
After primary filming concluded in June 2010 , Yates examined the footage , and concluded that the problem could not be resolved through editing or CGI , and had the sequence re - shot that December , with redesigned makeup .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Part 2 was filmed back - to - back with Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 from 19 February 2009 to 12 June 2010 , with reshoots for the epilogue scene taking place at Leavesden Film Studios on 21 December 2010 .
Director David Yates , who shot the film with director of photography Eduardo Serra , described Part 2 as " operatic , colourful and fantasy - oriented " , a " big opera with huge battles . "
Originally set for a single theatrical release , the idea to split the book into two parts was suggested by executive producer Lionel Wigram due to , what David Heyman called , " creative imperative " .
Heyman initially responded negatively to the idea , but Wigram asked , " No , David .
How are we going to do it ? " .
After rereading the book and discussing it with screenwriter Steve Kloves , he agreed with the division .
SETS Section::::Sets .
In an interview with Architectural Digest , production designer Stuart Craig remarked on creating sets for Part 2 .
Of the Gringotts Wizarding Bank , he said , " our banking hall , like any other , is made of marble and big marble columns .
And it has great strength .
The fact that the goblins are the bankers and tellers at the counter helps that feeling of grandeur and solidity and the big proportions .
That was part of the fun of the set : we exaggerated the size of it , we exaggerated the weight of it , and we even exaggerated the shine of the marble . "
About the multiplication of treasure in one of the bank 's vaults , he noted , " We made literally thousands of pieces for it and vacuum metallised them to be shiny gold and silver .
John Richardson , the special effects supervisor , made a floor that was capable of rising on different levels , so there was kind of a physical swelling of the treasure on it . "
Craig spoke about the Battle of Hogwarts to Art Insights Magazine , saying that " the great challenge is the destruction of Hogwarts .
The sun rising behind the smoke ...
the massive remains of destroyed walls , the entrance hall , the entrance of the Great Hall , part of the roof of the Great Hall completely gone ,
so
yeah .
A big challenge there and an enjoyable one really –
maybe it helped me and the guys in the art department sort of prepare for the end ...
we demolished it before we had to strike it completely .
"
When asked about the King 's Cross scene near the end of the film , Craig said , " We experimented a lot , quite honestly .
I mean it was quite a protracted process really
but we did experiment the sense of it being very burnt out very very kind of white – so we experimented with underlit floors , we experimented with different kind of white covering everything : white paint , white fabric , and the cameraman was involved in how much to expose it , and a series of camera tests were done , so we got there
but with a great deal of preparation and research . " VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
Visual effects supervisor Tim Burke said that " It was such a major job to stage the Battle of Hogwarts , and we had to do it in different stages of production .
We had shots with complex linking camera moves from wide overviews , to flying into windows and interior spaces .
So , we took the plunge at the end of 2008 , and started rebuilding the school digitally with Double Negative . "
He went on to say that " It 's taken two years – getting renders out , texturing every facet of the building , constructing interiors to see through windows , building a destruction version of the school .
We can design shots with the knowledge that we have this brilliant digital miniature that we can do anything with .
With a practical Hogwarts , we would have shot it last summer and been so tied down .
Instead , as David Yates finds the flow and structure , we are able to handle new concepts and ideas . "
On the quality of 3-D in film , Burke told Los Angeles Times , " I think it 's good , actually .
I think people are going to be really pleased .
I know everyone 's a little nervous and sceptical of 3-D these days , but the work has been done very , very well .
We 've done over 200 shots in 3-D and in the visual effects as well , because so much of it is CG , so the results are very , very good .
I think everyone 's going to be really impressed with it , actually . "
Producer David Heyman spoke to SFX magazine about the 3-D conversion , saying that " The way David Yates is approaching 3-D is he 's trying to approach it from a character and story point of view .
Trying to use the sense of isolation , of separation that sometimes 3-D gives you , to heighten that at appropriate moments .
So we 're approaching it in a storytelling way . "
In 2012 , the visual effects in the film were nominated for an Oscar .
The film also won the BAFTA Award for Best Special Visual Effects at the 65th BAFTA Awards in 2012 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
It was confirmed that the composer for Part 1 , Alexandre Desplat , was set to return for Part 2 .
In an interview with Film Music Magazine , Desplat stated that scoring Part 2 is " a great challenge " and that he has " a lot of expectations to fulfill and a great deal of work " ahead of him .
In a separate interview , Desplat also made note that John Williams themes will be present in the film " much more than in part one .
" The soundtrack for the film was nominated for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards .
DISTRIBUTION MARKETING Section::::Distribution .
Section::::Marketing .
In March 2011 , the first preview for Deathly Hallows – Part 2 was released revealing new footage and new interviews from the starring cast .
The first United States
poster was released on 28 March 2011 , with the caption
" It All Ends 7.15 " ( referring to its international release date ) .
On 27 April 2011 the first theatrical trailer for Part 2 was released .
The trailer revealed a range of new and old footage .
The IMAX trailer for the film was released with IMAX screenings of on 20 May 2011 .
During the MTV Movie Awards on 5 June 2011 , Emma Watson presented a sneak peek of the film .
THEATRICAL RELEASE
Section::::Theatrical release .
On 2 April 2011 , a test screening of the film was held in Chicago , with director David Yates , producers David Heyman and David Barron and editor Mark Day in attendance .
The film had its world premiere on at Trafalgar Square in London .
The United States premiere was held in New York City at Lincoln Center on .
Although filmed in 2-D , the film was converted into 3-D in post - production and was released in both RealD 3D and IMAX 3D.
The film was originally scheduled to open in Indonesia on 13 July 2011 .
The Indonesian government levied a new value added tax on royalties from foreign films in February 2011 , causing three film studios , including Warner Brothers , to halt the importation of their films , including Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 into the country .
The film was not released to cinemas in the Kingdom of Jordan due to recently enforced taxes on films .
It had not been premiered in the Kingdom .
On 10 June , one month before the film 's release , tickets went on sale .
On 16 June 2011 , Part 2 received a 12A certificate from the British Board of Film Classification , who note that the film " contains moderate threat , injury detail and language " , becoming the only Harry Potter film to receive a warning for " injury detail " .
At midnight 15 July , Part 2 screened in 3,800 cinemas .
In the United States , it played in 4,375 cinemas , 3,100 3D cinemas and 274 IMAX cinemas , the widest release for an IMAX , 3D and a Harry Potter film .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 was released on 11 November 2011 in the United States in four formats : a one - disc standard DVD , a two - disc standard DVD special edition , a one - disc standard Blu - ray , and three - Disc Blu - ray 2D Combo Pack ( Blu - ray + DVD + Digital Copy ) .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the film was released on 2 December 2011 in three formats : a two - disc standard DVD , a three - disc Blu - ray 2D Combo Pack ( Blu - ray + DVD + Digital Copy ) , and a four - disc Blu - ray 3D Combo Pack ( Blu - ray 3D + Blu - ray 2D + DVD + Digital Copy ) .
The film set the record for fastest - selling pre - order DVD and Blu - ray on Amazon.com , just two days into the pre - order period .
Deathly Hallows –
Part 2 sold 2.71 million Blu - ray units ( $ 60.75 million ) in three days ( Friday to Sunday ) .
It also sold 2.83 million DVD units ( $ 42.22 million ) during its debut .
By 18 July 2012 it had sold 4.71 million Blu - ray units ( $ 99.33 million ) and 6.47 million DVD units ( $ 88.96 million ) .
On 28 March 2017 , Deathly Hallows – Part 2 made its Ultra HD Blu - ray debut , along with Deathly Hallows - Part 1 , The Half - Blood Prince , and Order of the Phoenix .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
+ Box Office Records set by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 upon its release !
Record item ! !
Record detail Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 grossed $ 381,011,219 in the United States and Canada , along with $ 960,500,000 in other markets , for a worldwide total of $ 1,341,511,219 .
In worldwide earnings , it is currently the tenth - highest - grossing film , the highest - grossing 2011 film , the highest - grossing film in the Harry Potter franchise and the highest - grossing children 's book adaptation .
Part 2 set a worldwide opening - weekend record with $ 483.2 million .
It set a worldwide IMAX opening - weekend record with $ 23.2 million .
In worldwide earnings , it is the fastest film to reach $ 400 million ( 5 days ) , $ 500 million ( 6 days ) , $ 600 million ( 8 days ) , $ 700 million ( 10 days ) , $ 800 million ( 12 days ) , $ 900 million ( 15 days ) , and $ 1 billion ( 19 days , tied with Avatar and Marvel 's The Avengers ) .
On 31 July 2011 ( its 19th day of release ) , it became the ninth film in cinematic history and the second in 2011 to surpass the $ 1-billion mark .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
In the US and Canada , it is the 27th - highest - grossing film , the highest - grossing 2011 film , the highest - grossing Harry Potter film , the highest - grossing children 's book adaptation , the highest - grossing fantasy / live action film and the 13th - highest - grossing 3-D film .
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 40 million tickets .
It set new records in advance ticket sales with $ 32 million , in its midnight opening with $ 43.5 million and in its IMAX midnight opening with $ 2 million .
It grossed $ 91.1 million on its opening Friday , setting a Friday - gross record as well as single- and opening - day records .
It also set an opening - weekend record with $ 169.2 million , an IMAX opening - weekend record of $ 15.2 million and opening - weekend record for a 3-D film .
Although 3-D enhanced the film 's earning potential , only 43 % of the opening gross came from 3-D venues .
This means only $ 72.8 million of the opening - weekend grosses originated from 3-D showings , the second - largest number at the time .
It also scored the largest three - day and four - day gross , the sixth highest - grossing opening week ( Friday to Thursday ) with $ 226.2 million , and even the seventh - largest seven - day gross .
It fell precipitously by 84 % on its second Friday and by 72 % during its second weekend overall , grossing $ 47.4 million , which is the largest second - weekend drop for any film that opened to more than $ 90 million .
Still , it managed to become the fastest - grossing film in the franchise and also achieved the second - largest ten - day gross ever at the time ( now eighth ) .
In its third weekend , the movie surpassed Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone to become the highest - grossing film of the franchise in the US & Canada .
OTHER MARKETS
Section::::Other markets .
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 is the third - highest - grossing film , the highest - grossing 2011 film , the highest - grossing Warner Bros. film and the highest - grossing Harry Potter film .
On its opening day , Deathly Hallows – Part 2 grossed $ 43.6 million from 26 countries , placing it 86 % ahead of Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and 49 % higher than Half - Blood Prince .
From Wednesday until Sunday , on its 5-day opening weekend , it set an opening - weekend record outside the US and Canada by earning $ 314 million .
The average 3D share of Deathly Hallows –
Part 2 was 60 % , which was lower than the 3D share for ( 70 % ) and On Stranger Tides ( 66 % ) .
On its second weekend , it held to the top spot , but fell precipitously by 62 % to $ 120.2 million despite minor competition .
This amount is about the same as what On Stranger Tides made from its second weekend ( $ 124.3 million ) .
Deathly Hallows – Part 2 was in first place at the box office outside North America for four consecutive weekends .
In the United Kingdom , Ireland and Malta it brought in a record $ 14.8 million on its first day .
On its opening weekend it earned £ 23,753,171 in the United Kingdom , marking the second largest opening weekend in 2011 .
Its performance did not surpass that of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban in 2004 , which earned £ 23,882,688 on its opening weekend .
In United States dollars , its opening weekend was an all - time record $ 38.3 million , ahead of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix ( $ 33.5 million ) .
The film also achieved the largest single - day gross on its first Saturday and the largest opening week with $ 57.6 million .
The film made a total of £ 73.1 million ( $ 117.2 million ) at the United Kingdom box office , marking the fifth - highest - grossing film .
It also is the highest - grossing film of 2011 and highest - grossing Harry Potter film .
Deathly Hallows –
Part 2 also set opening - day records in Mexico ( $ 6.1 million ) , Australia ( $ 7.5 million ) , France and the Maghreb region ( $ 7.1 million ) , Italy ( $ 4.6 million ) , Sweden ( $ 2.1 million ) , Norway ( $ 1.8 million ) , Denmark ( $ 1.6 million ) , the Netherlands ( $ 1.7 million ) , Belgium ( $ 1.4 million ) , the Czech Republic ( $ 2.0 million ) , Argentina ( $ 961,000 ) , Finland ( $ 749,000 ) and Hong Kong ( $ 808,000 ) .
It also established new Harry Potter opening - day records in Japan ( $ 5.7 million ) , Brazil ( $ 4.4 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 4.2 million ) , Spain ( $ 3.3 million ) and Poland ( $ 1.25 million ) .
Deathly Hallows –
Part 2 set opening weekend records in India with 15 crores ( $ 3.41 million ) , Australia with $ 19.6 million , New Zealand with $ 2.46 million , Brazil with $ 11 .
million , Scandinavia with $ 18.5 million , Mexico with $ 15.9 million and many other Latin American and European countries .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 96 % based on 315 reviews , with an average rating of 8.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Thrilling , powerfully acted , and visually dazzling , Deathly Hallows Part II brings the Harry Potter franchise to a satisfying – and suitably magical – conclusion . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating to reviews , the film achieved an average of 87 out of 100 , based on 41 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
The film received a score of 93 from professional critics at the Broadcast Film Critics Association ; it is the organisation 's highest - rated Harry Potter film .
On CinemaScore , audiences gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
Philip Womack in The Daily Telegraph commented , " This is monumental cinema , awash with gorgeous tones , and carrying an ultimate message that will resonate with every viewer , young or old : there is darkness in all of us , but we can overcome it . "
He further expressed that David Yates " transmutes [ the book ] into a genuinely terrifying spectacle . "
Another review was released on the same day from Evening Standard , who rated the film 4 out of 5 and stated " Millions of children , parents , and those who should know better wo n't need reminding what a Horcrux is – and director David Yates does not let them down .
In fact , in some ways , he helps make up for the shortcomings of the final book .
"
The Daily Express remarked that the film showcases " a terrifying showdown that easily equals Lord of the Rings or Star Wars in terms of a dramatic and memorable battle between good and evil . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film three and a half out of four and said , " The finale conjures up enough awe and solemnity to serve as an appropriate finale and a dramatic contrast to the lighthearted ( relative ) innocence of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone all those magical years ago . "
Mark Kermode from the BBC said that the film is a " pretty solid and ambitious adaptation of a very complex book " , but he criticised the post - converted 3D. Christy Lemire of the Associated Press gave the film three and a half out of four and said " While Deathly Hallows : Part 2 offers long - promised answers , it also dares to pose some eternal questions , and it 'll stay with you after the final chapter has closed . "
Richard Roeper , also from the Chicago Sun - Times , gave the film an A+ rating and said that " this is a masterful and worthy final chapter in one of the best franchises ever put to film . "
In one of the few negative reviews , Brian Gibson of Vue Weekly described the film as " deadly dull " and a " visual overstatement " .
Other reviews criticised the decision to split the novel into two cinematic parts , with Ben Mortimer of The Daily Telegraph writing "
Deathly Hallows – Part 2 is n't a film .
It 's HALF a film ...
it 's going to feel somewhat emotionless .
"
Other critics wrote of the film 's runtime ; Alonso Duralde from The Wrap said , " If there 's one substantial flaw to the film , it 's that this cavalcade of people and places and objects can barely fit in the 130-minute running time . "
Rebecca Gillie from The Oxford Student gave the film two out of five and wrote , " at the end of [ the film ] there is nothing that stays with you once you 've left the cinema . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film won a number of accolades and nominations .
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 was nominated for Best Art Direction , Best Makeup , and Best Visual Effects at the 84th Academy Awards .
At the 65th BAFTA awards , the film won the Best Visual Effects award , and was nominated in the Best Sound , Best Production Design and Best Make - up and Hair categories .
The film was nominated for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media at the 54th Annual Grammy AwardsBAFTA Awards Screen Actors Guild International Film Music Critics Association Awards rowspan=2Best
Supporting Actor SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 at The Numbers