ALCOHOL LAWS OF INDIA
The legal drinking age in India and the laws which regulate the sale and consumption of alcohol vary significantly from state to state .
In India , consumption of alcohol is prohibited in the states of Bihar , Gujarat and Nagaland as well as the union territory of Lakshadweep .
There is a partial ban on alcohol in some districts of Manipur .
All other Indian states permit alcohol consumption but fix a legal drinking age , which ranges at different ages per region .
In some states , the legal drinking age can be different for different types of alcoholic beverage .
In spite of legal restrictions , alcohol consumption in India has risen over 55 % over a period of 20 years ( according to OECD figures ) .
LAW Section::::Law .
Alcohol is a subject in the State List under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India .
Therefore , the laws governing alcohol vary from state to state .
Liquor in India is generally sold at liquor stores , restaurants , hotels , bars , pubs , clubs and discos .
Some states , like Kerala and Tamil Nadu , prohibit private parties from owning liquor stores making the state government the sole retailer of alcohol in those states .
In some states , liquor may be sold at groceries , departmental stores , banquet halls and/or farm houses .
Some tourist areas have special laws allowing the sale of alcohol on beaches and houseboats .
Home delivery of alcoholic beverages is illegal in Delhi .
However , in Delhi home delivery of beer and wine by private vendors and departmental stores is permitted .
LEGAL DRINKING AGE BY STATES / UTS Section::::Legal drinking age by States / UTs .
The following list is incomplete .
Please help complete the list by providing references !
State / UT ! !
Drinking Age ! !
Remarks 25 others but older than chon are fine DRUNK DRIVING LAW Section::::Drunk Driving Law .
The blood alcohol content ( BAC )
legal limit is 0.03 % or 30 mg alcohol in 100 ml blood .
On 1 March 2012 , the Union Cabinet approved proposed changes to the Motor Vehicle Act .
Higher penalties were introduced , including fines from 2,000 to 10,000 and imprisonment from 6 months to 4 years .
Different penalties are assessed depending on the blood alcohol content at the time of the offence .
DRY DAYS Section::::Dry Days .
Dry Days are specific days when the sale of alcohol is not permitted .
Most of the Indian states observe these days on major national festivals / occasions such as Republic Day ( January 26 ) , Independence Day ( August 15 ) and Gandhi Jayanti ( October 2 ) .
Dry days are also observed on and around voting days .
DRY DAYS BY
STATES / UTS ANDHRA PRADESH AND TELANGANA Section::::Dry Days by States / UTs .
Section::::Andhra Pradesh and Telangana . !
Month ! !
Date Prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
DELHI Section::::Delhi .
Every excise year , the Government of Delhi , notifies the number of Prohibited days in a year .
The three national holidays — January 26 , October 2 and August 15 , are always prohibited days , and additional prohibited days are announced at the start of the excise year ( 1 July ) . !
Month ! !
Date / Festival †
In addition to the above the following days are also prohibited days : * Ram Navami * Maha Shivaratri *
Eid al - Adha * Eid al - Fitr * Muharram * Milad un Nabi * prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
JAMMU AND KASHMIR Jammu
: { class="wikitable " Section::::Jammu and Kashmir . !
Month ! !
Date / Festival †
In addition to the above the following days are also prohibited days :
* Ram Navami * Maha Shivaratri * Prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
* Prohibited days can also be declared on such days not exceeding three days during a year as may be declared by the State Government
Kashmir : { class="wikitable " ! Month ! !
Date / Festival †
In addition to the above the following days are also Prohibited days :
* Maha Shivaratri * Eid al - Fitr
* Eid al - Zuha * Eid - e - Milaad * Prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
* Prohibited days can also be declared on such days not exceeding three days during a year as may be declared by the State Government .
KERALA
Section::::Kerala . !
Month ! !
Date †
During elections , are observed the day of the vote , the day before the vote , and during vote counting .
Sundays are no longer observed as Prohibited days in the state .
KARNATAKA
Section::::Karnataka .
Gandhi Jayanti ( October 2 ) , and also prohibited days are announced when elections are held in the state .
MAHARASHTRA Section::::Maharashtra .
This list may vary depending on the date of festivals as well as specific Prohibited day announcements by the Government of Maharashtra . !
Month ! !
Date / Festival Prohibited days are designated on election days , plus the two days before and after the vote , and the day(s ) of the count , plus one day before and one day after the counting days .
The district collector can also designate any day as a Prohibited day by giving seven days ' notice .
RAJASTHAN Section::::Rajasthan . !
Month ! !
Date / Festival †
In addition to the above the following days are also Prohibited days :
* Maha Shivaratri * Harijan Day
* Prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
TAMIL NADU Section::::Tamil Nadu . !
Month ! !
Date ! !
Festival
* Prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
WEST BENGAL
Section::::West Bengal . !
Month ! !
Date / Festival
In addition to the above the following days are also Prohibited days :
*
On the day of Muharram * Dol Jatra only till 14 hours of the day However , no dry day rule is applicable for 5-star hotels , clubs and resorts in West Bengal .
Drinks may be served and consumed in those places in West Bengal even on " dry days " .
Private consumption too is allowed on the said " dry days " .
Only the open sale of liquor at restaurants , liquor shops and other permitted places is disallowed on those days .
*
For Lok Sabha or Vidhan Sabha elections , Prohibited days are declared for 48 hours prior to the close of voting , plus during the counting day(s ) .
For Municipality , Panchayat , Municipal Corporation , or Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council elections , Prohibited days occur on the polling day , the previous day and the counting day(s ) .
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS Section::::Andaman and Nicobar Islands . !
Month ! !
Date Retail shops are closed on every month on the 7th , which is the pay day / salary day in this union territory , and on 2nd & 4th Tuesdays of every month .
Plus , a maximum of two fulls or four beers are permitted per person for sale in retail shops .
Prohibited days are also announced when elections are held in the state .
SEE ALSO
* Alcohol prohibition in India REFERENCES