LEGO CITY UNDERCOVER
Lego City Undercover is an action - adventure video game developed by TT Fusion for the Wii
U. The game was released on 18 March 2013 in North America , in Europe and Australia on 28 March 2013 and in Japan on 25 July 2013 .
A prequel , was developed for the Nintendo 3DS .
Unlike previous Lego titles developed by Traveller 's Tales , which have been based on various licenses , the game is based on the Lego City brand and is the first Lego game to be published by Nintendo .
It was also the first Lego game to be first released on the Wii U and Nintendo Switch .
A remastered version of the game was released for Microsoft Windows , Nintendo Switch , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One on 4 April 2017 .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Taking place in the vast Lego City , players control an undercover cop named Chase McCain .
Chase goes on the hunt for criminals , with various moves at his disposal , such as swinging across poles and performing wall jumps .
He can also gain disguises that give him additional abilities , such as a robber disguise that lets him break locks .
Chase can also pilot vehicles , such as cars and helicopters , and use loose bricks to build various objects .
Other characters can be playable once unlocked , but they 'll still talk with Chase 's voice ( except in cut - scenes where Chase can still be seen ) .
Custom characters are also playable .
The Wii U GamePad can be used as a device including a communicator and as a scanner to locate criminals .
Lego City
Undercover 's gameplay borrows heavily from the Grand Theft Auto series .
However the game is role - reversed with the player taking on the role of a police officer enforcing the law , rather than a criminal committing crime , although the player is required to commit criminal acts on some occasions in order to infiltrate criminal gangs .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Police officer Chase McCain ( Joseph May ) returns home to Lego City , after being sent away two years ago in the aftermath of an important case , at the request of Mayor Gleeson .
Upon his return , Gleeson reveals the city is in the grips of a crime wave , which she suspects to be the work of Rex Fury - a notorious criminal that Chase helped to arrest , who had recently escaped from prison - and asks Chase to find him and stop him once again .
To assist him in his work , Chase is joined by dim - witted rookie Frank Honey , and assisted by police technician Ellie Phillips , though his return is not welcome news for Natalia Kowalski ( Jules de Jongh ) , Chase 's ex - girlfriend , who was forced into the witness protection program after he inadvertently revealed her as the witness in Fury 's trial , nor Marion Dunby ( Kerry Shale ) , the city 's new Chief of Police , who had Chase sent away because of his mistake as well as always having a giant dislike to him .
After helping to deal with a number of minor cases , Chase manages to gain a few clues that lead him to encountering Rex at Bluebell Mine .
Despite finding him , he is defeated before he can arrest him , and upon regaining consciousness , he learns that Natalia 's father has gone missing .
Despite offering to help her find him , Chase finds his help refused by Natalia .
After being pressured by Gleeson to involve Chase in Rex 's case , upon Frank informing her that he is being purposely kept out of it , Dunby sends Chase undercover within a limousine company owned by Chan Chuang , head of a crime gang .
During his time in the company , he works as a driver for millionaire Forrest Blackwell , gains acceptance with Chan 's boss , Vinnie Pappalardo , and steals a moon buggy for Chan .
When Natalia is captured by Chan , while investigating his connection to her father 's disappearance , Chase goes to rescue her , causing her to accept his help in finding her father , but angering Dunby when Chan goes into hiding .
Dunby temporarily removes him from the case , and has Chase and Frank transferred to Bluebell National Park to work with Sheriff Duke Huckleberry .
Sometime later , Dunby reinstates him to the case , whereupon Chase is tasked by Vinnie to taking on work for him , including the job of stealing a robotic T - Rex from the Lego City museum .
After helping to rescue Natalia from a group of mysterious men , whereupon they partially reconcile , Chase tails Vinnie to his private buyer and finds it to be Rex himself .
When Vinnie learns he wo n't be paid for his work and is ordered to steal more items for his buyer , he instructs Chase to steal from Blackwell .
After breaking into his mansion , Chase returns to Vinne 's ice cream parlour , only to find it overrun by Rex 's thugs and Vinnie locked in a freezer in retaliation for going against Rex 's orders .
Chase manages to save Vinnie from Rex 's thugs , and after interrogating the thug 's leader , takes their place to learn what Rex is planning .
Managing to infiltrate Rex 's hideout , Chase overhears Natalia 's father , Henrik Kowalski , being interrogated by Rex and discovers that Blackwell himself organised the crime wave , and had managed to kidnap Natalia to coerce her father to work on his plans .
Rescuing Kowalski , Chase calls Ellie with what he learnt , whereupon she informs him that Blackwell recently was in the news with promises he had plans that would change Lego City forever .
Proceeding to Blackwell 's mansion , he searches it for evidence of Blackwell 's crimes and to locate Natalia .
Chase soon discovers that Blackwell intends to build a colony on the moon , after his plans to build a shopping mall in Bluebell were thwarted by environmental issues .
To facilitate his plans , Blackwell converted his high - rise , Blackwell Tower , into a rocket , which Chase discovers will destroy the city when it 's launched .
Chase quickly has Henrik and several members in the police department build a force field to prevent the rocket 's engines from burning the city down .
Learning that Blackwell took Natalia with him , Chase pursues him via a space shuttle .
Upon the moon , Chase finds himself using a construction mech to battle against Rex within the modified T - Rex he helped to steal .
Blackwell leaves both men behind , destroying the shuttle .
Chase manages to defeat Rex in a final battle , whereupon Blackwell sends both into free fall towards Earth .
Vowing for revenge , Blackwell finds himself sent flying away by a cow out of nowhere .
Skydiving towards Natalia 's prison within the rocket 's command module , Chase rescues her by triggering the module 's parachute .
Once back in the city , Gleeson congratulates him for saving Lego City , while Dunby offers Chase the honor of overseeing Rex 's arrest .
However , Chase turns it down , claiming Natalia is more important to him now , and leaves with her .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The development team at TT Fusion had been wanting to create a video game based on the Lego City theme for some time , but the available technology and the fact that most staff were working on existing IPs limited their ability to create such a game .
Prototyping for what would become Lego City Undercover began in 2010 , and lasted roughly twelve months .
As they did not have a solid idea of what the game would be , so began with creating a small environment with drivable vehicles and Lego buildings .
In 2011 , Nintendo approached the company and showed them the Wii U hardware , asking whether they would like to develop a game for it .
Having already had good experiences with Nintendo with successful ports of their previous titles and liking the platform 's specs , the team agreed to work with Nintendo .
Developing a game not tied to a movie license gave the team a degree of freedom previously unavailable , while also presenting difficulties with multiple aspects including the story , gameplay and general mechanics of the game .
Due to the high compatibility between the team 's concept and its prospective hardware , ports to other consoles were not seriously considered , until a few years after the game was released .
They were also able to integrate the Gamepad functions into the game , making part of Undercovers world .
Nintendo generally left the team to develop the game as they pleased , though they received regular updates on the project and would notify them if they saw anything as a problem .
One of the early gameplay challenges was the combat , which needed to fit into the story context of the lead character being a policeman .
Instead of a simple brawling style , the team designed the battle system to allow for defensive gameplay and not involve an equivalent to lethal take - downs .
While designing the setting , the team used elements from multiple locations , including New York City , San Francisco and London .
As the game was being developed for a Nintendo console , the team included multiple Nintendo - themed Easter eggs for players to find .
The team had to create a new game engine as previous ones were not able to cope with the scale of the environments .
They also wanted the main character , Chase McCain , to have depth as they knew both children and adults would play the game .
Undercover features full voice acting , which at the time development started was a first for the series , although due to development time , others featuring voice acting were developed and released ahead of it .
For the voice casting , the team used voice casting and recording company Side UK .
A large voice casting session was held , and several established comedians were specifically asked to come in as the team wanted good delivery for the funny sections of the script .
By the time the script writer , former stand - up comedian Graham Goring , was brought on board , a rough outline of the story had been created .
His main role was to fill in the gaps and put in as much humor as possible .
Goring was given a lot of freedom when it came to the parodies , although the team were regularly consulted on the suitability of the material and a script editor was assigned to check his work .
Drawing on his former profession , Goring included a large amount of one - liners and humor intended for both children and adults .
Following the template of The Simpsons , the game contains a high number of family - friendly parodies , referencing movies such as The Shawshank Redemption and The Matrix , and TV series such as Starsky & Hutch .
The game 's story took a while to write , as the team wanted to give it depth .
Lego City Undercover was announced during Nintendo 's press conference at E3 2011 on 7 June 2011 under the tentative title Lego City Stories .
At Nintendo 's press conference at E3 2012 on 5 June 2012 , the game was revealed to have had a name change to Lego City Undercover .
The game 's debut trailer was shown during that event , revealing game footage for the first time .
During Nintendo 's 13 September events , some new trailers detailing the story were shown , along with the announcement that a Chase McCain minifigure would come with the game as a pre - order bonus on North America and Australia while stocks last , and be included in the first copies of the game on Europe .
A police high speed chase toy was also released and includes a code for additional in - game content .
Nintendo also published the game in Japan on 25 July 2013 .
On 22 November 2016 ,
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment announced that a remaster would be released for Microsoft Windows , Nintendo Switch , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One in April 2017 , which introduced split - screen cooperative support .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
With a Metacritic score of 80 on the Wii U version , reviews were largely positive , praising the humour and design , but generally criticizing lengthy loading times and a lack of co - operative multiplayer , the latter of which is a staple in most Lego titles .
Official Nintendo Magazine awarded the game 90 % , making it the magazine 's third highest rated Wii U game at the time .
IGN gave the game 8 out 10 , praising its huge open world while criticising its generic gameplay .
Eurogamer gave the game a score of 9 out of 10 , saying the game features " a mixture of great writing , twinkling level design and laudable values that keep you coming back " .
GamesRadar gave the game 4 out of 5 stars , praising the inventive use of occupations and rewarding puzzles but criticising the lack of co - operative multiplayer .
GameTrailers gave the game a score of 8.4 , calling it " the best game in the series so far . "
Nintendo Insider awarded the game a score of 85 % , writing that it " signals a bold new direction for TT Fusion 's creativity . " SALES Section::::Sales .
According to NPD figures , the game sold more than 100,000 units in the United States in its debut month , debuting outside the top 10 and tying with Monster Hunter 3 Ultimate .
In the UK , the game debuted at number 12 in the all - formats chart , however , it debuted at number 8 in the individual - format chart and at number 1 in the Wii U chart .
In Japan , the game sold more than 18,000 copies during its first week , entering all the charts at number 9 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS