GUN LAWS IN WISCONSIN
Gun laws in Wisconsin regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the U.S. state of Wisconsin .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes
No
Yes
Campus carry is allowed , but buildings may be exempted if signs forbidding firearms are posted .
No
947.01
66.0409 Open carry of loaded handguns and long guns and knives is permitted without a license .
No
No
No
No
No 941.26 } CONSTITUTIONAL PROTECTION Section::::Constitutional protection .
The Constitution of Wisconsin protects the right to bear arms in Article 1 , Section 25 -
" The people have the right to keep and bear arms for security , defense , hunting , recreation or any other lawful purpose . "
PREEMPTION Section::::Preemption .
Wisconsin has state preemption laws which generally forbid cities from passing firearms or knife ordinances stricter than that of state law .
Localities may impose a sales or use tax , and may restrict the discharge of firearms ( except for self - defense ) .
On March 8 , 2017 , the Wisconsin Supreme Court ruled that Madison 's Metro Transit rule forbidding firearms on public buses violated the state 's preemption law , and that people who are lawfully carrying arms must be allowed to carry on public buses .
CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Concealed carry .
Wisconsin is a shall - issue state for concealed carry licensing .
As of November 1 , 2011 , Wisconsin residents may apply for a concealed carry license through the Wisconsin Department of Justice .
The law allows Wisconsin to become the 49th state in the Union to make some provision for the concealed carry of firearms by normal citizens .
OPEN CARRY
Section::::Open carry .
Open carry is legal anywhere concealed carry is legal .
It is legal for all adults who are 18 years of age or older unless they are prohibited from possession of firearms .
A license is not required unless in a taxpayer - owned building or within 1000 feet of school property and not on private property .
In the past , some jurisdictions have tried to prosecute open - carry by equating the open carry of handguns with disorderly conduct .
On April 20 , 2009 the Wisconsin Attorney General 's office released a memorandum to all law enforcement agencies stating that mere open carry of a firearm was not disorderly conduct , and instructed both law enforcement and the district attorneys to cease this practice .
In 2011 a subsection was added to the Disorderly Conduct statute ( 947.01 ) reading " Unless other facts and circumstances that indicate a criminal or malicious intent on the part of the person apply , a person is not in violation of , and may not be charged with a violation of , this section for loading , carrying , or going armed with a firearm , without regard to whether the firearm is loaded or is concealed or openly carried . "
This codified open carry , ending any debate as to its legality .
Loading , or having a loaded , uncased handgun inside a vehicle was legalized beginning November 1 , 2011 .
The firearm must not be " hidden from ordinary observation " while inside the vehicle unless the citizen has a license .
However , the Wisconsin Supreme Court ruled that a license is required to have a concealed loaded handgun within reach in a vehicle , regardless of the Safe Transport Statue removing restrictions on transporting loaded handguns .
CASTLE DOCTRINE Section::::Castle Doctrine .
On December 7 , 2011 , Governor Walker signed a bill passing a Castle Doctrine for Wisconsin .
The bill provides criminal immunity ( WI statute 939.48(1 m ) ) and protection from civil suits ( WI statute 895.62 ) for homeowners or business owners who use a gun in self - defense while on their property , with the presumption that any action is justified .
The law is a " stand your ground " law , which does not contain a duty to retreat .
This applies at the user 's private vehicle , business , and at their home .
Protection extends to improvements only ( driveway , sidewalk , patio , fence , garage , house ... ) , not bare ground .
Also , the criminal must have forcibly entered , or be in the process of attempting to forcibly enter , and the defender must be present in the home , car , or business .
The Washington County DA ruled that opening a door counts as forcible entry .
The law does not apply if force is used against police while in the line of duty if the shooter knows or should have known that the victim was a police officer or other public safety worker.(WI statute 895.62(4)(b ) )
The law also does not protect those who are engaged in criminal activity .
( WI statute 939.48(1m)(b)(1 ) )
NO DUTY TO INFORM Section::::No duty to inform .
Wisconsin is not a " must notify " state .
If an officer is " acting in an official capacity and with lawful authority " , and the citizen is carrying a concealed weapon , the citizen must show both a carry license and photographic identification upon demand .
WI statute 175.60(2g)(c ) GUNS IN VEHICLES Section::::Guns in vehicles .
The Wisconsin Supreme Court ruled that a license is required to have a concealed loaded handgun within reach in a vehicle , regardless of the Safe Transport Statue removing restrictions on transporting loaded handguns .
Beginning November 1 , 2011 , it is legal to load a handgun , or to transport a loaded handgun cased or uncased , in a vehicle without a license .
NOTE :
This does NOT apply to long guns ; they still must be unloaded , but now may be uncased .
There is still some confusion as to whether or not an encased gun is concealed , so if it is cased , best practice is to keep the long gun out of reach .
Long guns must be " discernable to ordinary observation " , since a conceal carry license does not apply .
Previously all firearms had to be unloaded & encased ( per the transport statute ) , & out of reach ( derived from the concealed carry statute ) .
Those with a concealed carry license may conceal a pistol in a vehicle .
WI statute 167.31 BOATS Section::::Boats .
Pistols may be carried openly without a license , and concealed .
Long guns must be unloaded while the motor is running ; they are not required to be encased , but must be in plain sight .
AIRCRAFT Section::::Aircraft .
Firearms are prohibited on commercial aircraft except in checked baggage .
A discussion of federal laws is in this blog post , with links to and quotes from the statutes .
Carry is legal on a private aircraft .
With a license a user may carry openly or concealed .
Without a license , only open carry is legal .
EXCEPTIONS Section::::Exceptions .
Anyone on their own property , on - duty law enforcement officers , military personnel on active duty , landowners and their family and employees on farm tractors inside CWD eradication zones , and disabled hunters with special permits meeting all the requirements .
BUYING AND SELLING Section::::Buying and selling .
Private sales are legal .
No background check or governmental permission / registration are necessary .
A sales receipt is recommended in case the buyer needs to prove ownership ( as when retrieving firearms which have been confiscated by police ) .
As of July 24 , 2015 , there is no longer a 48-hour waiting period on handgun purchases from an FFL ( does not apply to private sales ) .
WI statute 175.35 Rifles and shotguns can be purchased in another state as long as the purchase complies with Federal law and the laws of both states .
There is no longer a requirement that the other state be contiguous .
WI statute 175.30 TITLE II FIREARMS Section::::Title II firearms .
Machine guns ( fully automatic firearms ) are legal if the firearm is registered with the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms & Explosives ( BATFE ) , and the owner has received permission from the local sheriff or chief of police ( 941.26 ) , or the weapon is exempted per statute 941.27 .
Short - barrel rifles and shotguns are legal if they are registered with ATF , state statute 941.28 Suppressors are legal if they are registered with ATF , statute 941.298 STATE PARKS , FISH HATCHERIES , AND WILDLIFE REFUGES Section::::State parks , fish hatcheries , and wildlife refuges .
Statute 29.091 and 29.089 used to require firearms to be encased and unloaded in state wildlife refuges and fish hatcheries .
Those who have a concealed carry permit were not subject to these restrictions on handguns .
As of January 2013 , anyone who is legal to possess a firearm may openly carry a pistol in a state park without a license .
( The law used to say that to possess in a state park , one must be a licensee .
That law was removed . )
The restriction still applies to fish hatcheries & long guns , and in order to enter a taxpayer - owned building anywhere ( including a park ) one must be a licensee .
OTHER LAWS
Section::::Other laws .
Possession of a firearm while intoxicated , or " materially impaired " , shooting within 100 yards of a home without permission , pointing a weapon at anyone except in self - defense , and negligent handling of a weapon are all crimes .
Carrying a concealed weapon without a valid license is a class A misdemeanor .
This is any " weapon " , not just firearms .
This restriction does not apply in one 's own home or business .
A concealed carry license only covers handguns , tasers , billy clubs , and knives .
WI statute 941.23 Carrying a handgun without a concealed carry license where alcohol is sold AND consumed ( the class B establishment - a " tavern " , a place which sells alcohol for on - premises consumption ) is generally a class A misdemeanor unless you have permission from the owner , manager , or agent of the establishment .
Exceptions are having a license , and that the owner or manager of can give permission for someone ( without a license ) to carry openly .
When carrying ( openly or concealed ) on a license , alcohol may not be consumed on the premises .
When carrying openly with permission of the owner or manager , it is legal to consume alcohol as long as you do not become " materially impaired " .
It is legal to carry a handgun into a store that sells alcohol for the express purpose of being consumed elsewhere ( a liquor or grocery store ) .
WI statute 941.237 Armor - piercing ammunition when committing a crime upgrades the crime to a Class H felony .
WI statute 941.296
" No person may carry or display a facsimile firearm in a manner that could reasonably be expected to alarm , intimidate , threaten or terrify another person " , unless on your own property or business , or that of another person with their consent .
WI statute 941.2965
Committing a crime while possessing a dangerous weapon is a penalty enhancer .
WI statute 939.63
It is a felony to possess a firearm or ammunition if one : * Has been convicted of a felony
* Adjudicated delinquent for an act committed on or after April 21 , 1994 , that if committed by an adult would be a felony
* Has been found not guilty of a felony by reason of mental disease or defect * Has been committed under mental health laws and ordered not to possess a firearm
* Is the subject of a restraining order * Is ordered not to possess firearms as a subject of a restraining order or as a condition of bond or parole Any person who knowingly provides a firearm to a prohibited person is party to a felony crime .
It is a class I felony to possess a firearm on school grounds .
This statute does not apply to :
* unloaded and encased firearms
* individuals with firearms for use in a school - approved program * individuals with school contract to possess firearm
* on - duty law enforcement acting in official capacity
* off - duty officers or retired law enforcement who maintain their certification per Federal Law HR218 .
* unloaded firearms when traversing school grounds to gain access to hunting land , if the entry is approved by the school .
It is a forfeiture ( fine ) to possess a usable firearm on public property within 1000 feet of a school unless the carrier is a licensee .
( If the gun is unloaded & encased , it is not a crime . )
Wisconsin only issues resident licenses , and the ATF has interpreted federal law to mean that only licenses issued by the state in which the school is located are sufficient to void the " gun - free " school zone .
It is a class G felony to discharge or attempt to discharge a firearm in a school zone .
Exceptions for self - defense , private property not part of school grounds , school programs , and on - duty law enforcement .
FIREARMS AND MINORS Section::::Firearms and minors .
Leaving a firearm within reach of a child under 14 is generally a misdemeanor if that child points it at anyone , harms anyone , or shows it to anyone in a public place .
Defenses include having the gun locked in a safe or container , having it holstered on their person , having a trigger lock on the gun , removal of a key operating part , illegal entry by anyone to obtain the firearm , or a reasonable belief a juvenile could not access the firearm .
WI statute 948.55 Firearms retailers are required to provide every buyer with a written warning stating , " If you leave a loaded firearm within the reach or easy access of a child , you may be fined or imprisoned or both if the child improperly discharges , possesses or exhibits the firearm . "
WI statute 175.37 Possession of a dangerous weapon by anyone under 18 is a class A misdemeanor .
Giving / loaning / selling a dangerous weapon to someone under 18 is a class I felony .
WI statute 948.60 Defenses to prosecution under this statute : *
Target practice under the supervision of an adult * Members of armed forces or police under 18 in the line of duty
* Hunting ( either with an adult or having passed hunter 's safety ) For hunting purposes , the following exceptions to the age limit apply , as specified in statute 29.304 for firearms with barrels 12 " or longer .
* under 10 may not hunt with a firearm or bow under any circumstances * under 10 can only possess firearm / bow in Hunter Safety class , or while cased / unloaded and under adult supervision while going to / from Hunter Safety class , or while under adult supervision while at a target range .
* anyone age 10 or over may hunt when accompanied by an adult ( within arms reach , both must be licensed ,
only _ one _ firearm / bow between the adult and mentor ( no hunter safety course requirement for the mentored hunter ) .
* 12 - 13 may hunt when accompanied by an adult and the child has successfully completed a Hunter Safety class .
* 12 - 13 may possess firearm when accompanied by an adult , or while transporting cased / unloaded firearm to / from Hunter Safety class , or in Hunter Safety class * 14 - 17 is the same as 12 - 13 , except Hunter Safety graduates can hunt and possess firearms ( rifles / shotguns ) without adult supervision .
School students shall be suspended until their expulsion hearing if they possess a firearm in school or during a school event ( except if the student is participating in a Hunter Safety class ) .
State law requires a minimum one - year expulsion for this offense .
Statute 120.13(1)(bm ) and 120.13(1)(c)2 m .
In addition , the student 's driver 's license may be suspended for two years under Statute 938.34(14q ) .
This suspension also applies to students who make bomb threats or having CCW violations in taxpayer - owned buildings .
SCHOOL ZONES Section::::School zones .
" School " means a public , parochial or private school which provides an educational program for one or more grades between grades 1 and 12 and which is commonly known as an elementary school , middle school , junior high school , senior high school or high school .
" School zone " means any of the following : 1 .
In or on the grounds of a school .
2 .
Within 1000 ' from the grounds of a school .
WI statute 948.605(1)(c )
Any individual who knowingly possesses a firearm at a place that the individual knows , or has reasonable cause to believe , is in or on the grounds of a school is guilty of a Class I felony unless one of the exemptions applies .
WI statute 948.605(2)(a )
Possession in the 1000 ' zone is a forfeiture ( ticket ) , unless an exception applies .
The most common of those are : private property , licensee , unloaded & encased .
WI statute 948.605(2)(b ) references 18USC922(q)(2)(b )
( i ) , ( iv ) , ( v ) , ( vi ) , & ( vii ) .
ADDITIONAL WISCONSIN LAWS TABLE
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Wisconsin Department of Justice — Concealed Carry home page
* Wisconsin Carry - concealed carry FAQ