ALCOHOL LAWS OF SOUTH CAROLINA
The alcohol laws of South Carolina are part of the state 's history .
Voters endorsed prohibition in 1892 but instead were given the " Dispensary System " of state - owned liquor stores .
Currently , certain counties may enforce time restrictions for beer and wine sales in stores , although there are no dry counties in South Carolina .
PROHIBITION Section::::Prohibition .
Prohibition was a major issue in the state 's history .
Voters endorsed prohibition in 1892 but instead were given the " Dispensary System " of state - owned liquor stores ,
They soon became symbols of political corruption controlled by Ben Tillman 's machine and were shut down in 1907 .
Today , the retail sale of liquor statewide is permitted from 9 a.m. until 7 p.m. Monday – Saturday , and Sunday sales are banned by state law .
However , counties and cities may hold referendums to allow Sunday sales of beer and wine only .
Counties currently allowing Sunday beer and wine sales : Berkeley , Beaufort , Charleston , Dorchester , Georgetown , Horry , Newberry , Oconee , Richland ( unincorporated areas only ) , and York .
Lancaster and Lexington allow in cities with referendums .
Cities and towns that have passed laws allowing Sunday beer and wine sales include Columbia , Spartanburg , Charleston , Greenville , Aiken , Rock Hill , Summerville , Santee , Daniel Island , Hardeeville and Tega Cay .
VARIED STANCES
Section::::Varied stances .
While there are no dry counties in South Carolina , and retail liquor sales are uniform statewide , certain counties may enforce time restrictions for beer and wine sales in stores ( e.g. , no sales after 2 a.m. in Pickens County ) while others do not ( in - store beer and wine sales are allowed 24 hours a day , 7 days a week in Charleston ) .
Columbia , the state 's capital , largest city , and the home of the University of South Carolina , took one of the more relaxed stances on alcohol sales in bars compared to other cities in the state .
Many bars , especially those catering to younger crowds in the busy Five Points district , served alcohol until sunrise , and it was not unheard of for bars and clubs to serve alcohol until 7 or 8 a.m. , although the legality of this practice is questionable .
In 2011 , however , Columbia City Council voted to force bars to close at 2 a.m. , requiring a special permit to stay open further .
Requirements for the permit involved having trained security staff and no events that violate " the public peace " ( wet T - shirt contests , etc . ) .
In Greenville city limits , it is illegal to serve alcohol after 2 a.m. at bars and restaurants .
MINIBOTTLES Section::::Minibottles .
Before 2006 , South Carolina was infamous amongst tourists and residents alike for being the last state in the nation to require cocktails and liquor drinks to be mixed using minibottles , like those found on airplanes , instead of from free - pour bottles .
The original logic behind this law was twofold : it made alcohol taxation simpler and allowed bar patrons to receive a standardized amount of alcohol in each drink .
However , minibottles contain 1.75 oz ( 52 ml ) of alcohol , approximately 30 % more than the typical 1.2 oz ( 35 ml ) found in free - pour drinks , with the obvious result of overly strong cocktails and inebriated bar customers .
The law was changed in 2006 to allow both free - pour and minibottles in bars , and the vast majority of bars quickly eschewed minibottles in favor of free - pour .
REFERENCES