TEEN WOLF ( SEASON 1 )
The first season of Teen Wolf , an American supernatural drama , was developed by Jeff Davis based upon the 1985 film of the same name , premiered on June 5 , 2011 and concluded on August 15 , 2011 on the MTV network .
The season featured 12 episodes .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Scott McCall ( Tyler Posey ) , is an average teenager suffering from asthma and living with his single mother in Beacon Hills .
One night , he and his best friend Stiles Stilinski ( Dylan O'Brien ) , the son of the local sheriff , Sheriff Stilinski ( Linden Ashby ) , learn about half a corpse found by police in the woods .
The two set out to find the other half , but Scott is attacked and bitten by a werewolf .
With his new - found lycanthropy , Scott gains supernatural abilities , such as enhanced speed and heightened senses , enabling him to excel as the captain of his Beacon Hills High School lacrosse team .
He gains respect from popular girl , Lydia Martin ( Holland Roden ) and the envy of her lacrosse - playing boyfriend Jackson Whittemore ( Colton Haynes ) .
Scott also develops a romantic relationship with school newcomer , Allison Argent ( Crystal Reed ) ; however , he discovers her father Chris Argent ( JR Bourne ) is a werewolf hunter .
Scott and Stiles meet Beta werewolf Derek Hale ( Tyler Hoechlin ) , whose family perished in flames during a mysterious house fire 6 years ago .
They uncover the second half of the missing corpse and discover it is Derek 's sister , Laura Hale .
Scott learns the Alpha werewolf , the most powerful of all wolves , is on a murdering spree and was responsible for biting him .
Realizing the consequences and dangers of his new life , he is forced to protect his peers and loved ones , including his girlfriend Allison , who does not know she belongs to a family of werewolf hunters .
Allison 's cruel werewolf - hunter aunt , Kate Argent ( Jill Wagner ) , arrives into town .
Derek suspects Scott 's mysterious veterinarian boss , Dr. Alan Deaton ( Seth Gilliam ) is the Alpha , but after it is confirmed that he is not , Alan concedes he is aware of the supernatural world and becomes Scott 's ally .
Jackson learns Scott is a werewolf and devises a plan to become a werewolf himself to rival Scott 's success at lacrosse .
The Alpha werewolf is revealed to be Derek 's uncle , Peter Hale ( Ian Bohen ) , who was the only survivor of the fire .
Kate reveals to Derek that it was she who started the fire , and she also reveals the existence of werewolves to Allison .
Chris Argent finds out that Scott is a werewolf , but realizes he is innocent .
Peter bites Lydia , who becomes catatonic , and it later turns out that she is mysteriously immune to the bite .
Allison discovers that Scott is a werewolf , but this does not change her romantic feelings about him .
Scott finds out that Peter had killed Laura ( his niece ) to become an Alpha werewolf .
Allison sees that her aunt Kate is actually cruel and remorseless , and Peter gains revenge for the fire that killed his family by finally killing Kate .
However , Derek kills Peter , and becomes the new Alpha werewolf .
At the end , Jackson demands Derek bite him and Derek complies .
Adrian Harris ( Adam Fristoe ) , Coach Bobby Finstock ( Orny Adams ) , Danny Mahealani ( Keahu Kahuanui ) , Melissa McCall ( Melissa Ponzio ) and Victoria Argent ( Eaddy Mays ) also appear during the season .
CAST MAIN * Tyler Posey as Scott McCall * Crystal Reed as Allison Argent * Dylan O'Brien as Stiles Stilinski
* Tyler Hoechlin as Derek Hale
* Holland Roden as Lydia Martin * Colton Haynes as Jackson Whittemore RECURRING EPISODES
Section::::Episodes . AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
class = unsortable Year !
Association !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Season 1 was released on DVD in the United States on May 22 , 2012 , which is 12 days before the premiere of season 2 on June 3 , 2012 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS