ICE BATH
In sports therapy , an ice bath , or sometimes cold - water immersion or cold therapy , is a training regimen usually following a period of intense exercise in which a substantial part of a human body is immersed in a bath of ice or ice - water for a limited duration .
While it is becoming increasingly popular and accepted among athletes in a variety of sports , the method is controversial , with a risk of hypothermia , with the possibility of shock leading to sudden death .
Many athletes have used cold water immersion after an intense exercise workout in the belief that it speeds up bodily recovery ; however , the internal physical processes are not well understood and remain elusive .
Generally research into the health effects of cold water immersion as part of an athletic training regimen is inconclusive , with some studies suggesting a mild benefit such as reducing muscle damage and discomfort and alleviating delayed onset muscle soreness , with other studies suggesting that cold water immersion may slow muscle growth and interfere with an overall training regimen .
TECHNIQUES BATH Section::::Techniques .
Section::::Bath .
It is done by standing or sitting in a bucket or bath of icy water .
One writer advised : " do n't overdo it . "
Wearing rubberized " dive booties " on the feet ( to protect toes ) as well as rubber briefs to warm the midsection have been recommended .
Champion weightlifter Karyn Marshall , who won the world women 's weightlifting championship in 1987 , described what it was like to take an ice bath after a day of competition at the CrossFit Games in 2011 in Los Angeles :
One report suggested that if ice water is circulating , it 's even colder such that the water will be colder than measured by a thermometer , and that athletes should avoid overexposure .
Physical therapist Nikki Kimball explained a way to make the bath more endurable : ICE BATH ONLY VERSUS CONTRAST BATH THERAPY Section::::Ice bath only versus contrast bath therapy .
Some athletes use a technique known as contrast water therapy or contrast bath therapy , in which cold water and warmer water are alternated .
One method of doing this was to have two tubs––one cold ( 10–15 degrees Celsius ) and another hot ( 37–40 degrees Celsius ) – – and to do one minute in the cold tub followed by two minutes in a hot tub , and to repeat this procedure three times .
TEMPERATURE AND TIMING Section::::Temperature and timing .
The temperature can vary , but is usually in the range of 50–59 degrees Fahrenheit or between 12 and 15 degrees Celsius .
Some athletes wear booties to keep their toes warm or rubberized coverings around their midsection while immersed .
Some drink a warm beverage such as tea .
One report suggested that " ten minutes immersed in 15 degree Celsius water " was sufficient .
Accounts vary about how long to be immersed and how often to do them .
One adviser suggested that an athlete should take ten two - minute ice bath treatments over a two - week period .
One account suggested immersion times should be between ten and twenty minutes .
Another suggested that immersion run from five to ten minutes , and sometimes to twenty minutes .
There were no sources advocating being immersed for longer than twenty minutes .
ICE BATHS
VERSUS
COLD BATHS Section::::Ice baths versus cold baths .
Several sources suggest that cold baths ( 60–75 degrees Fahrenheit ) were preferable to ice baths .
Physiotherapist Tony Wilson of the University of Southampton said that extremely cold temperatures were unnecessary and a " cold bath " would be just as effective as an ice bath .
Another agreed that a mere cold bath is preferable to ice baths which are " unnecessary . "
A third report suggested that cool water ( 60–75 degrees Fahrenheit ) was just as good as water at a lower temperature ( 54–60 degrees Fahrenheit ) and that eight to ten minutes should be sufficient time , and warned against exceeding ten minutes .
EFFECTIVENESS Section::::Effectiveness .
After exercise , there is some evidence that taking an ice bath may reduce delayed onset muscle soreness , but no good evidence of any other benefit .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
There is agreement in the medical and scientific communities that ice baths can pose serious risks to health .
Risks include hypothermia , shock and the possibility of sudden cardiac death .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Marathon runner Paula Radcliffe won the 10,000 m event at the 2002 European championships and attributed her victory to the use of ice baths .
She reportedly said " It 's absolute agony , and I dread it , but it allows my body to recover so much more quickly . "
She reported taking ice baths before racing and preferred her pre - race bath temperature to be " very cold . "
After the Radcliffe comment , the technique has grown in popularity .
It is gaining in popularity among athletes , such that some athletes " swear by it " but other accounts suggest it may be a fad .
It has been used by athletes such as A. J. Soares and Olympic swimmer
Michael Phelps as well as other celebrity endorsers and is getting to become " common practice " among athletes from different sports , including American football , association football ( soccer ) , long distance running , rugby , tennis , volleyball , and other sports .
There was a report that sports equipment manufacturers are considering different designs for ice baths .
In the summer of 2014 , as a fundraising method , the nonprofit ALS Association , which raises money for research and public awareness of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS , also known as Lou Gehrig 's Disease , began the Ice Bucket Challenge which involved donors filming themselves and challenging other donors to participate and then being doused with a bucket of ice cold water ; as a fundraising effort , it raised $ 16 million over a 22-day period .
There are indications that ice baths may be gaining popularity with groups outside sports , such as dance .
The Pittsburgh Post - Gazette reported that some Radio City Rockettes , a precision dance company performing in New York City , use ice baths after a long day of performing as a way to " unwind " and cope with " aches and pains .
"
One report suggested that entertainer Madonna used ice baths after her performances .
And there are indications that use of ice baths is spreading to amateur sports , such as high school football .
Ice baths are a part of a broader phenomenon known as cryotherapy––the Greek word cryo ( κρυο ) means cold––which describes a variety of treatments when cold temperatures are used therapeutically .
Cryotherapy includes procedures where a person is placed in a room with " cold , dry air at temperatures as low as −135 ° C " for short periods of time , and which has been used in hospitals in Poland as well as a center in London to treat not only muscular ailments , but psychological problems such as depression .
Basketball player Manny Harris reportedly used a Cryon - X machine featuring extreme low temperatures around minus 166 degrees Fahrenheit , but used it with wet socks resulting in a serious freezer burn .
Occasionally ice baths have been an ill - advised treatment of fever in young children , but that doctors were counseled not to use this technique because of the risk of hypothermia .
Ice baths have been suggested as a way to prevent muscle soreness after shoveling snow .
In addition , there have been instances of ice bathing as an extreme bodily test by persons vying for an endurance record , such as Dutch Iceman Wim Hof , and Chinese record - holders Chen Kecai and Jin Songhao .
According to reports , doctors and scientists are studying how these people can spend an hour and a half submerged in an ice bath , and survive ; for almost all humans , such tasks are impossible .
SEE ALSO * Cryotherapy
* Dousing
* Ice bucket challenge *
Polar bear plunge *
Winter swimming REFERENCES