INFAMOUS : FESTIVAL OF BLOOD
Infamous : Festival of Blood is an action - adventure standalone downloadable content video game developed by Sucker Punch Productions for the PlayStation 3 video game console .
Festival of Blood is an expansion in the Infamous series based on the Infamous 2 engine and map , but does not require a copy of Infamous 2 in order to play .
The story is set aside from the canon aspect of the Infamous series , being a spoof told by the main protagonist 's friend Zeke Dunbar and follows the story of Cole 's gradual transformation into a vampire .
The game features new characters and powers and a new comic cutscene creation for the main game Infamous 2s user - generated content ( UGC ) , as well as support for the PlayStation Move controller .
Unlike previous games , the game does not feature karmic choices on missions due to Cole 's vampire state , and it does not penalize the player for killing civilians by drinking their blood .
Infamous :
Festival of Blood – along with Infamous and Infamous 2 – was released on August 28 , 2012 as part of the Infamous Collection under Sony 's new line of PlayStation Collections for the PlayStation 3 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Zeke Dunbar meets a woman at a bar and talks with her , when she notices a comic book Zeke was reading .
The woman is about to leave until Zeke mentions his relationship with Cole MacGrath , persuading the woman to stay and listen as he begins to tell her a story involving Cole during the events of " Pyre Night " , a fictional celebration in New Marais .
During the event , Cole investigates a nearby church after hearing screams , rescuing civilians trapped in its crumbling catacombs .
As Cole ventures deeper looking for more survivors , he encounters a woman yelling , who is revealed to be a vampire .
Cole is then cuffed and dragged to a tomb deep within the church , and awakens on top of the corpse of a vampire known as Bloody Mary .
One of the vampires opens up a vein from Cole 's neck and drips his blood onto Mary 's corpse , awakening her due to its superhuman properties .
She then proceeds to bite Cole , drinking his blood and turning him into a vampire , while her youth and powers are restored from Cole 's Conduit blood .
When Cole comes to , he realizes his amp is missing , forcing him to create a makeshift wooden stake in order to fight his way out .
Having escaped , he realizes , to his horror , that Mary can now invade his mind .
She taunts Cole telepathically , saying that by dawn , he will complete his transformation and become her puppet forever .
Driven by the need to drink blood , he feeds on a random civilian .
At the same time , Mary 's followers surface and begin rounding up other civilians , taking advantage of Pyre Night to blend in .
Seeking a solution , Cole contacts Zeke and both begin researching Pyre Night , the celebration commemorating the burning of Bloody Mary by town hero Father Ignatius centuries ago .
They eventually find out the folklore surrounding Father Ignatius , including a weapon he crafted to kill vampires , the Barbed Cross .
Cole goes to Ignatius 's grave to retrieve the weapon , but finds that the vampires have already claimed it .
Using his finely - tuned vampire senses , Cole is able to identify the vampire who stole it , but he does not have it either .
Desperate , Cole heads towards Bloody Mary 's tomb , believing it to be there .
Instead , he discovers a plot by the vampires to set fire to the surface of New Marais with white phosphorus bombs , as well as mementos kept by Bloody Mary detailing her past .
According to the mementos , Mary was once a governess to a wealthy family until she contracted a fatal case of smallpox .
Her admirer , a vampire named Marco , turned her to save her life , and the two went to Europe to start new lives .
One night , they were ambushed by Ignatius and Marco was killed , cursing Mary to remain a vampire for all eternity .
Enraged , Mary established her own clan and traveled to New Marais , where she terrorized the inhabitants until Ignatius captured her and she was burnt alive .
Realizing the power of the cross , Cole and Zeke set out to retrieve it .
Upon finding it , the two storm the church , with Cole holding off Mary and her forces while Zeke plants the phosphorus bombs he stole earlier .
As the morning sun rises , Cole struggles to escape the church as Zeke detonates the bombs , destroying Mary and her clan .
Her death frees Cole and he slowly returns to normal .
Back in the present , Zeke finishes his story .
The woman refuses to believe him until Cole arrives , needing Zeke 's help to retrieve his amp from a pool .
The woman follows Cole to help him out and thanks Zeke for " informing " her before revealing herself to be a vampire , much to his shock .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Infamous : Festival of Blood received positive reviews .
On Metacritic , it has received a 78/100 out of 32 critics , indicating " generally favorable " reviews .
On GameRankings , the game received a 79.71 % based on 28 reviews .
As of November 19 , 2011 , the game was the number one downloaded game on the PlayStation Network , and was the number two downloaded game of November 2011 .
According to PlayStation Blog , Festival of Blood was the fastest - selling PlayStation 3 downloadable game launched on PlayStation Network , as of December 2011 .
The record was later surpassed by Journey .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Infamous : Festival of Blood at Sucker Punch Productions