HIGH - MALTOSE CORN SYRUP High - maltose corn syrup is a food additive used as a sweetener and preservative .
The majority sugar is maltose .
It is less sweet than high - fructose corn syrup and contains little to no fructose .
It is sweet enough to be useful as a sweetener in commercial food production , however .
To be given the label " high " , the syrup must contain at least 50 % maltose .
Typically , it contains 40–50 % maltose , though some have as high as 70 % .
By using β - amylase or fungal α - amylase , glucose syrups containing over 50 % maltose , or even over 70 % maltose ( extra - high - maltose syrup ) can be produced .
This is possible because these enzymes remove two glucose units , that is , one maltose molecule at a time from the end of the starch molecule .
USES Section::::Uses .
High - maltose corn syrup is used as a substitute for normal glucose syrup in the production of hard candy : at a given moisture level and temperature , a maltose solution has a lower viscosity than a glucose solution , but will still set to a hard product .
Maltose is also less humectant than glucose , so that candy produced with high - maltose syrup will not become sticky as easily as candy produced with a standard glucose syrup .
Since maltose has a low freezing point , HMCS is useful in frozen desserts .
It is also used in brewing , because it has a balanced fermentability , can be added at high concentrations to the wort kettle , increasing throughput , and reduces haze caused by varying malt quality .
Another of HMCS 's uses is to preserve food .
According to the Center for Science in the Public Interest , HMCS preserves food by inhibiting fermentation and bacterial growth .
HEALTH EFFECTS Section::::Health effects .
In recent years , HMCS has seen an increase in use as a food additive due to the negative reputation of HFCS , as well as the absence of fructose , which is the source of the concern about the health effects of high fructose corn syrup .
High - maltose syrups produced from corn are gluten - free , but certain syrups produced from wheat or barley may contain small amounts of gluten .
It is unclear whether this can have significant effects in celiac disease .
REFERENCES