LIST OF OBJECTS
THAT HAVE GONE OVER NIAGARA FALLS Numerous objects , both natural and artificial , have gone over the Niagara Falls .
These events have been the result of both stunts and accidents , some of which have resulted in fatalities .
The first recorded person to survive going over the falls was Annie Edson Taylor , who went over the falls in a barrel in 1901 .
72 years previously , however , Sam Patch had jumped from a platform adjacent to Goat Island .
An estimated 5,000 bodies were found at the foot of the falls between 1850 and 2011 , and an estimated 40 people are killed each year when they are swept over the falls — most of which are suicides .
Other figures suggest that the number of suicides is between 20 and 30 , many of which are not publicized by officials .
The majority of jumps take place from the Canadian Falls , which account for between 55 % and 70 % of suicides .
Mortality rate for the daredevil attempts over the falls is approximately 25 % .
PEOPLE
* 1901 – On October 24 , Annie Edson Taylor went over the falls in a barrel .
She was mostly unharmed , but exited the barrel bleeding .
* 1903 –
On July 2 , Ed Delahanty , a baseball player , was swept over the falls .
He had fallen from the International Railway Bridge , after having been kicked off a night train for drunk and disorderly conduct and threatening passengers .
Delahanty 's body was later recovered near the Maid of the Mist 's berth ; his body was mangled and one leg was severed .
* 1911 – On July 25 , Bobby Leach went over the falls in a barrel .
He spent the following six months in hospital , recovering from two broken knee caps and a fractured jaw .
* 1920 – On July 11 , Charles Stephens from Bristol went over the falls in a barrel .
Bobby Leach and William " Red " Hill , Sr . urged Stephens to test his barrel over the falls before attempting the stunt , but he refused .
When the barrel was recovered at the foot of the falls , the ballast had pulled Stephen 's body out of the barrel , leaving just his right arm in the safety harness .
* 1928 – On July 4 , Jean Lussier went over the falls in a large ball with a spring steel frame and a rubber covering .
* 1930 – On July 4 , George Stathakis , a Greek immigrant working as a chef in Buffalo , New York , went over the falls in a barrel .
Upon impact , the barrel was stuck behind a curtain of water and could not be recovered for 18 hours .
Stathakis had an air supply of up to eight hours – although he had survived the initial fall , he died of suffocation .
Stathakis took the plunge with his pet turtle , which was said to be around 150 years old .
The turtle survived the ordeal .
* 1930 – On September 5 , the body of an unidentified woman went over the American Falls ; the remains were seen in the lower river but sank .
* 1951 – On August 5 , William " Red " Hill , Jr. ( son of William " Red " Hill , Sr . ) went over the falls in a craft he named " The Thing " .
The vessel broke apart on impact and Hill was killed ; his body was found the following day .
* 1960 – On July 9 , a seven - year - old American boy named Roger Woodward was swept over the falls .
Woodward , his sister Deanne and boat driver James Honeycutt were in a aluminium fishing boat powered by a motor which capsized .
Roger , who was wearing a lifejacket and remained buoyant , was rescued by the Maid of the Mist at the bottom of the falls ; Deanne was pulled from the river from the lip of the falls by two bystanders — John Hayes and John Quattrochi .
Honeycutt died in the accident .
* 1961 – On July 15 , Nathan Boya ( also known as William Fitzgerald ) went over the falls in a rubber ball nicknamed the " Plunge - O - Sphere " .
The ball hit rocks on impact and bounced , but Boya was uninjured .
* 1981 – On August 29 , Dunia Sayegh , a 28-year - old resident of Toronto , dropped her two - month - old son , Hesham , over the railing and into the river just up from the brink of Horseshoe Falls on the Canadian side , whereupon he was quickly swept over the falls .
The boy 's body was never found .
Sayegh was arrested and charged with second - degree murder .
The charges were dismissed after Sayegh claimed she accidentally dropped the child after suffering a dizzy spell .
* 1984 – On July 3 , Karel Soucek went over the falls in a barrel .
He emerged with only minor injuries to his face , caused by his wristwatch on impact with the water .
Soucek 's descent was reported to be , and it took 45 minutes for the barrel to be recovered .
* 1985 –
On August 18 , Steve Trotter went over the falls in a barrel .
It was his second attempt – his first , in November 1984 , was foiled by the police .
Trotter 's third attempt ( on June 18 , 1995 ) was also successful , when he went over the falls with Lori Martin .
* 1985 –
On October 5 , David Munday went over the falls in a barrel .
During his second attempt , in 1990 , the barrel became lodged at the top of the falls and was removed by crane .
His third attempt , in 1993 , was successful .
* 1989 – On September 28 , Peter De Bernardi and Jeffery James Petkovich went over the falls in a reinforced barrel .
Their stunt was to draw attention to an anti - drugs campaign .
* 1990 – On June 5 , Jesse Sharp went over the falls in a whitewater canoe .
He intended to continue paddling downriver after the fall , and had made dinner reservations at a restaurant in Lewiston , downstream .
After beginning the plunge he quickly disappeared into the falls and although his kayak was later found ; his body was never recovered .
Sharp decided not to wear a life jacket in case it impeded an escape should he get trapped under the falls , and refused to wear a helmet in order to keep his face recognizable to cameras .
* 1995 – On October 1 , Robert Overacker went over the falls on a Jet Ski to raise awareness for the homeless .
His rocket - propelled parachute failed to open and he plunged to his death .
Overacker 's body was recovered the next day and he was pronounced dead at Niagara General Hospital .
* 2003 – On October 22 , Kirk Jones went over the falls .
He became the first person to survive the drop without any aid in the fall , having swum from approximately before swimming over the falls .
Jones and his friends had been drinking before the incident , and had planned to record the event — although his friends were not able to operate the recorder .
Jones was fined $ 2,300 and banned for life from entering Canada .
Jones has said that his going over the falls was a suicide attempt rather than a stunt .
* 2009 – On March 10 , an unnamed man attempted suicide over the falls .
In the attempt , his clothes were ripped from his body and he suffered shock and a laceration to the head , but survived .
* 2011 – On May 26 , an unidentified woman was killed after she was swept over Horseshoe Falls .
Reports suggest that she appeared alive on approaching the brink , but was declared dead on arrival of the rescue boat .
* 2011 – On August 14 , Ayano Tokumasu — a Japanese exchange student — was swept over the falls .
Niagara Parks Police surveillance cameras show Tokumasu climbing onto the railing near the water 's edge and sitting on a pillar block .
At about 8:30 p.m. she stood up , lost her footing , and fell over the edge into the Niagara River , approximately upstream from the falls .
Her body was recovered on August 18 .
* 2012 – On May 21 , an unidentified man in his early 40s became the fourth person to survive an unprotected trip over Horseshoe Falls .
Eyewitness reports indicate that he " deliberately jumped " into the Niagara River after climbing over a railing .
He suffered broken ribs , a collapsed lung and lacerations .
* 2017 – On April 19 , Kirk Jones , the same man who went over the falls unprotected in 2003 , attempted it again , this time inside an inflatable ball .
He did not survive .
The ball was picked up afterward by boat , and Jones 's body was recovered on June 2 .
* 2017 – On October 15 , an unnamed 10-year - old boy fell between into the Niagara gorge after losing his balance on a railing along the gorge .
He was airlifted to hospital with non life - threatening injuries .
* 2018 -
On December 16 at roughly 10:30 am , an elderly man wearing black was seen entering the Canadian side of the falls .
His body was briefly seen at the base of the falls but disappeared shortly after .
ANIMALS
* Fish regularly swim down the falls .
The rapids upstream are rich in nutrients which draw fish in , and the currents can disorient them sufficiently to cause them to go over the falls .
More fish survive the fall over Horseshoe Falls than the American Falls , due to the latter 's talus .
At one point , a tourist was grazed at the Cave of the Winds when a salmon was swept over the falls and hit him .
* Instances of waterfowl being swept over the falls have been recorded , particularly when disoriented in foggy weather .
*
In 1827 , William Forsyth , a hotel owner , bought a schooner called Michigan .
He filled it with a buffalo , two small bears , two raccoons , and a dog .
Some reports say two foxes , fifteen geese , and an eagle were also included .
After the schooner was sent adrift , the two bears jumped free and swam to Goat Island .
The rest of the animals , with the exception of the goose , perished going over the Falls .
*
On October 19 , 1901 , a cat named Lagara was sent over the falls in a barrel and survived .
*
On July 5 , 1930 , a turtle named Sonny went over the falls in a barrel with its owner , George Stathakis .
The massive barrel survived the fall , but became trapped beneath the falls for hours .
Stathakis suffocated and died , but the turtle , believed to be around 150 years old , survived .
INANIMATE OBJECTS * 1829
– On November 23 , a schooner named the Superior went over the falls .
It was a deliberate event that was originally scheduled to coincide with Sam Patch 's stunt , but the ship was caught in the falls ' whirlpools and rested on rocks in shallow water for a month until stronger currents took it over the falls .
* 1837 – On December 29 , the steamer Caroline was set alight and sent over the falls during the Upper Canada Rebellion .
The events were part of the Caroline affair .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS