LIST OF TEEN WOLF CHARACTERS Teen Wolf is an American television series that airs on MTV .
The series premiered on Sunday , June 5 , 2011 , following the 2011 MTV Movie Awards .
Teen Wolf is a supernatural drama series that follows Scott McCall ( Tyler Posey ) , a high school student and social outcast who is bitten by a werewolf .
He tries to maintain a normal life while hiding his secret and dealing with supernatural dangers that plague the town of Beacon Hills .
He is aided by his best friend , Stiles Stilinski ( Dylan O'Brien ) , and mysterious werewolf , Derek Hale ( Tyler Hoechlin ) .
Casting announcements were made in December 2010 , with the rest of the main cast being Crystal Reed , Holland Roden and Colton Haynes playing Allison Argent , Lydia Martin and Jackson Whittemore respectively .
Haynes left the series after the second season to work on Arrow .
He returned in the second part of the sixth season as a guest star .
Reed followed , leaving after the third season to pursue other projects .
She returned to guest star in the second part of Season 5 and played one of Allison 's ancestors .
Arden Cho , Shelley Hennig , and Dylan Sprayberry joined the cast for Seasons 4 and 5 .
Tyler Hoechlin left the series after the fourth season .
Hoechlin later returned to the show in the second part of the sixth season in a guest capacity .
On April 11 , 2016 , Arden Cho announced that she would not be returning for Season 6 .
After appearing in a recurring capacity in the first five seasons , Linden Ashby , Melissa Ponzio and J.R. Bourne were all upgraded to series regulars for the final season .
CAST 123456Main
castRecurring
cast CAST NOTES MAIN CHARACTERS meld minds and enter Stiles ' mind with Lydia .
Because Stiles is in his Pack , Scott uses his Alpha Roar , allowing Stiles to break free of the Nogitsune .
In " Insatiable " , Allison is fatally stabbed by the Oni .
Scott tries to save her life by taking her pain , but he ca n't .
Allison comforts Scott , telling him she is in his arms
and she loves him before she dies .
Devastated , Scott kisses Allison 's forehead .
In the Season 3B finale , " The Divine Move " , Scott defeats the Nogitsune with an Alpha 's Bite , as the Dark Kitsune ca n't be both a Fox and a Wolf .
At Season 3 's end , Scott moves on with his life mourning Allison .
In Season 4 , Scott is trying to come to terms with Allison 's death .
He puts his romance with Kira on hold , but eventually decides to move on and give in to his feelings for her , sharing a deep kiss with her .
In " Muted " , Scott is forced to Bite Liam Dunbar , to save Liam from falling to his death , transforming Liam into his first true Beta .
Scott takes Liam under his wing , helping him adjust to being a werewolf and keeping him safe .
Scott vows to stop the Dead Pool and save his friends from death .
Upon learning Rafael killed an assassin to save Stiles ' life with no way
otherwise , Scott contemplates should he resort to killing his opponents in order to stop them .
In " Monstrous " , Scott saves young Lori Rohr from death and then attempts to kill the assassin out of rage .
This action causes Scott to Evolve for the first time , triggering a transformation into a new bestial shape which includes a heavier brow , rippled - like skin , more fangs , his eyes turning completely black with the exception of his Alpha eye color becoming brighter .
When the assassin surrenders , Scott stops at the last minute , sparing the man 's life .
He permanently gains additional fangs afterwards .
In " A Promise to the Dead " , Scott and Kira are captured by Kate Argent and her Berserker and they are both taken to La Iglesia , where Kate transforms Scott into a new Berserker .
In " Smoke & Mirrors " Scott , under Kate 's control as a Berserker , attacks his friends .
Liam reaches Scott 's spirit , and Scott breaks free of the Berserker form .
Scott then faces Peter , having figured out the latter 's plan to conspire with Kate to have Scott killed .
He clashes with his werewolf sire fiercely .
Peter goads Scott he 'll have to kill him if he wants to beat him .
When Peter threatens Liam , Scott Evolves again , gaining new super - strength .
He defeats Peter while also sparing him , deciding for good he 's an Alpha instead of a monster while declaring that Peter was always the other way around .
In Season 5A , Scott and his Pack start senior year .
Scott plans to get into UC , Davis to become a vet following in Deaton 's footsteps .
A new Omega werewolf , his grade - school friend Theo Raeken , returns to Beacon Hills wishing to join his Pack which Scott considers .
Scott eventually tells Kira he loves her , but is then unnerved by her increasingly bloodthirsty behavior due to her Kitsune Evolution , admitting to Theo he 's losing trust in her .
During the Dread Doctors ' killing spree , to combat the para - scientists , Scott and his Pack read the subliminally coded novel based on the Doctors .
It causes Scott to flashback to when he was hospitalised as a child following a severe asthma attack .
It 's then revealed that as a child , Scott used to own a dog named Roxy who was fatally attacked by another dog which led to his asthma attack and hospitalisation .
The book also causes Scott 's asthma to psychosomatically return .
When Hayden Romero is identified as the next Chimera , Scott takes rash action to stop the Doctors ' bloodbath , using Hayden as bait in a sting operation to capture the para - scientists , to Liam 's fury .
Unfortunately , the plan fails with Liam and Hayden captured , but both are rescued by Theo afterwards .
Due to this , Scott willingly accepts Theo into the Pack .
Scott later has an emotional breakdown over his failed leadership and Kira having to leave ( sharing a goodbye kiss with her ) and is overwhelmed by the distrust and secrecy in everyone around .
Upon learning of Donovan Donati 's death at Stiles ' hands , and because of Theo 's lies , Scott kicks Stiles out of the Pack .
In " Status Asthmaticus , Scott finally uncovers Theo 's villainy and agenda to take Scott 's Pack and True Alpha status for himself .
The revealed Chimera has spiked his inhaler with wolfsbane to weaken him and arranges for Liam , enraged and supercharged due to the supermoon , kill him .
Mason snaps Liam out of his rage , but Theo kills Scott afterwards .
He is revived by Melissa and the supermoon 's power .
In Season 5B , " The Last Chimera " , Scott is physically and emotionally defeated over his failure , his Pack being estranged and his werewolf powers left faulty , his mortal wound from Theo not healing .
Despite the rift in his friendship with Stiles , he and Scott figure out how to save Stilinski 's life and succeed .
Scott later takes his mom 's advice to bring hope for his Pack .
He marks this promise with a symbol , his tattoo , the symbol for his Pack .
Amongst the enmity of Theo 's Chimera Pack , and the bloodshed caused by the Dread Doctors ' success , the Beast of Gévaudan , Scott ultimately pulls everyone back together including fixing his friendship with Stiles , slowly coming to forgive Liam and reuniting with Kira .
After the shattered Pack is reunited , Scott 's wound from Theo fully heals and he completely gets his confidence , power and motivation back .
As the dangers escalate , Scott reveals he 'd instigated a constructed plan in motion weeks in advance to put a stop to the collected villains : having a repentant Deucalion undermine Theo , preventing the sociopathic Chimera from stealing the Beast 's power , as well as conspiring with Argent to double cross Gerard after securing the information and means to vanquish the Beast which succeeds , including saving Mason .
Later , to assuredly save a consenting Hayden 's life , Scott gives her the Bite , adding her to his Pack and power .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost " , after 3 months of Beacon Hills being safe from supernatural threats , Scott believes the town no longer needs his protection , but is quickly embroiled in a bizarre case of a lost boy named Alex , his missing parents and mysterious horsemen known as the Ghost Riders .
After Stiles ' encounter with a Ghost Rider , Scott suddenly forgets about him .
In " Superposition " , when Scott tells Deaton that parts of his memory are missing , Deaton tells him that his subconscious is trying to tell him something
and he should try getting some sleep .
After waking up in the woods , Scott calls Malia and Lydia and tells them about the night he was bitten .
Certain things do n't add up , like how he knew about the body or how he got to the woods .
He knows it sounds crazy , but he thinks he had a best friend who came with him that night .
In " Sundowning " , Scott , accompanied by Malia and Lydia go to visit Elias Stilinski despite the Sheriff 's disapproval .
Scott explains that they 're looking for someone named " Stiles " but due to his dementia , Elias mistakes Scott for his son .
In " Relics " , after unsuccessfully trying to convince several students of the dangers they face by playing in the lacrosse game , Scott is forced to play in order to protect them .
Unfortunately , he fails as each of the students were taken by the Ghost Riders .
In " Radio Silence " , Scott is forced to give up $ 50 to prevent Stiles ' jeep from being towed .
When the tow truck driver returns to take it , Scott becomes aggressive at him .
Later in the episode , Scott and Lydia are contacted by Stiles through the radio .
He tells them to find a place called " Canaan " .
In " Ghosted " , Scott , Lydia and Malia drive to Canaan where they discover it 's a ghost town .
Scott wants to figure out why Stiles sent them there .
He suffers a hallucination of his mom with a bite to her head , as a result of energy in the town .
He and the others visit a house belonging to the only resident still in town , a banshee named Lenore .
Scott , Lydia and Malia prepare to leave after failing to figure out what took place , only for Lenore to prevent them from leaving .
After Lydia reasons with Lenore , Scott and the others are allowed to leave .
Scott believes that Stiles sent them to Canaan to warn them of what will happen to Beacon Hills if they do n't defeat the Ghost Riders .
When Scott sees Theo back from Hell , he is furious .
In " Heartless " , Scott reminds Liam of all the awful things Theo has done .
He wants to find Stiles but with someone they at least trust .
Scott helps Liam , Hayden , Mason , Corey and Theo in catching a Ghost Rider .
They succeed in catching a Ghost Rider , but ca n't get him to talk .
They summon Deputy Parrish to talk to the Ghost Rider .
When the Ghost Rider forces Parrish to shift into his hellhound form , Scott and Liam manage to push him away from the Ghost Rider .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Scott , along with Lydia , Malia and Peter attempt to find the rift into The Wild Hunt .
They eventually find it in a tunnel .
Scott and Malia are close to being killed by the Ghost Riders when Peter allows himself to be erased for a second time , allowing Scott and Malia to escape .
Scott calls his mom 's phone repeatedly , only to receive the same voicemail .
Malia tells him that Melissa is gone
but she 's still alive , so they can still save her .
In " Memory Found " , Scott enters the cooling chamber , hoping the cold will allow him to remember Stiles , thus opening a rift .
He regains his memories of Stiles but it is n't enough to open a rift .
As Lydia goes through hypnosis to remember Stiles , Scott guides her , telling her to find memories of Stiles .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Scott is informed by Liam that everyone has been taken and they discover train tracks across town , ( This is caused by Garrett Douglas using Corey to merge the phantom world with the real world ) .
Scott is reunited with Stiles who escaped the Wild Hunt .
He manages to divert the train , saving everyone in Beacon Hills and watches the Ghost Riders leave Beacon Hills , but not before turning Garrett Douglas into a Ghost Rider .
In the aftermath , Scott drives off with Stiles after finishing high school .
In Season 6B , Scott is faced with the threat of all - out war , as it is revealed in " Said the Spider to the Fly " that when he , Malia and Lydia opened the door for Stiles to escape the Wild Hunt , a supernatural creature the Wild Hunt had imprisoned an unspecified amount of time ago , known as the Anuk - Ite , used the opportunity to escape as well .
The Anuk - Ite creates fear those it encounters , and uses that fear to sustain itself .
As a result , many of the civilians inside Beacon Hills who previously had contact with the supernatural in some way turn on the supernatural population out of fear , become Hunters and begin hunting down every supernatural creature they can find .
While Scott is trying to figure out how to stop the Anuk - Ite , which Gerard is using to build an army of Hunters , it is revealed that he has developed romantic feelings for Malia , as in the episode " After Images " , Scott is injured by a trap set by Gerard , and when Malia tries to take Scott 's pain away so he can heal faster , Scott , who is half - delirious from the pain , confesses that he believes Stiles , Malia 's ex - boyfriend , would be fine with them being together .
It is revealed that Malia reciprocates Scott 's feelings , and they share their first kiss in " Triggers " , and consummate their relationship in " Genotype " .
When the Anuk - Ite reaches its full power and reveals the ability to turn people to stone through eye contact , Scott and Malia briefly train with Deucalion in " Broken Glass " to learn how to fight without seeing .
However , in the final confrontation with the Anuk - Ite during " The Wolves of War " , Scott realises that he will inevitably be unable to keep his eyes closed , and , resorting to drastic measures , claws his eyes out .
Once the Anuk - Ite is defeated , Scott is initially unable to heal his eyes , but when Malia kisses him to divert his attention , his eyes heal naturally .
Two years later , Scott rescues a young Omega werewolf named Alec from Hunters and informs him that although the Anuk - Ite is gone , the fight with the Hunters still continues against Gerard 's former second - in - command , Tamara Monroe , and her followers .
Scott offers Alec a place in his pack as one of Scott 's Betas , which Alec accepts , and after Malia , Stiles and the rest of Scott 's pack arrive , they all walk off together .
It is also seen that Scott and Malia are still together after two years , making Malia Scott 's longest - lasting girlfriend .
" Teen Wolf : The Hunt " , a Teen Wolf - inspired social network game for Facebook , states that Scott was born on October 6 .
He likes guitars , horror films , and skateboarding , and is a fan of The Black Lips , Kids of 88 , Blink-182 , and Lost in Kostko ( Tyler Posey 's band in real life , in which he plays guitar and sings lead vocals ) .
Allison Argent is Scott McCall 's first love , a member of the Argent family , a long line of werewolf hunters , being a direct identical descendent of Marie - Jeanne Valet and a member of Scott 's Pack .
Allison is best friends with Lydia , and later on the girlfriend of Isaac Lahey .
Allison is naturally sweet , charming and has a rebellious streak .
Throughout the series , Allison falls deeply in love with Scott .
She has a natural talent for archery and is an accomplished gymnast .
As a werewolf hunter , Allison displays skills in hand - to - hand combat , wiring vehicles , first aid , hunting werewolves and weaponry such as Chinese ring daggers , as well as her archery skills .
During Season 2 , struck with grief over her mom Victoria 's death , her personality changes ; she temporarily becomes reminiscent of Kate — bloodthirsty and cold - hearted .
She later shows a genuine guilt and contrition for her actions .
At her best , Allison is strong - willed and immensely loyal to her loved ones , going to great lengths to protect them .
In the pilot , " Wolf Moon " , Allison meets Scott McCall on her first day of school .
There is instant chemistry between the two and they begin a romantic relationship .
She is at first unaware of Scott life as a new werewolf , and her family 's werewolf - hunter crusade .
Her aunt Kate reveals the supernatural world to her in " Co - Captain " including her family 's werewolf - hunter life by showing her a captured Derek .
In the Season 1 episode " Formality " , Allison is shaken up after the revelation , but she decides to be strong .
She 's shocked further when it is revealed Scott is a werewolf at the school formal .
In the Season 1 finale , Kate entices Allison into joining her in hunting the Betas .
Allison confronts Scott over his lies , but later she learns what Kate truly is , witnesses Peter Hale kill her as revenge for the Hale fire , and helps to defeat Peter .
Realizing that Scott 's dishonesty was to protect her , Allison kisses Scott and tells him she loves him .
In Season 2 , Scott and Allison are in love , but carry on their romance in secret after Argent threatens Scott and she promises to never see Scott again .
Her grandfather , Gerard , decides that it is time Allison be trained to be an official hunter , which in her case means being groomed to eventually succeed her mother as the family 's leader .
Allison helps Scott and Stiles deal with the Kanima and its mysterious Master .
She is devastated in " Party Guessed " , when she learns that Victoria is dead .
She is later corrupted by Gerard emotionally , who uses Victoria 's suicide to use her to attack and kill Derek 's pack , straining her relationships with her friends and Argent .
She comes close to murdering Erica and Boyd , but Argent shoots her bow out of her hand .
In the Season 2 finale , when Gerard holds her captive with the Kanima so he can force Scott to have a paralyzed Derek Bite him to cure his cancer , Allison realizes Gerard 's true intentions , and her mistake .
Allison , saddened by the death of her mother and feeling guilty over her actions , breaks up with Scott .
Scott accepts this .
She also reconciles with Argent .
At the start of Season 3 , Allison returns to Beacon Hills , having spent the summer with Argent in France ; she has had no contact with Scott whatsoever in the past four months .
Although the two are no longer together , they still care deeply for each other .
Allison and Argent have made a pact to lay aside their family legacy to start a normal life .
Eventually Allison finds out from Scott that Victoria tried to murder him back in Season 2 which is why Derek bit her , to save Scott 's life .
She accepts this .
In violation of her agreement with her father , she begins to help Scott and Derek 's Pack fight the Alpha Pack .
Allison and Isaac also mend fences as she attacked him during her moral spiral , so much that they frequently partner up to deal with the current situation and they develop feelings for each other .
He is chosen as her tether when she chooses to undertake a dangerous ritual to save her missing father from being sacrificed by Jennifer Blake , the Darach .
Deaton warns her along with Scott and Stiles that sacrificing themselves , temporarily , will have lasting mental effects on them , such as having a permanent darkness around their hearts .
In " Lunar Ellipse " , Allison , with help from Isaac , finds the parents in the root cellar just before Jennifer sacrifices them .
In response to the Nemeton 's activation , Allison convinces her father to bring both of them out of retirement , accepts her role as leader of the family and states a new code : "
Nous protégeons ceux qui ne peuvent pas se protéger eux - mêmes " : "
We protect those who can not protect themselves " in English .
In " Anchors " , as a result of her sacrifice to the Nemeton , Allison has hallucinations of Kate and trembling which interferes with her motor and archery skills .
Using her new code as an anchor , Allison regains her confidence and skills , saving Malia Tate 's life .
Allison appears slightly hurt , but shows acceptance when Scott starts going out with Kira .
After a series of fits and starts , Allison also starts acting on her feelings for Isaac , entering into a romantic relationship with him .
Isaac is electrified and induced into a coma by a trap set by off the Nogitsune saving her life .
In " The Fox and the Wolf " , Allison suffers a minor breakdown from all the pressure on her shoulders , confessing to Sheriff Noah Stilinski she seems to always feel scared due to the dangers
and she 's conflicted over her feelings with Scott and Isaac , the latter she thinks could be dying .
In " De - Void " , to her relief Isaac recovers , and spends the night with her .
With Kira 's help , she keeps him and the twins at bay whilst they are under the Nogitsune 's control .
After Lydia is kidnapped by the Nogitsune in " Insatiable " , Allison sets out to search for her with Isaac .
She is pleased that Isaac was himself when he slept with her before the Nogitsune 's fly took control .
In the meantime , Argent shows her how to cast her silver bullet as part of her allegiance to the Code to ' graduate ' as a hunter .
She opts to make a silver arrowhead instead , since the bow is her weapon .
She tells Argent she loves him and is proud of what they 've done .
At Camp Oak Creek , the Nogitsune gains control of the Oni and turns them against Kira , Isaac , and Allison .
During the fight , Isaac is slashed by the Oni and is about to be killed .
Allison draws her final arrow , her silver arrowhead and fires it into the Oni , destroying the demon and saving Issac .
Another Oni runs her through with its sword .
Allison collapses into Scott 's arms , and he tells her that Lydia is safe .
Dying , she comforts a horrified Scott , saying it is perfect , that she 's in the arms of her first love and tells Scott she loves him .
She tells Scott he has to tell her father something but dies before she can tell him .
In the Season 3 finale , " The Divine Move " , Isaac figures out Allison wanted Scott to tell Argent that the Oni are vulnerable to silver .
She had forged four additional arrowheads , one for each demon .
Argent and Isaac head to the school , joining the final stand against the Nogitsune , and using the arrowheads , destroy the last of the Oni , avenging Allison .
After the Nogitsune 's defeat , Scott , Stiles and Lydia return to their normal lives mourning their close friend .
Argent and Isaac leave Beacon Hills together to help each other cope .
In the Season 5 premiere , Allison is remembered when Scott 's Pack begin senior year , writing their initials for the annual senior scribe and Scott adds Allison 's initials .
Lydia believes her best friend is still with them .
Scott also thanks Allison due to his memories of her saving his life from Sebastien Valet , the Beast of Gévaudan ( because Sebastien had confused Allison for her ancestor Marie - Jeanne , his sister , giving Scott the opportunity to escape ) .
" Teen Wolf : The Hunt " , a Teen Wolf - inspired social network game , states that Allison was born on March 19 in Elkhorn , Wisconsin .
She likes archery , running , and Unicef , and is a fan of Karmin , Arcade Fire , Florence and the Machine , and Vampire Weekend .
Stiles Stilinski ( officially Mieczysław " Stiles " Stilinski ) is Scott 's best friend , he and Scott consider each other brothers , as well as a member of his Pack .
Stiles is very sarcastic , but has a very quick mind , being intelligent and clever if somewhat impractical .
His intelligence is shown very early on when he figures out that Scott is becoming a werewolf and helps his best friend adapt to his new life .
Stiles is Scott 's sidekick and confident , helping the young werewolf deal with the supernatural crimes and events that plague the town .
The show alludes to him having attention deficit hyperactivity disorder through references to his Adderall use , which lends to his fidgeting gestures and frequent flailing .
Stiles often provides comic relief to the otherwise dramatic events surrounding him and Scott .
Stiles ' eagerness and caring nature have constantly put him in danger , nevertheless he continues to help , support and protect his supernatural friends .
Stiles shares a close and affectionate relationship with his father , Sheriff Stilinski , partially due to the death of his mother , Claudia .
Stiles is shown to be very emotional and insecure over her death because he was with her when she died .
Stiles was 10 years old at the time , and he suffered panic attacks afterward .
Stiles blamed himself for her death and secretly fears that his father blames him .
Stiles , throughout Seasons 1 and 2 , has an intense , unrequited love for Lydia Martin , having harbored a crush on her since the 3rd grade .
He likes her for not only her beauty , but also her hidden genius , which only Stiles could see at time .
In Season 3 , after Jackson left and Lydia was informed about the supernatural , she and Stiles form a close friendship .
Stiles is shown to be working alongside Lydia to figure out who is the culprit behind the Human Sacrifices in Beacon Hills
and they have a closer dynamic that suggests Stiles ' love for her has changed from a simple boyhood crush into something deeper .
As Stiles suffers from a panic attack , Lydia kisses him in order to make him hold his breath .
Although Stiles still had a crush on Lydia , this seems to ignite his deep feelings for her yet again , which may now obviously be somewhat mutual .
Stiles also wishes to keep his father out of the supernatural world out of fear he could get him killed , not wanting to lose both his parents .
When the Dark Druid , or Darach , kidnaps his father for the Guardian sacrifice , Stiles eventually sacrifices himself temporarily along with Scott and Allison to save their parents , with Lydia as his Tether due to their extremely deep and strong connection .
He is finally reunited with his father at the end of the mid - season finale " Lunar Ellipse " , with the new burden of having a " darkness " forever shrouding his heart .
With his father finally brought into the supernatural business , the two are now closer .
After the Druid sacrifice , in " Anchors " , Stiles suffers from hallucinations , sleep paralysis and partial dyslexia , as well as the fact that the sacrifice left a door to his mind open .
Later , after using his natural intelligence to rescue Lydia from a steel jaw trap and helping to reunite the werecoyote Malia Tate with her father , Stiles ' symptoms are cured .
In " Illuminated " it 's revealed Stiles was who left the message telling serial killer William Barrow to kill Kira Yukimura though he does n't know why or even remembers it .
Stiles is later revealed to be possessed by a Nogitsune , a Dark kitsune that was able to take control of him due to the after effect of the sacrifice leaving him vulnerable and giving the nemeton power released the dark spirit .
In " Riddled " , Stiles comes face to face with the Trickster in his visions asking the riddle , " Everyone has it , but no one can lose it " , which Stiles , eventually replies : " shadow " .
He comes to the dreaded realization he 's possessed when the Void Kitsune assumes his very face .
Posing as Stiles , the Nogitsune causes a slew of attacks that leave innocents injured and dead .
The Nogitsune 's hold over him is temporarily broken when Deaton poisons Stiles with a shot of letharia vulpina .
In " Echo House " , Stiles , to prevent the Nogitsune from harming anyone else , has himself institutionalized at Eichen House .
He 's shown around by his roommate Oliver .
He sees that Malia is also interned there .
With her help , Stiles searches for the connection between the Nogitsune and Eichen House .
Stiles explains his situation to Malia , and they kiss and sleep together , which is seen as Malia merely exploring herself being human for the first time , but later forms into a relationship .
Oliver , who is being controlled by the Nogitsune , attacks them both .
Stiles gives up his fight with the dark kitsune , letting him back in so that he will spare Malia .
In " De - Void " , Scott enters Stiles 's mind and using an Alpha 's roar , Stiles is finally separated from the Nogitsune , but the Void kitsune has now taken on his shape .
Stiles is shown to be in constant internal pain and freezing , while the Nogitsune grows stronger .
After Allison 's death , Stiles , while growing consistently weaker in " The Divine Move " , he goes along with Scott , Lydia and Kira to the school to make a final stand against the Nogitsune .
The Kitsune traps them in an alternate dimension at the school and are surrounded by the Oni .
Stiles realizes that the winter reality is only an illusion .
He has the foursome endure the Oni 's attacks until they escape the illusion the Nogitsune has trapped them in , pulling off a divine move that turns " the game " around .
Scott then Bites the Nogitsune , defeating the Dark Kitsune , winning the game , allowing Stiles to become whole , fully recovering .
In Season 4 , Stiles is shown to hold himself in deep horror over the Nogitsune 's possession of him , remembering everything he did while " feeling powerful " .
He is in a relationship with Malia , helping her adjust to a regular human life .
Upon learning of the Dead Pool , Stiles sets up a clue board in his room to solve the mystery of who is behind the money .
Stiles is reluctant to tell Malia about her true relation to Peter Hale because of the sociopathic werewolf 's past actions .
However she soon discovers the truth herself , straining their relationship .
In " Perishable " , Stiles and Lydia following clues leading to Eichen House , are almost murdered by Brunski and discover Meredith has been the Benefactor all along .
After Malia finds out what happened and that Stiles and Lydia were almost killed , she decides to forgive him .
In ' Monstrous ' , Stiles and Malia locate and shut down the computer servers that house the Dead Pool , terminating all the Benefactor 's contracts .
At the end of Season 4 , Stiles starts a new investigation to find Malia 's biological mother , the Desert Wolf .
In Season 5 , Stiles is anxious of senior year , hoping his friends will remain together after graduation whilst attending college in the bay area .
He is suspicious of the newcomer Theo Raeken , who says he 's come to join Scott 's Pack , convinced Theo 's not the " grade - school friend " Scott and Stiles remember .
When Scott asks Stiles why he ca n't just extend people the benefit of the doubt , he retorts that Scott is too trusting .
In " A Novel Approach " , Stiles is attacked by Donovan Donati , a petty enemy of his dad , and a recently converted Chimera .
In the ensuing struggle , he kills Donovan in self - defense and by accident .
Feeling distraught , guilt - ridden and horrified , his world falling apart , Stiles tells no one and His relationship with Malia becomes rocky as a result .
Theo reveals to Stiles he knows about Donovan , blackmailing him to keep quiet over Theo 's killing another Chimera , allegedly to save both their lives .
Stiles keeps an eye on Theo , but eventually admits to him his killing Donovan to save himself at the moment felt good , but fears he 'd lose Scott because killing is against Scott 's moral code .
In " Lies of Omission " , Stiles is confronted by Scott over Donovan , the both of them under false impressions due to Theo 's machinations .
Scott declares they should n't have to kill the people they 're trying to save .
Stiles furiously fires back that not everyone can be True Alphas , that some people have to make mistakes , that some people " are human " .
Nonetheless , Scott kicks Stiles out of the Pack .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , a devastated Stiles ' learns Malia knew about Donovan , but it did n't matter to her .
Stiles replies it matters to him , knowing that his romance with Malia is over .
Stiles is later accosted by Theo and he learns of the Chimera 's plan to take Scott 's Pack for himself , and that Scott is in danger , but Theo forces him to choose between saving Scott or his father .
Stiles in incensed , but in the end rushes to save his father .
In Season 5B , Stiles is overcome with worry for his dad at the hospital , flashing back to his mom 's funeral .
He violently berates Scott for trusting Theo and believing his lies , their bond severely damaged .
In the end , they manage to save Stilinski 's life .
Stiles and Stilinski talk about Donovan 's death :
Stiles confesses to his dad that he could n't say anything to him or anyone , and it felt like he wanted Donovan dead .
His Dad comforts and assures him that his actions were out of self - defense .
He is then advised that to counterbalance the burden he now has on his shoulders , he should save someone 's life instead of taking one and that he 'll start to feel better by forgiving himself .
Stiles takes his father 's advice to forgive and make things up with Scott , accompanying him to reunite their estranged Pack .
He tells Scott the whole story about Donovan 's death in " Co - Dominance " with Scott assuring him he knows the difference between murder and self - defence .
They ultimately patch everything up with Scott taking responsibility for trusting Theo despite his friend 's suspicions and saying that due to the life they lead , he knew that at some point , someone was going to get a little too much blood on their hands and it should have been Scott himself .
In " Amplification " , Stiles steadfastly hatches a plan to break an institutionalized Lydia out of Eichen House and rescue her from Valack 's deadly experiments .
To his total relief and delight , in the end , they succeed in safely stabilizing her .
In " Apotheosis " , Stiles arrives at the McCall house to pass on a plan from Scott to Malia to take down her mother .
Though he gets caught up in the skirmish between Malia and the assassin , injured , he swiftly passes the garuda talons to Malia , allowing her to defeat her mother .
Stiles talks with his father telling him that everything he did , saving Malia 's life amongst others left him feeling fulfilled at being able to help and save people , fully forgiving himself for killing Donovan , inspired to take up a career in law enforcement .
In the season 6 premiere , after a boy and his parents disappear , Stiles and Scott search their house and realize they have been erased from existence .
When Stiles goes to the boy 's room , he sees the Ghost Rider who then attacks him but later disappears .
Afterwards when he returns to the school , everyone soon begins to forget about him including his friends , Scott , and his father .
Lydia becomes the only person who remembers Stiles due to the pair 's emotional tether .
After realizing he ca n't escape from the Ghost Riders , Stiles tells Lydia to find a way to remember him and that he loves her and always has .
The next day , Lydia forgets all about him and Stiles is now erased from existence but has a slight inkling that something is off in her daily life .
In " Superposition " , Stiles ' voice is heard in Lydia 's mind when her subconscious relives the memory of Stiles being taken by the Ghost Riders .
In " Radio Silence " , Stiles is revealed to have been taken to a train station .
He encounters Peter Hale , who was also taken by the Ghost Riders .
Stiles makes several attempts to escape , with no success .
He manages to make contact with Scott and Lydia through an old ham radio .
He tells them to find Canaan .
In " Memory Found " , Stiles appears in flashbacks as Scott and Malia use the cooling chamber to remember him and Lydia undergoes hypnosis to remember him .
It is then that a rift is created , from which someone appears .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Stiles returns to the real world just as Garrett Douglas begins merging the phantom train station with the real world .
Stiles reunites with his friends , declares his love for Lydia and talks about heading off to George Washington University at Washington DC .
In season 6B , Stiles is now an intern for the FBI in Virginia .
He is surprised the FBI happened to be hunting Derek Hale for mass murder .
In the series finale , Stiles and Derek reunite with Scott and his pack to stop the hunters and the Anuk - Ite .
Two years later , Stiles is seen with Scott , Lydia , Malia , Derek , Liam , and a beta named Alec planning to stop Monroe and the hunters .
" Teen Wolf : The Hunt " , a Teen Wolf - inspired social network game , states that Stiles was born on April 8 .
He likes drumming , snowboarding , and the New York Mets .
He is a fan of the bands The Ramones , The Offspring , Mumford and Sons , All Time Low and Slow Kids At Play ( Dylan O'Brien 's band in real life , in which he plays drums ) .
Derek Hale is a werewolf by birth .
Derek lived in Beacon Hills with his family , a Pack of both werewolves and humans , and his mother Talia Hale being Alpha .
When he was 15 , Derek fell in love with a girl named Paige .
His uncle Peter came up with the idea of turning her into a werewolf so they could be together long term .
Ennis , an Alpha werewolf , gave her the Bite although it is not clear if Peter asked him to or if he took action on his own .
Derek , hearing Paige 's screams , was too late to save her and saw that Paige was rejecting the Bite .
Derek attempted to pull Paige 's pain out of her , but it was too intense and she asked him to end her suffering .
Mercy killing her caused his werewolf eyes to change from yellow to blue .
Later on , Kate Argent seduced Derek and committed statutory rape .
Derek was unaware she was a hunter and was only using him to get information on the Hales .
Kate burned the Hale House down , killing most of Derek 's family and rendering Peter comatose .
Derek and his older sister Laura left Beacon Hills for New York soon after .
Due to his tragic experiences , Derek became angry , sullen , misanthropic , cynical , defensive and mistrustful .
In Season 1 , Derek returns to Beacon Hills six years after the fire to investigate a mysterious Alpha who had Bitten Scott McCall and killed Laura .
He attempts to train Scott to help him control his new werewolf nature but Scott resists , blaming Derek for everything wrong in his life when Derek had nothing to do with it .
He is antagonistic towards the Argents , especially Kate , the murderer of his family , and immediately disapproves of Scott 's relationship with Allison .
Without any support system and desperate for help , he uses empty threats against Scott and Stiles as it is the only way anyone will help him .
In " Wolf 's Bane " , Derek discovers the Alpha is his uncle Peter who had murdered Laura to rise to Alpha status and his nurse
was helping him sending the message to Allison .
In the Season 1 finale , Derek becomes the new Alpha werewolf , killing Peter to stop him from continuing to take revenge on the people responsible for the Hale fire .
In Season 2 , Derek is on an initial power rush from the sudden power gain and sometimes acts rashly .
He attempts to recruit Scott into his Pack , but Scott still holds an unfounded grudge against him .
He goes on to Bite three students , Isaac , Erica , and Boyd , after informing them of the downsides and the threat of hunters .
He provides them with a chosen family of sorts and does his best to train them in hopes they will be able to survive together .
As the town becomes threatened by the Kanima , he sets out to kill it to prevent it from killing even more innocent lives .
As the dangers escalate , Erica and Boyd leave , frightened of the Argents ' werewolf genocide .
In the finale " Master Plan " , Scott forces a paralyzed Derek to bite Gerard Argent even as Derek begs Scott not to , convinced Gerard will kill him after in order to become alpha .
However , Gerard was poisoned with mountain ash in Deaton and Scott 's attempt to kill the hunter .
Rejected , used , and betrayed by Scott , Derek avoids him over the following summer even though he really could have used additional help .
The reason Derek was in a hurry to build his Pack and train them to survive was because an Alpha pack would be on the prowl for a development such as his rising to Alpha status .
In Season 3 , the Alpha Pack are in Beacon Hills ostensibly to recruit Derek , and are holding Erica and Boyd hostage .
Derek is devastated when Erica is found dead and is further emotionally shaken when he discovers his younger sister Cora is there and had survived the fire that killed their family .
When Boyd and Cora are feral under the full moon , Derek saves Jennifer Blake , the English teacher , from them .
She uses the power of virgin sacrifices in order to magically seduce and later rape him towards the middle of the season .
After discovering that Cora is alive , Derek displays a more caring and timid side of himself around her , becomes protective of her and seeking her approval from wanting to connect with one of his few remaining family members .
In " Currents " , Derek is shattered when the Alphas use his body against his will to kill Boyd .
Jennifer is later revealed to be the Darach who was making Human sacrifices across Beacon Hills , and had poisoned Cora with mistletoe for leverage against him to his anger .
Having almost no one left in his pack and fearing for his sister 's life , Derek gives up his Alpha status to save Cora from death .
He tricks Jennifer into using up most of her power healing Deucalion 's eyesight , giving Deucalion and later Peter the chance to kill her for good .
Derek leaves town with Cora for South America with the weight of his previous alpha responsibilities lifted from his shoulders .
In Season 3B , Derek , now an Omega werewolf once again , is on a mission with Peter in Mexico to retrieve his mother Talia 's claws which are in the possession of the Calavera family and had Cora go into hiding .
They retrieve the claws with the mercenary Braeden 's help .
After returning to Beacon Hills , Derek uses the claws in a ritual to communicate with Talia his late mother .
Derek meets with Scott , telling him Talia revealed to him the Hales did n't only live in Beacon Hills , they protected the town and it needs someone like Scott to continue protecting it .
Derek comes to solve his differences with Argent after he saves Argent 's life from a bomb set off by the Nogitsune , and Argent tells Derek they are n't enemies anymore right after the Nogitsune had controlled him to kill the former .
In the Season 3 finale , Derek and the twins face off against the Oni after bringing the triskele urn which held Talia 's claws because it could be used to seal the Dark Kitsune away .
Derek is last seen being cornered in his loft by the Calaveras .
Suddenly the hunters are attacked , and Derek comes face to face with a revealed - to - be - alive Kate Argent .
In the Season 4 premiere , " The Dark Moon " , Kate is holding Derek in Mexico , in an underground Aztec temple .
Scott 's Pack and Braeden rescue him , but Kate , using the magic of Tezcatlipoca , had Derek regressed in age and mind to 15 or 16 years old , the time of his life when he trusted Kate before she killed his family .
In the episode " 117 " , Kate used him to have him reveal to her the location of the Hale vault so she could steal a Triskelion medallion .
Later on , Derek fights Kate 's Berserkers , shifting to his werewolf form , and this causes him to return to his normal age , but his werewolf eye color has returned to gold .
He later realizes this means he 's gradually losing his werewolf power .
Derek hires Braeden to find Kate for him over her contract with the Calaveras .
Braeden accepts the job while simultaneously starting up a flirtation with him .
Derek and Malia later seek out the Pack of Satomi Ito after finding out they are on the Deadpool .
Tracking them , he finds Braeden injured , and takes her to the hospital .
Derek and Braeden start a casual relationship as she gives him lessons on how to use firearms , as well as hand - to - hand combat necessary for a human against supernatural foes .
He overpowers the assassins at the high school and protects Satomi 's Pack .
With Lydia arriving at his loft letting out a Banshee Scream , Derek contemplates the fact he may not come back alive on the mission to rescue Scott , sharing a final kiss with Braeden and refusing her weapons , implicitly ending their relationship .
Derek is wounded by a Berserker and later dies .
However , he revives with all of his powers restored and at their peak , destroying the Berserker , as well as gaining the talent to fully shapeshift into a wolf , like his mother Talia and sister Laura before him .
Derek learns he was actually Evolving all throughout Season 4 .
Derek and Braeden leave together , presumably back to Beacon Hills as they had n't packed for anything other than a rescue mission , and later go their separate ways .
Derek returns to Beacon Hills in the last two episodes of season 6 to help fight the hunters .
In the final flashforward , two years later , he 's shown to still be allied with Scott 's pack .
Lydia Martin is Beacon Hills High 's most popular student , a member of Scott 's Pack , the former love interest of both Jackson Whittemore and the werewolf Aiden , Allison Argent 's best friend , and ( revealed in Season 3 episode " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " ) is a banshee .
In Season 1 , Lydia at first appears to be the archetypal spoiled materialistic high school queen bee .
In reality she is surprisingly caring to her friends , befriending Allison on her first day at school .
Lydia is also extremely intelligent , having a GPA exceeding 5.0 .
Her boyfriend is Jackson Whittemore , although she initially makes it apparent she is merely dating him due to his status as the school 's lacrosse team captain , Lydia is actually in love with Jackson .
She initially barely knows who Scott and Stiles are , only expressing interest in Scott after he is Bitten and shows skill at lacrosse .
Stiles , throughout Seasons 1 and 2 , has an intense , sweet crush on Lydia , but she does not reciprocate .
In the Season 1 penultimate episode " Formality " , Lydia is Bitten by the Alpha Peter Hale , which starts to trigger her supernatural powers .
In the beginning of Season 2 , Lydia recovers , but suffers from a hallucination while in the shower and goes into a fugue state running through the woods naked for two days .
Afterwards she does n't remember the entire experience at all .
Lydia is determined to be immune to the Kanima 's venom , and thus Derek assumes she 's the Kanima , although it is later revealed to be Jackson .
Lydia suffers further fugue episodes and hallucinations which , along with Jackson 's rejection , causes her to have emotional breakdowns .
The hallucinations are caused by Peter , who planted memories of himself in Lydia 's mind from his Bite , possessing her to use her to resurrect himself .
As a result , she learns pieces of the supernatural events taking place .
In the Season 2 finale , Lydia selflessly faces the Kanima and successfully coaxes the shapeshifter to transform back into Jackson , by holding up the house key Jackson had given her when they were together .
When Jackson asks if she still loves him while he 's dying , she responds that she does and embraces him when he is cured of being a Kanima and resurrected as a werewolf .
By Season 3 , Lydia has been brought up to speed on the supernatural , has matured and come to care deeply for Scott and Stiles .
She and Jackson have parted since he moved to London and she is attempting to get over it .
Lydia enters into a purely physical relationship with Aiden , initially to distract herself from Jackson , unaware he was assigned to get close to her to get leverage on Scott .
Lydia displays a strange connection to the events occurring in Beacon Hills being mysteriously drawn to the locations of several of the sacrifices and occupying her time with drawing the same tree over and over again .
Lydia joins forces with Stiles to figure out who is really behind the sacrifices .
In " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " , when Cora Hale tells she , Scott and Stiles all they do is find bodies , not saving anyone , Lydia later appears at the memorial recital deciding to stop fighting her peculiar talents if it could help save someone with Scott offering his support .
Later she is held captive by Jennifer Blake , the Darach , who attempts to kill her and Lydia
lets out a high pitched Scream .
Jennifer then reveals to Lydia that she is actually a banshee .
Lydia later helps Stiles through a panic attack by kissing him .
She then begins to develop small mutual feelings for Stiles .
Lydia and Stiles find out the tree she 's been consistently drawing is an inversion of the Nemeton 's root system , which allows them to realize it is where the kidnapped parents are being held .
During Season 3B , though Lydia continues her liaison with Aiden , she eventually tells the werewolf that he is only a ' bad guy ' because he helped to kill Boyd , while she uses her abilities to help save lives .
Lydia 's talents allow for her to communicate on a network that predicts death : Jeff Davis has revealed this network is the whispers of other banshees .
The Nogitsune kidnaps Lydia in " Insatiable " and takes her to Oak Creek .
She senses the pending death of the Nogitsune - only this was the reason the he took her , to know in advance when the Oni would appear to kill him , so he would be able to take control of the demons .
Lydia had warned the others through a message relayed by fellow banshee Meredith Walker not to come for her , because she had sensed an impending death - Allison 's .
Lydia Screams for Allison when she 's impaled by an Oni and is overcome with grief as she feels her best friend 's death .
In the Season 3 finale , Lydia meets with Deaton and Scott , and comes up with the idea to use the Hales ' triskele urn to trap the Void kitsune .
Shortly after the Nogitsune 's defeat , she " feels " another death - this time it is Aiden .
Despite her previous opinion of her lover being a " bad guy " , Lydia grieves him from fighting the Oni as a " good guy " .
In Season 4 , Lydia has started over with new friends in Kira and Malia .
Lydia helps Malia with her schoolwork by lending her notes .
She learns some of the notes is actually computer code she does n't remember transcribing .
Using her banshee talents , Lydia learns the computer code comprises the Dead Pool , a hit list of supernaturals in Beacon Hills as well as the first cipher key to decode the list : ALLISON .
Lydia immediately works on getting the other two cypher keys , later learning from Meredith the second is AIDEN .
Lydia cracks the final third of the Dead Pool but sees that Meredith is on the list .
She is saddened that Meredith has committed suicide out of fear .
Lydia later learns her paternal grandmother Lorraine was also a banshee ; she 'd written a list of names , part of the Dead Pool code which lead her and Stiles to Eichen House .
The twosome , along with Parrish , learn Lorraine was actually murdered by Brunski , that Meredith is alive and has been the Benefactor all along , and later on , Meredith 's history with Peter .
Meredith reveals to Lydia she 'd enacted the Dead Pool after Hearing Lydia 's Scream when she felt Allison 's death , because of how many people have died because of the supernatural .
Lydia tells Meredith " Not all monsters do monstrous things " , the two banshees coming to an understanding .
At the end of Season 4 , Lydia gives Parrish a hard copy of the bestiary and offers him her help to learn what his supernatural species is .
In Season 5A , everyone is preparing for senior year .
She and Parrish have also grown closer .
Lydia watches over fellow senior Tracy Stewart who is actually a Kanima , and her target is Lydia 's mother , Natalie .
In the ensuing skirmish , Lydia is injured by the Kanima - Chimera , but implores her mom to secrecy .
Tired of being defenseless , Lydia requests and takes up hand - to - hand lessons from Parrish and makes exceptional progress .
Lydia , along with Stiles , discover Parrish is the one who is stealing the bodies of the deceased Chimeras , and is bringing them to the Nemeton .
In " Lies of Omission " , Lydia spars with Parrish to get him to " stop thinking " , intending to , and successfully triggering his nature .
She surmises what Parrish 's doing is covering up the supernatural , protecting the secret .
After a conversation with Parrish , and remembering Kira mentioning the Wild Hunt , Lydia positively identities Parrish as a hellhound .
She suddenly predicts Scott 's upcoming death in the library , but Theo knocks her out and kidnaps her before she can tell anyone .
Theo then performs a mind - meld on her so he can find the Nemeton .
Lydia is left driven out of her mind from the process .
In Season 5B , Lydia is rendered catatonic from Theo 's clawing into her memories .
Her mother Natalie has Lydia moved to Eichen House which has been usurped by an escaped Valack in disguise .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , Lydia separates from her physical body , then telepathically communicates with Meredith .
The fellow banshee tells her she has to wake up to save her friends who are in danger and promises to teach her how to use her voice as a weapon .
Under Meredith 's coaching , while simultaneously predicting the carnage in Beacon Hills due to Beast of Gévaudan and predicting Malia 's death at the hands of the Desert Wolf , Lydia succeeds in finding her voice .
She snaps awake from her coma , Screaming and inconspicuously saves Malia 's life .
With her new skill , Lydia makes an attempt to escape to save her friends ' lives , but Valack , glamoured as Aiden distracts her
and she 's restrained .
Valack then performs a trephanation on her .
In " Amplification " , when Lydia comes to , she 's gained extrasensory perception and her powers are dangerously amplified .
Valack uses her to learn more about the Dread Doctors , Theo and the Beast , having her " be ( his ) eyes " .
Simultaneously , the Pack hatches a plan break her out of Eichen House , just as Theo 's Chimera Pack also breaks in to capture her for Theo 's own ends .
Valack manages to slip away with Lydia , just as the Banshee whispers become powerful enough to kill her .
Soon Lydia unintentionally kills Valack with her uncontrolled Scream , but Parrish , as the hellhound , shields the Pack from being harmed by her voice .
Deaton treats her trephanation head wound with mistletoe , and Lydia recovers from her experience , to Stiles ' euphoria
and she 's embraced by her recently enlightened mother .
During the ongoing hunt for the Beast , in " A Credible Threat " the Argents have Lydia communicate with Parrish 's hellhound side .
Lydia tells the Guardian he ca n't beat the Beast without Parrish , and later convinces a disheartened Parrish to stay in Beacon Hills to help fight the Beast , reassuring him that her visions of death do n't always come true and helps him figure out how to consciously tap into his powers .
In " Apotheosis " , Scott 's Pack invoke an old piece of werewolf lore , by calling out a shapeshifter 's Christian name they assume their human form .
Lydia , as a harbinger of death , Screams Mason 's name at the Beast of Gévaudan with her banshee voice : the sound cripples the Beast , and reverses the transformation , freeing Mason from the Beast 's essence .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost "
, Lydia figures out the recent disappearances connect with the Wild Hunt and the Ghost Riders .
She is present as Stiles is taken by the Ghost Riders .
She promises she 'll remember but appears to have forgotten him completely the next day .
In " Superposition " , Lydia notices a doctor sitting across from her in class ( who happens to be the same one Stiles will sit next to in " Radio Silence " at the Ghost Riders ' train station ) .
She confronts the woman , wondering who she is and why she 's in the class .
The doctor opens her mouth and emits a high - pitched train sound .
Then , when talking with Scott and Malia , Lydia admits that she had been looking for someone all day , though she does n't know who .
Lydia confesses that whoever it was , she thinks she loved him .
She later falls into a trance and writes the word " mischief " several times in a format that spells the name " Stiles " .
She wonders " What the hell is a Stiles ? "
In " Sundowning " , Lydia spots an elderly woman inside the Stilinski house .
She excuses herself , following the woman down a hallway .
Lydia calls to her , asking why she 's there and
what is it she wants to tell her .
This woman is the same one that Stiles has a conversation with in " Radio Silence " .
Lydia seeing the same people that Stiles is seeing is symbolic of the pair 's emotional tether , first brought up in " Lunar Ellipse " from Season 3A.
In " Relics " , Lydia returns to the Stilinski house , hoping to find a relic that belonged to Stiles which the Ghost Riders may have left behind .
She returns to the hallway where she last saw the elderly woman .
She starts ripping the wallpaper , only to be interrupted by Claudia Stilinski .
In " Radio Silence " , Lydia and Scott are forced to pay a tow truck driver off in order to prevent Stiles ' jeep from being taken out of the school car park .
She finds paperwork in the jeep which she presents to the Sheriff and Claudia .
She breaks down in tears when Claudia tells her to drop the investigation of Stiles ' existence .
Lydia and Scott later make contact with Stiles through the radio where they both remember parts of Stiles and his existence .
He also tells them not to try and find him ( because it is impossible ) , and to rather find Canaan .
In " Ghosted " , Lydia has a dream of a Ghost Rider attack on a town .
She , Scott and Malia travel to Canaan where Lydia discovers it to be the same town she saw in her dream .
She meets a fellow banshee named Lenore who prevents her , Scott and Malia from leaving .
Lydia questions Lenore on the current state of the town .
After Lenore knocks Lydia across the room , the two banshees engage in a Scream off as waves of power are radiated from their hands and propelled by the Screams .
After sharing a vision of the Ghost Rider attack in Canaan , Lydia snaps Lenore out of her denial
and she , Scott and Malia are allowed to leave .
In " Heartless " , Lydia confides in her mum about her experience in Canaan and that Claudia was conjured by the Sheriff to keep him from remembering Stiles .
She joins Sheriff Stilinski in Stiles ' bedroom and tells him of her experience in Canaan , claiming that he conjured Claudia to subconsciously hide the fact that he 's missing Stiles .
Then she notices Stiles ' lacrosse jersey , crying as she picks up and then tosses it to the Sheriff .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Lydia and Liam encounter a Ghost Rider as they make their way out of the tunnel .
Liam surmises that the Ghost Rider fears Lydia as it lowers its weapon , allowing them to pass .
In " Memory Found " , Lydia guides Scott and Malia as they use the cooling chamber to remember Stiles .
Lydia ca n't survive the cooling chamber due to her lack of supernatural healing , so she is put under regular hypnosis .
She eventually remembers Stiles , causing a rift to form .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Lydia finds Stiles
and they kiss passionately after he gets out of the rift .
She helps Sheriff Stilinski save Stiles from the make - believe Claudia .
In the aftermath , Lydia got into MIT where she 'll be starting as a junior .
Teen Wolf :
The Hunt , a Teen Wolf – inspired social network game , states that Lydia was born on March 23 .
She likes Mu Alpha Theta , figure skating , yoga , and astrophysics , and is a fan of Madonna , Calvin Harris , Kids of 88 , Muse , and Kat Graham .
Jackson Whittemore is the - captain of the Beacon Hills lacrosse team and the captain of the school 's swim team .
Jackson 's birth parents were Gordon and Margaret Miller .
They died in a car crash on June 14 , 1995 , but Margaret was kept on life support long enough for the doctors to deliver Jackson by c - section into the middle of the night as his birthday is June 15th .
He was adopted by attorney David Whittemore and his wife .
In compensation for their deaths , Jackson is to receive a large insurance settlement on his eighteenth birthday .
Jackson is the big man on campus at Beacon Hills High , and has a competitive , self - absorbed and aggressive nature , which shows through hostility towards people who best him .
Jackson wishes to make others proud of him , this desire to always live up to people 's expectations appears to stem from his deeply rooted insecurity about his adoption and the fact that he does not know his real parents , leading him to be unable to see his adoptive parents as his true mom and dad .
Despite his abrasive character , he is shown to care for his friends and dislikes hurting them .
It turns out he is genuine friends with Danny Mahealani and he actually cares more for Lydia Martin than he lets on , though he 'd never admit it .
During Season 1 , Jackson is angered , suspicious by Scott 's sudden , seemingly impossible improvement on the lacrosse field and other activities repeatedly besting him , which impacts his psyche .
Consequently , he investigates Scott , eventually coming in contact with Derek Hale and being accidentally scratched by Derek in " Magic Bullet " ( who was poisoned with wolfsbane at the time and partially passes the poisoning onto Jackson through the claws ) , witnessing the Alpha werewolf in " Night School " .
He eventually discovers Scott is a werewolf .
Jackson threatens to expose Scott unless he helps him become one too .
The Argents grew suspicious of Jackson .
At the school formal he gets drunk and exposes Scott 's werewolf nature to them .
In the Season 1 finale , " Code Breaker " , he regrets turning Scott over to the Argents , and helps Scott , Allison and Stiles defeat the Alpha werewolf , Peter Hale .
Later Jackson appears the Hale house demanding the Bite from Derek because he helped him .
In the Season 2 premiere " Omega " , it is revealed Derek had Bitten Jackson , which he takes with absolute smugness .
However , Derek notices his body is rejecting the transformation , causing black blood to bleed out of his orifices .
In the fifth episode of Season 2 " Venomous " it is revealed Jackson instead became a Kanima , a murderous reptilian shapeshifter that is a weapon of vengeance .
Jackson , as the Kanima , commits numerous murders throughout Season 2 .
Jackson does not know that he is the Kanima , nor does the Kanima side of him know that it is Jackson .
In his Kanima form , Jackson was nigh unstoppable : he had enhanced strength and agility that far exceeded the werewolves , even Derek , the Alpha werewolf , the Kanima could heal from being shot by Argent repeatedly , Derek slashing its throat , and Allison putting an arrow in its head and stabbing it in the chest .
The Kanima 's claws also produced a paralytic poison that could completely immobilize a victim by the Kanima slashing the back of the neck and it could scale walls .
The Kanima seeks a Master who wishes to exact revenge on others to control the shapeshifter and the Kanima carries out whatever vengeance the Master bids , revealing that as the Kanima , Jackson 's every move is controlled by someone else .
In the episode " Fury " , it is revealed Jackson came across an unstable , traumatized student , Matt Daehler who became his Master .
Matt had the Kanima murder former Beacon Hills High students who almost caused him to drown when he was a little boy during a drunken pool party .
After Gerard Argent kills Matt , he becomes Jackson 's new Master .
It is revealed that Jackson became the Kanima because he is an orphan , exemplified by his outward behavior and personality , meaning he lacks an identity .
He can be saved by a person with whom he shared a true bond ; in Jackson 's case , this person is Lydia .
Through Lydia 's selflessness in the Season 2 finale , " Master Plan " , the Kanima reverts to Jackson .
Aware of what he is , Jackson then allows Derek and Peter Hale to kill him .
Dying , he asks Lydia does she still love him , she responds that she does .
Jackson returned to life and finally becomes a werewolf , however , with blue eyes rather than the common yellow .
His eyes as a werewolf are blue , because as the Kanima he took innocent lives ( regardless of his intent ) ; Derek , Peter , and the twins Ethan and Aiden share this feature .
In the Season 3 premiere , Lydia revealed that Jackson was trained by Derek to control his werewolf nature .
Later he and Lydia parted and his father moved him to London .
He is next seen late in season six , when he is revealed to be in a same - sex relationship with Ethan Steiner , another werewolf .
The pair live together in London attempting to find other werewolves , but are attacked by hunters linked to Gerard Argent .
Returning to Beacon Hills , they are captured by Gerard 's lieutenant , school guidance counselor Ms. Monroe , although they are later freed by Lydia and Stiles after Gerard reveals he has the pair captive .
When telling Lydia he is in a same - sex relationship now , she is initially startled and then happy that he " figured it out " .
He is seen checking out a female and male student in his brief scene at Beacon Hills High , and to have retained some of his kanima abilities , including venom , claws , and the ability to manifest kanima eyes and a kanima tail , but is unable to completely shift into one .
In the closing montage of the series finale , he and Ethan are shown happily together in London once more .
" Teen Wolf : The Hunt " , a Teen Wolf - inspired social network game , states that Jackson was born on June 15 .
He likes Porsche , Golden State Warriors , USC Trojans , and the San Jose Sharks , and is a fan of Wiz Khalifa , Nicki Minaj , Drake , and Gym Class Heroes .
Malia Tate is a werecoyote , a member of Scott 's Pack , the adoptive daughter of Henry Tate and his late wife Evelyn , and the love interest of Stiles starting in Season 3B.
She also has a deceased younger adoptive sister named Kiley .
In " Letharia Vulpina " ; however , it is revealed Peter Hale is Malia 's biological father .
Malia 's birth mother is an assassin named Corrine also known as the Desert Wolf .
At age 9 , Malia was presumed dead for eight years from a car accident that claimed the lives of her mother and her younger sister .
She was actually alive , fully transformed as a coyote .
On the night of the car crash Malia had shapeshifted on a full moon .
Her shift had supposedly caused the accident , and killed her mom and sister in the process earning her blue eyes by taking innocent lives .
In the Season 3B premiere " Anchors " , Sheriff Stilinski reopens the case under a suspicion a supernatural may have been involved , and Scott and Stiles discover Malia in the woods .
In the episode " More Bad Than Good " , Scott uses his Alpha roar to have Malia return to human form .
Sheriff Stilinski and Stiles bring her home
and she is reunited with Henry .
After eight years as a coyote in the wild , Malia is very in touch with her animal side , is rather brash , quick to fight , and tends to speak her mind .
She initially struggles academically and shows little regard for social etiquette .
As the series progress , Malia readjusts to her humanity .
In " Echo House " , Malia is interned at Eichen House sanatorium .
There , she sees Stiles who has voluntarily committed himself .
When he walks up to Malia , she attacks him aggressively .
Malia tells Stiles she is unhappy as a human , because she now lives back with her father and ca n't tell him that she killed her mom and sister , and Scott 's Alpha roar has caused her to remain human and unable to fully transform again .
Stiles , who needs access to the basement for information regarding the Nogitsune 's connection to Eichen House , specifically the kanji " self " on the wall , makes a deal with her : she helps him get into the basement , then Scott will teach her how to change back .
Very soon afterward , they sleep together .
Behind a wall in Eichen House , they find the Nogitsune 's original host 's body , a sheathed katana , and a photo .
Afterwards , they are attacked by Oliver , Stiles ' roommate , who is being controlled by the Nogitsune .
Stiles lets the Nogitsune back in , in exchange for the Kitsune sparing Malia .
Malia later prepares to leave Eichen House , intending to rescue Stiles .
She eventually brings the sheathed sword and the photo to Scott .
At the end of Season 3 , Malia has started to learn to live as a human , enrolling at Beacon Hills High School and joining Scott 's Pack .
In Season 4 , Malia is continuing her romance with Stiles , with the Pack attempting to help her reintegrate back into society .
Malia has a survival - of - the - fittest mentality , as shown when she was willing to leave Lydia behind when the Pack was held captive by the Calaveras .
She regularly sneaks into Stiles ' house at night .
Malia is struggling in learning control during the full moon .
In " The Benefactor " , Stiles stays with her on the full moon while she is transformed into her werecoyote shape for the first time ; he surmises she lacks control because of her guilt in what she did to her mother and sister .
He relates to her because of the Nogitsune 's possession of him .
Malia perfects control at this .
The Pack keeps Malia in the dark that Peter Hale is her biological father , to protect her from the sociopathic werewolf .
But in " Weaponized " Malia discovers the truth when she sees she is listed on the Dead Pool as " Malia Hale " .
Malia is severely hurt and feels betrayed by Stiles keeping the information from her , straining her relationship with him .
Malia meets with Peter , learning from him her real mother is known as ' the Desert Wolf ' .
Malia does n't see herself as different from Peter , he being a killer while she killed her adoptive mother and sister .
In " Monstrous " after being almost killed and learning of Stiles ' own near - death experience , Malia , with a push from Melissa , ultimately makes up with him , and at the Martin lakehouse they locate the computer servers that house the Dead Pool , and shut them down .
On the mission to rescue Scott and Kira , Peter tries to coax Malia into unleashing her animal side in the fight against Kate and the Berserkers , but Malia sees Peter for the monster he truly is upon learning he was intending to murder Scott .
Malia is pleased that Stiles is looking into her biological mother .
In Season 5 , Malia has settled back into her relationship with her dad Henry .
She receives her summer school results allowing her to be a senior with the others .
In " Dreamcatcher " , Malia receives a photo of a carnage caused by the Desert Wolf from Braeden through Stiles .
Malia is content in just " putting Tracy Stewart down " after her out - of - control murder spree .
After Scott 's encouraging and urging to save Tracy instead , with the latter at her mercy , Malia goes through with it .
Unfortunately , Tracy is euthanized by the Dread Doctors at that moment to her horror .
Malia soon grows to trust the newcomer Theo Raeken .
In " A Novel Approach " , while on a driving lesson with Theo , after reading Valack 's novel , Malia remembers more of the crash that caused her family 's death : it was not her full - moon transformation , but a woman that opened gunfire on the car that caused it to go off the road in the first place .
She realizes the woman was the Desert Wolf .
Unable to deal with it , Malia does n't tell anyone .
She notices Stiles ' obvious lies , and starts to lose trust in him .
In " Lies of Omission " , Malia fails to save another Chimera .
The recent trauma and chaos having left its mark , Malia states she ca n't follow Scott 's rules on protecting people anymore and considers leaving the Pack .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Malia reveals to Stiles she knew about Stiles ' killing Donovan , but it did n't matter to her .
Nonetheless , her relationship with him has ended .
Malia secretly makes the decision to kill the Desert Wolf in vengeance for her family .
In Season 5B , when Braeden returns to assist Malia in her plan , she learns the Desert Wolf is coming back to Beacon Hills for her .
Because of this and not wanting to put her friends in danger , Malia quits Scott 's Pack saying she ca n't help .
She and Braeden prepare for her mother 's arrival , but learns she has taken Deaton hostage .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , despite her best efforts , Theo seduces Malia to convince her to let him help the two find Deaton and the Desert Wolf .
He betrays them at the last minute as he 'd made a deal with the assassin and Malia finally comes face to face with her mother ( Corrine ) .
Malia faces off against her in vengeance for causing her to kill her family while Corrine wants to take back the power she transferred to Malia upon giving birth to her .
When the Beast of Gévaudan intercepts , Malia chooses to save Deaton and Braeden over killing her mother which gives her back her confidence , and the resolve to rejoin the Pack .
Braeden and Malia keep an eye out for Corrine as the assassin will come to kill Malia to reclaim her power on the full moon while also assisting in the hunt for the Beast .
In " Apotheosis " , despite their best efforts , Malia , Braeden are caught in a gunfight and faceoff with her mother at the McCall house .
After Braeden is wounded , Corrine eventually has Malia at her mercy , but Stiles had slipped Malia the garuda talons from the Chimera Belasko at Scott 's suggestion : once Corrine claws Malia , she stabs her mother back with the talons and yells " I want my family back . "
Malia drains the last of the Desert Wolf 's power , then Braeden captures Corrine , gaining justice for her mom and sister , while also sparing Corrine .
In the season 6 premiere , Malia is seen in her coyote form for the first time since season 3 , as she had finally learned to fully shapeshift .
She helps the Pack investigate a missing couple and determines they are still alive due to the lack of blood but says she could n't smell any sign they were ever in their car .
In " Superposition " , Malia is revealed to be losing control of her animal side as she is growling at people , clawing at her desk when stressed and she has built a coyote den at the corner of her bedroom .
She later admits to Scott and Lydia that she knows she was n't alone when she was chained up during the full moon .
In " Sundowning " , while she 's making up for a test , Malia loses control and shifts into her coyote form and makes her way to the school basement .
In " Relics " , Malia hears dying screams while running through the woods .
The smell of blood leads her towards a murder scene , but is shot by Argent before she could investigate further .
In " Radio Silence " , after recognising the distant howl and scent of a dying werewolf , Malia and Scott track it to the woods .
They both realise that it 's Peter Hale who had escaped from the train station .
Both Malia and Scott did n't know Peter was taken by the Ghost Riders 3 months prior .
In " Ghosted " , while she , Scott and Lydia are visiting Canaan , Malia is affected by energy in the town , causing her to hallucinate her dead adoptive mum Evelyn and sister Kiley as well as Theo .
He shoots her , causing her to fall directly in between Evelyn and Kiley as they pull her into the ground .
While trapped in Lenore 's house , Malia and Scott encounter the ghost of Lenore 's son Caleb who starts to drown them .
They stop drowning once Lydia reasons with Lenore .
When Malia sees Theo at Scott 's house , she is furious .
In " Heartless " , Malia repeatedly punches Theo as he betrayed her back in season 5 .
With her claws out , she plans to finish him off , but Scott and Liam intervene .
She accompanies a healed Peter in looking for the rift .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Malia and Scott fight the Ghost Riders long enough for Lydia and Liam to get away .
She saves Scott before the Ghost Riders could kill him , however the two of them are not enough to hold off the Riders for long .
They 're saved by Peter who allows himself to be erased , giving them the chance to run .
In " Memory Found " , Malia enters the cooling chamber shortly after Scott .
She finds herself in the school library , where each book represents a memory .
She soon finds the shelf with all her memories of Stiles .
In " Riders on the Storm " , after finding Peter in the Ghost Riders ' dimension , Malia musters a small amount of love for Peter to call him " Dad " .
She , along with Peter and Theo join Scott in the final showdown against Garrett Douglas and the Ghost Riders .
After the Ghost Riders take Garrett and leave , Malia has to attend summer school before she could graduate .
In Season 6B , Malia , who has successfully graduated , excitedly plans to travel to France , but is convinced to stay in Beacon Hills by Scott and Lydia when it becomes apparent that there is a new supernatural problem to deal with .
While dealing with the threat of new Hunters emerging and killing supernatural creatures without mercy , Malia is surprised but secretly pleased when Scott deliriously indicates his feelings for her in " After Images " , as it is revealed that she has developed feelings for him in return .
Malia initially tries to tell Scott how she feels about him in " Face - to - Faceless " , but to her frustration , she is unable to spark up the courage .
In " Pressure Test " , while being trapped inside the police station by Hunters , the Anuk - Ite amplifies Malia 's fear of being killed to the point where she becomes almost hysterical , but Scott calms her down .
In " Triggers " , Malia , Scott , Lydia and Argent attempt to destroy the Hunters ' arsenal , but when it is revealed to be a trap set by the Hunters , Scott and Malia end up locked in a room which rapidly begins to run out of oxygen .
After Lydia and Argent rescue them , the near - death experience is enough to give Malia the courage she needs to kiss Scott , and although Malia 's Alpha is initially taken aback , Scott then responds by passionately kissing Malia , confirming that he returns her feelings .
In " Werewolves of London " , Malia and Scott try to recruit every surviving supernatural creature they know to help them fight the Hunters , but are mostly unsuccessful with the exception of Peter , who joins them when he looks into Malia 's mind and sees that her feelings for Scott have developed to the point where she has fallen in love with him .
In " Genotype " , Malia and Lydia work to resurrect the dead Hellhound Halwyn to try and defeat the Anuk - Ite , but he is only able to live long enough to tell them it can kill through eye contact if its two halves merge , before dying again .
After this , Malia has sex with Scott , consummating their relationship .
In " Broken Glass " , Malia and Scott are trained by Deucalion to fight the Anuk - Ite without having to look at it .
Unfortunately , in " The Wolves of War " Malia is ( off - screen ) unable to resist looking into the Anuk - Ite 's eyes , and is turned to stone , although she is freed from her stony prison after the fear - monger is defeated .
When Malia sees that Scott had to claw his eyes out to fight the Anuk - Ite and is unable to heal himself , she gently kisses him at the suggestion of Lydia to divert Scott 's attention and allow his eyes to heal naturally .
Two years later , Malia arrives with the rest of the pack at the scene where Scott is talking to Omega werewolf Alec about the war with the Hunters .
Malia gazes lovingly at Scott more than once during this encounter , and they walk off together , revealing that after two years , Malia is still in a relationship with Scott , making him Malia 's longest lasting boyfriend .
Kira Yukimura is a kitsune , the daughter of Ken and Noshiko Yukimura , and Scott 's second love interest .
In Season 3B , Kira is the new girl at school , having moved to Beacon Hills from New York .
Kira is sweet and intelligent , but introverted and socially awkward .
After being brought into the supernatural and learning of her own nature , as well as her family 's secrets , she shows a defined sense of ethics , protection , a growing sense of confidence and camaraderie on joining Scott 's Pack .
As a Kitsune , Kira is of the type Thunder : she has power over electricity , and she naturally wields a katana sword as a " gateway " to her Fox Spirit .
At Season 3B 's start , " Anchors " , Kira looks to make friends in school , but is embarrassed because her dad , Ken , is the new history teacher and prone to unintentionally embarrassing her .
Early on , Kira has an obvious crush on Scott , which he reciprocates .
In " Galvanize " , Kira is revealed to be supernatural after mass murderer William Barrow kidnaps her and , while attempting to kill her using electrocution , causes her to manifest an ability to absorb electricity .
Scott witnesses this display , and Kira is intrigued that Scott does n't " run the other way " from her peculiar circumstances .
In " Illuminated " , it is shown that Kira radiates an aura that is shaped like a bipedal fox , flaring around her like armor .
Scott invites her to Danny 's black light party and their interest in each other strengthens .
Later , she witnesses Scott and Derek Hale fight the Oni in their werewolf forms , revealing the supernatural lives of Scott , his Pack , and everything else to her , to her elation and inspiration .
Kira eventually does research into her own abilities and theorizes that she is a Kitsune , the Fox trickster .
This is later confirmed by Derek .
Kira discovers further abilities ; super speed and a natural talent for swordplay .
When her mother , Noshiko , displays similar talents , Kira discovers , to her shock , that Noshiko is also a Kitsune and the one who summoned the Oni to Beacon Hills .
In " The Fox and the Wolf " , Kira and Scott confront her parents .
Kira is distrustful of her mom and is further baffled when Noshiko reveals that she is actually 900 years old .
Noshiko tells Kira her story of her time as an intern at Camp Oak Creek , and her role in unleashing the Nogitsune .
Noshiko asks Kira to trust her this once , telling her she is a Thunder kitsune , and showing her how to use her FoxFire to repair her shattered katana .
Upon being passed the katana , Kira is told that Noshiko 's legacy is now hers .
Kira comes to grips with her Kitsune nature , and resolves to help save Stiles .
In " De - Void " , still unable to face her parents after everything they 've kept from her , Kira spends the night with Scott , she shares a kiss with him .
In " Insatiable " , Kira along with Isaac and Allison go up against Noshiko and the Oni trying to dissuade her mother from outright killing the Nogitsune as the process could potentially kill Stiles .
Unfortunately , the Nogitsune takes control of the Oni and turns the demons against them and Allison is killed .
In the Season 3 finale , Kira is told by Ken and Noshiko their move at this point has to be a divine move in order to stop the Nogitsune .
Kira goes along with Scott , Stiles and Lydia to stop the Nogitsune at the school .
She battles the Oni and then fatally stabs the Nogitsune running the demon 's corporeal form through with the katana after Scott Bites him .
In Season 4 , Kira has her romance with Scott on hold because she wants to give Scott the time he needs to grieve for Allison .
Kira has also become completely integrated with the Pack , becoming close friends with Lydia and Malia , wanting to use her abilities to protect people in Beacon Hills .
In " Muted " , Scott decides to give in to his feelings for Kira , sharing a deep kiss with her , to her joy .
Scott and Kira finally go on their first date .
They are attacked by Kate Argent and her Berserker and are taken to La Iglesia .
Kate has Scott converted into a new Berserker , and under the malevolent werejaguar 's control , Kira is attacked by Scott .
Hallucinating her mother and determined to save Scott , Kira breaks off a piece of obsidian in the temple and uses it to trigger her kitsune healing .
She saves Scott when , as per Peter Hale and Kate 's plan , he 's almost destroyed as a Berserker .
Kira keeps the obsidian shard when returning to Beacon Hills .
Afterward , Ken has the shard reshaped into a shuriken and Noshiko presents her with the star , and Kira realizes the shuriken is her first Kitsune Tail .
In Season 5A , Kira , after a summer with her parents in New York , starts senior year with her friends , including she and Scott consummating their relationship .
She has been fashioned a customized sword by Ken that was forged with a " unique power " .
In " Dreamcatcher " , Kira takes Tracy on the Chimera Tracy Stewart , and displays an Evolution : her Kitsune aura erupts around her frame and becomes naturally visible .
Second time around , she starts to lose control , attempting to behead another hybrid shouting " Watashi wa shi no shisha da ! " , but Scott stops her .
Her Fox Spirit has also become independent which Scott witnesses when he views the Fox spirit , though he keeps quiet about it .
Kira is flabbergasted when Scott tells her he loves her under the impression he does n't realize he did , but is lighthearted upon hearing he remembers , and that he meant it .
After the debacle at Eichen House , Kira starts to feel she 's causing problems , when she ca n't read or finish Valack 's novel , due to her Fox being affected by it , and later when she almost kills her mother in a rage .
In " Ouroboros " , Kira goes into a trance leading to route 115 .
She learns , to her horror , her sword was found impaled in the body of a Chimera , but she ca n't remember .
Noshiko gives Kira instructions for to allow her Fox Spirit to read the novel and Kira remembers the Dread Doctors experimented on her during the storm on route 115 , amplifying her Kitsune status and power , revealing that they 're responsible for her Evolution .
She and her parents decide they have to leave so they can tame her Fox spirit .
Kira has Scott tell her the truth about her Fox Spirit ; he does .
She shares a kiss goodbye with him , and leaves Beacon Hills and the Pack behind .
In Season 5B , " Codominance " Kira and her mother have traveled to Shiprock , New Mexico to find a solution for to control her Fox Spirit .
They come into contact with local skinwalkers .
Kira is put through a test by the shifters , facing off against an Oni .
Her Fox Spirit takes control and destroys the demon .
The three skinwalkers declare that while Kira wields the sword , the Fox wields her : Kira is now condemned by the skinwalkers to stay and become one herself .
Scott appears in time to help her and Noshiko escape .
Overjoyed , Kira tells a light - hearted Scott she loves him and rejoins the Pack .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Kira is advised by her father Ken to use her mind as a weapon instead of the sword and she 'll " outfox the Fox " as a new solution to control the Spirit , dismantling her mystical belt - sword .
In " Amplification " , as part of the plan to break Lydia out of Eichen , Kira draws power from the electrical grid which overloads her , causing her Fox Spirit to periodically jump out .
In " A Credible Threat " , Kira completely loses control , possessed by her abrasive , bloodthirsty Fox Spirit ( whom is fluent in Japanese ) but Scott pulls her back with his werewolf voice .
When the dangers escalate with Mason revealed to be the host for the Beast of Gévaudan , Kira takes desperate action and slips away with the shards of her sword , returning to the skinwalkers .
She tells him that she will join them , but only if they assist her to help save her friends .
The skinwalkers accede to Kira 's request but also telling her , there will be a price .
In " Apotheosis " , Kira ( now has her Fox Spirit under control ) returns to Beacon Hills just in time to stop a vengeful Theo from killing everyone .
Kira tells the sociopathic Chimera the skinwalkers have a message for him : his sister wants to see him .
Using her sword , harnessing the skinwalkers ' power , Kira creates an underworld chasm .
Theo 's undead sister emerges and drags Theo down to Hell .
Later , due to her deal with the skinwalkers , Kira returns to Shiprock , New Mexico to be taught how to fully navigate her Fox Spirit .
She promises Scott she will return , hands him her shuriken Tail to keep it safe for her and gives him a kiss goodbye , leaving the Pack for a second time .
Liam Dunbar is a new freshman at Beacon Hills High School in Season 4 , Mason 's best friend and a Beta werewolf in Scott 's Pack .
Liam is loyal , extroverted , sometimes cocky , but has severe anger issues .
Liam lives with his mother , and step - father Geyer .
In sixth grade , Liam had gone into one of his rages , injuring Hayden Romero 's face on the day yearbook photos were taken , earning him her enmity .
Liam transferred to Beacon Hills High after being kicked out of Devonford Prep because he 'd vandalized his lacrosse coach 's car .
Over the series , Liam 's rage problems mostly diminish , with him wanting to atone for his actions , being exchanged for a more emotionally responsible , mature and dutiful personality .
Liam is Scott 's first true Beta .
Liam first appears in " Muted " at lacrosse practice .
He is accidentally injured by Scott who immediately helps bring him to the hospital .
Liam enters the supernatural world when he 's attacked , held hostage by Sean Walcott , a wendigo .
Scott attempts to rescue him , but Liam is thrown over the hospital roof .
Sean has Scott 's arms pinned , so to save Liam from falling to his death , Scott catches Liam with his fangs , Biting him , transforming Liam into his first Beta .
In the next episode " The Benefactor " , Liam 's werewolf abilities begin to manifest .
At Lydia 's lake house , Scott 's Pack meet with Liam , attempt to gain his trust and debrief him of their supernatural species .
Annoyed , Liam angrily snaps at them , losing control , fully transforming for the first time and running out into the Preserve .
Scott and Argent effectively subdue him .
Horrified at what 's happened to him , Liam tearfully admits he deserved getting kicked out of his old school .
He fears his parents seeing him as a monster .
Scott comforts and tells Liam
: " You 're not a monster .
You 're a werewolf .
Like me . "
Afterwards , Liam is brought into the Pack , with Scott teaching him control and everything supernatural .
In " I.E.D. " , Liam faces off against his old school rival Brett Talbot during the lacrosse season 's pre - season scrimmage .
Scott and Stiles attempt keep him under control during the game , but they learn that their teammate Garrett is an assassin , and is targeting Brett who is also a Beta werewolf from a Pack of buddhist .
Liam is then kidnapped by Garrett and dying of a wolfsbane laced wound .
Liam remembers Scott 's instruction on how to be a werewolf which gives him enough control to let out a howl allowing Scott to find and rescue him .
Liam eventually develops enough control outside of the full moon .
In " Time of Death " , Scott tells him he does n't have to get involved in the plan of catching the Benefactor if he does n't want to .
Liam decides he 's not afraid and wants to help .
Liam and Kira take on a Berserker , but they 're overpowered with Liam terrified of the demons .
Afterwards , Liam develops PTSD afterward , having hallucinations of the monsters .
Later on with his price on the Dead Pool being spiked and the attempted assassination at the bonfire , the trauma and stress starts to get to him .
Liam admits his fears to Scott , saying he 's not like his Alpha , how he and the others put their lives on the line to save people .
In " A Promise of the Dead " , Liam continues to struggle , but gets help from Brett , his former rival roughing him to encourage him , and reminding him he is alive , snapping Liam out of his paranoia .
Brett then tells Liam he 's lucky to have Scott as his Alpha , because Scott is a True Alpha , meaning he earned his status .
Liam is inspired upon hearing this , fully overcoming his fears .
In " Smoke & Mirrors " , it is the full moon , but Liam insists on coming to help save Scott .
Liam manages to control himself when Stiles has him recite Satomi 's mantra .
When Scott is cursed as a Berserker by Kate Argent , Liam reaches Scott using Scott 's same words : " You 're not a monster .
You 're a werewolf .
Like me " .
These words then breaks Kate 's spell , and Liam sees Scott put away Peter after the murderous werewolf threatens him .
In Season 5A , Liam is still learning to perfect control under Scott 's tutelage .
In " Parasomnia " , he learns , to his chagrin , his nemesis from grade school , Hayden has enrolled .
The Pack has given him permission to let Mason in on the supernatural business .
Though worried that his best friend would reject him , Liam attempts to do so .
However , a full wolf ( Theo ) chases him and Mason , forcing Liam to fully expose himself to his best friend , but the latter is instead completely beside himself with awe .
Liam tracks a Chimera at the club Sinema where Hayden works in " Condition Terminal " , but he causes her to drop the shots she 's carrying , to her annoyance .
He later attempts to pay her back .
Hayden coldly rebukes him , but he insists on making up for the shots , even more so when he learns the money is for her medication .
Their relationship overtime begins to improve , with the two starting to fall for each other .
Liam later discovers Hayden is a Chimera .
He manages to convince her of the supernatural , and brings her to Scott 's Pack in " Strange Frequencies " to protect her .
Liam is furious , appalled at Scott 's decision to use Hayden as bait , but has Scott promise that he 'll do everything he can to save Hayden .
Despite the Pack 's efforts , the Dread Doctors abduct both Liam and Hayden , and while held captive , they comfort each other .
Upon being rescued by Theo , Liam shares a kiss with Hayden , also activating his pain siphoning ability .
After this , he and Hayden enter a romantic relationship , becoming lost in their own world .
When Hayden is poisoned by the Dread Doctors in " Lies of Omission " , Liam , overcome with worry , is tricked by Theo into thinking the Bite will save her .
Liam demands Scott Bite Hayden , but a discouraged Scott says no , reasoning the Bite could actually kill her .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Scott 's refusal and the supermoon greatly feeding his bloodlust and temper , Liam is led by Theo to violently clash with Scott ( who has been weakened by wolfsbane ) and attempts to kill him to take his True Alpha powers so he can save Hayden himself .
Liam comes close to killing Scott , but Mason arrives in time and snaps Liam out of his rage .
Mason tells him of Hayden 's death .
Devastated , Liam gives Hayden a final kiss before she is taken by Parrish .
In " The Last Chimera " , Liam mulls over his misplaced , misguided actions , wracked with guilt for almost killing Scott and leaving Hayden for dead .
He is however shaken when he discovers she is actually alive , having been brought back to life by Theo .
Liam and a frosty Hayden confront
each other over his leaving her to die to kill Scott , and she being in Theo 's Pack after Theo manipulated Liam to kill Scott , and had killed Scott himself .
In " Codominance " , the two make up after Hayden tells him she ca n't die again for her sister 's sake .
Liam admits he ca n't bear for her to die again either and the two kiss .
Later on they consummate their romance , but he continually pressures her to get away from Theo .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Liam attempts to locate the Dread Doctors ' lair and runs into Scott .
Liam guiltily admits to Scott
he did something wrong in attempting to kill him and says he has to make things right for it , like he 'd have to save Scott 's life .
Scott reassures him that Hayden is alive and is sure he 'll get a chance .
During the chaos caused by the Beast of Gévaudan , the Dread Doctors and Theo , Liam does everything he can to make things up to Scott , and his Alpha slowly comes to forgive him and accept him back into the Pack .
In " A Credible Threat " , during the charity lacrosse game with Devonford Prep , Liam is overjoyed when Hayden says she 's taking his advice to stand with Scott 's Pack because she wants to be with him .
By the end of Season 5 , the Pack puts an end to the Beast , Sebastien Valet , including saving Mason separating his best friend from the Beast 's essence to Liam 's relief and joy , and he and Hayden affirm their love after Hayden is willingly Bitten , made a Beta werewolf by Scott , sharing a kiss with her under the next full moon .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost " ,
while on a date , Liam and Hayden find a car with no driver and a scared boy in the back .
Liam and Mason investigate unusual compass readings leading them to the home of a missing couple .
Liam , Hayden and Mason investigate the smell of blood in the school , it leads them to a dead body in the boiler room .
In " Superposition " , Liam is blunt with Mason about his distrust in Corey , he questions where Corey was when they fought Sebastien Valet or why he was loyal to Theo for such a long period of time .
He says he 'll trust Corey when he does something trustworthy .
In " Sundowning " , Liam takes charge of the situation with Gwen as Scott is preoccupied with other things .
They trick her into going to a party at Scott 's house .
Shortly after Gwen arrived , the Ghost Riders appear .
Liam and Corey are forced to fight , but they 're no match for them .
In " Relics " , Liam is forced to take action as the Ghost Riders storm the sports field during a lacrosse game .
He lunges at one of the Riders , knocking it off its horse and clawing at it .
In " Ghosted " , when Hayden 's plan to trap a Ghost Rider is no longer an option , Liam devises a plan of his own .
He insists they get Theo , doing so would allow them to use Theo 's power .
Liam drives Kira 's sword into the ground , releasing Theo .
He is disappointed to learn Theo no longer has the powers he stole from Josh and Tracy .
He and Hayden then discover that Theo remembers Stiles , convincing them to keep Theo above ground .
In " Heartless " , Liam convinces Scott that Theo could help in stopping the Ghost Riders .
He reminds Theo that he still has the sword , and if he becomes more trouble than he 's worth , Liam will send him back .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Liam learns of Garrett Douglas ' past from Theo and is stunned to learn that when Garrett escaped from the tube in the Dread Doctors ' lair , he has the power of an Alpha , a Lowenmensch and a Ghost Rider .
Liam becomes enraged as he is forced to watch Mason get taken by the Ghost Riders .
He attacks the Ghost Rider at fault with such ferocity , despite being outmatched .
He escapes after Hayden allows herself to be taken .
In " Memory Found " , Liam and Theo lure the Ghost Riders to the hospital in order to buy Scott , Lydia and Malia time to remember Stiles .
Despite the odds stacked against him , Liam attacks and kills a few Ghost Riders with Theo 's help .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Liam discovers parts of the phantom train station being merged with the real world .
After Scott discovers a way to divert the train , Liam enters the rift by using one of the Ghost Riders ' horses and is reunited with Mason and Hayden .
They find Corey wired up in the radio room .
Once he hears Scott 's Roar , telling him that the train has been diverted , Liam helps Mason and Hayden rescue Corey which also rescues everyone else who had also been taken .
Noah Stilinski ( primarily referred to as Sheriff Stilinski ) is Stiles 's father and the sheriff of Beacon Hills .
His first name is not known until season 6 where he intrudes on his father Elias Stilinski having a conversation with Scott and Lydia .
Stilinski is close to Scott and Melissa .
He is an intelligent and dedicated officer , although his ability to do his job is hampered by his initial unawareness , and later because of the supernatural forces behind many of the crimes in Beacon Hills .
Stilinski and Stiles are mutually supportive and protective of one another , in part because of the death of Stiles ' mother , Claudia , some years before the series timeline .
In Season 1 , " Co - Captain "
, Stilinski links the murders committed by the Alpha to the Hale House fire .
He discovers an accomplice in the arson , Adrian Harris , who gave him the lead to the culprit , a pendant .
In the Season 1 finale , Stilinski finds the body of Kate Argent with the necklace , linking her to the crimes .
In Season 2 , the Sheriff is again working on solving a killing spree .
He is put on temporary leave because of Stiles ' behavior throughout the season , straining his relationship with his son .
With Stiles ' help , he finds out the victims were part of the Beacon Hills High swim team in 2006 .
He is held hostage at the Sheriff 's station with Melissa and their sons by Matt , when they uncover evidence convicting Matt .
After the events are resolved and Matt 's death , he is reinstated as Sheriff .
In Season 3 , Stilinski has a murder spree on his hands , this time committed by the Darach .
Stiles is reluctant to let his father in on the supernatural loop out of fear he could be killed .
Eventually in the episode " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " , he attempts to tell Stilinski the truth using previous seemingly inexplicable incidents , but Stilinski says he does n't know what he 's seen , harshly trying to end the argument .
Stiles talks back , saying , " Mom would 've believed me .
"
Stilinski later uncovers information on a hunch about the supernatural and discovers Jennifer Blake about to kill Lydia .
He witnesses Jennifer removing her glamour talent to reveal her actual face , the Darach , and Scott in his werewolf shape .
Jennifer abducts him for the Guardians ' sacrifice .
He is held in the Nemeton along with Melissa McCall and Argent .
He is now brought up to speed .
In " Alpha Pact " , Stilinski relays a story eight years ago when Claudia was on her deathbed .
He was helping a girl who was caught in a car accident .
He was holding the girl 's hand and her grip tightened .
She 'd comforted him saying if his wife was dying , he should leave and go be with her .
Ultimately , he did n't , waiting for paramedics to arrive instead .
Claudia had already died when he arrived and Stiles had been with her .
If he 'd believed in the supernatural , believed that the girl psychically knew that Claudia was dying , he would 've been with his wife in her final moments .
He and the parents are rescued by Allison and Isaac just as Jennifer is using the storm to bury them .
Stiles arrives holding up the ceiling of the root cellar with an aluminum bat and is reunited with his son .
Finally brought into the supernatural circle , and subsequently closer to Stiles , Stilinski starts to search through old cases which he suspect could involve a supernatural creature , particularly the case of Malia Tate .
He asks Scott to help him to find some clue in Malia 's house , but this proves unsuccessful .
Later , Stiles admits to Scott this action was his last attempt to solve some case when he 's still the sheriff , since Rafael , Scott 's father is having Stilinski impeached for a " lack of resolution and ability to close cases " .
However , with Scott and Stiles ' help in the following episode " More Bad than Good " , Malia Tate is found alive and he reunites her with her father and Stilinski closes the case .
Stilinski temporarily puts his dislike of Rafael aside in " Riddled " when Rafael finds Stiles after he goes missing and shakes his hand in gratitude .
Stilinski has been taking notes of Stiles ' growing symptoms and has him undergo a test for the same disease that killed Claudia .
When he sees a brain scan similar to his wife 's , he is visibly shaken .
However , later , Scott reveals to Stilinski Stiles is possessed by the dark trickster , the Nogitsune .
Displaying belief in the supernatural , Stilinski clues in on the fact that the Kitsune is a trickster .
He learns Stiles ' MRI results are fake : they are virtually similar to his wife 's results , courtesy of the Void Kitsune .
He recalls his time in the army ; he was taught that to defeat a foe , " you take away their hope " .
Rafael helps to talk Stilinski out of the impeachment case , saving his career and admits he only needed a reason to stay in Beacon Hills so he could make things up with Scott .
Stilinski attempts to give Rafael some sound advice : that he reveal to Scott why he left .
In " Insatiable " , when he sees the Nogitsune has been exorcised from his son , he gives Stiles a tight hug .
In Season 4 , Stilinski investigates the murders by the assassin , ' the Mute ' .
With Derek in tow , he is led to the school , where a Claymore mine is set up , but the assassin shows up .
Derek and Stilinski overpower him , then Stilinski attempts to arrest him , but the assassin is killed by Peter .
The Sheriff learns of the Dead Pool from Scott and Stiles ; he has the hit list run through recognition to find the intended targets .
Stilinski and Stiles are having money problems , trying to pay for the MRI and the " visit " to Eichen House which are both long overdue .
Stiles is tempted to use the Dead Pool money Scott found to help solve the problems .
Later on however , because Stiles was almost murdered by Brunski , their Eichen House bill is dropped as a gesture of apology .
In the Season 4 finale , " Smoke and Mirrors " , Stilinski saves Lydia and Mason from a Berserker using the Mute 's Claymore , destroying the demon .
In Season 5 , Stilinski is constantly given death threats from the delinquent Donovan Donati for his history with Donovan 's father .
Stiles notes his dad has taken off his wedding ring .
In " Condition Terminal " , Stilinski is against moving Tracy 's shapeshifted corpse from a crime scene .
Deaton counters he 'd be holding a press conference announcing the existence of the supernatural .
Stilinski stammers , with a growing frustration over having to obscure supernatural aspects in his cases , saying " There is a line we have to draw " , but reluctantly acquiesces .
Stilinski notices Stiles ' uncharacteristic silence and withdrawal upon realizing Donovan is a Chimera .
In " Strange Frequencies " , he and Melissa uncover that all the known Chimeras had previous organ transplants from an unknown donor : they were all genetically chimeras beforehand .
In " Ouroboros " , when another unnamed Chimera is found dead , impaled upon Kira 's sword , Stilinski culminates by resolutely reporting it with an APB out on Kira to the protest of Melissa , Stiles and Kira 's parents .
He vehemently argues the girl is murder , it is his job to investigate within the parameters of the law and although his son along with Scott 's Pack combat threats outside the law , they 're not above it .
Melissa humors him writing an official report detailing all the supernatural phenomena present in the town , and sharply tells him " maybe ( he ) should learn to bend a little before someone else breaks . "
In " Lies of Omission " , Stilinski sees Parrish has incarcerated himself because he 's the one stealing the bodies .
He considers letting it slide , but Parrish resolutely says no .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Stilinski uncovers clues surrounding Donovan 's death , but he 's attacked then left to die by Theo .
Stiles , horrified , manages to find Stilinski and the latter is hospitalized .
Scott , Stiles and Malia uncover he 'd been slashed , poisoned by Noah Patrick , a Berserker Chimera .
The bone marrow poisoning him is removed by Geyer and Stilinski recovers , waking up and reassuring Stiles
he " still has ( him ) " .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , Stilinski recovers from his near - death experience .
He talks to Stiles about Donovan 's death .
Stilinski reassures and advises his son that his only crime was surviving , though his heart is telling him it was murder , and if a judge said differently " then hell with the judge .
"
Stilinski admits he made a mistake in arresting Kira and says he 's learning " to bend .
" Stilinski advises Stiles that the burden he now carries wo n't ever feel OK again without a counterbalance , like saving a life .
He encourages Stiles to reconcile with Scott , saying he 'll feel better by forgiving someone if not himself .
Stilinski moves forward with his new mindset , keeping Parrish on as a deputy , despite growing increasingly concerned over Parrish 's apocalyptic dream and the growing number of bodies committed by the Beast .
In " Amplification " , Stiles alerts him to the danger
Lydia 's in while in Eichen House .
Stilinski talks to a resolutely oblivious Natalie Martin firmly telling her she knows the bigger picture of what 's happening in Beacon Hills , giving her the records of Valack 's experimentation at Eichen House and Melissa 's " police report " as proof , which later leads to her finally acknowledging the supernatural .
In " Apotheosis " , the Beast is destroyed ( with Mason separated ) and the Desert Wolf defeated and captured by Malia and Braeden , Stilinski tells Stiles his role in making all of the above happen must have felt good .
Stiles admits it did and he wants to feel it again .
Stilinski proudly tells his son : " Welcome to your future career in law enforcement . "
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost " , the Sheriff brings Scott in to help find out what happened to a boy 's missing parents .
After Stiles ' encounter with a Ghost Rider , Stilinski does n't recognise him .
In " Superposition " , the Sheriff and Parrish enter the station as they go over a recent case .
His wife Claudia is alive as a result of the Ghost Riders ' interference .
She waits for him in his office .
He asks if she 's happy to which she says " Always " .
In " Sundowning " , Stilinski tells Scott and Lydia that " Stiles " is not a thing , but a person .
His father Elias was an army engineer and used the nickname Stiles .
He denies Scott 's request to see Elias as he would be no help to them due to his dementia .
He later walks in on Scott , Lydia and Malia visiting Elias .
Elias becomes agitated towards his son and tells him to go back to his " dead wife and loser son " .
The Sheriff later tells Scott that he remembers back in college , he and Claudia were discussing their future including having a son named Stiles .
In " Relics " , Stilinski gives Lydia permission to search his house for any possible relics of Stiles .
He tells her that he could n't sleep the night before , he got up to do some paperwork but he stubs his toe on an old baseball bat and , without thinking , he yells out Stiles ' name .
In " Radio Silence " , the Sheriff does n't know how the jeep ended up in the school car park , he admits the vehicle was a junker in the day , but does n't understand who would want it now .
In " Ghosted " , the Sheriff refuses to acknowledge the possibility that Stiles is his son and that he was taken by the Ghost Riders .
He believes the person Scott heard on the radio could 've been the result of signal crossing .
He later talks to Claudia that someone should write a paper on how she survived the frontotemporal dementia , but she shoots him down and instead talks about replacing the wallpaper Lydia had damaged .
In " Heartless " , Stilinski discovers what he believes to be Stiles ' bedroom .
He asks Claudia why it was sealed off .
She just says there are several simple explanations for the room and tells him to " leave it alone " but he can not .
He begins to think that maybe what Scott and Lydia have been telling him was true .
Lydia gives him the first clue that he has a son by spotting Stiles ' lacrosse jersey in the room and tossing it to him .
In " Blitzkrieg " , the Sheriff starts piecing together that he has a son by running string to the walls of Stiles ' room , causing Stiles ' possessions to reappear .
He later tries to show Claudia Stiles ' room full of Stiles ' stuff but she sees nothing .
He then realises that Claudia is n't real as he ca n't remember her last birthday or anniversary .
Claudia tries to fill his head with false memories but he persists , remembering her " last good day " at the hospital .
Once he remembers Stiles , Claudia disappears .
The Sheriff tells the Pack that he has a son , his name is Mieczyslaw Stilinski
but they call him Stiles .
He remembers everything about his son , everything from his first time behind the jeep to him dragging Scott into the woods .
In " Memory Found " , Stilinski is shot and erased by the Ghost Riders as he exits the Sheriff 's station .
In " Riders on the Storm " , the Sheriff is briefly reunited with Stiles before giving him cover so that Stiles could escape .
He later saves Stiles from the conjured up Claudia .
After the Ghost Riders leave Beacon Hills and everyone is saved , the Sheriff is back at the station with all his deputies .
colspan=5 Melissa McCall ( née Delgado ) is Scott 's overworked , cynical but comforting and loving mother .
Melissa is close friends with Stilinski and is like a surrogate mother to Stiles .
Melissa works as a nurse at Beacon Hills Memorial Hospital .
Scott is very close to her , since her ex - husband Rafael is absent .
From Season 2 's end onwards , Melissa is in the know of Scott 's werewolf status .
She becomes closer to him , participating and helping her son in his missions to protect Beacon Hills , serving as his moral tether and role model .
In " Formality " , Melissa helps Scott get ready for the school formal and tells him " Women love words " , giving her son the confidence he needs to tell Allison both he loves her , and that he 's a werewolf .
In Season 2 , " Abomination " , Melissa 's life is inconspicuously threatened by Gerard Argent to blackmail Scott into following his orders .
Scott complies , though Melissa notices his distress right afterward .
Scott lies to her , saying everything 's fine .
In " Restraint " after Jackson files a restraining order against Scott and Stiles , Melissa angrily confronts Scott over all of his bizarre behavior .
She concernedly asks are his actions because of his absent father .
To keep her in the dark , Scott affirms this .
In " Fury " , Melissa is called to the sheriff 's station as a witness , but as she arrives she sees Matt Daehler shoot Scott in the stomach and is horrified .
Melissa is held hostage with Stilinski .
Melissa comes into contact with the supernatural , witnessing a shapeshifted Derek Hale fight the Kanima , and finally sees Scott as a werewolf .
At first , she is horrified , devastated , having trouble coping .
She avoids Scott for a week and is even more frightened when Gerard breaks into the house and has the Kanima hold her hostage .
Eventually , Melissa comes to accept Scott for his new identity , and encourages him to help others with his abilities .
In Season 3 , Melissa is closer to Scott having come to terms with his world , assisting him whenever possible , attempting to smuggle Isaac out when he 's committed to the hospital and helping Stiles identify a new killer in Beacon Hills by allowing him access to the morgue .
In the episode , " The Overlooked " , during the evacuation of the hospital because of a storm , Melissa finds Ethan and Aiden in their merged form attacking Scott .
She saves her son by electrocuting them with a defibrillator .
She helps Scott the others with their plan to help Jennifer , the Darach , escape the Alphas ( Jennifer had poisoned Cora and kidnapped Stilinski for leverage ) , but Jennifer double - crosses them and kidnaps Melissa .
Melissa is later held in the Nemeton along with Stiles ' and , later , Allison 's father for the final sacrifice , Guardians .
In " Lunar Ellipse " , she and the other parents are rescued by Isaac , Allison and Stiles .
Like Scott she is not happy with her ex - husband , Rafael back in town .
In " Anchors " , Melissa , along with Scott , is angry when Rafael conducts a case for impeachment in his attempt to fire Sheriff Stilinski .
Right afterward she realizes Scott is about to lose control of his wolf side .
More used to the supernatural , she helps him regain control by telling tell him to " be his own anchor " , as Allison was his anchor and they 've parted which Scott manages to do .
After that she comforts and promises him that people fall in love more than once .
Melissa has also had the McCall residence installed with ash wood base boards with Deaton 's help to work as wards against supernatural intruders which she arms when the Oni attack the house .
Mellisa , Stilinski and Scott 's issues with Rafael are revealed in " Insatiable " : when they were married , Rafael used to be a heavy drinker .
One time , when Scott was only a toddler , Rafael came home drunk and had accidentally knocked Scott down the stairs bruising his head on the floor
and she 'd kicked Rafael out .
Stilinski had answered the domestic distress call , exacerbating spite from Rafael .
In the Season 3 finale , the hospital is attacked by the Oni , and Melissa makes Rafael promise her , if she does n't make it , he is to make things up with Scott .
Melissa is saved when the Nogitsune is defeated .
Melissa comforts her son when he finally has time to mourn Allison 's death .
During Season 4 , because of all the antecedent damage done to the hospital , Melissa is late in paying her bills for the house , forcing her in having to make double shifts at the hospital .
She calculates the cost of the budget to learn how long before she and Scott could lose their house .
Scott , worried for Melissa , hides the duffel bag full of Dead Pool money , paid to the assassin Garrett , in his room , hoping it could solve their financial crunch .
In " Time of Death " , Melissa takes part in Scott 's plan to have Scott fake his death to catch the Benefactor .
She hates the plan when told Scott will die for real if Kira does n't shock him again within the next 45 minutes .
Melissa snaps at Noshiko asking why are they letting their kids handle these dangers .
Noshiko answers that they 'd be asking them to " run and hide for the rest of their lives " otherwise .
Melissa finds the Dead Pool money in " A Promise to the Dead " , and confronts Scott , saying while he can " save lives " , he ca n't save people " from life " , convincing her son to return the money to the Hales .
In Season 5 , " Condition Terminal " , Melissa calls Scott to the hospital where a patient named Corey is in relentless pain so Scott can siphon the pain .
Scott and Melissa store the Chimera Lucas ' corpse in the morgue after the Dread Doctors kill him .
Scott mulls that he " should have done something " .
Melissa says his grandfather had a saying ; when one says " I should have " too much , then " You 're should - ing all over yourself . "
She says she wishes she could be the mother to say Scott ca n't be involved in the danger of Beacon Hills because he 's always going to be at the center of it all , and because he cares .
She asks him the foremost question : what is he going to do .
Scott replies he 'll find out whoever murdered Lucas and stop them .
In " Ouroboros " , when Stilinski sticks to the law putting out an APB on Kira when her sword is found in the body of a dead Chimera in spite of the world they now live in , Melissa slaps him in the face for it , sharply telling him , " Maybe you should learn to bend a little , before some else breaks .
"
In " Status Asthmaticus " , after Scott is killed by Theo Raeken , Melissa persistently applies CPR .
She screams for her son to roar to bring himself back : it works and Scott is revived , roaring .
Melissa treats and comforts her defeated son .
Melissa tells Scott his friends will come back to him , and advises him to bring and give everyone and his Pack hope .
In " The Last Chimera " , Melissa comforts a distraught Stiles over Stilinski 's injuries and attempts to help Geyer keep Stilinski from dying .
She learns from Stiles the Sheriff 's being poisoned by bone marrow .
She manages to convince Geyer to perform surgery to remove the piece of bone : it works and successfully saves Stilinski ' life .
In " Amplification " , Melissa conducts and oversees the evacuation of the hospital to Hill Valley in time before the Beast of Gévaudan arrives at the building .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Melissa looks up Mason 's medical records after the reveal he is the host for the Beast and reveals new information to Lydia and Stiles : Mason is genetically a chimera because he 'd absorbed his twin while still an unborn fetus accounting for him having two sets of DNA .
Melissa asserts that this information sounds " just bizarre enough to sound like it might be important . "
In " Apotheosis " , Melissa , not caring she could be fired , gives an injured Lydia a shot of cortisone to the throat to allow her limited use of her voice , her banshee voice , so Lydia can Scream Mason 's name to save him , separate him from the Beast .
In season 6A " Sundowning " , Melissa sneaks Argent into the morgue at the hospital in order for him to take a look at a recent murder victim .
Upon further examination , she realizes that the murder victim is missing his pineal gland , which is said to house the soul .
In " Relics " , Melissa follows Argent in the woods as he hunts for the werewolf that 's been killing people .
She decided to join him because she 's sick of seeing people she cares about getting hurt .
They find two cyclists with their heads caved in .
Melissa is later approached by Lydia and Natalie who want her to show them Claudia Stilinski 's medical records .
The records show Claudia never had children but did have frontotemporal dementia " 10 years ago " .
Melissa is shocked Claudia is still alive and thinks it 's a miracle .
In " Ghosted " , in order to save Argent 's life , Melissa secretly moves him down to an abandoned storage room .
She mixes together nine herbs to counter - act the nine toxins that are poisoning him , and uses the herbs to heal him .
In " Heartless " , Melissa informs Malia that Peter is dying .
She reminds Malia that Peter is ruthless and always has a plan to hurt everyone around him .
She injects Peter with a syringe containing the nine herbs which heals him .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Melissa agrees to take Garrett Douglas to Deputy Parrish in order to save Argent .
On arrival at the bunker , she pleads with Parrish to awaken but he does n't
and she 's erased .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Melissa and Argent attempt to escape the Wild Hunt as it 's being merged with the real world .
After Argent kills two Ghost Riders , Melissa kisses him before they leave .
After the Ghost Riders leave and everyone in Beacon Hills are saved , Melissa treats Corey with the nine herbs .
colspan=5 Christopher " Chris " Argent ( primarily referred to as simply Argent ) is Allison 's father and a werewolf - hunter veteran .
Argent is a strong willed , stern man , and while initially hostile towards werewolves having been born and indoctrinated into his family 's cause , Argent has a sense of honor and a moral compass .
Unlike most of the Argents , he sticks to the Hunter 's Code not believing in killing the innocent and wishes to instead provide a symbol of protection for people against supernatural creatures and truly loves his family , wanting the best for Allison , being overprotective of her .
In Season 1 , Argent is antagonistic towards Derek Hale , and is suspicious of Scott due to his being Allison 's boyfriend .
Argent eventually learns Scott is another Beta werewolf , but later that Kate has revealed their secret life to Allison , to his fury .
Argent locates Stiles and Jackson for Scott 's whereabouts but
the former instead tells him Kate orchestrated the Hale fire .
He then confronts Kate and fires a warning shot to have her take her gun off of Scott .
In Season 2 , after Kate and Peter 's deaths , Argent forces Allison to end her romance with Scott by holding Scott at gunpoint to prove his point .
His father , Gerard then arrives afterward to declare war , despite his protests .
Argent begins Allison 's training to be a hunter but grudgingly keeps Scott safe for her sake .
In " Raving " , Argent confronts Allison over her knowledge of the murders committed by the Kanima explaining to her that because they know of the supernatural , it is the hunters ' job to protect the human norms from them .
When Victoria is Bitten , Argent is conflicted over it while Gerard endorses her suicide and Victoria ultimately decides to go through with it to obey the Hunter 's Code .
She asks Argent to help her commit suicide when she ca n't do it alone , to his devastation and remorse .
He desperately tries to comfort Allison upon her learning the news .
In " Fury " , Argent is reluctant to let Allison take charge of the family .
He eventually follows her lead but becomes upset , horrified when she falls under Gerard 's influence .
After she almost murders Erica and Boyd out of rage , Argent saves their lives , horrified by the person she 's becoming .
Realizing Gerard is the enemy in " Master Plan " , Argent defects from his family 's crusade , sets Erica and Boyd free and allies with Scott and Derek , putting aside their differences , to stop Gerard .
When Gerard comes out with his plan all along was to get the Bite to cure his cancer , having the Kanima threaten Allison 's life to this end , Argent is incensed at his father 's betrayal after he 'd pushed for Victoria 's suicide all while what he was planning to do and now threatening Allison 's life , branding his father a monster .
After Scott puts an end to Gerard , Argent is now on more reasonable terms with him and comforts a devastated Allison .
In Season 3A , Argent and Allison have retired from hunting to stay out of supernatural affairs .
In " Fireflies " , Scott goes to him for help in stopping Cora and Boyd when they are under the influence of the full moon .
Argent initially refuses saying Scott 's world " decimated his " .
After seeing a supposed victim of their rampage however , he relents assisting Scott , Derek , and Isaac , in finding and capturing them .
Despite saying that he has retired , Argent starts getting involved with the Alpha Pack situation in " Motel California " and is revealed to have been hunting the Darach for some time and knows also about Allison 's continued involvement .
Argent has also grown more supportive and compromising towards Allison 's relationships with her supernatural friends .
When Jennifer names him as the final sacrifice , Argent hands himself over to keep his daughter safe and is kidnapped by her .
He is held in the Nemeton along with Scott 's mother and Stiles 's father , all three being Guardians of their children for the final sacrifice .
Argent and the other parents are eventually rescued by his daughter , Isaac and Stiles .
He decides to re - work the Code with Allison in the mid - Season 3 finale and " protect those who can not protect themselves " , since the Nemeton had been revitalized .
During Season 3B , when the Oni appear in Beacon Hills , Argent relays a tale to the group in " Silverfinger " .
24 years earlier , at the age of 18 , Gerard had Argent conduct his first gun deal leaving out the fact that the customers were Yakuza .
During the meeting , three Oni appeared and went after the Yakuza boss , the kumichō , who was supernatural , possessed by a Nogitsune .
Argent had survived and saved the life of a man called " Silverfinger " by shooting one of the Oni directly in the face , shattering its mask .
Argent and Derek also come to solve their differences in " Letharia Vulpina " , when Derek saves his life , shielding Argent from the blast of a bomb , and after Derek is freed from the Nogitsune possession in " De - Void "
, Argent tells Derek he 's not his enemy anymore .
In the penultimate episode of Season 3 , when he shows Allison how to cast a silver arrowhead to graduate as a hunter , Allison takes the time to tell Argent she loves him
and she 's proud of what they 've accomplished .
Argent later arrives at the Oak Creek camp and sees that Allison has been killed .
In " The Divine Move " , Argent feels devastation , but knows how to deal with it saying he has the capacity and a skill to compartmentalize his emotions .
He actually comforts Isaac over the latter 's sorrow .
Isaac figures out that Allison wanted Scott to tell him that she had destroyed the Oni with her silver arrowhead .
He has Argent recall his first deal where he 'd shot off an Oni 's mask ; Argent had fired a silver bullet , but the bullet must have gone through and through :
silver is a poison to the Oni .
They come to the school and destroy the remaining Oni with the arrowheads avenging Allison .
Argent leaves Beacon Hills for France with Isaac in tow to permanently put away the Nogitsune trapped in the triskele urn and to help each other come to terms with the death of his daughter .
In Season 4
" The Benefactor " , Argent returns to Beacon Hills after receiving Scott 's text telling him Kate is alive and in Beacon Hills .
Argent arrives just in time to help Scott corral and subdue Liam .
While apparently dealing with Allison 's death , determined to honor her by upholding her Code and resolved to protect her loved ones during the Dead Pool situation , Argent is shown to be desolate , harboring immense grief .
He receives a visit from the Calaveras who come to enlist him in hunting Kate , intending to have Argent return to the ways of the hunter .
In " A Promise to the Dead " , Argent tracks Kate 's Berserkers to the sewers , but he 's captured by Peter .
The werewolf pegs Argent to the sewer wall through a rebar , then bends it , trapping him .
He is found by Parrish but eventually Argent tells Parrish to just leave him , to warn Scott about Peter and Kate , and gives into his pain , fatigue and ultimately grief , telling Parrish , " I 've got nothing left " .
Parrish refuses , telling Argent he knows about Allison , and how she felt about Scott .
He enthralls Argent to use anger over how Allison would feel if Scott were in danger , and Argent eventually breaks free .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " Argent and Parrish , along with the Calaveras arrive at La Iglesia and face off against Kate and her Berserker .
Argent subdues Kate , shooting her with a yellow monkshood laced bullet .
Kate defends her actions telling Argent that Scott and his friends killed Allison .
Argent firmly tells Kate that Allison died saving her friends ' lives .
Argent tearfully admits he wo n't kill his sister , but wonders is she even worth saving .
When Kate escapes , Argent leaves with the Calaveras to hunt her down as his part of a deal he eventually made with them ; in exchange they have to leave Scott 's Pack in peace .
In Season 5B " The Last Chimera " , Argent returns to Beacon Hills as backup called by Scott , helping the latter , Stiles and Malia escape from the Dread Doctors .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , Argent visits Gerard admittedly knowing he needs his father 's knowledge and experience .
In contempt , Argent hands his crippled father yellow monkshood which heals Gerard of his ailment .
Argent questions him on the Dread Doctors knowing his father has information .
Gerard replies the para - scientists ' success is a resurrected werewolf that 's actually connected to their family : the Beast of Gévaudan .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Argent and Gerard track the Beast and uncover the operating theatre of the Dread Doctors .
Argent shows Scott ( who is affronted by his decision to heal and recruit Gerard )
the fresco depicting the Beast fighting a creature called a hellhound with bodies littered below the fray - bodies of citizens of Beacon Hills .
Argent and Gerard then visit Parrish and confirm he 's a hellhound .
In " The Maid of Gévaudan " , Argent and Lydia hear the story of his ancestor , Marie - Jeanne Valet from Gerard and also learn of the only means of killing the Beast :
the mystical Pike Marie - Jeanne used to slay him in the eighteenth century .
He and Gerard set out to find the weapon along with Parrish who is now able to consciously tap into his powers .
They recover the Pike which has been re - forged into the same cane that was carried and used by the Surgeon .
In " Apotheosis " , the Argents lure the Beast , Sebastien Valet , into the sewers for the final showdown .
Argent gives Parrish a pep talk to give the latter the confidence he needs to take on the Beast in repentance for Parrish saving his life .
As events come to a close , with all the pieces in place , Argent comes out with his and Scott 's own plan to double cross Gerard , passing the Pike to Scott .
Everyone knew his father 's only purpose would only be serving his own ends than saving people , shooting his father , disabling him .
After the Beast is destroyed , Argent once again severs all ties with Gerard without hesitation .
In season 6A " Sundowning " , after seeing a murder victim in the morgue , Argent informs Melissa that the body found in the school was n't the first victim .
There are several others , all of which are missing the pineal gland , which Melissa says houses the soul .
Argent suspects the attacker was a werewolf who is stealing souls .
In " Relics " , Argent and Melissa search the woods for the werewolf responsible for the recent murders .
They finds 2 more victims with their heads caved in .
Argent offers to help Malia gain control as she almost killed him and Melissa the night before .
He tells her that he saw the look of blood lust on Kate 's face years prior .
He believes that if he 'd done something , then maybe Kate would n't be a monster .
He is later injured by the Ghost Riders while trying to protect several people who saw the Ghost Riders at Scott 's house .
In " Ghosted " , Argent is dying as a toxin quickly spreads throughout his body .
The Ghost Riders ' whip infects its victims with a supernatural toxin .
He requests Melissa to mix together 9 herbs to counter - act the toxin .
In " Blitzkrieg " , upon bringing Garrett Douglas to the bunker , Argent grabs a nearby shotgun , shooting him several times .
This does n't do much damage .
He apologises to Melissa before he is erased .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Argent and Melissa try to find a way out of the Wild Hunt .
Argent kills a Ghost Rider with its own gun .
He then faces another in a standoff with Argent quickly pulling the trigger .
After everyone is saved from the Wild Hunt , Argent accompanies Melissa and Mason as Melissa treats Corey 's injuries with the 9 herbs .
SECONDARY CHARACTERS
Worm moon
, Peter successfully has Lydia resurrect him .
It is revealed by Deaton , that Peter lost his Alpha status upon resurrection and his abilities are subsequently impaired .
Throughout Season 3 , Peter has an uneasy alliance with Derek and the gang after helping them against the Kanima .
It 's depicted in the past that even before the fire , Peter was a conniving manipulator ; he started a chain of events that lead to the death of Derek 's first love , Paige .
Peter felt envy and resentment over his older sister Talia 's leadership of their family , firmly believing the role of Alpha was his .
Sneaky as always , Peter has shown to somewhat care about his remaining family , Derek and his other niece Cora , most likely out of convenience and survival .
When Cora is dying of mistletoe poisoning in " Alpha Pact " , Peter tells Derek of a technique to cure sickness with pain transference as a way to save her , but he 'll give up his Alpha status .
When Derek decides to go through with it , Peter grins in triumph .
In the mid - Season finale , after Scott becomes a True Alpha , Peter prevents Jennifer from attempting to re - energize herself using the Nemeton again .
The Darach reveals she knows he plans to kill Scott .
Peter kills Jennifer , boasting that he 's " always been the Alpha " .
In Season 3B , Peter goes along with Derek on the latter 's mission to recover his sister Talia 's claws from the Calaveras .
Derek has Peter use Talia 's claws to conduct a ritual so Derek could communicate with Talia 's ghost , in exchange he tells his nephew he wants to keep the claws .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Peter tells Lydia he will help her control her banshee powers on the condition that she do something for him : he wants her to listen to Talia 's claws and translate a memory Talia stole from him before the fire .
Lydia manages , and she discovers that Peter had fathered a child , the werecoyote Malia Tate , but refrains from telling him her name .
In " De - Void " , after the Pack paralyze Void Stiles ' body , Lydia calls Peter for help .
He complies , but Lydia has to give him his child 's name .
Peter shows Scott how to utilize an Alpha 's power to meld minds so that he and Lydia can enter Stiles ' mind to find Stiles and guide him back .
Lydia gives Peter Malia 's name .
In episode " 117 " of Season 4
, Peter comes face - to - face with Malia , though Malia is initially kept in the dark about her relation to him .
Peter has also regained his full strength and werewolf abilities .
He learns of Kate Argent 's survival and faces off against her when she infiltrates the Hale vault , but the Benefactor simultaneously robs the Hales ' fortune , $ 117 million in bearer bonds , to his anger .
In " Orphaned " , Peter approaches Kate with a proposition : he offers her control over her werejaguar shapeshift .
In return , she helps him recover his money and implement his plan to kill Scott .
In " Time of Death " , Peter meets with Malia after she finds out he 's her biological father , showing her the file confirming her adoption .
He offers her his help in finding her biological mother who is known as ' the Desert Wolf ' .
After it is revealed Meredith Walker is the Benefactor in " Monstruous " , Peter , reading Meredith 's mind , sees that through Meredith telepathically hearing his vengeful thoughts , he 'd concocted the Dead Pool plan .
He is amused by the whole ordeal , saying the ' plan ' was the ravings of a lunatic , that comatose for a werewolf is beyond torture .
At the end of Season 4 , Peter and Kate initiate the plan to kill Scott .
Kate abducts Scott and transforms him into a Berserker .
Peter goes along with the Pack when they rally to go up against Kate , ostensibly promising Malia she 'll meet her mother if she kills Kate , and imploring the Pack not to hold back against the Berserkers .
The plan fails at the last minute when Scott is able to break free of being a Berserker .
Scott confronts Peter that he figured the plan out to kill him for power .
Showing his true colors , Peter viciously retorts that he pursues power for his family , that the one to inherit it is him , telling his werewolf progeny he does n't deserve his power .
Peter clashes against Scott .
Peter gets the upper hand but Scott triggers new strength and swiftly defeats Peter , telling him he " was never an Alpha , he was always a monster " .
Peter is drugged with yellow monkshood , brought back to Beacon Hills , and incarcerated in the prison of Eichen House for supernaturals .
Peter vehemently swears he will find a way out .
After getting a frightening vision from Valack 's " third eye " , he was relocated to another cell .
In season 6A " Radio Silence " , Peter is revealed to be taken by the Wild Hunt and dropped off at an abandoned train station .
He finds Stiles who was also taken and does n't look too pleased to see him .
Stiles questions him on how he escaped from Eichen House , Peter explains that during the power outage that happened around the time Scott and his Pack were rescuing Lydia from Eichen House , Peter escaped , only to be taken by the Ghost Riders .
When Peter learns that he 's been at the train station for 3 months , he could n't believe no one noticed he was missing .
Both Peter and Stiles reluctantly work together to find a way out , which is through a tunnel but with a barrier at the end .
One person tries to escape , but gets incinerated .
Peter makes it out , but gets burned in the process .
After making it to the woods , he Roars which is heard by Scott and Malia .
They find him and instantly remember him , then they realise that he was taken by the Ghost Riders .
They siphon some of his pain , hoping to make it easier for him .
He 's later taken to the hospital where Melissa begins treating his burns .
After he recovers , Peter wants Malia to leave town with him .
She refuses to do so without Stiles to which he says her loyalty is overrated .
He tells her to run as he 'll hold off the approaching Ghost Riders .
In " Blitzkrieg " as Scott and Malia are underground trying to escape the Ghost Riders , Peter arrives just in time to stop the Ghost Riders from killing Malia and Scott .
He sacrifices himself and allows the Ghost Riders to erase him again , giving Scott and Malia a chance to escape .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Peter is found by Lydia and Malia in the train station , only for them to discover that he 's in a trancelike state .
He is snapped out of it by Malia
and he helps her ,
Theo and Scott fend off the Ghost Riders .
After Garrett Douglas tries to call back the departing Ghost Riders , Peter points out that the Ghost Riders have no leader .
He , Scott , Malia and Theo watch on as Garrett is turned into a Ghost Rider and leaves with the other Ghost Riders .
colspan=5Victoria Argent is Allison 's mother , Chris Argent 's wife .
As a result of the matriarchal rules of the Argent family , Victoria is the official leader of the Argents ' hunters who makes the final decisions , with leadership on the field being deferred to Argent himself .
Victoria is a rather zealous , vindictive and hard - hearted woman , giving werewolves no mercy , even with humans .
While she shares Argent 's restraint , she does not share his morals .
Her cold demeanor not withstanding , Victoria loves Argent and Allison , nonetheless .
Victoria is an attentive wife and mother and , like Argent , overprotective of Allison .
She is overbearing also and prone to fits of rage .
In " Lunatic " , when Derek Hale is on the run after being framed for the attempted murder of Allison and the kids at the high school , Victoria coldly states that the hunters are to " find ( Derek ) , kill him , cut him in half " .
In the Season 1 finale she demands Allison keep quiet over her introduction to the supernatural .
Victoria is not above torture to get what she wants , as in " Shape - Shifted " she electrocutes the principal of Beacon Hills High to have him resign so Gerard could take his place as part of a plan to keep an eye on Beacon Hills ' werewolves .
When Victoria suspects Scott and Allison are still seeing each other after she and Argent had forbade them to , she mutilates her arm in " Ice Pick " , so to ask Scott 's mother Melissa questions on Scott .
In " Frenemy " , she takes a job as a substitute teacher to completely keep an eye on her daughter .
In " Raving " , Victoria inconspicuously sees Scott and Allison kissing .
To keep Scott away from Allison for good , she ambushes him at the rave party during the sting operation to capture the Kanima .
She attempts to murder him by triggering his asthma with wolfsbane .
Scott lets out a howl for help , but Victoria gloats believing he 's on his own .
Derek however , fights her off and saves Scott , Biting her in the process .
In " Party Guessed " , Bitten , changing into a werewolf , Victoria must now commit suicide to obey the hunter 's code , which Gerard endorses .
She writes a goodbye letter to Allison , feeling genuine sorrow that she did n't get a chance to talk to her daughter one last time as Allison had taken off to Lydia 's party .
Upon the full moon rising , she feels the transformation happening .
Overwhelmed , she confesses she ca n't pull off her suicide by herself and asks Argent to help her .
Together , they impale her upon a knife .
Victoria dies in Argent 's arms .
Victoria 's death causes Allison 's devastation and moral spiral at the end of Season 2 , but also Argent 's defection from the hunter 's cause .
Victoria 's attempt to murder Scott is unknown to Allison until Season 3 , as Scott did not want her actions to be Allison 's last memory of her mother .
During Season 3A , Victoria appears in flashbacks , and mental visions to Allison .
colspan=5Coach Bobby Finstock is the eccentric and sarcastic coach of the Beacon Hills High School lacrosse and cross - country teams , as well as the economics teacher .
Finstock pressures the players to do their best , targeting Scott and Stiles often .
Though he pushes the team to their limit , he encourages teamwork and is shown to support them wholeheartedly through games .
He often expresses hostility toward an unseen character named " Greenberg " and makes cracks about his one testicle .
He is an alcoholic , drinking " every night " , but has been sober for 15 years .
He uses quotes from his favorite movie , Independence Day , as a way to motivate his players .
Every year , on October 30 ( which is his birthday ) , the students of Beacon Hills High pull pranks on him .
In the pilot " Wolf Moon " , Finstock is the first to notice Scott 's improvement on the lacrosse field and puts him on first line .
In " Second Chance At First Line " , he tells Scott to play at the first game despite Scott claiming he has issues with anger .
In " The Tell " , during the parent teacher conference , Finstock discusses Stiles with Sheriff Stilinski , including Stiles ' inability to concentrate in class despite having good grades .
He is later seen amongst a panicked crowd when a mountain lion enters the school car park .
In " Heart Monitor " , Scott and Stiles use Finstock 's heart rate monitor to help Scott control his abilities .
Finstock later humiliates Scott in class which nearly causes Scott to wolf out .
In " Lunatic " , he is forced to put Stiles on first line because of a pink - eye epidemic .
In " Wolf 's Bane " , Finstock promotes Scott to Co - captain of the team alongside Jackson , much to the latter 's displeasure .
In " Formality " , Finstock forbids Scott from going to the dance due to poor grades .
When he tries to throw him out , Scott has Danny dance with him and forcing Finstock to back down before he makes a bigger problem .
In the season 2 premiere " Omega " , Finstock offers " A " grades to any of his players who can help find Lydia who is wandering naked in the woods .
He relates a comic story of losing a testicle to hypothermia .
In " Shape Shifted " , he holds a lacrosse practice session and is continually annoyed by Scott 's antics while being the goalie , unaware Scott is actually trying to determine who the new werewolf is by scent , which he discovers to be Isaac .
In " Ice Pick " , Finstock stumbles upon Scott and Stiles as chains fall out of Stiles ' locker and awkwardly leaves the situation .
In " Abomination " , he pulls Boyd out of the crowd to play lacrosse after an opposing player disables most of the Cyclone 's front line .
In " Venomous " , Finstock witnesses Lydia 's breakdown in his class as she writes " Someone Help Me " backwards on the blackboard several times while hallucinating .
Later in the episode , he exposes Danny 's shredded equipment .
In " Raving " , Finstock inquiries Stiles about Jackson 's absence as the championship game is soon approaching .
In the penultimate episode " Battlefield " , Finstock gives the same speech heard from Independence Day .
During the game , as the players begin to drop like flies , he 's forced to send in Scott even though he 's on academic probation .
In the season 2 finale " Master Plan " , despite his loud and eccentric behaviour , Finstock is shown to be concerned about some of his players , especially Scott and his grades to which Scott vows to get his grades back up .
In season 3A " Chaos Rising " , during a lesson on the " Risk and Reward " principle of economics , Finstock is surprised by Scott 's new found knowledge .
He demonstrates the well known college drinking game " quarters " .
In " Unleashed " , during a cross country session , he helps Sheriff Stilinski clear away bystanders after a teenage boy is found dead in the woods .
Finstock assumes the dead boy was some homeless guy until Scott tells him that the boy was a senior at school .
In " Frayed " , Finstock takes the Cross Country team for a meet while Scott and his friends recover from their recent attack on the Alpha Pack .
During the trip , Finstock chastises Jared for being carsick .
In " Motel California " , when the meet is postponed until the following day , Finstock takes the team to the Motel Glen Capri for the night .
In the morning , he announces that the meet has been cancelled .
Lydia discovers wolfsbane in Finstock 's whistle , meaning that each time he blew it on the bus , everyone was dosed with the poison .
In season 3B " Anchors " , Finstock is attempting to teach the difference between Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) and Gross National Product ( GNP ) when Stiles slips into a waking nightmare .
Finstock blows his whistle which snaps him out it .
In " Galvanise " , he falls victim to pranks from Scott and Stiles due to the fact that it 's his birthday .
In " Illuminated " , he reminds everyone that there i d a curfew using a bullhorn .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Finstock walks into one of the Nogitsune 's traps when he steps over a trip wire and is shot with an arrow .
In the penultimate episode " Insatiable " , he helps Scott 's friends get an Eichen House escapee ( Meredith )
away from Brunski whom he seems to have a past with .
In the season 3 finale " The Divine Move " , he shows Malia around the school , telling her about how she 'll adjust pretty quickly .
In season 4 " Muted " , as the lacrosse season resumes , Finstock supervises tryouts and finds interest in Liam and even Kira who technically did n't tryout .
In " I.E.D " , during the first scrimmage , he refuses to sit out Liam at Scott 's request .
He benches Kira for failing to pass even though she scored a goal .
In " Orphaned " , he instructs his players to find Garrett after it is discovered he is a killer .
He 's later seen in his office feeling sick .
In " Weaponised " , Finstock is the first to be infected by a weaponised virus via an inkpad .
Later , he fully recovers .
In " Perishable " , he warns his players about responsible drinking at the annual bonfire .
In the penultimate episode " A Promise To The Dead " , he gives Malia a test back with an " F " on it .
In the season 4 finale " Smoke And Mirrors " , when Scott , Stiles and Liam found out that they missed practice , they try to explain to Finstock that Scott and Kira were in Mexico on a date and Stiles and Liam went to bring them back .
In season 5B episode " A Credible Threat " , it 's revealed Finstock has been in rehab for 7 months .
When Scott and Stiles went to visit him , he reveals that he has been purposely relapsing just to stay there .
Scott and Stiles convince him to return for a charity game to forfeit , but he is determined to win as usual .
When a loud squeal fills all the speakers during the game , Finstock comments that he " should 've stayed in rehab " .
In season 6A " Superposition " , Finstock breaks up an extra credit session as he believes the teens are wasting their youth , even calling them losers .
He tells them to live their lives while they still can before kicking them out of the school .
In " Relics " , Finstock appoints Liam as the new captain of the lacrosse team .
During the game , Finstock wrongly assumes that Liam was still on the field playing despite the heavy rain when in reality , he was fighting the Ghost Riders .
After the game , Finstock names Liam the new captain of the lacrosse team .
colspan=5Adrian Harris is the chemistry teacher at Beacon Hills High School .
Harris sadistically pressures students in class when they do n't pay attention , quizzing them quite often and gives indirect insults to Stiles .
In " Wolf 's Bane " , Harris is questioned by Sheriff Stilinski regarding the murderous events that take place during Season 1 after the Alpha werewolf tries to kill him .
Harris reveals that six years ago , he babbled to a woman on how to set a house on fire and make it look like it was not an act of arson after she got him drunk .
A few days after he gave this information , a house caught on fire and was burned down ( the Hale family mass murder ) .
The woman he gave information to is revealed to be Kate Argent .
In Season 2 , Harris is believed to be the Kanima 's Master , because his car was stolen by the Master and was identified to be at the presence of several of the murder sites .
He was proven innocent by Stiles and Scott .
During Season 3 , in episode " Unleashed " , it is revealed Harris was a former military officer and so he was sacrificed as a Warrior .
Before he was abducted from his classroom , he left behind a clue to the gang in his test papers allowing Deaton to identify the killer as a Darach .
He begged for his life , saying the Darach still needs him .
He knew who and also about this person 's motives , but the Darach kills him .
Later in " Currents " , Stiles uncovers Danny 's proposed telluric currents project for Harris along with a note to Danny directly from Harris to stay away from the subject .
This allows them to figure out the Darach 's abductions and sacrifices are aligned with the telluric currents around Beacon Hills , and that Harris was n't only sacrificed , he knew something .
It 's implied that eventually Harris ' body was found off - screen since Sheriff Stilinski had labeled him when he 's investigating possible supernatural explanations of some crimes .
colspan=5Alan Deaton is the veterinarian at the Beacon Hills Animal Clinic , the older brother of guidance counselor Marin Morrell , and Scott 's boss .
Deaton is calm and collected , inscrutable , a compassionate , dedicated pacifist , and has a mysterious past .
He is a father figure to Scott , and overtime becomes a mentor to all of Scott 's Pack , due to his vast knowledge , experience with the supernatural .
In Season 3 , his role is revealed to be a Druid emissary .
During Season 1 , Sheriff Stilinski goes to Deaton for help when the murders are implied to be animal attacks .
Deaton , however , apparently knows more than he lets on .
In " Co - Captain " , after Scott is shot with a wolfsbane laced bullet by Kate Argent , Deaton finds Scott and treats him revealing that aside from working with animals , he also works with werewolves , healing them .
In " Formality " , Deaton remains calm when Peter Hale , the Alpha werewolf comes for Scott .
Peter is repelled by the clinic 's balustrade is made of mountain ash .
In Season 2 , Deaton helps Scott , Stiles , and Derek and his Pack against the Kanima .
Deaton is later visited by Ms. Morrell , the school guidance counselor and French teacher , who confronts Deaton over the wisdom of having Scott and his allies dealing with the current situation and " what 's coming " .
Deaton reveals to Derek in " Fury " that he had been a trusted adviser to the Hale family for a long time and that he made a promise to Derek 's mother that he would help Derek and look after him if anything were to happen to her .
Deaton helped Scott prepare the mountain ash laced pills to swap with Gerard 's cancer medication when Scott figured out Gerard 's plan to be Bitten by Derek .
In the Season 2 finale , after Gerard 's plan fails , he and Morrell begin tracking him , Morrell saying she 's glad he 's out of retirement .
It is revealed that the upcoming threat Deaton and Morrell mentioned was an Alpha Pack .
In Season 3 , Deaton has taken on a mentor - like figure to Scott and all his friends .
In the episode " Unleashed " , Stiles comes to him concerning a new killer committing Human Sacrifices , having linked the murders to the Druid order , and that he always seems to have more information than anyone else .
When Stiles demands why he 's always so cryptic and withdrawing , Deaton alludes to a dark past that presumably caused him to go into retirement when he answers that spending the past decade " trying to push something away " with the lies and the denial becomes a pretty habit .
When Lydia calls saying the music teacher has been taken for to be sacrificed
he helps Stiles and Lydia identify the new killer as a Darach .
He also identifies the pattern of the sacrifices of being groups of three offering the Darach its type of power - Virgins , Healers , Philosophers , Warriors .
It is discovered Marin is actually his younger sister , and that they are both Emissaries , Druid practitioners , that function as advisers to the werewolf Packs and ambassadors between them and humanity .
Deaton fulfilled this role for the Hale family , and was especially close to Derek 's mother , Talia Hale .
In " Alpha Pact " , he helps Scott , Stiles and Allison find their parents , by proposing they take a sacrificial Druid ritual in order to locate the Nemeton which will have consequences for them , leaving a " scar " around their hearts for the rest of their lives and being substitute Guardian sacrifices for the parents which will fully revitalize the Nemeton , subsequently attracting the supernatural to Beacon Hills like a magnet .
They decide to do it , to sacrifice themselves temporarily with someone to pull them back as a tether .
Deaton fulfilled this role for Scott .
Later , Deaton , with help from Cora and Lydia , saves the lives of the twins , Ethan and Aiden after they 're nearly killed by the Darach .
In " Anchors " , Scott and Stiles come to Deaton concerning their and Allison 's symptoms as a result of the Druid sacrifice .
He informs them that when they died and subsequently resurrected , they essentially opened ' a door ' in their minds which is still ajar .
He tells them an opening into their minds is dangerous , that they each need to ' close that door ' .
When it is revealed the Nogitsune is possessing Stiles , Deaton heads to Japan in " Letharia Vulpina " , to retrieve a sample of a plant called letharia vulpina that was born out of the blood of the very Nogitsune Argent
saw killed 24 years earlier , which makes the plant " quite special " .
Upon arriving back in Beacon Hills , he poisons Stiles with the plant which temporarily breaks the Nogitsune 's hold over Stiles .
After Scott retrieves the Shugendō scroll in " Echo House " , which has instructions on how to exorcise a Nogitsune , Deaton translates that the host 's body has to be changed .
In " The Divine Move " , Deaton confirms that the Hales ' triskele urn could imprison the Nogitsune because it was crafted by Deaton himself , out of wood of the Nemeton tree .
At Season 3B end , after Allison 's death , Deaton provides counsel for Scott with the fallacy " Regression to the Mean " , saying things will stop being all bad , or all good and always revert to a neutral space .
In Season 4 , Deaton sets out to learn what Kate did to Derek , causing him to revert to being a teenager , the subsequent loss of his werewolf abilities and what it means for him .
He visits an inmate at Eichen House 's prison for supernaturals , Gabriel Valack .
When Valack asks him why , Deaton answers he made a promise to a woman he loved ( Talia Hale ) that he would look after Derek .
Valack inflicts a psychic vision upon Deaton concerning La Iglesia .
Lydia snaps Deaton out of his vegetative state with a Scream .
Deaton tells the Pack the old Mexican church is where Scott and Kira will be found after they 're abducted by Kate .
In Season 5 , " Parasomnia " Deaton examines the claws of the mutant werewolf who attacked Scott .
He 's concerned that he seemed to be able to absorb Scott 's power when only Liam should be able to do that .
In " Dreamcatcher " , he examines new supernatural Tracy Stewart after her killing spree and keeps her sealed within a mountain ash barrier .
Tracy , however , escapes through the barrier .
After Tracy is killed , Deaton stores her corpse in the clinic and studies her .
He reports to Scott Tracy had the claws of a werewolf but the venom and scales of a kanima .
He also realizes the werewolf mutant and Tracy could n't be supernatural , born or Bitten : they had to have been artificially made .
Deaton is shaken saying someone has blurred the lines between science and the supernatural , changing the rules .
He tells Scott he has to leave for a few days .
In " Ouroboros " , Deaton is in Russia , and discovers an old lair used by the Dread Doctors .
He takes a particular tooth out of a container calling it " an answer " .
Right afterwards , Deaton is confronted and captured by the assassin , the Desert Wolf who interrogates him on whether her daughter ( Malia ) is alive or not .
The werecoyote takes him hostage across the borders .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Deaton is used as bait for a trap for Malia by the Desert Wolf .
Deaton moves his gag free , and stops the Desert wolf ( Corrine ) from killing Malia saying to regain her full powers by killing Malia , she has to kill her on the full moon .
Malia rescues Deaton from the Beast of Gévaudan and he reunites with Scott , giving his surrogate son a tight hug .
In " Amplification " , Deaton shows Scott and Stiles the only living evidence of Valack 's experimentation on supernaturals , revealing what will happen when Lydia is subjected to trephanation .
Her dying Scream will be so powerful , it will kill her and everyone else around her .
In " Lie Ability " , after the Pack rescues Lydia from Eichen House , Deaton saves Lydia by pasting her trepanation hole with mistletoe .
It succeeds and Lydia recovers .
In the season 5 finale " Apotheosis " , Deaton examines the Surgeon after he 's mortally wounded by the Beast .
When Liam asks how he 's going to keep the Surgeon alive , Deaton is unsure if the Dread Doctor is still alive .
He realises that there 's a possibility Mason is still alive inside Sebastien Valet as a spark of energy since energy ca n't just disappear .
Later , he stabilises Hayden 's mortal injuries after Sebastien wounds her .
In season 6A " Superposition " , Deaton examines the blue shard of glass from the sheriff 's impound as Scott tells him that pieces of his memory are missing .
Deaton suggests that Scott 's subconscious is trying to tell him what 's missing .
The easiest way to figure this out would be to sleep .
Later in the episode , as Lydia is tapping into her subconscious through automatic writing , Deaton explains how the Wild Hunt does n't just take people , it erases them from reality .
colspan=5Natalie Martin is Lydia 's mother , divorced from Mr. Martin , her husband and who Lydia currently lives with .
Natalie is a wealthy socialite , vivacious , sometimes shallow - minded and sarcastic , but a loving , competent mother to Lydia as well as a teacher and counselor at Beacon Hills High school in later seasons .
Natalie is kept out of the loop regarding the supernatural status and activities of Lydia and her friends , and that of Beacon Hills until Season 5 .
Natalie is not on good terms with her divorced husband accusing him of forcing Lydia to choose which parent she 'd rather live with during the parent teacher conference in Season 1 " The Tell " .
Natalie is seen at her daughter 's bedside after she 's attacked by Peter Hale in " Code Breaker " .
In Season 2 " Abomination " , because of Lydia 's behavior due to the deceased Peter 's control of her , she wants Lydia to see Ms. Morrell , the high school guidance counselor , and becomes all the more resolved when she sees her daughter 's hand bleeding from punching a mirror .
In Season 3 episode , " Alpha Pact " ,
Natalie comforts Lydia after Jennifer Blake tried to kill her by strangulation .
She tells Lydia she could have the marks covered with make - up , using a patented method she had of covering up her own fair " share of hickies " when she was in high school .
Lydia instead tells Natalie , she does n't want to cover the wound , saying someone tried to kill her , she survived , and she does n't have to hide that .
Natalie is surprised at , but later approves of Lydia 's maturity .
In Season 3B , Natalie takes the position of biology teacher at the high school after Adrian Harris is found dead .
Lydia is somewhat embarrassed by this , but Natalie asks Lydia not to embarrass her .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Natalie is seen talking to Peter Hale at the school , to Lydia 's distress .
Natalie tells her Peter said he is in Health department to give hearing tests to patients , but Lydia figures out this is a subtle message by Peter offering to help Lydia control her banshee ability .
Lydia tells her mom the card he gave her is a phone number .
Natalie brightly replies , " I know .
Still got it . "
In Season 4 , " The Benefactor " , Natalie allows Lydia and her friends use the Martins ' lakehouse , but asks her to lock up the basement because she thinks a " pack of wild animals " managed to get in ( Malia 's use of the basement to keep herself restrained during full moons ) .
When the juniors are taking the PSATs in " Weaponized " , Natalie oversees the examinations .
She notices red and white lesions on Sydney , a student who 'd collapsed , and Coach Finstock .
She promptly calls in the CDC .
Natalie hopes she 's wrong , and she 'll be " the crazy biology teacher who panicked for nothing " .
In " Time of Death " , Natalie notices Lydia 's escapades to the lakehouse .
She asks her daughter if she can help with anything .
Lydia shows her the photo of Meredith Walker , who Natalie recognizes .
Natalie tells her daughter the story of her paternal grandmother , Lorraine Martin who was interned at Eichen House .
In Season 5 " Parasomnia " , Natalie is holding a session with a senior , Tracy Stewart .
Tracy tells her she 's having trouble sleeping , she gets night terrors .
She assures Tracy her problems could be just anxiety , which most seniors experience .
Suddenly , Tracy vomits up black barf along with raven feathers all over Natalie 's desk .
Natalie acts rationally telling Lydia people with night terrors have done far stranger things than " eating their pillows " .
In " Dreamcatchers " , Natalie had been asked out on a date by Stilinski and they meet at the station .
Suddenly they notice several deputies paralyzed .
Lydia and Kira appear with Lydia yelling at Natalie saying Tracy 's coming for her .
Natalie is confused , but then Tracy attacks , jumping down off the roof .
A horrified Natalie sees Tracy , in her kanima shape with a tail and glowing yellow eyes , in plain view .
Tracy eventually paralyzes Natalie , but she is saved by Malia who takes Tracy down .
In the aftermath , Natalie is shaken , but upon seeing Lydia bleeding , she rushes to her daughter 's side .
In the hospital , Natalie comforts Lydia as she 's going into surgery .
Lydia implores her mother to keep quiet about what she saw .
Natalie responds all she saw was some " lunatic girl trying to kill everyone " , after a moment of hesitation .
In " Lies of Omission " , Natalie holds a class , when a Chimera named Beth runs out of the class .
Natalie tells a following Malia to leave Beth alone and that " all of them " should get back to school work .
Malia calls Natalie out that she " knows something " and flashes her werecoyote eyes .
Natalie is n't surprised at all , but willfully overlooks this display and insists the kids focus on school .
In " The Last Chimera " , when Lydia is rendered catatonic , Natalie is distressed and out of fear for her daughter 's life , angrily refuses to allow Stiles to see her , blaming him and her friends for her state of mind .
She later signs for Lydia to be transferred to Eichen House with Dr. Conrad Fenris ( actually Valack in glamour ) promising her Lydia will be taken care of .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Natalie maintains her belief that Lydia is save at Eichen House and that she 's being prepped for legal and medical electroshock therapy , in spite of Stiles ' protests .
In " Amplification " , Stilinski visits Natalie over Lydia 's situation .
Stilinski rebukes her insistence for rational explanations handing her a folder .
Inside are photos from Deaton displaying Valack 's trepanation experimentation at Eichen House and Melissa 's police statement to Stilinski detailing the supernatural .
Natalie is left unnerved and horrified .
She visits Eichen House buzzing , requesting to see her daughter .
She finds guards mauled , the institution goes into lockdown and has a determined look in her eye as she picks up an electrical prod .
Afterwards , Natalie sees Lydia with Scott 's Pack and her daughter is taken hostage by Tracy Stewart .
Natalie shocks the emotionless Chimera , and drops all her denial and willful ignorance demanding that " someone please get ( her ) daughter out of this hellhole .
" Lydia is treated at Deaton 's animal clinic and has her trepanation wound healed .
Natalie shows herself to a surprised Lydia and embraces her daughter .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost "
, Natalie prevents Scott and Stiles from skipping class as Scott already has 38 missed classes , explaining to the two of them that they can protect the town at 3:30 , after school ends .
That night , when a body is found at the school , she runs into Stiles , but she does n't seem to know him , as if they had never met .
In " Superposition " , Natalie enters Lydia 's room after hearing her scream .
Lydia explains that she saw a train passing through her room
but Natalie thinks it was a nightmare .
In " Sundowning " , Natalie allows Malia to make up her test inside her office .
When Malia becomes stressed , Natalie suggests that Malia relax by breathing in .
However , this does n't work as Malia shifts into her coyote form and leaves the office .
In " Relics " , Natalie confronts Lydia about tearing the wallpaper off the wall at the Stilinski house .
She then discovers that Lydia is checking into Claudia 's past .
Natalie has known Claudia since they were teenagers
and she trusts her .
In " Heartless " , Natalie finds Lydia lying in bed , deep in thought .
She asks Lydia what she 's thinking about .
Lydia tells her about Caleb , how his mum Lenore conjured him to fill the void .
Lydia believes the Sheriff is doing the same with Claudia .
Natalie is skeptical about this and tells Lydia that if it 's true , she should n't be the one to tell the Sheriff .
In " Memory Found " , Natalie 's voice is heard in one of Lydia 's flashbacks while under hypnosis .
colspan=5Danny Mahealani was Jackson 's best friend , the former boyfriend of the werewolf Ethan and is good friends with Stiles and Scott .
His last name is Hawaiian for " full moon " .
He is one of the Beacon Hills High in - crowd and is openly gay .
He is the goalie on the lacrosse team and also plays trumpet in the school band .
Danny often tries to calm Jackson down when he is angry or frustrated .
He also seems to have befriended Scott and Stiles in indirect ways .
Stiles often wonders aloud if Danny finds him attractive , comments which Danny usually ignores , but once returns by snidely offering to sleep with Stiles .
In Season 2 , Danny helps Jackson recover lost footage from his camera which Jackson shot for his first full moon transformation with Jackson 's instruction not to watch the footage .
He manages to do so with help from Matt Daehler whom he is attracted to .
He does n't act on his attraction because Matt 's into Allison .
In " Frenemy " , he is shown to be depressed over his break - up with his ex - boyfriend at the gay club , Jungle .
Presumably , because the Kanima 's Master wanted to remove any evidence , Danny is attacked at the club , but is only paralyzed by the Kanima and the footage Danny recovered from Jackson 's video has vanished .
In the episode , " Battlefield " , he is warned by Jackson to not get anywhere near him during the lacrosse finals game , most likely because Jackson is somehow aware he is the Kanima and is killing people .
In Season 3 , Danny develops an interest in Ethan , one of the Alpha pack , unaware that Ethan was originally using him to get leverage on Scott .
Although Danny does n't realize it , his relationship with Ethan softens the werewolf to the point where he is willing to change for the better going as far as meeting Scott and Stiles halfway .
In episode 7 " Currents " , Danny is lethally poisoned with mistletoe by the Darach and his lung collapses .
Ethan , obviously excessively worried about Danny , helps him to the hospital , where Melissa McCall saves his life using a needle thoracostomy .
It 's revealed Danny was targeted by the Darach because he did a project on telluric currents which were placed on the locations of where the Darach was sacrificing his victims .
Despite the fact that Ethan was only supposed to manipulate Danny 's feelings to gain information , as Aiden had been assigned to do with Lydia , he eventually fell in love with Danny and is shown to have several tender moments with him .
However , in season 3B , after their separation and Ethan and Aiden later decide to re - enroll in high school , Danny is shown making out with Damon , his ex , which Ethan is clearly upset about , to Aiden 's amusement .
In " Illuminated " , because of the power outage , Danny wants to hold a black light party , but is cut down .
Ethan and Aiden help him out by acquiring a power generator and letting him use Derek 's loft for the party .
Danny is very pleased with the results and bonds with Ethan again .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Danny is seen with the cross country team on the track where traps are laid by the Nogitsune and Ethan tackles him to protect him and says he missed Danny and proceeds to make out with him .
When Coach Finstock is shot by an arrow triggered by a trip wire , Danny looks on while Ethan stays protectively beside him .
In " The Divine Move " , Ethan comes to break up with Danny , saying he ca n't stay after Aiden 's death .
Danny lets Ethan down gently , breaking up with him instead , saying that while he likes Ethan , he ca n't date a werewolf - Danny was aware of the supernatural all along , to Ethan 's surprise .
Ethan gives Danny a kiss goodbye .
Show creator Jeff Davis reveals at the SDCC 2015 Danny graduated early during junior year .
Teen Wolf :
The Hunt , a Teen Wolf - inspired social network game , states that Danny was born on Leap Day ( February 29 ) and likes computers and photography .
He is a fan of Jay - Z , Bruno Mars , and Janelle Monáe .
colspan=5Katherine " Kate " Argent is Allison 's aunt and Argent 's sister .
Throughout the series , Kate is a member of the Argent family of werewolf - hunters in Season 1 until her death , then a werejaguar returning in Season 4 .
Kate makes her first appearance in episode 4 " Magic Bullet " when she arrives in Beacon Hills to help her family hunt down the Alpha werewolf , then poisons and nearly kills Derek Hale .
Unlike Argent , Kate is bloodthirsty , deadly and cruel , taking pleasure in hurting any werewolf she can .
Kate is also very rife with sexual innuendo , using her sexuality to her advantage .
Kate was responsible for orchestrating the Hale Fire , murdering Derek Hale 's family six years previously .
Despite her being a sadist , Kate is close to her niece Allison , whom she gives a necklace which depicts a wolf for her 17th birthday in " The Tell " .
Kate is revealed to have been the woman who got chemistry teacher Adrian Harris intoxicated at a bar and had him reveal to her how to start a fire " and get away with arson " as Harris relayed to Sheriff Stilinski in " Wolf 's Bane " .
However Harris also drew him a necklace he saw Kate wearing that night , the same necklace she gave to Allison .
In " Formality " , Kate reveals the supernatural to Allison by showing her a captured Derek in werewolf .
In the past , Kate also had a sexual relationship with a younger Derek Hale simply to track down the Hale Pack and set their house on fire .
In the Season 1 finale , Kate lies to Allison that all werewolves are monsters and entices Allison to join her in the hunt for Derek and Scott after it is discovered Scott is the other Beta werewolf .
She nearly executes Scott , but Argent stops her , confronting her about her involvement in the Hale fire and threatens to shoot her if she does n't lower her gun .
Peter Hale , the Alpha werewolf arrives at that moment and takes everyone down before capturing Kate .
Peter demands Kate apologize for decimating his family if she wants to save Allison .
Though faced with death , Kate apologizes only to Allison .
Kate is later killed by Peter as revenge for the Hale Fire , slashing her throat .
After Peter Hale is killed , the necklace is left on Kate 's corpse as evidence for her part in the arson .
During Season 3B , Kate appears in visions and nightmares to Allison as a result of Allison 's Druid sacrifice .
In the Season 3 finale , it is revealed Kate survived Peter 's attempt on her life .
She appears and attacks a team of the Calavera hunters in Derek 's loft before shooting Derek himself and abducting him .
Kate had become supernatural as she transforms into a shapeshifter , a werejaguar , because Peter had slashed her throat .
It 's depicted in flashbacks Kate 's body had begun to heal after she was killed with Peter 's claws : she was coming back to life .
The Calavera hunters inconspicuously came to check if Kate was really dead and saw her transforming instead .
They switched out Kate 's body from the morgue and took her to Mexico .
They demanded Kate kill herself to follow the Hunter 's Code .
Instead Kate faked her suicide , and when the hunters inspected her , she killed half a dozen of Araya 's men and escaped .
Kate lacked control over her shapeshifting , leaving a trail of bodies behind her .
Kate was instinctively drawn to La Iglesia , the ruins of an Aztec temple which worshipped Tezcatlipoca , a werejaguar god .
With her own werejaguar status , Kate discovered a pair of Berserkers and gained control of the two monsters giving herself muscle and protection .
While in hiding , Kate discovered a cassette someone had anonymously left her ; the tape revealed information about the Hale Pack , specifically their artifact , the Triskelion .
The artifact was used by the Hales teach their young control on a full moon .
Needing to learn control , Kate decided to acquire the Triskelion , which lead to her kidnapping Derek .
In " The Dark Moon " , it is revealed Kate had taken Derek to La Iglesia .
Using the power of her species ' god , Kate had Derek regressed to the time of his life before she 'd set the fire when he was in love with her .
In " 117 " , Kate has Derek reveal the location of the Hale Vault to her and has the Berserkers hold off Scott and his Pack .
Derek hands her the Triskelion .
Peter arrives just then totally amused , letting Kate know the Triskelion does n't have magic that teaches a shapeshifter control , it was a physical placebo for young Betas to focus on .
Angered , Kate faces off against Peter , but smoke bombs go off by an unseen figure .
In the chaos , Kate escapes and calls off the Berserkers .
Kate had been tricked into opening the Hale Vault so the Benefactor could steal the Hales ' fortune , to use for financing the Dead Pool .
As assassins begin arriving in Beacon Hills over Season 4 for the money , Kate begins a manhunt for the Benefactor , who she realizes left her the cassette to find , leading her to killing ' the Orphans ' , then confronting Scott and Argent .
She tells Argent she needs more time for learning control before eventually confronting him .
When the Berserkers overpower them she spares Argent 's life when one Berserker almost kills him .
Kate is later approached by Peter , her would - be killer .
She accepts his deal , he offers her control over her shapeshifting , she helps him get his money back and help to implement his plan to kill Scott unaware he plans to stab her in the back .
Kate masters control later on .
She attacks Scott and Kira in " A Promise to The Dead " , abducting them and taking them to La Iglesia .
Kate had learned from Peter her species , the werejaguar , as " La Loba " , she has the talent not only to control the Berserkers , but also to create new ones using a vessel .
Kate has Scott transformed into a Berserker planning to have him fight his friends so to have them kill him , or vice versa .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " , Kate faces off against Scott 's allies along with the Calaveras .
Her and Peter 's plan to kill Scott and his Pack fails .
She kills hunters , but she is taken down by Derek who severely mauls her in his new full wolf shapeshift , and being shot by Argent with a yellow monkshood laced bullet .
Kate appeals to her brother saying her intentions were to have their family return to power after its decimation , and to have Scott and his Pack killed because she blames them for Allison 's death , saying they killed her .
Kate tells Argent
she knows he wo n't kill her and escapes .
colspan=5Isaac Lahey is a Beta werewolf , Allison 's second boyfriend , and Scott 's close friend and former roommate .
Isaac was Bitten by Derek Hale as an Alpha werewolf .
In the past Isaac was abused and tormented by his father , who tortured him by often locking him in their basement freezer .
His mother is also deceased and his older brother Camden was killed in combat overseas .
Isaac was the first member of Derek 's Pack , though he joins Scott 's Pack later on .
Isaac asked to become a werewolf to feel powerful and confident after all the abuse from his father , who is murdered by the Kanima at the beginning of Season 2 ( after they had an argument and his father through a ceramic plate at him ) .
Isaac was the first of Derek 's Beta werewolves to gain control of his animal side during the full moon , and in spite of his dark family - life , Isaac has good intentions and a warm heart .
At first , Isaac did not like Scott and did not trust him , because he believed Scott was a loser because he wondered how Scott survived so long without a pack .
Nevertheless , he eventually trusted Scott when he realized he has good intentions , and becomes friends with him .
Among the dangerous events throughout Season 2 , Isaac sides with Scott , revealing that he trusts him and holds onto Scott 's friendship because he does n't have anyone there for him .
He helps Scott against Gerard when Gerard takes control of the Kanima , but he is stabbed by Allison .
After Jackson is cured of being a Kanima and Gerard 's defeat , Isaac stays as a part of Derek 's Pack instead of following Boyd and Erica , but holds onto Scott 's friendship .
At the start of Season 3A , Isaac is revealed to have found where the Alphas have been keeping Erica and Boyd , however he was attacked by them and had his memory wiped .
Isaac was rescued by a mysterious woman .
To cure his amnesia , Deaton helps Isaac remember the night he had his memory wiped using an ice bath and remembers that Erica is already dead , while Boyd is being held captive by the Alphas with another werewolf named Cora .
He later participates in helping Scott and Derek capture Boyd and Cora , who are rabid from the full moon with assistance from Argent .
Isaac takes on a despise the twins , Aiden and Ethan , blaming them for the supposed death of the girl who saved him and the numerous sacrifices , and stands off against them .
Allison apologizes to Isaac for attacking him back in Season 2 and assists him in his vendetta against the twins .
He teams up with her against the threats throughout the season becoming closer , eventually forgiving and developing feelings for her .
After being thrown out of Derek 's loft by Derek to protect him from Derek himself , he moves in with Scott and Melissa .
In " Alpha Pact " , Isaac later becomes fed up over Derek 's intentions , the deaths of Boyd and Erica , and confronts him about how people always get hurt around him and his pursuit of power , leading to him rejecting Derek as his Alpha and leaving Derek 's Pack .
Isaac is chosen to be Allison 's tether when she undertakes a dangerous druid ritual to find her father .
During the mid - season finale , he helps Allison , Stiles , and Scott find their parents .
With Scott becoming a True Alpha , Isaac joins his Pack .
In " Anchors " , Isaac starts acting on his feelings towards Allison , even attempting to kiss her , following her for her protection and arriving at her apartment , to her mutual consent .
He is open about this with Scott who is evidently uncomfortable at their budding relationship .
Isaac still holds a grudge towards Ethan and Aiden saying they ca n't join Scott 's Pack because of their part in Boyd 's murder and taking glee when Scott says no .
After helping Allison with research on William Barrow , Isaac is confronted and " tagged " by the Oni .
He later helps Allison and Argent retrieve information about the Oni , Kitsune and the Nogitsune from the Yakuza recluse , Katashi " Silver finger " .
He and Allison affirm their feelings for each other when Allison kisses him .
Isaac is induced into a coma in " Letharia Vulpina " , saving Allison from stepping into electrified water as one of the traps set by the Nogitsune possessing Stiles .
In " De - Void " , Isaac comes out of his coma and heals from his injuries , to Allison 's happiness and they spend the night together , consummating their relationship .
In " Insatiable " , after Isaac is freed from the Nogitsune 's possession , Isaac assists in looking for Lydia .
He and Allison share a moment where he assures her he was himself during their night together before the Nogitsune infected him .
After arriving at Oak Creek , Isaac fights alongside Allison and Kira against the now Nogitsune - controlled Oni .
He is eventually outmatched and by the Oni .
He is saved by Allison , who is fatally stabbed by the Oni right afterward .
Visibly shocked and stricken , Isaac watches on as Allison dies in Scott 's arms .
In " The Divine Move " , Isaac is devastated by Allison 's death and finds comfort from Argent .
Later , Isaac figures out that she had discovered that silver was the Oni 's weakness and that her arrows could destroy them .
Argent and Isaac head to the school with the arrowheads and kill the remaining Oni .
After Scott and Kira exorcise the Nogitsune , Isaac seals the dark spirit in Derek 's triskele box .
At the end of Season 3B , Isaac decides to leave Beacon Hills , moving out of Scott 's house and heading off with Argent to France to put away the Nogitsune for good , and help Argent cope with Allison 's death .
" Teen Wolf : The Hunt " , a Teen Wolf - inspired social network game , states that Isaac was born on September 22 , and likes lacrosse and BMX .
He is a fan of M. Ward , Belle and Sebastian , Coldplay , and Feist .
colspan=5Matt Daehler was a student at Beacon Hills High , a photographer and was on the lacrosse team .
Matt was the Kanima 's first Master and was the secondary antagonist of Season 2 .
In " Omega " , he takes pictures of Allison at Kate Argent 's funeral , but is accosted by Gerard Argent who destroys his camera 's memory card .
In the episode " Shape - Shifted " , he lends Jackson a night - vision camera for Jackson to record his expected full moon transformation .
He notices a strange flash in each of his photo shots of Scott McCall in the episode " Venomous " ( caused by Scott 's uncontrolled werewolf eyes which were triggered by the flash of his camera ) .
In " Restraint " , he steals a translated portion of the bestiary depicting the Kanima from Allison 's tablet .
He takes Allison out on a date to a warehouse party in " Raving " , unaware that Allison was only using him to throw her parents off her back about staying away from Scott , where he kisses her
but Allison pulls away .
In " Party Guessed " , Allison finds out he 's stalking her upon finding his many inappropriate photos of her .
She confronts him about his photos , but when his behavior annoys her , she judo - flips him .
Later on he is seen , by Scott , with Jackson in his Kanima state revealing Matt 's the Kanima 's Master .
In 2006 , 9-year - old Matt had gone to Isaac Lahey 's house to trade superhero comic books with him .
The swim team of Beacon Hills High at that time was having a pool party at the house and drinking alcohol to celebrate their winning the state championship .
Matt was thrown into the pool by Camden , Isaac 's older brother , despite yelling that he ca n't swim , resulting in him almost drowning .
He was resuscitated by Coach Lahey who berates him about not knowing how to swim and demands
he tell no one what happened .
Matt obliged keeping the incident secret for years , causing himself trauma and having irregular nightmares where he 's drowning .
Back during the Argents ' funeral , when he was photographing Allison , Lahey had got in one of his shots .
Matt'd felt an unbelievable rage for his near - drowning years earlier and wished that Lahey was dead .
The following morning he found out Lahey was dead .
In " Shape - Shifted " he 'd spied on Jackson using his camera and witnessed his transformation into the Kanima .
He and the Kanima touched hands seemingly by instinct .
Through a supernatural bond that formed between the two of them he saw that Jackson had killed Lahey for him and Matt became Master of the Kanima .
He used the Kanima to murder all members of the swim team who were involved in the incident , except for Jessica Bartlet whom he killed directly .
In " Fury " , at the Sheriff 's station , Matt has Jackson murder all the deputies on night shift , destroys all the evidence linking him to the murders and takes Scott , Stiles , Derek , Stilinski and Melissa hostage .
He reveals he knows all about the supernatural events occurring and demands Scott hand over the bestiary .
He needed answers as to why he was beginning to transform into the Kanima , but Derek silently realized Matt had broken the rules of the Kanima .
The Master is to use the Kanima to kill murderers , while Matt had him kill innocent people and he had killed people himself .
The hunters attack the building and in the struggle between the Argents , Jackson , and Scott and Derek , Matt escapes but Gerard kills him by drowning him , using this opportunity to become the Kanima 's new Master .
As a result of his childhood trauma , Matt became a teenage killer , psychologically unstable , dangerous .
He irrationally called Lahey and the swim team murderers saying they ' murdered ' him .
He was also a stalker , relentlessly pursuing Allison by taking photos of her and photo shopping himself into these pictures depicting they were in a relationship .
As Master of the Kanima , Matt gained abilities to control the Kanima through a supernatural bond .
He could communicate with Jackson telepathically , control him also as a human , sense him from a distance and speak through him .
The bond between Master and Kanima was affected akin to Matt 's personality ; Jackson , as the Kanima would share his fear of water , and his affinity for photography : to target a victim , Matt just had to take their picture or think about killing them , then Jackson would kill them .
colspan=5Gerard Argent is Allison 's grandfather , Argent and Kate 's father , and a werewolf hunter .
Gerard is a psychopath , ruthless , selfish , deceitful , and shows no remorse for any life he threatens or takes , even his own .
Gerard first arrives in Beacon Hills for his daughter Kate 's funeral , though he declares vengeance for her death ; to signify this he kills an innocent Omega werewolf the hunters trapped cutting him in half , declares that there is no more Code and that the Argents will kill all werewolves they find , regardless of their innocence .
In " Shape - Shifted " , Gerard goes undercover as the principal at Beacon Hills High .
When Gerard figures out that Scott is a werewolf in " Abomination " , he blackmails Scott into following his orders by threatening to kill Melissa .
Scott complies supplying him with information and becoming a member in Derek 's Pack .
Gerard heartlessly endorses that Victoria must kill herself after Derek Bites her and uses her death to emotionally manipulate Allison into joining him .
In " Fury " , Gerard kills Matt Daehler and becomes the Kanima 's new Master .
He then steps up as the main threat , threatening Melissa McCall 's life again , and abducting and beating Stiles as a message to Scott .
In the Season 2 finale , during the showdown at the industrial warehouse between Scott , Derek , Isaac , Argent , Allison , and Jackson as the Kanima , Gerard surprisingly has the Kanima hold Allison hostage .
It comes out that he has cancer ; all of Gerard 's scheming and his genocide campaign was all a ruse for to push Derek into a position to Bite him , become a werewolf , kill Derek to become an Alpha , to ultimately cure himself .
He has the Kanima threaten to kill Allison unless Scott has Derek Bite him .
Argent is incensed at his father 's actions and betrayal , after he pushed for Victoria 's suicide all while what he was planning and threatening his daughter 's life .
Gerard fires back at Argent
he 'd kill his son
so he 'd survive .
Scott follows his orders and Gerard is forcibly Bitten by Derek , and he holds his Bitten arm in victory .
However , because of a plan by Scott , he and Deaton had replaced Gerard 's cancer medication with mountain ash filled capsules .
Gerard 's body violently rejects the Bite , black ooze eschewing out of his ears , eyes , nose and mouth
and he is incapacitated .
After Jackson is cured of being a Kanima , Gerard disappears .
During Season 3 , Gerard is shown to be alive , in hiding and living at a medical home .
His cancer has now vanished , but is confined to a wheelchair and is consistently suffering the effects of the rejected Bite , black liquid still pouring out of his orifices .
He reveals to Argent that one of their family members in 1977 , Alexander Argent , his brother , was bitten by the Alpha werewolf , Deucalion .
In " Visionary " , Allison and Scott come to him for information about Deucalion 's Alpha pack in exchange for Scott siphoning some of his pain .
Gerard lies to them about Deucalion ambushing him and killing his men when they met with Deucalion 's pack during Deucalion 's proposed peace offering , when it was actually Gerard himself who ambushed all involved parties , killing Deucalion 's Pack members and killing his own men because they wanted peace with the Packs ( which Scott catches onto ) .
He 'd also stabbed Deucalion in the eyes with two arrows which caused Deucalion 's blindness .
Gerard 's treachery is what caused Deucalion to become the sociopath he is in the present , and lead to the Alpha Pack being formed .
However , he truthfully tells them that while Deucalion is blind , he can actually see in his werewolf form .
Scott threatens Gerard ; if he finds out that the story he told them about how Deucalion truly lost his eyesight was a lie , and people get hurt , he will return to " take away more than ( Gerard 's ) pain " .
In Season 5B " Damnatio Memoriae " , Gerard , still hospitalized , is visited by Argent .
Argent reluctantly produces yellow monkshood to Gerard 's surprise .
The older man eats the plant 's flowers voraciously : he is fully healed of his ailment .
Argent tells his father he knows he 's kept eyes and ears open .
Gerard responds that he knows of the Dread Doctors ' success .
The creature is a resurrected monster whose only purpose was to just take life wherever it could find it and is also personally connected to their family : the Beast of Gévaudan .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Gerard reveals himself alongside Argent to a stumped Scott , but the meeting is cut short by the sight of the Dread Doctors ' terrifying fresco depicting the Beast fighting a creature Gerard identifies as a hellhound , a guardian of supernatural places - amongst bodies littering Beacon Hills .
Gerard and Argent then visit Parrish : Gerard informs and confirms Parrish 's supernatural species as a hellhound .
In " The Maid of Gévaudan " , Gerard tells Lydia and Argent the story of their ancestor , Marie - Jeanne Valet who 'd slain the original Beast - her own brother , Sebastien Valet .
In particular Gerard references the weapon she used to kill Sebastien , the only thing capable of totally killing the Beast , is the mystical Pike she and her husband forged , and that Marie - Jeanne became the first hunter in the Argent family line : that his family name will be remembered once more .
He , Argent and Parrish track the Beast just as the monster has killed the Dread Doctors and completely revived as Sebastien Valet .
Gerard calls out to Sebastien as " La Bête du Gévaudan " and demands Sebastien to answer him by his name .
Sebastien answers Gerard from afar :
" Argent " .
In " Apotheosis " , Gerard and Argent recover the Pike ( re - forged into the cane used by the Surgeon ) , and Gerard affirmatively answers that the cane will kill the Beast for sure .
Parrish takes on the Beast at spear - point , Gerard readies to kill the ancient werewolf at spear point , ready to strike once both the werewolf and the hellhound
are weak enough .
Gerard puts a bullet into Deucalion , discovering the alliance between him and Scott to his surprise , holding him and Liam at gun point , but Argent double crosses his father passing the Pike to Scott .
He and Scott had known Gerard would eventually stab them all in the back , regardless of how many people would perish and in the end , Gerard 's only care would be about immortalizing his own name .
Father and son hold each other at gun point : Gerard is shot by Argent .
In the end , Gerard snarls at an unapologetic Argent , who departs once again .
colspan=5Marin Morrell is the guidance counselor and French teacher at Beacon Hills High .
Throughout Season 2 , Marin counseled both Stiles and Lydia through various traumas and helped Allison translate an entry in the Argent 's bestiary .
It 's implied , and confirmed in " Raving " , that Marin is aware of the supernatural side of things when she is seen conversing with Deaton concerning the Kanima situation and leaving it all up to Scott and his allies .
She asks Deaton is he going to inform them " what 's coming " .
At the end of Season 2 , she convinces Deaton to get more involved in the supernatural circle of Beacon Hills and the two start tracking Gerard after his plan fails .
At the beginning of Season 3 , Marin is revealed to be somehow involved with Deucalion , the Alpha Pack leader .
She is actually Deaton 's younger sister and they are both practitioner druids called Emissaries that act as advisers to werewolf Packs , liaisons between them and humanity
and she supposedly fulfills this role for the Alpha Pack .
Marin was originally the Emissary for Deucalion 's original Pack and was the only one spared when the Alphas killed off their Packs .
In the episode " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " , Scott confronts her asking her what Deucalion wants with him .
Marin replies he wants to make a killer out of him , because if Scott kills someone he 'll destroy his potential to be a True Alpha or have Scott join his Pack , either way Scott is eliminated as a threat to Deucalion .
In " Alpha Pact " , after the Darach is revealed to be Jennifer Blake , she is seen fleeing from the Alphas in the woods but protects herself with a mountain ash circle .
They had suspected her to have had a role to play with the Darach .
Marin confronts Deucalion over his ruthlessness in his goal to form his ' perfect pack ' , that she 'd begun to try and stop him .
Kali tells her they know she sent the mystery woman to save Isaac and had begun helping Scott and his friends find a way to stop Deucalion .
Marin reveals the woman 's name was Braeden , that she 'd sent Braeden to do what Marin herself does , " maintain balance " and reveals to the other Alphas that Deaton had actually saved Ennis , but Deucalion killed him and lied to them about it being Derek who 'd killed him .
She tries to tell Kali he intended for her to force Derek 's decision to join the Pack , because that paves the way for Deucalion 's plans for him and Scott .
Deucalion states she 's lying and injures her with his cane but Scott saves her and she tells him where they can find the location of the last Druid massacre , the Nemeton .
In Season 3B , Marin appears in " Echo House " , as a counselor at Eichen House .
She acts as Stiles 's contact when he voluntarily checks himself in at the institution to prevent the Nogitsune from harming anyone .
Marin leads group therapy , which includes Stiles and Malia , discussing the subject of guilt .
Stiles and Malia both offer input on the feeling because of the Nogitsune possessing him and Malia over her changing on a full moon causing the death of her mother and little sister .
Marin cuts the session short when she notices the electric burn marks on Stiles 's neck , the site where Deaton had injected the wolf lichen .
Marin supplies Stiles with amphetamines to keep him awake as he needs to avoid sleeping when he 'll be most vulnerable to the Nogitsune possession .
Marin lets Stiles know if the burns disappear completely , the Nogitsune returns and Scott and Deaton have n't found a cure by then
, she will kill him by lethal injection to do what she does : " maintain the balance " .
Stiles understands and thanks her for the " illicit drugs " .
After the Nogitsune returns and escapes
Eichen , Marin tells Malia where to find Scott so she can join in the hunt for Stiles .
colspan=5Vernon Milton Boyd IV , or simply Boyd , was a shy loner at Beacon Hills High School and worked at the Beacon Hills Ice Rink .
In the episode " Motel California " , when Boyd is hallucinating , poisoned by wolfsbane , it is revealed he had a younger sister named Alicia .
She and Boyd had gone ice - skating when Boyd was younger , when Alicia suddenly disappeared and was never seen again .
Boyd felt terrible guilt over not watching his sister .
In Season 2 , he is first seen in episode " Ice Pick " .
Boyd becomes the third member of Derek 's pack , completing the basic requirement for an actual werewolf pack .
He joined so he would n't have to be the high school loner anymore .
For most of the season , he was Derek 's right - hand man and physically the strongest Beta werewolf of the pack .
Derek treated Boyd distinctly differently from the way he treated Isaac and Erica .
Isaac and Erica were sent in like attack dogs , while Derek held Boyd in reserve , as he was more mature and stronger than them .
In " Party Guessed " , he experiences his first full moon as a werewolf ; he goes feral and almost gets loose but is subdued by a more successful Isaac .
Boyd was close to Erica .
They both became frightened of the Argents ' vendetta , especially when the whole Pack had to go on the run and left Derek with her to find another pack at the end of Season 2 .
The pair are led into a trap by the Argents using recorded wolf howls .
Boyd saves Erica from being shot with an arrow by a vengeful Allison , but she relentlessly fires arrows into him , but Argent shoots her bow away saving Boyd 's life .
After a short altercation with and capture by the Argents , Argent rebels against his family and sets them free .
He and Erica attempt to flee Beacon Hills , but are trapped by the Alpha pack , leaving their fate uncertain .
In Season 3 , it is revealed that Boyd and possibly Erica were alive and had been held captive by the Alpha pack for four months in the abandoned Beacon Hills First National Bank .
During this four - month period , he and Erica had a heart - to - heart about them possibly becoming stronger during the lunar eclipse .
Erica tried to fight back against the Alphas , but was killed .
Boyd and Cora , Derek 's younger sister who was also captured , were refrained from fully transforming during the full moons , by the hecatolite lined in the bank vault keeping the full moon from reaching them .
This caused their rage and bloodlust to build up inside for months .
He became friends with Cora over this experience .
Upon being found by Derek and Scott , both of them lost all control and escaped into the woods to kill whomever they came across .
They were later subdued by Derek , with assistance from Scott , Isaac and Argent .
Boyd re - joined Derek 's Pack and returned to school still upset over the death of Erica .
He participated in the battle against the Alpha pack , taking on Ennis with Cora , but is easily defeated by them .
Knowing that Kali would eventually come to kill Derek to " avenge " Ennis ' death , Boyd came up with a plan to weaken Kali using electrified water .
The plan failed when the Alphas cut the power to the building .
During Derek 's fight with Kali , Boyd is held captive by Kali and she has the twins Ethan and Aiden hold Derek 's claws upward .
Kali then kills Boyd by impaling him upon Derek 's claws , causing the latter to absorb Boyd 's powers and see his memory of Erica 's death , which shatters him .
Dying , Boyd comforts Derek by telling him to not blame himself and that the sensation of the full moon was worth everything .
colspan=5Erica Reyes was a student at Beacon Hills who suffered from epilepsy .
Her father , Mr. J. Reyes , was the insurance adjuster who investigated the car crash that killed Gordon and Margaret Miller , Jackson Whittemore 's biological parents in 1995 , and who also withholds the insurance settlement Jackson is to receive upon his eighteenth birthday for their deaths .
At the hospital after a seizure in " Ice Pick " , Derek seduces her with the Bite , promising her that not only her epilepsy would go away , along with the side - effects , but she would become even better .
Erica accepted the Bite , becoming a Beta werewolf and the second member of Derek 's Pack .
She changed remarkably , her originally timid , self - conscious personality becoming more confident , exploitive , snarky , flirtatious and stylish .
She revealed that she used to have a huge crush on Stiles , but he never noticed her since he was " too busy " with his crush to Lydia .
Erica was shown to be close to both Isaac and Boyd throughout the season , and repeatedly antagonized Allison .
Erica had hit on Scott twice , hinting that she was attracted to him .
She along with the rest of the Pack , attempted to stop the Kanima and goes rabid on her first full moon and has to be restrained by Derek .
Near the end of Season 2 , terrified of the Argents ' werewolf genocide she and Boyd decide to leave Derek to find a new Pack , becoming Omega werewolves in the process , but are led into a trap by the Argents .
Erica is almost killed by a corrupted Allison , angry over her mother 's death , but Boyd saves her life catching the arrow but is plummeted by arrows from Allison .
Erica hysterically begs Allison to stop when she readies a seventh shot , but Boyd is saved by Argent .
In the Season 2 finale , they were held hostage by Gerard , but were freed by Argent .
While fleeing again , Erica and Boyd were trapped by the Alpha pack .
During Season 3 , it is revealed that she and Boyd were held captive by the Alpha Pack in the abandoned Beacon Hills First National Bank .
During captivity , she and Boyd had a heart - to - heart about them possibly becoming stronger during the lunar eclipse .
Erica says she hopes it does , while looking at Kali with baleful eyes .
Erica decides to fight , taking on Kali , but she dies from the fight in the process , reaching for Boyd , her only friend , whispering his name with her last breath .
Isaac later reveals that he found them and also Erica 's body when being captured and escaping .
After Derek finds Erica 's body , he mourns her death and carries it out of the bank .
Derek sees the circumstances of her death through Boyd 's memories as he absorbs Boyd 's powers , which shatters him emotionally .
colspan=5Ethan and Aiden were twin werewolves and former members of the Alpha Pack .
The twins were originally members of a Pack of infamously brutal werewolves and their Alpha having been the worst .
The twins were constantly mistreated , abused by all the others ; Ethan admitted to them being something like " the bitches " of the Pack .
After meeting Deucalion , he taught them how to harness a form where they could Merge .
Once they mastered the skill they proceeded to eliminate each member of the pack , eventually both becoming Alpha werewolves themselves after killing their Alpha together .
Out of fealty , and perhaps fear , they joined Deucalion 's Alpha pack .
Enrolling at Beacon Hills High in Season 3A , they repeatedly antagonize Isaac and Scott .
Ethan is gay and begins pursuing Danny Mahealani , while Aiden begins a liaison with Lydia .
Ethan and Aiden initially seduced Danny and Lydia respectively to try to get leverage and information on Scott and his allies , but Ethan 's feelings for Danny eventually turn genuine .
Aiden insists that his feelings for Lydia are fabricated , though they in fact run deeper than he would like to admit .
Ethan 's relationship with Danny softens the Alpha to the point where he meets Scott halfway in the episode " Currents " explaining
he wo n't harm Danny , as he realizes that Danny is n't part of Scott 's group but now knows that Lydia is .
When the Alphas have Derek kill Boyd by hand as per Kali 's order , Ethan shows guilt for his actions , which Scott catches onto .
Having Lydia distract Aiden , Scott and Stiles confront Ethan for conformation concerning whether or not the Darach could have been an emissary to any one of them in " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " .
Ethan relays their story to them , explaining how they owe Deucalion and lets them know that Morrell , Deucalion 's emissary , was the only emissary spared .
Ethan betrays the Alpha Pack in the mid - Season 3 finale , " Lunar Ellipse " , to help Derek and Cora escape from Kali , enlisting Lydia 's help and
Aiden is quick to join his brother turning on Kali when she threatens Lydia .
Unexpectedly , this confrontation is interrupted by the arrival of Jennifer Blake , who is the Darach .
The twins fight Jennifer in separate one - on - one duels , but ultimately decide to merge into their super - werewolf form when they are overpowered and Kali is killed .
Still they prove unsuccessful , when Jennifer snaps their merged form 's neck and appear dead .
Minutes later , they demerge as individuals , barely alive .
Fortunately , Lydia and Cora get them to Deaton , who helps save their lives .
In Season 3B , they 've lost their Alpha status and their talent to merge into their super - werewolf form in their feat to survive Jennifer 's attack , so they disappear for a couple of weeks , with Ethan breaking up with Danny , though Lydia keeps in contact with Aiden .
In " Galvanize " , they say they need to join a new Pack as they are now Omegas and enemies will come for them because of their time with Deucalion .
They come to ask Scott to join his Pack .
Isaac and Stiles are vehemently against this and Scott says no as they do n't trust them , particularly because of their part in Boyd 's murder .
Later , they decide to re - enroll in high school .
Aiden continues his affair with Lydia but she eventually states that she helps to save lives , while all she sees is how he helped kill Boyd saying he 's a ' bad guy ' not just a ' bad boy ' .
Aiden shows genuine guilt for this .
Ethan , meanwhile catches Danny making out with his ex - boyfriend and appears hurt .
To make a fresh start and earn Scott 's trust the twins help out with threats such as finding the serial killer William Barrow , combating the Oni , where they are both " tagged " by the said demons and helping out with the chaos caused by Stiles under the Nogitsune 's possession .
In the Season 3B finale , " The Divine Move " after events take a turn for the worse with Alison 's death and the Nogitsune takes control of the Oni , the twins consider the idea to run .
Derek scolds them and tells them they have to fight for Scott 's cause of protecting people instead of fighting for Scott himself if they wish for redemption and become part of his pack .
They assist Derek in fighting the Nogitsune and the Oni .
After a prolonged altercation , they are saved by Argent , who begins to destroy the Oni with Allison 's silver - tipped arrows .
Aiden destroys an Oni with a silver arrowhead , only to be fatally stabbed himself .
Bleeding heavily and dying , Aiden is held in Derek 's arms while Ethan cries over him .
Aiden tearfully states that Lydia will have a hard time thinking he became a ' good guy ' , but Derek reassures
he will tell her himself .
After passing away , Aiden 's death is " felt " by Lydia , which deeply saddens her .
With the loss of his brother , Ethan decides to leave Beacon Hills .
Danny breaks up with him instead and reveals that he knows Ethan is a werewolf , which shocks the latter .
He then gives Ethan a kiss goodbye .
Ethan and Aiden had a talent to sense when the other is in pain and the power to physically merge their bodies into a single more powerful werewolf form .
However , when Jennifer Blake killed their " super - wolf " form , their feat to survive as individuals cost them their Alpha status and that ability .
Personality - wise , Ethan is calm , reserved , calculating , passive and shows remorse for his actions , as while Aiden was impulsive , aggressive , cocky , spontaneous and prone to violence .
Both twins have a sense of honor as they followed Deucalion after he helped them fight back against their abusers in their original pack , and they both show guilt for their actions against Scott 's fellowship .
colspan=5Jennifer Blake was the English teacher at Beacon Hills High School .
Jennifer was the Darach .
In " Tattoo " , Jennifer starts her class with the last quote from Joseph Conrad 's " Heart of Darkness " .
Suddenly , flocks of birds mysteriously come flying through the window and begin attacking the class .
She is seen mildly distressed afterward .
In " Fireflies " , Jennifer is seen late at school grading papers , when she happens across a feral Boyd and Cora .
She is saved by Derek who endures their attacks until the sun rises .
Derek helps her up and she supposedly takes a liking to him .
She sees Derek again in " Unleashed " , where she says she 'll say nothing about what she saw .
Derek says he was going to see if she was okay
and they connect .
When Derek comes to her for help , after being wounded by Deucalion 's Alpha pack , she takes him to his loft in " Motel California " and tries to help him heal .
Jennifer and Derek connect again with him saying she should n't get involved with him , because everyone around him gets hurt , but she says she 's been hurt before .
They share a kiss and spend the night together , which helps Derek heal faster .
When the Alphas attack his loft in " Currents " , Kali has the twins hold her hostage as leverage against Derek and she witnesses Derek , in his Alpha werewolf form , and Kali fight .
She is saved by Isaac but Kali has Derek kill Boyd .
In the episode " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " , Jennifer is taking a class and sees Lydia drawing a tree .
Later , she organizes the recital to honor the dead .
Sheriff Stilinski simultaneously uncovers an old case about a patient who was brought to Beacon Hills Memorial years ago , but birds , similarly to the events in " Tattoo " died that day with Stilinski realizing the birds were sacrificing themselves for the girl - who he figures out to actually be Jennifer .
Jennifer is revealed to be the Darach , the dark druid responsible for the mass sacrifices in Beacon Hills , tries to kill Lydia and kidnaps Stilinski .
Using mistletoe Scott and Stiles prove to Derek she is the Darach in " The Overlooked " , by exposing her true form .
Derek angrily attacks her , but she reveals she 's poisoned his sister Cora with the same plant and only she can heal her .
As the Alpha pack try to kill her , she shows her intense hatred for them .
She reveals to Derek her first name was Julia Baccari
and she was Kali 's Emissary .
She and Kali were close , but Kali had attempted to kill her , as part of killing her entire Pack in order to join the Alpha pack .
She was able to survive because Kali could n't bring herself to deliver the final blow .
Julia then struggled to the Nemeton , which had n't had power for a long time .
But the sacrifice of a virgin months earlier had given the tree stump a spark of power again , which gave Julia the ability to survive just long enough until help arrived .
Eventually , because Kali 's attack had left Julia hideously disfigured , she used her talents to disguise herself with a new identity , ' Jennifer Blake ' .
She informs him of her plan to destroy Deucalion 's Alpha Pack on the next full moon which is also a lunar eclipse because werewolves lose all their power during the eclipse .
Derek affirms this .
She also tells him the virgin sacrificed at the Nemeton that reignited its power was Paige Krasikeva , his first love when Derek mercy - killed her , explaining her felt connection towards him .
In " Alpha Pact " , Jennifer holds Stiles ' father , along with Scott 's mother and Allison 's father for the final sacrifice , Guardians , as they are all Guardians of their children .
The behavior of the animals throughout the season is later discovered to have been caused by Jennifer in response to her and her mass sacrifices .
She is also discovered to be aligned with the telluric currents as she committed her sacrifices in line with them .
She 's holding the captive parents at the Nemeton , the same tree in Lydia 's been consistently drawing which is why Jennifer tried to kill her .
In " Lunar Ellipse " , Jennifer appears at Derek 's loft , breaking through the glass roof and takes on the Alpha Pack .
She overpowers Kali and the twins .
She angrily faces Kali , asking her what it takes for to look normal to spite Kali as she 'd physically ruined her actual face .
Jennifer demonstrates her power using telekinesis to have the glass shards rise and suspend .
Kali stubbornly rages at her former friend and Jennifer ferociously rockets the glass shards into Kali 's body , killing her former Alpha .
The twins then take her on in their merged form but she snaps their neck inducing them into a coma .
She uses Lydia to lure Derek back to his loft .
She promises Derek the kidnapped parents if he will be her " Guardian " , even after he informs her he 's no longer an Alpha werewolf .
Jennifer begins sacrificing the parents using the storm to bury them alive with her connection to the telluric currents .
At the abandoned distillery outside of Beacon Hills , they face off against Deucalion who has Scott with him .
Deucalion easily overpowers both of them , but , to buy more time , Scott blinds the " Demon Wolf " long enough for the lunar eclipse to arrive and the werewolves are rendered powerless .
Jennifer assumes her true form and thrashes Deucalion .
Derek convinces her to heal his blindness so he can see the results of his actions on her with the intent of him repenting her .
However , this leaves Jennifer weakened as Derek had intended .
Enraged , Jennifer repeatedly assaults Derek , but he endures her attacks just long enough for the lunar eclipse to pass .
The lunar eclipse passes , but Jennifer protects herself with a mountain ash barrier , now fully intent on sacrificing the parents .
To save them , Scott determinedly pushes through her barrier and eventually breaks it becoming a True Alpha .
Scott says he 'll kill her himself if she does n't stop the storm , but Deucalion does it mortally wounding her .
Jennifer survived Deucalion 's slash to the throat , and was hoping the Nemeton would restore her health once more only to be stopped by Peter Hale .
After revealing she knows all about his plan ( killing Scott to steal his new Alpha status ) , Peter slashes her throat himself , killing her for good .
Jennifer was highly intelligent , specializing in literature and mythology , as expected of a druid Emissary .
She had an intense hatred for Deucalion 's Alpha pack , specifically Kali as she was friends with her and Kali tried to kill her and she stopped at nothing to get revenge on them , to the point of sacrificing innocent people .
As the Darach , Jennifer was amongst the most powerful beings seen in the series because of her mass druid sacrifices .
By massacring Warriors , she gained enhanced strength , Healers for healing abilities so great she healed Deucalion 's eyesight , Philosophers for intelligence and strategy , and Virgins , to seduce people easily for her agenda as with Derek .
She could use telekinesis , a form of mind control to have a pianist killed by a split random cord off the piano to slit her throat for her final Philosopher sacrifice , she could appear somewhere else partially or teleport completely as seen when Lydia saw her materialize in a blaze in " Motel California " and when she abducted victims .
Overall , her most impressive ability was glamoring herself to hide in plain sight
so efficiently she settled into her " Jennifer Blake " persona for the majority of the time fooling many people
she was a harmless , innocent woman .
colspan=5Cora Hale is Laura and Derek 's younger sister and also a born werewolf .
She unknowingly survived the Hale House fire and was apparently unaware her siblings
Laura and Derek were away at school at the time .
Cora was long believed by Derek and Laura to be dead .
After the fire , Cora ventured to South America where she lived during the intervening years .
She believed her entire family was dead , but she came into town after hearing rumors an Alpha werewolf was building a Pack back in Beacon Hills , California , " one of the Hales " .
After Boyd and Erica were captured by the Alpha Pack , Cora was captured also and learned her brother Derek was alive .
All three were held captive in the abandoned Beacon Hills First National Bank .
During this period , Erica tried to fight back , but was killed by the Alpha werewolf Kali .
Cora became friends with Boyd during their imprisonment , but the hecatolite lined in the bank vault refracted the moonlight , refraining the two werewolves from fully transforming during the full moons , causing their rage and bloodlust to build up inside .
Three months later , upon being found by Derek and Scott , Cora and Boyd lost all control of their animal sides and escaped into the woods to kill .
They were later subdued by Derek , with assistance from Scott , Isaac and Argent .
Eventually the sun rises and she and Boyd are rescued and Cora is reunited with her brother joining his Pack .
Cora is impulsive , trigger - happy , short tempered , vengeful and tomboyish but she cares for those close to her .
Like her older brother Derek , she gives death threats to people ; of course , like her older brother , she has no intention of going through with them .
In " Currents " , when Deaton is kidnapped to be sacrificed by the Darach , Cora helps Scott 's friends to find him deducing that Deaton is being held in the same bank she was locked in for three months , but she learns the Alphas have attacked Derek 's loft and sabotaged the trap for them .
Cora leaves with Stiles and Lydia to help her brother .
After Boyd is killed by the Alphas , she breaks down in tears and cradles her close friend 's body .
Cora tries to avenge his death by killing Aiden , but fails to do so and is knocked out when Aiden strikes her in the head with a weight .
She is saved by Scott and Ethan when they restrain Aiden .
Her wound from the blow to her head Aiden gave her suddenly does n't heal , she falls unconscious and is put in the hospital .
She was later revealed to have also been poisoned by Jennifer with mistletoe for leverage against Derek .
Derek saves her life by giving up his Alpha werewolf status using his pain transference to heal her .
In the mid - season 3 finale , Cora helps Lydia and Deaton save the lives of Aiden and Ethan after their defection from the Alpha Pack .
She later leaves Beacon Hills with Derek for her former residence in South America .
During Season 3B , Cora goes into hiding at Derek 's request , remaining in South America as he undertakes a mission to retrieve their mother Talia 's claws from the Calavera hunters and they separate .
colspan=5Braeden is a US Marshall - turned - mercenary , an ally of Scott 's Pack and Derek 's girlfriend in Season 4 .
Braeden saves Isaac from the Alpha Pack , in the Season 3 premiere , " Tattoo " .
Later , fleeing the Alphas , Braeden heads to the high school , looking for Scott , who she calls ' the Alpha ' .
She comes up to Allison and Lydia asking for Scott .
Unfortunately the twins spot her .
She bruises the two girls ' arms .
The Alphas corner her
and she manages to put up a good fight against the Pack , but is ultimately knocked down after sustaining wounds from them .
Braeden lets
Deucalion know she knows he 's afraid of Scott , of ' the man he 'll become ' .
The Alpha pack leader informs her
he 's aware
Scott 's a potential threat , but he intends to place Derek and Scott against each other to eliminate " the threat " and slashes Braeden .
Braden 's actions are revealed in the episodes " Chaos Rising " , that the bruises she left on Allison and Lydia form the logo for the abandoned Beacon Hills First National Bank where the Alpha pack is holding Boyd and Cora hostage and " Currents " , that her words regarding Scott was that he had the potential to be a True Alpha and was intending to warn him about the Alpha Pack and Deucalion 's plan for him .
Her identity remained unknown until " Alpha Pact " when the Alpha Pack confront Marin Morrell that she sent her in a move against them .
Morrell reveals she sent Braeden to rescue Isaac from the Alphas , to ensure balance .
In " More Bad Than Good " , it is discovered Braeden is actually alive , but scarred on her face and neck from Deucalion 's claws .
She rescues Derek and Peter from the Calavera werewolf hunters and helps them retrieve the triskele urn in the hunters ' possession .
She reveals she was hired by Deucalion to save them .
While Braeden is shown to be fearless , spontaneous and altruistic , it is explained she is a mercenary for hire , taking dangerous jobs from anyone who can pay her , regardless of her client 's intentions or identity , or the moral compunctions of her missions .
Braeden appears in " The Dark Moon " in Season 4 , being provided by Araya Calavera as a guide to Scott 's Pack during their mission in Mexico to find Derek .
She 's taken a contract from the Calaveras to find Kate , capture her and return her to them .
Scott asks her if she 'd kill Kate if paid enough .
She replies if paid enough , she 'd kill Scott himself .
In " Muted " , Braeden arrives in Beacon Hills in her US Marshall pose , where Derek hires her to find Kate for him first so he may learn what Kate did to him , causing his werewolf eye color to return to gold .
While she accepts , the two develop an attraction to each other .
Braeden is found wounded , shot by an assassin , in the Preserve at Lookout Point by Derek where he was trying to track down the Pack led by the Alpha Satomi .
He brings her to the hospital where she informs Derek and Melissa that the dead werewolves she found were infected by a virus lethal to supernaturals .
She catches Derek watching over her , he claims to be " protecting his investment .
" Recovering in " Time of Death " , Braeden crashes at Derek 's loft , continuing their interest in one another .
When Derek reveals he 's gradually losing his power , Braeden takes Derek under her wing to teach him how to fight supernaturals as a human , beginning with firearms .
They wind up sleeping with each other , starting a relationship .
In " Perishable " , Braeden interrogates the incarcerated Haige after he tried to assassinate Parrish .
She learns of the plan to assassinate Scott 's Pack at the school bonfire .
With her lessons for Derek in hand - to - hand combat and firearms paying off , both are able to fight off the assassins both at the school , saving Scott , Malia and Liam 's lives , and at the Argent Arms International warehouse when protecting Satomi 's Pack .
In the Season 4 finale , Braeden and Derek gear up to hunt down Kate in Mexico after she abducts Scott and Kira .
Braeden tells Derek she 's not accepting that Derek may not come back alive after he confides in her , sharing a sweet kiss with him .
At La Iglesia , Braeden fights off Kate and a Berserker .
She is saddened when Derek supposedly dies , though she keeps on fighting .
She is elated when he 's actually alive from the process of evolving .
At the end of Season 4 , Braeden tells Derek her employment as a US Marshall ended after she 'd spent her entire career tracking a single target : the Desert Wolf .
The two of them leave Beacon Hills afterwards .
In Season 5 , Braeden keeps in touch with Scott 's Pack sending them intel she finds on the Desert Wolf .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Braeden returns to Beacon Hills , helping Malia fend off a Chimera .
She 's been in contact with Malia , in on her plan to kill the Desert Wolf .
Braeden informs Malia that the Desert Wolf is coming to Beacon Hills for her .
In Season 5B , the two begin tracking associates of the assassin .
They find an informant bribing him for information .
They learn the Desert Wolf has a hostage -Deaton .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Malia and Braeden prepare to rescue Deaton who is being held in an abandoned building in the industrial estate .
Braeden is untrusting of the treacherous Theo pointing out the Chimera had almost killed Scott .
Malia pushes for Theo to come along as they have to capture the Desert Wolf worried for Deaton .
Braeden warns Malia they are walking in with so much uncertainty .
Theo asks why would a werecoyote use guns .
Braeden tells a story that somehow the Desert Wolf lost part of her power that she 's not as strong , fast nor heals as quickly as she once did , but warns Malia she has a perfect shot .
After Theo leads the two into a trap with the assassin - Corrine - Malia and Braeden escape with Deaton when the Beast arrives at the scene .
Braeden remains in Beacon Hills for the full moon to guard Malia as the Desert Wolf will come to kill Malia to regain her lost power .
She assists in fighting the Beast of Gévaudan .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Malia and Braeden once again fall into a face - off with Corrine at the McCall house .
Corrine outmaneuvers them and in the resulting firefight , Braeden is wounded and Stiles winds up in the skirmish .
Corrine makes her move to kill Malia , but she is defeated by Malia , thanks to Stiles ' actions , draining the ruthless werecoyote of her remaining power .
Braeden staggers into the house and knocks Corrine unconscious finally capturing the Desert Wolf .
colspan=5Deucalion is an Alpha werewolf , formerly the Alpha Pack leader .
In the past , Deucalion was the leader of his Pack and his Emissary was Marin Morrell .
Deucalion had come to Beacon Hills for a meeting to discuss the threat of the Argent werewolf - hunter family .
Fellow Alpha Ennis wanted help to combat the Argents because they had killed one of his Beta werewolves .
Deucalion reasoned saying they killed his Beta because he killed two of theirs .
Ennis declared revenge , anyway .
Deucalion wanted to avoid bloodshed to make peace with the Argents .
He met with Alpha werewolf Talia Hale and her Emissary , Deaton , to seek their advice before meeting with Gerard Argent .
He and three of his Betas were instead tricked and ambushed by Gerard , who not only killed Deucalion 's Betas , but his men who wished for peace with the Packs .
He later blinded Deucalion in an unsuccessful attempt to kill him .
With the help of Deaton , Deucalion 's eyes healed physically , but his sight did n't return .
This discovery coupled with Gerard 's betrayal enraged Deucalion .
Marco , another of his beta werewolves , took this opportunity to try and kill Deucalion to become the Alpha of their pack .
Deucalion , however , realized he could see using his werewolf vision and savagely killed Marco in retaliation .
In doing so he realized Alphas became stronger when they kill their own Betas .
The entire experience corrupted Deucalion .
Eventually , he killed the rest of his pack to add all of their powers to his own and lead fellow Alphas Kali and Ennis to do the same .
Sometime after , he came across the twins ( Aiden and Ethan ) who were " the bitches " in a brutal Pack .
Deucalion taught them how to control their merged form to fight back against their abusers and they joined him after killing their original Alpha .
He pulled all five of them together to form an Alpha pack .
He even had all the members kill their Emissaries , except for Marin , his own .
Deucalion eventually came to be known as " the Demon Wolf " .
Deucalion 's Alpha Pack arrived in Beacon Hills in the Season 2 finale , capturing Boyd and Erica in the process .
In " Unleashed " , Deucalion goes to Derek 's loft along with Kali and Ennis to offer Derek a proposition for Derek to kill his own Pack to join his own with the intention of recruiting him .
Deucalion 's actual plan for Derek was to place him against Scott .
To this end , after the battle between the Packs in " Frayed " , Deucalion kills Ennis after he fails to heal himself , absorbing Ennis ' power ; he lies to Kali and the twins that Ennis died of his wounds , intending to have a vengeful , distraught Kali force Derek 's decision to join the Alpha Pack .
In " Currents " , the reason for this is because Deucalion knows that Scott has the potential to become a True Alpha and wants to recruit Scott , not Derek .
Deucalion 's true intentions throughout Season 3 were to push Scott into a position to either join the Alpha Pack or have Scott kill somebody , destroying his True Alpha potential and eliminating Scott as a potential threat to him .
He had Ethan and Aiden enroll in high school to seduce people close to Scott for leverage .
When the new killer committing human sacrifices is revealed to be a Darach , Deucalion had his pack hunt it down .
He targets the Darach because it used to be a druid who can call upon powers from sacrifices .
After finding out that the Darach is Jennifer , Kali 's old emissary , the Alpha Pack leader tried to have her killed .
Scott later tearfully joins Deucalion 's pack in " The Overlooked " in return for Deucalion 's offer to help look for his kidnapped mother .
In " Alpha Pact " , he tries to have Marin killed when he suspects her to have had a role with the human sacrifices and she confirms to have had been working against him to " maintain balance " , but Scott ultimately saves her .
In " Lunar Ellipse " , Deucalion and Scott face off against Jennifer and Derek ( who Jennifer forced into helping him ) .
Deucalion shifts into his Demon Wolf persona and overpowers both of them easily .
He then tries to force Scott into killing Jennifer to become an Alpha , but Scott blinds him using flash bolts as he can see as a wolf .
During the lunar eclipse , Deucalion temporarily loses his powers and Jennifer is to be able to defeat him .
After being beaten to a pulp , Jennifer is tricked by Derek into healing Deucalion 's normal eyesight to allow him to see her face and the result of his crimes on her but Jennifer is weakened because of this .
After the lunar eclipse passes , Deucalion is in awe as Scott awakens his True Alpha abilities , breaking through Jennifer 's mountain ash barrier .
Deucalion saves Scott from becoming a killer by mortally wounding Jennifer , slashing her throat , subsequently stopping her from sacrificing the kidnapped parents .
Because of this , Derek and Scott decide to let Deucalion go , hoping he can be the man he once was before .
They warn him , if he commits something they do n't like , he 'll never see them coming .
In Season 3B episode , " More Bad than Good " , Braeden reveals Deucalion had hired her to rescue Derek from the Calavera werewolf hunters .
In Season 5 , " The Sword and the Spirit " , Deucalion has been tracked down and is held hostage by Theo 's Chimera Pack after some strife and pain on their part .
Deucalion is blind again saying Jennifer 's magically healing his eyesight was only temporary .
The Alpha tells Theo he 's aware of the Beast of Gévaudan which has been resurrected by the Dread Doctors and that Theo wants the werewolf to show him how to steal its power .
In exchange , Deucalion says that he only wants Scott 's eyes " on the tips of ( his ) claws " .
In " Amplification " , Hayden is assigned to watch over Deucalion .
The Alpha offhandedly lets her know Theo plans on siphoning the Beast 's power using the garuda talons , but Theo 's own Chimera frequency would reject the talons then kill him .
He also gives her subtle advice on where her loyalties lie referring to the skirmish between Scott and Theo 's Packs , giving her the resolve to leave Theo so she can be with Liam .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Deucalion proposes that a ruffled Theo trust him while revealing he 'd has been playing them all along in that he 'd let them take him hostage .
Deucalion tells Theo the secret to stealing power is to " take their pain , take their life , take their power " which leads to Theo murdering Josh to siphon the latter 's power to use the Dread Doctor mask to identify the Beast .
He encourages Theo to align with Scott , saying he ca n't get to the Beast 's host – Mason – without Scott 's connection .
In " Apotheosis " , Deucalion is betrayed by Theo after the latter tests
his newfound Chimera abilities on him .
It is then revealed that Deucalion allied himself with Scott all along to double cross Theo and had lied to Theo about being both blind again ( using a mastery over his werewolf body to disguise his eyes ) , wanting to get back at Scott , and that Belasko 's talons could 've worked to siphon the Beast 's power .
Deucalion blinks with purpose and
his natural eye colour is back .
He then breaks Theo 's neck .
Deucalion presumably then leaves after Gerard is disabled by Argent , the Beast is killed and Theo is banished to the underworld .
Originally , Deucalion was described as a " man of vision " in the past , a level - headed , rational person as an Alpha , the leader of his Pack with a belief and faith in humanity .
He was changed by Gerard Argent 's treachery , the loss of his sight and his subsuming the powers of his Pack members by killing them .
As the Alpha Pack leader , Deucalion is obsessive , vain , charismatic , power - hungry , willing to kill anyone who gets in his way , not above killing members of his own if they are useless to him .
By Season 5 , Deucalion reforms , having helped Scott and his Pack against Theo and the Beast .
As the Alpha Pack leader , Deucalion possessed abilities greater than that of an average Alpha werewolf ; he was able to command a Pack of exceptionally powerful Alphas with both fear and respect .
Unlike most werewolves , in his transformed state , Deucalion 's skin turns dark blue / grey and his facial features appears more demonic than wolf - like .
colspan=5Kali was an Alpha werewolf and a member of Deucalion 's Alpha Pack .
Kali was one of the most dangerous werewolves and used the claws on her feet to fight in a martial arts form of combat .
Kali was Deucalion 's right hand in his Alpha pack , though Deucalion mentioned later , she joined so she could be with Ennis , hinting she and Ennis were involved with each other .
Kali was ruthless , arrogant , sadistic , cowardly and had no remorse for her actions ; like Deucalion and Ennis , Kali murdered her entire Pack to add all their power to hers , which she states felt " liberating " and she was responsible for the death of Erica .
After their pack 's battle with Derek 's Pack , Kali is shown to be worried over Ennis ' condition from his fight with Derek .
With Aiden and Morrell 's help , they get Ennis to Deaton 's clinic for treatment .
She is devastated when Deucalion reports that Ennis has died from his wounds ( in truth Deaton had actually saved Ennis , but Deucalion killed him to entice Kali into coming for Derek to further his plans for Derek and Scott ) .
Kali eventually fought Derek one - on - one at his loft , having Ethan and Aiden hold Derek 's girlfriend Jennifer Blake hostage and disabling the trap Boyd had set with the electrified water .
During the fight , Kali gets a hold of Boyd and has Derek inadvertently kill him so to have him absorb Boyd 's powers with an ultimatum : Derek has to join their pack by the full moon or she would kill him and all of his pack in repentance for Ennis ' death .
In the episode " The Overlooked " , when the Alpha pack began hunting the Darach which is actually Jennifer , it is revealed she is really Julia Baccari , Kali 's former Emissary .
When Deucalion confronted her , Kali admitted she 'd attempted to kill Julia , as part of killing her entire Pack in order to join the Alpha Pack , but she 'd loved Julia and was unable to do it in the end and left her to die .
Kali felt genuine remorse for this .
The Alphas attempted to kill Jennifer , but were foiled by Scott and his allies .
In the mid - season finale , she and Aiden show up at Derek 's loft to kill Derek , only to have their plans foiled by Ethan - who betrayed them .
Kali demands to know where Derek is .
Aiden is quick to join his brother after she threatens Lydia .
Kali confronts Aiden over his loyalties when he becomes violent in his supposed defection .
However , this turn of events is interrupted by Jennifer , who breaks into the loft through the glass roof .
Kali takes her on , but is overpowered .
Jennifer confronts Kali about her new glamoured form , asking her what it takes to be able to look normal to spite Kali as the malicious Alpha had ruined her real face when she 'd attempted to kill her .
Kali fires back saying she does n't care , but Jennifer responds saying " it takes power .
Power like this " , and uses telekinesis to levitate shards of the broken glass off the floor .
Kali shows fear at this display , but ultimately refused to back down in arrogance and screams she " should 've ripped
( Julia 's ) head off " , and Jennifer rockets the glass shards into Kali 's body , violently killing her .
colspan=5Ennis was an Alpha werewolf and part of Deucalion 's Alpha Pack .
In the past , one of Ennis ' Pack members accidentally killed two werewolf hunters and was killed in retaliation .
This enraged and saddened Ennis because he considered the Beta werewolf to be family to him .
This caused him to seek out a new member for his Pack .
He also came to Beacon Hills to seek out help combating the Argents meeting with delegations from other Packs including Deucalion , Kali and Talia Hale .
He was advised against it , but he declared revenge anyway igniting the conflict between the packs and the Argents that persisted to the present .
After being sought out and asked by Peter Hale , Ennis Bit Derek 's girlfriend Paige .
His intention was to be on good terms with Talia and to give his Pack a new member .
After changing his mind Derek tried to save Paige , but Ennis had already bitten her .
However , the Bite did n't take effect , her body rejecting the transformation , and Derek later killed her to end her suffering .
Sometime after that , Ennis killed his Emissary and his remaining Pack members to absorb their powers following Deucalion 's lead , along with Kali , and later on , with Ethan and Aiden , forming the Alpha Pack .
In the Season 3 premiere , " Tattoo " Ennis first appears disguised as a hospital orderly and tried to kidnap Isaac at the hospital , only to be stopped by Derek and Scott .
After breaking into Derek 's loft , Ennis easily subdued Cora while Deucalion explained his proposition to Derek about joining their pack .
During the Alpha pack 's battle against Derek 's pack in " Frayed " , Ennis was severely injured by Derek and Scott , which caused Kali and Aiden , along with their Emissary , Marin Morrell , to seek out Deaton for help .
Deaton saves his life , but Deucalion kills Ennis to absorb his powers after he could n't heal himself .
The Alpha pack leader lies to Kali and the twins that Ennis had actually died from his fight with Derek .
The Alpha pack declares that Derek must now either be killed or he is to join their Pack in repentance for Ennis ' death , as per their rules .
Marin tries to let the Alphas know Deucalion had actually killed Ennis intending to have Kali force Derek 's decision to further Deucalion 's plans for Derek and Scott , but he states she 's lying and Kali came for Derek anyway .
Ennis was the biggest member of the Alpha pack and a force of pure brutality .
His brute strength and fighting knowledge made him a deadly adversary in a fight .
He was arrogant , brutal and made rather zealous , amoral actions as an Alpha werewolf , declaring revenge on the Argents for their killing his dangerous Beta and Biting Paige .
He was also quite murderous , killing his entire Pack and Emissary to absorb all their power .
It 's shown that he and Kali were involved with each other and that he followed Deucalion which is why Kali joined , according to Deucalion .
colspan=5Rafael McCall is an FBI agent , Scott 's father , and Melissa 's ex - husband .
Rafael arrives in the episode " Alpha Pact " of Season 3 , investigating the murders by the Darach .
While it was implied now and then ( via Melissa 's response to Adrian Harris ' question regarding Scott 's relationship with his father in Season 1 , her asking Scott if his actions are in relation to his father during Season 2 , as well as Stiles ' negative reaction to the sight and questions of him during season 3 ) that Rafael is a jerk and deadbeat , he is shown sitting in Scott 's room with teary eyes , implying that whatever his flaws , Rafael cares about his son .
In the mid - Season 3 finale , Rafael insensitively reunites with Scott at Allison 's house .
He is seen trying to reconcile with Scott to no avail , which Melissa finds amusing .
During Season 3B , Rafael begins having Sheriff Stilinski 's cases forwarded to him .
As many of these are unclosed and unresolved ( due to the Sheriff 's new found knowledge of the supernatural ) , and inspecting Stilinski 's reopening of the Malia Tate case , he starts to have Stilinski impeached , which would have him fired , much to Scott and Melissa 's anger .
Stiles coldly lets Rafael know that his attitude towards his father is because of something else rather than his " professional disapproval " of Stilinski , something Rafael does n't like Stilinski knowing and
Stiles says he knows what it is .
When Stiles goes missing while sleepwalking in " Riddled " , Rafael picks up on a line from Stiles ' phone message to Scott and correctly deduces Stiles is sleepwalking , had called Scott while still asleep and is unknowingly at the werecoyote 's den .
Stilinski puts aside his differences with Rafael when he finds Stiles and brings him to the hospital , shaking his hand .
When Stilinski faces the impeachment case in " De - Void " , Rafael helps to talk him out of the case , revealing to him the real reason he came was to have an excuse to stay so he could talk to Scott .
In " Insatiable " , Rafael reveals to Scott why he left .
He used to drink heavily back when he and Melissa were still married .
One time , Rafael had come home drunk and was holding Scott when Scott was little .
He 'd got into a fight with Melissa , but he 'd caused Scott to fall down the stairs , bruising his head on the floor which led to Melissa screaming at him to get out .
Rafael left the family the next day , divorced Melissa and never took another drink again .
Rafael later learned Melissa had confided in Stilinski over his drinking over the phone ; Stiles had overheard the conversation and Rafael
became spiteful toward Stilinski due to his alcoholism when his wife Claudia died .
Scott is n't satisfied with his explanation , telling Rafael he used to " get hurt all the time " and that Rafael was never there for him .
In " The Divine Move " , Rafael talks to Melissa , consider returning to San Francisco .
Melissa snaps at him , telling him when she yelled at him to " get out " after the incident
, she was telling ' a drunk to get out of the house ' , not telling a father to get out of his son 's life .
Rafael helps to save Melissa when the Oni attack the hospital , promising Melissa that he 'll do his best to make things up to Scott .
In Season 4 , Rafael is staying at the McCall house , to repair things with Melissa and Scott because he 's " keeping ( his ) promises this time . "
In " Orphaned " , Rafael is able to identify the supposed freshmen Garrett and Violet that have been killing supernatural people in Beacon Hills as the assassins , ' the Orphans ' from Violet 's weapon , the thermal cut wire .
Rafael and Stilinski oversee Violet 's transport to a federal facility , but the transport is attacked by Kate Argent , though they survive .
During the school 's quarantine in " Weaponized " , Rafael investigates the situation .
He enters the school disguised as a CDC worker after receiving a call from Melissa about a cure for the virus which will save Scott and his friends .
He comes upon the assassin ' the Chemist ' about to execute Stiles .
Rafael takes out his gun and kills ' the Chemist ' to save Stiles .
In " Time of Death " , Rafael has to leave for San Francisco to report to his superiors about his shooting the assassin .
Scott asks him has he killed before , he replies two other times and lets his son know it is not easy , taking a life .
Scott gives him a hug , but the conversation causes Scott to subconsciously debate
should he resort to killing his enemies in order to stop them .
Before Rafael departs , he tells Scott he 's noticed the strange behavior of Scott and his friends .
Particularly how they handle the situations happening in Beacon Hills , that they 're far too calm for the horrible things that keep happening to them .
Rafael tells a nervous Scott he wants a talk with him that he wants " to be in the know " when he returns .
He reappears in season 6 apparently fully caught up on Scott being a werewolf , though how this happened is never shown .
He attempts to get the pack to leave town for their safety , but ultimately fails .
Later he teams up with the sheriff and Parrish to fight various enemies .
When faced with a group of hunters and sees Parish disarm them by heating up their weapons he asks Parrish to teach him how to do that .
colspan=5Noshiko Yukimura is Kira 's mother and Ken 's wife .
Noshiko is also a Kitsune of the type Celestial , and she is close to 900 years old .
Despite her supernatural status , Noshiko is a caring , domesticated and helpful mother to Kira and happily married to Ken .
She is a pragmatist , being stoic and forthcoming .
Noshiko serves as Kira 's mentor to harness her Kitsune powers , and due to her centuries ' long life , occasionally a source of guidance and knowledge .
Noshiko is first seen in " Galvanize " when Scott is invited over for a sushi dinner with the family after Scott and Kira develop an interest in each other .
Noshiko tells Scott some of their family history .
In " Riddled " , Noshiko unintentionally displays talents similar to Kira 's which Kira catches .
Noshiko later appears at the hospital during the power surge .
She faces off against the Nogitsune , who is possessing Stiles Stilinski , with two of the Oni by her side .
She and the Nogitsune trade words letting him know she will be undeterred in eliminating the Dark Kitsune , even if his chosen host is an innocent .
Later , Noshiko sees Kira manifest her Foxfire defusing a sabotaged electrical cable , subsequently leaving Kira all the more suspicious .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Noshiko meets with Ken , where he hands her a fake book containing blades , unaware that Kira is spying on them .
It 's realized that Noshiko is who summoned the Oni to Beacon Hills .
The blades she carries , represent her Kitsune Tails .
By sacrificing a Tail , a respective Oni is summoned from the Nemeton , and she can command the demons .
Noshiko is adamant that Stiles be killed to eliminate the Nogitsune .
In " The Fox and the Wolf " , Scott and Kira object to her saying they want to save Stiles instead and implore her to call off the Oni .
Noshiko reveals her story to her daughter and Scott , that she is responsible for unleashing the Nogitsune , saying he " came from ( her ) " .
In 1943 , Noshiko was living in a " relocation camp " called Camp Oak Creek under Executive Order 9066 .
Noshiko would subtly improve the lives of the interned Japanese Americans by stealing food and supplies , all the while engaged in a clandestine romance with a field medic , Corporal Rhys .
During an outbreak of pneumonia , Noshiko and Rhys discovered that the camp 's army medics were selling medical supplies on the black market , resulting in several deaths in the camp .
Noshiko hastily told her fellow interns of her discovery , but this unintentionally incited a riot .
Rhys had attempted to defuse the chaos but was set aflame by a cocktail from an intern , Satomi , who Noshiko realized too late
was a Bitten werewolf , and he died in agony .
Eventually the officers opened fire and innocents were put down .
Noshiko was shot also , but survived with her body healing .
She learned the entire incident was going to be covered up .
Enraged the army medics were going to get away with mass murder , as well as distraught with Rhys ' death .
Out of injustice , Noshiko prayed for her ancestors to send a Nogitsune to punish those responsible for the massacre , intending for the Dark Kitsune to possess her , for her pain and misery to imbue him with power .
But a Kitsune can not be controlled .
So being a trickster , the Nogitsune possessed Rhys ' corpse instead .
He proceeded to slaughter not only the officers , but the interns at Eichen House when the inhabitants relocated there .
Realizing her great mistake , Noshiko eventually cornered the Nogitsune and , with some help from Satomi , slew him .
Noshiko had buried the fly from the corpse which embodied the Nogitsune 's very being underneath the Nemeton .
The Yukimuras had relocated to Beacon Hills because the ritual Allison , Stiles and Scott undertook released the Kitsune from its prison .
Later , Noshiko visits Rhys ' grave in Eichen House 's basement in " De - Void " .
It is revealed she had carved the kanji " self " into the board to signify that Rhys had died as himself , not as a monster when the Nogitsune possessed him .
The Nogitsune corners her and he steals her last Kitsune Tail from her .
In " Insatiable " , Noshiko and the Oni arrive at Camp Oak Creek to slay the Nogitsune .
She confronts Kira 's protesting that she thinks he could be taken alive , saying that she tried to save Rhys seventy years ago , saying Stiles is gone .
She admits that while she is indeed no longer the Fox because of the sacrifice of her Tails , her daughter is , but the Nogitsune is still her demon to bury .
Unfortunately , the Void Kitsune , takes control of the Oni using her final Tail and he turns the demons against the group and Allison is killed .
With the Oni taken from her control , Noshiko takes Stiles and Kira back to their home .
The stakes having been raised , Kira asks her mom if the Nogitsune could be trapped again .
Noshiko replies the Nemeton 's power is what trapped the Void kitsune .
At the end of Season 3B , the Nogitsune is imprisoned in the Hales ' triskele urn , and Noshiko feels at rest now that her enemy has been put away .
In Season 4 , during the Dead Pool situation , in " Time of Death " , Noshiko shows Kira how to use her Thunder Foxfire to incapacitate Scott into a vegetative as part of a plan to catch the Benefactor .
She advises Scott he 'll experience dreams and whether they 're good or bad depends on him .
When Melissa snaps , asking why they 're letting their kids fight these fights , Noshiko advises her saying they 'd be telling them to run and hide for the rest of their lives otherwise .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " , Kira hallucinates Noshiko in La Iglesia when she and Scott are abducted by Kate Argent , comforting her after Scott tried to kill her as a Berserker and teaching her how to trigger a Kitsune 's healing , using pain from cutting herself using a piece of obsidian .
Back in Beacon Hills , Noshiko presents Kira with the obsidian piece shaped into a shuriken .
Kira figures out the shuriken represents her first Kitsune Tail with her mother smiling in pride .
In Season 5 , the Yukimuras return from a summer in New York and arrive back during a traffic jam on route 115 .
Noshiko and Ken tell Kira of a legend for a similar storm ; the Wild Hunt .
In " Strange Frequencies " , Noshiko engages Kira in a surprise spar , during which Noshiko speaks out in Japanese to Kira , saying " Show yourself , Kitsune ! "
Kira promptly flies into a rage , her Fox aura taking control of her .
Kira moves in to kill her mom , but Ken snaps Kira out of her rage using her shuriken Kitsune Tail .
Her worries confirmed , Noshiko informs a horrified Kira her Fox spirit is vying for control .
At home , Noshiko attempts to help her daughter regain control of her power using acupuncture .
Unfortunately , she and Ken later see that Kira has involuntarily escaped into the night , and then that Kira 's sword was found embedded in a deceased Chimera .
Noshiko , enlightened , helps a frustrated Kira to read Valack 's coded novel which uncovers suppressed memories .
The elder kitsune advises Kira she ca n't read the novel because the story is confusing her Fox spirit .
To solve this issue , Kira should read the book , but without following the story : read the book backwards .
Kira succeeds , remembering the Dread Doctors experimented on her the night of the traffic jam .
Kira and Noshiko leave Beacon Hills for answers so to tame her daughter 's Fox spirit .
In Season 5B , " Codominance " Noshiko and Kira are in Shiprock , New Mexico .
They track down a trio of skinwalkers .
Noshiko tells Kira they may have a solution for taming her Fox spirit if she passes their test , but the alternative would be Kira staying with them and become a skinwalker herself .
Kira is appalled at her mother for even considering the option .
Noshiko placates her daughter , saying if the Fox becomes too powerful it will consume Kira and there 'll be nothing of her left , but if she becomes a skinwalker her daughter would be kept alive .
Kira despondently asks her mom would she really leave her there .
Noshiko is conflicted after this .
After Kira destroys the Oni manifestation as the test , but the shifters declare Kira must stay with them , Noshiko changes her mind .
The elder kitsune firmly tells the skinwalkers if they want her daughter " they 'll have to go through ( her ) " .
Scott and Stiles arrive at that moment and help them escape .
Noshiko is surprised but smiles upon hearing Kira tell Scott she loves him .
In season 6A " Ghosted " , Noshiko was entrusted with Kira 's sword , but she agrees to allow Liam to use it .
However , this is not to be mistaken for Noshiko approving of Liam 's plan .
She tells Liam and Hayden that the Wild Hunt have been riding the storm and collecting souls since long before she was born .
Before she leaves , Noshiko lets Liam know that he 's responsible for whatever happens .
colspan=5Ken
Yukimura is Kira 's father , the husband of Noshiko , a talented weapons smith , and the new history teacher at Beacon Hills High School in Season 3B. Ken is a loving and endearing , if slightly oblivious , husband and father .
Despite his jolly disposition , Ken is level - headed , demonstrates bravery and resourcefulness whilst dealing with the supernatural , aware his wife and daughter are both Kitsunes , doing his best to support both of them in times of need .
At school in Season 3
" Anchors , Ken regularly unintentionally embarrasses Kira by trying to help her make friends .
He spills the fact that Kira has a crush on Scott , right in front of Scott himself .
He attempts to help , culminating in inviting Scott over for a sushi dinner with their family in " Galvanize " .
He and Noshiko tell Scott some of their family history .
In spite of his name , Ken is Korean , having married Noshiko in Japan , but taking her last name , as Japanese law requires that the couple must take the same last name to belong to the same Koseki ( family registry ) .
Ken affirms to Scott he was proud to join his wife 's family , given her family 's long and storied history which is famous in Japan .
In " Riddled " , Allison and Isaac come to him for help in translating a strange Japanese voicemails on Allison 's phone from a mysterious unknown caller .
He says the voice is instructing Japanese - Americans at an American internment camp named Camp Oak Creek during WWII .
He tells them the message is fake as he says no such camp existed in California .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , it is revealed Ken is supernaturally aware , and Noshiko is a kitsune .
During the bomb scare at the school , Ken meets with Noshiko discreetly .
Ken hands Noshiko her Kitsune Tails , concealed in a fake book .
He implores his wife to talk with Kira , after what happened at the hospital .
In " The Fox and the Wolf " , the Nogitsune , inhabiting Stiles ' body , enters Ken 's classroom , looking for Noshiko 's Tails .
The Dark kitsune infects Ken with one of its flies to possess him to have him reveal where the Tails are .
He is saved by Noshiko using a remedy brought to them by Kira and Scott , to expel the fly .
When Noshiko reveals her story concerning the Nogitsune , Ken admits he lied to Isaac and Allison about Camp Oak Creek existing because of the Argent family 's history of violence , unsure if he could trust Allison .
Ken reveals he 'd met Noshiko during his time in grad school when he 'd searched for the confirmation of Camp Oak Creek 's existence .
He convinces his wife to share details with Scott , not just with Kira , saying allies should be welcome in times of war .
Scott confronts Ken over his supporting Noshiko 's demand that Stiles be killed to destroy the Nogitsune .
Ken placates the young Alpha , saying that Stiles is gone and because of the bloodbath caused by the Nogitsune in 1943 , he says sometimes " history does repeat itself " and life can conspire against people .
In " Insatiable " , when Kira is stressing about recent events and the secrets she 's learned , Ken comforts and advises his daughter , saying as a Kitsune , she has a lot to learn , specifically the game of Go in order to combat the Nogitsune , known as Baduk in his native Korea .
In the Season 3 finale , when Kira and Stiles take refuge at their home , Kira asks what their move is now that Nogitsune has split from Stiles ' body and has taken control of the Oni .
Ken says that at this point , to turn the game around against the Dark Kitsune , they need a divine move .
After the Nogitsune is imprisoned , Ken and Noshiko correspondingly put away the Go pieces , as " the game " has been won .
In Season 4 , Ken remains on the school staff as the History teacher .
In " I.E.D. " , Ken confronts Kira , asking her if there was something she wanted tell he and Noshiko about .
Kira promptly apologizes to him over not telling them about the Dead Pool and the assassins .
Ken dumbfounded says he was talking about her joining the lacrosse team .
He and Noshiko are let in on the situation when both Kira and Noshiko are revealed on the hit list .
In " Weaponized " , during another assassination attempt , Ken helps his daughter and the Pack locate a second entrance to the Hale Vault so they can hide when they lose control of their powers during the virus out break .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " , Ken has Kira 's obsidian piece which she used to trigger her healing at La Iglesia reshaped as a shuriken as it represents Kira 's first Kitsune Tail , similar to how Kaiken blades represented those of his wife .
In the Season 5 premiere , after a summer in New York Ken has forged Kira a new katana blade that can be fashioned as a belt .
He starts giving Malia driving lessons .
In " Strange Frequencies " Ken volunteers Kira to help him with school supplies on a Saturday , though it is a ruse by him and Noshiko to lure Kira into an elaborate Kitsune training session .
Kira 's Fox spirit takes control of her , and she moves in to kill Noshiko .
Ken snaps her out of her rage by embedding her shuriken Tail into his desk .
Noshiko attempts to assist Kira in bringing the sway of her power back to her human side , but she and Ken see their daughter has left into the night , going into a fugue state .
In " Ouroboros " , when Kira 's sword is found in the corpse of a Chimera girl and Kira is arrested , Ken confesses to the crime and that the sword is his to protect Kira .
Ken is let go when the corpse is stolen .
In Season 5 " The Sword and the Spirit " , as another option to tame the Fox , Ken confiscates Kira 's belt sword , reasoning that the sword works as a gateway to the Fox which is right now too dangerous .
Ken advises Kira to instead use her mind as a weapon , to " outfox the Fox " .
To this end , Ken dismantles the mystical sword .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , after her latest bout in losing control , Kira changes her mind , insisting she needs to help her friends .
Ken relents , telling Kira her sword was forged with a unique power , and will need a certain similar power to re - forge it , giving Kira the motive to go back to the skinwalkers .
colspan=5"The Nogitsune " ( 野狐 ) is a Void , or Dark , Kitsune , a 1000-year - old spirit .
The Nogitsune possessed Stiles Stilinski , causing a string of chaos throughout Beacon Hills .
He is a trickster that feeds on pain , tragedy , chaos and the like .
Stiles was vulnerable to Nogitsune 's control as the sacrificial ritual Stiles took , along with Scott and Allison , had left a door to his mind ajar .
This Void kitsune was the reason the demon entities known as the Oni were summoned to Beacon Hills by the 900-year - old Kitsune Noshiko Yukimura ; to search for the Nogitsune and kill him .
The Nogitsune first appears to Stiles in a mental apparition in " Riddled " .
Stiles is sleepwalking , but in reality Stiles does not know he is actually still asleep .
Stiles sees himself in a basement with the kanji " 己 " carved on a wall .
The Nogitsune appears as a bandaged humanoid wearing an over - worn leather bomb jacket .
The Void Kitsune haunts Stiles referring to himself ( along with Stiles ) as " we " .
The Nogitsune riddles Stiles with the question , " Everyone has it , but no one can lose it .
What is it ?
" Stiles eventually wakes up and the Nogitsune , inhabiting his mind , vanishes .
When Stiles loses consciousness during his MRI test for frontotemporal dementia , the same disease that killed his mother , the Nogitsune appears again in Stiles ' mental visions .
Stiles solves the riddle : a shadow .
The Nogitsune removes the bandages from his body revealing Stiles ' face : the Void kitsune has taken on Stiles ' form as his ' shadow ' .
He instantly takes control of Stiles ' body .
The Void Kitsune causes utter chaos , arranging for traps , attacks to happen which kill innocents including a sabotaged electrical cable at Beacon Hills Memorial hospital , which induces Isaac into a coma , a bomb scare at the high school but the real bomb going off at the Sheriff 's department .
The Nogitsune employed absolute trickery , taunting Stiles ' loved ones as his MRI test results displaying positive signs of the disease were fake , he was a master at Machiavellian schemes , at one point tricking Scott into thinking Stiles had broken free of his possession , enlisting Scott to siphon away the victim 's pain from the very traps he 'd set so he could absorb all the collected pain from Scott 's body to grow stronger and maneuvering Stiles ' friends to use as bodyguards from the Oni .
In the episode , " The Fox and the Wolf " , it is revealed Noshiko Yukimura had summoned the Nogitsune in the first place back in 1943 .
Noshiko had wanted him to possess her to seek vengeance upon the corrupt army medics that had caused a manslaughter at Camp Oak Creek , by selling medical supplies for her fellow interns on the black market and the death of her lover Corporal Rhys .
She wanted her pain and tragic experience to imbue the Void Kitsune spirit with power .
Only the trickster , once it was unleashed from Noshiko 's prayers to her ancestors , he instead possessed the bandaged corpse of Rhys because a Kitsune can not be controlled .
The Nogitsune had unleashed his horror causing a bloodbath at the Eichen House institution where the interns had been relocated which Noshiko had never intended to happen .
She eventually cornered him and with some help from her werewolf friend , Satomi , slew the Nogitsune .
But because the Void Kitsune could not be killed , his very essence , embodied in the form of a fly , left Rhys ' corpse , was captured by Noshiko and buried beneath the magical tree , the Nemeton , just outside Beacon Hills .
He laid there dormant for the next seventy years , but the sacrifice undertaken by Stiles , Scott and Allison had released him from his prison .
The Nogitsune corners Noshiko Yukimura in the basement of Eichen House in " De - Void " where he steals Noshiko 's last Kitsune Tail from her , her last remaining kaiken and cuts open Stiles ' stomach which releases a stream of flies from Stiles ' body .
These flies infect and possess Derek , Isaac and the twins causing them to go feral , endangering their lives and others .
The Void Kitsune is eventually subdued with Deaton drugging Stiles ' body with Kanima venom .
As assessed by Peter Hale , Stiles is in a battle for control of his mind ; the Nogitsune has maintained his grip on Stiles body by playing an endless game of Go with Stiles as Rhys ' corpse atop the Nemeton within Stiles ' subconscious .
Scott uses an Alpha 's ability to meld Stiles ' mind with his and Lydia 's to free Stiles from the Dark influence .
Scott uses an Alpha 's roar while present in Stiles ' head and Stiles tips over the Go board and breaks free of the Nogitsune .
This process splits Stiles from the Nogitsune , Stiles is free and the infected werewolves are cured of their possession .
But the Void Kitsune now exists in real time as a copy of Stiles ' shape and takes Lydia hostage .
The Nogitsune holds Lydia at the abandoned Camp Oak Creek .
He taunts her telling her that Stiles is dying and he is growing stronger .
Lydia senses the Void Kitsune 's impending death at the hands of the Oni , but he had kidnapped Lydia just for the very purpose of knowing in advance when the Oni would be close enough to him .
When the demons appear , he takes Noshiko 's last Tail and snaps it with the Oni so close to him that the control of the Oni is transferred from Noshiko to him .
The Nogitsune then unleashes the Oni upon the group , though he and his new minions retreat after one Oni is destroyed and another succeeds in killing Allison .
In the Season 3 finale episode " The Divine Move " , the Nogitsune , with the Oni still under his control , enters the final stages of his plan of destruction by unleashing the demons all over Beacon Hills ; with each person dying as a result of being cut by their blades .
Led by Scott , the entire group make one last stand against the Void Kitsune and his forces , intent on trapping him within the triskele urn that contained Talia Hale 's claws , as its wood was made from the Nemeton , the very power that kept him trapped before .
When Scott , Kira , Stiles , and Lydia face off against the Nogitsune at the school , the Dark Kitsune informs them that the only way to stop the chaos is for Scott to kill Stiles ( comparing the young Alpha and his best friend respectively to a kaishakunin and a samurai ) in a Seppuku ritual .
When Stiles feels he has no other choice , he grabs Kira 's dropped katana and starts to kill himself to end the strife , but then figures out that everything that is happening around him and his friends is an illusion , which they break .
The Nogitsune , angered that his " game " has been ruined by the destruction of the Oni and by Stiles ' divine move , attempts to kill his host .
He advances on Stiles and Lydia raging , " I 'm a 1000 years old !
You ca n't kill me ! "
Stiles and Lydia tell the Kitsune they can change him instead by changing the body of his host 's copy .
Stiles tells his foe he " ca n't be a Fox and a Wolf
" moments before Scott Bites him , turning him and Kira stabs him with her sword .
The Nogitsune loses his power , his Stiles shape which collapses and dissipates like dry clay , reverts to the form of a fly , and Isaac seals him in the triskele urn , putting an end to his threat .
colspan=5Deputy Jordan Parrish is the new Deputy Sheriff to Stilinski at the sheriff 's station starting in Season 3B , an ally of Scott 's Pack and a supernatural creature , having been drawn to Beacon Hills by the Nemeton .
Parrish has a sense of duty , and a friendly , loyal nature , being resourceful , intelligent and well - adjusted .
Parrish is ex - military and served in Afghanistan , has a variety of skills including weaponry , electronics , hand - to - hand combat , and specifically explosives being a certified Hazardous Devices Technician ( HDT ) .
Parrish is revealed in Season 5 to be a hellhound .
Parrish makes his first appearance when Stiles goes missing in " Riddled " .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Parrish operated on a suspected bomb disguised as a birthday present left on the school bus , to determine if it is a bomb .
He manages to distract the student Jared , the one holding the potential explosive while he was opening it by chatting with Jared to take his mind off of the present situation .
In " Insatiable " , Stilinski tells Parrish he likes having him around and asks why he 'd transfer .
Parrish responds that he transferred to Beacon Hills because he felt drawn there , thinking he needed a change of space .
In the Season 3 finale , Parrish and Stilinski are attacked at the Sheriff 's station by the Oni , slashed by their blades , slowly killing them , but are cured when the Oni are destroyed .
In Season 4 episode " Muted " , Parrish investigates the Walcott family murder where he comes across Lydia , who is drawn to the site because of her banshee ability .
Parrish lets her know of her reputation of being present at scenes where dead bodies turn up .
He unwittingly asks her if she 's psychic .
Lydia scoffs at Parrish asking if he believes in things like that .
Parrish replies he keeps an open mind .
In " The Benefactor " Parrish , using his military background , helps Stilinski and Derek in analyzing the Mute 's motorized keypad , uncovering the fact that the Mute is an assassin and disarming the claymore mine planted at the school .
In " I.E.D. " Parrish brings Meredith to the sheriff 's station and later helps her recite numbers which are a clue to the second third of the Dead Pool .
Lydia later sees his name on the list .
She and Stiles show him the Dead Pool in " Orphaned " .
He asks them why would he be on the list which they deflect for the time being .
In " Perishable " , an assassination is attempted on Parrish .
The culprit is his fellow deputy Haige .
Haige soaks Parrish in gasoline and sets him on fire .
His car and clothes burn , but his confirmed supernatural ability manifests : he survives , totally unharmed with no residual burns at all .
Parrish walks into the station , and brutally attacks Haige , beating his would - be killer to a pulp .
After the entire ordeal , Parrish is brought to Derek 's loft by Lydia and meets with Scott and Derek .
The three subsequently let Parrish in on the supernatural .
He comes to grips with what they tell him , though they ca n't identify his species .
Attempting to help with the Dead Pool situation , Parrish helps Lydia and Stiles with the list of names Lorraine Martin left Lydia .
They were all supposedly suicides committed at Eichen House , but Parrish later notices each suicide was reported by the same person : Brunski .
Parrish arrives at the institution just in time to save Stiles and Lydia from being murdered by Brunski , shooting him dead .
Parrish , tracking Peter Hale in " A Promise to the Dead " , arrives in the sewers and attempts to free Argent from being pegged to the wall .
Parrish tells Argent he needs adrenaline , and he can get it using anger , and encourages the older man to use anger over what Allison would feel if Scott were in danger , and while pulling the rebar again , Parrish 's supernatural nature triggers again , his eyes glowing with fire .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " , Parrish accompanies Argent to Mexico to rescue the Pack from Kate .
At the conclusion of Season 4 , Lydia gives Parrish a copy of the bestiary and offers him her help to find out what his supernatural identity is .
During their investigation , Parrish tells her of a recurring dream he 's been having .
He 's carrying a corpse through the woods to the Nemeton , where he 's laying it down next to the tree stump .
Parrish leaves out the fact that there are hundreds more bodies littering the clearing .
In Season 5 , " Condition Terminal " , Parrish gives Lydia hand - to - hand lessons from his time in the Army at her request .
When the Chimeras ( genetic mutations of supernatural creatures produced by the Dread Doctors ) appear , and as they 're killed off , Parrish unconsciously goes into trances , his supernatural nature activating , where he steals the corpses and places them at the Nemeton , the scene in his dreams playing out .
In one of his trances , Parrish flips over Stiles ' jeep , and attacks fellow deputies guarding one of the corpses .
Parrish 's supernatural side also displays a telepathic connection with Lydia 's banshee spirit .
In " Lies of Omission " , Parrish succeeds in consciously activating his powers by Lydia 's intervention .
Once he 's told of his actions , he 's horrified and tells Lydia the rest of the dream .
To protect everyone around him , Parrish has himself incarcerated in a jail cell , telling Stilinski he 's dangerous .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Parrish 's powers activate again and he easily escapes the cell to collect the remaining corpses .
Lydia simultaneously uncovers his nature : a hellhound .
In Season 5B , a newly enlightened Stilinski keeps Parrish on as a deputy , but as the Beast of Gévaudan is resurrected and brings a bloodbath to the town , Parrish grows increasingly concerned over the number of bodies piling up .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Parrish is visited by Argent and Gerard .
Parrish tells them part of his time serving in Afghanistan .
He was part of an EOD team removing improvised explosive devices .
One bomb he was assigned went off on him close range :
Parrish had walked away alive and unscathed .
The Argents list all his supernatural activity and test his imperviousness to fire .
They confirm , and reveal to Parrish his hellhound status .
Parrish participates in the plan to break Lydia out of Eichen House .
As the hellhound , his fire ability incinerates the mountain ash barrier allowing all of Scott 's Pack to reach Lydia and shields them from her deadly amplified Scream .
Scott 's Pack discover that Parrish , as the hellhound during further fugue states , hunts and takes on the Beast during its killing spree .
In " A Credible Threat " , in an attempt to have Parrish understand his nature , to have a fighting chance against the Beast , Argent and Gerard use a cooling machine on Parrish to bring the hellhound to the surface .
The Guardian of the supernatural awakens and communicates with Lydia : Parrish himself is an avatar for the hellhound to function , who was born by the Nemeton 's power around the same time Scott , Stiles and Allison committed their sacrifice .
Jordan Parrish himself had actually died when the IED back in Afghanistan exploded on him , but the hellhound took over , allowing him to live on .
Jordan resurfaces , terrified , saying he has to leave Beacon Hills .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Parrish attempts to swiftly leave , but Lydia and the Sheriff intercept and attempt to dissuade him .
Lydia informs Parrish she 's been predicting death longer than him , that the premonitions do n't always come true .
She further urges him to consider what if the bodies he 's seen in his dream are due to him not being there to protect them .
Stilinski hands him his badge back .
Discouraged from leaving , Lydia then takes Parrish to the Nemeton , the force that drew him to Beacon Hills .
Parrish touches the tree stump .
He attempts to , and eventually succeeds in consciously activating his abilities .
He rushes to aid Scott 's Pack and the Argents against the Beast with a renewed sense of confidence and determination .
In " Apotheosis " , Argent repays Parrish for saving his life from before by telling him the Beast is n't unstoppable that the prediction seen by whoever painted the fresco is taking place .
Parrish takes up the fight with the Beast at spear - point .
Once Lydia succeeds in freeing Mason from Sebastien 's essence , Parrish restrains and holds down the Beast 's shadow allowing Scott to finish off the Beast once and for all .
In season 6A " Superposition " , Parrish is approached by Corey and Mason who are under the impression that someone is missing but Parrish disagrees .
Mason asks Parrish if his hellhound intuition is telling him that something may be off with the supernatural .
Parrish replies that he senses death , not kidnappings .
In " Sundowning " , Parrish enters Scott 's house with his gun drawn , demanding that the Ghost Rider stop when it refuses to comply .
He fires several shots in its back , to no effect .
In " Relics " , Mason believes Parrish could be the key to stopping the Ghost Riders .
When he 's confronted by a Ghost Rider , Parrish goes into hellhound mode , his eyes glowing a fiery orange as the flames consume his body .
The Ghost Rider fires a shot at him as he approaches , causing Parrish 's flames to turn green as they burn out .
In " Heartless " , Parrish agrees to help the Pack communicate with a Ghost Rider known as the Outlaw .
Plans change as the Outlaw forces Parrish to shift into his hellhound form .
Attempting to burn the mountain ash barrier as he does so , but he is stopped by Scott and Liam .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Parrish is found to be in an unresponsive state inside the cooling chamber in the bunker .
Garrett Douglas uses some kind of command to awaken the hellhound , however , Parrish 's eyes glow green instead of the fiery orange .
At Garrett 's request , he opens up the rift .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Parrish is brought back to his senses by Scott , Stiles and Liam
and he then reveals that while the train can not be stopped , it can be diverted .
After the Ghost Riders leave with Garrett , Parrish is back at the station with Sheriff Stilinski and the other deputies .
A hellhound , Parrish is amongst the more powerful creatures to appear in the series .
His natural power , pyrokinesis aside , his super - strength , speed and healing factor are unequaled , and is almost nigh invulnerable .
When his hellhound abilities manifest , Parrish is engulfed in a nimbus of flames , embodies fire himself and his eyes also glow with fire .
Parrish is a Guardian of the supernatural , who swiftly and steadfastly protects the supernatural world from discovery and disaster .
The hellhound spirit within Parrish is immortal and has been named throughout mythology many times : Cerberus , Garmr and the Black Shuck .
colspan=5Meredith Walker is a banshee first appearing in Season 3 and a long term patient at Eichen House .
Meredith is eccentric , shy , mentally and emotionally fragile .
She has no living family , and her banshee symptoms most lead her to being institutionalized at the hospital .
Nonetheless , Meredith display strong resolve and conviction , and is revealed to be the Benefactor during Season 4 .
After meeting Lydia , she offers the fellow banshee help in understanding her banshee talents .
Meredith first appears in Season 3 episode " Echo House " , when Stiles is checked in at the institution .
Stiles comes up behind her when Meredith is concernedly talking into a disconnected , dead phone saying she should " tell them " and that " one of them is standing right behind ( her ) " , which Stiles overhears .
In " Insatiable " , the Pack deduce Meredith is another banshee by comparing her symptoms to Lydia 's .
Meredith escapes and breaks into the school but is saved by the Pack before she is attacked and returned to the hospital by Brunski .
Scott , Stiles and Isaac take her to Scott 's house .
They 're hoping she can help them find Lydia .
Meredith remembers Lydia as " the red - haired girl " .
Meredith recalls being able to communicate with a kidnapped Lydia over an immense distance .
Meredith had received a message that Lydia does not want them to look for her .
She listens to a phone , and says " Coup de Foudre " .
Scott translates her message as French for " Love at first sight " , the phrase Noshiko Yukimura had taught her lover Corporal Rhys at Camp Oak Creek in 1943 : Lydia is at Camp Oak Creek .
Meredith is then presumably returned to Eichen House .
In Season 4 , Lydia and Malia decide they need help from Meredith in " I.E.D. " to decode the rest of the Dead Pool .
Meredith heads to the high school , but is brought to the sheriff 's station by Parrish , saying she 's looking for Lydia .
Lydia and Malia arrive and they ask her about what she knows .
Meredith is cryptic as always saying Lydia ' called her ' .
Parrish offers input that perhaps what she needs to tell Lydia may be a number to call .
Meredith affirms this reciting the number 2 - 4 - 3 - 6 .
Lydia says a phone number is ten digits , but Meredith repeatedly insists that 's the number .
Malia and Lydia later figure out the number sequence spells out AIDEN on a telephone pad , cracking the second third .
In " Orphaned " , Lydia and Stiles pay Meredith a visit at Eichen House where they implore her to reveal the final cipher key .
Meredith is shaking in fear saying things have changed , though she telling Lydia she wanted to help .
Lydia asks Meredith why not help now .
Meredith says ' the Benefactor ' does n't want her to tell them .
They ask Meredith for his name , but eventually she lets out a banshee scream giving Lydia a bleeding ear .
When Lydia decodes the final third of the Dead Pool , she sees Meredith 's name and Lydia immediately has Parrish check on her .
Unfortunately , Meredith had apparently committed suicide by hanging herself out of fear for her life .
Her corpse is found by Brunski and Lydia and Stiles mourn her death .
In " Weaponized " , Lydia claims a box of Meredith 's possessions and finds a photo of Meredith standing in the study of the Martins ' lakehouse .
Lydia learns about the history of her grandmother Lorraine Martin and that Meredith was one of her subjects brought in for her study of parapsychology ; Meredith had put on headphones for a test .
Her ears bled out causing her to be hospitalized for a year .
In " Perishable " , after Parrish saves Stiles and Lydia by killing Brunski , Meredith reveals herself to be alive .
She had been using Brunski because she knew of his being a serial killer , and says , " ( Brunski ) was n't on ( her ) list . "
: Meredith is revealed to have been the Benefactor all along .
In " Monstrous " , Meredith is brought to the sheriff 's station .
Lydia implores Meredith
why would she launch the Dead Pool .
Meredith tells Lydia she only wanted " to help " and that she 'll only talk to Peter Hale .
When Peter arrives , he repeatedly tells Meredith they have never met .
Meredith says Peter does n't remember her .
Peter reacts to this , and performs a mind meld .
Through Meredith 's memories , it is revealed during her hospitalization from Lorraine 's experiment , Meredith was placed next to Peter when he was comatose from the Hale Fire for months .
The whole time , a catatonic Meredith could involuntarily hear Peter 's thoughts telepathically : Peter was ranting due his trauma from the fire , raving over how he 'd predicted the Argents would target his family .
Meredith was terrorized by Peter 's cognizant revenge - fueled thoughts that he would remake the supernatural population of Beacon Hills in his image instead of his sister Talia 's .
To do this , Peter said first he 'd hire assassins to purge Beacon Hills of all supernaturals , placing them all on a hit list , " The Dead Pool " .
Peter was originally the one who planned the Dead Pool , though he did n't remember ; Meredith , using Lorraine 's computer code to comprise the Dead Pool , put the list online .
After Peter leaves , Lydia talks with Meredith afterward , showing her compassion for " someone who 'd put their name on a hit list .
"
Meredith justifies Peter 's ' plan ' in that the supernatural are monsters , even the banshees .
She believed too many people had died at their hands , and that she decided " to help " : she enacted the plan in response to her Hearing Lydia Scream as Allison died .
Lydia tells Meredith " not all monsters do monstrous things " , like Scott .
Meredith touches Lydia 's face and realizes , the latter is also an example .
The vulnerable banshee tears up , showing remorse , lamenting " What have I done ? "
In Season 5 , " Damnatio Memoriae " , Meredith communicates with a catatonic Lydia during the latter 's stint at Eichen House .
Meredith tells Lydia she has to wake up if she wants to save her friends .
Meredith reminds Lydia that she learned how to fight and promises to teach her the rest , how to use her voice as a weapon .
Within their telepathic communication , Meredith instructs Lydia to use her hands to guide her voice , to push it towards the target .
She traps Lydia in a cell to push her to break the glass .
Lydia asks Meredith to tell her how she learned .
Meredith immediately says Lydia has to find her own way .
She caves in to Lydia 's questions saying her way got people hurt .
Meredith was at school in chemistry class .
She was hearing people dying " everywhere " , she started slamming the desk so hard
and then Meredith Screamed .
All the windows shattered , the glass reverberated throughout the classroom , embedding into people 's arms , faces and their ears bled .
The event was blamed on an explosion caused by chemicals , but people knew it was her .
Meredith implores Lydia find " her own way " because her voice is like a bomb , she is too dangerous ; Lydia has to make hers " a bullet . "
When Malia is close to being killed by the Desert Wolf , Meredith yells at Lydia to break the glass , successfully coaxing Lydia to find her voice and snap her out of her catatonia .
When Scott 's Pack breaks into Eichen House to rescue Lydia , Scott finds Meredith also catatonic .
She is competent enough to direct Scott to communicate with her via a mind meld .
She tells him that to penetrate the mountain ash barrier , to reach Lydia , they need the hellhound ( Parrish ) .
colspan=5L. Brunski was the head orderly at the mental institution Eichen House .
Brunski is sadistic and snarky , taking great pleasure in harassing or manhandling his charges or other people given the chance .
Brunski is first seen in " Echo House " .
When Stiles steals his key to the institution 's basement , Brunski catches Stiles and has Stiles locked up in a separate quiet room and sedates him with Haldol with a comment , " I always love the sarcastic ones .
" Brunski is seen in " Insatiable " , when Meredith Walker escapes Eichen House to find the gang at Beacon Hills High School .
Brunski and two orderlies come to the school to return Meredith to the institution , where he talks down to Coach Finstock .
Apparently , when Brunski was in high school , Finstock was classmates with him and he frequently bullied Bobby .
He mocks Finstock over his teaching policy and Finstock is cowed by him .
When Meredith is found in the music room , Brunski stalks her with a taser , but before he strikes , Finstock grabs the taser and shocks Brunski before he attacks the banshee , saying the school has a strict policy against bullying , and again when Brunski curses him .
In Season 4 , Brunski appears in " Orphaned " where he hassles Parrish , Stiles and Lydia when they come visit Meredith .
Brunski demands they come back with a court order .
He then talks down to Stiles letting him know of Stilinski 's overdue payment for Stiles ' bills .
Parrish has Brunski back off saying he owes them a favor for the Canaan PD talking him out of a DUI charge .
Brunski finds Meredith 's corpse after she 'd hung herself .
In " Perishable " , Lydia and Stiles bribe Brunski with $ 500 for a look at Eichen House records concerning a list of people Lydia had been left by her grandmother , Lorraine Martin , who 'd all committed suicide at the institution over the past decade .
Brunski lets them into the file room , but just as Stiles realizes Lydia wrote down his name on the list , Brunski sneaks up behind them and tasers both of them .
He binds them with restraints , and Lydia realizes the suicides committed were actually murders committed by him , including Lorraine and Meredith , and conclude that Brunski is ' the Benefactor ' .
Brunski bawls that some people are just beyond helping , and that he helps them , not by treatment , but by " releasing them " .
Brunski then plays a tape for Lydia - a recording of when he murdered Lorraine , emotionally torturing Lydia .
Stiles bawls at him to turn off the tape , but he punches Stiles quiet .
Lydia hears her grandmother 's dying words , pleading with Brunski not to hurt " Ariel " , Lorraine 's nickname for her granddaughter .
Brunski takes a syringe , a lethal injection and just as he stabs the syringe into Lydia 's neck , Parrish appears .
He orders Brunski to withdraw from Lydia 's neck .
Brunski scoffs , telling Parrish " Young Deputy " that he 's young and bets he has n't ever fired a gun , but Parrish proves him wrong , shooting him .
As Brunski dies , he laughs telling them he was n't controlling Meredith or anyone , he was n't ' the Benefactor ' , he was being controlled by her .
The true perpetuator behind the Dead Pool , the assassinations then appears , a very - much - alive Meredith Walker .
Brunski was realized to have been blackmailed by Meredith in helping her put together the Dead Pool plan because of his being a serial killer .
Brunski was the culprit who 'd broken into the Hale Vault , stolen the Hales ' bearer bonds , converted them into cash , issued the tapes to the assassins and sent out the payments electronically under Meredith 's instructions .
colspan=5Satomi Ito is an Alpha werewolf , the leader of a Pack , over 100 years old , an old friend of Noshiko Yukimura and Talia Hale , and was Bitten .
In 1943 , during WWII , Satomi was amongst Japanese - Americans , along with Noshiko Yukimura , interned at Camp Oak Creek .
Satomi could be seen regularly playing the game of Go .
When it was uncovered that the corrupt army medics were selling medical products on the black market during an epidemic of influenza , a riot between the interns and the officers broke out .
Satomi was decked by a soldier during the chaos , but Noshiko saw her injury heal and her eyes glow revealing Satomi 's status as a Bitten werewolf .
She 'd had " monthly migraines " and the game Go worked as an anchor for her humanity .
Unfortunately , Satomi in her vicious , rabid state threw a Molotov cocktail that had been brewed for the riot and she set Corporal Rhys aflame .
When the interns were relocated to Eichen House institution and the Nogitsune had brought his chaos to the institution resulting in a bloodbath , Satomi had survived and helped Noshiko defeat the Dark Kitsune .
In " Orphaned " , it is revealed that over the years Satomi had become an Alpha of a Pack : werewolves targeted by assassins in Beacon Hills , DeMarco Montana , Carrie Hudson and Brett Talbot were all Betas of this Pack .
Satomi had risen to her status by adhering to the percepts of Buddhism ; several of her Pack members utilized the mantra " Three things that can not be long hidden .
The sun , the moon , the truth " as an anchor for their animal nature .
Derek and Malia track down Satomi 's Pack to warn them of the Dead Pool , but they find members of the Pack slaughtered .
Satomi appears in " Weaponized " arriving at Deaton 's animal clinic with Reed , a Pack member of hers who was sick from what killed the others , eventually dying , to Satomi 's sorrow .
Satomi 's Pack were all infected with a virus , a variant of Canine distemper designed for werewolves .
Satomi meets Derek , realizing how much he reminds her of Talia .
Satomi knew Talia , she 'd occasionally visited her before the fire .
Derek tells her he remembers because of the tea they drank during such occasions which he found smelled awful .
Deaton figures out Satomi was n't infected with the virus because she has been inoculated from the tea recipe , from Reishi mushrooms , a powerful anecdotal .
An assassin shows up and opens fire on Derek and Satomi , but Satomi dodges the bullets and kills the assassin .
In " Monstrous " , hunters - turned - assassins have swarmed into the area , and Satomi 's Pack now totals only eight members , herself included .
She and her Pack regroup at the Animal Clinic after Kira saves Brett and Lori , the youngest Betas from the hunters .
Kira introduces Satomi to Scott .
They bring the Pack to the abandoned Argent Arms International warehouse and rally Argent , Braeden and Derek .
Satomi is wary of Argent at first , but Scott tells Satomi he trusts Argent .
Argent remembers Satomi from a meeting in the past , he asks her what her mantra means to her .
She responds it means ' the truth ' that werewolves are inherently violent creatures can not be denied in reflection of her loss of control that led to Rhys ' death seventy years previously .
The assassins arrive , and the group is able to fight them off , until the Dead Pool is shut down , terminating all the Benefactor 's contracts with no casualties .
Satomi is well known amongst werewolf Packs because she is one of the oldest wolves alive ; she is physically identical to how she appeared back in 1943 indicating a trait of long life .
Satomi is a wise , well - adjusted and progressive leader and guardian of her Pack , having taught her members control as well as talents to avoid detection .
She is a philosophical and disciplined individual having mastered her inherent rage as a Bitten werewolf , admits her kind are violent creatures but she will kill if it means self - defense or protecting her Pack from harm .
Satomi has immense supernatural agility , able to evade gunfire at point - blank rage and wields a suntetsu as a weapon .
colspan=5Araya Calavera is the leader of the Calaveras , a Hispanic werewolf - hunter family based out of Mexico .
In Season 3B , Derek and Peter Hale had come to South America , confronting her clan to retrieve the claws of Talia Hale .
Unfortunately the hunters captured the two werewolves .
Araya calls off her subordinates when they are torturing the two captive wolves and interrogates them herself .
She demands to know the location of " La - Loba " .
When Peter remains silent , she takes a blade - and lacerates Peter 's right ring finger leaving him screaming in agony .
Araya and her subordinates leave them be , but tells them she was only going to ask him " nine more times " .
Araya arrives in Beacon Hills at the Sheriff 's station in " Echo House " , pretending to be Argent 's lawyer when he is arrested for suspicion of murder .
Araya states her disappointment with his family 's retirement from hunting .
She supplements her opinion with her belief that Victoria honored them by committing suicide upon being Bitten .
Argent defies , telling Araya Victoria would have honored Allison by staying alive .
Araya leaves without revealing what she is up to .
In " The Divine Move " , it is discovered the " La - Loba " that Araya is hunting is actually Kate Argent .
In the Season 4 premiere , " The Dark Moon " , Scott and his Pack infiltrate Araya 's base under the belief she had taken Derek , however , the hunters manage to outmaneuver them and take them hostage , revealing they do n't have Derek .
Araya has Scott and Lydia wired for torture by electricity .
She has Kira turn the dial on Scott by threatening to electrocute Lydia as a test for what kind of Alpha Scott is .
During the torture , Araya viciously claims Scott already knows who could have Derek , someone who was a shapeshifter , but not turned by a Bite , who had a vendetta against him .
Scott figures out that Kate is whom Araya is referring to .
Araya spitefully tells Scott he would n't have believed her if she 'd just told him .
Araya has been hunting Kate ever since Kate broke the Hunter 's Code by refusing to commit suicide upon her transformation .
Having confirmed Scott is a True Alpha by Scott overcoming the electricity by sheer determination , Araya intends to use Scott ' Pack to find Kate for her as the men she 's sent have wound up dead .
Araya releases Scott 's Pack with a not - so - veiled threat , if Scott Bites an innocent , she 'll come knocking at his door .
In " I.E.D. " , Araya and Severo arrive in Beacon Hills to enlist Argent in hunting Kate .
Argent and Severo hold each other at gunpoint , at which she amusedly calls as " a standoff " .
Araya recites the Hunter 's Code and plays on Argent 's grief over Victoria and Allison 's deaths family to have him change his ways and return to being a hunter .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " , Araya and her men arrive at La Iglesia and face off against Kate and her Berserker .
After Kate kills one hunter , Kate tells Araya
she 's next .
Araya faces the werejaguar , telling " La - Loba " she 'll see how the Calaveras die .
Instead , Araya watches on as Kate is defeated , severely mauled by Derek in a full - wolf - shapeshift .
When Kate escapes , Araya continues her hunt of Kate with Argent in tow as he agreed to , but on the condition she has to leave Scott and his Pack be .
Araya is most often portrayed as easily amused with a wide smile on her face , while simultaneously displaying her ruthlessness and cruelty towards supernaturals , particularly werewolves , typical of a hunter , or hunters who violate the Code , even people who cross her as she murdered one of her own men for " robbing " her .
While zealous and amoral as a hunter , Araya is ultimately fair as she follows the Hunter 's Code not to kill were - creatures unless there 's proof they 've harmed innocents .
Her base of operations is a music / dance club as she has an adoration for " the music of youth " .
colspan=5 " The Mute " was an assassin .
" The Mute " is of an unnamed species : he has no mouth , from which he derives his codename .
He communicated via a portable keyboard strapped to his glove with an output speaker which transmitted a computerized voice , and fed on a protein liquid that he injected into his neck through a test tube .
He receives his assigned targets from the criminal known as " the Benefactor " to kill off the supernatural people of Beacon Hills by email .
" The Mute " was hinted to have been military - trained , utilizing military grade weapons - tomahawks , his specialty , and a claymore mine .
He takes pleasure in his kills , in which he taunts both Sean and Peter when he targets them .
" The Mute " is first seen in " Muted " murdering the Walcotts , a family of wendigos in their home , but is unable to kill the youngest , Sean , who manages to escape to the Beacon Hills Hospital .
When Sean gives into his cannibalistic urges and takes Liam to the roof with Scott in pursuit , " the Mute " shows up on the roof , killing Sean by axing him in the back .
He leaves Scott and Liam be after motioning for Scott to remain quiet with the shushing motion , the finger over his face .
In " The Benefactor " , " the Mute " attacks Peter Hale in Derek 's loft with his tomahawk laced with wolfsbane , intending to assassinate Derek .
Peter is able to fight him off and take his keyboard .
Deputy Parrish is able to crack the code in the keyboard to track the IP address and determines it to be connected to the school 's wifi network .
At the school , " the Mute " sets a trap for Derek intending to kill him off with a claymore mine which he and Stilinski are able to see first . '
The Mute ' then attacks but Derek and Sheriff Stilinski are able to overpower him .
Stilinski attempts to arrest him , but Peter appears and attacks the assassin , clawing him , killing him out of revenge .
When Scott had faked his death in " Time of Death " , " the Mute " appeared during his dream vision .
Scott was subconsciously debating whether or not to kill his opponents to stop them . "
The Mute " would appear representing his killer side , visually appearing to Scott while attacking or killing Liam .
" The Mute " speaks to Scott in his computerized voice saying Scott is " evolving " into supposedly a killer as Scott had grown more fangs , indicating a growth in his transformation .
The third time ' the Mute ' appears , the assassin directs Scott how to kill with his tomahawk , saying " Let me help you .
Let me show you " , enticing Scott to kill Liam , his Beta .
colspan=5Mason Hewitt is a freshman attending Beacon Hills High School in Season 4 .
Mason is openly gay , and has a friendly , optimistic nature , being bright , compassionate and mature for his age .
Mason is Liam 's best friend and an ally of Scott 's Pack .
Mason first appears in " The Benefactor " where he notices Liam 's peculiar behavior upon Liam 's transformation into a werewolf .
Mason is initially kept in the dark that Liam is now supernatural , but he tries to convince his best friend to tell him his secret .
In Season 5 , Mason is let into Scott 's Pack 's supernatural circle and becomes the boyfriend for the Chimera Corey .
In " I.E.D. " , Mason tries to calm Liam down when the latter finds out the pre - season lacrosse scrimmage is against his old school , Devonfort Prep and when Liam later confronts his old rival , Brett Talbot .
At the game , Mason tells Liam he can take Brett on , while at the same time being in denial that he thinks Brett is hot , but they both laugh it off .
In " Perishable " , Mason shows concern over Liam 's strange behavior when he 's traumatized from fighting a Berserker and his paranoia because of the Dead Pool situation .
At the annual lacrosse bonfire , he tells Liam not only does he want Liam to tell him what 's going on with him , he wants to help him .
When Liam , Malia and Scott are disabled , Scott tells Mason their well - being is not the drinks , it is because of the music .
A team of assassins had wired a sonic weapon into the music , that was weakening the three shapeshifters because of their sense of hearing .
When Mason sees the three being taken away by the assassins , posing as security guards , Mason seemingly concerned about them , pulls the plug to the DJ 's booth , shutting off the music .
His actions unknowingly saves Scott , Liam and Malia from being burned to death .
Mason , though thoroughly confused by what 's going on with Liam , he nevertheless tries to convince Liam to talk to him whenever he 's ready to talk in the penultimate episode of Season 4 , " A Promise to the Dead " .
In " Smoke And Mirrors " , Mason is asked by Liam to check on Lydia when she 's missing , but he 's attacked by one of Kate Argent 's Berserkers , along with Lydia .
He 's confused by Lydia referring to the creature as ' not human ' , that if they do n't stop it Scott , Liam and her friends will die , and watches as the Sheriff blows up the Berserker with a landmine .
In Season 5 , " Parasomnia " during sophomore year Mason , intrigued , has been obsessing over what he saw , having purchased a rare , expensive book over the summer .
He shows Liam an image of a Berserker , but is annoyed when Liam brushes it off .
Mason is silently amused when Liam is pranked by his middle school enemy Hayden .
Liam meets Mason at the school late at night to talk but Mason notices a black wolf ( a fully transformed Theo Raeken ) which chases them into the school .
Mason witnesses
Liam scare the animal away with his werewolf roar and says with excitement " You 're a werewolf ! "
In " Dreamcatcher " , Mason is boisterous , beside himself with awe , as he 's introduced to the Pack and their different supernatural species when they all meet to discuss Tracy Stewart .
However , upon learning of the danger present , he then takes the situation seriously .
He later learns Brett is also a werewolf , striking up a friendship with him .
Mason goes along with Liam and Brett into the woods to find the sink - hole where Liam found Tracy 's necklace .
Mason says it is not a sinkhole , because it had to have been dug out from below meaning Tracy and the other Chimeras were buried alive , discovering the Dread Doctors ' incubation process .
In " Condition Terminal " , Mason talks Liam into being his wingman at the club Sinema where they run into Brett .
Mason catches the eye of a boy named Lucas , and makes out with him , but he and Brett notice he 's another Chimera , a scorpion - man .
Mason tends to Brett as he 's slashed by the Chimera , witnesses Scott , Kira and Liam bring him down , and the Dread Doctors appearing , killing Lucas .
In " Required Reading " , Kira shows Mason the novel " The Dread Doctors " , the function of which is to trigger wiped memories .
Mason surmises the Fox in her ca n't read it , because the novel is one big language trick which according to his research kitsune have difficulty with .
Mason later talks with Brett where he 's given signs to look for in identifying supernaturals .
Mason tells Brett of Liam 's history with Hayden and their middle - school spat .
In " Strange Frequencies " , Mason runs into Corey , Lucas ' boyfriend , and he gives his apologies to Corey over Lucas ' disappearance .
He catches the title of the book Corey was reading , " Miraculous Healing " .
Mason then sees Corey later at the club Sinema , where he sees the latter 's necrotized arm has fully healed , realising Corey is another Chimera .
Mason informs Scott about Corey while also snapping the True Alpha out of an illusion concocted by the Dread Doctors , but both learn Liam and Hayden have been taken .
In " Ouroboros " , Mason has brought Corey to the Pack and enlightened him .
When Scott determines their location , Mason volunteers to go along with Scott and Malia to help find Hayden and Liam , saying Liam 's his best friend .
Mason gives Scott a hand - up when the latter has a meltdown over the abduction from the failed plan .
In " Lies of Omission " , Mason keeps an eye on and bonds with Corey when they test his new Chimera abilities , but is distressed after the latter suffers a hemorrhage , and is taken to the hospital .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Mason is at the hospital , attempting to help Melissa treat a poisoned Hayden .
After being informed by Melissa that Hayden is on the verge of dying , Mason leaves to find and tell Liam .
Mason snaps Liam out of his supermoon - induced rage where Liam almost kills Scott , telling him Hayden died a few minutes ago .
In " The Last Chimera " , Mason tries his best keep Liam on his feet during his mulling over his misguided actions .
When they uncover evidence that Hayden may be alive , Mason figures out how to find the Nemeton : that Liam should look with his supernatural eyes .
They find the supernatural tree , just as Hayden later turns up alive with cops taking the remaining corpses .
In Season 5B , Mason and Liam
discuss Hayden as well as other Chimeras having been resurrected by Theo .
Mason concludes that Theo is building a Pack that 's loyal to him and that maybe coming back has darkened the Chimeras .
He 's surprised but lit up when Corey turns up alive also .
A mutual flirtation , then romantic interest starts up between him and Corey , despite his reservations with Corey now being a member of Theo 's Pack of Chimeras .
In " Codominance " , Mason tells Corey he does n't want to fall in with the bad guys .
Corey tells Mason there 's no concept of good or bad guys anymore what with the resurrected the Beast killing its way throughout Beacon Hills .
Nonetheless , the two boys share a kiss after Mason falls for Corey 's charms and the two boys continue their romance during the tension between the two Packs .
In " A Credible Threat " , Mason dissuades a paranoid Corey from leaving reasoning ordinary people like him need people with special abilities to look out for them , wanting Corey to survive with him .
Mason has an epiphany , deducing the Dread Doctors ' method for bringing out the Beast 's transformations is high - powered frequencies .
In " The Maid of Gévaudan " , Scott , Liam and Corey discover Mason is the host for the Beast of Gévaudan .
Corey , terrified , attempts to keep Mason safe , who freaks out and ca n't believe he is the host , saying he 's not even a genetic chimera .
Melissa however , discovers Mason was born with twin embolization syndrome , he 'd absorbed his unborn twin while in utero .
The Dread Doctors easily find Mason due to his frequency and abduct him .
They hook him up to the Nazi Alpha werewolf , " Der Soldat " .
Scott and Liam arrive but are helpless to remove the painful contraption from him .
Mason urges Liam to leave when the Dread Doctors appear to trap them .
Right then , the Dread Doctors ' conversion process to fully revive Sebastien Valet completes .
Mason is enveloped in the transformation of the Beast .
Once the Beast shapeshifts back , Sebastien Valet is in Mason 's place .
Though Mason is now wiped from existence , his very being still exists as spark of life and memories that Sebastien has himself .
Scott 's Pack intend to save Mason , by invoking a myth that to cure a shapeshifter , you call out their Christian name .
Lydia , using her banshee voice , Screams Mason 's name at the Beast intending to have Mason remember himself before they put Sebastien away .
It works and Mason is separated from the Beast 's essence , alive and well to an overjoyed Corey 's relief .
After the Beast is destroyed for good , an alive and well Mason moves on with his life including his romance with Corey .
In the season 6 premiere , Mason discovers unusual compass readings .
He and Liam investigate and find an abandoned house belonging to a missing couple .
Mason , Liam and Hayden investigate the smell of blood at the school and discover a man 's body in the boiler room .
In " Superposition " , Mason and Corey witness the Ghost Riders take a boy at the school library while camouflaged .
Mason explains that he ca n't stop thinking about Corey and his first encounter with the Ghost Riders .
He 's read everything there 's to know about The Wild Hunt , how they come by storm , collecting souls
but he does n't know why they were in the library .
In " Sundowning " , Mason comes up with a plan to keep Gwen safe by bringing her to Scott 's house and covering the doors with mountain ash .
When the Ghost Riders show up , he attempts to get her to safety by leaving out back but the Ghost Riders are there as well .
In " Relics " , Mason is tasked with finding a way to stop the Ghost Riders as he happens to be the one who knows the most about them .
He later realises that the reason the Ghost Riders left the party was because of Deputy Parrish .
In " Heartless " , Mason assists Scott and Corey in building a metal cage as part of a plan to catch a Ghost Rider .
He is still able to see Corey despite the latter being camouflaged .
Mason explains that there 's a refraction of light around Corey 's silhouette that he can always see .
After receiving word that Scott and Liam have been unable to get the captive Ghost Rider to talk , Mason realises that during the party , the Ghost Riders were actually trying to communicate with Parrish .
In " Blitzkrieg " , as Mason , Liam and Hayden prepare to warn the rest of the Pack of Garrett Douglas ' true identity , a Ghost Rider appears .
Mason is caught around his neck by the Ghost Rider 's whip .
It tugs until Mason disappears .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Mason and Hayden find Corey hooked up to electronics in the radio room of the train station .
Mason , along with Liam and Hayden unhook Corey once the train had been diverted .
After the Ghost Riders depart , Mason takes Corey to the hospital where Melissa treats him with the 9 herbs .
colspan=5Garrett was a freshman at Beacon Hills High School , Violet 's boyfriend and an assassin along with Violet called ' the Orphans ' .
Garrett was a sociopath , being calculating and arrogant .
He cared only about Violet , and the bounties from his kills .
His weapon was a hidden - bladed lacrosse stick .
Garrett is first seen in " Muted " during lacrosse practice and is put on the lacrosse team .
In " The Benefactor " he , Mason and Violet attend the party at Lydia 's lake house with the other freshmen .
Garret pays for the beer keg that was delivered to the party by the distributor named DeMarco Montana .
It 's revealed Garrett had ordered the beer keg to lure DeMarco , who was a werewolf , to the party , so Violet could kill him .
Both he and Violet are working for ' the Benefactor ' by assassinating supernaturals in Beacon Hills , as seen when he and Violet learn they 've received the money in their account for the assassination by a text sent by ' the Benefactor ' and they kiss .
Garrett and Violet assassinate another werewolf on the Dead Pool in " I.E.D. " , Carrie Hudson , with Garrett delivering the killing blow with his blade .
Garrett tries to talk Violet out of going after Scott reasoning that Scott came out on top when the Alpha Pack went after him .
He reasons their target , Beta werewolf Brett Talbot was worth a lot of money as well .
During the lacrosse game , Garrett wounds Brett with his weaponized lacrosse stick which was laced with yellow monkshood , immobilizing Brett .
Scott and his Pack catch onto Garrett .
Violet , instead of assassinating Brett , sets a trap for Scott which only ends with Scott overpowering Violet .
When Violet is taken into police custody in " Orphaned " , Garret goes into hiding .
Out in the Beacon Hills Preserve , Garrett kidnaps Liam , poisons him with wolfsbane and traps him in a well deep in the preserve .
He uses Liam as a bargaining chip to have Scott help him free Violet from the police , telling the Alpha that Liam will die if the wolfsbane reaches his heart .
Scott and Garret follow the federal transport vehicle holding Violet .
They come up to the overturned vehicle which had already been attacked by Kate and her Berserkers and Violet is taken .
Garrett takes out his bladed lacrosse stick , rips off the mesh net , and wields his weapon ready to take on the Berserker in his path .
He goads and dares the Berserker to bring it to him but the other demon sneaks up behind him , and runs Garrett through with a bone , killing him .
colspan=5Violet was a freshman at Beacon Hills High School and an assassin along with her boyfriend and partner Garrett , known as ' the Orphans ' , assassins for the Dead Pool .
Violet was impulsive , efficient , and greedy only caring about the payments for her jobs and Garrett , showing no remorse for her actions .
Violet 's weapon was a thermal cut wire that was disguised as a necklace to behead her victims .
Violet and Garrett both attend Lydia 's lake house party in the episode " The Benefactor " .
Violet is seen coming upon the werewolf DeMarco Montana .
She appears behind , strangles and beheads him with her necklace , her wire .
Sending a picture of her kill to ' the Benefactor ' , she returns to Garrett 's side afterwards who reveals that they 've been paid for the assassination .
They openly embrace and kiss .
In " I.E.D. " , Violet wants to start targeting people worth " the seven - figure - money " , specifically Scott as he has the biggest bounty on the Dead Pool .
Garret cautions her against going after him as Scott was left standing after the Alpha Pack went after him .
When their target , Brett Talbot , is immobilized with wolfsbane , Violet goes in for the kill , but when Scott shows up to save Brett , Violet decides to target the True Alpha anyway .
She wraps her wire around his neck , taking glee in having " got an Alpha " , but Scott overcomes the wire and knocks her unconscious .
Violet is then arrested in " Orphaned " by Stilinski , Parrish and Rafael McCall .
Violet plays innocent saying she 's just a student , but Rafael identifies she and Garrett as ' the Orphans ' from her weapon , the thermal cut wire which had reportedly been used in a dozen murders .
Violet is held in custody to be taken into a federal transport vehicle but smugly smiles at Scott , knowing Garrett is implementing a plan to free her using Scott by having Liam as leverage .
Before Garrett and Scott can move up to the vehicle , Kate Argent along with her Berserkers attacks the vehicle .
Violet is taken hostage by Kate to interrogate her for information on the Benefactor and holds her at the abandoned Argent Arms International warehouse , a building the Argents once used for their arms business .
Kate eventually kills Violet .
colspan=5 Brett Talbot is a born Beta werewolf of Satomi 's Pack and a lacrosse player at Liam 's old school , Devonford Prep .
Brett is Liam 's rival .
Brett is originally portrayed as abrasive and a jerk disliking Liam because of his violent behavior , but is later seen to be a friendly , loyal member in his Pack , and is protective of his younger sister Lori , and eventually becomes friends with Liam , Mason Hewitt and an ally of Scott 's Pack .
Brett is also bisexual .
Brett and Lori were adopted by Satomi after their birth parents were killed in a fire .
Brett first appears in " I.E.D. " , when his lacrosse team arrive at Beacon Hills High for the pre - season scrimmage .
Liam approaches Brett , attempting to show sportsmanship , but Brett laughs it off .
He threatens Liam he and his teammates are going to break him in half for what he did to their coach 's car .
During the game , Brett refuses to let Liam off for the car incident when Scott asks him to as Scott was attempting to keep Liam from losing control .
When Brett comes into a collision with Liam and Garrett , he is transported to the locker 's room , Stiles learns Brett is on the Dead Pool , worth $ 1 m and is a Beta werewolf .
Brett was n't initially identified as a werewolf because he was taught how to mask his scent .
He is attacked by the assassin Violet and is defenseless because the other assassin Garrett had poisoned him with a blade laced with yellow monkshood .
Brett is saved by Scott , and is taken to Deaton 's clinic for treatment by Stiles and Derek .
Brett chants the mantra , " The sun , the moon , the truth " .
This allows Deaton , Derek and Peter to figure out that Brett is from a Pack which has an affinity for Buddhism , and whose Alpha is Satomi Ito .
In " Monstrous " , Brett , along with Lori are seen being chased by assassins who are hunters .
Brett stands in front of Lori to protect her when hunters have laser sights on them , and arrows are subsequently fired at them .
Kira saves their lives slicing the arrows in mid - air .
At the Animal Clinic , Brett and Lori have regrouped with Satomi and the remaining Pack members who are all exhausted and battle - weary .
They all meet Scott who has them take refuge at the Argent Arms Int .
warehouse until the Dead Pool is finally shut down , saving the rest of the Pack .
In " A Promise to the Dead " , Brett has made peace with Liam , in gratitude for Scott 's Pack saving he , Lori and his Pack members .
During the real game against Beacon Hills High , Liam is still traumatized from fighting the Berserkers .
Brett tackles Liam , body checking him to get Liam realize he is alive .
After the game , Brett ultimately helps his former rival overcome his trauma by telling Liam he 's
lucky Scott is his Alpha because Scott is a True Alpha , he gained his power not by killing , dominance or taking power from others , Scott earned his status .
Liam is ultimately inspired when Brett tells him he 's not strong because he has super strength , but because he endures .
In Season 5 " Dreamcatchers " , Brett is playing lacrosse when Liam and Mason visit and come to him asking if Satomi knew of any Alpha that could have Bitten new supernatural Tracy Stewart .
Brett replies he has n't seen Tracy before .
He informs the newly - enlightened - Mason on some general werewolf lore .
He accompanies Liam and Mason for the sink - hole where Tracy fell in and left her necklace .
The three of them determine that Tracy had been buried alive , uncovering the Dread Doctor 's incubation process for the Chimeras .
In " Condition Terminal " , at the bi club Sinema , Brett dances and flirts with both a guy and a girl and runs into Liam and Mason again .
He shares shots with Mason , but later protects him from Lucas , a werewolf / scorpion Chimera .
Brett is slashed by the Chimera , but Lucas is eventually brought down by Scott , Kira and Liam .
All five of them witness the Dread Doctors as they appear and kill Lucas .
In " Required Reading " , after eight new Chimeras have been created , Brett continues to help out , reporting that everyone at Devonfort seems normal .
He gives Mason signs to look for in supernatural creatures .
He is amused at the tension between Liam and Hayden .
A similarly amused Mason tells Brett how Liam 's spat with Hayden began in middle school .
In " A Credible Threat " , a charity game between Beacon Hills and Devonford Prep for cancer is being held .
Brett and his teammates arrive .
He and his sister Lori assist Scott and his Pack 's attempt to prevent another attack by the Beast of Gévaudan and locate the teenage chimera that is being used as its host .
When Kira loses control , becomes possessed by her Fox Spirit , Brett arranges to have her kicked off the field by provoking the Fox .
colspan=5Gabriel Valack is well known in the supernatural underworld for his supply of information .
Valack displays psychic abilities including clairvoyance , telepathy and the talent to glamour himself .
First appearing at Season 4 's end , Valack is an inmate held in the underground prison of Eichen House for supernatural beings .
Valack has a third eye rooted inside his skull which supplements his powers .
The eye is visible by a hole in his head caused by trepanation .
Valack first appears in Season 4 " A Promise to the Dead " in his cell reading a romance novel .
He is visited by Deaton who introduces himself .
Valack lets Deaton know he 's aware
Deaton 's specialty is not actually " cats and dogs " .
Deaton asks for information on Valack 's knowledge of South American lore .
Valack corrects Deaton he wants to know about Kate Argent , about " La Loba " or " the Bone Woman " .
Deaton wishes to know what Kate had done to Derek ( regressing Derek back to his teenage self ) , the subsequent loss of his powers asking if Derek could be dying .
Valack tells Deaton he 'll have to move closer .
Deaton reluctantly complies .
Valack displays his third eye ; it opens up and Deaton receives a vision of La Iglesia , but is rendered unconscious .
In " Smoke and Mirrors " , after his plan to have Scott killed fails , Peter Hale is incarcerated for his crimes , and he is placed in Valack 's cell .
After Peter swears he 'll escape , Valack humors the werewolf due to the mountain ash all around them .
Peter demands to know who he is .
Valack replies he could tell Peter , but that it will be easier to just " show ( him ) " and removes his bandage , revealing him his third eye .
Peter screams in horror , slamming against the Plexiglas .
Valack smirks .
In Season 5 , Scott 's Pack are led to Valack by the novel " The Dread Doctors " by a T.R. McCammon , illustrating the Doctors in " A Novel Approach " .
At Eichen House , Stiles and Lydia visit Valack for information .
Peter has been moved to a new cell .
Valack knows what they want , asking for the book , and that the Dread Doctors are in Beacon Hills also .
Valack affirms he is the author under a pseudonym .
He says the Doctors gain their power , longevity and erase the memories of those who 've encountered them by their discovering of electromagnetic forces .
When Lydia asks what they want , Valack replies he wants Lydia to record a banshee Scream as the deal .
Stiles is hesitant , but Valack fires back that the Doctors are in Beacon Hills because their Pack reignited the Nemeton .
When the Dread Doctors infiltrate the institution for Valack , he hurriedly says the book is a tool that triggers erased memory senses of those who have encountered the Doctors .
Lydia complies , handing the recorder back through the cell flap .
As the Doctors approach , Valack yells " Read the book ! " .
Stiles and Lydia hide and leave , but the Dread Doctors open Valack 's cell .
Using a device , they tear out his third eye .
The Dread Doctors leave him in pain .
Valack then plays the recorder playing Lydia 's Scream against the cell wall glass of his cell , the subsequent compression causing the glass to crack , engineering his escape from his cell .
In Season 5B , Valack has taken over Eichen House .
In " The Last Chimera " , after Lydia is rendered catatonic at the hands of Theo Raeken , when Natalie Martin signs a transfer paper for Lydia to be brought to Eichen House , Valack ( glamoured as Dr. Conrad Fenris ) promises Natalie her daughter will be safe .
It 's revealed Valack was chief medical officer at Eichen House before his imprisonment .
Valack experimented on supernatural patients , any creature he could get his hands on .
Performing trepanation would heighten the powers of the subject , but the new levels were uncontrollable resulting in his subjects dying out .
Once Lydia comes out of her catatonic state , and attempts to escape , Valack distracts her by glamouring as Aiden to her shock .
Valack has Lydia restrained and presses her to remember what 's happened to the Pack over the last few weeks .
Lydia ( seeing right through Valack 's veil ) is still recovering and is amnesiac .
Valack produces a drilling device used for trepanation and performs a procedure on her .
When Lydia comes to , she has a vision of the time and circumstances of when Theo killed his older sister .
Valack has amplified Lydia 's powers to near dangerous levels in that her Scream can kill everyone around her and herself .
He uses her newly gained extrasensory perception to find out more on Theo and the Dread Doctors .
In " Amplification " , just as Valack is questioning Lydia , both Theo and Scott 's Packs , and Parrish 's hellhound side attempt a jailbreak for Lydia .
In the ensuing struggle between Parrish and Theo 's Pack , Valack slips away with Lydia .
Lydia figures out Valack " wants ( her ) to be his eyes " .
He unveils a mystical mask with electromagnetic properties akin to those worn by the Dread Doctors .
He modifies the Screams in Lydia 's head so to allow her to focus .
If Lydia were to find the teenage Chimera that acts as the Beast 's host , her powers at that point will surely kill her , but placates that it may end up saving her friends ' lives .
Theo and Stiles arrive , their actions disrupting his equipment , letting Lydia 's power spiral again .
Valack decides it is time for drastic measures and prepares to encase her with the mask , but Lydia lets out an uncontrolled Scream : half of Valack 's head is blown off , killing him .
colspan=5Theodore " Theo " Raeken is a werewolf / werecoyote Chimera .
Theo was classmates with Scott and Stiles in fourth grade .
He had an older sister named Tara who 'd wandered into the woods during a cold night and died from exposure .
Theo had found her body and his family moved away .
In truth , Theo had remorselessly murdered his sister at the behest of the Dread Doctors .
Theo wanted his sister 's heart so the Doctors would transplant the organ into him and he could become their first experimental Chimera .
The Doctors chose Theo for his being " the perfect evil " , willing to murder his caring sister who looked out for him .
He then became a henchman for the Doctors .
Theo first appears in Season 5 " Creatures of the Night " , in his werewolf form , helping Scott and Kira fight off the werewolf / garuda Chimera Belasko .
Scott eventually recognizes him .
Theo says he 's come back to Beacon Hills because he 'd heard of Scott McCall , his grade school friend , becoming a True Alpha , and wishes to join his Pack .
In " Parasomnia " , Scott and Stiles , at Stiles ' urging , ask Theo for his story .
Theo recalls he 'd been Bitten when he was skateboarding in a neighbours ' empty pool when an Alpha came upon him .
This said Alpha was killed before Theo 's first full moon by two members of his own Pack , twins ( hinting to be Ethan and Aiden ) .
He also recalls a moment in grade school which Scott remembers that convinces him .
Stiles however , remains suspicious .
Stiles later compares Theo 's father 's signature from his school transfer form to that of a speeding ticket from years ago , insisting they are not similar .
Theo attempts to placate Stiles , saying he has Scott , someone who 'll always look out for you , but he does n't , that he 's meant to be part of the Pack .
However , Theo is later seen with his parents , who are actually imposters and are terrified of him .
Theo breaks the man 's hand to put it in a cast , so to explain Stiles ' evidence .
In " Dreamcatchers " , Theo inconspicuously observes the events caused by the Chimera Tracy Stewart .
He volunteers to help with the situation , saying it does n't have to mean he 's been accepted by them .
He saves a bleeding Lydia 's life in " Condition Terminal " using his belt as a tourniquet .
However , Theo 's simultaneously working as a mole for the Dread Doctors .
In their lair , he wickedly advises new Chimera , the delinquent Donovan into killing Stiles if he wants to cause the Sheriff " soul - crushing pain " .
In " Required Reading " , Theo sets about sabotaging and breaking the Pack apart ; he takes advantage of Stiles and Malia 's secrets in their relationship ( Stiles ' killing Donovan in self - defense , and Malia impulsively confiding in Theo , because of his coyote side , that the Desert Wolf caused her family 's crash ) and plants seeds of doubt in Scott regarding Kira due to her Kitsune Evolution .
Theo
then blackmails Stiles using Donovan 's death into staying quiet about Theo killing a new Chimera , allegedly to save the former 's life .
He and Stiles form a forced partnership in " Strange Frequencies " .
He advises Stiles that Scott would n't be a True Alpha if he 'd reject Stiles for killing in self - defense while successfully pulling Stiles under his influence .
Theo is completely accepted by the Pack in " Ouroboros " after finding an abducted Liam and Hayden .
The then uses the latter two 's romance to his advantage , staging Hayden 's slow lethal injection once she is declared a " failure " , and planting the idea in Liam 's head that the Bite could save her , knowing Scott would say no .
Theo lies to Scott on how Donovan 's death at Stiles ' hands occurred falsifying Stiles had murdered him in a rage , effectively breaking apart his and Stiles ' friendship .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Theo shows his true colors and executes his plan to take Scott 's Pack and True Alpha status for himself .
HINmanipulates Liam to kill Scott ( because only Liam can steal Scott 's True Alpha status , allowing Theo to steal it himself afterwards ) and forces Stiles to make a choice to save Scott or his dad .
After Liam fails , Theo angrily comes back to kill Scott himself .
Scott , weakened , tells Theo his Pack will never follow him because he is " barely even human " .
He kills Scott in a petty tantrum .
Theo then uses a mind - meld on a kidnapped Lydia , rendering her catatonic , so to find the Nemeton where the deceased Chimeras are kept by Parrish , and succeeds .
Using the blood of ' The Soldier ' , the Doctors ' incubated Alpha werewolf , revives four Chimeras , Hayden , Corey , Tracy and Josh .
Theo declares to the revived teens he is their Alpha , and they belong to him .
Theo 's goal is revealed to become a proper werewolf , an actual powerful Alpha .
In Season 5B , he is angry that dominating a Pack did n't grant him the power , then irked upon discovering Scott is alive .
Ever deceptive and self - serving , Theo takes command of his Pack , devising ways to help them develop and control their abilities , feeding them false promises only he can keep them safe when in truth dominating them , having them turn into killers .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , aware that Parrish is a hellhound and the Dread Doctors have resurrected the Beast of Gévaudan , Theo proposes a truce with Scott 's allies saying the Beast is what they need to worry about .
Theo sets about tracking down the ancient werewolf .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Theo seduces Malia into letting him help her find the Desert Wolf .
He then betrays Malia and Braeden revealing he 'd made a deal with the assassin .
In exchange for bringing Malia to her , Corrine hands him the garuda talons from the late Chimera Belasko , appropriated from Deaton , and leaves Malia to die .
Theo then meets with the Alpha Deucalion whom his Pack have tracked down and captured .
Theo wishes for the Demon Wolf to give show him how to steal the Beast 's power .
In exchange , Deucalion says he wants Scott 's eyes .
In " Amplification " , Theo leads Tracy , Corey and Josh into Eichen House to abduct Lydia to lure out Parrish so to use the hellhound against the Beast .
Once he hears Valack speak of his Mask created by the Dread Doctors , he changes his mind and instead takes the Mask in order to identify the Beast .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , now knowing the talons wo n't work and his Pack dwindling , Theo accepts an alliance from Deucalion who tells him the secret to stealing power from others - by taking pain , then life , then " the spark of power " .
Immediately afterwards , he kills Josh to absorb the latter 's electrical power , allowing him to wear the Mask to track down the Beast , seeing its true human – Sebastien Valet .
Theo waits for his opportunity for the Beast to appear and complete its transformation .
In " Apotheosis " , after his first attempt to take the Beast goes wrong , Theo then kills Tracy to steal her power , siphoning her Kanima capabilities .
He electrocutes Deucalion and ambushes Scott 's Pack as they attempt to save Mason , testing his new powers .
Up against the Beast , Theo makes his move to steal Sebastien 's power .
It fails this time and Sebastien thrashes him .
Theo realizes Deucalion double crossed him , working with Scott all along then has his neck snapped by the Demon Wolf .
After the Beast is destroyed , a recovered Theo angrily attempts to kill everyone present .
Kira , however deflects his attack .
She tells Theo a message from the skinwalkers – his sister wants to see him .
Kira , harnessing the skinwalkers ' power opens an underworld chasm beneath Theo .
Petrified , Theo sees the ghost of his sister emerge who right away grabs him , effortlessly dragging him down with her .
Theo desperately pleads with Scott to help him , but everyone just watches as he is pulled down , banished to Hell .
In season 6A " Ghosted " , Theo is released from the ground by Liam who used Kira 's sword to do so .
He restrains Liam against a wall , demanding to know where his sister is , only to be reminded that she 's dead .
It 's discovered that Theo no longer has Josh 's electricity manipulation and Tracy 's ability to produce Kanima venom .
He reveals to Liam and Hayden that he remembers Stiles who had been taken by the Ghost Riders .
In " Heartless " , Theo suffers a recurring nightmare , each one ending exactly as the last , with his sister Tara tearing his heart from his chest .
The cycle continues until he tells her that it 's okay , she does n't have to stop .
In reality , he 's being bashed repeatedly by a furious Malia .
He later assists Scott and his friends in their plan to catch a Ghost Rider .
While the others are distracted by getting Parrish away from the Ghost Rider , Theo is forced by Garrett Douglas to break a mountain ash barrier around the cage and he witnesses Garrett killing the Ghost Rider .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Theo agrees to tell Liam , Hayden and Mason everything he knows about Garrett Douglas , but only on the condition that Liam breaks the sword .
Upon completion , Theo lives up to his end , explaining Garrett 's past with WWII and the Dread Doctors .
In " Memory Found " , Theo helps Liam lure the Ghost Riders to the hospital to distract them .
They manage to kill a few but with more coming , Theo saves Liam by pushing him into the lift and shutting him in .
He takes on the Ghost Riders all by himself , the confrontation ends with a single gunshot .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Theo is revealed to be alright and gives Liam more time to get into the rift .
He later joins Scott , Malia and Peter in fighting Garrett 's army of Ghost Riders .
Personality - wise , Theo is charming , charismatic and has a serene demeanor .
He is a sociopath , liar and trickster , being manipulative , cunning , seductive , self - serving , and feels no remorse , guilt nor care for who gets hurt because of his actions .
Being a Chimera , Theo is unaffected by everyday supernatural rules .
He has killed people , but displays the golden Wolf eyes of an innocent .
He can also penetrate mountain ash barriers and cast them himself .
Theo has traits of both werewolves and coyotes .
He is able to shapeshift into a werewolf , and because of his werecoyote part , he can shapeshift to both a full wolf and a full coyote form .
After killing Tracy and Josh , taking their power , he gains the abilities of electricity manipulation and to produce Kanima venom .
colspan=5The three Dread Doctors are para - scientists who perform experiments upon supernatural beings in Beacon Hills , altering and producing Chimeras .
They are known individually as the Pathologist and the Geneticist , and are led by the Surgeon .
At the end of Season 5 , the Surgeon 's identity is revealed to be Marcel , the best friend of Sebastien Valet , the Beast of Gévaudan .
The Dread Doctors were all once human scientists who worshipped , were obsessed with the supernatural .
Discovering and manipulating the secrets of electromagnetism , the Doctors rescinded their humanity , giving them power , including mass illusionary projection , phasing , teleportation , and the ability to harness and manipulate electronic frequencies .
The Doctors are frequently outfitted with breathing tubes and wear special masks infused with electromagnetism ( " a unique and deadly power " ) created through pseudoscience by the Surgeon .
They hold a Nazi Alpha werewolf known as " Der Soldat " ( German for " The Soldier " ) who fought in WWII in a large green tube whose blood provides them with a serum with rejuvenating properties to restore their health and prolong their lifespans .
In Season 5A , the Dread Doctors are partners with Theo Raeken , working to break Scott McCall 's Pack and fellowship apart .
The three para - scientists also perform a procedure on Kira to amplify her Thunder Kitsune power to near dangerous levels for their advantage .
In " Creatures of the Night " , the Dread Doctors send a Chimera named Belasko to siphon Scott 's True Alpha power .
When he fails , they declare him useless , telling him " no second chances " .
The Surgeon spears Belasko with his sword cane .
Throughout the season , the Dread Doctors carry out their experiments abducting , converting and brainwashing innocent teenagers with two sets of DNA , altering them into Chimeras , creatures with incongruous body parts of more than one supernatural creature , werewolf claws , garuda talons , Kanima hide and venom , wendigo teeth , etc . , which also breaking the set rules of the supernatural , e.g. their produced Chimeras can penetrate mountain ash barriers .
They come into conflict with Scott 's Pack who attempt to stop their actions , while simultaneously employing Theo to act as a spy amongst the Pack for them .
When the Chimeras come to bleed mercury , the Doctors kill them off declaring them failures ; they are aiming , searching for a " success " .
In " A Novel Approach " , Theo reports to the Doctors Scott 's Pack is going to see Valack at Eichen at nightfall .
Eichen House was closed off to the Dread Doctors due to electromagnetic energy from the convergence of ley lines .
Kira 's Thunder Kitsune power however , disrupted the defences allowing the Doctors to enter .
They take the opportunity to restrain Valack and rip out his third eye , presumably because of his clairvoyance ability being a threat to them .
In " Strange Frequencies " , the Doctors move to experiment on their latest victim , Hayden Romero , but Scott 's Pack manage to intervene .
They attempt to capture the Doctors by disrupting their frequency using cellphone jammers .
The Doctors outsmart them , the Surgeon declaring they run " on a frequency ( they ) ca n't possibly imagine " .
Successfully abducting Hayden , and after performing experimentation , Hayden is declared a failure .
In " Lies of Omission " , Theo requests Hayden be kept alive a little longer so to use her to his advantage in breaking apart Scott 's Pack .
The Surgeon tells Theo he has until the perigee syzygy ( the upcoming supermoon ) .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , the Doctors observe their latest Chimera , the Surgeon stating " Success ... imminent . "
The Doctors later on , look upon a fresco of two monsters in battle .
The Surgeon pronouncing the Chimera as " La Bete " , and a " success " .
In Season 5B , Valack reveals the Dread Doctors ' goal was to resurrect the most dangerous killing machine - the Beast of Gévaudan .
The Doctors ' methods were to achieve the process of reviving the ancient werewolf with their last chimera test subject serving as a host for the creature from their skills in pseudoscience .
All the other Chimeras were only guinea pigs to perfect their experiment .
Another requirement for the process to work was to kill off the failed Chimeras ( " Failure compromises the experiment pool " ) .
The Doctors also end their partnership with Theo , allowing him to use the Soldier 's blood to revive several Chimeras to form his own Pack .
With their work completed , the Doctors watch over and protect the Beast from discovery , covering up its carnage .
They now want the Beast to remember itself in its previous life .
To do this , they nurture its naturally lethal actions as it rampages throughout Beacon County , triggering the Beast 's shapeshifting using high - powered frequencies and inconspicuously leave the Beast the message ' Damnatio Memoriae ' .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , after Scott 's Pack discover Mason is the host for the Beast , the Doctors abduct Mason hiding him in a cabin and hook him up to the Soldier preventing him from escaping to allow for the transformation to finish .
Scott , Liam and Theo arrive for Mason before the Doctors corner them , having anticipated Theo would come to take the Beast 's power .
The Surgeon goads his narcissistic henchman openly declaring him a failure for their experiment while also laying out their epiphany of their work .
The lead para - scientist adds Theo 's ultimate failure however provided a turning viewpoint in their paranormal research for the Chimeras , for reviving " La Bête " : the ' banality of evil ' .
The Dread Doctors initially believed that to resurrect the Beast , the perfect killer , they first needed the " perfect evil " .
They chose Theo as the ideal candidate as Theo would murder his caring sister given motive and opportunity .
However , they realized Theo failed in the end because ' true evil ' comes only from corrupting someone truly good which is why Mason is the success .
An infuriated Theo assaults his former masters to no use .
The Doctors witness Mason determinedly , resolutely unpluck himself from the device when the Doctors attack Scott and Liam ; the " corruption " they 'd planned for him .
The transformation occurs and the Surgeon excitedly notes the Beast is transforming without frequency .
The Beast of Gévaudan is fully revived , remembering its name .
The ancient werewolf slaughters the Doctors , killing the Pathologist and the Geneticist , but the Surgeon revels in his " Success " , before he too is mauled by the Beast and it runs into the night .
In " Apotheosis " , the Surgeon is still partially alive .
Scott and Liam take him to the animal clinic to treat and for information .
The lead para - scientist however , jolts awake and hears the voice of Beast of Gevuadan , Sebastien Valet calling to him .
He bursts out of the clinic , and staggers to his knees before Sebastien walks up to him .
Sebastien rips off the Mask , revealing his disfigured , inhuman face .
Sebastien recognizes the Surgeon as his loving friend , Marcel .
Sebastien scolds Marcel that if his appearance is what immortality promised him , he was misled .
Marcel , dying , justifies and declares his centuries of twisted acts and experiments was all for Sebastien .
He tells Sebastien the Pike , which he now uses as his cane was taken by the Argents .
Marcel dies .
colspan=5Hayden Romero is a sophomore and soccer player at Beacon Hills High , and the girlfriend of Liam .
Hayden 's older sister , Valerie Clark is also her guardian .
Hayden has an independent nature , being tomboyish , tenacious , down - to - earth and mischievous , but eventually shows a warmer , empathic and braver side , being supportive of those in times of need .
In Season 5 , Hayden is a werewolf / werejaguar Chimera from the Dread Doctors ' experimentation .
She is brought back to life by the Theo Raeken after being killed then brought into his Chimera Pack , but later willingly accepts the Bite from Scott , becoming a new Beta werewolf in his Pack .
Hayden first appears in " Parasomnia " in Ken Yukimura 's history class with Mason and Liam .
Hayden chews bubblegum while Liam is chagrined that he has to sit next to her .
When Ken asks Liam to sit , he sees he 'd sat in Hayden 's gum , to her satisfaction .
Beside Liam at the lockers , she tells him she 's not still pissed off for sixth grade , she insists " I 'm vengeful .
" Back in grade school , Liam had accidentally backhanded Hayden 's face during a fight he had with another boy on year book picture day as collateral damage , for which earned she bears him a grudge .
Hayden has a part - time job as a shot - girl at the bi club Sinema , to help her sister make ends meet for her medication for a kidney transplant
she had a few years earlier .
In " Dreamcatchers " , Hayden notices Tracy Stewart , a senior , next to her in class .
Tracy grabs Hayden 's arm , clawing her to the latter 's distress .
After Tracy lets go then collapses ,
Hayden curiously watches , as Scott and his Pack take Tracy out of the school .
Hayden goes to the bathroom to clean up Tracy 's claw marks , but after the blood is washed away , she sees , to her astonishment , the wound has healed .
In " Condition Terminal " Hayden spitefully allows Mason and Liam access to the club for a plus $ 50 .
Liam later accidentally knocks over shots she 's carrying , to her ire .
In " Required Reading " , Liam attempts to mend his relationship with her , starting with paying her back for the shots .
Hayden refuses , saying she does n't care about his nice guy act .
Liam answers she can keep on hating him for the sixth grade , but insists on paying her back .
Hayden eventually accepts some of the debt .
Hayden has a faceoff with Liam over their respective sports at school PE .
She then sees Liam later rush to assist an asthmatic Scott with an inhaler .
She smiles , touched at this display of care .
Hayden decides to convince Liam to forget the shots , because her obnoxious boss Phil takes half her money anyway , hearing it from several yards away , which Liam catches .
He places a glow stick near her face to her confusion , but her eyes reflect the light , revealing she 's a Chimera .
Hayden is annoyed , weirded out when Liam attempts to convince her of the supernatural world .
After Liam shows her his Wolf face , his rescuing her from the Dread Doctors , brought to Scott 's Pack and then being horrified at seeing her own werewolf features , she answers them : " I believe you " .
In " Strange Frequencies " , Scott 's Pack utilizes a plan to protect Hayden from the Dread Doctors as well as attempt to capture one of them .
Liam stays by Hayden 's side .
She asks herself " what am I " , with Liam answering she 's Hayden .
Touched more than ever , Hayden softens up towards Liam , their feelings for each other deepening .
The plan fails , with Liam and Hayden being captured .
In " Ouroboros " , to her distress , Hayden is experimented upon by the Doctors , resulting in her bleeding black blood .
She and Liam comfort each other while held captive , holding hands , seeing another Chimera Zach being taken away .
Eventually , they are ' rescued ' by Theo .
Hayden and Liam then kiss , with Liam also activating his pain siphoning ability taking away her pain .
Hayden is ultimately amazed and inspired at this , her grudge towards him completely gone .
Liam and Hayden spend the night afterwards at Scott 's house , starting a romantic relationship .
In " Lies of
Omission " Hayden and Liam take content in their newfound bliss .
Hayden 's wounds heal , but she soon starts to bleed mercury , indicating she is a failure .
Scott 's Pack do their best to keep her safe , but she is soon poisoned by the Doctors .
Melissa McCall attempts to treat her .
Faced with the possibility of dying , Hayden asks Scott for her sister .
Unfortunately , she slowly dies , to Liam 's devastation .
Her body is taken by Parrish to the Nemeton .
Theo finds the supernatural tree , then using the blood of the Dread Doctors ' incubated Alpha werewolf " Der Soldat " , he revives Hayden along with Corey , Tracy Stewart and Josh Diaz , bringing them back to life .
Theo announces to the four Chimeras he is their Alpha and they are his Pack .
They instinctively follow Theo , all of them following his orders as if in a trance .
In " The Last Chimera " , after Liam and Mason locate the Nemeton ( Liam being a supernatural creature ) , Hayden reveals herself to Liam leading the cops to the location revealing the remaining Chimera corpses so to cover up her death and those of the others ' .
In Season 5B , Hayden is emotionally broken after having died , uncertain on how to feel about coming back to life .
She becomes more alert , paranoid taking a higher sense of self - preservation .
Like the other Chimeras , she falls under Theo 's influence , following him , falling for his words that only he can keep them safe .
Hayden is miserable over being unable to talk to her sister about her experiences .
Nonetheless she firmly decides she ca n't die again for Valerie 's sake .
Hayden is frosty towards Liam for his leaving her to die and appalled at his trying to kill Scott .
Liam confronts her for being in Theo 's Pack after the latter 's treachery is revealed .
In " Codominance " , Hayden makes up with him professing that Theo can keep her safe in a way Scott ca n't .
She also adds that nothing feels right after being revived except for when she 's with him .
She admits her fear of dying again , and .
She and Liam ultimately carry on then consummate their romance .
Liam continually pushes for her to get away from Theo .
In " Amplification " , Hayden takes watch over the captive Deucalion , fully aware Theo considers her a liability where Liam is concerned .
Deucalion lets her know that Theo will only die if he follows through with his plan to steal the Beast 's power using the Garuda talons .
He also leaves her cryptic advice about what her role is , regarding her conflict about being with Liam during the enmity between the Packs .
Soon , Hayden pulls herself together , regains her confidence and grows disillusioned about standing by Theo , not passing along Deucalion 's message about the talons .
In " A Credible Threat " , inspired by both Scott and Liam 's steadfastly drive to protect by identifying the Beast , she tells Liam she 's with Scott 's Pack and wants to be with him , to his joy .
In " The Maid of Gevaudan " , after the Beast injures Liam , Hayden helps get him to safety , then discovers her own pain siphoning ability by kissing Liam , to her amazement .
When Mason is identified as the vessel for the Beast of Gévaudan , Hayden supportively assists Liam in trying to find him and tries to comfort a worried Corey .
In " Apotheosis " , Hayden rushes to the Sheriff 's station where Sebastien Valet , the Beast has attacked , worried for her sister .
Sebastien fatally mauls Hayden after kidnapping her for information , but is lured away by the Argents .
At the animal clinic , Deaton manages to stabilize Hayden 's wound , but he ca n't answer if or when she 'll heal due to her invalidated Chimera status .
To fully heal herself , of her own choice and volition , Hayden accepts the Bite from a compliant Scott .
At the full moon , Hayden , now a real Beta werewolf , shares a kiss with Liam .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost " , Hayden , along with Liam and Mason investigate the smell of blood inside the school and discover a man 's body in the boiler room .
In " Sundowning " , Hayden confronts a classmate named Gwen after discovering that her sister is missing .
She explains that Gwen 's sister was taken by the Ghost Riders , which would make Gwen their next target as dhe saw the hunt occur .
In " Relics " , Hayden is forced to fight after Parrish is taken down by a Ghost Rider .
She shifts into her werewolf form , but as she charges towards the Ghost Rider , a lightning strike blinds her
and when she looks back , the Ghost Rider is gone .
In " Ghosted " , Hayden comes up with a plan to trap a Ghost Rider , an admittedly bad one .
However , when that goes awry , Liam suggests an even worse back up plan that Hayden insists will go bad .
In " Heartless " , Hayden volunteers to lure the Ghost Rider into a cage , explaining that she 's faster than Liam .
As the Ghost Rider arrives , everything goes as planned on her end , she runs in one side and out through the other .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Hayden intervenes as Liam is nearly erased by a Ghost Rider , first disarming the Rider , then flipping him to the ground .
Despite their best efforts , they 're no match .
She allows herself to be taken so Liam can escape .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Hayden and Mason try to find Corey after they recognise his voice on a call box .
When Liam comes through the rift , she kisses him in relief before they continue their search .
After finding Corey hooked up in the radio room , Hayden is informed by Liam that they ca n't unplug Corey until the train has been diverted .
Once the train has been diverted , Hayden helps Liam and Mason unplug Corey which takes them and everyone else out of the Wild Hunt .
colspan=5Donovan Donati is a petty criminal .
As a result of the Dread Doctors ' experimentation , he is a wendigo / lamprey Chimera .
Donovan applied to become a Sheriff 's Deputy , wanting to be like his father .
He failed the aptitude test with the psychological evaluation declaring him " not suitable for law enforcement " , particularly his anger expression inventory .
He blames Stilinski for not being able to pursue his dream job , and constantly threatens him .
In " Creatures of the Night " , Donovan first appears being dragged into the Sheriff 's station by Deputies Clark and Cordova , arrested for breaking and entering , and possession of a weapon .
Sheriff Stilinski comes up to Donovan , reminding him the next time he ran afoul of the law would be jail time .
Donovan tries to reason with Stilinski , but the Sheriff simply says " Book him " .
Donovan then immediately and repeatedly screams and curses at Stilinski , telling him he 's dead .
In " Dreamcatcher " Donovan is readied for prison transport by Clark and Parrish .
His attorney , Mr. Stewart arrives wishing to converse a reasonable deal .
Donovan listens , but then stubbornly bawls at the Sheriff , threatening to gut him with a knife in exploratory detail .
Stilinski orders Donovan be taken out .
As Donovan is brought to jail in the prison transport van , the vehicle is attacked by a shapeshifted girl who Mr. Stewart calls Tracy - his daughter .
Donovan witnesses Tracy savaging the van , but escapes out the back , terrified .
He looks back just as Tracy kills Mr. Stewart .
Suddenly he runs into the Dread Doctors .
The Pathologist holds him while the Surgeon drills a lobotomy into his skull .
Silver lids appear over Donovan 's eyes .
He is later seen unharmed when Scott tracks him down and subdues him .
Donovan is re - imprisoned at the station .
He experiences head pains , the silver lids over his eyes appearing now and then .
In " Condition Terminal " , during Tracy 's attack on the station , the Doctors appear , coming for Donovan , and abduct him .
Donovan is seen later in the Doctors ' lair , struggling , strapped to an exam table .
They take turns examining him ; the Surgeon declares Donovan " looks promising " .
The Geneticist , performs one last procedure , tearing out Donovan 's teeth , allowing new wendigo teeth to grow in place .
Donovan is later visited by Theo Raeken .
He mocks , and chews Donovan out , assessing his aptitude test to be a Deputy , saying he now ca n't be one like his dad .
Theo tells him that he instead has something else now : power .
He knows Donovan wants to go after Stilinski and make him suffer , but advises him that " real pain is emotional pain " .
If he wants to get back at Stilinski then he should go after someone he loves , imploring he go after Stiles .
Donovan takes this to heart .
Later at night , at the high school , Donovan is free , and comes upon Stiles as the teenager is fixing his Jeep .
In the struggle , he mauls Stiles ' shoulder but Stiles fights back , but drops his cellphone .
Donovan picks up the phone , then chases Stiles throughout the school , into the library .
As Stiles hides , Donovan trash - talk and taunts him .
He tells him Stilinski was once partners with Donovan 's father when he was a deputy .
His father got caught in a shootout that severed his T-9 vertebrae that left him paralyzed while Stilinski was calling for backup .
Donovan rants it is Stilinski 's fault for being a coward , for his dad being in a wheelchair .
He eventually catches Stiles , then chases him up a construction scaffolding .
He grabs Stiles ' leg , then taunts him
he 's not going to kill him , he 's going to eat his legs away shapeshifting to his wendigo shape .
Stiles , out of desperation , pulls out a ring that 's supporting part of the construction ; materials fall on top of Donovan .
As Donovan falls backwards , he is impaled upon a metal bar through the chest , and dies .
His corpse is taken by Parrish to the Nemeton .
In " The Last Chimera " , Donovan 's body as well as those of Lucas , Beth and the unnamed Chimera girl were retrieved by the cops once they were shown the location of the Nemeton by Hayden .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , Donovan 's death was discussed with Stiles and his dad with the Sheriff having figured out Theo 's version of how Donovan died was true , except that Theo was n't the one who killed Donovan ; it was Stiles who acted in self - defence .
In " Codominance " , Donovan 's death was discussed between Stiles and Scott with the latter learning the truth of how Donovan was killed , that it was self - defence rather than murder as Theo had claimed .
Donovan was converted into a Chimera by the Dread Doctors because he 'd had an allogeneic skin graft .
His Chimera makeup consisted of a lamprey and a wendigo .
He had the eyes and fangs of a wendigo and could manifest lamprey mouths anywhere on his body .
colspan=5Tracy Stewart is a senior at Beacon Hills High in Season 5 .
After being experimented upon by the Dread Doctors , Tracy is a werewolf / Kanima Chimera .
Tracy is killed by the Dread Doctors when she 's declared failure .
In Season 5B , Tracy having been revived by Theo Raeken , is a member of his Chimera Pack .
In " Parasomnia " , Tracy first appears in counseling with Natalie Martin .
She nervously tells Natalie
she 's having night terrors , trouble sleeping .
She recalls ravens appearing at her bedroom window , her sealed skylight is open , and she 's hallucinating the Dread Doctors .
Lydia notices Tracy 's symptoms , she and Parrish suspecting Tracy could be newly supernatural .
They note the skylight is n't sealed and the dead ravens all over her roof .
Her father , Mr. Stewart , has the skylight boarded up , tells Tracy he has to meet a client and he 'll be back soon .
Later on , Tracy starts sleepwalking .
She walks into the Dread Doctors ' lair where the Doctors appear .
Terrified , shedding a tear , Tracy tells herself she 's sleeping .
The Surgeon responds to her she 's " awakening " .
The other two para - scientists restrain her , while the Surgeon injects her with a chemical .
Tracy roars , manifesting the claws and the fangs of a werewolf .
In " Dreamcatchers " , Tracy appears , feral , out of her mind , outside a prison transport van after veering it off the road .
Inside is her father and his client , Donovan Donati .
She attacks the van , wounding the two guards , then comes out facing her father in her shapeshifted state and savages him to death .
Scott 's Pack learn of Tracy , her night terrors and attempt to track her down , thinking she could be a new werewolf .
Parrish learns later in the night
Tracy was at the hospital , killing her psychiatrist .
Tracy appears in Ken Yukimura 's sophomore history class .
Scott and his Pack come for her , but she hallucinates them as the Doctors .
Tracy collapses , puking up mercury .
Scott , Stiles and Malia bring her to Deaton for treatment while Kira and Lydia search her house .
Tracy comes to , suddenly manifesting a Kanima 's tail and hide , and escapes the clinic , even bypassing a mountain ash barrier .
Lydia deduces Tracy is still in a night terror , sleepwalking , and is targeting people who tried to help her , including Natalie Martin .
Tracy appears at the Sheriff 's station having tracked down Natalie , wall crawling on the roof , paralyzing the deputies , about to savage Natalie .
She wounds Lydia , but Kira fights her off , severing her reptilian tail .
Malia arrives and takes Tracy on .
The werecoyote eventually subdues Tracy .
Malia snaps Tracy out of her night terror , telling her she 's awake and not dreaming .
Tracy , fully aware and conscious , confusedly asks " What 's happening to me ? " .
Just then the Dread Doctors appear , and euthanize Tracy , killing her .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Theo Raeken injects Tracy 's corpse with a restorative liquid , and she is brought back to life ( along with Hayden , Corey , and Josh Diaz ) .
Theo declares to the four other Chimeras he is their Alpha and they are his Pack .
Tracy and the others obediently follow Theo .
In Season 5B , Tracy completely pledges her loyalty to Theo , becoming his right hand whilst the other three just follow him out of fear .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , Tracy disaffectedly murders the surviving witness to her savaging Donovan 's prison transport and remorselessly assaults Scott and Stiles under Theo 's guidance .
Tracy joins Theo in tracking down the Beast of Gévaudan so for Theo to steal the Beast 's power .
She remains emotionless when Theo tells her the Beast 's body count back in the 18th century was closer to 500 instead of the reported 113 as stated online .
In " Amplification " , during the attempted extraction of Lydia from Eichen House , the Chimera Pack is all beat by Parrish as the hellhound .
After Corey and Josh are both badly hurt , Tracy simply leaves them to find and recover Lydia for Theo , slaughtering guards in her way .
Right after both Packs exit Eichen House , Tracy appears and attacks Parrish and takes an injured , overpowered Lydia hostage .
She rebukes Scott 's warning that Lydia 's powers right now are dangerous , warning them none of them are getting in her way , but she 's tazered from behind by an angry Natalie Martin .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Tracy supports Theo 's order that Josh wear the Dread Doctors ' mask due to its electromagnetic properties .
She remains disaffected when Theo kills Josh to take his power simply so Theo can wear the Mask himself .
When Theo asks Tracy for her , she talks of Josh disdainfully , noting that he was " small and inexperienced .
"
Tracy prevents Malia and Braden from participating in final showdown against the Beast by breaking their mountain ash seal allowing the Desert Wolf to enter the McCall house and leaves them to die at the assassin 's hands .
In " Apotheosis , Tracy assists Theo in regrouping at the Doctor 's operating theatre after he 's injured by the Beast .
Tracy , worried about him , inspects his injuries .
Theo reassures Tracy
he 's fine , then seduces her .
Tracy falls for his advances , lets her guard down and they make out .
Tracy reminds him she ca n't take his pain .
Theo softly reassures her there 's something else she can do , give him her power .
He then forcefully impales her in the back with his claws .
Tracy roars in protest and pain , then tries to fight back against her treacherous savior , but Theo buries deep into her .
With Theo taking her power , Tracy dies again .
Tracy is at first delicate , shy and faint - hearted .
After being resurrected , she loses her humanity , her morals , being cold , aggressive , dispassionate and emotionless , having no regard for human welfare and revels in her lethal tendencies , but is unerringly loyal and affectionate towards Theo .
Tracy became a Chimera for the Doctors due to her having an allogeneic skin graft .
Tracy 's Chimera makeup consists of both a werewolf and a Kanima .
Her natural shapeshifter abilities , super - strength , super - speed , healing are the amongst the strongest of the Chimeras .
She displays the claws , fangs of a werewolf , and a Kanima 's hide , wall crawling and ability to produce a paralytic toxin .
colspan=5Corey Bryant is a sophomore at Beacon Hills High first appearing in Season 5 and is openly gay .
Corey is fun - loving , charming and has a sweet , amicable nature , but is rather faint - hearted and comes from a neglectful household .
In Season 5 , Corey is a Chimera created by the Dread Doctors , with abilities of super - strength and healing .
Corey has traits of the chameleon as he can use camouflage as well as make others become invisible through touch .
After being killed by the Doctors then resurrected , Corey is a member of Theo Raeken 's Pack in Season 5B.
He later becomes the boyfriend of Mason .
Corey is first seen in Season 5 episode 4 " Condition Terminal " .
Corey had been making out with his boyfriend Lucas .
He noticed Lucas seemed like a whole different person .
Corey then felt a sudden sting on his arm , and saw Lucas ' eyes turn completely black , to his horror .
Lucas left , telling Corey he 'll see him at their favourite nightclub , Sinema .
Corey was left writhing , screaming in " the worst pain of ( his ) life " and the wounded flesh on his left arm necrotized .
Corey is forwarded to the hospital , still screaming .
Melissa McCall and Geyer attempt to help him , pumping him full of morphine to no effect .
Melissa calls Scott and Kira to the hospital , and Scott siphons his heavy pain , and Corey stops screaming .
Though confused , Corey tells Scott and Kira that Lucas stung him , his witnessing his features , and where to find Lucas .
In " Strange Frequencies " , a fully recovered but unnerved Corey returns to school .
He runs into Mason Hewitt at the library .
He asks Mason if he 'd seen Lucas at Sinema , if he 'd said anything about Corey .
Mason gives him his apologies over Lucas but said that he 'd told the cops " everything " .
Corey thanks him , but leaves up a book he 'd been reading titled " Miraculous Healing " .
Corey is later seen drinking at Sinema , but Mason asks him about his arm that had been melted off , but it had healed .
Corey is distressed and confused over the bizarre things happening to him , but Mason identifies him as a Chimera .
Corey is then enlightened on his situation , and brought to Scott 's Pack afterwards .
In " Ouroboros " , Corey attempts to help locate an abducted Liam and Hayden Romero , reading the book " the Dread Doctors " to recover his altered memories , but a desperate , overwhelmed Scott instead performs a mind - meld to extract his memories himself .
Corey is immensely disturbed by the process afterwards , but Scott rebuffs him saying he 'll be fine .
After Scott , Malia and Mason leave , Corey is just about to take off , being unwilling to help out now , because " a werewolf wired his way into ( his ) brain with his claws " .
Theo attempts to calm Corey down , and convinces him to try and remember something else .
Corey , after some pressing , remembers an abandoned house which the Dread Doctors used to house the stored Chimeras , where Theo manages to ' find ' Liam and Hayden .
In " Lies of Omission " , Corey eventually relaxes and adapts to his new identity with Mason 's help , showing off super - strength in the school 's gym to the latter .
Unfortunately , he vomits up mercury , meaning he 's not a success for the Dread Doctors .
He 's taken to the hospital , but escapes causing a ruckus as well as displaying camouflage .
The Surgeon however still pinpoints his location and kills him .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Theo brings Corey , Hayden , Tracy Stewart and Josh Diaz back to life using a restorative serum , courtesy of the Doctors .
All four teens instinctively follow Theo when he declaring they all belong to him .
In Season 5B , Corey goes back to school , with he and Theo having covered up his death .
Though traumatized over having been killed , then brought back to life and feeling in debt to Theo , Corey also wants to return to normalcy in " Damnatio Memoriae " .
He hits it off with Mason , asking him out on a date .
Theo however corners him and smooth - talks his way up to Corey , then subtly threatens the younger boy that he 's going to follow Theo 's orders because of his fear of dying again .
Though unsettled , Corey timidly complies .
In " Codominance " , Corey continues to pursue Mason , but Mason tells Corey he 's with Theo , " the bad guys " .
Corey reasons with Mason that there are no bad guys or good guys anymore .
It 's whether you are dead or alive and he wants to be alive .
He asks Mason does he want to be alive with him .
Mason falls for Corey 's charm and the two boys kiss .
Corey maintains his loyalty to Theo
but he and Mason carry on their romance and trade information during the tension between the two Packs .
In " Amplification " , Corey goes as part of Theo 's Pack to extract Lydia from Eichen House .
When Parrish as the hellhound arrives to protect the banshee , Theo orders his Chimeras to take Parrish to Corey 's disbelief and terror due to the hellhound 's fire .
Theo demands he obey because he 'll heal .
Corey complies before the hellhound strikes Josh , but he 's set completely aflame badly burned , then dying .
Josh helps him to safety and Malia saves his life by taking his pain so Corey can heal from his burns .
In " A Credible Threat " , Corey 's burns slowly heal .
He has had enough of the dangers everywhere and decides to leave Beacon Hills .
Mason attempts to convince him to stay , assuring him he is healing and reasoning that normal people like Mason need people with special abilities like Corey to survive .
Corey replies that Mason is smart and it is the smart ones who survive .
However , when Mason uncovers the Dread Doctors ' method of triggering the Beast 's transformations with super strong radio frequencies and discovers their latest method to trigger its transformation is around the corner , Corey , having grown fond of and feeling protective of Mason , ultimately changes his mind .
He assists Mason in following up on the clue to the Beast 's host 's identity , a size 10 shoe with Parrish 's blood .
He has himself and Mason camouflaged when they 're almost caught , but Corey is disturbed , feeling something off about Mason , and is dreadfully fearful that Mason is the host .
When Scott and Liam determine Mason is the Beast 's host , Corey comes out of hiding and camouflages both he and Mason fearful for Mason 's life .
Corey attempts to convince Mason he 's the host because he felt something really wrong back when he flinched away from him , but that every other second he 's with Mason is completely and totally right .
Corey panics when the Dread Doctors adduct Mason and goes back to Scott 's Pack for help .
In " Apotheosis " , Corey remains camouflaged as the Pack successfully saves him , to his awe and content , and embraces a fully alive and well Mason .
After the two of them witness Theo being banished to Hell for his crimes , Corey and Mason carry on with their lives .
In the season 6 premiere , Corey uses his camouflage in order to " borrow " Mr. Douglas ' compass so Liam and Mason can investigate strange readings .
In " Superposition " , Corey hides in the school as the Ghost Riders approach , warning Mason of their arrival as they he secretly watches while the Ghost Riders make someone vanish .
In " Sundowning " , Corey ca n't help thinking they forgot something as he prepares for the worst .
When the Ghost Riders arrive at Scott 's house , Corey and Gwen are the only ones who can see them .
While camouflaged , he grabs a Ghost Rider as it passes , making them both visible to everyone .
In " Relics " , after he finds Liam in the locker room , Corey suggests that they leave as the night is over .
Liam announces that he plans on catching one of the Ghost Riders but Corey is in disbelief .
In " Heartless , Corey helps Scott and Mason in their plan to catch a Ghost Rider .
While Scott and Liam attempt to question the Ghost Rider they captured , Mason reveals that he can still see Corey even though he 's camouflaged due to light refracting off him .
When Corey finds Garrett Douglas in the woods , he asks what he 's doing there .
Garrett says something he 's wanted to do for a long time .
Then he wraps the Ghost Rider 's whip around Corey 's neck until he disappears in a puff of green smoke .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Liam figures Corey 's camouflage allows him to live in the real world and the phantom world .
Corey is found to be attached to many wires in the radio room of the phantom train station and acts as the link to merging the Ghost Riders ' limbo with Beacon Hills .
Once Liam , Hayden and Mason take out the wires , the townspeople are returned and remnants of the Ghost Riders disappear .
Corey is taken to the hospital where Melissa uses the 9 herbs to heal his injuries .
colspan=5Josh Diaz is a junior at Beacon Hills High appearing in Season 5 , he is a raijū Chimera altered by the Dread Doctors and a member of Theo Raeken 's Chimera Pack in Season 5B. Josh is portrayed as being a thrill seeker , but shows that he cares for those he 's close to .
Josh first appears in " Required Reading " at the night club Sinema , then on the high school 's lacrosse field .
As a raijū Chimera , Josh was responsible for the electricity outages at the school , then at the hospital feeding on the electrical wires with his fangs .
Josh , in a feral state , attacks Stiles on the hospital roof , but Theo engages him .
Theo manages to overpower Josh , and tears out Josh 's throat , killing him .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Josh is revived by Theo via a restorative serum courtesy of the Dread Doctors .
Theo declares to Josh , as well as Hayden , Corey and Tracy Stewart that Theo is their Alpha , and they all belong to him .
Along with the others , Josh follows Theo .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , while at Sinema , Josh complains to Theo that he ca n't get drunk or high anymore .
Theo consoles him that he ca n't because his body now heals too fast .
To lure Josh under his influence , Theo plays on Josh urge for thrills and instead shows Josh how to use electricity , feeding Josh 's electricity manipulation , having him shapeshift which Josh finds exhilarating , becoming power - drunk .
Like Tracy , Josh falls for Theo 's thrall losing touch with his ability to feel empathy , becoming more violent as seen when Theo sends them out to test their abilities against Scott .
In the Chimera Pack , Josh joins Tracy in becoming Theo 's muscle .
In " Amplification " , Josh along with the rest of Theo 's Pack , infiltrate Eichen House to abduct Lydia under Theo 's orders .
Parrish , as a hellhound , appears and the Chimeras engage him to no use .
When Corey is severely burnt by Parrish , Josh displays worry for the younger boy .
He stops Malia from touching Kira because of her Thunder Kitsune power overload , saying he can feel the voltage from her .
He makes a deal with Malia that he will siphon Kira 's excess electricity and Malia will absorb Corey 's pain so he can heal .
When Hayden and Mason turn off the electric grid allowing the Packs to leave , the four leave without conflict .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Josh , due to his electrical abilities , is chosen by Theo to put on the Mask with him being compatible with its electromagnetic properties .
He ultimately refuses due to not being interested in the Beast 's identity , fed up with being used , telling Theo to do it himself .
He decides to leave .
Right after Deucalion shows him how to steal power from another , Theo murders Josh , taking his electrical powers in the process to use the mask .
Josh has enormous front teeth , werewolf claws , the ability of electricity manipulation and his eyes glow royal blue .
Josh 's Chimera makeup consists of a werewolf as well as a shapeshifter called a raiju , the Japanese " thunder beast " .
colspan=5Corinne also known as " The Desert Wolf " is a werecoyote , a professional killer and Malia 's biological mother .
Corinne was a lover of Peter Hale and eventually bore his child ( Malia ) .
When her daughter was born , Peter 's older sister , Talia Hale snatched Malia from the assassin before she was even given a name and was put up for adoption .
When Malia was nine years old , the Desert Wolf attempted to kill her .
She opened fire upon the car she was in , along with her adoptive mother and sister ; the car veered off the road , into the Beacon Hills Preserve and wound up in the ravine .
Evelyn and the younger girl were killed but unbeknownst to her mother , Malia survived .
The Desert Wolf eventually became the quarry of Braeden , the mercenary .
In Season 5 " Ouroboros " , the Desert Wolf tracks down and corners Deaton in Russia , where he was investigating an old lair used by the Dread Doctors .
She kills his guide and holds him at gunpoint .
The assassin informs him over a rumour she heard that her daughter is alive , and interrogates him if he knows anything .
Deaton lies he does n't know anything about any daughter of hers .
The Desert Wolf replies that if he 's wrong then she 'll just have to " kill ( Malia ) again " .
The Desert Wolf takes Deaton hostage and makes her way to Beacon Hills .
In " The Sword and the Spirit " , Corinne holds Deaton at an abandoned base in the industrial estate and waits for Malia to arrive .
Her daughter , Braeden and Theo arrive at the scene , and Theo makes his move knocking out Braeden and shooting Malia non - fatally , having made a deal with the Desert Wolf .
Theo then leaves Malia for Corrine who then appears handing Theo
the garuda talons appropriated from Deaton .
After Theo leaves , Corinne malevolently greets her daughter .
She rants that she lost part of her werecoyote power - super - strength , speed and healing - to Malia once she gave birth , all while torturing her daughter .
She intends to kill Malia to regain her lost power .
Corinne moves in to make the killing blow , but Deaton gets free of his gag and yells out to the assassin that she ca n't get her lost power back from Malia except whilst on a full moon , otherwise she gets nothing , stalling her .
A banshee Scream from Lydia distracts the assassin further and Malia recovers from her wound enough to take on Corinne .
Mother and daughter ferociously face off , both shapeshifted .
The fight is , however , interrupted by the Beast of Gévaudan and all parties leave .
In " A Credible Threat " , Corinne stalks Malia during the Pack 's plan to prevent the Beast from appearing at the lacrosse game .
Malia faces off with her , the full moon around the corner .
She is amused by Malia 's attempt at heroism and identifies Stiles as someone Malia really cares about and slips away .
The full moon closing in , the Desert Wolf stalks Scott 's Pack to locate Malia making her move to strike .
Corinne overhears Lydia talk to Malia over the phone :
Malia is at the McCall house and protected by a mountain ash seal .
The assassin heads to Scott 's house and she recruits Tracy Stewart employing the Chimera to break the barrier , allowing Corinne to infiltrate the McCall house and faces off against Malia and Braeden , including a shootout between her and Braeden whilst Malia takes cover .
Corinne remorselessly gloats and taunts Malia , telling her daughter nothing with dissuade her from killing Malia , from reclaiming what Malia ' stole ' from her .
She recalls , years ago , Talia Hale 's persistent attempts trying to make her realize the gift of childbirth whilst she was pregnant with Malia , and her seeing the beauty of a werecoyote passing part of her power to her child .
She spitefully declares bearing a baby " a parasite " and Malia gaining part of her power " theft " .
Malia causes a distraction , allowing Corinne to shoot Braeden .
Stiles arrives at the house and inadvertently gets caught up in the fray .
Corinne manages to catch Malia at gunpoint .
She gleefully shoots Malia three times before moving in , claws extended .
She impales a weakened Malia , but Malia guts her back - her own claws outfitted with the garuda talons , provided to her by Stiles , turning the tables .
Malia absorbs Corrine 's remaining power instead .
The Desert Wolf staggers back just as a recovered Braeden knocks her unconscious .
Afterwards , Corrine is imprisoned at Eichen House .
Corrine is ruthless as an assassin , arrogant , sadistic , cruel , selfish and remorseless over her actions .
Like Malia , Corrine is a werecoyote and she sports the supernatural blue eyes of a canine shapeshifter who has taken lives .
Her supernatural powers , super - strength , shapeshifting , super - senses and healing are not on par with a normal werecreature , due to having given birth to Malia .
Corrine is later fully sapped of her power by Malia .
colspan=5Sebastien Valet , " La Bête du Gévaudan " , or " the Beast " , is the most notorious , fearsome and famous werewolf in history .
Sebastien was a super - powered , beastly werewolf who terrorized the French province of Gévaudan in the 18th century , killing scores of people until he was finally killed by his sister , Marie - Jeanne Argent in 1767 .
In the present , Sebastien is gradually resurrected by the Dread Doctors by binding his essence to a vessel , Mason Hewitt .
Sebastien was born an antisocial and unrepentant sociopath .
In 1760 , Sebastien was a soldier alongside his faithful companion Marcel , and fought against the British in the French territory of Canada .
One rainy night , whilst he and Marcel were evading the British , Sebastien fell face - forward into a puddle and unintentionally drank from it .
The water - filled hole was a wolf 's footprint .
Sebastien , as a result of his disturbed persona , became a demonic werewolf .
Overtime , he started killing , driven to simply kill whoever and whatever came across his path .
His friend Marcel also became aware of his carnage , but steadfastly remained his ally , covering for him .
Soon Sebastien was mentioned with fear throughout Gévaudan , becoming known as " La Bête " .
In 1764 , Sebastien and Marcel return to town entering the local pub where all are talking the Beast and he reunites with his sister , Marie - Jeanne .
Sebastien urges his sister to lead the hunting party for La Bête , which she eventually accepts after a little boy , the innkeeper 's son is found dead by a man , Henri .
Later at night , Marie - Jeanne 's hunting party is slaughtered by La Bête one by one , but Marie - Jeanne is saved by Henri via a mountain ash barrier .
Later on , Marie - Jeanne proposes a toast to honor the dead .
Sebastien plays along , but he and Marcel uncover the spiked wolfsbane in Marie - Jeanne 's mead .
Sebastien splutters and involuntarily starts to shapeshift with eyes glowing blue .
Sebastien unperturbedly waits as his sister walks over to him , having discovered his secret .
A tearful Marie - Jeanne tells him he is a monster .
Sebastien responds he 's a beast , " the Beast " to his sister , that he 'll kill anyone who crosses his path , because it is what he is .
Sebastien gives his sister a kiss to the forehead , tells her she wo n't go up against him because they 're family .
Three years later , Marie - Jeanne tracks her brother down .
Sebastien gives chase , attempts to kill her in his werewolf shape , but Marie - Jeanne reveals the pike hidden underneath the snow and impales the Beast .
Back in human form , Sebastien is unconcerned with his injury , confident he 'll heal from it and he will be remembered by history , that everyone will speak his name .
Marie - Jeanne responds no one will remember his name .
Affronted , Sebastien realizes she intends to invoke " Damnatio Memoriae " on his name .
Suddenly , Sebastien realizes he 's not healing
but he 's dying .
Marie - Jeanne reveals the pike is mystical , was forged with their blood .
In the Beast 's dying moments , Marie - Jeanne tells Sebastien everyone will remember him , " but only as a Beast . "
Sebastien dies .
During the Dread Doctors ' reign on Beacon Hills , they work on perfecting the process of reviving Sebastien Valet .
Using the teenage chimera Mason as a host , they produce an engineered version of Sebastien 's demonic Wolf form which Mason sporadically transforms into under the Doctors ' guidance as it kills its way throughout Beacon County .
The Beast gradually remembers its former incarnation , nurtured by the Dread Doctors ' actions .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , the process fully completes , with Mason being enveloped by Sebastien 's essence , with Sebastien himself completely reviving once he shapeshifts back from the Beast shape .
Mason Hewitt now only exists as memory within Sebastien 's form .
In " Apotheosis " , the resurrected Beast of Gévaudan accesses Mason 's memory and uses his vessel 's persona to adapt to the 20th century .
Having killed the Dread Doctors , but aware the Surgeon is still partially alive , he looks for the surviving para - scientist , becoming aware he took possession of the only weapon that 's capable of killing him , the Pike .
He finds the Surgeon , whose face is horribly ravaged from his centuries ' work but recognizes him as Marcel , his old comrade .
Sebastien is disaffected by Marcel 's centuries of twisted actions to bring him back , only demanding the location of the Pike .
Marcel , in his dying moments , tells him the Argents took the weapon .
Sebastien wreaks havoc throughout Beacon Hills searching for the Argents and the Pike , threatening Stilinski at the Sheriff 's station , mauling both Lydia and Hayden , fighting ferociously against Parrish , the Argents and disabling Theo Raeken attempting to steal his power in the process .
Sebastien finally comes face to face with Liam and Scott , and politely asks the Pike back .
The Alpha and Beta state they just want Mason .
Sebastien states he does n't know where to begin , but states that Mason is gone anyway .
The two werewolves take Sebastien on with all their might :
Sebastien easily overpowers them whilst mocking them for not fighting with a killer instinct .
He 's about to kill Scott , but he unintentionally taps into Scott 's memories , seeing images of Allison Argent .
Sebastien confusedly hesitates , mistaking Allison for his sister Marie - Jeanne , allowing Scott escapes his grip .
Right then , Lydia and Kira arrive :
Sebastien shifts into the Beast then moves to kill them .
Lydia Screams out Mason 's name in her banshee voice , powerful sound waves striking the Beast .
The power reverses the process , allowing Mason to separate from the Beast .
Having been stripped of a physical body , the Beast now only exists as a shadow .
Parrish arrives , catching and holding the Beast 's essence captive .
Scott then takes the opportunity to take the sword / cane and spears the Beast 's spirit with the weapon , the shadow dissipating vanquishing Sebastien Valet , the Beast of Gévaudan once again .
Having killed close to 500 people , Sebastien Valet is a born monster , arrogant , diabolical , vain and boasting of his immense power , entitled in being the " famous and feared Beast of Gévaudan " .
He has no emotions , no regard for any human life , not even those of his sister and Marcel and kills for the sake of killing , even his family , all so to carve himself in history .
Sebastien 's werewolf ability is the most powerful seen so far , surpassing even Peter 's Alpha capabilities , Deucalion 's as the Alpha Pack leader and those of Parrish , a hellhound : his strength , speed , durability and healing all extremely heightened , and completely indestructible due to being a sociopath relishing in his carnage .
He is fully vulnerable only to the mystical Pike forged by his sister .
When Sebastien shapeshifts , he is enveloped in dark energy and his clothes assimilate as part of his transformation .
colspan=5The
Ghost Riders are humanoid horsemen dressed in cowboy hats and other " old west " clothing and are part of the Wild Hunt .
They are mentioned a few times in season 5 , but first appear in season 6 .
There are many Ghost Riders but only 3 are named , the Outlaw , the Enforcer and the Ranger .
The Ghost Riders tend to take and erase people who have seen them .
The process can be instant or gradual as the memory seems to disappear for different people at different times .
In the season 6 premiere , they take a couple whose son is left behind .
The boy is later taken as he saw his parents get taken .
The boy and his parents are instantly forgotten .
Stiles Stilinski encounters a Ghost Rider at the boy 's house .
His memory is gradually erased from those who knew him until Lydia Martin is the only one who still remembers him .
Stiles is taken by the Ghost Riders as Lydia watches on .
The Ghost Riders take people by shooting them with guns .
They also use whips and ropes to grab and erase their victims .
The whip carries a supernatural toxin that can kill if the victim is struck but not taken .
Victims disappear in a puff of green smoke .
The Ghost Riders deliver their victims to what appears to be a train station that only the Ghost Riders can enter and exit safely .
They apparently do n't erase banshees despite their ability to see them , which is evident in " Ghosted " when the Ghost Riders erased the residents of Canaan but leave behind a banshee named Lenore .
Lydia speculates that this may be because the Wild Hunt is connected to the old Irish legend of Morrigan , a mythical Irish figure that Lydia saya was a banshee .
She also figures out that once the Ghost Riders left Canaan , their victims became Ghost Riders .
Capturing a Ghost Rider is possible as Scott , Mason and Corey constructed a special cage that shielded it from electric currents to prevent the Ghost Rider from leaving once he enters the cage .
They then surrounded it with mountain ash as a precaution .
Killing a Ghost Rider was n't deemed possible until Garrett Douglas killed the Outlaw in " Heartless " .
This is due to the fact that he was infused with their power .
In " Memory Found " , Liam and Theo battle Ghost Riders and were able to kill a few of them with a bone saw and their own guns .
In " Riders on the Storm " , after Scott diverts the phantom train , the Ghost Riders holster their weapons and start to leave .
Garrett Douglas yells for them to come back , claiming that he is their master .
The Ghost Riders turn around and surround him .
Peter Hale points out to Garrett that the Ghost Riders have no leader .
The Ghost Riders turn Garrett into one of their own and they leave Beacon Hills via lightning .
colspan=5Garrett Douglas is an Alpha löwenmensch ( werelion ) who works as a teacher at Beacon Hills High School in season 6 .
He was a Hauptmann ( German for Captain ) in the Nazi Regume during World War II .
In 1943 , Garrett was part of the Ahnenerbre , Heinrich Himmler 's personal project to use the occult to win World War II .
The Nazi captain proposed the use of the Ghost Riders as soldiers in their regume .
However , Garrett intended to take the Ghost Riders for his own purpose .
In the Ruhr Valley in Germany , Garrett and some soldiers attempted to penetrate the rift to the Ghost Riders ' limbo .
However , the Ghost Riders attack and the Germans are easily beaten .
Garrett survived but is wounded by one of their whips .
Still wanting to control the Ghost Riders , Garrett sought help from the Dread Doctors .
Instead , they captured him and encased him in a large tube filled with liquid and used the healing properties in his blood to prolong their lives .
The bleeding from the whip lash " infected the water " and mixed with the fluid from the tube .
The combination made Garrett stronger .
He was soaking it in , absorbing the power for 70 years .
Throughout his captivity , he was known as " Der Soldat " by the Dread Doctors .
At the end of season 5 , he escapes their lair and resumed his efforts to use the Ghost Riders .
Garrett is first seen in season 5A " Strange Frequencies " when Liam Dunbar and Hayden Romero are held captive by the Dread Doctors .
Liam catches a glimpse of him in the tube while looking around the Dread Doctors ' lair .
In " Ouroboros " and " Lies of Omission " , the Doctors use the liquid from Garrett 's tube to rejuvenate their health .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Theo Raeken uses the liquid containing Garrett 's blood to revive Tracy Stewart , Corey Bryant , Josh Diaz and Hayden .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Theo shows Scott McCall and Liam " Der Soldat " and they find Mason Hewitt attached to his tube .
In the season 5 finale " Apotheosis " , after the deaths of the Dread Doctors and the Beast of Gévaudan , Garrett breaks out of the tube and escapes .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost "
, Garrett is teaching a class where students including Hayden and Corey are smitten by his good looks .
Liam , Mason and Corey steal his compass to track down strange magnetic readings .
In " Superposition " , Garrett catches Scott trying to open a locker that is n't his and reminds him that it 's against the rules opening someone else 's locker .
In " Sundowning " , it 's revealed Garrett 's health is bad as a result of his time in the tube when he suffers a coughing fit while teaching a class .
Because of this , he must inhale helium which eases his cough .
He is later revealed to be the one responsible for a series of murders where he kills his victims and eats the pineal gland , which is said to house the soul as he is seen killing a janitor and eating his pineal gland .
In " Ghosted " , Garrett listens in as Liam and Hayden make their next move against the Ghost Riders .
He decides to join them as they plan to trap one , assisting the two teens as they construct their plan .
In " Heartless " , Garrett shows up at the site where a Ghost Rider is held in the cage , non one is around but Theo and the captured Ghost Rider .
He forces Theo to break the mountain ash barrier surrounding the cage .
Garrett enters the cage , attacks the Ghost Rider and kills it by taking a bite out of its head and eats its pineal gland , which grants him the power of a Ghost Rider and changes his eye color to emerald .
He also steals the Ghost Rider 's whip which he uses to erase Corey .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Garrett 's Nazi past is revealed by Theo and part of Garrett 's plan is to find the hellhound .
Once he locates an unresponsive Jordan Parrish , he erases Argent and Melissa McCall .
After awakening Parrish , he commands the hellhound to open the rift , passing through as he does .
In " Riders on the Storm " , Garrett uses Corey to merge the Ghost Riders ' limbo with the real world .
He fights Scott and the Pack to complete his plans to create his own personal supernatural army , but Scott diverts the train before it could enter Beacon Hills .
When the Ghost Riders start to leave , Garrett attempts to take command of them once more .
They surround him and he is turned into a Ghost Rider with a swastika on his arm before he and the Ghost Riders are taken up by the lightning storm .
colspan=5Gwen is a member of the lacrosse team .
She is first seen in season 6A " Sundowning " , where she 's searching for her sister Phoebe who had been taken by the Ghost Riders .
Distraught that no one remembers Phoebe , the only thing Gwen has left of her is a bracelet she wove for her .
When Hayden tells her about the Ghost Riders , Gwen does n't believe her until she sees a Ghost Rider at a party set up to protect her because she is a target .
In " Relics " , Gwen still refuses help despite what happened during the party .
Hayden realises that Gwen wants to be taken because she feels it would n't matter if she disappeared .
When the Ghost Riders arrive during a lacrosse game , Scott and Liam protect Gwen
but she allows the Ghost Riders to take her
and she disappears .
In " Radio Silence " , Gwen is brought to the train station where Stiles and the others are being held and is reunited with her sister .
MINOR CHARACTERS frontotemporal dementia .
At one point when Stiles was young and Claudia was hospitalized she suffered an onset of her illness .
The family visited Claudia .
Suddenly she became irrational , not recognizing Stiles , claiming the boy was trying to kill her , appealing to her distraught husband .
Stilinski attempted to placate his wife saying her illness was affecting her .
Claudia lost herself further attacking her son .
In Season 5 , " Required Reading " , Stiles relives this painful memory after being affected by the novel , The Dread Doctors which subliminally unlocks it from his subconscious .
In season 6A " Superposition " , Claudia is alive and well after the Ghost Riders took Stiles .
She and the Sheriff are married and very much in love .
In " Sundowning " , Claudia comments that she and the Sheriff have had a long day .
He asks if she 's ever had second thoughts about not having kids , to which she replies not once .
In " Relics " , she offers to help Lydia in searching for a relic that belonged to Stiles .
Just as Lydia starts ripping the wallpaper off the hallway wall , Claudia interrupts her .
In " Radio Silence " , Lydia presents Claudia and Sheriff Stilinski with paperwork of Stiles ' jeep
, Claudia claims that she has n't seen the jeep for nearly 18 years and believes it was stolen .
She thinks Lydia should " let it go " , which upsets Lydia .
In " Ghosted " , Claudia is surprised when the Sheriff suggests that someone should write a medical paper on how she survived frontotemporal dementia .
She shoots him down , instead she talks about replacing the ripped wallpaper .
In " Heartless " , after the Sheriff shows her the previously sealed off room , Claudia claims the previous owners could have sealed off the room .
The Sheriff believes that it could 've been Stiles ' room , Claudia says there are simpler explanations than a forgotten son .
Lydia figures out that Claudia is actually a visage , conjured by the Sheriff to subconsciously hide the fact that his son was taken by the Ghost Riders .
In " Blitzkrieg " , Claudia is dragged by the Sheriff to the once sealed off room , claiming they had a son and that everything in his room has returned but Claudia sees nothing .
She tries to fill his head with false memories as he realises he does n't remember her previous birthday and anniversary .
Claudia disappears as the Sheriff realises she is n't real .
In " Riders on the Storm " , the visage of Claudia shows her true face .
She tries to kill Stiles so she can stay
but she is stopped for good by the Sheriff 's bullet and Lydia 's Scream .
colspan=5Talia Hale was Laura , Derek and Cora 's mother , and Peter 's older sister .
Talia was an extremely powerful Alpha , as well as a fully Evolved werewolf ; she had the talent to shapeshift into a fully animal wolf .
Talia was deeply respected by Packs up and down the Pacific coast , she was a leader in the larger werewolf community .
Talia was friends with Satomi Ito and had contact with Alphas Ennis , Deucalion and Kali before they formed their lethal Alpha Pack .
Deaton was Talia 's druid Emissary .
During the skirmish between the Argent hunters and nearby Packs , Talia and Deaton met with Deucalion concerning his proposed peace offering with the Argents .
She advised him against it considering Gerard Argent 's monstrous nature , but demanded that he meet Gerard on equal grounds .
Talia was a wise and loving mother as she comforted Derek after he gave his girlfriend Paige a mercy - killing to end her suffering from Ennis ' Bite , saying his newly changed blue eyes were still beautiful .
She also removed Derek and Peter 's memories of the Nemeton 's location , ostensibly because what happened with Paige was too painful , but likely to prevent Peter from misusing it .
Her children inherited her last name , showing the Hales ' Pack , like the Argents , had a matriarchal leadership .
Her elder daughter , Laura also had the capacity to shapeshift into a full wolf form .
It 's implied Talia taught Laura this power and also groomed Laura to succeed her as the Hales ' Alpha .
Talia appears in flashbacks in the episode " Visionary " in Season 3 .
Talia died in the Hale House fire .
In " Galvanize " of Season 3B , Derek utilizes a channeling ritual with Peter 's help in order to communicate with Talia 's ghost .
Derek envisions meeting his mother in her wolf form atop a manifestation of the Nemeton inside his loft .
Talia revealed to her son that the Hales did n't only live in Beacon Hills , they protected the town .
In " Letharia Vulpina " , Peter has Lydia listen to Talia 's claws to translate a memory Talia had wiped from his mind before her death .
It is revealed Talia had Peter forget he 'd fathered a child – Malia Tate .
It 's revealed Talia had wiped Peter 's memories of his child and that of the mother , as well as taking the child away from the mother who was the Desert Wolf Corrine after birth to protect the soon - to - be - named Malia .
colspan=5Conrad Fenris is a medical doctor at Beacon Hills Memorial Hospital , later a doctor and guard at Eichen House .
Fenris was originally named Dr. Conrad Haberlind .
One time , he came across a woman in Wisconsin who 'd been shot with an arrow .
People who 'd brought the patient in claimed it was a hunting accident .
Fenris had treated the woman , but when the arrow was removed , he saw the skin heal .
Fenris was convinced werewolves existed .
He began a study of the mythology becoming an expert , but over the years he was publicly ridiculed , his life was ruined as a result of his obsession , and subsequently changed his name .
During Season 1 , in the webseries Search for a Cure , Scott and Stiles come across Fenris .
Scott was looking for a cure of being a werewolf and Stiles said Fenris was the closest thing they had to an expert .
They asked Fenris if they could ask him questions concerning his knowledge of werewolves .
Fenris said no , that he was no longer involved with anything like that .
Scott and Stiles later break into his house and Fenris catches them , holding them at gunpoint .
Scott convinces him to put his gun down , saying he 's a doctor , he has an oath to help people , not hurt them , and to just give them five minutes .
Fenris relents .
He gives them a basic rundown of the various stations of werewolves the Alpha , Beta , Omega , and the rights of passage they would conduct during the Wolf moon , the full moon in January .
He 's stressed , saying he needs a cigarette and his housekeeper has hidden them .
Scott and Stiles see a photo of the woman he met in Wisconsin .
Derek Hale is in the picture as well - the woman is presumed to be Talia Hale , his mother .
Scott asks Fenris if he knows if there is any cure for someone who was Bitten .
Fenris says he 's never heard of any cure , despite his expertise .
He demands to know why are they are interested in what he was obsessed with which resulted in his life , both personal and professional , being ruined .
Scott and Stiles are disappointed but are sympathetic in what Fenris has been through .
He insists they leave , but while they are leaving , Scott asks does he still believe .
Fenris says sometimes , but he always returned to reality .
Scott then tells him , if he really needs a cigarette , they 're on the book shelf , behind the books .
He flashes his werewolf eyes , then leaves .
Fenris finds his cigarettes .
Suspiciously , he runs back outside , but Scott had already left .
In " Wolf 's Bane " , Fenris is treating Jackson having a look at the scratches Derek had unintentionally left on the back of his neck .
Fenris tells Jackson he has wolfsbane poisoning from the claw marks .
Derek had been poisoned by wolfsbane and had passed on the infection to Jackson .
In Season 4 , " A Promise to the Dead "
, Fenris is now more integrated into the supernatural world .
He is seen employed at Eichen House , stationed in the secret prison level that houses supernatural beings .
Deaton had returned a wendigo , Patrick Clarke , to the institution .
Fenris thanks Deaton and allows him to see one inmate , Dr. Gabriel Valack .
He advises him against seeing Valack , saying the last person who saw Valack too close " left the cell , but not the building " .
Fenris brings Deaton out after Valack renders him unconscious , exasperated saying " they never listen " .
Fenris has Deaton monitored every hour .
Just when he declares Deaton be moved to level 6 , Lydia comes in to collect Deaton .
Fenris tells her Deaton is not responding to any external stimuli .
Lydia assures him , Deaton will " hear her .
"
In Season 5 " A Novel Approach " , Fenris lets Scott , Stiles , Kira and Lydia come down to the supernatural ward of Eichen House for intel on the Dread Doctors from Valack as a favor to Deaton .
He advises them not to make eye contact with anyone " or anything " .
He informs them mountain ash is highly concentrated in the ward which is why Scott and Kira ca n't go any further because of their werewolf and kitsune status .
In " The Last Chimera " , when a catatonic Lydia is being prepared to be sent to Eichen House by her mum Natalie , Fenris tells Natalie that Lydia will be cared for there .
But Fenris is actually a glamoured Valack .
In " Amplification " , while Scott and his Pack attempt to get Lydia out of Eichen House , a patient in the institution reveals that someone took Fenris away .
colspan=5Mr .
Lahey was Isaac 's father , the owner of the Beacon Hills Cemetery and the swim team coach of Beacon Hills High in 2006 .
His wife is deceased and his elder son Camden died in combat .
Lahey was abusive to Isaac , torturing him by often locking him in the basement freezer .
In the season 2 premiere , he makes fun of Isaac when interrogated by Sheriff Stilinski , and also attacks Isaac during dinner by throwing cutlery at him .
Lahey 's abuse of Isaac is what set the teenager on the quest to become part of Derek 's Pack and get the confidence and power he lacked .
Lahey is later murdered by the Kanima .
Even after all the abuse and his death , Isaac still has fond memories of him , as his father was Isaac 's emotional anchor for gaining control during the full moon .
In " Fury " , it is revealed the swim team had won a state championship and Lahey had invited the team over his house for a pool party and have some drinks to celebrate .
Matt reveals that Lahey had rescued him from drowning in the pool when he was nine .
Lahey had cruelly berated Matt about not knowing how to swim and made him tell no one about the incident at his house ( as he would 've got in trouble if it was revealed he was letting the swim team drink alcohol ) .
It 's revealed that Matt 's rage at Lahey for the incident caused Jackson to shift into his Kanima form and kill Lahey ( the Kanima seeks a Master that desires vengeance on others to control the shapeshifter ) .
colspan=5Henry Tate is Malia 's adoptive father , the husband of the deceased Evelyn Tate , and the father of an unnamed deceased younger daughter .
Henry is out of the loop about Malia 's werecoyote status , her activities with Scott 's Pack , and the supernatural in general .
Eight years previously , Henry 's family was caught in a car accident that caused the car to slide off the road into a ravine in the Beacon Hills Preserve .
Evelyn and his younger daughter were killed , but Malia 's body was never found .
Henry spent the next eight years alone to deal with the tragedy of losing his family .
In " Anchors " , Sheriff Stilinski reopens the case when he notices the night of the accident was on a full moon and suspects a werewolf could have caused the accident .
Henry finds belongings of Malia 's from the night of the accident and wants to kill the coyote that supposedly killed mauled his family and/or killed Malia ; in reality Malia was the animal as a werecoyote .
He brings out rifles and bear traps , and almost kills Malia but Scott and his Pack save her .
After eight years as a coyote , she is returned to human form by Scott ; Henry is tearfully reunited with Malia .
Malia now lives back with him , but she later learns she was adopted .
By Season 5 , Malia has settled back into her father - daughter dynamic with Henry .
Henry is seen in " Creatures of the Night " during a big storm where he rallies a party of people to lift an overlarge , uprooted tree .
Malia easily lifts the tree with her super strength .
Malia is checking her phone for her summer school test results so she can be a senior .
Henry comforts and eases Malia telling her
she 'll find out when she finds out .
Malia is then picked up by Scott , Liam and Stiles in Stiles ' jeep for the annual senior scribe .
After Stiles kisses Malia , Henry warns the boys that he owns a gun , then walks away with a lopsided smirk .
colspan=5Dr .
Geyer is Liam 's step - father , the husband of his mother , a hospital administrator and co - worker of Melissa at Beacon Hills Memorial .
Geyer is intelligent , accomplished doctor as well as athletic having played lacrosse and was team captain when he was in high school , and he went to Harvard Med in college .
Geyer used to play lacrosse with Liam in Liam 's youth , and seems dedicated to help his step - son overcome his rage problems .
Geyer and his wife are unaware of Liam 's transition into the supernatural world as a new werewolf , as well as his role in Scott 's Pack .
Geyer is first seen in " Muted " , conversing with Melissa regarding the financial mess the hospital is in .
When Liam is admitted to the hospital after Scott accidentally injures him during lacrosse practice , he talks with his dad
admits it was his fault as he took on two juniors .
Geyer shows him sympathy , while also saying they 'd always agreed to " Play smart , not hard . "
In " Time of Death " , Geyer is paged when Scott is forwarded to the hospital , supposedly dead .
Geyer springs into action , having personal prep Scott for defibrillation .
He shocks a number of times , but fails .
He sets the defibrillator to 360 and shocks one last time .
Scott remains asystole .
Grimly , Geyer decides to call in and marks the time of death .
He asks someone to page Melissa .
He informs Melissa causing her to break down uncontrollably and he tries console her .
Geyer did n't know Melissa was only acting : Scott 's death was a ruse as part of a plan to flush out the Benefactor .
When Noshiko is injured by the Berserkers , Geyer runs in and sees Melissa applying pressure and immediately runs to get help .
When Scott is revealed to be alive , Geyer wants Scott to return to the hospital so to run some tests , as well as answers to many questions .
In Season 5 , " Condition Terminal "
, Geyer and Melissa are paged when teenager Corey is placed in the hospital .
When Geyer asks what 's wrong with him , Melissa indicates the large gash , and melted flesh on his left arm .
They attempt to do whatever they can for Corey , pumping him full of morphine to no use .
Geyer leaves Corey with Melissa , asking her to see whatever she can do for the teen , while he goes off to find an anesthesiologist .
In " The Last Chimera " , Geyer treats Stilinski after he 's attacked , mauled then forwarded to the hospital and immediately starts to stitch him up .
Later , however , Stilinski 's body starts to break down from minor internal bleeding .
Geyer fruitlessly works on him with Melissa to no use which leaves him frustrated .
Geyer talks with Melissa saying he does n't have a clue how to save Stilinski , but tells her he 's noticed the weird , inexplicable activity that happens in Beacon Hills , that she seems to know something , and nothing seems to faze her .
Melissa firmly responds she could tell him really bizarre things , but nothing right now that can save Stilinski .
Later Melissa runs up to Geyer , saying they have to perform surgery on Stilinski , open him up because he 's being poisoned by a piece of bone marrow stuck inside him , to his total confusion .
Melissa admits it does not make any sense , but demands that Geyer open Stilinski up right away .
Geyer complies and during the surgery , finds and removes the piece of bone .
Stilinski recovers .
colspan=5Lorraine Martin was Lydia 's paternal grandmother , and also a banshee .
When Lydia was a little girl , Lorraine would read The Little Mermaid to Lydia as a bedtime story .
For a few months , Lydia would insist on being called ' Ariel ' which Lorraine thought was adorable .
Lorraine owned a lake house , along with a boathouse out in the Beacon Hills Preserve , which was inherited by her family .
In the 1970s , Lorraine was in love with a woman named Maddy .
Lorraine worked for IBM in San Francisco .
One weekend , at the office , Lorraine heard a strange sound .
She heard rain and thunder , but when she looked outside it was a clear blue sky .
The sound became so loud , Lorraine Screamed : she was a banshee .
Maddy was about to be going out on the lake , so Lorraine suspiciously asked her about the weather .
Maddy replied it was clear at the lakehouse too , so Lorraine said nothing about what she heard .
The thunderstorm she 'd heard in her premonition however arrived while Maddy was out on the lake , there was an accident , and Maddy died .
Lorraine spent years trying to learn how she 'd known the rain would be coming , how she knew Maddy was going to die before knowing it happened .
She brought in parapsychologists , pseudoscientists who designed the study in the lakehouse along with the record player , and later on , mediums and psychics .
Everything failed , until Lorraine found Meredith Walker at Eichen House .
Meredith was brought in one day .
She put on headphones for tests , but the sound almost killed her and ended up hospitalized .
In Season 4 , " Time of Death " Lydia learns of Lorraine 's story and legacy .
In Lorraine 's will Lydia had been left behind instructions to scatter Lorraine 's ashes out onto the lake , but what she found in the urn was not her ashes , but mountain ash , as well as computer code .
This new code was a list of people who were murdered by Brunski at Eichen House , he being a serial killer .
Lydia surmises in " Perishable " Lorraine eventually experienced another death prediction : the entire Dead Pool situation which would actually occur in the present .
Lorraine had written the entire code which would ironically be used as the actual hit list , and had provided the actual computer servers which would serve as the Dead Pool .
Lorraine 's " erratic behavior " strained her relationship with her son , Lydia 's father .
Eventually , she was declared mentally ill , and was interned at Eichen House .
In Season 5 , " Required Reading " , Lydia experiences a flashback where she saw Lorraine after walking right into Eichen House when she was a little girl .
Lorraine had drilled a hole into her head using trephination .
Noticing Lydia , Lorraine looked up .
The elderly banshee gave her granddaughter a message .
" They 're coming , Lydia .
They 're coming for all of us . "
Lorraine had predicted the arrival of the pseudo - supernaturals , the Dread Doctors .
One day , Lorraine had one final premonition .
She escaped Eichen House and headed to the lakehouse .
She was in the study , listening to the record player when Brunski came upon her .
He injected Lorraine with a syringe , and Lorraine asphyxiated .
Brunski recorded his murder of her , and plays the tape for Lydia .
Lorraine had predicted Lydia 's own near - death experience at the hands of Brunski .
Lydia hears her grandmother 's final breaths pleading with Brunski not to hurt " Ariel " , her nickname for her granddaughter .
colspan=5Deputy Cordova is a Sheriff 's deputy at the Sheriff 's station first seen in Season 3 .
In " Riddled " , Cordova and Deputy Jordan Parrish are introduced when Stiles is reported missing due to his parasomnias .
Stilinski orders Cordova to get a list of any industrial basements or sub - levels Stiles could have wandered into while sleepwalking .
Stilinski orders everyone to work fast .
In Season 5 , " Creatures of the Night " , Cordova is seen alongside Deputy Clark dragging delinquent Donovan Donati into the station for his latest petty crime .
In " Required Reading " , Cordova is again seen with Clark investigating holes seen in the school 's sports field ( the Dread Doctors ' incubation process for the Chimeras ) .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Cordova is seen at the sheriff 's station when Parrish causes the overheating in the station due to his hellhound side taking over .
Stiles warns the other deputies including Cordova not to get in Parrish 's way .
In " Sword and the Spirit " , Cordova is seen among several deputies walking through the school with shotguns .
colspan=5Severo Calavera is a member of the Calavera werewolf hunters and is Araya 's right - hand man .
Severo is rather quiet , letting Araya do the talking .
He is shown to share Araya 's zealotry towards supernatural people , though follows her orders unquestioningly and obeys the Hunter 's Code .
In " More Bad than Good " , Severo is seen electrocuting Derek and Peter when the clan had captured the two wolves during their mission in South America to retrieve Talia 's claws .
He demanded the location of the " La - Loba " from the two Hales .
When Derek and Peter say they do n't know what he is talking about .
Severo has one of his men start up a chainsaw threatening to cut one of them in half taunting
then he wonders how far their healing goes , sure they ca n't grow back their head .
They are called off by Araya .
Severo is again seen in " The Divine Move " at Derek 's loft cornering the werewolf with a team at his back .
He is again demanding Derek for the location of the " La - Loba " or the " she - wolf " .
Derek tells Severo to just kill him , because he 's never telling them where to find Cora .
It turns out Cora is n't who Severo is talking about .
Right then , a smoke bomb goes off in the loft and Severo 's men are killed by unseen assailant , the La - Loba , Kate Argent , but Severo slips away .
In " The Dark Moon " , Severo is seen when Scott 's Pack infiltrate the Calaveras ' club in search of Derek .
He assists Araya in her interrogation and torture of Scott .
In " I.E.D " , Severo faces off against Argent in a standoff with their guns drawn , when the Calaveras arrive in Beacon Hills to recruit Argent in hunting Kate .
Severo is seen during the Calaveras ' stand against Kate and her Berserker in " Smoke and Mirrors " .
He grimly stands at Araya 's side as Kate is mauled by a fully transformed Derek Hale .
After Kate escapes and her Berserker destroyed , Severo is among the few survivors of Kate 's onslaught .
colspan=5This
unnamed homeless man appeared in the Season 2 premiere " Omega " .
He is first seen outside Beacon Hills high school , scouring through a dustbin for food and was accosted by Jackson , who gave him a single dollar and told him to " go find another parking lot to die in " .
The man is later revealed to have been the werewolf at the Beacon Hills cemetery who stole a liver to eat and the culprit who 'd attacked an ambulance , when Scott and Stiles assumed it was Lydia turning into a werewolf .
He briefly fought Scott in his shifted form , but was caught in a trip - wire left by the Argents .
Scott attempted to help him but Derek held Scott back when Argent and Gerard arrived , along with their crew and interrogated the captured werewolf .
The man fearfully said he came to Beacon Hills looking for the Alpha .
He begged for his life saying he hurt no one , that the patient was n't alive in the ambulance when he broke in .
The Argents realize the werewolf is an Omega werewolf , one without a Pack .
Gerard then draws a broadsword , stating an Omega rarely survives and mercilessly slices the man in half .
colspan=5Danielle is the extremely sassy best friend of Heather .
Danielle first appears in Season 2 , as a random attendee of Lydia 's birthday party .
Seeing Scott 's unsuccessful attempts to sober Stiles up , Danielle dunks Stiles in the pool .
Since she did n't appear to be hallucinating , she seems to have avoided the wolfsbane - spiked punch being served by the Peter - possessed Lydia .
In Season 3 , Danielle is Heather 's best friend and is seen at Heather 's birthday .
When Heather reveals that she plans to lose her virginity , Danielle gives her advice about choosing the right guy , but she also seems to disapprove of Heather 's decision .
Later on , Stiles and Lydia see Danielle is in counseling , still trying to handle the death of Heather , although after seeing the dozens of identical drawings of the Nemeton Lydia has produced , declares that she has bigger issues and departs .
colspan=5Dr .
Vandenburg is a doctor who works at Beacon Hills Memorial Hospital .
He lives in Hill Valley , a neighbouring town .
In the season 3 premiere " Tattoo " , he is sent to perform surgery on Isaac Lahey but found the boy 's wounds have miraculously healed .
Angered by this , Vandenburg tells an orderly ( Ennis in disguise ) to wheel Isaac out .
In " The Overlooked " , Cora Hale was his patient at the hospital ( she had been injured by Aiden and later poisoned with mistletoe by the Darach ) .
Vandenburg evacuated the hospital during a powerful storm due to a flood alert in Hill Valley .
In season 3B , " Galvanise " , he operated on and then attacked by William Barrow who was controlled by the Nogitsune via a tumour filled with flies .
In " Riddled " , he performed Stiles Stilinski 's MRI scan , checking to see if Stiles has frontotemporal dementia , the same disease that killed his mum Claudia Stilinski .
In season 4 , " Perishable " , Vandenburg is preparing to remove a bullet from Sheriff Stilinski 's shoulder after he was shot by Deputy Haigh who tried to shoot Deputy Jordan Parrish who had survived an attempt on his life .
In " Monstrous " , he appears in Meredith Walker 's flashback where he leads a group and discusses hers and Peter Hale 's conditions ( Meredith was hospitalised after she was almost killed by Lorraine Martin 's tests , while Peter went into a self - induced coma after being badly burnt in the Hale House Fire ) .
colspan=5Heather was a childhood friend of Stiles , who knew each other since they were three years old .
Their mothers were best friends before Stiles ' died .
Stiles said that they were playmates from their time as children and played a lot together .
Heather planned to lose her virginity on her seventeenth birthday and decided that Stiles would be her " first " .
However , due to the fact that she was a Virgin , the Darach kidnaps and kills Heather on her birthday , before she can sleep with Stiles .
Her death causes Stiles great pain and also motivates him to find out who the Darach is and why Heather was killed .
colspan=5Deputy Tara Graeme was Sheriff Stilinski 's assistant deputy .
Tara was close to the Stilinski family , she used to help Stiles with his homework when he was younger , when he had to wait for his father to finish his working hours at the station , after Stiles finished school for the day .
Tara is first seen in " Fireflies " when she and Stilinski meet with a girl named Caitlin , who 'd happened across " a girl with glowing eyes and fangs , and claws " ( Cora Hale , who was feral under the full moon ) .
Tara subsequently appears in " Unleashed " helping Stilinski coroner off the area on the school 's cross country track where a student , Kyle , is found murdered and comforting his girlfriend Ashley , and in " Currents " at the animal clinic after Deaton has been abducted .
Tara arrives at the high school late at night in " The Girl Who Knew Too Much " .
She had responded to a potential 911 call .
When she searches the school , she sees a pair of immobile feet supposedly being dragged into the locker room .
She moves into the locker room , gun drawn .
In the shower , Tara sees a corpse , against the wall - herself .
Shocked immobile , the Darach comes from behind and strangles her dead .
Her body is placed exactly as she saw in the illusion .
Stilinski and Stiles are shocked and affected by her death : Stilinski is determined that the killer is not getting away with one of his own .
Scott 's Pack believed Tara was sacrificed as a Guardian , being in law enforcement .
It is later revealed by Stiles , Tara was not always a cop , she used to be a middle school teacher , so she was actually sacrificed as a Philosopher .
colspan=5Jared is a student at Beacon Hills High .
In the episode " Frayed " , the cross country team was on a bus ride to a meet .
Jared was feeling really carsick and Coach Finstock threatened him not throw up or he 'd throw up on Jared and promised it to be " profoundly disgusting " , which only made Jared feel worse .
Later Stiles sits down next to him , greets him , grinning evilly and somehow has him throw up heavily .
So heavily , the bus has to pull over at a rest area as Stiles intended because Scott was n't healing from an Alpha 's wound .
Jared is seen again on the bus in " Letharia Vulpina " , where he 's holding a suspected bomb wrapped up as a birthday present , the same M.O. as the crime William Barrow had committed some time before .
Jared is sweating heavily , scared stiff when all the other students are evacuated .
When Deputy Parrish inspects the bomb , he asks Jared not to through up on the suspected bomb .
Parrish succeeds in distracting Jared responding to his statement to his appearance to keep him occupied .
Parrish opens the container , Jared winces , closing his eyes shut but the bomb turns out to be a fake .
colspan=5Paige Krasikeva was a student at Beacon Hills High .
Paige was in the school 's music class , playing the cello .
She was Derek 's first love , when they were both freshman , when Derek was 15 .
Paige first met Derek , one day at school when he was causing too much noise for her to do her cello lessons .
Despite not liking Derek at first , the two began a relationship and began to fall deeply in love with each other .
Their favorite rendezvous was the abandoned distillery on the outskirts of Beacon Hills .
Derek was content in his relationship with Paige .
His uncle Peter , ostensibly , gave the relationship his support saying Paige is " perfect for him " .
But duplicitous as always , Peter deceptively talked Derek into the idea of turning Paige , to remove any inhibitions between her and Derek .
After much persuasion , Derek reluctantly agreed to the idea .
Paige had received a note supposedly from Derek , telling her to meet him late at the school one night .
Peter had approached Ennis , an Alpha werewolf who was needing a new member for his Pack , to give Paige the Bite .
Ennis appears attacking Paige to her fright .
When Derek hears Paige 's screams of fright , he changes his mind at once .
He tries to stop it but is too late , Ennis had already bitten Paige .
Unfortunately , Derek saw the transformation was n't taking effect .
Paige was expelling black blood ; an effect of the Bite being fatal to her instead .
Derek immediately takes Paige to the root cellar , the Nemeton , cradling her and fervently tries to save her life , siphoning away her pain .
Paige asks him if she 's going to die , Derek morosely nods yes .
Paige tells Derek she suspected he was different , e.g. he 'd say how he 'd catch a scent , hear things .
She comforts Derek , telling him she loved him anyway .
Paige eventually let out a plea
she ca n't take the pain anymore .
Grief - stricken , Derek takes Paige gently in his arms , and hugs her with enough strength to break her neck , giving his first love a mercy - kill .
Having taken an innocent life , Derek 's werewolf eyes changed from yellow to blue , and Paige 's death would haunt him in the years that followed .
In the present timeline , it was later revealed to Derek by Jennifer Blake that because Paige was a virgin and had died in the Nemeton , her Virgin status gave the tree a spark of power .
This lone ember of magic gave the nearly - dead Jennifer the ability to survive her attack from the Alpha werewolf , Kali , just months later .
colspan=5William Barrow is a former electrical engineer who worked at a power substation in Beacon Hills .
Barrow is a convicted mass murderer .
He 'd walked onto a school bus , carrying a shrapnel bomb disguised as a birthday present .
The bomb went off killing four kids and left a fifth with no legs .
Barrow was arrested and convicted , but shrapnel from the force of his explosion got lodged inside his body .
Barrow is supernaturally aware , saying the kids he murdered had " glowing eyes " .
After he was convicted , Barrow was held at the Eichen House mental hospital .
In " Galvanize " , Barrow is forwarded to Beacon Hills Memorial to extract the shrapnel from his body .
Melissa McCall takes his pre - op interview , to her discomfort .
He rambles to her that he murdered those kids because he claims they had " glowing eyes " , which makes Melissa and the Sheriff suspicious of him .
During his surgery , a tumor emerges from inside his body which bursts open and flies come out of it and in the mayhem Barrow escapes from the hospital and heads to the high school .
He performs minor surgery on himself closing his surgical wound with a stapler .
Scott and his allies are on high alert , searching for him after Melissa and the Sheriff let him know of his " glowing eyes " statement .
Barrow is able to disguise his scent using the chemicals he found in the chemistry lab , where he was able to hide from the werewolves trying to track him .
Barrow had been left an unexplained coded message on a blackboard for him to kill Kira Yukimura .
He shows up at the Yukimura residence knocking Scott unconscious and abducting Kira .
He holds Kira hostage at his old power substation .
He takes Kira 's phone and takes pictures with the flash on it , exposing Kira 's Kitsune nature .
He subdues Scott who attempts to rescue Kira and he attempts to murder Kira by zapping her with a live electric wire .
Kira is electrified , but the current does n't harm or kill her , because she is a Thunder Kitsune .
Her Foxfire talent manifests , blasting the electrical field and absorbing the gigawatts through her hands .
Barrow was knocked aside from the blast , but was n't seen again after that .
It 's currently unknown if Barrow was killed or knocked unconscious or if he was recaptured or is still on the run .
Its later revealed Barrow was controlled by the Nogitsune through the flies that were present in his body .
The Nogitsune had maneuvered Barrow into activating Kira 's Foxfire talent when Barrow made the move to kill her with a live wire , to super - charge the Void Kitsune 's power and control over Stiles ' body .
colspan=5Katashi , also known as Silverfinger , was a member of the Yakuza , the Japanese organized crime syndicate .
He underwent a ritual called yubitsume because of a faux pas he 'd committed and he paid by cutting off part of his little finger .
Afterwards he wore a silver prosthetic and went by the name " Silverfinger " because of it .
He was part of the Yakuza entourage at the gun deal with an 18-year - old Argent in the past .
Directly at sunset , three Oni appeared and when the Yakuza uselessly opened fire on the demonic beings , they killed everyone in their path and impaled the kumichō which was possessed by a supernatural being .
Katashi rose to flee , but an Oni got in his way under the impression he intended to take them on .
Argent saved his life by firing at the Oni in the face , shattering the demon 's mask , giving both of them time to escape .
In " Silverfinger " , Argent , along with Allison and Isaac track down Katashi for information regarding the samurai - like entities that have appeared in Beacon Hills .
They deal with his private security , which included a werewolf named Kincaid , until Katashi calls them off after Argent shows him the very same broken mask Argent had shot off twenty - four years earlier .
Silverfinger reveals that the beings are demons called the Oni and they are hunting for the dark , malevolent form of the Kitsune , the Nogitsune which possesses a host and draws its power from strife and chaos , pain and tragedy .
He also reveals that the marks left on victims of the Oni is the Japanese kanji for self [ 己 ] indicating that said victim is still themselves and is not possessed by the Nogitsune .
He declares to Argent that he owes him his life , his honor because when Argent saved his life from before as Katashi had intended to flee and according to Yakuza code he would 've paid with his " head " for such an act of cowardice .
Silverfinger concludes with a warning that if they have a Nogitsune amongst them , they should let the Oni destroy it .
In the episode " Letharia Vulpina " , Silverfinger is revealed to be murdered , supposedly by the Nogitsune and his death is blamed on by Derek and Argent when they got arrested .
colspan=5Kincaid is a werewolf with blue eyes .
In " Silverfinger " , he is first seen as the mobster Katashi 's main bodyguard .
Kincaid meets Isaac posing as an arms dealer selling a rare antique gun from Argent 's private collection to Katashi as a decoy for Allison and Argent to sneak into Katashi 's estate .
Kincaid catches onto Isaac and threateningly relays a story about the very gun to Isaac about a legendary duel between two brothers .
He reveals the duel was a cover story , used for one of the brothers being bitten in the woods by something " monstrous " and by the family 's code of honor the other brother put down his sibling .
Ironically , Kincaid bears unsheathed werewolf claws during the entire interview .
He restrains Isaac and brings him to Katashi , but when Katashi recognizes Argent , he lets Isaac go .
After Katashi is found murdered , Kincaid raids the federal transport vehicle in " Echo House " containing all the evidence surrounding the murder including his silver prosthetic and takes the finger .
Scott 's allies confronts him saying they need the finger .
Kincaid attempts to make a deal , saying it is worth $ 3 million .
When they demand the finger anyway , Kincaid takes the gang on , knocking Kira and Allison aside and beating Scott down , stating that the young werewolf has the eyes of an Alpha , but lacks the strength .
Ethan and Aiden overpower Kincaid and almost kill him , but Scott orders them to spare him and takes the Shugendō scroll from the prosthetic , saying they 're there to " save a life , not end one " .
colspan=5Ikeda is a Yakuza mobster living in Japan .
His pet wolf Yuki was unwell and had not moved for hours .
His bodyguards had called in Deaton to treat Yuki .
Deaton inspected the immobile wolf and asked if Yuki had been around any moss - like plant and asks for a sample to help treat the wolf .
Ikeda takes Deaton to the garden of his estate , the same location where Argent had conducted his first arms deal with the Yakuza , seen the Oni appear and slain the Nogitsune - possessed kumichō twenty - four years earlier .
The same kumichō happened to be Ikeda 's father .
Deaton asks Ikeda to hold a jar for him and takes a sample of the plant he was looking for , letharia vulpina , off a fountain .
In the past , Ikeda 's Nogitsune father had bled all over the very fountain when the Oni had impaled him on their Ninjatos .
When Deaton brought up the subject of his father , Ikeda pulled a gun on him .
Deaton revealed he had n't poisoned Yuki , he 'd given the wolf a paralytic toxin , Kanima venom , the same he 'd applied to the jar Ikeda was holding .
Ikeda falls paralyzed .
Deaton and Argent had set up the ruse at Ikeda 's estate to obtain a sample of the plant because it was quite special being born out of the Nogitsune 's blood and was used to poison the Nogitsune possessing Stiles .
colspan=5Oliver is a patient at Eichen House .
Oliver has to be restrained at night under the institution 's " five - point restrain system " and is under treatment for trephination .
He was Stiles ' roommate , when Stiles checks himself in at Eichen House to prevent himself from harming anyone else under the Nogitsune 's possession .
Oliver shows Stiles around .
He says Eichen House is nicknamed ' Echo House ' because of the echoes that can run through the facility at night .
Oliver mentions he 'd swallowed a fly the other day .
When Stiles and Malia are lurking around in the basement , Oliver attacks them knocking Malia out and restraining Stiles .
Stiles suddenly sees the Nogitsune 's spiritual form , and realizes the Nogitsune is controlling Oliver through the fly that he had swallowed .
The Void kitsune affirms this saying , " Every Dracula needs a Renfield " .
The Nogitsune has Oliver threaten to drill a hole into Malia 's head to have Stiles let the dark spirit back into Stiles ' head .
Stiles complies .
After that , Oliver is knocked unconscious by Stiles .
colspan=5Corporal Rhys was a medic corporal in the army that was stationed at Camp Oak Creek that housed the Japanese - American interns during WWII .
Rhys was in love with an intern , the Kitsune Noshiko Yukimura , the two of them meeting discreetly in a clandestine romance .
Noshiko would steal supplies from the camp 's storage to subtly improve the lives of her fellow interns while Rhys would look the other way , while also quietly supporting her antics , passively returning a baseball to a young intern named Michio .
Rhys was about to be transferred to North Africa and Noshiko started helping him learn French when they uncover a corrupt conspiracy on the camp .
Rhys ' two underlings , Merrick and Hayes , along with the camp doctor were selling medical supplies on the black market during an outbreak of pneumonia resulting in several deaths and a riot between the officers and the angry interns .
Rhys immediately stepped into the riot preventing the soldiers from opening fire on the interns and tried to diffuse the chaos .
Rhys unfortunately was set aflame by a werewolf intern named Satomi much to Noshiko 's horror .
Because the doctor had also sold the morphine , Rhys died in absolute agony .
Noshiko 's fury over the death of her boyfriend was a key factor in her decision in unleashing the Nogitsune : unfortunately rather than possess Noshiko as she intended , the Dark Kitsune possessed Rhys ' corpse as it began its terror spree at Oak Creek and Eichen House .
Noshiko , with the help of Satomi , exorcised the Nogitsune from Rhys ' corpse and gave him peace .
Rhys was buried in the basement of Eichen House with a photo of Noshiko and her shattered katana with the Japanese kanji for " self " marked on the wall to show that he died as himself .
colspan=5Deputy Haigh is a police deputy at the Sheriff 's station .
Haigh is rather obnoxious and ill - mannered , the kind of cop that will definitely give a driver a ticket after pulling them over no matter the circumstances .
In " 117 " , Haigh is first seen with Parrish when they come across a de - aged Derek Hale at the condemned site of the Hale House .
Haigh accosts the newly teenaged Derek for trespassing on a restricted site , shouting at him , calling him a " dumbass " .
Parrish suggests he try a gentler approach , but after Derek snaps from Haigh 's rudeness and assaults him , the deputy zaps the werewolf with a taser .
When Derek is held at the station , he tells Parrish that Haigh is an idiot and Parrish does n't disagree .
Haigh is seen in " Perishable " , where he 's tied Parrish 's hands to his steering wheel of his cruiser .
He pours gasoline over the car .
Parrish is shocked at Haigh 's actions .
Haigh says Parrish is worth $ 5 million the Dead Pool .
Parrish tries to talk him out of his actions , but Haigh throws gasoline on Parrish , throws in a lighter , setting him on fire .
Haigh is seen at the station hoping to collect Parrish 's bounty on his laptop , suddenly Parrish walks having survived the fire unharmed because of his unknown supernatural status .
Parrish , out of anger , attacks Haigh and beats him into submission .
Haigh is incarcerated afterward , and is in the interrogation room , confronted by Braeden in her US Marshall cover .
She breaks his nose .
Braeden learns from Haigh of the planned assassination of Scott , Liam and Malia at the school 's annual lacrosse bonfire .
colspan=5Ms .
Fleming is the math teacher at Beacon Hills High , first seen in " Muted " .
Ms. Fleming is middle - aged , of Latina descent and a brusque , no - nonsense high school teacher who expects the best from her students .
In " Orphaned " , Ms. Fleming notices Stiles , Lydia and Kira are missing and lets Malia know .
Malia bluntly offers to find them " by scent " .
Confused , Ms. Fleming decides to mark them as absent .
When Malia hears Derek 's call for help , she gets up and leaves .
Ms. Fleming interrogates Malia if she 's permitted to just leave the class , Malia says " Yeah " as if it is obvious , confusing the teacher more .
In season 5B episode " Codominance " , Ms Fleming takes notice of Scott , Stiles and Lydia 's absence .
She labels it " coincidential " that Scott and Stiles are sick on the same day ( in reality , Scott and Stiles were actually driving to New Mexico to get Kira back ) .
When she brings up Lydia 's absence , Theo claims it 's due to medical issues ( in truth , Lydia was in Eichen House ) .
In season 6A episode " Superposition " , Ms. Fleming hands back tests in which Malia scored a D- .
When Lydia notices Malia 's anger over her results , she tries to distract Ms. Fleming who tells her that she wo n't give extra credit for alternate equations on ( Lydia 's ) own theoretical findings .
colspan=5Sean Walcott lived in Beacon Hills with his parents David and Christina , and older brother Michael .
His entire family was murdered by the assassin , ' the Mute ' in their house one night .
Sean survived , and managed to escape to Beacon Hills Memorial .
Melissa looked after him and there was a sheriff 's deputy placed outside his room .
Lydia and Deputy Parrish discovered Sean 's family kept a meat locker full of human corpses in plastic bags beneath the house - to ration .
The Walcotts were wendigos , beings that need human flesh and blood for sustenance .
Back at the hospital , Sean gave into his nature , his hunger and urges , and shapeshifted , his eyes glowing glassy white and displaying a double row of fangs .
He killed the deputy guarding him and fed on his insides .
Next he attacked Melissa , but after being stopped by Scott , Sean took Liam to the roof of the hospital and held him hostage .
Scott tried to convince Sean to let Liam go , that whatever type of being Sean is , he can help Sean .
Sean yells at Scott that he ca n't help Sean : " Wendigos do n't need help .
We need food ! " .
In the ensuing struggle , Liam was thrown over hospital roof , dangling from the edge and Sean had Scott 's arms pinned , forcing Scott to Bite Liam to save him from falling .
Sean was then hacked in the back with a tomahawk by ' the Mute ' , killing him .
Sean and his family were all on the Dead Pool , each family member worth $ 250k .
colspan=5Simon
" The Chemist " was a biochemist and an assassin hired by the Benefactor .
Simon utilized a weaponized variant of Canine distemper to kill his victims which was lethal to supernaturals while only temporary for humans .
This virus eliminates members of Satomi 's Pack .
Simon posed as a proctor for the junior years ' PSATs .
He infected the juniors with the virus through an ink pad as the students had to sign in with an inked thumbprint for the examinations .
The virus hit infecting most of the students including Scott , Kira and Malia as well as Coach Finstock as he 'd touched the ink pad by accident .
Stiles uncovered the cause of the contraction of the virus , just when Simon cornered him .
Simon pulled a gun on Stiles and threatened to kill Stiles if he did n't tell him where the Pack was so he could have visual confirmation for their deaths to receive payment .
Stiles attempts to fool him by saying they 're in the library , but he puts the gun to Stiles ' forehead .
Simon threatens he 'll shoot at the count of three unless he gives them up , but he is shot by Rafael McCall beforehand .
colspan=5Sydney is a junior at Beacon Hills High in Season 4 .
Sydney is a classmate of Scott 's Pack .
Sydney is first seen in " Weaponized " when the juniors are taking the PSATs .
Sydney collapses during the examination .
Natalie Martin checks on her , seeing the red and white welts on her wrist courtesy of the virus caused by ' the Chemist ' .
When the school 's put under quarantine by the CDC , Sydney is seen in the triage area .
She 's upset as the PSATs are necessary for the National Merit Scholarship and her parents ca n't afford to send her off to college without it .
Scott comforts her saying they 'll let her take the tests again .
When the virus passes , Sydney is seen as all the sick wake up healthy .
Sydney is seen in " A Promise to the Dead " , sitting in the stands with Mason cheering Liam on in the game against Devonford Prep .
Sydney is seen in Season 5 " Parasomnia " , in AP Biology along with Scott , Kira and Lydia when Mrs. Finch begins the class .
In " Condition Terminal " , in the same class , when Mrs. Finch is talking about DNA sets in the same individual , and a mythological creature called a chimera that features such a phenomenon .
Sydney pipes up saying the chimera is of Greek mythology and has both a lion and goat 's heads and a snake for a tail .
Mrs. Finch thanks her , but is not impressed by her reading the Wikipedia entry off her phone .
In " Required Reading " , in AP Biology , Sydney is seen stressed pulling roots of her hair out .
Eventually she stands up , handing Mrs. Finch her signed drop form for the class .
Mrs. Finch tells Sydney " Wise decision .
" Sydney then heads to Natalie 's office .
Lydia enters asking her is something wrong .
She replies she 's been losing her hair for three years because of stress , she 's tried methods to cope with it , including hypnotism , medication .
Lydia offers to do something about her bald patch .
Sydney shows her the spot , but then the banshee faints .
Sydney immediately informs Natalie about her daughter .
In " A Credible Threat " , Sydney attends the charity lacrosse game where she sits next to Hayden Romero and unknowingly hits Stiles in the head after he tries to check her shoes for blood .
In " Maid of Gevaudan " , she hides in the school library along with several other students when the Beast of Gévaudan attacks the school .
Scott has Sydney and the other students move to safety in time before the Beast enters the library .
In the season 6 premiere , Sydney is tasked with taking photos of each student for the Beacon Hills High School yearbook .
However , several interruptions from Stiles forces Malia to leave before Sydney could take her photo .
In " Relics " , Sydney attends the lacrosse game with Lori Talbot where the Ghost Riders appear and take people .
colspan=5Lori
Talbot is a born Beta werewolf of Satomi 's Pack with gold eyes and Brett Talbot 's younger sister .
Brett and Lori 's parents were killed in a fire .
Afterwards , they were adopted by Satomi .
Lori and Brett are friends and allies of Scott and his Pack .
Lori is the youngest and most innocent member seen in Satomi 's Pack .
After meeting and being saved by Scott , she later displays a sense of courage , strong will and some newly gained combat skills .
In Season 4 , Satomi 's Pack were all in hiding , on the run from the Dead Pool , Lori herself being worth $ 250k .
Lori and Brett were running for their lives from hunters - turned - assassins at night , but are saved by Kira .
Lori and her older brother regroup with Satomi and the remaining members of their Pack and Kira brings them to the animal clinic .
Lori and their entire Pack meet Scott , the True Alpha .
Scott immediately has them all hide at the Argent Arms Int .
warehouse .
During the stand between Scott 's allies and the assassins , Lori becomes separated from her brother .
She comes face - to - face with an assassin with his laser sight between her eyes .
Lori closes her eyes waiting death , but she is saved by Scott .
Once Scott 's Pack terminate the Dead Pool , the assassins retreat since the prices have all been terminated .
In Season 5 , " A Credible Threat " Brett and Lori assist Scott 's Pack in their mission to prevent the Beast of Gévaudan 's next predicted strike at the charity lacrosse game .
Lori searches the bleachers for the clue to the host 's identity , a blood soaked size 10 sneaker .
Lori follows Kira who has been taken over by her Fox Spirit .
Scott motions for Lori to keep an eye on her .
Lori walks up to the Fox - possessed - Kira in the empty school .
She asks Kira in Japanese is she OK .
The abrasive Fox turns to Lori , responding to her Japanese and mocks her accent .
The Fox lures and engages Lori in combat .
Lori manages to fend Fox - Kira off with her new fighting skills , though tries to talk her down .
Scott intervenes , with Lori sarcastically asking him is Kira a friend of his .
Scott manages to get Kira back under control .
In season 6A " Relics " , Lori is watching a lacrosse game with Sydney when the Ghost Riders arrive and begin taking people .
colspan=5Marie - Jeanne Valet was an ancestor of the Argents in the 18th century and became remembered as the " Maid of Gévaudan " .
Marie - Jeanne slew the original Beast of Gévaudan - her brother Sebastien - in 1767 after its killing spree with the help of her eventual husband , Henri Argent and Marie became the first known official hunter of supernatural creatures .
Marie - Jeanne was an expert hunter in the provincial town of Gévaudan .
In 1764 , during the Beast 's carnage , Marie - Jeanne welcomes home her brother Sebastien , and his best friend Marcel , at the town 's local tavern after they arrive home from the Seven Years ' War .
During the terror of the Beast killing its way throughout the province , Sebastien declares that Marie - Jeanne is the best hunter in town and that she lead the hunting party for " La Bete " .
Marie - Jeanne is flustered .
Just then , the corpse of a little boy is brought in by a local man .
Marie - Jeanne accepts Sebastien 's proposal , but is skeptical of the animal - a wolf or a hyena - being " a Beast " .
Marie - Jeanne 's hunting party heads deep into the woods at night to uncover the animal 's lair .
Later towards midnight , all of her party around her falls victim , slaughtered , one by one .
Marie - Jeanne finally sees the Beast up close who almost kills her , but she is saved by Henri , the man from before in the tavern .
Marie - Jeanne exclaims in fright that the Beast is " no wolf " , Henri tells her the Beast is a werewolf .
Overtime , Henri brings her into the world of the supernatural .
Marie - Jeanne , no longer skeptical , requests Henri to teach her how to kill a werewolf to stop the Beast .
Back at the tavern , Marie - Jeanne proposes a toast to the dead .
She has spiked the mead with wolfsbane in a plan to flush out La Bete 's human identity .
She takes notice of a suspect , Marcel who is coughing and breaks his glass .
She discretely takes him outside .
Marcel shows her to his cellar and she discovers it is filled with corpses .
She marches back to Marcel , thinking he 's the Beast .
Marcel eggs her on to release the arrow and kill him .
Marie - Jeanne however , sees he 's not healing from being cut by his smashed glass .
She realizes he 's not the killer : he 's only covering for the real culprit .
She horrifically realizes , Sebastien has been the Beast all along .
Walking back into the tavern with a heavy heart , Marie - Jeanne walks up to her brother and confronts him .
To her horror , Sebastien is totally unrepentant over his carnage .
Marie - Jeanne brands her brother a monster .
Sebastien smugly states she wo n't kill him because they 're family .
Marie - Jeanne completely believes in the supernatural from then on .
Marie - Jeanne recruits Henri to help her forge a weapon to kill " both a Beast and a brother .
" They ritualistically forge a steel - tipped pike using her blood .
Over the next three years , Marie - Jeanne determinedly hunts Sebastien .
She at last tracks him down with Sebastien giving chase .
Marie - Jeanne turns the tables revealing the snow - covered pike and impales the charging Beast through the heart .
Sebastien is forced to shift back .
He declares he will recover even from an injury like this .
But he begins to die as the pike is mystical , forged with his and Marie - Jeanne 's blood .
Marie - Jeanne declares to her brother , giving him a final kiss , he will only be remembered as " a Beast .
" Once Sebastien is finally dead , Marie - Jeanne and the town 's people invoke the practice " Damnatio Memoriae " , burning everything Sebastien owned and signed , erasing all traces of his existence .
Marie - Jeanne came to live with Henri after killing her brother .
Their relationship progressed from partners to husband and wife and she took his name :
" Argent " .
Marie - Jeanne became famous in history becoming the first known official hunter of supernatural creatures and her legacy , the Argents ' legacy of being werewolf hunters was born .
colspan=5Henri Argent was an ancestor of the Argent family in the late 1700s .
He began accumulating knowledge and defences against the supernatural , especially when he learned about the Beast of Gévaudan .
He saves Marie - Jeanne Valet from the Beast by casting a mountain ash circle .
He offers to teach her how to defend herself against werewolves but Marie - Jeanne wishes to learn how to kill one .
After Marie - Jeanne finds out her brother Sebastien Valet is the Beast , Henri assists her in making a weapon capable of killing the Beast .
They create a steel pike mixed with wolfsbane and mountain ash , along with a steel tip shaped in a fleur - de - lis and forged with Marie - Jeanne 's blood under the light of a full moon .
Sometime after the Beast was killed , Henri married Marie - Jeanne .
colspan=5Belasko was a Chimera , a mutated supernatural by the Dread Doctors , seen in the Season 5 premiere " Creatures of the Night " .
Belasko first appears bursting out of a stone wall of a deserted house that is investigated by Deputy Parrish .
He grabs Parrish by the throat and stabs the deputy with his right - hand claws .
Parrish 's eyes glow his supernatural orange and Belasko 's eyes mimic his color as he 's supposedly siphoning Parrish 's power .
Belasko realizes Parrish is supernatural , but not a werewolf and lets him go .
He demands Parrish give him Scott 's location .
When Parrish replies " Never heard of him " , he slashes the deputy , leaving him for dead .
Belasko appears at the McCall house , stalking Melissa , looking for Scott .
He learns that Scott at the senior scribe .
At the high school he assaults Scott and Kira .
As he fights the kitsune and werewolf , he taunts Scott , saying he 's a " devoted fan " , demanding Scott show him the man who broke the Argents and took down Deucalion .
Belasko eventually stabs Scott , siphoning some of his power .
Scott musters enough strength and breaks Belasko 's arm and ripping out his separated claws .
He gives Belasko a choice :
stay and Scott will break something else , or run .
Belasko chooses the later .
He appears at a laboratory .
He asks his masters , the Dread Doctors for another chance and more power .
The Doctors appear , saying their time is limited and he wo n't get a second chance .
Belasko begs for his life , saying he can help them with their cause .
The Pathologist repeats " No second chances " , and the Surgeon spears Belasko with a sword , killing him .
As Belasko dies , supernatural ravens emerge flying out of his corpse .
Personality - wise
: Belasko was an immensely power - hungry and bloodthirsty individual who had no problem with killing whenever it suited his needs as seen with how he viciously attacked Scott 's Pack as well as Deputy Parrish .
He was also very arrogant and impulsive as he lorded his augmented powers over others , but cunning as he had a great understanding of how his powers worked and was an effective tracker .
Underneath , Belasko was a deeply cowardly individual who does everything he 's ordered to as evidenced by his fear of the Dread Doctors .
Belasko 's Chimera mutation was dominantly that of a werewolf .
His right hand claws were actually the talons of a shapeshifter of Eastern mythology called a garuda , glowed blue and had the power to siphon power , life - force from other supernaturals .
colspan=5Deputy Valerie Clark is a Sheriff 's deputy at the station appearing in Season 5 , and Hayden 's older sister and guardian .
Deputy Clark is a tough , determined law enforcement officer , loyal to her colleagues and is close to and protective of Hayden .
Valerie comes into contact with the supernatural aspects of Beacon Hills .
Clark first appears in the Season 5 premiere " Creatures of the Night " , bringing in juvenile delinquent Donovan Donati with Deputy Cordova .
Donovan tries to play nice whilst struggling Clark tells him she 'll hand him a compound fracture .
In " Dreamcatchers " , Clark and Parrish prep Donovan for his prison transport .
Right after Donovan acts out threatening Stilinski 's life , the two deputies drag him out .
Clark is paralyzed at the sheriff 's station when the Kanima Chimera Tracy Stewart attacks .
She recovers and helps Stilinski to his feet .
The next day in " Condition Terminal " , she and the Sheriff observe the ruined security footage of Donovan 's cell before his ' escape ' .
They remark the attack at the station was a " pretty convenient time for a camera malfunction " .
Stilinski asks Clark why is n't she taking her day off .
Clark responds she listened to Donovan threatening her boss a few feet away from him
and she 's not taking a break until Donovan is caught .
In " Required Reading " , she tracks down a prank 911 call from the school library after Stiles made the call and does n't respond .
She surprises Hayden during school to bring her anti - rejection medication , for a kidney transplant , which Hayden forgot at home .
While there , Clark points out that Liam Dunbar " got cute " .
In " Strange Frequencies " , she investigates a missing teenager named Josh Diaz while working a double shift at the Sheriff 's station .
In " Ourobouros " , Clark arrests and handcuffs Kira on suspicion of murder after a Chimera is found with Kira 's sword impaled through it at the McCall House .
Clark finds out that school Access cards belonging to Stiles and Theo were scanned on the night of the " prank " 911 call .
She joins the search for the other Chimeras .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Clark is involved in a car accident while chasing a very large " suspicious bipedal animal " .
She 's mostly uninjured but the car is totaled .
Then she shows Sheriff Stilinski the BHHS sign that had been thrown into the school .
In " The Last Chimera " , Clark gets a call from Deputy Parrish about Lydia 's disappearance , hours after he escaped from the station .
She tells him that he 's missing too and people are confused by his behaviour .
She mentions the attack on the school , the trashed library , believes there 's " a prehistoric animal running in the streets " and is thinking of transferring out of Beacon Hills .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , she chastises Hayden for disappearing for 3 days .
Afterwards , she discovers an attack caused by the Beast of Gévaudan and is nearly attacked herself .
In " Amplification " , Clark takes part in a car chase with Sheriff Stilinski and other deputies against the Beast where she admits that it 's not an animal .
In the season 5 finale " Apotheosis " , Clark is working at her desk when she notices that the Sheriff has his firearm drawn at Sebastien Valet .
She stands up , then reaches for her gun and demands that Sebastien does n't move .
When Sebastien continues to approach , she fires .
However , her bullets have no effect on him .
In the season 6 premiere
" Memory Lost " , when a young boy named Alex goes missing from the sheriff 's station , Clark and the other deputies are ordered to search the station for him .
They find the boy in a holding cell .
After Alex is taken by the Ghost Riders , Clark does n't remember him as if he was never at the station .
colspan=5Mrs .
Finch is a teacher at Beacon Hills High School who teaches Advanced Placement Biology and first appears in Season 5 , " Parasomnia " .
Mrs. Finch is a tough and practical teacher the kind who expects the best from her students and wo n't tolerate slackers but recognises and praises hard work when she sees it .
In the first class of the year , Scott , Kira , Lydia and Sydney are in her class .
She starts the class by checking who is awake .
Lydia answers her first question , but is stumped by the following one .
Mrs. Finch asks Scott his number one college choice .
Scott answers UC , Davis .
Mrs. Finch tells him he 's in the right class if that 's what he wants .
Mrs. Finch announces the following test will help determine which students are in the wrong class , and they have two weeks to drop .
In " Dreamcatchers " , when students have the test scores returned , Mrs. Finch commends Scott that he has his priorities in order as he 's returned his test score , 86 % to his pleasure .
Finch asks Scott to speak to the class on last night 's reading , but Scott is distracted by Liam reporting about the feral Tracy Stewart .
In " Condition Terminal " , Mrs Finch talks about chimeras and nulecotides just as Scott is trying to figure out how Tracy seems to be both Wolf and Kamina and how Belasko seems to be a werewolf with talons .
In " Required Reading " , Mrs Finch lectures about invasive species in AP Biology .
She uses the real - world example of the cane toad in Australia and later calls out for help when Scott suffers an asthma attack as a result of reading the " Dread Doctors " novel .
In " Codominance " , Mrs Finch explains to her sophomore class that codominance is " a relationship among alleles where both alleles contribute to the phenotype of the heterozygote . "
In the season 6 premiere , Mrs. Finch is sought out by Scott who needs her help in figuring out what could cause a glass window to turn blue .
She explains that the chemicals in a muzzle flash of a gun could include copper , barium and caesium which are chemicals that can turn blue and green .
In " Radio Silence " , as she is teaching a class , Mrs. Finch is perplexed by Scott and Lydia leaving class and asks the class if they know that class is not optional .
colspan=5Mr .
Stewart , Esq . was Tracy Stewart 's dad .
Mr. Stewart attempts to help his daughter with her night terrors in " Parasomnia " .
He gives her a dreamcatcher attached to a note with his nickname for her , " Tracy Bear " .
He lets Tracy know he has to meet a client .
He comforts his daughter , telling her " I wo n't let anything happen to you . "
Mr. Stewart appears at the Sheriff 's station .
His client is the teenage delinquent Donovan Donati .
He informs his client the DA is pushing for three to five years , but it is possible they can get a plea bargain for two .
Mr. Stewart is frustrated when Donovan instead rages at Stilinski , and threatens to gut him with a knife .
When Donovan is being transported to prison , Mr. Stewart chastises his client , saying he 'll be lucky to get Donovan " three to five decades " .
Suddenly the driver is suddenly immobile , unable to move , and the vehicle veers off the road into a viaduct .
Stewart manages to steady the van .
Stewart sees his daughter Tracy outside the van .
He worriedly , confusedly calls his daughter 's name .
Tracy then , in her Chimera shapes savages the van .
Mr. Stewart , is struck with shock , confusion , fear , horror as Tracy claws , wounds the driver , the second officer opens fire on her , but Tracy then wounds the second officer .
Mr. Stewart stumbles out of the van .
Tracy appears in front of him .
Mr. Stewart , horrified , calls his daughter 's name .
Tracy , brainwashed , in her parasomnia , her feral state , tells her dad the same thing he last said to her : " Do n't worry , Daddy .
I wo n't let anything happen to you .
Ever again .
" With her eyes glowing yellow , Tracy savages Mr. Stewart , killing him .
Stewart had tried to help Tracy with her night terrors .
Tracy , due to her disorder , and her Chimera transformation , killed all the people who tried to assist her .
colspan=5Schrader is an orderly at Eichen House and later a henchman for Valack appearing in season 5 .
In " A Novel Approach " , he allows Scott , Stiles , Lydia and Kira to enter Eichen House where they go to see Valack in the supernatural ward .
He later hides when the Dread Doctors appear .
In " The Last Chimera " , when a catatonic Lydia is being prepared to be sent to Eichen House , Schrader comments on how attractive Lydia is until Valack warns him that Lydia could easily kill him by shattering his skull if someone taught her how to use her power .
In " Codominance " during Lydia 's institutionalisation at Eichen House , Schrader and Nurse Cross tend to her after they heard her Scream even though she 's supposed to be unresponsive .
In " Sword And The Spirit " , Schrader prepares to give Lydia an injection on Nurse Cross ' orders and appears to take pleasure in stabbing her with the syringe .
He stabs her arm twice in an unsuccessful attempt to find a vein .
He is about to stab her in the neck when she releases a powerful Scream , pushing a startled Schrader back against the wall .
In " Amplification " , Schrader chases a patient in the lobby and unknowingly allows Kira and Malia to gain access to the electrical room .
A while later , Schrader is at the reception desk in the lobby when Theo and his Chimera Pack enter Eichen House and tells him that they 've come for Lydia .
Immediately after that , Schrader is knocked unconscious by Theo .
colspan=5Nurse Cross was an employee in the closed unit at Eichen House and an associate of Valack appearing in season 5 .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " during Lydia 's institutionalisation at Eichen House , Nurse Cross believes Lydia is faking her catatonic state and cruelly taunts her , saying someone as " dangerous " as Lydia could be locked up for the rest of her life .
In " Codominance " , Nurse Cross and Schrader race to Lydia 's cell after they heard a Scream followed by an explosion .
In " Sword And The Spirit " , as Stiles finishes his visit with Lydia , Nurse Cross prepares her for her shower .
She continues to taunt Lydia during her shower , still believing Lydia is faking catatonia .
As Lydia is led back to her cell , Nurse Cross discusses Lydia 's " performance " as a non - responsive catatonic with Schrader .
Once Lydia is back in her cell , Nurse Cross orders Schrader to give her a high dose of medicine that will indeed make her catatonic .
In " Amplification " , she 's with Valack in an old room beneath Eichen House where he takes a Dread Doctor mask from a locker .
They discuss the mask .
When Nurse Cross expresses doubt the mask still works , Valack places the mask on her head .
She thrashes about and screams in pain until she lies dead on the floor .
In " Lie Ability " , Nurse Cross ' body is seen by Lydia in a Plexiglass cell within the old room .
Valack tells Lydia that Nurse Cross was n't strong enough to handle the mask .
colspan=5Lucas was a young gay boy and Corey 's former boyfriend .
Lucas was a Chimera , the makeup of which included a werewolf and scorpion characteristics .
Lucas became a Chimera because he 'd had an cornea transplant .
His werewolf side allowed him to sprout claws while his scorpion side turned his eye color black and allowed him to sprout venomous stingers along his limbs .
In " Condition Terminal " Lucas is spotted by Mason at the bi club Sinema .
Scott and Kira realize Lucas is a Chimera and had wounded his boyfriend Corey as he 'd seemed different like confident , and super - aggressive while making out with Corey , instead of shy and reserved .
Lucas had stung Corey with his shapeshifted scorpion sting .
Lucas lures Mason to a corner in Sinema and flirts with , and kisses him while manifesting his stingers .
Before he can make a move , Brett Talbot and Liam take Lucas on .
Lucas wounds Brett , pins Liam down , Scott and Kira join the brawl .
Lucas is knocked unconscious .
Lucas is then however , executed by the Dread Doctors , the Surgeon declaring his condition was terminal .
Scott and Melissa store Lucas ' shapeshifted corpse in the hospital morgue .
It 's then taken by Parrish in a fugue state and brought by him to the Nemeton .
In " The Last Chimera " , Lucas ' body as well as those of Donovan Donati , Beth and the unnamed Chimera girl were retrieved by the cops after Hayden Romero showed them the location of the Nemeton .
colspan=5Zach was a Chimera , one of the Dread Doctors ' experiments .
In Season 5 , " Ouroboros " , Zach is being held hostage in the basement of an abandoned house alongside a captured Liam and Hayden .
Zach giggles at Liam being shocked by the electrified fence .
He apologizes saying he should have warned him .
Zach asks them the question what is Zach himself aware of his mutation by the Dread Doctors .
He sports broken wings on his back .
Zach tells Hayden
he 's like her , " one of the experiments " .
As they are held captive , Zach tells Liam to stop testing the electricity , that they 're not escaping .
Zach describes the experiences of three previous Chimeras held by the Doctors .
He says it all starts with not being able to remember what 's happening , forgetting who you are , what you 're doing .
They then become violent .
He tells Hayden , who is sporting a wound bleeding black blood , that black ooze means you 're OK , but when you bleed mercury , that 's when the Doctors decide you 're a failure .
He asks them what the success is going to be .
At night , Zach begins to bleed mercury .
The Pathologist arrives and drags a screaming Zach out of the cage .
Zach 's corpse is seen later with the Surgeon 's cane impaled through his body .
colspan=5Noah Patrick was a sophomore at Beacon Hills High and a Chimera modified by the Dread Doctors .
Noah had traits from a Berserker in his Chimera makeup .
He had super - strength and could grow venomous bone from his arms .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Noah is encountered by Malia in Beacon Hills Memorial hospital .
Noah is feeding from bags of liquid bone marrow .
He and Malia fight until he is chased off by Braeden .
In " The Last Chimera " , Scott and Stiles realize Noah was the Chimera who 'd attacked and mauled Stilinski .
Along with Malia , the two track Noah down in the tunnels of the industrial side of Beacon Hills .
The Dread Doctors simultaneously are tracking the Chimera .
Stiles realizes Noah had broken off a part of his bone marrow in Stilinski , causing the Sheriff 's systems to break down .
Noah is last seen cornered by the Dread Doctors before they move in to euthanize him .
colspan=5Deputy Strauss is a Sheriff 's deputy at the station .
He first appears in " Status Asthmaticus " when Stiles arrives at the station looking for his dad .
Strauss informs him that Sheriff Stilinski had already left .
When Deputy Parrish is walking through the station and causing it to overheat while in a hellhound trance , Strauss and the other deputies point their guns at him .
Stiles orders the deputies including Strauss not to shoot and to stay out of Parrish 's way .
In " Damnatio Memoriae " , Strauss jokingly elbows Deputy Clark as she finishes her report on an attack at the Telecom building caused by the Beast of Gévaudan .
In " Sword and the Spirit " , Strauss is approached by Scott and Stiles after the two boys saw deputies walking around the school with shotguns .
Stiles asks him about the guns to which Strauss says they were issued by order of the Sheriff .
He admits the Sheriff did n't tell him and the other deputies why he issued the guns .
When Scott and Stiles ask him for his theory , Strauss asks the boys if they believe in the supernatural .
In " Amplification " , Strauss is at the scene of a multi car pile - up caused by the Beast .
He reports fatalities and believes the pile - up is caused by an animal attack .
colspan=5The three skinwalkers are powerfully magical beings who live away from civilization in their homeland of Shiprock , New Mexico who first appear in Season 5 .
They agree to assist Kira Yukimura , who had been unwillingly experimented upon by the Dread Doctors , in regaining control of her kitsune Fox Spirit .
In Season 5 , " Codominance " , the skinwalkers encounter Kira and Noshiko whilst the two are attempting to find a solution to taming Kira 's Fox spirit .
Unwelcoming towards the two kitsune , the three engage Kira in a spar .
Pinning Kira , they say Kira is afraid not of them , but of herself , afraid to use her sword which is the gateway to her Fox spirit .
Noshiko asks the three magic - users are they able to help Kira .
They agree to attempt to help her gain control .
The three shape - shifters put Kira through a test atop their local summit .
If Kira fails the test , she is to stay with them at their convenience , possibly even become a skinwalker herself .
They summon a manifestation of an Oni for the test .
As the test plays on , Kira 's Fox spirit destroys the demon .
The skinwalkers accede that Kira wields the sword , but the Fox wields her and is who actually destroyed the Oni .
They condemn Kira must stay with them forever .
Both Kira and Noshiko object and prepare to fight them off .
Scott arrives and roars at the skinwalkers , and everyone takes off leaving the skinwalkers in their wake .
In " The Beast of Beacon Hills " , Kira has come back to the skinwalkers ' land at Shiprock with no other option .
She calls out to them , knowing they can hear her .
She unflinchingly declares she will stay with them once they help her save her friends back in Beacon Hills .
The skinwalkers appear out of the darkness and agree to help her but warns that their help comes with a price .
In the season 5 finale " Apotheosis " , the skinwalkers are briefly seen after Kira leaves Scott and the Pack for a second time .
Since the skinwalkers provided Kira with the means to save her friends , she joins them in the desert in the hopes they can help her control her Fox Spirit .
The skinwalkers and Kira disappear in a whirlwind of dust as Scott watches on .
colspan=5Rebecca " Harley " Harlowe was an acquaintance of Scott and Stiles in " Wolf Moon " , casually talking to them about Allison befriending Lydia and joining the popular clique .
Harley was later seen in the episode talking with Stiles at the party , showing a bit of concern when Scott started getting sick .
She was also seen during " Pack Mentality " , spotting the bus driver , Garrison Myers , being taken to the hospital after being attacked by the Alpha werewolf , Peter Hale .
Harley is last seen in " Omega " , gossiping with another student about Kate and the murders behind Allison 's back , upsetting Allison .
colspan=5Garrison Myers was the bus driver for Beacon Hills High .
He was hospitalized after being attacked by what is presumed to be a mountain lion in episode " Pack Mentality " .
Scott initially worries he attacked the driver .
Derek helps him recall his memory of the night on the bus and Scott remembers it was the Alpha werewolf who attacked Mr. Myers .
Myers eventually dies from his wounds in the hospital .
Sheriff Stillinski later discovers that Myers was an insurance investigator assigned to the Hale House fire and was fired for suspicion of fraud .
Myers had been hired by Kate Argent cover up the fire as an accident .
Right before he died , he apologized to Derek Hale .
colspan=5Reddick and his friend Unger were two men who came upon Scott and Stiles drinking in the woods , where Scott was depressed over Allison breaking up with him and they steal their alcohol .
Scott demands Reddick give them their alcohol back .
He jokingly says no .
Scott 's eyes then turn yellow , his inner wolf rising and they run off scared .
They then run into the Alpha werewolf who then murders them .
It 's later discovered that Reddick and Unger had priors all over their records including arson .
They were arsonists hired by Kate Argent to set the Hale House on fire .
colspan=5Unger and Reddick came upon Scott and Stiles when they were drinking because Scott was depressed over Allison breaking up with him .
They harass the two boys stealing their liquor .
They run off after Scott partially wolfs out .
After they run off , Unger loses sight of Reddick and calls out for him .
Suddenly Unger is held up side down by the Alpha werewolf and drops him head first into a trash fire .
Sheriff Stilinski later links their murders to the Hale fire .
Unger , Reddick and the video store clerk killed by the Alpha werewolf back in the episode
" The Tell " were all convicted arsonists .
colspan=5Leveque is a werewolf hunter and one of the Argents ' men .
He accompanied Kate in confronting Derek concerning the murders .
When they faced off against Derek , Derek knocked him unconscious .
colspan=5Ulrich is a werewolf hunter and one of the Argents ' crew .
He along with Kate and Leveque went to confront Derek concerning the murders during season 1 .
Derek incapacitated both him and Leveque , but Kate sadistically tortured him with an electric rod .
Ulrich was later seen when the Argents are gearing up when Derek was framed for the murders in season 1 .
colspan=5Tyhurst is a state detective Stilinski brought in to help deal with the murder spree being committed by the Alpha werewolf in season 1 .
It is later revealed he 's also a werewolf hunter seen with the Argents when they gear up to hunt down Derek and the Alpha .
Tyhurst informed Argent that the Sheriff had traced the murders to the Hale House Fire six years previously .
colspan=5David Whittemore is the husband of Mrs. Whittemore , and the adopted father of Jackson Whittemore .
He is rather wealthy and is a lawyer .
He first appeared in season 1 episode " The Tell " , with his wife at the parent teacher conference .
In season 2 , " Frenemy " , David and his wife report Jackson missing while being unaware
Jackson is the Kanima .
A while later , he finds out from Jackson that Scott and Stiles were responsible for his disappearance .
In " Restraint " , David files a restraining order against Scott and Stiles .
In " Raving " , he helps Sheriff Stilinski identify a recent murder victim of the Kanima .
In the season 3 premiere , it 's revealed David moved Jackson to London .
colspan=5Mrs .
Whittemore is the wife of David Whittemore , and the adopted mother of Jackson Whittemore .
She is only seen during Season 1 , " The Tell " , during the parent - teacher conference .
colspan=5Mr .
Martin is the ex - husband of Natalie Martin , and the father of Lydia Martin .
In season 1 , " The Tell " , he seems ready to hear the worst as he and Natalie meet with Lydia 's teachers at the parent teacher conference .
He 's expecting " bad grades , concentration issues , bad behaviour " .
His reaction upon learning Lydia is the smartest and most popular girl in school is n't seen .
After Lydia is attacked during the school dance by Alpha werewolf Peter Hale , Mr. Martin stays with her at the hospital .
Mr. Martin is last seen in the season 2 premiere " Omega " , where he gives a statement to Sheriff Stilinski after Lydia goes missing from the hospital .
colspan=5Brian is a player on the lacrosse team and a friend of Jackson and Danny .
He dislikes Scott , mostly because Jackson dislikes him .
After winning the big game , he seen celebrating with the team and unintentionally interrupts a conversation between Scott and Allison , prompting Scott to glare at him and scare him away .
colspan=5Ms .
Ramsey is Allison and Lydia 's teacher .
She first appeared in " The Tell " for the parent teacher conference with Lydia 's parents and the Argents .
She expresses how gifted Lydia is and mentions that she should take an IQ test .
She informs the Argents that Allison was absent from school .
In " Wolf 's Bane " , she is teaching a class when Allison chastises Scott for trying to talk to her .
colspan=5Jennifer was Peter Hale 's nurse .
She looked after him at Beacon Hills Memorial during his six - year coma .
When Peter is revealed to be the Alpha werewolf , Stiles realizes she has been helping Peter with his crimes and was the one who lured Allison , Jackson and Lydia to the school during " Night School " with the text that was sent to Allison 's phone from Melissa McCall 's computer at the hospital .
She was later killed by Peter , after he " got better " .
colspan=5Marcus is a werewolf hunter , and an associate of Kate Argent .
Kate had Derek restrained in an underground cell beneath the Hale House .
Marcus would join Kate in her torture of Derek without Argent 's knowledge .
In " Code Breaker " , Marcus appears with a baseball bat while Derek is panting .
As he swung the bat for the first blow , Derek caught the bat , as he 'd got loose from one of his manacles and tells Marcus he had " a little help " as Scott had freed him .
Derek promptly knocked Marcus out cold .
colspan=5Principal Thomas is the principal of Beacon Hills High School .
In season 2 " Shape Shifted " , Principal Thomas is kidnapped by Argent and Victoria Argent and they torture him into stepping down so Gerard could take his place , as part of a plan to keep an eye on Allison .
In the season 3 premiere " Tattoo " , Principal Thomas returns after Gerard 's defeat .
He discusses the applications for the new " Career Adviser " and mentions the damage that happened to the library while he was gone , pointing out that it needs to be fixed .
He questions why there was a broadsword in his office .
colspan=5Bennett was a werewolf hunter and one of Argent 's men .
In " Ice Pick " , Bennett is seen with Argent when he conducts Allison 's first training session to be a hunter , cutting her restraints while being tied to a chair .
Bennett tells Allison congratulations for getting out in two and a half hours , as when it took him three when he did it .
After Allison leaves , Bennett is tripped off his feet , cut on the back of his neck and is killed by the Kanima .
Bennett was killed by the Kanima , on orders from his Master , Matt , because Bennett was involved in the incident in 2006 where Matt almost drowned when he was a little boy .
colspan=5Tucker Cornish was a car mechanic who worked at a garage Stiles took to get his jeep fixed .
He was murdered by the Kanima .
In " Fury " , it is revealed Tucker was on Beacon Hills High swim team in 2006 and was present at the pool party where Matt Daehler almost drowned .
Matt , as the Kanima 's Master , had Tucker killed because he said Tucker ' murdered ' him .
colspan=5Sean Long was a poor man who lived , along with his pregnant wife , Jessica , in a trailer outside of Beacon Hills .
He was killed by Jackson Whittemore as the Kanima .
Sean was on the Beacon Hills High swim team in 2006 .
The team had just won state championship and was at their coach 's Lahey 's house to have some drinks and a pool party to celebrate , but Matt Daehler almost drowned in the pool and had the Kanima kill Sean because he did n't save him , stating Sean ' murdered ' him .
colspan=5Jessica Bartlet was a young woman married to her husband Sean .
One night , Sean was murdered his corpse was thrown through the window glass .
She was scared still when Jackson , as the Kanima , slithers threw the window and almost kills her .
But he sees her swollen belly seeing she 's pregnant and leaves her alive .
She screams out loud .
Later Jessica is seen in the hospital exhausted after just given birth to a baby girl .
She tries to tell Melissa McCall a " monster " killed her husband .
Melissa thinking
she 's only scared and tired , does n't believe her , lets her know
the police are working on her husband 's murder and leaves her to rest .
Seconds later , a shadowed figure , the Kanima 's Master , enters her room .
She sees her assailant , terrified and the Master smothers her to death .
It 's revealed the Master is Matt Daehler , and he had her and Sean killed because they almost caused him to drown at a pool party where they were drunk when Matt was nine .
colspan=5Kara Simmons was the promoter and ticket seller for a warehouse rave party in the episode , " Raving " .
During the party the Kanima came upon her and slit her throat open .
Kara was on the swim team for Beacon Hills ' high school in 2006 and the team won state championship .
The team had a pool party and drank alcohol to celebrate .
A 9-year - old Matt Daehler was at the party and nearly drowned while the drunken team just laughed at him .
Matt had the Kanima kill Kara because of the incident .
colspan=5Breanne and her younger brother Billy were two little kids who were out in Beacon Hills Preserve late one night catching fireflies when Boyd , who was under the influence of the full moon , scared them and tried to kill them , but they were saved by Scott who then took them home .
colspan=5Billy and his sister Breanne were out at night catching fireflies in jars .
Suddenly , a rabid Boyd jumps out and chases him and Breanne .
Boyd nearly kills them , but he is distracted by a swarm of fireflies and both of them were saved by Scott .
colspan=5Caitlin is a young woman who is first introduced as having been in a relationship with Emily , a victim of the Darach .
She was nearly attacked by a rabid and shifted Cora , but she was saved by Scott , Isaac and Derek .
Caitlin is later seen at Danny 's black light party where she kisses Stiles and reveals she is bisexual .
colspan=5Emily was Caitlin 's girlfriend .
While going camping with Caitlin , Emily is killed by the Darach because , like Heather , she was a Virgin .
Her body is later found by Sheriff Stilinski .
colspan=5Noah was a young lifeguard at Beacon Hills public pool .
During another of her mysterious supernatural " fugue states " , Lydia finds his corpse .
Stiles notices he 's wearing a purity ring meaning he was a Virgin allowing Stiles to figure out his ,
Heather and a girl named Emily 's murders are human sacrifices .
colspan=5Kyle was a senior at Beacon Hills High .
He was in junior ROTC and came from a military family .
He was abducted by the Darach outside the animal clinic after having his dog , Bullet , over for an injection by Deaton .
He was sacrificed as a Warrior because of his military background .
colspan=5Ashley is a student at Beacon Hills High .
She was Kyle 's girlfriend and was devastated by his death .
Stiles came to her with his theory about the sacrifices centring on Virgins , and after apologizing profusely , asked if Kyle was a virgin asking , if she 'd slept with Kyle .
She says " no , he was n't a virgin " after slapping him in the face .
Stiles had to revisit his pattern .
colspan=5Alexander Argent was a werewolf hunter , Gerard 's brother , Argent and Kate 's uncle , and Allison 's great - uncle .
In 1977 , Alexander was Bitten by Alpha werewolf Deucalion .
He checked in at the Glen Capri motel for a one night 's stay .
It was a full moon and he was about to transform into a werewolf .
He killed himself with a shotgun in order to follow the werewolf hunter 's code which he recited in French as his last words : " Nous chassons ceux qui nous chassent " , before he pulled the trigger .
Alexander 's death would one of the infamous Glen Capri 's long line of guests ' suicides .
colspan=5Dr .
Hilliard was a doctor at Beacon Hills Hospital .
Hilliard is driving to the hospital because of victims from a ten - car - pileup .
Moths enter her car and the swarm all over her , but suddenly the Darach apports into her car using the swarm .
Since Hilliard is a Healer , she was killed by the Darach .
colspan=5Marco was an angry , confrontational and violent Beta werewolf and a member of Deucalion 's Pack .
During an important meeting between various Packs , he arrogantly confronted Ennis stating his Beta werewolf was killed by the Argent werewolf - hunters because he killed one of theirs .
After Gerard Argent blinded Deucalion , Marco attempted to kill him in order to become the new Alpha of their Pack , but Deucalion killed him in retaliation after discovering he could see using his werewolf eyes .
colspan=5Before the series timeline , this unnamed werewolf was a member of the Alpha werewolf Ennis ' pack .
He was naïve and dangerously unstable as at some point he went feral and killed two of the Argents ' people by accident .
He was hunted down and killed by the Argents in retaliation and cut in half .
Ennis was angered and saddened by his death as he considered the Beta werewolf family to him .
In revenge for his death , Ennis carved the spiral symbol into the wall of an abandoned distillery outside of Beacon Hills declaring revenge on the Argents , sparking the initial conflict between the Argent family and the local werewolf Packs that persisted to the present day .
colspan=5This young woman Rinko was the best friend and fellow intern of Noshiko Yukimura at Camp Oak Creek during WWII in 1943 .
She was a caring woman attempting to keep the fellow interns organized , but below the MP 's radar .
She supported Noshiko 's intentions stealing food and supplies for the other interns , though she scolded the Kitsune saying she needed to be more discreet .
Rinko was killed by the Nogitsune at Eichen House after he was unleashed .
colspan=5Merrick was a field medic in the army stationed at Camp Oak Creek during WWII .
Merrick liked to poke riddles at his partner Hayes , just to annoy him .
Merrick was rather impudent and threatening , harassing the prisoned Japanese - Americans he was stationed to watch over .
When there was suspicion of supplies being stolen ( actually committed by Noshiko ) , he threatened the interns with severity , sexually accosting the intern Rinko , Noshiko 's best friend .
Merrick and Hayes were selling medical supplies for the interns on the black market .
During the riot , he threatened to shoot the interns confronting him , coming to pistol - whipping Satomi Ito , who unfortunately was a Bitten werewolf , resulting in Corporal Rhys ' death .
After the massacre , Merrick and Hayes were tasked with disposing the bodies .
The disposal included Noshiko 's healing body and Rhys ' bandaged corpse .
Just when they were finished , the Nogitsune was summoned .
After killing Hayes , the Void Kitsune grabbed Merrick by the head , and quoting one of Merrick 's own riddles , " What has a neck but no head ? " , the Void Kitsune beheaded Merrick .
colspan=5Hayes was a field medic during WWII at Camp Oak Creek and Merrick 's partner .
Hayes assisted in the selling of supplies in the black market .
He and Merrick were assigned to dispose of the bodies after the massacre at Oak Creek .
Merrick was riddling Hayes along the way with riddles , much to his annoyance .
When the Nogitsune was unleashed , he attacked Hayes .
Hayes grabbed his gun and shot the Kitsune to no use .
The Nogitsune then grabbed the gun and forced Hayes to shoot himself , killing him .
colspan=5Briggs was a gas station attendant in Beacon Hills .
In " 117 " , Briggs was closing his shop down for the night , when he heard a strange noise inside the bathroom of the shop .
It was Kate struggling to control her werejaguar shift , when he assumed she was on some sort of drug .
He banged on the door and came in just when Kate lost total control , eviscerated Briggs tearing his body to shreds as a symptom of her lack of control .
Brigg 's corpse would then be found by Lydia and Kira the next day .
colspan=5DeMarco Montana was a Beta werewolf with gold eyes living in Beacon Hills .
DeMarco was the distributor who delivered a beer keg to Lydia 's impromptu party , which was ordered and paid for by freshman Garrett .
When DeMarco returns to his car , he saw that the tyres had been slashed .
He got angry as a result and his werewolf side began to rise under the full moon 's influence .
He regained control by chanting a Buddhist mantra .
Demarco was then killed , beheaded by a thermal cut wire used by Violet , an assassin .
DeMarco was on the Dead Pool , the hit list of Beacon Hills ' supernatural population .
He had a bounty prize of $ 250k .
Argent and Scott found his body where Scott identified him to be part of a Pack ; the Pack of Satomi Ito .
colspan=5Carrie Hudson was a Beta werewolf fleeing from Violet after the assassin had severed her left hand by Violet thermal cut wire .
Carrie was lured into a trap by Garrett , Violet 's boyfriend when he appeared to rescue her from Violet with his car .
Instead , Garrett locked the doors and stabbed Carrie repeatedly with his hidden blade .
Carrie was 23 years old and had gold werewolf eyes meaning she had never taken a life .
She was on the hit list , the Dead Pool worth
$ 500K. Carrie was from the Pack of the Alpha Satomi Ito .
colspan=5Fahey was amongst the assassins that arrived in Beacon Hills for the assassination of the town 's supernatural population .
Fahey was attacked by Kate Argent and her Berserkers .
Fahey was captured , held hostage by one Berserker amongst a carnage .
Kate interrogated him for the identity of who is financing the murders .
Fahey , fearful for his life said he did n't know , he never met ' the Benefactor ' face - to - face , but Kate held up a cassette which catches Fahey 's eye .
Kate surmises
he got one as well .
Fahey says no , but he knows someone else who did , ' the Orphans ' ( Violet and Garrett ) .
Kate was then shot at from behind by one of Fahey 's fellows who 'd survived .
This only resulted in Kate losing control of her werejaguar shift , her going feral and clawing first the survivor , then the screaming Fahey to death .
colspan=5Janelle Wentz appears in " Weaponized " of Season 4 .
Wentz is a medical field director and directs the quarantine of the high school when the CDC is brought for a potential disease outbreak at the school .
When taking blood samples from the students , she calls for Kira Yukimura .
However , when the needle touches Kira 's skin , her Thunder Kitsune Foxfire is triggered , an electrical spark burning Wentz 's bio - hazard suit .
Wentz is rushed outside to inspect the burn , right after she 'd cast Kira an odd , suspicious look , but as soon as she got outside , she brushes the burn off to her co - workers as " possibly static electricity " .
This implies that Wentz could be supernatural - aware .
colspan=5Reed
Schall was a Beta werewolf of Satomi 's Pack .
Reed appears in " Weaponized " .
Satomi had brought him to Deaton 's animal clinic , because he was blind and dying from a disease .
Deaton tells Satomi they need to get him to a hospital , to get help from Melissa McCall .
They make it to the hospital , but they are too late to save Reed as he dies .
Deaton performs an autonomy on him with Melissa 's help ; Reed , as well as Satomi 's Pack members were killed by a variant of canine distemper .
Reed was worth $ 250k on the Dead Pool .
colspan=5Maddy was the girlfriend of Lorraine Martin , Lydia 's paternal grandmother .
Maddy was an award - winning captain in yacht racing .
Maddy went out onto the lake one day , but then a thunderstorm hit while she was boating .
Lorraine had heard the thunderstorm in a Banshee premonition , there was an accident , and Maddy died out on the water , her body found four days later .
colspan=5This unnamed man was a hired gun for the Dead Pool , posing as a security guard along with his three accomplices at the high school lacrosse bonfire .
To kill Scott , Malia and Liam , they had wired a sonic weapon into the music , weakening them because of their hearing .
They then kidnapped the three Pack members , doused them in gasoline and the leader then clicked open a lighter in Scott 's face .
However , Mason pulled the plug to the music .
Scott , with his strength back , broke the man 's wrist closing the lighter .
He and his team were then overpowered by Derek and Braeden .
The leader then made another move for the lighter , but had his neck snapped by Braeden .
colspan=5This
unnamed man is a hunter - turned - assassin , part of a team of hunters that were out to kill Satomi 's Pack for money from the Dead Pool .
This man had cornered Lori and about to execute the preteen Beta , but he is tackled by Scott .
Scott then savagely attacks the man , about to kill him out of rage , starting to transform into a new , more monstrous werewolf shape .
The hunter held up his hands in fear , surrendering .
Scott stopped at the last minute , sparing his life .
When the Dead Pool was shut down , Scott takes the man 's phone out , sees the message and disgustedly shows the man the message : " All contracts terminated " .
colspan=5Patrick Clarke is a wendigo and a patient at Eichen House 's supernatural wing .
Patrick at some point escaped the institution and was on the run from the Dead Pool , worth $ 1 m .
Patrick captured an innocent woman , Kalissa , and sadistically frightened her before about to feed on her .
Patrick is subdued by Deaton and is taken to Eichen House .
colspan=5This woman Kalissa was captured by a wendigo , Patrick Clarke .
He 'd kept her in a body bag , presumably to fake her death , taking her to a meat locker .
Kalissa is instantly horrified .
Patrick reveals his intent to kill her , sadistically telling his would - be prey fear makes the kill tasty , but she is saved by Deaton .
colspan=5Stephanie is a little girl who brought her dog , a male wirehaired mix , to the Animal Clinic .
Scott gives her pet an intramuscular injection overseen by Deaton .
Scott hands him back to Stephanie .
She thanks Scott calling him " Dr. McCall " .
Scott smiles at Stephanie , saying he 's not a doctor yet .
colspan=5This unnamed female was a Chimera that displayed claws like needles .
Melissa finds her corpse at the McCall house on her kitchen table impaled upon Kira 's sword .
Stilinski calls in the homicide .
He calls in deputies to guard her body but her corpse is taken by Parrish in a fugue state to the Nemeton .
In " The Last Chimera " , the girl 's body is retrieved , along with those of Beth , Donovan Donati and Lucas by the cops once Hayden Romero showed them the location of the Nemeton .
This girl 's name and the culprit behind her death currently remain unknown .
colspan=5Vadim was a guide to Deaton where they uncover a Russian base beneath an abandoned nuclear factory that once served as an underground laboratory for the Dread Doctors .
Vadim translates a Russian message to Deaton on a wall : " They are coming .
They 're coming for all of us . "
He also tells Deaton that some people believed the Doctors had no faces underneath .
They come upon the lab sporting a sigil of the ouroboros .
Deaton finds a tooth saying it is an answer and says they should leave .
Just then , Vadim is shot dead by an intruder , the Desert Wolf .
colspan=5Beth was a Chimera appearing in " Lies Of Omission " .
Beth is in a class with Malia held by Natalie Martin .
Beth is nervously chewing on her fingernails , looking up supermoon on her computer .
Malia sees Beth is leaking mercury .
Beth picks up on Malia spotting her and runs out of class .
Malia follows her , but Beth immediately runs outside .
She is right away captured by the Pathologist who holds her hostage in front of Malia , then snaps Beth 's neck , killing her .
In " Status Asthmaticus " , Beth 's body is taken to the Nemeton by Deputy Jordan Parrish while he was in a hellhound trance .
In " The Last Chimera " , Beth 's body as well as those of Donovan Donati , Lucas and the unnamed Chimera girl were retrieved by the cops once they were shown the location of the Nemeton by a recently revived Hayden Romero .
colspan=5Nelson is a patient at Eichen House appearing in season 5B episode " Amplification " .
He is seen walking naked in the lobby of Eichen House .
Orderly Schrader leaves his post in the reception desk to give chase .
Nelson is tasered by Schrader off - screen .
colspan=5Kathleen Kassidy is a reporter for KQNB .
She appears in season 5B episode " A Credible Threat " interviewing Brett Talbot about the upcoming charity lacrosse game between Devenford Prep and Beacon Hills High School .
The winning team will take home all the money for their charity , to which Brett tells Kathleen
that he and his school intent to win .
Later , when the game goes into overtime due to the scores being 5 to 5 , Kathleen wants to go live immediately .
As soon as she keys her microphone , it emits a squeal which fills all the speakers on the field and results in an appearance from the Beast of Gévaudan .
Kathleen and the film crews presumably flee the scene .
colspan=5Elias Stilinski is the Sheriff 's father and Stiles ' grandfather .
He lives at the Goodwater Assisted Living faculty because of dementia .
Beforehand , he was an army engineer and had a poor relationship with his son .
Elias is seen in season 6 episode " Sundowning " where Scott , Lydia and Malia visit him in order to find someone named Stiles .
He mistakes Scott for the Sheriff and thinks the year is 1976 .
He later recognises Scott and Lydia and becomes agitated when the Sheriff shows up .
After Sheriff Stilinski forces Scott , Lydia and Malia out of his room , Elias tells him to " go crawling back to your dead wife and loser son " .
He becomes confused again afterwards .
colspan=5Lenore is a banshee and a survivor of the Ghost Riders attack in her hometown of Canaan .
She had a son named Caleb who was born in 1976 and drowned at a young age .
On April 8 , 1987 , the Ghost Riders came through and took everyone during a town picnic leaving her behind .
However , the Ghost Riders bring her son back from the dead .
Almost 30 years later , she lives alone in Canaan with the ghost of her son and is in a delusional state of denial .
In season 6 episode " Ghosted " , Lenore is visited by Scott , Lydia and Malia who are in the town looking for a way to save Stiles .
Lenore is delighted to see visitors , but when they question her about the Ghost Riders , she becomes agitated and traps them in her house .
She battles with Lydia through Screams while the teenager forces her to reveal what happened .
They share a vision of the day the Ghost Riders came which snaps Lenore out of her delusion .
Lenore asks how long it 's been , to which Lydia tells her that almost 30 years have past .
Lydia surmises that Lenore is a banshee which explains why the Ghost Riders did n't take her .
Lenore lets Lydia and her friends go but refuses to leave her son even if he 's not real .
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Eonline.com