LIST OF BLUE 'S CLUES CHARACTERS Blue 's Clues is an American children 's television series airing on the Nickelodeon family of channels .
The series takes place inside a picture book world in which everything is made of paper cutouts , clay , and other craft materials .
It is presented by a live - action human host who lives in a yellow house inhabited by everyday objects that talk and move .
Steve Burns hosted the series from its debut in 1996 until 2002 , when the part was taken over by Donovan Patton .
The program features an ensemble cast of animated characters who interact with the host .
Co - creator Traci Paige Johnson voices the title character , a dog named Blue who communicates through distinctive barks .
The series ' composers Michael Rubin and Nick Balaban voice Mailbox and Mr. Salt , respectively .
In addition to the main characters , the show included various newly - introduced recurring characters and guest stars throughout its run .
Some guests appeared as live - action companions of the host , while others voiced an animated cameo role .
When a spin - off series titled Blue 's Room premiered in 2004 , a group of puppet characters were introduced as new friends of Blue .
MAIN CHARACTERS BLUE Section::::Main characters . Section::::Blue .
Blue is a playful and energetic female puppy with light blue fur and dark blue spots .
She can not talk but communicates with her owners , Steve and Joe , through barks that they interpret based on her tone and expression .
In each episode , she plays a game called Blue 's Clues , in which she leaves three blue paw print clues for the host and viewers to find in order to answer a question .
She has the ability to enter storybooks and picture frames by " skidooing " into them with a special dance routine .
In the sixth season , she is granted a magic playroom called Blue 's Room in which she can interact with the viewer and a cast of live - action puppet characters .
She is voiced by Traci Paige Johnson , one of the series ' creators .
Johnson was cast as the character 's voice because out of the crew , she was able to sound the most like a dog .
STEVE Section::::Steve .
Steve is the host for the show 's first four seasons .
He is Blue 's owner and caregiver .
He wears a distinctive green - striped shirt and loves anything that has a similar pattern .
He is clever and sympathetic but sometimes forgetful .
He is always excited to play Blue 's Clues , but can almost never find clues himself and relies on the viewer to help locate them .
Whenever he finds a clue , he draws it in a pocket - sized pad of paper called the Handy Dandy Notebook .
When he finishes a game of Blue 's Clues , he sits in a giant red armchair called the Thinking Chair and comes up with possible solutions to Blue 's puzzle .
His favorite time of the day is mailtime , when he receives a letter from Mailbox .
He owns a stuffed anteater named Horace .
At the end of the fourth season , Steve leaves for college on a hopscotch scholarship and leaves his younger brother , Joe , to care for his house and Blue .
He is played by Steve Burns .
JOE Section::::Joe .
Joe is the host of the fifth and sixth seasons .
He is Steve 's younger brother who stays at the Blue 's Clues house after Steve leaves for college .
He wears a variety of shirts with a horizontal line of squares on the front .
His favorite toy is a stuffed duck named Boris .
He owns a notebook similar to Steve 's , but it is larger and shaped like the Thinking Chair .
In later episodes of Season 5 & 6 , Joe normally does not draw clues in his notebook and instead watches magically - animated versions of the clues appear .
He is played by Donovan Patton .
MAILBOX Section::::Mailbox .
Mailbox is a cheerful purple mailbox who lives at the foot of the pathway in front of the Blue 's Clues house .
In each episode , Mailbox delivers a letter after the host sings a special song called " Mailtime " and sits on the Thinking Chair .
His letters contain video messages from children around the world that relate to the episode 's topic .
Mailbox has a thick Brooklyn accent and likes to crack jokes .
He wants to be a comedian when he grows up and has a collection of postage stamps .
Although he is normally stationed on a stake in the ground , he can use an " extendo " arm to move anywhere around the house or the backyard .
He is voiced by Michael Rubin , who is normally credited under the stage name Seth O'Hickory .
SIDETABLE DRAWER Section::::Sidetable Drawer .
Sidetable Drawer is the keeper of the Handy Dandy Notebook .
She lives in the living room to the left of the Thinking Chair .
Whenever Steve or Joe starts a game of Blue 's Clues , they must go to Sidetable and ask her for their notebook .
She usually has Steve 's telephone on top of her and holds an assortment of useful items in her drawer , depending on the situation .
She is a talented singer and enjoys performing on stage .
However , she is shy and sometimes lets her lack of confidence prevent her from singing in front of others .
Sidetable likes all kinds of music .
Unlike the other characters , Sidetable has an inanimate form without a face that is seen whenever she is not speaking .
She is voiced by Aleisha LaNaé Allen .
THE SHAKERS Section::::The Shakers .
The Shakers are a family of four condiment dispensers who live in the kitchen , each named after the type of spice they contain .
*
Mr. Salt is a salt shaker of French heritage who acts as the homemaker of the Blue 's Clues house .
He takes care of the other residents and prepares food for them .
He and his wife Mrs. Pepper come from Paris , where they worked as cooks .
Despite his experience as a chef , Mr. Salt is prone to accidents in the kitchen and often needs the host 's help when he is baking .
He is voiced by Nick Balaban , one of the show 's music composers .
* Mrs. Pepper is the mother figure of the Blue 's Clues house .
She spends much of her time caring for Paprika and Cinnamon .
In her free time , she likes to sing with Mr. Salt and swim in the kitchen sink .
She is commonly shown holding Cinnamon in her arms while Mr. Salt holds Paprika .
She was voiced by Penelope Jewkes during the first season and by Spencer Kayden for the remainder of the series .
*
Paprika is Mr. Salt and Mrs. Pepper 's daughter .
In the first three seasons , she is a baby and only speaks in incomplete sentences .
She has an orange gummy teddy bear and sleeps in a crib made from a peanut .
In the fourth season , Paprika becomes a toddler and prepares to be a responsible sibling after the announcement of Mrs. Pepper 's second child .
Paprika is voiced by Jenna Marie Castle as a baby and by Corrine Hoffman as a toddler .
* Cinnamon is Mr. Salt and Mrs. Pepper 's newborn son , who is introduced over a five - episode story arc during the fourth season .
He is the newest and youngest resident of the Blue 's Clues house .
He has several hand - me - down playthings from Paprika and a purple rattle , which is his favorite toy .
When Paprika helps teach him how to do things , she learns more about herself and her role as his older sister .
Cinnamon is voiced by Nick Balaban 's daughter , Annalivia Balaban .
SHOVEL AND PAIL Section::::Shovel and Pail .
Shovel and Pail are a brother and a sister , respectively , who live in the garden of the Blue 's Clues house .
They accompany Steve or Joe whenever a game of Blue 's Clues leads them outside to the backyard .
Their favorite activity is building sand castles together in the sand table .
They love learning about the different types of animals that live outside .
They both dream of becoming veterinarians when they grow up .
Their color schemes parallel each other 's ; Shovel is yellow with a red mouth , while Pail is red with a yellow mouth .
Shovel was voiced by Stephen Schmidt from 1996 - 2001 and by Jonathan Press from 2001 - 2004 .
Pail was voiced by Marshall Claffy from 1996 - 2001 , by Julia Wetherell from 2001 - 2003 , and by Nicole Gibson in 2004 .
TICKETY TOCK
Section::::Tickety Tock .
Tickety Tock , known as Tickety for short , is Steve 's alarm clock who lives on a nightstand in the bedroom of the Blue 's Clues house .
The ' 12 ' mark on her face is usually replaced by a symbol that relates to the episode 's topic .
She loves counting different things and often invites the host and the viewers to help her with basic math .
Tickety is very number - oriented and likes to keep schedules .
She is responsible for waking the residents of the Blue 's Clues house every morning by ringing her bells .
She is best friends with Slippery .
Tickety was voiced by Kathryn Avery from 1996 - 2000 and by Kelly Nigh from 2000 - 2004 .
SLIPPERY SOAP Section::::Slippery Soap .
Slippery Soap , known as Slippery for short , is a lavender - colored bar of soap who lives in the bathroom of the Blue 's Clues house .
He often has trouble standing upright and is known for shouting his catchphrase " Whoa ! "
whenever he slides around .
He is always surrounded by a trail of bubbles .
He dreams of becoming the captain of a boat when he grows up and likes to wear a blue sailor cap with an anchor emblem on it .
He is best friends with Tickety .
He was voiced by Cody Ross Pitts from 1996 - 2001 and by Patrick Van Wagnen from 2001 - 2004 .
SUPPORTING CHARACTERS MAGENTA
Section::::Supporting characters .
Section::::Magenta .
Magenta is Blue 's best friend , who is identical to her with the exception of a magenta fur coat .
She is first shown in the episode " Blue 's Story Time " but is not properly introduced until " Magenta Comes Over " .
She is one of Blue 's classmates at school and has visited the Blue 's Clues house on special occasions .
She gets a pair of purple eyeglasses , due to the fact that she is myopic , in the fourth season and keeps them for her appearances later on in the series .
Magenta is shyer than Blue but shares the same playful and energetic attitude .
Steve Burns stated in an interview that both she and Blue are girls .
She is voiced by Koyalee Chanda .
PERIWINKLE
Section::::Periwinkle .
Periwinkle is a precocious male kitten from the city .
He debuts in the season three episode " Blue 's Big Mystery " and becomes a recurring friend of Blue afterwards .
His hobbies include performing magic tricks , putting on shows , and building forts .
He is very outgoing and can speak unlike most of the other animal characters .
He is in a long - distance friendship with a purple bird from the city named Plum .
He was voiced by Cameron Bowen from 2000 - 2001 , by Kenny Kim from 2001 - 2003 , and by Jansen Panettiere in 2004 .
FELT FRIENDS Section::::Felt Friends .
The Felt Friends are a group of children made entirely of geometric felt shapes .
They live in a world that Blue and the host can enter by " skidooing " into a picture frame in the Blue 's Clues house .
They often ask for the host 's help when they need to count , build , or fix something constructed with felt shapes .
Many of the Felt Friends ' names start with the letter F. TURQUOISE Section::::Turquoise .
Turquoise is Blue 's pet turtle , who has a light blue shell with dark blue pentagonal shapes on it .
She debuts in the season two episode " Blue 's Birthday " when Steve gives her to Blue as a special birthday present .
Turquoise appears sporadically in episodes afterwards , normally in a small glass terrarium on the bedroom shelf .
SNAIL Section::::Snail .
The snail is a pink garden snail who appears hidden in three scenes of every episode .
His appearances are intended as Easter eggs for viewers to look for .
The snail is rarely addressed directly or acknowledged by the main characters .
He makes a guest appearance during the final musical number in Blue 's Big Musical Movie , in which he sings while riding a skateboard and reveals himself to have a loud , deep voice .
In the spin - off series Blue 's Room , the snail appears as a stuffed animal in the background .
MINOR CHARACTERS
* Baby Bear is a young female bear cub from the storybook " Goldilocks and the Three Bears " .
After Blue and Steve visit her story in " Blue 's Story Time " , she becomes a recurring friend of Blue and visits the main characters on special occasions .
She lives with her parents Papa Bear and Mama Bear .
*
Gingerbread Boy is a talking gingerbread cookie who lives in a board game similar to Candy Land .
Blue and Steve occasionally " skidoo " into his game to visit him .
He has a sister , Gingerbread Girl , who appears in the episode " Geography " .
* Green Puppy is one of Blue 's schoolmates , a mint green dog who communicates through gruff barks .
Unlike the other dogs featured in the series , Green Puppy is depicted with visible teeth incisors and has short ears .
She is voiced by Adam Peltzman .
* Miranda is Magenta 's owner and Steve 's friend .
She wears a red long - sleeved sweater with black pants and red shoes .
She is the only person other than Steve and Joe to use the Thinking Chair , which she shares with Steve in " Shy " .
She is played by Shannon Walker Williams .
* Marlee is a live - action librarian who appears in the episodes " Blue 's Book Nook " and " Our Neighborhood Festival " .
She appears to be deaf but can read people 's lips and communicates through sign language .
She is portrayed by Marlee Matlin .
* Miss Marigold is the teacher of Blue 's preschool class who appears in three episodes .
Unlike most of the other humans on the show , she is not portrayed by a live - action actor but is animated .
* Orange Kitten is a cat who attends Blue 's preschool class .
In " Blue 's Big Holiday " , she is revealed to be of Jewish heritage and celebrates Hanukkah with her caretaker Sam , played by Lisa Datz .
She is voiced by Caitlin Hale .
*
Purple Kangaroo is a young lavender - colored kangaroo who also attends Blue 's preschool class .
In " Blue 's Big Holiday " , he is shown to celebrate Kwanzaa with his caretaker Tyrese , played by Tyrese Gibson .
He is voiced by Alexander Claffy .
*
Steve 's grandmother is the grandmother of Steve and Joe , who wears a green striped dress similar to Steve 's shirt .
She lives next door to the Blue 's Clues house and is occasionally mentioned by Steve .
Her only physical appearance is in " Blue 's Big Treasure Hunt " , wherein she is played by Rue McClanahan .
*
Wynonna is Green Puppy 's owner and Steve 's friend .
Like most of Steve 's live - action friends , she is only shown in one of the Christmas specials Blue 's Big Holiday .
She is portrayed by Wynonna Judd .
* Plum is a small purple bird and is Periwinkle 's best friend from the city .
He is also fluent in speaking Spanish .
*
Jane & Carly are two little girls-(Jane being orange while her friend Carly is purple ) who taught Steve and Blue sign language in the episode Signs .
While Jane can talk and hear clearly , Carly is both deaf and mute .
They also enjoy storytelling .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Tracy , Diane .
( 2002 ) .
Blue 's Clues for Success : The 8 Secrets Behind a Phenomenal Business .
New York : Kaplan Publishing . .