LIST OF HUNTER ×
HUNTER ( 2011 )
EPISODES
Hunter ×
Hunter is an anime television series that aired from 2011 to 2014 based on Yoshihiro Togashi 's Hunter × Hunter manga .
The story begins with a young boy named Gon Freecss , who one day discovers that the father who he thought was dead , is in fact alive and well .
He learns that his father , Ging , is a legendary " Hunter " , an individual who has proven themselves an elite member of humanity .
Despite the fact that Ging left his son with his relatives in order to pursue his own dreams , Gon becomes determined to follow in his father 's footsteps , pass the rigorous " Hunter Examination " , and eventually find his father to become a Hunter in his own right .
This new Hunter ×
Hunter anime was announced on July 24 , 2011 .
It is a complete reboot of the series starting from the beginning of the manga , with no connections to the first anime from 1999 .
It is directed by Hiroshi Kōjina , produced by Madhouse , and features scripts by Jun Maekawa and character designs by Takahiro Yoshimatsu .
Instead of having the old cast reprise their roles for the new adaptation , the series features an entirely new cast to voice the characters .
The new series premiered airing weekly on Nippon Television and the nationwide Nippon News Network from October 2 , 2011 .
An hour after each episode is aired in Japan , American website Crunchyroll provided English subtitled simulcasts in the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , Ireland , South Africa , Australia , and New Zealand .
The series started to be collected in both DVD and Blu - ray format on January 25 , 2012 .
Viz Media has licensed the anime for a DVD / Blu - ray release in North America with an English dub .
On television , the series began airing on Adult Swim 's Toonami block on April 16 , 2016 .
The anime series ' opening theme is alternated between the song " Departure ! " and an alternate version titled " Departure ! -Second Version-
" both sung by Galneryus ' vocalist Masatoshi Ono .
Five pieces of music were used as the ending theme ; " Just Awake " by the Japanese band Fear , and Loathing in Las Vegas in episodes 1 to 26 , " Hunting for Your Dream " by Galneryus in episodes 27 to 58 , " Reason " sung by Japanese duo Yuzu in episodes 59 to 75 , " Nagareboshi Kirari " also sung by Yuzu from episode 76 to 98 , which was originally from the anime film adaptation , , and " Hyōri Ittai " by Yuzu featuring Hyadain from episode 99 to 146 , which was also used in the film .
The background music and soundtrack for the series was composed by Yoshihisa Hirano .
EPISODE LIST HUNTER EXAM
ARC
HEAVENS ARENA ARC
PHANTOM
TROUPE ARC GREED ISLAND
ARC CHIMERA ANT ARC
ELECTION ARC
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hunter × Hunter at Nippon Television
* Hunter x Hunter at Crunchyroll * Hunter x Hunter at Netflix