GIANTS – JETS RIVALRY
The Giants –
Jets rivalry is an American football rivalry in the National Football League ( NFL ) between the New York Giants and New York Jets .
It is an intra - city , interconference matchup between the two NFL teams based in the New York metropolitan area .
Since 1984 , both clubs have been the only teams in the league to share a stadium at the same time ( a situation that will end with the opening of Los Angeles 's City of Champions Stadium in 2020 ) .
Thus , a Giants – Jets game can be referred to as " the shortest road trip in the league " .
As the teams play in different conferences , the two teams only meet during the regular season once every four years when all four AFC East clubs play all four NFC East clubs .
In addition to annual preseason matchups , the only other way the two teams would meet would be in the Super Bowl , which has never occurred .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The New York Jets previously maintained a very tense rivalry with their in - town counterparts , the New York Giants , a rivalry that has since diminished due to the infrequency with which the teams meet in the regular season .
Its origins can be traced back to the formation of the American Football League in 1960 , as a rival to the more established NFL .
The upstart league decided to directly compete with the NFL 's Giants , and granted a charter franchise to Harry Wismer , who proclaimed that New York was ready for another professional football team .
Like the AFL and the NFL , their respective teams in New York fought for publicity , attention and fans .
Since the two teams play each other so infrequently in the regular season , some , including players on both teams , have questioned whether the Giants and Jets have a real rivalry .
FIRST PRESEASON GAMES
Section::::First preseason games .
However , the Jets and Giants did not actually play each other until a preseason game at the Yale Bowl in New Haven , Connecticut , on August 17 , 1969 , in the lead up to the AFL – NFL merger .
The game was viewed as a " turf war " by both opponents .
The Giants , considered a mediocre team at the time , were regarded as underdogs and were under much scrutiny by the media and their fans .
The Jets on the other hand were coming off a win in Super Bowl III as the first AFL team to win an AFL - NFL Championship Game .
Ultimately , the Jets won 37–14 , resulting in the firing of Giants coach Allie Sherman .
The teams have played in the preseason annually since .
Though the annual preseason game still served as a mild opportunity for bragging rights , the fervor of the rivalry had begun to fade by 1979 .
It weakened even further in 1990 , when the Jets fired Joe Walton , a former player and coach for the Giants who had other former Giants on his staff .
Another reason is that because the Jets and the Giants are in different conferences , they have only met in the regular season 11 times since the 1970 AFL – NFL merger .
Under the league 's current scheduling formula , in use since 2002 , the two New York teams only met every four years , and can only meet in the postseason if they both advance to the Super Bowl .
THE JETS JOIN THE GIANTS IN THE SAME STADIUM
Section::::The Jets join the Giants in the same stadium .
When the Jets left Shea Stadium and moved to Giants Stadium for the 1984 NFL season , many Jets fans hoped the name would be changed , however the Giants , who had the authority to approve the change , refused .
Many Jets refused to refer to the stadium by its official name , instead calling it " The Meadowlands " .
The naming of the stadium has played a role in the rivalry , as the Giants overshadowed the Jets .
CRITICAL GAMES
Section::::Critical games .
The Jets met the Giants in 1988 during the final game of the regular season .
The Jets , with a 7–7–1 record , had little to lose as their hopes for playoff contention had vanished .
The Giants , however , were contending for a playoff spot and a victory would have secured their spot and their division title .
Although the six point favorites , the Giants were unable to overcome the Jets defense which saw the Jets sack quarterback Phil Simms eight times .
With the Jets ' victory and victories by the Rams and Eagles , the Giants were eliminated from playoff contention and the Jets gained what many considered respect .
Over the twenty six years since the Jets were accepted into their NFC counterpart 's homefield ; Giants Stadium ; the unexpected and time - tested partnership of both teams have only gotten stronger in spite of the big sibling rivalry , resulting in both teams now sharing MetLife Stadium , a joint - venture in which the two franchises own a fifty percent share .
As part of the naming rights agreement , the preseason matchup between the Giants and Jets has been renamed the " MetLife Bowl / Snoopy Bowl " .
On December 6 , 2015 , Jets and Giants played in MetLife Stadium with Giants as the official home team .
Jets entered 6 - 5 and desperately chasing an AFC wildcard spot while the Giants entered 5 - 6 and were fighting for the top seed in the NFC East .
Giants had won the last five meetings between the clubs , and the last two were critical for the Giants ' championship runs .
After each teams started with one failed possession the Jets led a 78-yard drive with several strong runs by Chris Ivory and finished with a field goal .
A couple of possessions later in the second quarter as both teams were stagnant on offense Dwayne Harris returned a Jets punt for an 80-yard touchdown .
Jets
next possession Chris Ivory fumbled the ball in the Jets red zone but Giants failed to capitalize and only got a field goal out of the opportunity .
Jets had another strong drive that ended with a 25-yard pass touchdown pass from Ryan Fitzpatrick to Bilal Powell .
Giants star wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. caught a 72-yard touchdown pass on the next Giants drive to take a 17 - 10 lead .
Giants got another field goal before the end of the half and entered the locker room up by 10 .
Giants led an 11-minute drive in the 3rd-4th quarter .
On fourth down 2 on the Jets ' 4 yard line the Giants controversially attempted to go for the touchdown rather than take a short field goal and threw an interception .
Jets marched down to the Giants ' redzone but settled for a field goal .
Jets got the ball back again with two minutes and all of their timeouts remaining , and marched efficiently down the field until Fitzpatrick threw a TD to Brandon Marshall to tie the game .
The teams squared off in overtime for the first time in their history against each other .
The Jets got the ball first and continued their stellar offensive play from the fourth quarter and scored a short field goal .
Giants got within field goal range to the Jets 30 yard line on their drive , and Josh Brown missed the 48 yarder , his first missed field goal of the year .
Jets beat the Giants for the first time since 1993 .
SUPER BOWL WINS BY THE GIANTS IN 2008 AND
2012 Section::::Super Bowl wins by the Giants in 2008 and 2012 .
During the victory parade for the Giants , celebrating their win in Super Bowl XLII over the Jets division rivals , the New England Patriots , New Jersey government officials took jabs .
State Senate President Richard J. Codey took a jab at the Patriots when he referred to their videotaping scandal at Giants Stadium against the Jets in September .
" If the Patriots were here today , they could film all they want " , Codey said .
Jets coach Rex Ryan made an effort to fuel the flames of the rivalry .
The 2011 season matchup , which both teams needed to win to keep their respective playoff hopes alive , was hyped up by trash talking from both teams including comments by Ryan .
Just before their December 24 , 2011 meeting , the " host " Jets covered up the " visiting " Giants ' Super Bowl logos in front of their locker room , angering Giants players .
After the Giants defeated the Jets 29–14 , Giants running back Brandon Jacobs taunted Ryan , saying , " Time to shut up , fat boy ! "
The two reportedly came close to blows in a tense post game meeting .
The Giants win over the Jets eliminated the Jets from the playoffs and helped the Giants secure the NFC East title and a spot in the playoffs , where they would go on to win Super Bowl XLVI , once again by defeating the New England Patriots .
Giants kicker Lawrence Tynes called the win over the Jets the turning point of the season that spurred them onto their Super Bowl run .
Despite a Super Bowl that was described as a " lose - lose situation " for the Jets as their cross - town rivals played against their division rivals , Jets owner Woody Johnson congratulated both the Giants and Patriots in a post - game statement .
REGULAR SEASON RESULTS
FOOTNOTES
*
Although the San Francisco 49ers and Oakland Raiders share the San Francisco Bay Area media market and the Los Angeles Rams and the Los Angeles Chargers share the Los Angeles metropolitan area media market , both have different home stadiums in different cities .
And although the Rams and Los Angeles Raiders played at Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum , they never played there at the same time .
* SEE ALSO * Knicks – Nets rivalry – A basketball rivalry between NBA clubs Knicks and Nets * Islanders – Rangers rivalry A hockey rivalry between NHL clubs Islanders and Rangers
* Mets – Yankees rivalry –
A baseball rivalry between MLB clubs Mets and Yankees .
* Hudson River Derby - A soccer rivalry between MLS clubs Red Bulls and New York City FC .
REFERENCES