CATAN
The Settlers of Catan , sometimes shortened to Catan or to Settlers , is a multiplayer board game designed by Klaus Teuber and first published in 1995 in Germany by Franckh - Kosmos Verlag ( Kosmos ) as Die Siedler von Catan .
Players assume the roles of settlers , each attempting to build and develop holdings while trading and acquiring resources .
Players gain points as their settlements grow ; the first to reach a set number of points , typically 10 , wins .
The game and its many expansions are also published by Mayfair Games , Filosofia , Capcom , 999 Games , Κάισσα , and Devir .
The Settlers of Catan became one of the first German - style board games to achieve popularity outside Europe .
, more than 22 million copies in 30 languages had been sold .
The game involves large amounts of strategy , while still being fairly simple to learn .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The players in the game represent settlers establishing colonies on the island of Catan .
Players build settlements , cities , and roads to connect them as they settle the island .
The game board , which represents the island , is composed of hexagonal tiles ( hexes ) of different land types , which are laid out randomly at the beginning of each game .
Newer editions of the game began to depict a fixed layout in their manual , which has been proven by computer simulations to be fairly even - handed , and recommend this to be used by beginners .
In 2016 , editions of the game were released with a conventional fixed layout board in this configuration , the hexes of which can not be rearranged .
Players build by spending resources ( brick , wood , sheep , wheat , and ore ) , represented by resource cards ; each land type , with the exception of the unproductive desert , produces a specific resource .
On each player 's turn , two six - sided dice are rolled to determine which hexes produce resources .
Players with a settlement adjacent to a hex containing the number just rolled receive one card of the corresponding resource ; cities produce two cards of the corresponding resource .
For example , if a player has one city and two settlements adjacent to a wheat hex , that player would take four wheat resource cards if the corresponding number was rolled .
There is also a robber token , initially placed on the desert ; if a player rolls 7 , the robber must be moved to another hex , which will no longer produce resources until the robber is moved again .
That player may also steal a resource card from another player .
In addition , when a 7 is rolled , all players with 8 or more resource cards must discard their choice of half of their cards , rounded down .
For example , If a player has 9 resource cards , and a 7 is rolled , the player must get rid of 4 cards .
On the player 's turn , the player may spend resource cards to build roads , settlements , cities ( which replace existing settlements ) , or development cards .
Players can trade resource cards between each other ; players may also trade off - island ( in effect , with the non - player bank ) at a ratio of four of one resource for one of any other .
By building settlements adjacent to ports , players may trade with the bank at three - to - one ( three of any single resource type ) or two - to - one ( two of a specific resource ) ratios , depending on the port 's location .
The goal of the game is to reach ten victory points .
Players score one point for each settlement they own and two for each city .
Various other achievements , such as establishing the longest road and the largest army ( by playing the most knight cards ) , grant a player additional victory points .
Resource cards can also be spent to buy a development card .
Three types of development cards include cards worth one victory point ; knight cards ( or soldier cards ) , which allow the player to move the robber as if they had rolled a 7 ( but without the remove - half rule ) ; and a third set of cards which allow the player one of three abilities when played .
Teuber 's original design was for a large game of exploration and development in a new land .
Between 1993 and 1995 Teuber and Kosmos refined and simplified the game into its current form .
Unused mechanics from that design went on to be used in Teuber 's following games , Entdecker and Löwenherz .
The game 's first expansion , , adds the concept of exploration , and the combined game ( sometimes known as " New Shores " ) is probably the closest game to Teuber 's original intentions .
EXTENSIONS AND EXPANSIONS Section::::Extensions and expansions .
The base game of the Catan series , Settlers of Catan , includes support for 3 - 4 players .
In 1996 , an extension to allow up to six players was released for the base game .
As well as extra components to accommodate more players , the expansion adds an extra building phase to the turn , so that players can participate in the game during each other 's turns .
After releasing the 5 - 6 player extension , Teuber began to publish expansions for the base game .
The first , Seafarers of Catan , was released in 1997 ; it was later retitled Catan : Seafarers .
Seafarers adds ships that allow players to cross sea hexes , and includes scenarios in which players explore an archipelago of islands .
It also adds gold - producing hexes that allow players to take the resource of their choice .
The second major expansion to the game , Cities and Knights of Catan ( later Catan : Cities and Knights ) , was also released in 1998 .
It adds concepts from the card game and its first expansion to Catan , including Knights who must be used to defend Catan from invading barbarians , and improvements that can be bought for cities that give benefits to players .
In addition , three commodities ( paper , coin , and cloth ) can be produced , as well as the original resources .
A 5–6 player extension for Cities & Knights was released at the same time .
Also released in 2000 was a book of variations for Settlers .
The third large expansion , , was released in 2008 .
Traders & Barbarians collects a number of smaller scenarios , some of which have previously been published elsewhere .
The set includes an official two - player variant .
A special edition of the game was released in 2005 : a 10th anniversary collector 's edition of the base game and Cities & Knights , with hand - painted 3D tiles and playing pieces .
Mayfair Games released a fourth edition of The Settlers of Catan in 2007 , with new artwork , a locking frame , a deeper box , and an insert tray ; there was also a minor rule change .
Soon after its release , two changes were made to the fourth edition .
The robber playing piece was changed from a black to a grey color and the soldier development card was renamed a knight .
Fourth - edition versions of Cities & Knights , Seafarers , and the 5–6 player extensions were also released . , the fourth large expansion , was released in 2013 .
The Catan line was rebranded in 2015 for the 20th anniversary of the series , with the original Settlers game renamed simply Catan .
VARIANTS AND SCENARIOS Section::::Variants and scenarios .
In 1998 , the first historical scenario pack was released , which allows players to reenact the building of the pyramids of Egypt or the expansion of Alexander
the Great 's empire using Catan game mechanics .
A second scenario pack for Settlers concerning the building of the Great Wall of China and the Trojan war was released in 2001 .
Atlantis :
Scenarios and Variants was published in 2005 .
Atlantis was a boxed set which collected a number of scenarios and variants published in gaming magazines and at conventions , such as The Volcano and The Great River .
The set also included a deck of event cards which replaced the dice in the main game , giving it a less random spread of resource production .
The event cards , which were also available as a standalone item , have since been re - released in a modified form in the Traders and Barbarians expansion .
Kosmos , Mayfair , and 999 Games released the first stand - alone " Catan Geographies " title , Catan Germany , in 2008 .
In 2009 , ( ' Treasures , Dragons and Explorers ' ) was published .
This was a scenario pack for fans that included six new scenarios and the pieces needed to play them .
It was re - released in 2017 with artwork updated to match the 2015 fourth edition of Settlers of Catan .
has not been published in English .
Catan : Oil Springs is an expansion by Erik Assadourian and Ty Hansen introduced in 2011 designed to draw attention to environmental issues .
It is offered as a free download or for purchase from the Mayfair Games website .
The scenario adds oil fields that can be used to make other resources and develop metropolises , but disasters can strike if too much oil is used .
Oil can also be taken out of the game , for victory points and to prevent disasters .
The scenario Catan : Frenemies was released in 2012 .
In Frenemies , players are rewarded with redeemable " favor tokens " for " helping " their opponents by moving the robber harmlessly , giving away resources , and connecting their roads to their opponents ' road networks .
Depending on the circumstances , these favors might not be helpful .
Helpers of Catan is an expansion released in 2013 .
The computer opponent characters from the PC / Mac game Catan – Cities & Knights return in this scenario as " helper cards " , which can be used during gameplay ; for example , the helper card for Candamir allows the player who uses it to substitute any one resource when buying a development card .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Richard Dansky comments that " for all of its elemental simplicity , The Settlers of Catan has breathtaking depth and breadth of experience .
It 's a resource - management game , defined by position and strategizing .
It 's a social game , defined by horsetrading of resource cards and ' Siccing the Fritz ' ( as my friends call the robber ) with bloodthirsty bonhomie .
It 's a game of chance , ruled by dice rolls and card draws .
It 's a hardcore game and a light social pastime and everything in between , a laboratory where I can test a hundred different play styles and a genuine reason to invite friends over . "
It is popular in the United States where it has been called " the board game of our time " by The Washington Post .
A 2012 American documentary film titled Going Cardboard ( featuring Klaus Teuber ) is about this game 's impact on American gaming communities and what came of it .
AWARDS * 1995
: Spiel des Jahres Game of the Year * 1995 :
Deutscher Spiele Preis 1st
place * 1995 :
Essen Feather * 1995 :
Meeples ' Choice Award * 1996 : Origins Award for Best Fantasy or Science Fiction Board Game * 2001 :
Origins Hall of Fame * 2004 :
Hra
roku * 2005 : Games Magazine Hall of Fame
* 2005
: Gra Roku Game of the Year * 2015 : GamesCon Vegas Game of the Century VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Since the game 's release , a number of computer games have been published based on Settlers of Catan and its spinoffs .
The first sanctioned English - language release was Catan :
The Computer Game , developed for the PC by Castle Hill Studios and published by Big Fish Games .
This off - line game was available from MSN , as it was acquired by Microsoft who also released Catan Online in August 2005 on MSN Games , the game now requiring an internet connection .
In 2005 , Capcom edited the first portable version of Settlers of Catan on the N - Gage Nokia handheld device .
In June 2009 the MSN version of Settlers was discontinued .
The same game later became available on other online services .
Teuber and Big Huge Games worked together to produce Catan , a version of Settlers for the Xbox Live Arcade .
It was released on 2 May 2007 .
Game Republic developed a PlayStation 3 version in 2008 titled also Catan .
A Nintendo DS version of Settlers has been developed by Exozet games in collaboration with Klaus Teuber .
The game can be played against computer opponents , and includes Nintendo WiFi online play .
It was released in 2009 , but only in Europe .
The Settlers of Catan online game was announced on 16 December 2002 .
Catan Online World allows players to download a Java application that serves as a portal for the online world and allows online play with other members .
The original board game may be played for free , while expansions require a subscription membership .
Two official PC versions of Catan have been released , The First Island ( the basic game only ) and ( with Seafarers and Cities & Knights expansions ) .
The First Island is available for the PC only in German .
Cities & Knights was available in both English and German .
Catan and some of its expansions are also available in various languages for mobile phones , iPhone , iPad , iPod Touch , BlackBerry and Android smartphones .
Mayfair Games announced in 2010 that a version of Catan is coming to Facebook .
Catan was released on Xbox Live Arcade in 2007 .
It was pulled without notice in mid-2014 .
There is no official word on why it was pulled or if it will return .
Another game called Catan was released for the PlayStation Network in 2008 .
It also has been discontinued .
In 2010 , Vectorform showcased a Microsoft PixelSense game for Settlers of Catan .
USM also developed an Android and iOS mobile app version simply called " Catan " with the various expansions available as DLC .
In August 2013 , Catan : Creators Edition was made available for PC on Steam and Mac OS X in the Mac App Store .
Catan : Creators Edition officially replaces the previous Catan : Cities & Knights .
The game features both Seafarers plus the Cities & Knights expansions and includes a level editor .
In the summer of 2014 , Bontom Games collaborated with Catan GmbH and Internet Explorer to bring an asynchronous version of Catan to the digital world .
Catan Anytime is a short - session turn - based game designed for mainstream gamers to play with their friends and family , no matter the time and place .
On 10 June 2016 , Catan Anytime announced on their Facebook page that Catan Anytime has shut down operations .
The web site catananytime.com is no longer available .
In April 2017 , Catan Universe launched .
Mayfair games collaborated with Exozet and United Soft Media to make a cross platform version of Catan .
Catan Universe is available in web , Steam , Amazon , iOS and Android platforms .
While the steam version has a score of Mostly Negative , the mobile versions have a higher score of 4/5 stars .
SPINOFFS AND TIE - IN
PRODUCTS
Section::::Spinoffs and tie - in products .
The popularity of The Settlers of Catan led to the creation of spinoff games and products , starting in 1996 with The Settlers of Catan card game ( later renamed to Catan Card Game ) , and the 2003 novel , Die Siedler von Catan , by German historical fiction author Rebecca Gablé , which tells the story of a group of Norse seafarers who set out in search of the mythical island of Catan .
In 2002 a travel edition of Catan was published , featuring playing pieces which slot into a fixed - layout board .
The " Catan Histories " subseries includes Settlers of the Stone Age , a re - release of Struggle for Rome , and Settlers of America .
The Catan Dice Game was released in 2007 .
The game is played with six dice , the faces of which depict one of six resources ( brick , lumber , wool , grain , ore , or gold ) .
The dice are rolled up to three times , and the score of each roll is recorded by " building " roads , settlements , cities , and knights on a score sheet that shows a miniature version of the island of Catan .
In the base game , one to four players try to get the highest score .
There is also a " plus " version of the game , which , like the original Catan board game , is a race to be the first player to score 10 victory points .
In addition to the Catan Card Game above , two additional card game spinoffs have been published .
Rivals for Catan , published in 2010 , is a two - player strategy game for expert players that plays like a board game , and The Struggle for Catan , published in 2011 , is a two- to four - player game that plays more like a card game and is suitable for Catan novices .
Catan Junior is a 2012 spinoff for families with children .
The game is based on the original Settlers of Catan with a " pirate " theme and simpler rules .
Players build " pirates ' lairs " in the islands and build ships to reach new building sites .
Resource and development cards are replaced with tiles , trading and building are simpler , and the " Ghost Captain " does not steal resources as the pirate in the base game does .
Star Trek Catan is a spin - off of the original series released in 2012 by Mayfair Games .
The game uses the same basic components with new names , new graphics , and some minor rules additions .
The building costs and resources match the original game .
It incorporates the " Helpers of Catan " expansion , with the cards renamed as Star Trek characters .
A Game of Thrones
Catan :
Brotherhood of the Watch is a spin - off based on George R. R. Martin 's A Song of Ice and Fire series .
As Brothers of the Night Watch , players harvest resources from the Gift to build settlements and keeps , while contributing to the defense of the Wall .
The game was released in 2017 in English , German , Spanish , Italian , Polish , Russian , Czech / Slovak , Japanese , Hebrew and French .
CATANIMALS Section::::Catanimals .
Mayfair released a series of mini - stuffed animals based on the different resources presented in the game .
FILM / TELEVISION ADAPTATION
Section::::Film / television adaptation .
In February 2015 , Variety announced that producer Gail Katz had purchased the film and TV rights to The Settlers of Catan .
Katz said , " The island of Catan is a vivid , visual , exciting and timeless world with classic themes and moral challenges that resonate today .
There is a tremendous opportunity to take what people love about the game and its mythology as a starting point for the narrative " .
In October 2017 , Variety reported that Sony Pictures was negotiating to acquire the rights to adapt it into a film , with Gail Katz still attached to the project .
As of June 2018 it is known that Blaise Hemingway has written the screenplay and that the main character will be called Herman Wundeba , but the cast remains unknown .
A short film titled The Lord of Catan was released in 2014 .
Actors Amy Acker and Fran Kranz starred in the film as a married couple enmeshed in an increasingly intense game of Catan .
SEE ALSO
* List of world championships in
mind sports
* Going Cardboard ( Documentary , includes an interview with Klaus Teuber )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS