READY PLAYER ONE
Ready Player One is a 2011 science fiction novel , and the debut novel of American author Ernest Cline .
The story , set in a dystopia in 2044 , follows protagonist Wade Watts on his search for an Easter egg in a worldwide virtual reality game , the discovery of which will lead him to inherit the game creator 's fortune .
Cline sold the rights to publish the novel in June 2010 , in a bidding war to the Crown Publishing Group ( a division of Random House ) .
The book was published on August 16 , 2011 .
An audiobook was released the same day ; it was narrated by Wil Wheaton , who was mentioned briefly in one of the chapters .
In 2012 , the book received an Alex Award from the Young Adult Library Services Association division of the American Library Association and won the 2012 Prometheus Award .
A film adaptation , screenwritten by Cline and Zak Penn and directed by Steven Spielberg , was released on March 29 , 2018 .
SYNOPSIS SETTING
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Setting .
In the 2040s , the world has been gripped by an energy crisis from the depletion of fossil fuels and the consequences of global warming and overpopulation , causing widespread social problems and economic stagnation .
To escape the decline their world is facing , people turn to the OASIS , a virtual reality simulator accessible by players using visors and haptic technology such as gloves .
It functions both as an MMORPG and as a virtual world , with its currency being the most stable in the real world .
It was created by James Halliday who , when he died , had announced in his will to the public that he had left an Easter egg inside OASIS , and the first person to find it would inherit his entire fortune and the corporation .
The story follows the adventures of Wade Watts , starting about five years after the announcement , when he discovers one of the three keys which unlock three successive gates leading to the treasure .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Teenager Wade Watts lives with his aunt in Oklahoma City in the " stacks " , a poverty - stricken district constructed of trailer homes piled on top of each other .
He spends his spare time as a " gunter " ( " egg hunter " ) , logging on to the OASIS as an avatar under the moniker Parzival , reading Halliday 's journal Anorak 's Almanac , and researching details of the 1980s pop culture , mainly classic video games and movies , that Halliday loved .
One day , he realizes that the first key is located on Ludus , the same virtual world as his own online high school , in a re - creation of the Dungeons & Dragons module Tomb of Horrors .
He meets Art3mis , a famous female gunter and blogger who has been exploring the place , and advances further than she does when he defeats the AI Acererak at the video game Joust .
He is awarded the Copper Key , and Parzival appears on the " Scoreboard " , attracting the world 's attention .
Parzival completes the Copper Gate 's puzzles by teleporting to planet Middletown , playing through the Dungeons of Daggorath video game in a recreation of Halliday 's parents 's house and then role - playing Matthew Broderick 's character in the film WarGames .
Art3mis clears the gate shortly afterwards , as does Wade 's friend Aech .
Wade 's fame enables him to make a living by endorsing virtual products .
It also brings him to the attention of Nolan Sorrento , head of operations at Innovative Online Industries ( IOI ) , a multinational corporation bent on a well - funded effort to find the Easter egg in order to take control of the OASIS and monetize it .
When Wade refuses to join IOI , Sorrento attempts to kill him by blowing up the stacks where Wade lives , killing his aunt and disguising the explosion as a meth lab accident .
Wade escapes and moves to Columbus , Ohio , where he lies low , assuming the pseudonym Bryce Lynch and living in an anonymous apartment designed for hardcore OASIS users .
He considers an alliance with Aech , Art3mis , and Daito and Shoto , two Japanese gunters who have also earned the Copper Key .
Instead , he and Art3mis begin a wary friendship , but when he asks her out , Art3mis declines .
IOI operatives , called Sixers , attempt to assassinate Wade and Art3mis at the birthday party of OASIS co - founder Ogden Morrow .
They are stopped by Morrow , who has special privileges and powers within the OASIS .
Art3mis abandons Wade due to the competition being more personal for her .
Five months pass .
Neither Wade nor anyone else has found the next token , the Jade Key .
When Art3mis finds the Jade Key , Parzival scrambles to planet Archaide , where he plays a perfect game of Pac - Man , receiving only a quarter as a prize .
Aech , who was the second player to find the Jade Key , provides a hint leading him to the planet Frobozz where he solves the text adventure game Zork .
Sorrento , who had tracked Art3mis and Aech using a premium locator artifact , establishes a base there to farm their company 's avatars with keys , and unlocks the second Gate and acquires the Jade Key .
Shoto tells Parzival that the Sixers infiltrated Daito 's real - life apartment and threw him out of the building , killing him .
Parzival unlocks the Jade Gate , a Voight - Kampff machine by entering a privately - owned Blade Runner - themed bulding , and completes the arcade game Black Tiger as a character from the first - person shooter perspective , being given a virtual mecha as the prize and another clue : a red star in a circle .
Using his knowledge of Rush , he acquires the Crystal Key on planet Syrinx ( the red star being the symbol of the Solar Federation in the song " 2112 " ) , and after playing " Discovery " , the third movement of the song , finds a clue regarding the conditions to unlock the final gate .
As he messages Art3mis , Aech , and Shoto with his solution , Sorrento ends their covert attempts to clear the third gate , Castle Anorak on planet Chthonia , and places a force field around it .
Wade manipulates his assumed identity in order to be arrested and placed in indentured servitude in IOI 's tech support department .
While inside IOI , he uses black market passwords and security exploits to hack into IOI 's intranet : he acquires a wealth of information , including footage of Daito 's murder .
The information also includes the attempt on his own life , as well as plans to force Shoto and Art3mis to work for IOI in real life , and kill them at the end of the contest ( IOI does n't know who Aech is due to him using a pseudonym ) .
After escaping the corporation , he shares his information with his friends and publicizes a gathering of avatars to storm the castle .
They are interrupted by Ogden Morrow , who offers them a safe haven at his home in Oregon .
Wade meets the real - life Aech and Ogden , but not Art3mis and Shoto , who are already hooked into Ogden 's immersion pods .
The day of the battle , Wade uses his planted hack to bring down the barricade , and a massive fight among avatars ensues .
After Parzival uses the mecha Leopardon ( accompanied by Art3mis 's Minerva X and Aech 's Gundam ) to fight against Sorrento 's Mechagodzilla Kiryu , Parzival and friends unlock the gate , at which point the Sixers use an artifact called the Cataclyst to destroy the castle and all avatars over a large area .
Parzival survives because having the Pac - Man quarter granted him an extra life .
As he enters the Crystal Gate , he announces that if he wins he will share his fortune with his three friends .
With Sorrento and his Sixers on his heels , Parzival plays Tempest , role - plays King Arthur and various characters in Monty Python and the Holy Grail , and retrieves the Easter egg in Adventure .
His victory grants him control of the OASIS , including wiping out his enemies ' avatars , resurrecting his friends , and a Big Red Button that would wipe OASIS .
Sorrento is arrested for the murder of Daito and for conspiring to kill Wade and the others .
Back in Oregon , Wade and Art3mis , whose actual name is Samantha , meet in person and rekindle their relationship with a kiss .
CHARACTERS
* Parzival : the viewpoint character , an orphan from the " stacks " surrounding metropolitan Oklahoma City .
Wade names his OASIS character Parzival after the Arthurian knight involved in the quest for the holy grail , and dedicates his life to finding James Halliday 's Easter egg .
He is 18 years old when he finds the Copper Key in the prologue of the book .
His username at the virtual high school he attends is Wade3 .
Wade 's character was based on a mix of Cline as well as his geek friends .
* a.k.a .
Anorak : creator of OASIS .
A big fan of 1980s culture , he announces in his will his plans to leave his entire fortune to whoever can find his Easter egg that he had hidden in OASIS .
His character was initially inspired by Willy Wonka who Cline described as a " rich eccentric holding a fantastic contest " .
Cline used the personalities of Howard Hughes and Richard Garriott , and placed Halliday 's birth year around the same as his own so that his pop culture interests would coincide with Cline 's " and the other middle - aged uber geeks I know " .
* ( pronounced like the letter H ) :
Wade 's best friend , fellow gunter , and rival in the quest to find the egg .
Aech 's specialty is in PvP and first - person shooter games , and is one of the top combatants on OASIS .
Although Aech 's avatar is an athletic Caucasian heterosexual male , Aech is played by an African - American lesbian named " Helen Harris " , who grew up in Atlanta , Georgia and is about the same age as Wade .
Aech is based partly on Cline 's friend Harry Knowles as well as himself and other geeks , both men and women .
* : a famous female gunter and blogger .
Wade has a huge cyber - crush on her , which is complicated by their competition in search of the egg .
She chose her avatar 's name from the Greek goddess of the hunt .
Like other characters , Cline based Art3mis on himself and other geeks , both men and women .
Her real name is " Samantha Evelyn Cook " from Vancouver , British Columbia
and she has a port - wine stain on her face .
* : Co - creator of the OASIS and best friend of James Halliday .
They founded the video game company Gregarious Games , where he would handle the business operations , and which would later become Gregarious Simulation Systems ( GSS ) , the company that launched OASIS .
His appearance and personality are described as being " a cross between Albert Einstein and Santa Claus . "
Concerned that people were using it to escape reality , he quits GSS and works on educational software with his wife Kira until her death .
His relationship with Halliday deteriorated , and the two men remained estranged until before Halliday 's death , when he is entrusted with ensuring that the hunt goes smoothly and without cheating .
Ogden lives in Oregon and owns a set of advanced OASIS consoles and immersion rigs , and is able to monitor everyone in the OASIS , even in private chat rooms .
He rarely appears in public , and only shows up on the OASIS once a year on his birthday , where he assumes the avatar of the Great and Powerful Og .
Ogden 's character and relationship with Halliday was inspired by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak , with Morrow being more like Jobs as a " charismatic tech leader " .
* : one of the two Japanese gunters who rise to the top of the scoreboard early on in the hunt , working in a team with " brother " Shoto .
The pair have a generally tense , but not unfriendly relationship with Aech , and Art3mis , They are closer to Parzival , and work together on quests unrelated to the hunt .
They are based on otaku :
Japanese geeks who enjoy movies and anime , as well as hikikomori : people who live as recluses inside their family 's homes .
Daito 's real name is revealed to be " Toshiro Yoshiaki " after he is killed by the IOI .
* : the second and younger of the two Japanese gunters working as a team in their quest for the egg .
Shoto 's real name is " Akihide Karatsu " .
Following the death of his partner , Shoto collaborates with Art3mis , Aech and Wade to finish the hunt .
* : the head of operations at Innovative Online Industries ( IOI ) , the multinational corporation that serves as an Internet service provider for most of the world , and that plans to take over and monetize the OASIS .
Sorrento is head of IOI 's Oology division , which is dedicated to searching for Halliday 's Easter egg .
His avatar name is IOI-655321 , after his employee number .
IOI employees in the division are nicknamed Sixers , after their six - digit employee numbers that also begin with the number 6 .
Cline said that he named Sorrento after Nolan Bushnell , founder of the video game company Atari , and said , " Not that I think Nolan is a bad guy , or anything .
It 's meant as a subtle tribute ! "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Ready Player
One was a New York Times bestseller .
Among those praising the book were Entertainment Weekly , The Boston Globe , The A.V. Club , CNN.com , io9 , and Boing Boing .
USA
Today wrote that the novel " undoubtedly qualifies Cline as the hottest geek on the planet right now .
"
NPR said that the book was " ridiculously fun and large - hearted " .
Cline " takes a far - out premise and engages the reader instantly " with a " deeply felt narrative [ that ] makes it almost impossible to stop turning the pages . "
Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that " The book gets off to a witty start " but noted that it lacks at least one dimension , stating that gaming had overwhelmed everything else about this book .
Rebecca Serle of HuffPost described the book as " the grown - up 's Harry Potter " and that it " has it all – nostalgia , trivia , adventure , romance , heart and , dare
I say it , some very fascinating social commentary .
"
The book has been translated into over 20 languages .
In an interview with Fortune , Cline said that his book had inspired designers at companies such as Oculus VR which recommended the book for their new employees .
Oculus has also invited Cline several times to sign books and demo hardware .
The Ready Player One : Oasis beta , developed by Directive Games Limited , was released on March 23 , 2018 alongside the Steven Spielberg movie and consists of four experiences made for virtual reality headsets .
The game is currently available for free on Steam and Viveport .
SPIN - OFFS AND SEQUELS SHORT STORY Section::::Spin - offs and sequels .
Section::::Short story .
Lacero , a fan - fiction story by Andy Weir , was published in the 2016 edition of Ready Player One .
It follows the story of Nolan Sorrento and functions as a precursor to the main novel , and is considered canonical to the Ready Player One fictional universe .
SEQUEL
NOVEL
Section::::Sequel novel .
In 2015 , in an interview with Den of Geek , screenwriter Zak Penn reported that Cline was working on a sequel to the novel .
In December 2017 , Cline himself confirmed he is writing a sequel .
Cline stated that the new sequel would not consist of a contest and would have a different type of storyline involving all of the characters while still exploring pop culture references like the first book .
IN OTHER MEDIA EASTER EGG HUNT PROMOTION Section::::In other media .
Section::::Easter egg hunt promotion .
Ten months after the first edition release , Cline revealed on his blog that Ready Player One itself contained an elaborately hidden Easter egg .
This clue would form the first part of a series of staged video gaming tests , similar to the plot of the novel .
Cline also revealed that the competition 's grand prize would be a DeLorean .
The Easter egg was a URL hidden in the book for anoraksalmanac.com .
This was the first stage of the contest where the 2011 Atari 2600 game The Stacks by developers Mike Mika & Kevin Wilson was featured .
The game Ultimate Collector :
Garage Sale by Austin - based developer Portalarium was featured in the second stage of the contest .
The final stage of the contest was announced on August 1 , 2012 , and was to set a world record on one of several classic arcade or Atari 2600 games .
This was completed on August 9 , 2012 by Craig Queen , who set a new world record in Joust .
He was awarded the DeLorean on the TV show X - Play .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
The film rights were purchased by Warner Bros. on the same day Cline finalized his publishing deal with Random House , one year prior to the novel 's publication .
Dan Farah brought the project into the studio and produced it with Donald De Line .
Cline adapted his novel into a screenplay .
Over the years , Eric Eason and Zak Penn assisted Cline with rewrites .
Steven Spielberg signed on to direct in March 2015 .
Spielberg and Kristie Macosko Krieger of Amblin Partners also joined Deline and Farah as producers .
Warner Bros. initially announced a release date of December 15 , 2017 .
On February 9 , 2016 , the release date was pushed back to March 30 , 2018 , to avoid competition with .
The movie began production in the spring of 2016 and was filmed in both the United States and the United Kingdom .
On June 9 , 2016 , Variety stated that Spielberg 's regular collaborator John Williams was planning on composing the film 's score .
However , scheduling conflicts with another Spielberg film , The Post , led to Spielberg signing Alan Silvestri for the score .
The film stars Tye Sheridan , Olivia Cooke , Ben Mendelsohn , Lena Waithe , Simon Pegg , Hannah John - Kamen and Mark Rylance .
It premiered at South by Southwest on March 11 , 2018 , and was theatrically released by Warner Bros. in the United States on March 29 , 2018 .
It received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its visuals and brisk pacing , and noted it as an improvement over the book .
This film received criticism for its lack of character development and its " achingly regressive " view of pop culture fans .
SEE ALSO
* Simulated reality
* Simulated reality in fiction
NOTES
* The terms " Ch .. " and " p. " are shortened forms for chapter and page , and refer to chapters and pages in the Ready Player One novel in its first American edition .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Excerpts from the book from Scribd