BINUCLEATED CELLS
Binucleated cells are cells that contain two nuclei .
This type of cell is most commonly found in cancer cells and may arise from a variety of causes .
Binucleation can be easily visualized through staining and microscopy .
In general , binucleation has negative effects on cell viability and subsequent mitosis .
They also occur physiologically in hepatocytes , chondrocytes and in fungi ( dikaryon ) .
CAUSES
* Cleavage furrow regression :
Cells divide and almost complete division but then the cleavage furrow begins to regress and the cells merge .
This is thought to be caused by nondisjunction in chromosomes but the mechanism by which it occurs is not well understood .
* Failed cytokinesis :
The cell can fail to form a cleavage furrow , leading to both nuclei remaining in one cell .
*
Multipolar spindles :
Cells contain three or more centrioles , resulting in multiple poles .
This leads to the cells pulling chromosomes in many directions that end in multiple nuclei found in one cell .
* Merging of newly formed cells : Two cells that have just finished cytokinesis merge into one another .
This process is not entirely understood .
MEDICAL RELEVANCE
DETECTION Section::::Medical relevance .
Section::::Detection .
Binucleated cells can be observed using microscopy .
Cells must first be fixed to arrest them wherever they are in the cell cycle and to keep their structures from degrading .
Their nuclei and tubulin must next be made visible so that binucleation can be identified .
DAPI is a dye that binds to DNA and fluoresces blue .
For this reason , it is particularly useful at labeling nuclei .
Antibody probes can be used to label tubulin fluorescently .
The immunofluorescence may then be observed with microscopy .
Binucleated cells are most easily identified by viewing tubulin , which surrounds the two nuclei in the cell .
Binucleated cells may be mistaken for two cells in close proximity when viewing only nuclei .
CANCER Section::::Cancer .
Binucleation occurs at a much higher rate in cancer cells .
Other identifying features of cancer cells include multipolar spindles , micronuclei , and chromatin bridge .
However , the increased rate of binucleation is usually not high enough to make it a conclusive diagnostic tool .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
The fate of binucleated cells depends largely on the type of cell they originated from .
A large percentage of binucleated cells arising from normal cells remain in interphase and never enter mitosis again .
Cells that contain many mutations before they become binucleate are much more likely to proceed through subsequent rounds of mitosis .
One study found that more than 50 % of binucleated cells never entered mitosis again while greater than 95 % of cancer cells were able to proceed through mitosis .
Subsequent rounds of mitosis in binucleated cells have much higher rates of errors in chromosomal disjunction making it much more likely for cells to accumulate mutations .
REFERENCES