HUNTED ( 2012 TV SERIES )
Hunted is a 2012 British television drama series created and written by Frank Spotnitz and produced by Kudos Film and Television and Big Light Productions for British broadcaster BBC , for its main channel BBC One and American premium cable broadcaster Cinemax .
The series premiered on Thursday 4 October 2012 on BBC One and on Friday 19 October 2012 on Cinemax .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
Samantha ( Melissa George ) is an espionage operative for " Byzantium " , a private intelligence agency .
She survives an attempt on her life , which she strongly suspects was orchestrated by members of the company she works for .
After recovering and returning to active duty , she goes back to work undercover as a nanny , not knowing who tried to kill her or whom to trust .
It becomes evident that the attempt on her life is tied into a horrific event from her childhood .
MAIN CAST
* Melissa George as Samantha
" Sam " Hunter / Alex Kent * Adam Rayner as Aidan Marsh
* Stephen Dillane as Rupert Keel
* Stephen Campbell Moore as Stephen Turner
*
Adewale Akinnuoye - Agbaje as Deacon Crane * Morven Christie as Zoe Morgan * Lex Shrapnel as Ian Fowkes * Dhaffer L'Abidine as Bernard Faroux * Dermot Crowley as George Ballard * Oscar Kennedy as Edward Turner
*
Indira Varma as Natalie Thorpe * Patrick Malahide as Jack Turner * Doc Brown as Tyrone
* Richard Lintern as Hector Stokes
* Uriel Emil Pollack as Hasan Moussa PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series was created by Frank Spotnitz ( best known as executive producer and head writer for The X - Files ) , who will write the majority of the episodes of series 1 .
Spotnitz is executive producing with Kudos ' Stephen Garrett ( executive producer of , Spooks / MI5 ) , Jane Featherstone ( producer behind Spooks / MI5 , The Hour , Life on Mars ) , Alison Jackson ( Ashes to Ashes , Eternal Law ) , and BBC 's Christopher Aird ( Spooks , The Inspector Lynley Mysteries ) .
After Spotnitz had wrapped up The X - Files he met Stephen Garrett and Jane Featherstone of Kudos Film and Television .
They asked him to come to the UK and work with British television .
Spotnitz had lived in Europe before and was interested in returning .
He claims the idea was appealing but it simply never happened .
The years passed and Spotnitz was talking to The X - Files star Gillian Anderson , who was visiting Los Angeles from London where she lives , and she asked , " Would you ever consider doing a show ( in Britain ) ? " .
Spotnitz started talking to her about doing a spy series and then the first call he made was to Stephen Garrett since the two lost touch .
" You know the idea of doing a show in England ?
I think I may finally have it " .
On 13 January 2011 , the BBC announced the show — then called Morton .
Gillian Anderson was no longer attached to the show ; it took Spotnitz and Kudos longer than estimated to get the green light from the BBC and by then , Anderson was too busy with other projects .
Spotnitz relocated to London with his family .
While trying to get Hunted off the ground , he served as co - producer and head writer for ( or just Strike Back in the United States ) , which was also produced by HBO for Cinemax , but co - produced with another British broadcaster , BSkyB ( for Sky1 ) , not the BBC .
On 22 September 2011 , reports confirmed that HBO / Cinemax would come on board as co - producers and that the name Morton had been scrapped and the new name was Nemesis .
On 6 March 2012 , Spotnitz announced on his homepage that the show 's title had been changed again to Hunted .
Spotnitz spent a lot of time researching private spy agencies .
He told Screen International : " It 's not an area
I was very aware of
until I went looking for it .
Most private contractors do n't want to be noticed .
Their websites are dry and boring and they do n't want the wrong kind of attention .
I talked to people who run these companies in the US , United Kingdom and Switzerland
and then I researched the type of personality working at them " .
Filming started on location in Wales , Scotland , London and Morocco .
In early March , scenes were filmed in East Linton , Scotland at a local Deli Shop .
" There are no sound stages .
It 's all location filming .
It 's really expensive and difficult to do , but it looks so much better and has a real feel of authenticity " , Spotnitz told The Hollywood Reporter .
" It 's international and it looks international " .
During the series , Sam has childhood memories of an oast house and in episode 5 she finds the Oast House .
This is the oast house at Little Scotney Farm , Lamberhurst , Kent .
It is still a working oast house owned by the National Trust , producing hops to make " Scotney Ale " .
The first series takes place mainly in London .
Had the show been commissioned for a second series , each series would have taken place in a different European city .
George , who is based in New York , would have lived in London for six months to film each series .
SAM HUNTER SPINOFF Section::::Sam Hunter spinoff .
On 25 September 2012 , it was reported that British screenwriter Ben Harris had joined the writing team in preparation for a second series pickup from BBC One and Cinemax .
Melissa George has reported that the second series of Hunted would be set in Berlin .
The Australian star previously said that her Hunted role " could potentially be long - term " , adding that she may be playing Sam " for the next five years " .
On 3 November 2012 , it was reported that British screenwriter Claire Wilson had joined the writing team in preparation for a second series pickup from BBC One and Cinemax .
However , on 14 November 2012 , The Guardian reported that BBC One had decided not to commission a second series of Hunted , citing ratings declines as the primary reason .
It was reported the following day that Cinemax was looking into making a second series without the partnership with the BBC .
Cinemax has since announced that it is working with Frank Spotnitz to reboot the show , describing the current incarnation as " too expensive " to continue without BBC support .
Spotnitz has revealed that the original plans for Hunted series two — which would have followed Sam Hunter to Germany — have been abandoned in the wake of the series shake - up .
" It 's going to change — that [ Berlin plot ] was when we still had the BBC as a partner " , he explained .
" Now it 's one of those funny things where it 's the same character , but it 's a different series .
"
Spotnitz added that he " would very much expect " future episodes to air in the UK , adding that he has considered other British networks as potential partners .
In June 2013 it was announced that the second series would become a four - hour miniseries called Sam Hunter , airing in 2014 .
In early 2015 , Frank Spotnitz stated that the series – and spinoff – had been officially cancelled by Cinemax , though he and George were open to continuing the project if it were to be picked up by another network .
EPISODE LIST SERIES 1 ( 2012 )
DVD RELEASE Section::::DVD release .
On 30 July 2013 HBO Home Entertainment released the complete series on DVD in Region 1 via the Warner Archive Collection .
This is a manufacture - on - demand ( MOD ) release , available via WBShop.com and Amazon.com .
The series is also available on DVD and Blu - ray in the UK .
WEB CAMPAIGN Section::::Web campaign .
Hunted was accompanied by an Internet campaign carrying content developed during the filming of the series .
Known for a psychologically stimulating internet campaign where one would guess what dongle went to various computers .
It all turned out to be a honeypot .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reviews of the first episode were mixed .
While he liked the plot , Michael Hogan of The Daily Telegraph was critical of the dialogue and acting : " The protagonist pouts constantly and came across more sulky teenager than troubled soul .
When you 're performing this hokum , you need a heavyweight cast to give it credibility .
Spooks had Matthew MacFadyen and Peter Firth , 24 had Kiefer Sutherland , Homeland has Damian Lewis and Claire Danes .
Hunted 's assorted pretty young things are nowhere near that league .
They gazed moodily out of windows but rather than looking haunted by the terrible things they 'd seen , they looked like they were waiting for a minicab " .
The Observers Andrew Anthony compared the series unfavourably with the U.S. television series Homeland : " Both have high production values , both are capable of creating fiendishly clever plots , but whereas Homeland seeks to foreground character , Hunted relies on shorthand caricature .
Thus the three villains on display last week were a macho Arab , an inscrutable psychopath and a cockney gangster - turned - businessman , holding their faces in such ways as to convey , respectively , machismo , psychopathy , and tasty geezerness " .
Jim Shelley of the Daily Mirror was also critical , writing that Hunted " relied more on old - fashioned Spooks cliches .
Locations like Istanbul were viewed as dangerous – ie , full of foreigners , particularly handsome Arabs in suits driving around as if they were in a BMW ad " .
On a more positive note , Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly , said the U.S. première had " lots of slick suspense , well - turned violence , and a delightful air of menace hanging over everything Sam does " .
Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post also had a favorable review of the U.S. premiere saying "
To its credit , ' Hunted ' does n't take its profoundly disconnected characters and slap them into a slick , glitzy story about heroism in the face of greed .
It marries the doubt , regret and longing they feel into a chugging , twisty spy story about the cost of selling your soul one piece at a time " .
SEE ALSO
* The East — a film about an undercover operative for a private intelligence company
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hunted at BBC Programmes *
Hunted at Cinemax