YELLOWBRICKROAD YellowBrickRoad is a 2010 American horror film by Jesse Holland and Andy Mitton that stars Cassidy Freeman , Anessa Ramsey and Laura Heisler .
It is about an expedition to discover the fate of an entire town that disappeared into the wilderness 70 years earlier .
Although critical reception was mixed , it won best film at the New York City Horror Film Festival .
The film was released as part of the Bloody Disgusting Selects line .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1940 the entire town of Friar , 572 people , abandoned their town and walked into the wilderness with only the clothes on their backs after a viewing of The Wizard of Oz , a film with which the entire town was obsessed .
No one has ever been able to explain why they did this .
Only 300 of the townspeople 's bodies were recovered : some had frozen to death in the elements , while others were killed in horrific and bloody ways .
The remaining 272 citizens were never found , and the government designated the trail that the townspeople took as classified .
Despite this , the town was eventually repopulated , although the townspeople are cautious of the town 's history .
In the present day , the trail 's coordinates have been declassified , and a film crew has arrived to travel the trail to learn about the disappearances and deaths , as well as what lies at the end of the trail .
Crew leader Teddy found the trail 's coordinates via Friar 's cinema .
The crew befriends Liv , a townsperson who works at the local cinema , and she agrees to accompany them on their trip .
The journey goes well initially , but soon the crew is terrorized by loud and jarring music that appears to come out of nowhere .
Then crew member Daryl brutally murders his sister Erin and flees in the only vehicle , which also contains their food supply .
Desperate , the crew begins to argue and turn on one another .
Several of the group 's members kill themselves , either out of despair caused by abandonment or because they have been driven mad by the music and associated events .
Daryl returns and murders Teddy 's wife Melissa , before being killed himself by Liv .
A weary and visibly shaken Teddy crawls to the final portion of the trail , where the music finally stops .
He finds himself at what appears to be the cinema from the beginning of the film .
There , he meets a sinister Usher , who forces him to sit in a theater empty except for a brief glimpse of smiling theatergoers implied to be the spirits of the dead townspeople .
On the screen is footage of his wife , who has been transported by the Usher into a hellish landscape .
Horrified , Teddy begins to scream but is cut off .
CAST * Cassidy Freeman as Erin Luger * Anessa Ramsey as Melissa Barnes * Laura Heisler as Liv McCann * Clark Freeman as Daryl Luger
* Lee Wilkof as Clerk /
Usher
* Alex Draper as Walter Myrick * Tara Giordano as Jill * Michael Laurino as Teddy Barnes * Sam Elmore as Cy Banbridge
ANALYSIS Section::::Analysis .
Bernice M. Murphy finds similarities between this film and The Blair Witch Project ( 1999 ) .
On both films the horror lies in the " desperate fear of losing oneself in the wilderness " .
In both films the characters stray from " civilization " and go in search of something intangible , something lurking within the forests of the United States .
In both , the characters also stray away from their own rationality .
Murphy says that both films belong to a tradition of " Rural Gothic " horror fiction that can be traced back to " Young Goodman Brown " ( 1835 ) by Nathaniel Hawthorne .
She says that American narratives of horror fiction and Gothic fiction often take place in the forests , the same forests confronted by the settlers and explorers of the Colonial history of the United States .
She argues that " Rural Gothic " is an important subgenre of the wider American Gothic tradition .
Murphy further places the film within a type of " Rural Gothic " narratives , where bad things happen to those who willingly venture into the wilderness .
Such stories tend to feature the loss of a civilized way of life .
She cites as other examples Edgar Huntly ( 1799 ) , The Shining ( 1977 ) and its film adaptation ( 1980 ) .
She also cites the historical Donner Party ( 1846–1847 ) as fitting well with this trope .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , reports that 50 % of 18 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating was 5.2 out of 10 .
In a negative review , G. Allen Johnson of San Francisco Chronicle wrote , " Yellowbrickroad is without personality .
It 's competently made , but the cast and direction are just bland . "
Horror review site Life
After Undeath gave the film a largely negative review and stated that the ending " reeks of an overzealous attempt at providing a clever twist to something that may as well have remained unexplained .
"
Meet in the Lobby offered more praise , calling it " a psychologically haunting film that leaves a rather disquieting feeling that is slow to fade even days after seeing the movie . "
Dennis Harvey of Variety called it " a well - crafted horror - mystery " that may frustrate audiences that look for explanations .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
In 2010 , YellowBrickRoad won best film at the New York City Horror Film Festival .
SOURCES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS