MUMBAI –
AHMEDABAD HIGH - SPEED RAIL CORRIDOR
The Mumbai –
Ahmedabad high - speed rail corridor is an under - construction high - speed rail line connecting the cities of Ahmedabad , Gujarat , and India 's economic hub Mumbai , Maharashtra .
It will be India 's first high - speed rail line .
Construction of the corridor was began by August 2018 by acquiring land for Sabarmati terminus , and the first high speed train is scheduled to leave for its first run on 15 August 2022 .
The corridor will use Japan Railways Shinkansen E5 Series Electric multiple unit for its rolling stock .
HISTORY BACKGROUND Section::::History .
Section::::Background .
The Mumbai – Ahmedabad corridor , along with 5 other high - speed rail corridors , was introduced for a feasibility study in the 2009–2010 Rail Budget .
A 650 km long high - speed rail corridor was proposed to run from Pune railway station to Ahmedabad railway station via Mumbai .
The point at which this route would touch Mumbai was to be decided when the feasibility report was prepared .
The pre - feasibility study for the Ahmedabad – Mumbai –
Pune corridor was completed by a consortium of RITES , Italferr and Systra .
The top speed expected for the corridor was up to 350 km / h .
The proposed stations included Lonavala on Mumbai – Pune section and Surat , Bharuch and Vadodara on Mumbai – Ahmedabad section .
It was proposed to have 32 services between Mumbai and Ahmedabad .
Railway officials also proposed extending the corridor up to Bangalore .
A Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) was signed in New Delhi on 14 February 2013 between the Ministry of Railways and the Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer Français ( SNCF ) , the French national railways , for technical cooperation in the field of railways .
The parties agreed to carry out jointly an " operations and development " feasibility project on the Mumbai – Ahmedabad high - speed rail corridor .
The project was funded by the SNCF with support from the French Ministry of Finance .
In March 2013 , the Railway Board decided to drop the Mumbai - Pune section and operate the high - speed rail service only between Mumbai and Ahmedabad .
The Board took the decision due to financial constraints , as the ghat section between Pune and Mumbai would escalate the budget for the project .
According to V.A. Malegaonkar , Chief Public Relations Officer ( PRO ) , Western Railway , " It 's basically a Western Railway project and very little portion of Maharashtra was being covered under it .
Hence , the Maharashtra government was showing little interest in the project and was also reluctant to bear a financial burden .
That is the reason why the Railway Board has decided against including the Pune - Mumbai portion in the high - speed corridor " .
India and Japan signed a MoU to undertake a joint feasibility study of the Mumbai - Ahmedabad route in New Delhi in September 2013 .
This was in pursuance of the Joint Statement between then Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh and the Prime Minister of Japan Shinzō Abe on 29 May 2013 , which provided that the two sides would co - finance a joint feasibility study of the route .
The objective of the joint study was to prepare a feasibility report of the system with a speed of 300–350 km / h .
The cost of the study ( ¥ 500 million ) was borne equally by India and Japan .
The study was scheduled to be completed within 18 months from its commencement , i.e. it would complete by July 2015 .
The study carried out traffic forecasting , alignment surveys and undertook a comparative Study of high - speed railway technology and systems .
Japanese International Cooperation Agency ( JICA ) and the SNCF carried out studies on the project .
JICA researched the technology , alignment and traffic - related aspects , while SNCF worked on business projections .
The feasibility study included an alignment survey concerning aspects such as land acquisition , environmental challenges and building of tunnels and bridges .
It also suggested a financial model based on fare and non - fare box revenue .
PLANNING
Section::::Planning .
JICA officials visited Mumbai in January 2014 to discuss the details of the project , and made selective site visits to the proposed route .
On 21 January , following several meetings between JICA and Indian Railways officials , it was proposed to originate the corridor at the Bandra Kurla Complex ( BKC ) in Mumbai .
The proposed route would begin from BKC , go right up to Thane on the Central Line , and then take a diversion on the Trans - Harbour route which is on the Thane - Diva - Vasai - Virar stretch .
The corridor would then switch over to the Western Line , before entering Gujarat and terminating at Ahmedabad .
12 stations were proposed on the route , of which 8 would have been in Gujarat .
The intention behind taking the route via Thane is to keep the option open to link the corridor to Pune .
The team also proposed other options for originating the line at either Bandra Terminus or Lokmanya Tilak Terminus , if the BKC option was unfeasible .
Air - conditioned bullet trains are expected to operate in the corridor at speeds of 320 km / h , enabling commuters to traverse the 534 km distance in 2 hours .
Currently , the fastest train operating on this sector is the Ahmedabad Duronto Express , which takes Six and Quarter hours to reach Mumbai Central from Ahmedabad running non - stop between these two cities at a maximum speed of 130 km / h .
The project held its first full - fledged meeting at the Railway Ministry in the first week of April 2014 , to bring about a broad consensus on the project , especially between the governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat .
The meeting was attended by representatives from the Maharashtra and Gujarat governments , and the JICA , and Railway Board officials .
At the meeting , officials agreed to begin the line from BKC , and then take it to Thane and onward to Virar .
The Maharashtra government was in favour of connecting the line with Belapur as well , in order to bring high - speed rail to Navi Mumbai .
However , railway officials were opposed to the Belapur detour .
Officials also discussed the need to ensure that the terminal at BKC would be connected to Line 3 of the Mumbai Metro , enabling commuters from South Mumbai to reach BKC .
In May 2014 , the project was approved by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in a meeting with the chairman of the High Speed Rail Corporation of India .
The feasibility study on the project was carried out by RITES , Italferr and Systra in July 2015 .
On 20 July 2015 , a joint Japanese - Indian survey team recommended a Shinkansen - style system for the Mumbai - Ahmedabad line , including the adoption of Automatic train control and dedicated tracks .
JICA 's report recommended constructing 63.3 % of the route an embankment slightly above the ground , 28.3 % on stilts , 5.8 % underground and 2.2 % on bridges .
Minister of State for Railways Rajen Gohain informed Parliament on 15 March 2017 that under a new plan the entire corridor would be elevated except for the tracks that were proposed to be built underground .
An MoU was signed by the governments of India and Japan on 12 December 2015 .
The Ministry of Railways , based on the recommendtion of the NITI Aayog , announced that Shinkansen technology would be adopted for the line , with technology transfer to support the Make in India programme .
Japan would also provide staff training .
In January 2016 , the Ministry of Railways fast tracked the project and set up a Special Purpose Vehicle ( SPV ) named the National High Speed Rail Corporation Limited to build and operate the corridor .
The company was registered in January 2016 in the name of Indian Railways .
It was planned for the company to eventually be made into a joint venture with equity participation of the Maharashtra and Gujarat governments .
The Public sector company is expected to build and also carry out train operations .
The Ministry of Railways , the National High - Speed Rail Corporation ( NHSRC ) and JICA signed an tripartite consultancy agreement in December 2016 to implement the project .
The NHSRC is a new agency floated to implement the project .
A joint venture between Japan International Consultants for Transportation Co ( JIC ) , Nippon Koei Co , and Oriental Consultants Global Co. Ltd. was appointed as the general consultants for the project , and prepared design documents , bidding documents and technical standards and specifications for the project .
In late 2016 , JICA awarded the detailed design study for the project to a consortium led by Japan International Consultants for Transportation ( JIC ) , a subsidiary of East Japan Railway , West Japan Railway and the Tokyo Metro .
The study formally began in March 2017 .
JIC will forecast demand , set fares and devise a train operation plan , handle preliminary design work for structures such as tunnels and bridges , and draw up an overall construction schedule .
Japan International Consultants for Transportation ( JIC ) Project Manager stated that " conditions surrounding the construction of a high - speed railway in India - such as weather , which is harsh there , and the quality and standards of materials - are considerably different from those in Japan .
So we are now comparing and adjusting to these technical matters .
" Japanese public and private sector companies conducted training programs for railway staff in India .
JIC stated that the local expertise in India gained from constructing and operating various rapid transit systems could be utilized for the high speed rail project .
Japan also provided training to Indian Railway Ministry officials , some of whom studied in government - sponsored programs at graduate schools in Japan .
India and Japan signed an agreement to establish an HSR Training Institute in India by 2020 to train railway staff in high speed rail operations .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
Most of the corridor will be elevated , except for a 21 km underground tunnel between Thane and Virar , of which 7 km will be undersea .
The undersea tunnel was chosen to avoid damaging the thick vegetation present in the area .
The corridor will begin at the underground station in the Bandra - Kurla Complex in Mumbai , and then traverse 21 km underground before emerging above ground at Thane .
Survey work on the route began in January 2017 .
According to NHSRC director Mukul Saran Mathur , " The geo - technical surveys have started along the entire route between Mumbai and Ahmedabad and is expected to take two to three months .
The activities that have begun include geo - technical and geo - physical investigations into the 21-kilometre , under - water tunnel of the project as well as the Final Location Survey to mark the alignment , right down to the pillars on which the high speed trains will run . "
RITES identified 750 locations along the entire route to carry out soil testing , including 62 locations for the underground section .
The agency completed soil testing at a total of 250 locations by 24 February .
Officials carried out testing of soil and rocks at a depth of 70 metres underwater for the undersea tunnel stretch .
Railway officials utilized a helicopter mounted with a 100 megapixel high - resolution digital camera , a Light Detection and Ranging ( LiDAR ) scanner , a data recorder and other equipment to carry out the survey .
This aerial - survey method provides accurate data about land contours , buildings and vegetation , and will permit the survey work to be completed within 9–10 weeks as opposed to the 6–8 months required for a regular survey .
The helicopter completed its survey of the entire route within a flying time of 30 hours , and the rest of the time is required for data processing .
The aerial survey was completed by JICA and the Indian Railways by the end of February 2017 .
Railway Ministry officials stated in April 2017 that final location surveys had been completed , and that consultants to carry out environmental and social impact studies would be appointed within a few months .
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe laid the foundation stone for the project in Ahmedabad on 14 September 2017 .
All geo - technical surveys and tests under the sea bed for the underground section were completed by December 2017 .
Civil construction of the corridor is expected to begin by June 2018 .
The project is expected to be completed by August 2022 , and the bullet train is expected to go on its first run on 15 August 2022 on the occasion of India 's 75th Independence day .
Surveys and land acquisition for the project faced delays and disruptions due to protests by farmers and members of the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena party , which opposes the bullet train project .
The deadline to complete land acquisition was postponed from December 2018 to June 2019 as a result of the protests .
COST Section::::Cost .
The project is estimated to cost .
The cost includes interest during construction and import duties .
JICA agreed to fund 81 % of the total project cost , through a 50-year loan at an interest rate of 0.1 % with a moratorium on repayments up to 15 years and the remaining cost will be borne by the state governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat .
20 % of the components used on the corridor will be supplied by Japan , and manufactured in India .
Most of the line will be constructed on an elevated corridor to avoid land acquisitions and the need to build underpasses .
It will also enhance safety by eliminating the need for level crossings .
The decision to construct an elevated line raised the cost for the project by an additional .
INFRASTRUCTURE AND OPERATIONS Section::::Infrastructure and operations .
Trains are proposed to have length of between 10 and 16 coaches .
Each train will have a passenger capacity between 1,300 and 1,600 passengers .
The system will be designed to operate trains at a maximum speed of , while operational speed would be .
When traveling at a train will be able to travel end - to - end on the line in 2 hours and 8 minutes .
Currently , a train journey from Mumbai to Ahmedabad takes 7 hours .
Indian Railways proposes to operate two types of services on the corridor .
A " Rapid Train " service with only two stops at Surat and Vadodara , and a slower service that halts at all stations .
The " Rapid Train " would complete the journey in 2 hours and 7 minutes , while the slower service would take 2 hours and 58 minutes .
In total , 35 daily services will be operated on the line , with 3 services per hour during peak hours and 2 services per hour during off - peak hours .
The Railways estimates that the high speed rail corridor will have a daily ridership of around 36,000 in 2023 .
On 9 January 2017 at Vibrant Gujarat Summit , the Gujarat Government and the National High Speed Rail Corporation Limited ( NHSRC ) signed an MoU worth for component manufacturing for the high speed rail corridor .
The Gujarat Government will bear 25 % of the total project cost and provide land for the project .
ROLLING STOCK Section::::Rolling stock .
The corridor will use the E5 Series Shinkansen .
SIGNALING AND POWER Section::::Signaling and power .
Signaling equipment and power systems for the corridor will be imported from Japan , per the terms of the loan agreement with JICA .
OPERATOR Section::::Operator .
In February 2016 , the National High Speed Rail Corporation ( NHSRC ) was registered under the Companies Act , 2013 .
The NHSRC is a special purpose vehicle responsible for the implementation of the Mumbai –
Ahmedabad high - speed rail project .
In October 2016 , the Indian Railways invited applications to fill key positions in the NHSRC .
These positions include managing director , director ( project ) , director ( electrical and systems ) and director ( finance ) .
The managing director is required to sign a bond guaranteeing to serve in the position for a minimum of 5 years .
FARES Section::::Fares .
Fares are proposed to be 1.5 times that of a First - Class AC ticket on the Mumbai - Ahmedabad Duronto Express .
As of January 2017 , a First - Class AC ticket from Mumbai to Ahmedabad costs 2,000 , which would make the cost of a high - speed rail ticket 3,000 .
Trains will have business and standard sections with 2x2 and 2x3 seating configuration respectively .
STATIONS Section::::Stations .
The line will have 12 stations .
Proposed stations are Mumbai , Thane , Virar , Boisar , Vapi , Bilimora , Surat , Bharuch , Vadodara , Anand and Ahmedabad , Sabarmati .
High speed rail stations will be constructed either above or next to existing railway stations to provide transfer with the Indian Railways network .
The Director of the Railway Bureau of Japan 's Ministry of Land , Infrastructure , Transportation and Tourism stated that " this makes construction extremely difficult " .
MUMBAI TERMINAL Section::::Mumbai terminal .
The Indian Railways proposed constructing the proposed terminus at BKC as a three - storey underground station .
However , the Maharashtra state government planned to construct the International Financial Services Centre ( IFSC ) at BKC on the same plot .
JICA 's report had cited the BKC plot as the most suitable location to build the Mumbai terminus .
In February 2016 , the Railways and the state government came to an agreement to construct both projects at the BKC .
However , in April 2016 , the state government refused to permit construction of the underground station at BKC , citing the lack of availability of land in the area for an underground station after the completion of the proposed IFSC and its multi - level underground car park .
The state government also stated that IFSC would begin generating revenue for the government shortly , while the rail corridor was only expected to be completed by 2023 .
It instead suggested relocating the proposed BKC terminus to either Matunga or Kanjurmarg .
The issue was resolved in January 2017 , when the Maharashtra Government and the MMRDA agreed to provide 5.4 hectares of land in BKC to construct a terminus .
AHMEDABAD TERMINAL Section::::Ahmedabad Terminal .
The Sabarmati station will serve as the high - speed rail terminal in Ahmedabad .
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Future developments .
In September 2015 , Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis requested railway authorities to incorporate Nashik into the corridor 's alignment .
Railway officials stated that the proposal was not feasible as it would require the entire project to be re - planned , and would greatly escalate costs due to the ghat section between Mumbai and Nashik .
In January 2017 , Mumbai Mirror reported that the high - speed rail corridor would be extended to Pune and Nashik .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Preliminary Study
* India 's first bullet train project launched , by
Respected PM Narendra Modi calls it
New India 's big dream * OpenStreetMap
with route of Mumbai – Ahmedabad high - speed rail corridor