PAM 'S REPLACEMENT
" Pam 's Replacement " is the seventh episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 159th episode overall .
The episode aired on NBC in the United States on November 10 , 2011 .
It was written by Allison Silverman and was directed by Matt Sohn .
The episode guest stars Lindsey Broad and Steve Moore .
The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company .
In the episode , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) trains an attractive temporary worker to take her place while she is on maternity leave , and enlists Dwight Schrute 's ( Rainn Wilson ) support when she tries to show that Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) finds her replacement attractive .
Meanwhile , Robert California ( James Spader ) surprises Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) , and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson )
when he requests to join their band .
" Pam 's Replacement " relates to Pam 's pregnancy ; Fischer was actually pregnant and her pregnancy was written into the series with Pam and Jim having their second baby .
The episode received mixed reviews from critics .
According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode received 5.96 million viewers and received a 3.0 rating/7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 marking a slight drop in the ratings from the previous episode , " Doomsday " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) trains a temporary worker Cathy Simms ( Lindsey Broad ) so that she can take her place when she goes on maternity leave .
In the break room , the other workers discuss how attractive Cathy is and how excited they are to have her in the office .
Pam , being well into her pregnancy , is sensitive about her looks and so becomes offended by their discussion .
Most of them respond by assuring Pam that she is , if anything , more sexually attractive than before she was pregnant .
Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) , however , argues that sexual attractiveness is a mostly objective quality and pregnant women can not be sexually attractive , and accuses the others of lying to spare Pam 's feelings .
Troubled by Dwight 's comments , Pam asks her husband Jim Halpert
( John Krasinski ) if he finds the new temp attractive .
Not wanting to upset his wife , Jim tells her that he does not find her replacement attractive , even objectively .
Though Jim gives no sign of unease , Pam is convinced that he is lying to her , and enlists the help of the harshly honest Dwight to prove it .
After a number of unsuccessful attempts to trick Jim into revealing he finds Pam 's replacement attractive , Dwight and Pam convince Jim to submit to a lie detection test in the form of a retail store 's blood pressure tester .
At the conclusion of the interview , Dwight triumphantly announces that he recorded hypertension when Jim said he does not find the new temp attractive , but as Jim continues to insist he is telling the truth Dwight admits that he recorded equal hypertension on every question , including Jim 's name .
Pam realizes that Jim has unusually high blood pressure , which his father also suffers from , and forgets about the issue in order to focus on her husband 's health .
Meanwhile , CEO Robert California ( James Spader ) surprises Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) , and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson )
when he asks to join their band after he finds them having a jam session in the warehouse .
Soon thereafter , California 's friends , skilled musicians themselves , arrive to join in .
Not having brought their own instruments , two of them take over Kevin 's drums and Darryl 's synthesizer , while Andy 's acoustic guitar is drowned out by the newcomer 's electric guitar .
The three of them are thus relegated to playing percussion .
Andy , Kevin and Darryl , with the help of warehouse worker Val , realize that they were ousted , and after a failed attempt to try getting their original band roles back , they instead satisfyingly jam outside by themselves .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The episode was written by consulting producer Allison Silverman , her first writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff in the eighth season .
It was directed by Matt Sohn , one of the series ' cinematographers and camera operators , his third directing credit for the series .
The episode features a guest appearance from Lindsey Broad , and her character was described as " Pam 's competent and likable pal , " Cathy .
She appeared in a recurring role in the eighth season .
The episode also relates to Pam 's pregnancy .
Jenna Fischer was actually pregnant and her pregnancy was written into the series with Pam and Jim having their second baby .
The man who played Robert 's skilled drummer friend is Steve Moore , better known as " The Mad Drummer " for the viral video he featured in , " This drummer is at the wrong gig " .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
In its original American broadcast , " Pam 's Replacement " was viewed by an estimated 5.96 million viewers and received a 3.0 rating/7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 .
This means that it was seen by 3.0 % of all 18- to 49-year - olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49-year - olds watching television at the time of the broadcast .
This marked a two - tenths decrease in the ratings from the previous episode , " Doomsday " .
Despite this , however , the episode ranked second in its timeslot , beating Bones which received a 2.7 rating/7 % share in the 18–49 demographic and Person of Interest which received a 2.0 rating/2 % share , although both the latter two shows had more viewers .
"
Pam 's Replacement " was defeated by Grey 's Anatomy which received a 4.0 rating/10 % share .
Added with DVR viewers , who viewed the episode within seven days of the original broadcast , the episode received a 4.4 rating in the 18–49 demographic , adding a 1.4 rating to the original viewership .
A repeat of the episode on January 5 , 2012 drew 1.85 million and received a 0.7 rating/2 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , ranking third and last in its time slot .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
" Pam 's Replacement " received generally mixed reviews from critics .
HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall complimented the episode for staying true to the characters compared to the rest of the season , which he had criticized in an earlier review .
He called the episode a " significant step up " albeit just " decent " in absolute terms .
The A.V. Club reviewer
Myles McNutt criticized the Andy – Kevin – Darryl subplot for its lack of continuity or any sort of punchlines .
He was also critical of the Pam –
Dwight plot for not staying true to the characters , and suggested that the writers needed to write the show as less of " a bland copy of itself " .
He called it one of the laziest half - hours of the show and gave it a C−. Cindy White of IGN said that the episode needed a stronger A - plot writing that the plots " felt like a meal made up of two tasty side dishes " .
She gave it a 7 out of 10 .
Hanna Lawrence of Hollywood.com praised the episode for being believable and for showing things that happen in real life .
She also praised the Jim –
Pam plot for showcasing the couple as not completely " perfect " .
She called the band subplot " weak " .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" Pam 's Replacement " at NBC.com