LIST OF SMALL POLYHEDRA
BY VERTEX COUNT
In geometry , a polyhedron is a solid in three dimensions with flat faces and straight edges .
Every edge has exactly two faces , and every vertex is surrounded by alternating faces and edges .
The smallest polyhedron is the tetrahedron with 4 triangular faces , 6 edges , and 4 vertices .
Named polyhedra primarily come from the families of platonic solids , Archimedean solids , Catalan solids , and Johnson solids , as well as dihedral symmetry families including the pyramids , bipyramids , prisms , antiprisms , and trapezohedrons .
POLYHEDRA
BY
VERTEX COUNT Section::::Polyhedra by vertex count .
Notes : Polyhedra with different names that are topologically identical are listed together .
Except in the cases of four and five vertices , the lists below are by no means exhaustive of all possible polyhedra with the given number of vertices , but rather just include particularly simple / common / well - known / named examples .
The " Counting Polyhedra " link below gives the exact number of distinct polyhedra with n vertices for small values of n. !
valign = center4
Tetrahedrontriangular pyramid !
valign = center5 !
valign = center6
Pentagonal pyramid
Octahedron ( regular)triangular antiprismsquare bipyramid Triangular prismwedge !
valign = center7
Hexagonal pyramid
Pentagonal bipyramid
Augmented triangular prism Elongated triangular pyramid !
valign = center rowspan=28 Heptagonal pyramid
Hexagonal bipyramid HexahedronCubeSquare
prismCuboidRhombohedronTrigonal trapezohedron
Square antiprism
Triakis tetrahedron
Elongated triangular bipyramid
Gyrobifastigium
Snub disphenoid
Biaugmented triangular prism !
valign = center
rowspan=29
Triangular cupola
Triaugmented triangular prism Elongated square pyramid Gyroelongated square pyramid
Tridiminished icosahedron Octagonal pyramid
Heptagonal bipyramid !
valign = center rowspan=210 Enneagonal pyramid
Octagonal bipyramid
Pentagonal prism Pentagonal antiprism Gyroelongated
square bipyramid
Elongated
square bipyramid Metabidiminished icosahedron Augmented tridiminished icosahedron Sphenocorona !
valign = center rowspan=211 Decagonal pyramid
Enneagonal bipyramid Augmented pentagonal prism
Elongated pentagonal pyramid Gyroelongated pentagonal pyramid
Augmented sphenocorona Octadecahedron !
valign = center rowspan=212
Elongated pentagonal bipyramid Truncated
tetrahedron
Cuboctahedron
Square cupola
Triangular
orthobicupola
Biaugmented pentagonal prism Hendecagonal pyramid
Icosahedron
Decagonal bipyramid Hexagonal prism
Hexagonal antiprism
Sphenomegacorona !
valign =
center13 Dodecagonal pyramid
Hendecagonal bipyramid
Augmented hexagonal prism !
valign = center
rowspan=214
Tridecagonal pyramid
Dodecagonal bipyramid
Elongated hexagonal dipyramid
Heptagonal prism Heptagonal antiprism
Rhombic dodecahedron
Parabiaugmented hexagonal prism
Metabiaugmented hexagonal prism ]
Hebesphenomegacorona
Bilunabirotunda !
valign = center rowspan=215
Tetradecagonal pyramid
Tridecagonal bipyramid
Pentagonal cupola
Elongated triangular cupola Gyroelongated triangular cupola !
valign = center
rowspan=216 Octagonal prism
Octagonal antiprism
Triaugmented hexagonal prism
Augmented truncated tetrahedron Square
orthobicupola
Square gyrobicupola
Disphenocingulum Snub
square antiprism !
valign = center17 !
valign = center18
Enneagonal prism
Enneagonal antiprism
Gyroelongated
triangular bicupola
Elongated triangular orthobicupola
Elongated triangular gyrobicupola
Triangular hebesphenorotunda !
valign = center19 !
valign = center rowspan=220
Dodecahedron
Pentagonal rotunda
Elongated square cupola Gyroelongated square cupola
Pentagonal orthobicupola Pentagonal gyrobicupola Decagonal prism
Decagonal antiprism !
valign = center21
Augmented dodecahedron !
valign =
center22
Parabiaugmented dodecahedron Metabiaugmented dodecahedron !
valign
= center23 Triaugmented dodecahedron !
valign =
center24
Truncated cube
Truncated octahedron
Rhombicuboctahedron Elongated square gyrobicupola
Gyroelongated
square bicupola
REFERENCES
* Cromwell , P.;Polyhedra , CUP hbk ( 1997 ) , pbk .
( 1999 ) .
* Norman W. Johnson , " Convex Solids with Regular Faces " , Canadian Journal of Mathematics , 18 , 1966 , pages 169–200 .
Contains the original enumeration of the 92 solids and the conjecture that there are no others .
* The first proof that there are only 92 Johnson solids .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Counting Polyhedra