IVY DICKENS Ivy Dickens ( former alias : Charlotte " Charlie " Rhodes ) is a fictional character who exclusively appears in the Gossip Girl television adaptation , portrayed by Kaylee DeFer .
She first appears in " The Kids Stay in the Picture , " initially appearing as Serena 's estranged cousin , Charlie Rhodes , whom Serena takes under her wing and introduces to the Upper East Side .
The fourth season finale "
The Wrong Goodbye , " reveals her true identity as Ivy Dickens , a struggling actress and con artist hired by Carol Rhodes to pose as her daughter in order to gain access to the real Charlie Rhodes ' trust fund .
DeFer was promoted to series regular for the fifth season in light of cast members Taylor Momsen and Jessica Szohr 's departure .
She is the newest addition to the female cast of Gossip Girl villains , joining the likes of Georgina Sparks and Juliet Sharp .
TELEVISION SERIES CASTING AND CHARACTERIZATION Section::::Television series .
Section::::Casting and characterization .
Introduced in the fourth season , DeFer was set to join the cast as Carol 's daughter and Serena and Eric 's cousin , Charlie Rhodes .
DeFer 's contract with the show also included the possibility of her becoming a series regular for the fifth season .
She first auditioned for the role of Raina Thorpe .
However , that role went to Tika Sumpter .
DeFer was called back for the role of Charlie Rhodes , with the show 's writers stating that they were writing something new for her character .
DeFer had also previously worked with Gossip Girl executive producers , Stephanie Savage and Joe Lazarov as well as Penn Badgley in The Mountain .
Executive producer Joshua Safran later commented on her introduction and the perception that the character brought to the show .
" We always like it when we have new people who are witnessing this world for the first time ...
For Charlie , it 's like trial by fire .
From reading Gossip Girl for the first time or going to your first event , all that stuff we get to do over again in a new way . "
Charlie 's integration also made her a voice for the audience and critics of Gossip Girl .
TV Fanatic warmly welcomed her character , stating that she " good - naturedly mocked the show and its often convoluted plot lines .
" DeFer would later reveal details behind her character 's involvement in the fourth season finale , " As far as I know I 'm just in the next five episodes until the season finale , and then I have no idea .
But I really hope we get the opportunity to finish what Charlie started as I think it 's going to be a story - line that people will really want to follow . "
DeFer also states that Charlie is more relatable in comparison to other characters that have appeared in the show .
" She is such a real person , not being from that life and what not ... " SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
The character is first introduced in the second half of season four as Charlotte " Charlie " Rhodes , the estranged cousin of Serena and Eric van der Woodsen .
Under the guise of Charlie Rhodes , she experiences the world of the Upper East Side , becoming particularly close with Dan Humphrey , though Dan puts a stop to the budding relationship because of his history with Serena .
However , upon learning that Vanessa Abrams had intentionally sabotaged a meeting Charlie had organized , Dan allows himself to become closer to Charlie while severing his ties with Vanessa .
The two then begin an awkward relationship which concludes in the season 's penultimate episode when Charlie , dressed like Serena , demands that Dan call her by Serena 's name .
It is later revealed that Charlie suffers from bi - polar disorder and she has stopped taking her medication .
She leaves the Upper East Side and meets up with her mother , Carol .
In the season 's final moments , " Charlie Rhodes " is revealed to be Ivy Dickens , an aspiring actress that Carol hired to gain access to her daughter 's trust fund .
In her final scene she puts a napkin with Georgina 's number in her bag which hints that the two will team up in the fifth season .
With regard to her involvement in the finale , DeFer discussed her character 's involvement .
" Charlie has a great deal to do with the season finale ... but what I am allowed to say is that Charlie does mix it up with every character . " SEASON 5 Section::::Season 5 .
In between the fourth and fifth seasons , after returning to Miami , Ivy moved to Los Angeles with her boyfriend , Max , in order to become an actress .
Ivy later runs into Serena at a restaurant that she and her boyfriend both work at and Serena , under the impression that Ivy is Charlie , offers to have Ivy move in with her .
Ivy declines , looking for several ways to get out of the situation , but Serena convinces her to move back to New York with her .
After she and Serena return to New York ,
Charlie overhears that Carol is returning to New York and that Lily refuses to deceive her and she tells Serena that she is leaving .
Serena , however , has seen this coming and asks her to return her tickets to a fashion show .
When Charlie arrives , she discovers that Serena actually had her take her place as a model .
After a conversation with Blair , she decides to stay .
Her excitement does not last as she runs into Carol with Lily and Rufus , who had no idea that she had returned .
After a confrontation with Carol , Ivy states that the family that Carol hates has been kinder to her than her own and that everything in New York ' sparkles ' and she refuses to give that up and that the van der Woodsens would have a problem should it ever come out that Carol had hired her to impersonate Charlie in order to gain access to her trust fund .
After this conversation , Carol tells Ivy that she is on her own and that Carol will not help Ivy any more should her real identity ever be discovered before returning to Miami .
Ivy later panics when she learns that she has left her cell phone at the fashion show , as she believes her true identity will be discovered .
She is unaware , however , that her phone , along with several others , had been stolen by Nate Archibald and his shrewd boss Diana .
After a conversation with Nate about the phone , she offers to help him find the owner in attempt to retrieve it .
After she has accomplished this , however , Diana has discovered the connection between Ivy and Charlie and agrees to keep silent as long as Ivy works for her .
Under Diana 's control , Ivy is forced to procure gossip for Diana 's use .
She later finds the files that Bart Bass kept on Serena , Lily , Eric and himself , while Nate convinces her to leave them , she does not and in turn hands them over to Diana .
Ivy later competes to become a bridesmaid for Blair in order to get the scoop on her wedding for Diana , where her final task is to secure a kiss from Nate .
They later attend the launch party of Diana 's revamped ' Spectator ' where they use each other to reach their own ends ; Ivy to win Blair 's bridesmaid spot and Nate to make Diana jealous , unknown to the other .
Diana later confronts Ivy and threatens to reveal her secret , while Ivy is adamant that she had no idea that she was the one Nate wanted to make jealous .
Diana later reveals to Nate and Ivy that they had been deceiving each other , leaving them angry at one another .
Although Ivy has developed feelings for Nate , Diana has threatened her to stay away from him .
This changes , however , when she finds out that Ivy 's ex - boyfriend , Max , is in town looking for her and sets up an elaborate plot that very nearly causes her secret to be revealed .
Max finds Gossip Girl 's website , along with a picture of Ivy under ' Charlie Rhodes ' .
He tracks Ivy down at the Van der Woodsen loft and Ivy is backed into a corner where she tells Lily and Max that her mother made her change her name to Ivy in order to avoid being used for her money .
While discussing this later , Ivy offers Max money to leave town and start his restaurant in Portland , Oregon .
When he finds out that Ivy is actually impersonating Charlie Rhodes , he blackmails Ivy into giving him more money than she had originally offered before deciding to stay in town .
When Carol and CeCe return to town however , Carol tries to help Ivy out of her trouble with Max by getting CeCe to unlock the rest of Charlie 's trust fund , which she does .
After Ivy convinces Serena to drop her date with Max on Carol 's advice , Max shows up to the party and attempts to out Charlie as Ivy to the rest of the Rhodes / Van der Woodsen family .
It is Carol , however , that convinces the family that Max is lying , later telling Ivy that if the family found out what has happened to the real Charlie Rhodes , Ivy would n't be the only one out .
Carol tells Ivy that she may now leave New York and start a new life with the wealth she now possesses .
Ivy , however , tells her that she does n't care about the wealth and luxury of being a part of the family , and that Carol can have the trust fund , since all she really wants is a family to call her own .
Max continues to threaten Ivy , taking her story to Nate , who has already been warned by the Van der Woodsens .
When this fails , Max takes his story to Nate 's cousin Trip who is a congressman , on the eve of Charlie 's debut into the Upper East Side society .
When Max shows up at her party , Ivy sends a blast to Gossip Girl about Blair and Chuck being there as well , sending the paparazzi into the party as well .
When Blair and Chuck get into a life - threatening car accident after being tailed by the paparazzi , Ivy confesses to Rufus that she is a fraud , but before he can respond , Lily arrives with news that Blair is awake and responding , but Chuck is not .
Overwhelmed with guilt , Ivy calls Carol and asks her to help her leave the Upper East Side for good .
A few weeks later , concerned by Charlie 's long absence , Lily hires a private investigator to find her , but the private investigator instead finds the real Charlie Rhodes , who is attending school at Juilliard .
When Lily and the " real Charlie " meet , they do not recognize each other and nor do they seem to be aware of each other 's existence .
Ivy returns briefly , looking for Lily .
She finds Rufus instead , but is told where Lily can be found .
Georgina discovers that Ivy is back and blackmails her into attending Nate 's party .
While at Nate 's party , Ivy runs into the real Charlie Rhodes , who goes by the alias ' Lola ' and it is revealed that they took the same acting class where they grew up in Florida .
Ivy attempts to leave again , but is spotted by Nate , still not knowing the truth about either of them .
Nate makes a comment to Charlie about Ivy leading Charlie to get suspicious .
When Ivy can finally leave , it is revealed that she has been visiting CeCe
the whole time she was away .
CeCe 's condition worsens and Ivy is forced to take her to the hospital , where she has a run in with the Van der Woodsens and Carol .
When Charlie arrives , Ivy and Carol finally tell the truth about Carol 's scheme and Ivy 's role in it .
Ivy is turned away by the Van der Woodsens .
Following this , Ivy turns to Georgina and the two later crash CeCe 's wake , during which , through the reading of CeCe 's will , Ivy is left everything under her legal name instead of her alias Charlie Rhodes , revealing that CeCe knew about the fact that Ivy is n't her real granddaughter .
After this revelation , Ivy kicks Lily and Rufus out of the apartment as it had been paid for by CeCe and was now hers .
Ivy throws a party to commemorate the Celia Rhodes Foundation and to gain acceptance in the Upper East Side .
She believes she has found an ally in William van der Woodsen after he agrees to persuade people to attend the party in exchange for money , however , it is later revealed he is working with Lily to gather evidence against Ivy to take her to court and contest CeCe 's will .
After a courtroom hearing , Ivy loses all of her inheritance after Lily bribes CeCe 's nurse to testify against Ivy
so she can re - claim Ivy 's share of the inheritance .
Rufus takes pity on Ivy being without a home and family , and pays for her stay at a hotel .
Lily finds this out later on and they fight , and Rufus returns to Brooklyn .
Ivy later visits Lily and tries to seek her acceptance , confessing that she really wanted to be part of her family .
Lily rejects her but offers her a cheque of 1 million dollars , asking her to leave and never return .
Ivy leaves the apartment and tears up the cheque , revealing her confession was genuine .
Later , Lily has Carol Rhodes arrested and charged with fraud in order to acquire her share of CeCe 's estate for herself .
After William van der Woodsen takes pity on Charlie ' Lola ' Rhodes , he gives her Carol 's share of CeCe 's wealth
so she can live on .
In the final episode of the season , Lola signs over her entire half of Cece 's estate to Ivy and asks her to do one favor in return : Take Lily down in revenge for Carol 's imprisonment and her manipulation of events .
Ivy accepts , more than happy to help after her rejection .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Ivy looks in on Rufus after Lily annuls their marriage and the two soon become lovers .
However , Ivy is actually sleeping with Lily 's ex - husband William and using Bart in a plot to take down Lily .
When Rufus sees the two kissing ( although not seeing William 's face ) , he breaks up with Ivy .
Ivy helps Blair in her plans to try and take down Chuck 's father and when the man dies , she believes it 's finally time
she and William come out in public as a couple .
However , when she meets William , he is with Lily and claims to have never met Ivy before .
Ivy tries to tell Lily of their relationship but Lily does n't believe her .
After Lily leaves , William informs Ivy he was using her all along to break up Lily and Rufus
so he could finally have Lily to himself .
He coldly informs Ivy nobody wants her around
and she should just take her money and leave .
In the final scene ( set five years later ) Ivy has written a book about her experiences that 's being made into a movie .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The critical reception of the character had been positive until the start of Season 5 .
During the series fourth season , Charlie became the subject of praise with her successful integration into the Upper East Side .
TV Fanatic praised and welcomed her presence on the show .
In the episode The Princesses and the Frog , Steve Marsi praised her choice of confronting Vanessa alone , calling her " a natural " at schemes and that " even an outsider can thoroughly outshine an outcast . "
TV Guide praised the ousting of Vanessa by Charlie , stating that " it did n't take her long to cross over to " the other side " " .
Beginning in the fifth season , however , her character began to receive less than favorable reviews .
NY Mag and The Baltimore Sun referred to the Charlie / Ivy plot as " ridiculous " .
The Wall Street Journal suggested that the storyline was repetitive , baring too much of a resemblance to the Juliet and Vanessa plot in the previous season .
Sharon Tharp of Ology wrote that the Charlie / Ivy plot was predictable and earned " too much screentime " .
REFERENCES