VISA POLICY OF SRI LANKA Visitors to Sri Lanka visiting for tourism purposes must obtain an Electronic Travel Authorization ( ETA ) , unless they are exempt , prior to arrival or on arrival to Sri Lanka or they must obtain a visa in advance .
All visitors must hold a passport valid for 6 months .
Nationals of Afghanistan , Iran , Iraq , Nigeria , Pakistan , Somalia and Syria must hold return or onward tickets .
Visitors are strongly urged to use the online system to avoid lengthy delays at the port of entry .
VISA POLICY MAP
ELECTRONIC TRAVEL
AUTHORIZATION Section::::Electronic travel authorization .
Holders of ETA from all countries except the three exempt countries and countries listed in visa in advance can obtain a visa on arrival that is valid for 30 days .
The business purpose ETA can be obtained only from Sri Lankan diplomatic missions and head office of the Department of Immigration and Emigration .
From April 2018 nationals of designated 28 countries will be allowed to obtain an ETA valid for three months .
ETA EXEMPTION Section::::ETA exemption .
On the basis of reciprocity , citizens of the following three countries are exempt from the requirement to obtain the Electronic Travel Authorization and can obtain a visa on arrival free of charge : FUTURE PLANS Section::::Future plans .
As of August 2018
Sri Lankan authorities are examining options for a visa waiver for visitors from India , China and some European and West Asian countries .
VISA IN ADVANCE Section::::Visa in advance .
Citizens of the following 21 countries must obtain a visa in advance from one of the Sri Lankan diplomatic missions : valign = top NON - ORDINARY PASSPORTS Section::::Non - ordinary passports .
Holders of diplomatic , official or service passports of the following countries may enter without a visa : valign =
top STATISTICS
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Sri Lankan citizens
* Tourism in Sri Lanka
* Foreign relations of Sri Lanka
*
Sri Lankan passport
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Ministry of Foreign Affairs * Department of Immigration and Emigration * Electronic Travel Authorization ( ETA )