11.22.63 11.22.63 is an American science fiction thriller miniseries based on the book 11/22/63 by Stephen King , and consisting of eight episodes .
The series is executive - produced by J. J. Abrams , King , Bridget Carpenter and Bryan Burk , and produced by James Franco , who also has the main role .
It premiered on Hulu on February 15 , 2016 , and was received positively by critics .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Jake Epping ( James Franco ) , a recently divorced English teacher from Maine , is presented with the chance to travel back in time to Dallas , Texas , in 1960 by his long - time friend Al Templeton ( Chris Cooper ) .
He is persuaded into going in an attempt to prevent the assassination of John F. Kennedy in November 1963 ; however , he becomes attached to the life he makes in the past which could be the mission 's undoing .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * James Franco as Jake Epping / James " Jake " Amberson * Chris Cooper as Al Templeton
* Sarah Gadon as Sadie Dunhill
* Lucy Fry as Marina Oswald * George MacKay as Bill Turcotte
* Daniel Webber as Lee Harvey Oswald RECURRING AND GUEST * Cherry Jones as Marguerite Oswald
* Kevin J. O'Connor as the Yellow Card
Man
* T. R. Knight as Johnny Clayton
* Josh Duhamel as Frank Dunning
* Joanna Douglas as Doris Dunning
* Nick Searcy as Deke Simmons
* Jonny Coyne as George de Mohrenschildt * Tonya Pinkins as Mimi Corcoran * Brooklyn Sudano as Christy Epping
* Leon Rippy as Harry Dunning * Juliette Angelo as Bobbi Jill Allnut
* Braeden Lemasters as Mike Coslaw * Anthony Colonello as Clifford * Gregory North as General Edwin Walker *
Gil Bellows as Agent Hosty * Grantham Coleman as Bonnie Ray Williams * Michael O'Neill as Arliss Price
* Annette O'Toole as Edna Price
* Antoni Corone as Jack Ruby * Bob Stephenson as Silent Mike
* Wilbur Fitzgerald
as Captain Will Fritz * Constance Towers as Old Sadie
* Marsha Mason as Lady with Curlers EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In August 2011 , before the novel 's release , it was announced that Jonathan Demme had attached himself to write , produce , and direct a film adaptation of 11/22/63 with King serving as executive producer .
However , in December 2012 , Demme announced that he had withdrawn from the project , after disagreeing with King over what to include in the script .
On April 26 , 2013 , it was reported that Warner Bros. Television and J. J. Abrams ' Bad Robot Productions were in negotiations for the rights to adapt the novel as a TV series or miniseries .
On September 22 , 2014 , it was announced that a TV series based on the novel was picked up by Hulu .
Carol Spier would be a production designer .
The first trailer for the series was released on November 19 , 2015 .
When asked about developing a sequel series , King stated " I 'd love to revisit Jake and Sadie , and also revisit the rabbit hole that dumps people into the past , but sometimes it 's best not to go back for a second helping . " .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
James Franco was chosen to star as the character of Jake Epping .
After reading the novel , Franco contacted King about the rights to adapt it to film only to be told that Abrams had already acquired them .
Franco wrote an essay about the book for Vice , which was noticed by Abrams , and tweeted about his disappointment at not getting the film rights , which was noticed by Bridget Carpenter .
Soon after , they offered him the lead role .
Sarah Gadon was cast for the role of Sadie Dunhill .
She was interested in the role in part because it gave her the opportunity to work with Abrams .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began on June 9 , 2015 , in Hespeler , Ontario .
Filming during June 2015 also took place in Guelph , Ontario , as well as in Ayr , Ontario , at the Queen 's Tavern , Hamilton , Ontario , and in Knowles Restaurant in Dunnville , Ontario during September 2015 .
In early October , the production moved to Dallas to film exterior locations at Dealey Plaza .
During this time , the filming of various scenes during rush hour caused bumper to bumper traffic in the surrounding streets .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The show has garnered positive reviews from most critics .
Based on 51 reviews , the show carries an 80 % " certified fresh " rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes where the consensus states : " Though the execution feels almost as dated as the period it represents , 11.22.63 gradually reveals a compelling , well - performed series of events . "
On Metacritic , the show has a rating of 69 out of 100 , based on 35 reviews , signifying " generally positive reviews " .
Jack Moore of GQ commented that " the show is moody and supernatural , while somehow also remaining grounded and full of heart " , and lauded Franco as the show 's standout , saying " what Franco gives is a vanity - free , indulgence - free performance that feels like the work of an Old Hollywood legend .
It 's earnest and full - hearted . "
Alan Sepinwall also acclaimed Franco , stating " Franco 's a revelation as Jake .
He 's an immensely talented actor and he 's got the star quality you need to carry something this crazy , and this long . "
Vicki Hyman of the Newark Star - Ledger praised the performances of Franco and Gadon , writing : " Their stirring romance carries with it the same whiff of doom as Epping 's visits to Dealey Plaza , and gives what could be merely an interesting and handsomely - made take on the conspiracy thriller genre more texture and depth , resonating across the ages . "
Hank Stuever of The Washington Post wrote that " King 's work does n't always happily travel through the portal connecting the page to the TV screen , but Hulu scores with an impressively stout - hearted , eight - part adaptation of 11/22/63 . "
On the other hand , Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly had a more mixed reaction and criticized Franco 's performance , calling it " low - watt " and " disinterested " .
He wrote " 11.22.63 reaches some thoughtful , moving conclusions , but oh , what could have been with a more engaged star .
If only there were a time machine to fix that mistake . " ACCOLADES Saturn Awards HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
11.22.63 was released on DVD and Blu - ray on August 9 , 2016 in Region 1 .
The release includes all eight episodes , as well as a special feature titled " When the Future Fights Back " , where King , Abrams , Carpenter and Franco talk about elements of the production that turned King 's novel into an event series .
SEE ALSO
* List of original programs distributed by Hulu REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS