M. BUTTERFLY M. Butterfly is a play by David Henry Hwang .
The story , while entwined with that of the opera Madama Butterfly , is based most directly on the relationship between French diplomat Bernard Boursicot and Shi Pei Pu , a Peking opera singer .
The play premiered on Broadway in 1988 and won the 1988 Tony Award for Best Play .
PRODUCTIONS Section::::Productions .
M. Butterfly premiered at the National Theatre , Washington , DC , on February 10 , 1988 .
The play opened on Broadway at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre on March 20 , 1988 , and closed after 777 performances on January 27 , 1990 .
It was produced by Stuart Ostrow and directed by John Dexter ; it starred John Lithgow as Gallimard and BD Wong as Song Liling .
David Dukes , Anthony Hopkins , Tony Randall , and John Rubinstein played Gallimard at various times during the original run .
A highly unusual abstract staging , featuring Puccini 's opera Madame Butterfly intermixed with French pop music , had Kazakh countertenor Erik Kurmangaliev star as Song ; he also sang two of Butterfly 's arias live during the show .
This production was directed by Roman Viktyuk in Moscow , Russia in 1992 .
The play was a 1989 finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for Drama .
It is published by Plume and in an acting edition by Dramatists Play Service .
An audio recording of the play was produced by L.A. Theatre Works , with Lithgow and Wong reprising their Broadway roles along with Margaret Cho .
A Broadway revival opened on October 26 , 2017 , at the Cort Theatre , with previews beginning on October 7 .
Starring Clive Owen , the production was directed by Julie Taymor .
David Henry Hwang made changes to the original text for the revival , mostly centering around the issue of intersectional identities , but also for clarifications .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The first act introduces the main character , Rene Gallimard , a civil servant attached to the French embassy in China .
He falls in love with a beautiful Chinese opera singer , Song Liling .
Gallimard is unaware that all female roles in traditional Beijing opera were actually played by males , as females were banned from the stage .
The first act ends with Gallimard returning to France in shame and living alone after his wife , Helga , finds out about his affair with Song and leaves him .
Act two begins with Song coming to France as a spy and resuming the affair with Gallimard .
They stay together for 20 years until the truth is revealed , and Gallimard is convicted of treason and imprisoned .
Unable to face the fact that his " perfect woman " is a man , he retreats deep within himself and his memories .
The action of the play is depicted as his disordered , distorted recollection of the events surrounding their affair .
The third act portrays Gallimard performing seppuku while Song watches and smokes a cigarette .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Hwang adapted the play for a 1993 film directed by David Cronenberg with Jeremy Irons and John Lone in the leading roles .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS ORIGINAL BROADWAY
PRODUCTION Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Original Broadway production . !
width="5 % "
Year !
width="25 % " Award ceremony !
width="40
% "
Category ! width="20 % "
Nominee !
width="10 % " Result align="center"1989 colspan="3"Pulitzer Prize for Drama REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS