THE DEATH CURE
The Death Cure is a 2011 young adult dystopian science fiction novel written by American writer James Dashner and the third book published in the Maze Runner series ( the fifth and last in narrative order ) .
It was published on 11 October 2011 by Delacorte Press and was preceded in publication order by The Maze Runner and The Scorch Trials and followed by the series prequels , The Kill Order and The Fever Code .
In narrative order , it is the last book in the series .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Thomas is held in solitary confinement but is eventually released by WICKED 's Assistant Director Janson ( " Rat Man " in the prior novel ) .
Janson tells the Gladers ( Group A ) and Group B that there is a cure for the Flare .
Many of those present are immune to the Flare while some are not , and escaping would serve no purpose , as people in the outside world despise the Immunes .
Janson reads out names of people who are not immune to the Flare .
Thomas is devastated to hear that his friend Newt is not immune .
The Gladers are offered the chance to remove the mind - control chips in their heads , thus restoring their memories , but with the devices removed , Thomas , Teresa , and Aris will no longer be able to communicate telepathically .
Only Thomas , Minho , and Newt choose not to undergo the surgery , believing they can not help to find the cure if they lose their telepathic connection or gain their prior memories .
All three of them escape from WICKED with the help of Brenda and Jorge before their chips are removed .
Brenda and Jorge are revealed to be working for WICKED .
Thomas initially feels betrayed , but Brenda convinces him to forgive her .
Soon after , the Gladers discover that everyone who had undergone the memory - restoration abandoned them .
Newt gives Thomas a note and tells him to open it " when the time is right " .
The five of them then go to Denver looking for a former WICKED researcher named Hans who can remove Thomas ' , Minho 's , and Newt 's mind - control chips .
When they arrive at the airport a man in a black - suit directs them to an address where ex - Glader Gally is waiting for them .
Newt must remain behind because he would be arrested and confined with the other Cranks .
Gally has joined a rebel group called the Right Arm , and is determined to end WICKED 's trials and experiments .
He tells them that WICKED is capturing every Immune they can find to prepare another cycle of the Trials .
He also reveals the decaying cities are home to many who suffer from the Flare , but take an illicit drug called Bliss which slows down brain functioning and helps relieve the pain Cranks feel from the Flare .
Thomas and his friends find Hans who removes Minho 's control chip , but WICKED uses the chip to force Thomas to resist the procedure : Brenda , Jorge , and Minho have to hold him down in order for Hans to perform the surgery .
They visit a café where a man is caught taking Bliss and arrested by the security guards .
One of the guards apprehends Thomas in order to sell him to bounty hunters that will take him to WICKED .
WICKED Assistant Director Janson intervenes in holographic form , sending a police vehicle to rescue Thomas .
Janson tells Thomas that " to save Newt " , he must return to WICKED .
Minho , Thomas , Brenda , and Jorge return to the Berg ( vehicle ) to find a note saying that Newt has been taken to the Cranks .
Minho convinces the four of them to go to the Denver Crank Palace to rescue Newt , where they bribe the guards to get in .
When they meet Newt , he angrily orders them to leave and the other Cranks chase them out .
Thomas then remembers the note Newt gave him and reads it , to find that Newt had begged Thomas to kill him .
Thomas despairs over not having read the note earlier , and the four go back to Denver .
In Denver , Thomas sees Newt , who has succumbed to the Flare .
Newt begs Thomas to end his suffering and kill him .
Thomas shoots him in the head as an act of mercy .
Then , they discover that Teresa and the other Immunes all had been captured .
Thomas and Minho knock out the Immunes ' former guards and threaten them to make the guards take them to WICKED also .
Thomas and Brenda discover the guards were led by Vince , the leader of the Right Arm .
Vince tells them the Right Arm is copying WICKED 's operations , and plan to take over their headquarters building .
Working for the Right Arm , Thomas arrives at WICKED headquarters and discovers that how he meant for Thomas " to save Newt " is to provide data to complete the cure by Janson examining the physical structure of Thomas 's brain , which will kill Thomas .
Thomas is forced to begin the deadly brain surgery but is first able to plant a device that disables WICKED 's weapons , and the Right Arm begins storming the facility .
Thomas wakes up to find himself alive and finds a note from Chancellor Paige , head of WICKED .
She writes that some WICKED staff did not accept the violence that WICKED caused in its search for a cure to the Flare plague .
She explains there are already enough resources from the Trials to make a blueprint for the cure , and that his brain is not needed after all .
In the note , Paige reveals the location of the Immunes whom the Right Arm " sold " to gain access to WICKED , and gives directions to a " safe place " where Thomas should take them all .
Thomas and his friends re - enter the Maze and find the captured Immunes .
However , they learn the Right Arm does not intend to occupy WICKED headquarters but instead intend to destroy it .
Explosions rock the Maze and falling debris kills some of the Immunes inside .
Triggered by the commotion , the Grievers come out of storage , but Teresa shows Thomas how to shut them down .
She , however , dies from falling debris in an effort to save Thomas 's life .
Fleeing the building , the Immunes escape through a Flat Trans portal that leads to a lush paradise .
The Epilogue
The book 's Epilogue is written in the voice of Dr. Ava Paige , Chancellor of WICKED .
She reveals that after the catastrophic solar flares , the plague called " the Flare " had been deliberately created by the government and released as a form of population control .
The government believed that the disease would kill quickly and soon stop spreading , but once released it escalated beyond government control .
WICKED was not able to find a cure .
Dr. Paige finally realized that from the beginning the Immunes had been the only actual hope and devised a plan with Brenda and Jorge to send the remaining Immunes to a safe refuge .
There they can survive the collapse of the rest of the world , and afterward , rebuild society and restore the human race .
That is why , as she states , " WICKED is good . " CHARACTERS
* Thomas : The main protagonist of the series .
He is a teenage boy who was a Runner of Group A ( " the Gladers " ) before escaping the Maze with his fellow Gladers in The Maze Runner .
He continued this by crossing the Scorch in The Scorch Trials , in which he was continuously manipulated by almost everyone , making it hard for him to trust other people again .
Thomas escapes from having his memories restored in WICKED 's headquarters and becomes entangled in the conflict between WICKED and the Right Arm – a rebel organization that opposes it .
During the events in The Death Cure he falls for Brenda .
* Minho : A Glader , and the former Keeper of the Runners of Group
A.
He was Thomas ' fellow Runner back in the Glade and throughout the series becomes Thomas ' best friend throughout their Trials , joining him to escape WICKED 's attempt to restore their memories and saving the Immunes from the Maze .
* Newt : A Glader who took upon the role of the leader of Group A after their previous leader , Alby , died in The Maze Runner .
He is one of Thomas ' steadfast companions , alongside Minho .
The book reveals that Newt is not immune to the Flare virus and is slowly succumbing to its influence .
Eventually he begs Thomas to kill him , and then kills himself.(Thomas did not shoot to stop his misery , meaning he was that close to Thomas )
* Teresa : The only female Glader of Group A.
In The Scorch Trials she reveals she has always been working for WICKED , which causes Thomas to distrust her .
She volunteers for her memories to be restored and moves with the other Gladers to Denver .
She eventually turns against WICKED .
She dies after saving Thomas from being crushed by falling debris .
* Brenda : A Canadian girl who was part of a group of Cranks in The Scorch Trials before becoming separated and having to navigate through the Scorch with Thomas .
She helps Thomas , Minho , and Newt , escape from WICKED 's headquarters and help them remove WICKED 's controller chips from their brains .
She and Thomas fall for each other again .
* Jorge : The leader of a group of Cranks that the Gladers met in The Scorch Trials .
He has a close relationship with Brenda .
Brenda described their relationship as Jorge being to her " like an uncle " .
He was revealed to be working for WICKED , but helps Thomas , Minho , and Newt escape from WICKED 's headquarters and remove their mind - control chips .
He has a habit of mixing his speech with Spanish words .
* Aris : The only male member of Group
B. He met Thomas in The Scorch Trials .
Aris , Thomas , and Teresa were close friends before they were sent into the Maze .
In The Scorch Trials he was exposed as an agent of WICKED , like Teresa .
* Janson ( Rat Man ) : The Assistant Director of WICKED and the book 's main antagonist .
He is succumbing to the Flare virus , which explains his desperation for a cure .
He arranges for the Group A and Group B survivors ' memories to be restored , but wants to make them go through the Trials again .
Eventually Thomas kills him by strangling him , after Janson and other WICKED members try to re - capture the surviving Immunes .
* Gally : A Glader of Group A who strictly followed the rules of the Glade and thus became Thomas ' adversary in The Maze Runner .
He indirectly caused Chuck 's death when Chuck intercepted the knife Gally had thrown at Thomas .
In this book , he reunites with Thomas and reveals that he has been working with the Right Arm , an organization determined to stop WICKED .
However , after discovering the Right Arm 's true purpose , he left with Thomas and the Gladers to rescue the Immunes in the Maze .
* Vince : The leader of the Right Arm , an organization opposed to WICKED .
He is Gally 's boss .
He recruits Thomas to infiltrate the WICKED headquarters and plant a device inside that disables the WICKED 's weapons , and then leads the Right Arm 's invasion of WICKED .
He is strictly dedicated to his cause and brands Thomas and Gally traitors when they attempt to save hundreds of Immunes hidden in the Maze , which is about to be destroyed by the Right Arm .
*
Lawrence : Vince 's assistant who captures Thomas , Minho , Brenda , and Jorge and delivers them to a safe house .
After their demands to see " the boss " Lawrence took them to Vince .
He later drops off Thomas near the WICKED headquarters for his plan to plant the explosive device .
* Hans : A former WICKED scientist whom Thomas , Minho , Brenda , and Jorge , meet at Denver to help remove the mind - controlling chips from Thomas and Minho .
*
Ava Paige : The Chancellor of WICKED and the person responsible for managing and organizing the search for a cure of the Flare , including sending teenagers into the Maze to study the minds of Immunes .
However , she disagreed with the consequence that the teenagers were being killed .
Her character serves as the omniscient voice in the books ' Epilogues .
She was never seen in the series , but every Epilogue of the three books in the main series , plus The Fever Code , includes an e - mail that she writes to her associates .
She states that a cure for the Flare virus will never be found , that the Immunes are humanity 's last hope to restore the dying world , and that WICKED 's actions of sending them for Trials are threatening that hope .
She serves as an ex - machina in the narrative , saving Thomas from a fatal brain experiment at the last minute , after he was sedated ; She instigates and secretly orchestrates his rescue of hundreds of Immunes from the attack on the Maze .
She also promises and delivers a paradisaical safe haven for the Immunes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critical reception for The Death Cure was mixed .
Commonsensemedia gave the book three out of five stars , commenting that the book 's oppressiveness kept it from being more memorable than they wanted it to be .
The Deseret News also commented on the book 's bleak nature , but praised it as being " both conclusive and satisfying " .
The Horn Book Guide and Kirkus Reviews both gave positive reviews , with the Horn Book Guide opining that the book 's conclusion was " thought - provoking " .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Wes Ball , who directed the previous films in the series , confirmed that , if he returned to direct , the final novel would not be split into two films .
In March 2015 , T.S. Nowlin was confirmed to write the script .
On 9 July 2015 Defy Media revealed that filming was set to begin in February 2016 .
On 16 September 2015 Variety confirmed that Ball would return to direct the third film .
The film began principal photography on 14 March 2016 in Cache Creek , British Columbia .
On 19 March 2016 , Maze Runner star Dylan O'Brien was critically injured on - set when he was struck by a car during a stunt sequence .
On 20 March 2016 , director Wes Ball announced production was shut down to allow O'Brien time to recuperate from his injuries .
On 22 April 2017 , the studio again delayed the release in order to allow more time for post - production .
Maze Runner :
The Death Cure was released on January 26 , 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS