BEFORE I FALL Before I Fall is a 2010 young adult novel written by Lauren Oliver .
It is written in first - person narrative of a teenager who is forced to relive the day of her death every day for a week .
In an attempt to understand why this is happening to her , as well as trying to change her fate , she takes new actions each day , some of which are out of character and surprise her family and friends .
The book is the basis for the film of the same name released on March 3 , 2017 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The novel begins when the protagonist , 17-year - old Samantha " Sam " Kingston , is killed in a car accident in her hometown of Ridgeview .
She vividly describes her horrifying and painful death , and what flashes through her mind in those final seconds .
However , she realizes that for some reason , she is fated to relive the last day of her life , Friday , February 12 , also known as Cupid Day at her high school , over and over , until she gets things right .
Samantha , who seemingly had it all – popularity , an oft - desired boyfriend , and surface - level happiness – must examine what 's really important in her " Mean Girls " life , in which she and her snobby , wealthy friends – Lindsay ( the ringleader ) , Ally and Elody – made life miserable for underclassmen and social misfits , a life in which all that seems to matter is social status , clothes , boys , drinking and sexual activity .
Sam and her clique bully a classmate named Juliet Sykes " Psycho " or " Mellow Yellow " and Sam finds out some dark secrets about Juliet and Lindsay .
Through this " Groundhog Day " phenomenon , Sam experiences all five stages of grief .
Denial is seen as she tries to evade her fate ; she gets angry and rebels , lashing out at her friends ( particularly Lindsay ) and hanging out with students she would never dare be seen speaking with ; she bargains with God , or fate , believing that if she can make things right , she can save her own life ; depression , in which she feels that nothing even matters and where in she begins acting uncharacteristically and recklessly by having sex , kissing her teacher and doing drugs ; and finally , acceptance .
The Sam who accepts her death – but only if she is able to save Juliet Sykes from committing suicide – is a very different character from the girl on the first page of the book .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Fox 2000 optioned the rights for Before I Fall in mid-2010 , with Maria Maggenti named as the writer , and Jon Shestack named as a producer soon after .
Ry Russo - Young was hired to direct .
In 2015 , Awesomness TV came on board to the produce the film .
In September 2015 , it was announced that Zoey Deutch had been cast as the lead .
In October , Halston Sage was cast , along with actor Logan Miller and YouTube star Kian Lawley .
Later that same month , Scream Queens star Diego Boneta and actress Elena Kampouris were also announced as part of the cast .
The film had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival on January 21 , 2017 , and was theatrically released on March 3 , 2017 , by Open Road Films .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reviews for Before I Fall have been positive , with RT Book Reviews giving the book 4 1/2 stars and nominating it for their 2010 " Best Young Adult Paranormal / Fantasy Novel " .
Kirkus Reviews called the novel " Unexpectedly rich " .
The School Library Journal wrote that although the book was " somewhat predictable , the plot drives forward and teens will want to see where Sam 's choices lead " .
SEE ALSO
* Butterfly effect * Groundhog Day ( film ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Official author page
*
Book Trailer * Official Blog