BLACK MIRROR Black Mirror is a British anthology science fiction television series created by Charlie Brooker , with Brooker and Annabel Jones serving as the programme showrunners .
It examines modern society , particularly with regard to the unanticipated consequences of new technologies .
Episodes are standalone , usually set in an alternative present or the near future , often with a dark and satirical tone , though some are more experimental and lighter .
The show premiered for two series on the British television channel Channel 4 in December 2011 and February 2013 , respectively .
After its addition to the catalogue in December 2014 , Netflix purchased the programme in September 2015 .
It commissioned a series of 12 episodes later divided into the third and fourth series , each six episodes ; the former was released on 21 October 2016 and the latter on 29 December 2017 .
A fifth series was announced on 5 March 2018 .
Black Mirror was inspired by older anthology shows like The Twilight Zone , which were able to deal with controversial , contemporary topics without fear of censorship .
Brooker developed Black Mirror to highlight topics related to humanity 's relationship to technology , creating stories that feature " the way we live now – and the way we might be living in 10 minutes ' time if we 're clumsy . "
The series has garnered positive reception from critics , received many awards and nominations , and seen an increase in interest internationally , particularly in the United States after its addition to Netflix .
Two episodes , " San Junipero " ( from the third series ) and " USS Callister " ( fourth series ) , won a total of six Emmy Awards , with both episodes winning Outstanding Television Movie .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The show was originally commissioned by Channel 4 in the United Kingdom , and premiered in December 2011 .
A second series ran during February 2013 .
In September 2015 , Netflix purchased the programme , commissioning a series of 12 episodes later divided into two series of six episodes .
The first of these series was released on Netflix worldwide as the overall third series on 21 October 2016 .
The fourth series was released on 29 December 2017 .
PRODUCTION CONCEPTION AND STYLE
Section::::Production . Section::::Conception and style .
Charlie Brooker had completed production of Dead Set , a zombie - based drama series , and while working on Newswipe and other programmes , had decided that he wanted to make another drama series , in an anthology style like The Twilight Zone , Tales of the Unexpected , and Hammer House of Horror .
Brooker recognised that Rod Serling had written episodes of The Twilight Zone using contemporary issues , often controversial such as racism , but placing them in fictional settings so as to get around television censors at the time .
For Brooker , he realised he could do similar commentary on modern issues , and specifically focusing on mankind 's dependency on technology , something he encountered while producing the series How TV Ruined Your Life .
Brooker pulled the series ' title from this approach :
If technology is a drug – and it does feel like a drug – then what , precisely , are the side effects ?
This area – between delight and discomfort – is where Black Mirror , my new drama series , is set .
The ' black mirror ' of the title is the one you 'll find on every wall , on every desk , in the palm of every hand : the cold , shiny screen of a TV , a monitor , a smartphone .
Brooker wanted to keep the anthology approach , using new stories , settings , characters and actors for each episode , as he felt this approach was a key element of enjoying shows like The Twilight Zone ; he said " There was a signature tone to the stories , the same dark chocolate coating – but the filling was always a surprise .
" This approach would allow Black Mirror to contrast with current dramas and serials that had a standard recurring cast .
According to Brooker , the production team considered giving the series a linking theme or presenter , but ultimately it was decided not to do so : " There were discussions .
Do we set them all in the same street ?
Do we have some characters who appear in each episode , a bit Three Colours :
Blue / White / Red style ?
We did think about having a character who introduces them , Tales from the Crypt style , or like Rod Serling or Alfred Hitchcock or Roald Dahl , because most anthology shows did have that ...
but the more we thought about it , we thought it was a bit weird . "
While the production does not use linking elements , the show has included allusions and Easter eggs from previous episodes into later ones .
For example , " Hated in the Nation " in the third series calls back to the events of both the first series episode " The National Anthem " and the second series episode " White Bear " .
while the final episode of the fourth series " Black Museum " includes references to each prior episode of the series .
Some of these are for the ease of reusing a name developed in a prior episode ; for example , they created the fictional " UKN " broadcast network for handling news reports that drive stories , while the pizza delivery company used in " USS Callister " was used again for a company running automated pizza trucks in " Crocodile " .
Other Easter eggs were added as they knew viewers would be intensely dissecting the episodes and provided these as gags .
However , over time the use of Easter eggs became more purposeful , as to establish a canon of the " dream universe " that the episodes take place in .
Brooker noted that when they opted to reuse a cover of Irma Thomas ' " Anyone Who Knows What Love Is " , first introduced in " Fifteen Million Merits " , for " White Christmas " , as " it does sort of nest the whole thing together in some kind of artistic universe " .
Giles Harvey comments in a profile of Brooker for The New Yorker that each episode " establishes the background of normality against which a decisive tweak will stand out all the more starkly " .
Harvey notes that the show 's diverse range of genres show that it is " manifestly the work of someone who has clocked up many hours of screen time " .
He further comments that Brooker is " scrupulous " , as " the believability of each episode depends on maintaining the complex internal logic of its dystopic world " .
Brooker is involved during the filming and editing processes , pointing out any inconsistencies that arise , and is " determined to make the devices and screens and interfaces used in ' Black Mirror ' seem authentic " .
As examples of Brooker 's " meticulous attention to detail " , Harvey reports that Brooker carefully considered whether a falling wine bottle would shatter in the nested virtual realities of " Playtest " , and whether it would rain in the eponymous location in " San Junipero " .
An instance of realistic technology is the email system in " Be Right Back " , which contrasts with " histrionic computers " found in Hollywood ; an email is sent to the main character with the heading " Martha , people in your position bought the following " , containing various books on the topic of grief - counselling .
Knowing that fans of the show have dissected some of these details by watching the episodes frame - by - frame , Brooker and his team have included humorous jabs at these fans through printed messages on various props , such as a paragraph in a news article held up by a character directed to fans of the show on Reddit in " Crocodile " .
SERIES ONE
Section::::Series one .
The series ' inception was in 2010 .
Charlie Brooker and Annabel Jones served as executive producers ; the two had begun to work together on Charlie Brooker 's Screenwipe , a television review programme which aired from 2006 to 2008 .
The first pitch was for eight half - hour episodes written by different people .
Technology was a lesser focus and the worlds were larger and more detailed , which Jones said was not possible to execute properly in the short runtime .
The show was then commissioned for three hour - long episodes .
The first script was " Fifteen Million Merits " , which was written by Brooker and his wife Konnie Huq .
The second script was " Inbound " , an episode which was never produced .
It was about war and had ideas which were later repurposed for series three episode " Men Against Fire " .
The following script pitched became " The National Anthem " , the first episode to air .
The third episode is " The Entire History of You " .
The programme was produced by Brooker 's production company Zeppotron , for Endemol .
Joel Collins served as production designer , with his company Painting Practice working on visual effects .
An Endemol press release described the series as " a hybrid of The Twilight Zone and Tales of the Unexpected which taps into our contemporary unease about our modern world " , with the stories having a " techno - paranoia " feel .
Channel 4 described the first episode , " The National Anthem " , as " a twisted parable for the Twitter age " .
Black Mirror series 1 had a limited DVD release for PAL / Region 2 on 27 February 2012 .
In 2013 , Robert Downey Jr. optioned the episode " The Entire History of You " ( written by Jesse Armstrong ) to potentially be made into a film by Warner Bros. and his own production company , Team Downey .
The show was available in the U.S. on Netflix from late 2014 onwards .
In the early stages of Black Mirror , Jones was keen to avoid casting comedy actors , as Brooker was previously a comedy writer and they wanted the show to not feel like comedy .
" The National Anthem " stars Rory Kinnear as Prime Minister Michael Callow , with Lindsay Duncan playing Home Secretary Alex Cairns .
" Fifteen Million Merits " features Daniel Kaluuya as Bing , Jessica Brown Findlay as Abi and Rupert Everett , Julia Davis , Ashley Thomas as Judges Hope , Charity and Wraith .
In " The Entire History of You " , Toby Kebbell and Jodie Whittaker star as married couple Liam and Ffion .
The first series was popular and critically well - received , though viewing figures decreased throughout the series .
The show was expensive for Channel 4 , as the anthology format meant there were no economies of scale , but it was commissioned for a second series .
SERIES TWO
Section::::Series two .
Series two consists of three episodes .
Brooker described it as " more epic in scale , but more intimate in scope " .
The episodes are more " understated " in their technologies .
Brooker commented that the second series mirrors the first : the first series has topics of ( in order )
" warped political satire " , " dystopian hellscape " and " relationship torn apart by technology " , while the second series presents episodes of these forms in reverse .
Each episode in the first series had a male protagonist , so Brooker deliberately wrote female protagonists for series two episodes " Be Right Back " and " White Bear " .
A trailer for the second series was made by Moving Picture Company , and featured three interspersed storylines : " a dream sequence , the repetitive factory setting and the huge dust cloud that sweeps through the street at the ad 's climatic end .
"
Aired from 22 January 2013 , the advertisement was shown on Channel 4 and in cinemas .
The second series had a DVD release , which like the first series DVD was PAL for region 2 only .
" Be Right Back " stars Hayley Atwell as Martha and Domhnall Gleeson as Ash , both in human and robot form .
In " White Bear " , Lenora Crichlow plays Victoria Skillane and Michael Smiley and Tuppence Middleton play Baxter and Jem .
"
The Waldo Moment " features Daniel Rigby as Jamie Salter , Chloe Pirrie as Gwendolyn Harris and Jason Flemyng as Jack Napier .
SERIES THREE
Section::::Series three .
In September 2015 , Netflix commissioned 12 episodes of Black Mirror .
In March 2016 , it outbid Channel 4 for the rights to distributing the third series , with a bid of .
Endemol released a statement saying that Channel 4 " had the opportunity to recommission [ Black Mirror ] since 2013 and passed on this and subsequent co - production offers put to them .
[ ... ] Further efforts were made to try to reach a settlement regarding a U.K. window for Channel 4 , but these were also sadly to no avail " .
In a press release , Channel 4 say that they " offered to recommission Black Mirror " .
This marked the first time that an online streaming service had gained the rights to a show where the original network had wished to renew it .
The titles of the six episodes that make up series 3 were announced in July 2016 , along with the release date .
In developing the third series ' stories , Brooker had looked back to the first two series and the Christmas special , and recognised that all the stories were about characters becoming trapped in a situation that they could not escape from .
Coupled with the anthology format that asked for viewers to get immersed within the stories to understand the nature of each , this created a sense of darkness and horror , which could make it difficult to watch successive episodes without becoming uncomfortable .
With the third series , Brooker wanted to explore different formats , still having a few " trap " episodes but adding more conventional stories like a romance and police procedural , making the new series more digestible for the viewer .
A trailer for the third series was released in October 2016 .
The third series cast includes Bryce Dallas Howard , Alice Eve , James Norton , Cherry Jones , Wyatt Russell , Alex Lawther , Jerome Flynn , Gugu Mbatha - Raw , Mackenzie Davis , Michael Kelly , Malachi Kirby , Kelly Macdonald , and Faye Marsay .
The directors for the third series include Joe Wright , Jakob Verbruggen , James Hawes , and Dan Trachtenberg .
The third series was released on Netflix worldwide on 21 October 2016 .
SERIES FOUR
Section::::Series four .
According to Brooker , the fourth series has even more variety in the episodes than in previous series .
Brooker says that there is " some more hope " in the series , crediting this to the fact that writing began in July 2016 and continued throughout the 2016 U.S. election , and " I genuinely thought , I do n't know what state the world 's going to be in by the time
these [ episodes ] appear , and I do n't know how much appetite there will be for nothing but bleak nihilism .
" The series features an episode story conceived by Penn Jillette .
Jodie Foster directed the episode " Arkangel " , starring Rosemarie DeWitt ; one episode was filmed in Iceland ( " Crocodile " ) and another is overtly comedic in tone ( " USS Callister " ) .
Jesse Plemons , Cristin Milioti , Jimmi Simpson , Michaela Coel , Andrea Riseborough , Andrew Gower , Georgina Campbell , Joe Cole , George Blagden , Maxine Peake , Douglas Hodge , and Letitia Wright appear in the fourth series .
In addition to Foster , the episodes were directed by Toby Haynes , John Hillcoat , Tim Van Patten , David Slade , and Colm McCarthy .
In May 2017 , a Reddit post unofficially announced the names and directors of the six episodes in series 4 of Black Mirror .
Filming for the fourth series concluded in June 2017 .
The first trailer for the series was released by Netflix on 25 August 2017 , and contained the six episode titles .
In September 2017 , two photos from the fourth series were released .
Beginning on 24 November 2017 , Netflix published a series of posters and trailers for each episode in the fourth series of the show , referred to as the " 13 Days of Black Mirror " , concluding on 6 December 2017 with the announcement of the release date .
All six episodes were released to Netflix on 29 December 2017 .
According to Engadget and Gizmodo , as a means of viral marketing Netflix sent private messages to users of Turkish website Ekşi Sözlük .
The messages were sent from the account " iamwaldo " and read "
We know what you 're up to .
Watch and see what we will do . "
Though the advertising was met with positive reception from some users , others were critical of distress that the messages may have caused .
SERIES FIVE
Section::::Series five .
In December 2017 , when Brooker and executive producer Annabel Jones were asked about possibly creating a fifth series of Black Mirror , they said , " We would love to do it . "
Netflix announced the fifth series via social media on 5 March 2018 , though did not announce its release date or episode count .
On 20 March 2018 , at the 2018 Royal Television Society Awards , Brooker confirmed that the fifth series had begun filming .
According to Bloomberg L.P. , the fifth series is expected to be released in December 2018 , and will include an interactive episode , letting the viewer make a choice of which action the protagonist should take next , following previous Netflix interactive series , Puss in Book from Dreamworks Animation and from Telltale Games .
FUTURE IDEAS Section::::Future ideas .
In October 2016 , Brooker said that he had ideas of where sequels to both " White Bear " and " Be Right Back " would go , but it was unlikely that either would be made .
Furthermore , Brooker also stated that there were some characters in the series three episode " Hated in the Nation " who could potentially recur .
Actors have appeared in multiple Black Mirror episodes but for unrelated roles , such as Hannah John - Kamen ( " Fifteen Million Merits " and " Playtest " ) , Michaela Coel ( " Nosedive " and " USS Callister " ) , and Daniel Lapaine ( " The Entire History of You " and " Black Museum " ) .
When asked in interviews , Brooker has repeatedly stated that there are no plans for a sequel episode to " San Junipero " .
He told Los Angeles Times that they " want to keep [ Kelly and Yorkie ] happy there " .
However , Brooker has said that the show " may be referring to San Junipero again " in Easter eggs , which the show has used before .
Brooker has also raised the idea of doing a sequel to the episode in " a completely different form " , such as a graphic novel or " an experience " .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The first series has been praised as being creative and shocking with twists - in - the - tale reminiscent of The Twilight Zone .
Michael Hogan of The Daily Telegraph described the first episode , " The National Anthem " , as " a shocking but ballsy , blackly comic study of the modern media " .
He went on to say that " This was a dementedly brilliant idea .
The satire was so audacious , it left me open - mouthed and squealing .
Rather like that poor pig .
" The series was taken up across much of the world , including Australia , Israel , Sweden , Spain , Poland , Hungary and China .
The series has become popular and been well received in China , becoming one of the most discussed series in early 2012 .
User ratings on Douban reached 9.3 , higher than most popular American dramas .
Many viewers and critics praised the depth of the series .
A reporter from The Beijing News thought the programme was " an apocalypse of modern world " , " desperate but profound " .
Another article from the same newspaper thought each story criticised television from different aspects .
Xu Wen at The Epoch Times thought the stories reveal modernity 's moral turpitude .
In its second series , Black Mirror continued to receive praise .
In his review of the episode " Be Right Back " , Sameer Rahim of The Telegraph wrote , " The show touched on important ideas – the false way we sometimes present ourselves online , and our growing addiction to virtual lives – but it was also a touching exploration of grief .
To my mind it 's the best thing Brooker has done . "
Jane Simon of The Daily Mirror newspaper website , said that the second episode of the second series , " White Bear " , lacked the " instant emotional tug " of the series opener , " Be Right Back " .
She went on to say that , a third of the way through the second episode , she had lost hope of it concluding well , " the acting was unbelievable , the script was riddled with horror - film cliches , the violence was a bit over the top " , but that by the end , " I turned out to be absolutely dead wrong on every single count . "
She ended the piece with : " It 's another work of dark and twisted genius from Mr Brooker .
" The second series is popular in China .
Wen Bai at Information Times thought the second series was still " cannily made " , and " near perfection " .
In December 2014 , Stephen King noted his admiration of the series .
The show 's Christmas special that year , " White Christmas " received critical acclaim .
Ben Beaumont - Thomas of The Guardian praised the comic satire of the episode and noted that " sentimentality is offset with wicked wit , and Brooker 's brio and imagination paper over any gaps in logic .
"
The Daily Telegraph reviewer Mark Monahan gave the episode 4/5 stars , noting that the drama was " thrilling stuff : escapist entertainment with a very real - world sting in its tail " .
Monahan equated the episode with the stronger of the previous Black Mirror episodes , stating that " it exaggerated present - day technology and obsessions to subtle but infernal effect , a nightmare - before - Christmas reminder that to revere our digital gizmos is to become their pathetic slave . "
The third and fourth series received positive reviews from critics , earning ratings of 82 and 74 out of 100 on Metacritic , respectively .
Journalists have reported that some of the concepts in Black Mirror have come true , in fashion , within the real world , and have called the show a Magic 8-Ball for the future .
The first episode , " The National Anthem " , revolves around the British Prime Minister being blackmailed into having sex with a pig ; in September 2015 , four years after the episode aired , allegations were published that David Cameron , who at the time was British Prime Minister had placed a " private part " into the mouth of a dead pig as part of a university initiation rite .
Brooker has called the event a " coincidence , albeit a quite bizarre one " , and was quite perturbed when he first heard the allegations : " I did genuinely for a moment wonder if reality was a simulation , whether it exists only to trick me " , he said in an interview .
Several news reports compared Donald Trump 's 2016 presidential campaign to " The Waldo Moment " , a 2013 episode in the second series ; later , in September 2016 , Brooker also compared the Trump campaign to the episode and predicted Trump would win the 2016 election .
The third series episode " Nosedive " presented a social rating - based system that several found mirrored by China 's proposed Social Credit System .
Brooker has been surprised to see how some of these events had come to pass .
" It was quite trippy , though .
I 'm kind of getting used to it , because it seems like it 's quite often that there are things that are in the stories that come true .
" Ten days after the release of series four episode " Crocodile " - which included a self - driving pizza delivery truck as a major plot device - Toyota and Pizza Hut announced the e - Palette , a driverless delivery vehicle , at the 2018 Consumer Electronic Show .
The conceptual vehicle drew numerous comparisons with its fictional counterpart , and the official Twitter account for Black Mirror commented on the announcement saying , " We know how this goes . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
In November 2012 , Black Mirror won Best TV Movie / Miniseries at the International Emmy Awards .
Bryce Dallas Howard received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for her performance in the episode " Nosedive " .
At the 69th Primetime Emmy Awards , Black Mirror received three nominations with two wins , including Outstanding Television Movie for " San Junipero " .
" USS Callister " received three Emmy Awards and four Emmy nominations in 2018 .
LITERATURE
Section::::Literature .
In June 2018 , Brooker announced that he , along with Annabel Jones and Jason Arnopp , have written an oral history companion to the series titled Inside Black Mirror .
The book features sections on each of the 19 episodes in the first four series , containing conversational interviews from cast and crew and images from the episodes and behind the scenes .
The book was released in the UK on 1 November 2018 and in the US on 20 November 2018 from Penguin Random House .
In June 2017 , Brooker announced a series of novels based on Black Mirror that will offer " new , original , darkly satirical stories that tap into our collective unease about the modern world " .
Brooker will edit three volumes of novellas that will feature anthology short stories by different authors .
The first instalment was scheduled to include stories written by Cory Doctorow , Claire North and Sylvain Neuvel .
Initially scheduled for release in 2018 and 2019 , the project was postponed indefinitely as Brooker and Jones could not dedicate enough time to it .
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Black Mirror press release from Channel 4 * Black Mirror at Netflix