GUN LAWS IN IDAHO Gun laws in Idaho regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Idaho in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes }
On Friday , March 25th , 2016 Governor Butch Otter signed into law SB1389 making it legal for Idahoans 21 years of age and older to carry a concealed gun without a permit within cities ; permitless carry outside city limits was already legal .
Idaho is a " shall issue " state for concealed carry .
The local county sheriff shall issue a concealed weapons license to a qualified applicant within 90 days .
Applicants may be required to demonstrate familiarity with a firearm , generally by having taken an approved training course or by having received training in the military .
A permit is valid for five years ; permits issued before July 1 , 2006 are valid for four years .
Idaho recognizes valid concealed carry permits from all states .
A concealed weapon may not be carried at a school ( primary or secondary ) or at a school sponsored activity , in a courthouse , in a prison or detention facility , at a psychiatric hospital , or in certain other governmentally designated locations .
It is unlawful to carry a concealed weapon while intoxicated .
On July 1 , 2013 , Idaho legislation came into effect which created an " Enhanced Concealed Weapons License " designed to meet the criterion required by several other states to enter into agreements of reciprocal recognition of Concealed Carry Permits .
Among the requirements listed in Idaho statute 18 - 3302 , an applicant must :
* either be a resident of the state of Idaho for six months or hold a license in their state of residency
* complete an eight - hour training course , which shall consist of :
* instruction on Idaho firearms law conducted by a law enforcement officer or state bar
certified lawyer
* instruction on the basic concepts of the safe and responsible use of handguns * instruction on self - defense principles * live - fire training including the firing of a minimum of 98 rounds .
As of July 1 , 2014 , persons with an Idaho " Enhanced Concealed Weapons Licence " ( hereafter " Idaho Enhanced Permit " ) or qualified retired law enforcement officer are allowed to carry concealed on a public college or university campus .
However , this does not apply to student dormitories or residence halls , nor does it apply to a public entertainment or sporting facility that has a seating capacity of 1,000 + persons .
Open carry is legal in Idaho .
A concealed weapons license is not required for open carry , nor for long guns ( concealed or not ) .
The firearm being openly carried must be clearly visible .
A firearm can also be transported in a vehicle , as long as it is in plain view , or is disassembled or unloaded .
A concealed weapons license is not required when you are outside the confines of a city , or when in a motor vehicle while engaged in other lawful outdoor activities .
As of July 1 , 2016 , a concealed weapons license is not required for Idaho residents 21 and older within city limits ; nonresidents still require a permit .
Idaho has state preemption of firearms laws , local units of government can not regulate the ownership , possession , use , transportation , or carry of firearms , firearm components or ammunition .
The state constitution states that " No law shall impose licensure , registration or special taxation on the ownership or possession of firearms or ammunition .
Nor shall any law permit the confiscation of firearms , except those actually used in the commission of a felony . "
The possession of automatic firearms is permitted , as long such possession is in compliance with all federal regulations .
REFERENCES