GUN LAWS IN OREGON Gun laws in Oregon regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Oregon in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes * A parent or guardian , or another person with the consent of the parent or guardian , may transfer a firearm other than a handgun to a minor .
( ORS 166.470(3)(a ) )
* The temporary transfer of any firearm to a minor for hunting , target practice , or any other lawful purpose .
( ORS 166.470(3)(b ) )
Minors allowed to possess firearms ?
Yes , with exceptions Yes , with exceptions ORS 166.250 Minors may : * ... possess a firearm other than a handgun if the firearm was transferred to the minor by the minor 's parent or guardian or by another person with the consent of the minor 's parent .
ORS 166.250(2)(a)(A )
* ... not possess a firearm if they are under 18 years of age , and while a minor , committed the equivalent of an adult felony or a misdemeanor involving violence , within four years of being charged with possession .
ORS 166.250(1)(c )
* ... may also possess any firearm temporarily for hunting , target practice , or any other lawful purpose .
ORS 166.250(2)(a)(B )
( and ORS 166.470(3)(b )
; see above ) Assault weapon law ?
No
No
No Oregon state laws define or regulate assault weapons .
In 2011 , the Oregon Court of Appeals ruled that public universities no longer have the authority to prohibit firearms on their grounds , however may still prohibit them inside buildings .
This effectively legalized campus carry on grounds .
However , Oregon law allows a city or county to regulate open carry of loaded firearms in public places , but holders of concealed carry permits are exempt .
( ORS 166.173 )
The cities of Portland , Beaverton , Tigard , Oregon City , Salem , and Independence , as well as Multnomah County , have statutes which do not allow open carry of loaded firearms ( unless one has a concealed carry permit ) .
} CONCEALED AND OPEN CARRY Section::::Concealed and open carry .
Oregon is a shall - issue concealed - carry state .
and is notable for having very few restrictions on where a concealed firearm may be carried .
Oregon also has statewide preemption for its concealed - carry laws — with limited exceptions , counties and cities can not place limits on the ability of people to carry concealed weapons beyond those provided by state law .
There is one possible exception to the " shall issue " state .
The concealed - carry license is issued by each county 's sheriff , and is valid statewide .
The sheriff is given personal discretion if that sheriff " has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant has been or is reasonably likely to be a danger to self or others .
" There is no pure definition of what that reason must be .
For instance it might be a statement from another law enforcement officer about an individual , and that statement might come from personal acquaintance .
The burden , and perhaps the right to recover damages would then be on the applicant .
There is no reciprocity with other states ' concealed handgun licenses .
Individuals wanting to carry a concealed handgun in Oregon will need an Oregon Concealed Handgun License .
Oregon is also an open - carry state , but cities and counties are free to limit public possession of loaded firearms by individuals who do not have an Oregon Concealed Handgun License .
The cities of Portland , Beaverton , Tigard , Oregon City , Salem , and Independence , as well as Multnomah County have banned loaded firearms in all public places for those without a license .
OTHER LAWS
Section::::Other laws .
In Oregon , the right to bear arms is protected by Article 1 , Section 27 of the Oregon Constitution .
In Oregon , firearm owners can be held liable in civil court if a firearms injury is caused by negligence , and can be held responsible for damages in a wrongful death claim if the firearm is used to kill someone .
If a person appears to be a risk to themselves or to others , a police officer or the person 's family or household member may petition the court for a one - year extreme risk protection order that would prohibit the person from possessing a deadly weapon .
If a judge finds clear and convincing evidence that the person is in imminent danger of hurting themselves or another person , the respondent would have 24 hours to surrender all deadly weapons .
It is illegal for someone to possess a firearm if they are under 18 years of age , were convicted of a felony , were convicted by a juvenile court of a crime which , if committed by an adult , would constitute a felony or a violent misdemeanor , were found to be mentally ill and were committed by the Department of Human Services , or are subject to an order from the Department of Human Services prohibiting them from possessing a firearm for mental health reasons .
Unlawful possession of a firearm is a Class A misdemeanor .
HUNTING
Section::::Hunting . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes REFERENCES