GUN LAWS IN SOUTH CAROLINA Gun laws in South Carolina regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of South Carolina in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes } South Carolina is a " shall issue " concealed carry permit state .
No permit is required to purchase rifles , shotguns , or handguns .
South Carolina also has " Castle Doctrine " legal protection of the use of deadly force against intruders into one 's home , business , or car .
It is unlawful to carry a firearm onto private or public school property or into any publicly owned building except interstate rest areas without express permission .
Open carry of a handgun is not allowed ( long guns are allowed ) , but no permit is required to carry a loaded handgun in the console or glove compartment of a car . , states with which South Carolina has reciprocity are : Alaska , Arizona , Arkansas , Florida , Georgia , Idaho ( enhanced permit only ) , Kansas , Kentucky , Louisiana , Michigan , Missouri , New Mexico , North Carolina , North Dakota , Ohio , Oklahoma , South Dakota ( enhanced permit only ) , Texas , Tennessee , Virginia , West Virginia , and Wyoming .
South Carolina only recognizes resident permits from the states with which it has reciprocity ; non - resident permits from those states will not be honored .
South Carolina does issue a CCW permit to a non - resident from a non - reciprocal state only if the non - resident owns real property in South Carolina as per Title 23 Chapter 31 Article 4 Section 23 - 31 - 210 South Carolina law also now supports a " stand your ground " philosophy under the " Protection of Persons and Property Act " SECTION 16 - 11 - 440(C ) with the following language .
The act was apparently ruled non - retroactive in State v. Dickey .
A person who is not engaged in an unlawful activity and who is attacked in another place where he has a right to be , including , but not limited to , his place of business , has no duty to retreat and has the right to stand his ground and meet force with force , including deadly force , if he reasonably believes it is necessary to prevent death or great bodily injury to himself or another person or to prevent the commission of a violent crime as defined in Section 16–1–60 .
South Carolina also has the " alter - ego " clause with respect to the defense of others , under which a person who uses deadly force to defend a friend , relative or bystander will be allowed the benefit of the plea of self - defense if that plea would have been available to the person requiring assistance if they had been the one who used deadly force .
In other words , the person intervening is deemed to " stand in the shoes " of the person on whose behalf he is intervening .
If that individual " had the right to defend himself , then the intervening party is also protected by that right .
To claim self - defense , a person has to be in a place they have a legal right to be , not be involved in any illegal activity , must not have started the confrontation , and must be in imminent danger of death or serious bodily harm .
REFERENCES