GUN LAWS IN MISSOURI Gun laws in Missouri regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Missouri in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes } CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Concealed carry .
Missouri Statute 571.070 ( 8/28/2007 ) says that it is unlawful for a felon or adjudged incompetent Person to have possession of any firearm ( including concealable firearms ) .
Violation of this law is a class D felony .
This law was the subject of a challenge , in which a nonviolent felon successfully argued that the law is unconstitutional as applied to him .
The law failed muster against the required strict scrutiny test .
However , the law was found to be constitutional by the Supreme Court of Missouri .
Missouri law exempts the possession of antique firearms , as defined in 18 U.S.C. Section 921 , from the provision that specifies a person commits the crime of unlawful possession of a firearm if he or she is a convicted felon possessing a firearm .
Missouri Statute 571.121 ( 8/28/2007 ) says that : ( a ) You have to carry your permit with you when you carry the concealed weapon , and if you do n't have it with you , it is not a crime , but you can be fined up to $ 35 ; and that ( b ) County sheriffs issue a state CCW I.D. that reflects that you can carry concealed .
In September 2014 , Missouri lawmakers passed SB 656 allowing specially trained school employees to carry concealed guns on campuses .
It also allows anyone with a concealed weapons permit to carry guns openly in cities or towns with bans against the open carrying of firearms .
The age to obtain a concealed weapons permit was also dropped from 21 to 19
[ See 2014 Senate Bill 656 ] .
Missouri became the 10th state to pass legislation allowing armed school employees since the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown , Connecticut , in 2012 .
The bill was initially vetoed by Gov. Nixon , but the Missouri legislature overrode the veto during the September veto session .
In September 2016 , another Senate bill coincidentally numbered SB 656 was passed allowing permitless concealed carry by anyone 19 years of age or older who may lawfully own a gun .
This bill was also vetoed by Governor Nixon , on June 27 , 2016 .
After the Missouri legislature reconvened for the veto - override session on September 14 , 2016 , the Senate voted to override the veto with a 24 – 6 vote ( 23 required ) and the House followed through shortly thereafter with a 112 – 41 vote ( 109 required ) .
The permitless carry provision of the bill went into effect on January 1 , 2017 .
A concealed carry permit is required to carry in the state capitol , but one may not carry in the House and Senate chamber floor , gallery , and committee meeting rooms .
OPEN CARRY
Section::::Open carry .
Missouri allows open carry without a permit , so long as the firearm is not displayed in an angry or threatening manner .
Some localities prohibit open carry ; however , concealed carry license holders are exempted from this restriction .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Chapter 571 - Weapons Offenses of Missouri Revised Statutes