GUN LAWS IN MONTANA Gun laws in Montana regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Montana in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes Concealed carry without a permit is generally allowed outside city , town , or logging camp limits .
} MT GUN LAWS Section::::MT Gun Laws .
Montana has some of the most permissive gun laws in the United States .
It is a " shall issue " state for concealed carry .
The county sheriff shall issue a concealed weapons permit to a qualified applicant within 60 days .
Concealed carry is not allowed in government buildings , financial institutions , or any place where alcoholic beverages are served .
Carrying a concealed weapon while intoxicated is prohibited .
No weapons , concealed or otherwise , are allowed in school buildings .
Montana recognizes concealed carry permits issued by most but not all other states .
Concealed carry without a permit is generally allowed outside city , town , or logging camp limits .
Under Montana law a permit is necessary only when the weapon is " wholly or partially covered by the clothing or wearing apparel " , therefore it is legal to carry and/or keep a firearm inside a vehicle without a permit ( as long as it is not concealed on the person ) .
If you do not have a CWP it could be considered a violation of the law for you to conceal a gun in a purse or backpack , since the law defines a concealed weapon as one that is " wholly or partially covered by the clothing or wearing apparel of the person carrying or bearing the weapon .
As of 2017 , the concealed weapons law applies only to firearms , excluding items such as knives , slingshots , billies , etc .
from the permit requirement .
Open carry is generally allowed without a permit .
Montana has state preemption of most firearms laws .
Local units of government may not prohibit , register , tax , license , or regulate the purchase , sale or other transfer , ownership , possession , transportation , use , or unconcealed carrying of any weapon .
However , local governments may restrict the firing of guns , or the carrying of firearms at public assemblies or in public buildings or parks .
Montana has a number of restrictions on lawsuits against firearms manufacturers , dealers , or trade associations .
Such lawsuits may be filed by the state , but not by local governments .
Montana House Bill 246 , the Montana Firearms Freedom Act , was signed into law by Governor Brian Schweitzer on April 15 , 2009 , and became effective October 1 , 2009 .
This legislation declares that certain firearms and firearms accessories manufactured , sold , and kept within the state of Montana are exempt from federal firearms laws , since they can not be regulated as interstate commerce .
REFERENCES