AMERICAN HORROR STORY :
MURDER HOUSE American Horror Story :
Murder House ( originally titled as American Horror Story ) is the first season of the FX television series American Horror Story .
It aired between October 5 , and December 21 , 2011 .
The season was produced by 20th Century Fox Television , and the executive producers were Dante Di Loreto and series creators Brad Falchuk and Ryan Murphy .
It centers on the Harmon family : , and their daughter , who move from Boston to Los Angeles after Vivien has a miscarriage and Ben has an affair .
They move into a restored mansion , unaware that the house is haunted by the ghosts of its former residents and their victims .
The first season of American Horror Story received generally positive reviews from critics .
The series drew consistently high ratings for the FX network , ending its first season as the biggest new cable series of the year .
The season was nominated for various industry awards , including the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama , and received a total of seventeen Emmy Award nominations .
In addition , Lange won the Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress , the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series , and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The first season follows the Harmon family : Ben ( Dylan McDermott ) , Vivien ( Connie Britton ) and Violet ( Taissa Farmiga ) , who move from Boston to Los Angeles to start a new life in a Victorian mansion , after Vivien has a miscarriage and Ben has an affair with Hayden McClaine ( Kate Mara ) , one of his students .
On arrival , they learn from Marcy ( Christine Estabrook ) , the real estate agent , that the previous owners of their new mansion , a couple named Chad and Patrick ( Zachary Quinto and Teddy Sears ) , died in an apparent murder / suicide .
Their neighbor , Constance Langdon , ( Jessica Lange ) and her daughter Addie ( Jamie Brewer ) become frequent , and mostly unwelcome , guests .
Addie seems to have a connection with the house 's mysterious past .
Larry Harvey ( Denis O'Hare ) , a former resident of the house who has suffered from terrible burns , also begins inserting himself into the Harmons ' lives , giving Ben a cryptic warning about the house .
The house also " comes with " Moira O'Hara ( Frances Conroy and Alexandra Breckenridge ) , a housekeeper who appears young and seductive to men , but old and matronly to women .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Connie Britton as Vivien Harmon * Dylan McDermott as Dr. Ben Harmon
* Evan Peters as Tate Langdon * Taissa Farmiga as Violet Harmon * Denis O'Hare as Larry Harvey * Jessica Lange as Constance Langdon RECURRING * Frances Conroy as Moira O'Hara * Alexandra Breckenridge as Young Moira O'Hara
* Lily Rabe as Nora Montgomery * Jamie Brewer as Adelaide " Addie " Langdon * Christine Estabrook as Marcy * Morris Chestnut as Luke * Matt Ross as Dr. Charles Montgomery
* Bodhi Schulz as Troy
* Kai Schulz as Bryan
* Michael Graziadei as Travis Wanderley * Celia Finkelstein as Nurse Gladys * Eve Gordon as Dr. Hall * Rosa Salazar as Nurse Maria * Zachary Quinto as Chad Warwick * Teddy Sears as Patrick * Azura Skye as Fiona
* Kyle Davis as Dallas
* Adina Porter as Sally Freeman * Sarah Paulson as Billie Dean Howard
* Shelby Young as Leah * Rebecca Wisocky as Lorraine Harvey * Sam Kinsey as Beauregard " Beau " Langdon * David Anthony Higgins as Stan * Mena Suvari as Elizabeth Short * Malaya Rivera Drew as Detective Barrios
* Ben Woolf as Thaddeus Montgomery /
The Infantata * Kate Mara as Hayden McClaine * Eric Close as Hugo Langdon * Brando Eaton as Kyle Greenwell * Ashley Rickards as Chloe Stapleton * Alessandra Torresani as Stephanie Boggs
* Jordan David as Kevin Gedman * Alexander Nimetz as Amir Stanley GUEST STARS
* Eric Stonestreet as Derrick * Charles S. Dutton as Detective Granger EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
PRODUCTION CONCEPTION Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception .
Creators Murphy and Falchuk began working on American Horror Story before their Fox series Glee began production .
Murphy wanted to do the opposite of what he had done previously and thus began his work on the series .
He stated , " I went from Nip / Tuck to Glee , so it made sense that I wanted to do something challenging and dark .
And I always had loved , as Brad had , the horror genre .
So it just was a natural for me .
" Falchuk was intrigued by the idea of putting a different angle on the horror genre , stating that their main goal in creating the series was to scare viewers .
" You want people to be a little bit off balance afterwards , " he said .
The dark tone of the series is modeled after the ABC soap opera Dark Shadows , which Murphy 's grandmother forced him to watch when he was younger to toughen him up .
He also cited Rosemary 's Baby , Do n't Look Now , The Amityville Horror , and Stanley Kubrick 's version of The Shining as influences for the series .
From the beginning , Murphy and Falchuk planned that each season of the series would tell a different story .
After the first - season finale aired , Murphy spoke of his plans to change the cast and location for the second season , while retaining some actors from the first , " The people that are coming back will be playing completely different characters , creatures , monsters , etc .
[ The Harmons ' ] stories are done . "
In February 2011 , FX officially announced that it had ordered a pilot for a possible series from Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk , with both Murphy and Falchuk writing and Murphy directing .
Dante Di Loreto was announced as executive producer .
Production on the series began in April 2011 .
In July 2011 , FX officially announced the project had been given a series order consisting of 13 episodes .
In August 2011 , it was announced that Tim Minear , Jennifer Salt , James Wong and Jessica Sharzer had joined the series as writers .
FUTURE SEASON Section::::Future season .
On October 30 , 2016 , Murphy announced that a future crossover season of the series would continue the Murder House and Coven stories , merging their characters and themes .
He did not state which season it would be , but that he had already reached out to actors from both seasons to reprise their respective roles .
Murphy later confirmed one of the Murder House characters will be moved in the season finale of Coven .
However , on January 5 , 2018 , it was initially announced that the crossover season will be taking place in the ninth season , but on June 14 , 2018 , the crossover was moved from Season 9 to the eighth season , instead .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Casting announcements began in March 2011 , with Connie Britton first to be cast , portraying female lead Vivien Harmon .
Britton stated that she took a risk in taking the role of Vivien .
When Murphy presented the role to her , he said , " This is something we 've never seen you do before .
It will be turning what you 've just been doing on its ear . "
She was intrigued by what he had presented her and ultimately decided to take the part .
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , series co - creator Ryan Murphy stated that he had told Connie Britton , early on , that her character Vivien would die in the first season .
" We 've really had the whole season mapped out from the beginning , " he said .
" In the meetings with the core actors , the three leads being Connie , Dylan [ McDermott ] and Jessica [ Lange ] , as we tried to snare them we were able to say this is where you start , this is the middle , and this is where you end up .
So , yes , I was able to tell Connie really the whole run of the series . "
Denis O'Hare joined the cast in late March 2011 as Larry Harvey .
Jessica Lange joined the cast in April 2011 as Constance , marking her first regular role on television .
Lange was attracted to the role because it did n't require a 22-episode commitment like a series on a broadcast network .
" That was huge for me ! "
she said .
" I was n't about to commit to , you know , six months .
It was cable , rather than network ...
I 've been offered network [ shows ] before , and determined not to do it , just because I ca n't make that kind of time commitment . "
Dylan McDermott was cast as the lead Ben Harmon in late April 2011 .
His character was initially described as " a handsome and masculine but sensitive therapist who loves his family but has hurt his wife . "
McDermott stated that he wanted to do the role to break away from his previous role as Bobby Donnell in the ABC series The Practice .
"
This was exactly why I wanted to do this show – to change it up and do a different kind of character .
People think of me as the guy from The Practice ...
I wanted to turn that [ notion ] on its head
and hopefully I 'm doing that [ with this show ] " , he said .
In May 2011 , Taissa Farmiga and Evan Peters were the last lead actors to be cast , portraying Violet Harmon and Tate Langdon , respectively .
Farmiga said that she loved Violet " immediately " and that " she had spunk to her , she had attitude .
" Murphy has described Tate as the " true monster " of the series , adding , " To Evan 's great credit and the credit of the writers , I think Evan 's done an amazingly difficult job making a monster sympathetic . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
The pilot episode was shot on location in a house in Country Club Park , Los Angeles , California , which serves as the haunted house and crime scene in the series .
Designed and built in 1902 by Alfred Rosenheim , the president of the American Institute of Architects ' Los Angeles chapter , the Tudor or Collegiate Gothic - style single family home was previously used as a convent .
An adjoining chapel was removed from exterior shots using CGI .
The series is filmed on sets that are an exact replica of the house .
Details such as Louis Comfort Tiffany stained glass windows , and hammered bronze light fixtures , were re - created to preserve the look of the house .
The house became available for rent on Airbnb for six months , beginning February 2016 , before being unlisted .
Due to a " very aggressive " production schedule and the series ' pilot shoot having to wait for co - creators Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk 's other show , Glee , to wrap its second season production , it was announced that the show 's first - season finale , the thirteenth episode , would be thirty minutes shorter than planned .
Finally , the thirteenth episode was dropped and they made the twelfth episode 10 minutes longer ( 52 minutes ) .
The finale aired on December 21 , 2011 .
TITLE SEQUENCE
Section::::Title sequence .
The opening title sequence was created by Kyle Cooper and his company Prologue .
He also created the title sequence for the AMC series
The Walking Dead and the 1995 film Se7en .
The theme music was composed by sound designer Cesar Davila - Irizarry and musician Charlie Clouser .
The sequence is set in the Harmons ' basement and includes images of postmortem young children , unborn ( or aborted ) babies in jars , skulls , a Christening dress , a nurse 's uniform , and a figure holding a pair of bloody hedge clippers .
Murphy described the sequence as a mini - mystery and stated , " By the time you see the ninth episode of this season , every image in that title sequence will be explained " .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
American Horror Story : Murder House received generally positive reviews from critics .
The first episode scored 62 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 30 reviews .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 73 % approval rating with an average rating of 6.6/10 based on 39 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " Convoluted yet effective , American Horror Story is strange , gory , and twisted enough to keep viewers hooked . "
Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly awarded the pilot episode a B+ , stating , " AHS is pretty much all scare , all the time : a whole lotta screams , sex , jolts , mashed faces , psychotic behavior , and dead babies . "
Chuck Barney of the San Jose Mercury News said , " Most TV shows , after all , quickly fade from memory .
This one will haunt your dreams .
"
Hank Stuever from The Washington Post said in his review , " Overdoing things is one of Murphy 's trademark flaws , but this show has a captivating style and giddy gross - outs . "
The New York Times Mike Hale called the show " a more classically minded chiller , " taking into mind the success of HBO 's True Blood and AMC 's The Walking Dead .
However , not all reviews were favorable .
Alan Sepinwall of HitFix gave the series a D− , saying , " It is so far over the top that the top is a microscopic speck in its rearview mirror . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
In its first season , American Horror Story was nominated for 65 awards , and won 19 . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Nominated work !
Result
*
The FX network submitted the series to the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences in the miniseries , rather than the drama series , category for its 64th Primetime Emmy Awards .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The pilot episode gained a 1.6 ratings share among adults aged 18–49 and garnered 3.2 million viewers , and totalled 5.2 million between two airings .
These were the best numbers FX had ever received for a series premiere .
Taken together with equally strong numbers for the station 's returning original series – Sons of Anarchy , It 's Always Sunny in Philadelphia and The League – the episode helped make October the most - watched month on FX ever .
The episode was seen by 3.2 million viewers total in 59 countries .
Ratings increased as the season progressed , with the fourth episode receiving a 1.7 ratings share among adults 18–49 , a tenth of a point higher than the pilot episode .
The seventh episode had a viewership of 3.06 million , receiving a 1.8 ratings share in the 18–49 demographic ; a series high .
The season finale was watched by 3.22 million viewers and received a 1.7 ratings share in the 18–49 demographic .
The first season tied with the TNT series Falling Skies as the biggest new cable series of the year among adults 18–49 .
American Horror Story
November 2011 international premiere across Europe and Latin America , on Fox International Channels , drew rankings of 1st or 2nd among all Pay - TV in most metered markets for its time slot .
In the UK , it premiered on non - terrestrial channel FX , with 128,200 viewers .
The second episode saw an increase of 27 % , receiving an overall viewership of 158,700 .
HOME
MEDIA * 12 Episodes * Audio Commentary of the Pilot episode by Ryan Murphy * Behind the Fright : The Making of American Horror Story * The Murder House presented by Eternal Darkness Tours of Hollywood
* On the Set of American Horror Story * Overture to Horror : Creating the Title Sequence
* Out of the Shadows : Meet the House Ghosts REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* List of American Horror Story episodes at TV.com