GUN LAWS IN NEVADA
Gun laws in Nevada regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Nevada in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes * Nevada Attorney General Adam Laxalt opined that the law is unenforceable . }
CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Concealed carry .
Nevada is a " shall issue " state for concealed carry .
The county sheriff shall issue a concealed firearms permit to applicants who qualify under state and federal law , who submit an application in accordance with the provisions of section NRS 202.3657 .
To apply for a Concealed Firearm Permit , a person must be 21 ( 18 for military ) , complete an approved course in firearm safety and demonstrate competence ( qualify ) with any handgun .
Previously , a single permit applied to only those firearms the applicant qualified with .
Under revised legislation , a single permit is valid for all handguns the person owns or may thereafter own .
Holders of previous permit iterations are grandfathered per current law and are no longer constrained to their qualified firearms , nor qualified firearm action .
Note :
The change in the law regarding competence with semi - automatic handguns is effective July 1 , 2011 through Nevada Assembly Bill AB 282 .
This change is retroactive meaning that permits issued prior to July 1 , 2011 , that have specific semiautomatic firearms listed is the equivalent to having all semiautomatic firearms authorized .
States that honor a Nevada permit : Alaska , Arizona , Iowa , Idaho , Indiana , Kansas * , Kentucky , Louisiana , Michigan * , Minnesota , Missouri , Montana , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Tennessee , Texas , Utah
( * Residential permits only ) . , other state permits that Nevada honors : Alaska , Arizona , Arkansas , Florida , Idaho Enhanced Permit , Illinois , Kansas , Kentucky , Louisiana , Massachusetts , Michigan , Minnesota , Mississippi Enhanced Permit , Montana , Nebraska , New Mexico , North Carolina , North Dakota ( both types of permits ) , Ohio , Oklahoma , South Carolina , South Dakota Enhanced Permit , Tennessee , Texas , Utah , Virginia , West Virginia , Wisconsin , Wyoming .
The law allows holders of valid permits from these states to carry a concealed weapon while in the State of Nevada .
The valid permit along with current photo I.D. must be in the possession of the person at all times while carrying a concealed firearm .
On February 28 , 2013 , the Nevada Sheriffs ' and Chiefs ' association voted unanimously to end the recognition of Arizona concealed weapon permits .
Effective June 23 , 2015 Nevada once again recognizes Arizona concealed weapon permits .
The concealed firearm permit cost differs depending on which county one applies in .
The application must be turned in to the county in which the applicant resides .
The permit is valid for five years .
OPEN CARRY
Section::::Open carry .
Nevada is a traditional open carry state with complete state preemption of firearms laws .
Effective June 2 , 2016 SB 175 and SB 240
( duplicate provisions ) is legislation that prohibits counties , cities , and towns from enacting ordinances more restrictive than state law .
The legislature reserves for itself the right to legislate all areas of firearm law except unsafe discharge of firearms .
REGISTRATION OF FIREARMS Section::::Registration of firearms .
Nevada state law does not require the registration of firearms .
Following the passage of SB 175 , handgun registration ( or registration of any kind ) , is no longer required in Clark County or anywhere in the state of Nevada for handguns or long - arms ( which already did not require registration ) .
Governor Brian Sandoval signed this bill into law on June 2 , 2015 .
OTHER LAWS
Section::::Other laws .
AB 217 , allows residents of non - contiguous states to purchase long guns in Nevada .
It also allows Nevada residents to purchase long guns in non - contiguous states .
This legislation brings Nevada in line with the protections provided by the Firearms Owners Protection Act , which allows for the interstate sale of long guns by federally licensed firearms dealers .
AB 282 ensures that concealed firearm permit holders ' names and addresses remain confidential ; revise Nevada state law to allow carrying of any semi - automatic pistol , as with revolvers , once qualified for a CCW permit with a semi - automatic pistol ; allows carrying of firearms in Nevada state parks ; and statutorily mandates a background investigation ( which is currently being done by all Nevada sheriffs ) for CCW permit renewals for the purpose of reinstating the National Instant Criminal Background Check System ( NICS ) exemption for Nevada , thus ensuring that permit holders do not have to go through a point - of - contact check for every firearm purchased , as long as the CCW permit is valid .
Assembly Bills 217 and 282 went into effect on July 1 , 2011 .
REFERENCES