THE WIZARDING WORLD OF HARRY POTTER ( UNIVERSAL STUDIOS HOLLYWOOD )
The Wizarding World of Harry Potter is a themed area at Universal Studios Hollywood theme park near Los Angeles , California .
The area is themed to the Harry Potter media franchise , adapting elements from the film series and novels by J.K. Rowling .
The attraction — the second Harry Potter - themed area to exist at a Universal resort — was designed by Universal Creative from an exclusive license with Warner Bros. Entertainment .
After the successful debut of a similarly - themed area at Universal Orlando Resort , Universal Parks & Resorts announced the construction of a second Wizarding World of Harry Potter on December 6 , 2011 .
The Wizarding World of Harry Potter officially began operation on April 7 , 2016 .
BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS
UNIVERSAL HARRY POTTER ATTRACTIONS Section::::Background .
Section::::Previous Universal Harry Potter attractions .
A Harry Potter themed attraction at a Universal Studios park or a Disney park was rumored in 2003 .
However , the rights to the Harry Potter franchise had been acquired by Warner Bros. , which denied all rumors .
In January 2007 , About.com reported a rumor from a " highly credible source " that the Islands of Adventure park 's Lost Continent area at Universal Orlando Resort was going to be re - themed " to the stories and characters of one of the most popular children 's franchises " .
Other sources followed up in the next few days with unofficial confirmation that the new area would involve Harry Potter .
On May 31 , 2007 , Universal , in partnership with Warner Bros. , officially announced that the Wizarding World of Harry Potter would be added to Islands of Adventure .
After a two - and - a - half year construction period , the area officially opened to the public on June 18 , 2010 .
This resulted in attendance at the park jumping approximately 50 % in its first year of operation .
On July 8 , 2014 , Universal opened an expansion to the Wizarding World at Universal Studios Florida , Diagon Alley , which was placed in the former Amity Island area of the park .
This expansion also included the new ride experience : The Hogwarts Express , in which a train travels between the two Universal Florida Parks , from the Hogsmeade area to Kings Cross Station ( right outside of the entrance to Diagon Alley ) .
A week later , on July 15 , 2014 , Universal opened The Wizarding World at Universal Studios Japan .
RUMORS AND OFFICIAL ANNOUNCEMENT Section::::Rumors and official announcement .
On December 1 , 2011 , the Wall Street Journal reported a rumor from " people familiar with the matter " that Universal Studios Hollywood was going to add their version of Islands of Adventure 's Wizarding World of Harry Potter .
The report also detailed the possibility that Universal Parks & Resorts would open additional Harry Potter - themed areas at Universal Studios Singapore and Universal Studios Japan as well as a location in Spain .
This report was widely relayed by other media sources .
On December 6 , 2011 , Universal Studios Hollywood announced The Wizarding World of Harry Potter .
Universal Parks & Resorts executives Tom Williams and Ron Meyer were accompanied by Warner Bros. executives , the Governor of California Jerry Brown as well as James and Oliver Phelps who played the Weasley twins in the films .
The announcement came with very few details of what would be built , however , it did confirm that the Gibson Amphitheatre would be demolished and a re - creation of Hogwarts and Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey would be constructed .
The last show at the Gibson Amphitheatre was held on September 6 , 2013 prior to its closure and subsequent demolition .
On April 23 , 2013 , NBCUniversal made the final step by receiving a unanimous vote in approval of the 25-year expansion by the county Board of Supervisors .
This $ 1.6 billion expansion is expected to greatly boost tourism and the local entertainment industry .
It will also create 30,000 jobs during the time of construction .
On December 8 , 2015 , it was announced that the park will open on April 7 , 2016 .
The announcement featured actress Evanna Lynch , who played Luna Lovegood in the Harry Potter films .
However , the soft opening was on March 31 , 2016 .
ATTRACTIONS Section::::Attractions .
Similar to the Wizarding World in Japan , this one does not feature the Dragon Challenge coaster from Islands of Adventure , but does include Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey and Flight of the Hippogriff , along with Ollivander 's Wand Shop Show , and the Frog Choir and Triwizard Spirit Rally .
Wands purchased from Ollivander 's Wand Shop can be used to do " magic " , using sensors that track down the wands .
While performing different " spells " from the Harry Potter universe , fans can produce different reactions , such as unlocking a cabinet , opening a box of candy ( Chocolate Frogs ) , and forcing a ruler to lower itself .
DINING AND SHOPPING
* The Three Broomsticks and Hog 's Head Pub
* Ollivander 's Wand Shop * Owl Post
* Wiseacre 's Wizarding Equipment *
Gladrags Wizardwear *
Dervish and Banges
* Filch 's Emporium of Confiscated Goods
* Honeydukes * Zonko 's SEE ALSO
* The Wizarding World of Harry Potter ( Universal Orlando Resort )
*
The Wizarding World of Harry Potter ( Universal Studios Japan ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS