LORIEN LEGACIES Lorien Legacies is a series of young adult science fiction books , written by James Frey , Jobie Hughes , and formerly , Greg Boose , under the collective pseudonym Pittacus Lore .
LORIEN LEGACIES NOVEL SERIES
I AM NUMBER FOUR Section::::Lorien Legacies novel series .
Section::::I Am Number Four .
I Am Number Four is the first book in the Lorien Legacies series .
It introduces readers to the Loric , an almost extinct race of extraterrestrials represented by nine teenagers and their corresponding guardians living on Earth .
Another alien race , the Mogadorians , wiped out the majority of the Loric , except those who escaped to Earth .
Now the Mogadorians have come to finish the job .
The book is told from the perspective of Number Four , also known as John Smith .
John is the next target for the Mogadorians , who must kill the Loric in the order of their numbers .
He and his guardian Henri move from place to place , changing their identities to keep hidden .
Numbers 1 , 2 , and 3 have already died , proven by the circular brands that appear on the ankles of the Loric when one of their kind is killed .
John begins inheriting Legacies , the ancestral right of some Loric and must learn to keep his powers hidden from his human friends .
John befriends a young man named Sam Goode , whose father helped the Loriens when they first arrived has since then mysteriously disappeared .
John slowly falls in love with Sarah Hart , a beautiful girl who takes photos and posts them on her website , " Strangers In Paradise " .
John goes home to find the website and sees a few pictures of him disappear with a deleted status .
John and Sarah soon begin dating and forming a very close bond .
Later on , John and Sarah return to the high school to find out that the Mogs have found them .
John is trying to get Sarah and himself out of harm 's way when Number Six appears out of nowhere and kills two Mogs in a matter of seconds which John thanks her for .
Together they work their way through the school , killing the Mog commander sent after John .
However , Henri is lost in the process , telling John of a secret letter he has hidden for years .
The school is half destroyed , reduced to a massive pile of rubble and the football field has a massive crater in the center .
Because of social media and police officers , John , Six , and Sam are possible hostages .
The three escape in a truck , leaving Sarah behind .
THE POWER OF SIX Section::::The Power Of Six .
The story is told by two members of the Garde : Number Four ( John Smith ) , who is on the run with Sam , Number Six , and Bernie Kosar ( the pet of John Smith ) , and Number Seven ( Marina ) , who is hiding at a convent in Spain .
While John , Six and Sam try to stay ahead of the Mogadorians while searching for the other surviving Loric , Marina searches for news of John after his heroic battle at the school that came at the end of I Am Number Four .
The plot begins by showing what life is like for Marina in the convent .
Marina starts to suspect the Mogadorians have discovered her but believes the charm is what keeps them from attacking her .
She keeps seeing the same Mogadorian watching her in various circumstances .
A new 7-year - old girl named Ella comes to the orphanage and Marina befriends her .
Meanwhile , she tries to convince her Cepan ( Adelina ) to open her Loric Chest and take responsibility for her role as Cepan , but to no avail .
Ella finds the hidden Chest , and she and Marina retrieve it after a scuffle with four women from the convent .
In this fight , Ella breaks her arm , and Marina discovers her healing legacy .
Later , Marina drugs Adelina and opens her Chest .
Elsewhere , John , Six , BK ( Bernie Kosar ) , and Sam continue evading the police .
After a particularly bad chase one night , John finally decides to open his Chest , which he has kept with him all his life and contains special Loric items .
He and the others examine its contents but they are unfamiliar with almost all of the Chest 's objects .
However , by opening the chest , they notify the Mogadorians of their location and prompt an attack on the house , which they narrowly escape .
Later , John reads Henri 's letter and finds out the Mogadorians have captured Sam 's father .
Sam remembers his father telling him of a secret Loric base in his backyard , and they set off to find it .
Upon finding it , they are interrupted by Mogadorians , and the party splits up :
Six and BK stay and fight , while John and Sam find Sarah .
When they meet , the FBI appear and arrest John , putting him and Sam in a prison near Washington DC .
They suspect Sarah had notified the FBI while they met .
Meanwhile , Marina activates a communication device in her Chest , which alerts both the Mogadorians and the members of the Garde of her location .
As Mogadorians catch up to John and Sam in prison , Six helps them escape , though she is very angry they left her during the battle in Paradise .
After escaping , she shows them on the internet that someone has burned the same symbols on their ankles onto a mountain in Spain in giant letters and they decide on a plan : Six will go to Spain to help the newly discovered Marina ( Number seven ) , and Sam , BK , and John will go to the Mogadorian 's base in a hollowed - out mountain near West Virginia to retrieve John 's chest and possibly Six 's .
Meanwhile , the Mogadorians catch up with Marina and Adelina as they try to escape the convent .
Adelina is murdered while trying to help Marina .
Marina , after being saved by the Mogadorian she had noticed watching her , learns that he is not a Mogadorian , but a Cêpan , named Crayton , protecting Ella .
He explains that Ella is the tenth member of the Garde , who escaped on a second ship , and has disguised herself through her legacy of age - shifting .
Together , they all escape to a lake where Crayton has Loric Chimæra waiting to help them .
As they battle the Mogadorians at the lake , Six arrives at the scene and helps them win the battle .
Afterwards , Six makes plans with the others to find the other Garde and the rest of the Chimæras .
However , Crayton warns that their successes in battle will alert the Mogadorian ruler , Setrákus Ra , to join the fight .
Elsewhere , Sam and John use a stone from John 's chest to transfer Six 's invisibility to them and sneak into the Mogadorian mountain base .
They grab both John 's Chest and another , which turns out to be that of Nine , who is imprisoned in the mountain .
They run out of invisibility , but manage to free Nine and escape the mountain with everyone but Sam , who was caught and had to be left behind .
Setrákus Ra arrives , and as Nine is about to attack him , he hides in the base , unreachable .
Nine , John , and BK head north , with nowhere to go since the address for meeting Six was in Sam 's pocket .
THE RISE OF NINE Section::::The Rise of Nine .
The Rise of Nine , the 3rd book of The Lorien Legacies , was released on August 21 , 2012 .
John and Nine escape from the Mogadorian base and head to Chicago , where Nine 's penthouse is located .
Meanwhile , Six , Seven , Ella , and Crayton go to the Himalayas in India to meet up with Number Eight .
A battle commences between the Garde and the Mogadorians .
Crayton dies and Eight teleports himself and the girls away from the Loric cave .
However , Six ends up separated from the others , landing at a military base in New Mexico .
From there , the military finds her and drugs her .
She discovers that the government is working with the Mogadorians .
A quick battle between Six and Setrakus Ra , the leader of the Mogs , leaves Six in a rock cocoon .
Nine and Four arrive at the penthouse and attempt to contact the other Garde , where they meet up with Number Eight and Setrakus Ra in a dream .
Four proclaims to be Pittacus Lore , angering Nine .
Four insists on returning to Paradise , but eventually the two decide to rush to the aid of the other Garde in New Mexico , after learning of Setrakus Ra 's location .
Seven , Eight , and Ella teleport to New Mexico in the middle of a battle between the Mogs , the military , and Four and Nine .
Upon entering the base , they find Sarah and rush to aid Six in battle .
Setrakus Ra takes the form of Six , tricking the Garde and stabbing Eight .
A battle ensues while Seven heals Eight , making the Garde believe a Loric prophecy foretelling of Eight 's death has been broken .
Four develops a healing legacy in battle , allowing him to heal a burned Sarah and Ella after being shot by a Mogadorian blaster .
Ella develops a new Legacy that gives her the ability to block the Legacies of other Garde .
Setrakus Ra , who has the same Legacy , uses his to block the powers of the other Garde .
Ella , in turn , uses her Legacy to block his ; as a result , the other Garde regain their Legacies .
Setrakus Ra , powerless , retreats , giving the Garde time to retrieve Six and flee to Chicago , after the collapse of Dulce Base in New Mexico .
THE FALL OF FIVE Section::::The Fall of Five .
The Fall of Five , the 4th book of The Lorien Legacies , was released on August 27 , 2013 .
This book is also told in the first person perspective , between Sam Goode , John Smith ( Four ) , and Marina ( Seven ) .
The novel opens with Sam 's imprisonment in New Mexico by the Mogadorians .
Sam is being held incommunicado except for Mogadorian guards and fed a daily diet of stale cheese sandwiches and dirty water .
Through a flashback , we learn that Sam was transported to New Mexico by human co - conspirators of the Mogadorians shortly after the battle in West Virginia .
Before he was moved , he was tortured by the Mogadorian leader Setrákus Ra while suspended via chains from the ceiling .
An acidic black goo crawls down the chains and burns Sam 's wrists , a pain only relieved by being touched by Setrákus Ra 's oddly shaped golden cane .
Sam , unfortunately , does not know much , as he was the only one who had Six 's plan post - West Virginia in a letter that was seized by the Mogs .
After the flashback , the base is attacked by the Garde , as related at the end of the third book .
However , it is not the Garde that discover Sam , but surprisingly his long - missing father .
In a further twist , we discover that Malcolm Goode is accompanied by Adam , a good Mog teenager with Legacies .
Adam is able to cause localized earthquakes , an effect he uses to break the back of Sam 's cell , allowing Malcolm and Sam to escape .
Apparently , Malcolm and Adam , having learned where Sam was being kept , decided to attack at the same time as the Garde .
Adam stays behind to cover their exit .
Sam and Malcolm sneak out during the chaos unnoticed by both the Mogs and the Garde .
John ( Four ) begins to narrate and takes up the story , while the remaining Garde ( Six , Seven , Eight , Nine and Ten ) plus Bernie Kosar ( BK ) and Sarah are all safely at Nine 's penthouse apartment in Chicago .
Initially aimless while healing , John is struggling to determine what next step to take .
Ten
( Ella ) has been having nightmares , similar to the nightmares shared by John and Nine prior to going to New Mexico .
John discusses the dreams with Ella .
During the conversation , John recalls how Ella hurt Setrákus Ra by throwing a glowing piece of metal at him and speculates that it might be a new Legacy developing for her .
He attempts to get her to practice , but she resists , declaring it " wrong . "
She relates the dream of the fight with Setrákus Ra , except in this version he realizes who Ella is and kneels before her , asking if she has read the letter .
She tells John she knows of no letter and the conversation ends .
After a short detour for Sarah and Six to have target practice , it is then discovered via an old scanning program written by Nine 's Cêpan that the Loric symbol for " five " has been burned into crops in Florida .
Five next leaves a message on the Internet , in spite of the fact that the Mogadorians regularly monitor it .
After much discussion and fearful for the safety of the missing member of the Garde , John , Six , Sarah and BKL leave for Arkansas to meet with Five before the Mogadorians arrive .
Marina ( Seven ) takes over narration duties after the away team departs .
After nudging Ella to read the letter her Cêpan left her , she leaves the penthouse with Eight to go sightseeing .
Scolded by Nine on their return , they agree to train with him and thereby sharpen their skills .
At the culmination of this fight , Ella returns having read the letter from her Cêpan .
It reveals that unlike the other Loric , she is not to become one of the Elders .
Instead , her father comes from the family that once held the position of the tenth elder , but had since had it taken away .
Her escape from Lorien was a fluke , a byproduct of her father 's fascination with artifacts .
He loaded her , her Cêpan and his menagerie of Chimæra onto an old , fuel - powered ship and sent it off the planet .
He stayed with her mother , who was a Garde , to defend the planet , and fell with it .
Ella 's initial shock at this revelation makes her feel a fraud , but the other Garde reassure her
and she decides to stay .
John takes over narration as the away team is driving to retrieve Five .
On the way , John and Six resolve their tension over the kiss they shared in book two .
After this , they go on to meet Five , who is waiting to meet them .
On arrival , they discover Five is ignorant of the danger he created with the crop circle and the Internet message .
Five wishes he could meet all of the Garde together and his mind is " officially blown " when he meets Sarah , their human ally .
Just then they are attacked by the Mogadorians , who arrive in a cloaked ship .
Five does not participate in the battle , and appears shell - shocked at what he says is his first time to see Mogadorians .
Five demonstrates his Legacy , Externa , that allows him to take on the properties of things he touches .
Six uses her weather powers to cause the ship to crash , and Sarah , Four and Six mop up the Mogadorians .
Just as they think they have won , a new monster — much larger than the piken — appears , chasing Six .
It is a centipede the size of a tanker truck , covered in a cracked and leathery skin with hundreds of tin arms .
John remembers creatures like this caged in West Virginia .
Five then demonstrates his power of flight , and John climbs on his back above the monster and uses his lumen - powered fireballs to attack the creature .
John falls off of Five and lands in front of the creature .
Just as he is about to be eaten , a red dot appears on the creatures massive single eye
and then a rifle shot blows that orb apart in a grisly fashion .
John kills the creature and turns to discover he has been rescued by Malcolm , with Sam in tow .
With Sam , Sarah , John and Six reunited , and accompanied by Malcolm and Five , they return to the penthouse to meet up with Marina , Eight , Nine and Ella .
Sam takes narration duties just in time to be hugged by Six and overwhelmed by it .
Five continues to be both clueless and churlish , culminating in an evening where each of the Garde tells their stories .
Five says he lived on the islands with his Cêpan and remained hidden until his Cêpan took ill .
Five did n't believe he really was Lorien until he started to develop Legacies .
After his Legacies had come in fully , he fulfilled his Cêpan 's dying wish and went to the US to join with the other Garde .
After this story , Malcolm tells his own , about meeting Pittacus Lore .
Struggling to undo the effects of the Mogadorian torture that left holes in his memory , Malcolm reveals that each chest holds a key to contact Lorien again .
Malcolm also reveals that there are two kinds of Mogadorians — the disposable vat - born , and the more rare trueborn that form the ruling class .
He also revealed Adam — a trueborn son of a Mogadorian general — had One 's memories downloaded into him , which caused him to rebel .
Malcolm also revealed Adam 's abilities were a " gift from the Lorien .
" They theorize that One gave her legacies to Adam .
John declares that they will seek out Adam if he is still alive .
Five expresses suspicion about the humans , given how many stories of human collaborators he has heard and their recent contacts with the Mogadorians , but John talks him down .
Five continues to be churlish and flips to steel to break Nine 's hands in response to Nine 's constant bullying .
Bernie Kosar goes nuts over an antler artifact from a chest , trying to use it to call the other chimera .
A capture the flag game ensues in the newly restored training room where Marina wins the day .
John and Sarah go out on a date to the zoo and discover three Mogadorian spies collecting an envelope , filled with notes unhelpfully written in Mogadorian .
Malcolm whips up a translator to figure out what was said .
Sam attempts to ask Six out but is interrupted by Eight , who claims there is an emergency .
The emergency is that Ella 's bad dreams have gotten worse .
John touches her to try to wake her up and is sucked in , falling into a coma - like state .
Urged on in part by Five 's story of a healing prism in his lost chest , the rest of the group go off to get the chest to help their friends .
While gone , the wheels start to come off the Garde 's security .
First , the translation software determines the encoded notes were none other than Malcolm 's notes on the Garde Legacies .
He begins to wonder if the damage to his memory is so bad that he has been turned into a double agent .
While Sam has his doubts , Malcolm consents to be willingly locked up .
When the long - dead disposable cell phone that connects Malcolm to Adam rings , Sam answers and is warned by Adam that the Mogadorians are coming to raid their safehouse in the penthouse of the John Hancock building .
In Florida , Five , Six , Seven , Eight and Nine arrive and acquire a fan boat to go pick up Five 's chest .
Five flies up to get an aerial view but fails to return with his chest , instead of saying the group should go there together .
Just as Five pulls his chest out of the mud , the group is attacked by a three - headed monstrosity initially mistaken for three alligator heads .
At one point the narrator sees the letter " S " carved in the creatures foot , like a signature .
While the group struggles with the creature , Five retrieves a glove with a retractable blade and a pan flute from his chest .
He plays the flute and the creature subsides .
When asked if he can put the creature out of its misery , Five says gladly , saying he made the creature .
The " S " is an upside down 5 .
Without warning , he strikes Six in the head , holds Nine underwater and keeps Marina back with telekinesis .
He then declares to Seven and Eight that " they should talk . "
He then pins Nine against a tree and tries to stab him with his weapon .
Eight heroically teleports into the path of Five and is stabbed instead of Nine .
Upon Eight 's death , Marina develops a new Legacy that allows her to summon and create ice .
An icicle appears and she uses her telekinesis to stab out Five 's eye , before he flees .
Meanwhile , back at the penthouse , Mogadorians land on the roof and rappel into the penthouse .
Sam notes it is a relatively small force as if they were not expecting much resistance .
They did not expect the comatose Garde to be guarded by their human allies .
Bernie Kosar and Malcolm keep them at bay while Sarah and Sam go to get weapons .
More Mogadorians come in , and Sam baits them into the training room by declaring that the girl they are looking for — Ella — is this way .
He then turns on the newly restored training software to " insanity " and watches as the room deals with the Mogadorians .
Sarah and Sam shoot the stunned Mogadorians and then rejoin Bernie Kosar .
They hear wave two getting ready to come and attack .
Bernie Kosar tries to hold them off , but Sam discovers his dying father and is unwilling to leave him .
THE REVENGE OF SEVEN Section::::The Revenge of Seven .
The book is narrated in the first person , with Number Four ( John ) , Number Six , and Ella as narrators .
Ella wakes up in a strange place .
She sees Mogadorians and tries to escape using the Great Book as a weapon .
She realizes that she is in a spaceship .
Setrákus Ra claims to be her grandfather .
He tries to force her to eat and tells her that he used to be an Elder and that he experimented with altering genetics .
He also tells her about how Lorien was controlling everything , and he rivaled it .
Then , he puts a binding charm over himself and Ella .
The Mogadorians try to force Ella to read the Great Book by blasting an alarm at her whenever she does n't .
Ella rips the book apart .
Setrákus Ra talks to her , mentioning her " betrothed " .
Eventually , he arrives .
Ella is disgusted to note that she is betrothed to the treacherous Number Five .
She finds out that Five killed Eight , and is even more upset .
Setrákus Ra trains Ella to use her Legacy Dreynen , using Five as the equivalent of a punching bag .
She apologizes to him later telepathically .
He responds that he deserved it and that they need to escape .
Ella wakes up later to find Five talking about how Mogadorians were bad .
She and Five decide to escape .
She finds out that Five was not aware of their betrothal either .
Setrákus Ra catches them .
Five stabs Setrákus Ra and the blow injures Ella .
She loses consciousness .
Ella wakes up dressed formally for the invasion , with a Mogadorian injection of something disgusting where she was stabbed .
Setrákus Ra forces her to get up .
She sees a message from Phiri Dun - Ra saying that the Garde is at the Sanctuary .
Ella accompanies Setrákus Ra to greet the humans .
She sees Number Nine and tells him telepathically to break Ra 's staff .
She witnesses Ra talking about how the faithful humans will greet him , and then a human leader denying what he said .
She realizes that Number Four is there too .
John , Sam , Sarah , Malcolm , and Adam , as well as a bunch of Chimærae , are staying in an abandoned textile factory .
They figure out that the surviving Garde are in Florida , except for one of them , whose dot on the tablet is bouncing everywhere .
But Adam suggests going to Ashwood Estates instead of predictably going to Florida .
The others agree , Four with a bit of persuasion required .
They find a website titled They Walk Among Us with information about the Mogadorians and Sarah goes to meet Mark James .
Malcolm , Four , Sam , and most of the Chimærae go to Ashwood Estates .
The Chimærae carry cameras .
They survey Mogs carrying equipment and kill them .
Adam admits that the General residing at the Estates is his father .
Four attacks him , and his shield bracelet is broken .
The Chimærae also attack .
The General and Four wrestles .
Adam stabs his father through the back and takes up his father 's old sword .
Adam uses Mogadorian surveillance to help Seven , Six , and Nine break into the base .
Adam hacks a ship and uses its guns to kill all of the Mogadorians .
Number Six , Number Seven , and Number Nine are trying to escape the swamp .
They find a form of town and see that the Chicago penthouse was destroyed .
Marina finds a man who claims that there is an old NASA base in the swamp with UFOs flying around it .
She believes that Eight 's body is there and decides to have the man lead them there .
Nine and Six agree .
Marina tells Six that she can feel Eight somewhere .
They see Mogadorians from their boat and kill them .
The man who was leading them is frightened and flees the boat .
Nine , Seven , and Six find a huge Mogadorian base .
They turn invisible and enter it .
Nine uses his animal telepathy to tell a beast controlled by the Mogadorians to cause a distraction .
It obliges but is killed , but it has given them enough time to make it into a greenhouse .
They find Number Five lurking , as well as Number Eight 's body .
Five stabs a Mogadorian telling him to bring Eight 's body to a ship .
Six , Seven , and Nine are left with Eight 's body .
Five apologizes out loud .
A huge Mogadorian ship appears in the doorway and kills all of the Mogadorians .
They hear Number Four 's voice coming out of the ship and board it .
Six " pilots " it to Ashwood Estates , with Adam 's instruction .
Six and Sam kiss .
Shortly after Seven , Six , and Nine come to Ashwood Estates , Agent Walker and some FBI agents arrive .
They have realized that the Mogadorians are villainous and want to help the Garde .
They have seen what happens when someone stops taking the Mogadorian augmentations and they tell the Garde about the Mogadorians plan - to assassinate the secretary of defense , Bud Sanderson , who was working for the Mogadorians .
They believe that his assassination will help stop Setrákus Ra 's invasion plan .
The next day , Malcolm gathers footage of his mind being dredged .
He shows them what he said , that Lorien is not a planet , but an entity , and that it can be awoken in Earth when their Inheritances are put in Calakmul .
Four , Sam , and Nine decide to proceed with Walker 's plan and go to New York .
Marina , Six , and Adam decide to go to Calakmul .
They collect much of the Inheritances to " commit to the earth " and also bring Henri 's ashes and Eight 's body .
On the plane , Marina is hostile toward Adam .
When she finds out that he killed his Mogadorian father , she stops .
They find a Mogadorian ship trying to contact them .
Adam acts authoritative and their ship is allowed entry .
When they leave the ship , Phiri Dun - Ra pretends to bargain with him , but hits him on the head .
Six and Seven kill the Mogadorians except for Phiri Dun - Ra .
Six , Seven , and Adam pass through a force field and climb .
They open a door with three pendants and are transported to a place with Loralite everywhere .
They see a cylinder in the ground that looks like a well .
They dump the contents of the Chests , their pendants , and Henri 's ashes down it .
Eight 's body reanimates .
But it is n't him .
It 's Lorien speaking .
It speaks cryptically and annoys Six , but it temporarily resurrects Eight .
He kisses Marina one last time before disappearing again .
But they find out that the Lorien entity is spreading .
Sam , Four , Nine , and Walker are driving .
On the way , Nine tries to interrogate Sam about Six .
Four stops him .
Nine claps , wearing a pair of gloves from Marina 's Chest , and generates a huge noise .
The Mogadorians , of course , find them and attack .
The heroes are trying to get bystanders to flee .
One bystander takes a video of Four using his healing power .
They enter the hotel where Sanderson is staying to find him .
He looks awful and has clearly been taking Mogadorian augmentations .
He says that it is too late and then shoots himself in the head .
Four somehow stops the bullet with telekinesis and heals him .
Sanderson tells them that it is too late to prevent the invasion .
A spaceship arrives soon after .
Sanderson gives Walker names of politicians working for the Mogadorians .
They arrive at Setrákus Ra 's planned invasion site .
Nine breaks Setrákus Ra 's staff , and Ra reverts from his human form to the repulsive genetically modified Mogadorian one .
Ra uses Dreynen when Number Four attacks .
Ella stabs Setrákus Ra in the leg and realizes that she is the only one who can kill him .
He would have killed her , but Four prevented it .
Five stops Four from stabbing Setrákus Ra and killing Ella , and he later stops Nine when he attacks as well .
Ella is dragged back onto the ship , half - conscious , her fate unknown .
The warship starts to fire .
Sam and Four are separated from everyone else except for a group of human survivors being pursued by a piken .
It was knocked down with telekinetic force .
John realizes he did n't do it , but Sam did .
THE FATE OF TEN Section::::The Fate of Ten .
The Fate of Ten is the sixth in the series , and was released on 1 September 2015 .
Its title via facebook page for the series .
It was also revealed that there will be seven books in the series , rather than the previously believed six .
The cover for the book was released on the 23rd of April 2015 , via an interview with MTV .
The book is primarily narrated in first person , from the perspectives of Four ( John ) , Six and towards the end of the book , Ten ( Ella ) .
A prologue in third person narrates briefly the story of an unnamed human - turned - Garde ( later known as Daniela ) as she survives a Mogadorian attack on New York .
Prologue :
An unnamed 15-year - old girl and her 57-year - old stepfather are watching the news of the Mogadorian invasion on TV ( the girl is hinted to have a crush on Four )
when they hear the Mogadorian soldiers breaking into the apartments on the lower floors of their building .
Despite his poor relationship with his stepdaughter , the man sacrifices himself to save her and she flees via the fire escape .
Cornered by Mogadorians , she discovers her telekinetic abilities and manages to kill her three attackers .
Four
( John ) narrates chapter 1 , which picks up after the end of the previous book , Revenge of Seven .
Together with Sam Goode and other survivors , they flee from the Mogadorians , but Four is exhausted from excessive use of his healing legacy .
A cop leads the group to safety , but Sam and Four stay behind to continue looking for Nine , who was last seen fighting Five in front of the UN .
John realizes that the videos posted online by Sarah and Mark about the Mogadorian invasion have made him into a celebrity , the face of the resistance against the Mogadorians .
Sam and Four seek refuge in a deserted apartment where Sam experiments with his telekinesis .
They watch the news on TV and are see Nine and Five both battling the Mogadorian soldiers , but they are also fighting each other .
Four and Sam leave for Union Square to find them .
Six narrates chapter 2 , where Six , Seven ( Marina ) and Adam are leaving the Sanctuary , having recently awoken the Entity , or the spirit which previously dwelled on Lorien and now on Earth .
They note that nothing else seems to have changed after the Entity woke .
As they try operating a Skimmer ( Mogadorian ship ) to depart for the US they realize that an evil Mogadorian girl has sabotaged all the Skimmers by removing an important part from each of them .
They decide to hunt her down to retrieve the components .
Four narrates chapter 3 and 4 , where he and Sam are on their way to find Nine and Five .
They avoid a Mogadorian patrol which Sam convinces Four not to antagonize .
They notice a few Mogadorian soldiers ( and a Skimmer ) outside a bank , who are disarmed through telekinesis by someone inside the bank .
They kill all the Mogadorian soldiers , but not before one radios for reinforcements .
They enter the bank to find the girl from the prologue called Daniela , who recognizes Four immediately .
Daniela is disinterested in joining forces with them as she only focuses on surviving .
They are in the midst of bickering when Setrákus Ra 's ship , Anubis , comes into view , demolishing buildings left and right .
Daniela guides Sam and Four to the subway to hide , and Four notices that the duffel bag Daniela carries is stuffed with cash from the bank .
They flee into the tunnels , but the ceiling collapses , and all three work together to hold it up with telekinesis until they are out of danger .
Four collapses , and in his dreams he witnesses Mogadorian augmentation surgery performed on Ten ( Ella ) .
Six narrates chapter 5 and 6 , where Six , Seven and Adam and planning on how to catch Phiri Dun - Ra and retrieve the Skimmer engine parts .
They successfully bait her and Marina binds her with ice shackles .
Adam tortures her briefly , just enough to find out where the Skimmer parts are hidden .
However , the bag is rigged with explosives and blows up in their faces .
Adam and Six are badly injured with Adam almost dying
but Marina heals both of them in time .
Phiri Dun - Ra survives .
Adam uses one of the Skimmers to tap into Mogadorian communications where they hear that the Garde 's resistance in New York has been apparently crushed .
Chapter 7 is a continuation of Four 's dream from chapter 4 , which is revealed to be telepathically induced by Ten ( Ella ) .
Ten takes him on a virtual tour of the Anubis from her memories where they see Setrákus Ra throw four Loric pendants into a vat of sludge .
Four and Ten talk about Ten 's prescient visions of the future .
Ten believes that she will have to be killed in order to harm Setrákus Ra because of the Mogadorian charm that is causing her to bear injuries inflicted upon Setrákus .
She tells Four that he is likely to be the one who kills her .
As the telepathic vision breaks apart due to the Anubis moving too far out of range , Ten tells Four to warn Six that Setrákus Ra is on his way to the Sanctuary and that they should flee .
Chapter 8 - 9 :
Four wakes up in an abandoned subway car with Daniela and Sam .
Only Daniela is awake and she has illuminated the place with the light of cellphones left behind by the passengers when they ditched the train .
She tells Four that the duffel bag actually belonged to bank robbers who had robbed the bank she was hiding in , when they fled
and she thought the bag would be useful .
She and Four talk some more about the whole saving - the - world - from - Mogadorians thing
and she describes to him the video posted by Sarah and Mark .
Sam wakes and
they are about to leave for the civilian evac point at Brooklyn bridge when human soldiers find them in the subway car .
They take the three to the Bridge anyway to meet Agent Walker , an ex - MogPro agent from a previous book .
Daniela leaves the duffel bag behind in case they arrest her .
Four meets with Agent Walker who has been designated as the middleman for the cautious government 's communication with the Garde .
She tells him of the dire invasion situation all over the world and also tells him about Setrákus Ra 's threat to the government to surrender all the Garde and humans - turned - Garde to the Mogs in 48 hours .
Walker tells Four that the government might actually consider the bargain .
Chapter 10 snaps back to Six 's perspective in New Mexico where Adam is having trouble scraping together repairs for the Skimmer with his limited materials .
Phiri Dun - Ra taunts them and attempts to sow discord
but they gag her .
Six gets a call from Four who has obtained a satellite phone back in New York .
Sam , Four , Six and Seven chat happily with the revelation of Sam 's Legacies but
Sam urgently warns them of Setrákus Ra 's incoming ship .
Four narrates chapter 11 and 12 , where Walker tries to alleviate some of his stress .
She shows him Sarah 's video , and Sam prompts him to give her a call .
They chat for a while with Sarah ultimately encouraging him not to give up fighting when he updates her on the round - the - world Mog invasion .
She tells him that she has met GUARD in person and fills him in on the details , but GUARD 's information is not revealed to the reader until later in the book .
Four feels reinvigorated by his talk with Sarah and leaves the tent to find Sam advising Six not to fight Setrákus Ra at the Sanctuary by themselves .
Sam asks Four to help but instead Four discusses with Six and Adam on how they can board the Anubis when it arrives at the Sanctuary .
After the call ends , Sam argues with Four briefly
but Four says Ten 's vision depends on it ( having misunderstood her warnings for Six and the others to flee instead of fight ) .
Four walks off and Walker shows him footage taken by a civilian of a capsule dropped from the Anubis into the river .
Four tells her that Setrákus Ra does n't do anything on accident .
Suddenly , human soldiers turn up , one of them heavily injured .
They are discovered to have been attacked by Five after mistaking him for an ally .
They note that Five has taken an unconscious Nine hostage and that Five will expect Four to meet him at the Statue of Liberty at sunset , lest he give Four a new scar .
Everyone expects Five to kill Nine if Four does n't turn up .
Six narrates chapter 13 - 15 , where Six , Seven and Adam are fretting and arguing about the importance of protecting the Sanctuary .
It escalates quickly into full - blown quarrelling with insults thrown everywhere , but they manage to resolve the issue and decide to set up traps in order to ambush the Mogs when they arrive at the Sanctuary .
At the start of a new chapter , a non - Mog and non - human ship appears , and Sarah and Mark disembark .
Six realises that it is the same Loric ship that brought the nine Garde and their Cepans to Earth .
After some nostalgia , they meet Lexa , a Loric woman previously known as GUARD .
She piloted the antique ship which brought Ten and Crayton to Earth .
Mark and Sarah are mildly disappointed that they do n't have Legacies .
Mark comments on the traps as they finish setting everything up .
Six and Seven start to hear Ten 's voice in their heads , screaming at them to run or die as the Anubis draws closer , way before schedule .
Ten panics but Six and Seven assure her that they have everything under control .
The massive Anubis appears and instead of landing , blasts the Sanctuary apart .
Six and Mark and badly injured by shrapnel and Seven moves to heal then .
Four narrates chapter 16 and 17 , where he borrows a human boat and leaves for the Statue of Liberty with Sam , Daniela and a squad of human soldiers .
Five is waiting for them and seems badly weakened .
He hands over a badly damaged Nine to Four , who heals him almost immediately .
Four starts to leave , fed up with Five 's theatrics , but Five reveals that he was never going to kill Nine all along , and takes off his shirt with difficulty , revealing that Nine had shoved a steel pole through him while he was still in metal form .
Five asks Four to heal him , and turns back to flesh without warning .
Four is forced to heal him against Sam 's wishes , so Daniela helps him instead .
Five is disarmed and Four heals the rest of Nine 's injuries .
He 's about to call Sarah when a military submarine sent to investigate the Mog capsule is hurled out of the water onto land , followed by a massive beast created by Setrakus Ra 's use of four Loric pendants .
Before they can begin combat , a blue tentacle of light rises from the ground and causes Sam and Daniela to collapse unconscious , with nobody else being able to see it .
All of the Garde see the tentacle before they are knocked out , as well as all of the people who gained legacies when the Loric entity was released .
When they awake after the collective vision , they start battle against what is dubbed the Mogasaur , and seem unable to do it much damage .
Then Daniella finds a new legacy which turns the Mogasaur to stone .
The final chapter snaps back to Six and the rest of the crew on the loric ship with Lexa .
Marina is out from the beating she took at the hands of Setrakus , Ella sits crying while Six puts pressure on Sarah 's wound who is rapidly bleeding out .
She phones Johns and tell him she loves him and urges him to carry on fighting before her words fade .
Six checks for her pulse already aware that she is gone .
UNITED AS ONE Section::::United As One .
United As One is the 7th and final book in the series .
The title was revealed on October 26 , 2015 .
It was released on June 28 , 2016 .
The fact that John ( Number four ) has Ximic may hint at the fact that he is Pittacus ' descendant , as Ella is Setrákus ' .
Other clues include physical features , such as blonde hair , and Pittacus ' Lumen .
United as One is told in first perspective of two characters , Number Four ( John Smith ) and Number Six .
The book opens with brief descriptions of the state of some characters , describing them as " a girl " or " a boy " but can be determined who it is told about .
It first describes Marina standing on the edge of a cliff in a dream .
In The Fate of Ten she was left unconscious after a fight with Setrákus Ra .
She sees Setrákus Ra taking the appearance of Eight , convincing her to let go and be with Eight , but she refuses and chooses to continue to fight .
Next a scene is described of Five in a padded cell , locked up by Nine and John .
Setrákus Ra also comes to him in a dream to convince him to come back on his side .
Five refuses .
The next scene is Mark walking the football field of his old school in Paradise , clutching a photo of Sarah .
He is met by Setrákus Ra who tries to tell Mark he can bring Sarah back and they can fight together .
The scene ends with Setrákus Ra offering his hand to Mark , but does not tell if Mark accepts the offer .
John is sitting in his room in a bed and breakfast in Patience Creek .
He is called out by Sam and Daniella for the arrival of Ella , Marina , Six , Mark , Adam , and Lexa .
The Garde regroup and John has a moment with the deceased Sarah , and Mark James is disgusted at his lack of emotion and blames him for her death .
The Garde talk tactics with Lawson , the acting general .
John becomes increasingly cold and distant , no longer content with running and playing defense .
A plan is hatched to hijack one of the warships and to strip the skimmers of their cloaking devices to co - ordinate a united strike against the other Mogadorian warships .
Some new Human - Garde post a video on the internet to attract John 's attention to have him pick them up as they stand by a Loralite stone in Niagara Falls .
The team splits , with half going to rescue the human garde , while John and Nine meet with Five , who is locked away in a cell .
John wants Five to teach him how to fly so he can board the warship .
However , he struggles to pick up the legacy , so Five attacks him , hoping the battle rush would help him learn the skill , which he does .
However , Marina wakes up and levitates an icicle in front of Five 's face , threatening to kill him .
The other team , en route to Niagara Falls , encounter turbulence when Sam uses his technopathic legacy to accidentally turn off the ship 's engines .
With some help from Ella , Sam is able to visualize the workings of the ship and turn them back on .
When they arrive on the scene they see fresh signs of a battle , with Skimmers destroyed and fire and ash swirling .
The human garde managed to hold their own and fought off the Mogadorians .
However , there is some disagreement if the teens are ready for war .
To avoid any further people teleporting to Niagara Falls , Ella turns off the Loralite stone .
As a neighboring warship makes its way there to check in , the team leaves for base .
Adam instigates dissension in the Mogadorian ranks as they start to go against orders and do what they think is best , a warship fires on Sydney while another captain in Moscow declares himself the beloved leader , which leads to the captain in Berlin making an assassination attempt on the usurper .
In Kazakhstan another 2 warships meet and began to blow each other apart .
Sam attempts to use his techno legacy to copy the cloaking device codes into everyday electronics , he builds a prototype that he asks the team to test when they attack the warship .
John , Six , and Adam board the warship .
John begins killing all the Mogadorians in a cold ruthless manner , while Adam and Six strip the skimmers of their cloaking devices .
Before the day is done the Garde have stolen a warship .
They meet a Mogadorian named Rex , whom Adam recognizes and saves from John 's attack .
Sam 's tech is found to be successful .
John , not wanting to sacrifice any more friends , takes off to finish Setrákus without the others knowing .
He realizes he needs a cloaking device and heads back to Patience Creek .
However , the base is overrun by Mogadorians , who found the place through a mind controlled Mark James .
Some of the true - borns have augmentations , twisted forms of legacies .
Phiri dun Ra is there , whose arm has been replaced with black ooze - like tendrils , then she impales John and begins to drain his legacies while he 's helpless .
While helpless , Mark James slips the Voron noose around John 's neck .
The damage from this weapon can not be healed .
The others find out about John 's suicide mission and argue among themselves over his chosen course of action .
Six calls Sam to tell him about his prototype 's success when she hears firing in the background .
Sam tells Six he thinks they are under attack .
Back at the base , John is helpless as he 's dragged along the inside of the base , with Phiri mocking his failure at being a hero and his delusional idea of being able to save everyone .
To prove a point she kills Mark .
Phiri , John and the mind controlling Mogadorians run into resistance .
The mind controlling Mogadorian releases a swarm of seemingly black flies that force half the marines to open fire on the others .
The human garde make an appearance and are shocked to see John crawling on all fours with a noose around his neck .
he screams at them to run but Phiri manages to kill 2 while the other 2 manage to escape .
Sam shouts at the lights to turn off and frees Five who immediately attacks Phiri , however the mind controlling Mogadorian manages to overtake Five , but is quickly killed by Sam .
Phiri screams for extraction and loses her grip on John as Five slams into her .
The shadow Mogadorian makes an appearance and teleports both Phiri and Five .
The shadow Mogadorian tries to finish them off , but Sam tells the lights to turn on while he 's in a mid teleport , which slices him in half .
The others have no time to mourn the dead and set their plan in motion .
The garde use the loralite stone to teleport across the world arming the governments with cloaking tech .
The Garde aboard their stolen warship make their way to the West Virginia base where Setrákus waits .
Six summons the biggest storm she has ever created to damage the Anubis , destroying it .
Five flies Six and Adam into the base to deactivate the shield , once that 's done ,
Marina , John , Five , and Nine make their way underground to find Setrákus .
They find a mass grave of Mogadorians and Garde Humans , which repulses them all and steels their drives to end this .
Setrákus emerges from a pool of black ooze covered in black slime that has given him a youthful appearance and effective immortality .
They try to fight against him , however , their legacies are ineffective against him .
Setrákus grabs Five and drowns him in the black puddle .
He maims Nine , taking off his arm .
While trying to heal him , Marina attacks Setrákus with her healing legacy , to which he recoils in pain .
John , picking up on this , continues the healing assault and urges Marina to run with Nine , who is no shape to fight , she protests but John insists .
Nine transfers his strength and anti gravity legacy to her
and she slings him over her shoulder and runs .
John is locked in battle with Setrákus with both of them taking heavy damage , while John pours his healing legacy into him , while also using it on himself in small busts to keep him going .
He establishes telepathic contact with Sam and tells him to blow up the mountain .
While this is going on Adam and Six run into Phiri , who wounds Six and attacks Adam , Dust attacks Phiri but is quickly overwhelmed .
Six manages to telekinetically pin Phiri to the wall , but a Mogadoraian sneaks behind her and shoots her
, Adam promptly kills the Mogadorian but Phiri impales him and begins to drain his Loric spark , she releases a seismic wave that knocks Six back .
Adam plunges his hands into the black oily tentacles and begins to tear itself away from Phiri 's stump and bond with Adam .
He uses his seismic legacy and collapses the floor with both Adam and Phiri falling in .
Six attempts to save him
but there 's nothing there to telekinetically grab .
Six realizes Dust has disappeared .
Ella urges Six to make her way to the main entrance where Marina and Nine are on their way .
Marina tries to get Six out of the base , but she refuses , asking Marina to heal her so she can finish the battle .
Six makes her way to the central chamber where John lays beaten and broken .
She sees a frail withered old man crawling across the cavern floor she picks up the Voron dagger and decapitates him .
She makes her way over to John who she thinks is dead but a gasp from John proves otherwise .
His eyes swollen shut he grasps six 's arm and whispers ' Sarah ? ' , Six gives him a quick kiss before he falls unconscious .
Six grabs John and they climb on to Bernie Kosar 's back and fly up .
John remembers snippets after that such as seeing Adam crying as he clutched the final form of dust who was frozen in a wolf / snake form .
John decides to close his eyes not wanting to see any more sadness .
One year later John is in the Himalayas restoring the cave that Eight had found .
He scrubs the prophecies from the wall and Ella tells him it 's time .
John is hesitant as he secluded himself on the mountain after the fight until Ella found him and kept him company for some months .
While clutching a small box , he flies to the Garde academy that 's still under construction in San Francisco .
Invisible , he follows the sound to where kids are practicing their telekinesis ; Nine stands on the catwalk and when they miss a ball he makes them run laps .
His arm is still missing and he 's grown his hair .
John flies to him and turns visible , and he is greeted by a hug while being chastised for not staying in contact .
John apologizes and gives Nine something from his box .
Lexa is also at the academy hacking into the dark web protecting the human garde from potential threats .
He then goes to New York where repairs and construction is still under way .
He observes Daniela from afar who uses her stone legacy to repair building foundations before embracing her mother .
John sees Agent Walker in a Montreal car park where she kills someone .
John reveals himself to her
and she is pleased to see him , he says to her you better have a good reason for that , in response she shows what was in the man 's briefcase , 3 vials of black ooze which surprises John .
Walker takes out a vial from her pocket and pours it into the black ooze , destroying the substance .
Walker says she could use some help tracking this down and John hands her a blue loralite pendant from his box and says they will talk about it soon .
He finds Adam in Alaska with Rex in a prison camp with other Mogs who surrendered , John says he can break them out and he replies saying this is the best place for him to rehabilitate his people .
It 's mentioned he got a full pardon but did n't use it .
John gives him a pendant .
He goes to paradise and hugs Malcolm which brings back memories of Henri .
He ruminates on tracking Mark James ' father to tell him what really happened .
Finally he steps on Sarah 's doorstep still unable to tell her parents what happened .
He tracks Six and Sam who are on their vacation .
He observes them in the ocean in an embrace and leaves 2 pendants with a note .
Lastly he looks for Marina who John says would have taken ages to track if it were n't for her sporadic calls to Ella .
Ella says she 's not the same and has become paranoid and angry .
He finds her in a speedboat navigating islands in the south pacific .
John recognizes the signs of isolation from his own experiences .
When he appears she is n't started and asks if he 's really there or has gone crazy .
He replies that it 's really him and she smiles .
She says that he 's come at a good time and shows him a video footage of the West Virginia base where an object that looked like a missile shoots up into the sky .
Marina says she found Five last week on one of the small deserted islands .
His body is very skinny with lumps of skin hanging off with dark patches of obsidian blotching his skin .
Marina confides in John that she has tried to get over the war and all the death and destruction
but she just ca n't .
She tells John that he said her she could decide what to do with Five
but she does n't want to carry it around with her .
John suggests her to get out of here and Marina asks what to do with Five to which John says that he 's a ghost we are n't .
Marina returns with John to the Himalayas when she sees what he 's done with the cave she finally cries .
She reaches out to John before thanking him and she kisses him .
He 's not sure what it means ruminating maybe nothing , maybe something .
He shows Marina what he 's been working for the past year : a massive wooden table with a loralite stone in the middle reminiscent of the table in the Elder 's chamber with the loric symbol of unity burned into the table and the pendants .
John plans to use this as a meeting place for friends and allies where they will gather to solve problems , with a space at the table for Loric / Garde / humans / allies .
The only difference being there are not nine seats around the table saying he 's done with numbers .
THE LOST FILES SERIES
THE LEGACIES Section::::The Lost Files series .
Section::::The Legacies .
The Legacies , was released on July 24 , 2012 .
It is a paperback edition of the three previously released Lost Files novellas —
Six 's Legacy , Nine 's Legacy , and The Fallen Legacies .
Originally published as individual e - books , this was the first time they were available in print .
All the included stories can be found under these names :
Six 's Legacy , --- Nine 's Legacy , --- The Fallen Legacies .
SIX 'S
LEGACY
Section::::Six 's Legacy .
Six 's Legacy was released on July 26 , 2011 .
It is told from the first person perspective of Six .
Before she met John in Paradise , Ohio , she lived with her Cepan Katarina .
They were captured by the Mogadorians in NY .
Katarina was killed after Six gives the Mogs false information .
While in prison , Six developed her legacy of invisibility and used it to escape .
Before leaving she took revenge on the Mogadorian who killed Katarina .
After years , she hears of Number Four in Ohio and takes a bus there .
NINE 'S
LEGACY Section::::Nine 's Legacy .
Nine 's Legacy was released on February 28 , 2012 .
It is told from the first person perspective of Pittacus Lore 's character , Nine .
Nine and his Cepan , Sandor , live in a penthouse on top of the John Hancock Center in Chicago .
Nine starts to date a girl .
He realizes she was being used to find him and gets captured .
The Mogadorians torture Sandor to break Nine .
Eventually Nine kills him to put him out of his misery .
Nine is held in the West Virginia Mog compound until he 's rescued by John .
THE FALLEN LEGACIES Section::::The Fallen Legacies .
The Fallen Legacies was released on July 24 , 2012 .
It is told from the first person perspective of Adamus Sutekh , a Mogadorian general 's son .
The book starts with in front of the Washington Monument in Washington D.C. Adam and his adopted brother Ivan are doing homework .
Then Adam and Ivan are called by their father .
The Mogadorians have found a lead on Number One .
Adam and Ivan accompany their father to Malaysia to kill Number One .
A vat - born soldier ( a Mogadorian soldier grown through genetic engineering ) kills Number One right as she develops the legacy to create earthquakes .
Once back at Ashwood Estates , a Mogadorian compound , Adam is asked by his father to be hooked up to a special machine that is connected to One 's body .
He falls asleep .
In his deep sleep , he meets the ghost of One .
One takes him through her life on Earth up until she is killed and tries to see doubt in Mogadorian progress .
When Adam awakes it has been three years .
Adam ca n't believe he 's been asleep that long .
But , he is just in time to accompany his father and Ivan on a mission to find Number Two .
Adam gets to the apartment where she 's staying first .
He tells her he 's there to help .
Just then Ivan arrives .
He thinks Adam is trying to trick the Garde and kills her himself .
After however Adam deletes a post that Number Two was using to try and contact the other members of the Garde .
Time passes and Number Three is located .
The Mogs proceed to Kenya to find him .
Adam and Ivan meet a boy named Hannu .
He is Number Three .
Adam tries to warn him but is too late .
His father kills Three .
The book ends when Adam falls down a ravine .
SECRET HISTORIES Section::::Secret Histories .
Secret Histories was released on July 23 , 2013 .
Secret Histories refers to the second compilation of Lost Files in a paperback book .
Secret Histories is a collection of three novellas .
Originally published as e - novellas , they are now together in one print volume .
The entire book contains three separate stories : The Search for Sam --- Last Days of Lorien ---
The Forgotten Ones THE SEARCH FOR SAM Section::::The Search for Sam .
The Search for Sam , was released on December 26 , 2012 .
It is told from the first person perspective of Adamus Sutekh .
It picks up where The Fallen Legacies left off .
THE LAST DAYS OF LORIEN Section::::The
Last Days of Lorien .
The Last Days of Lorien was released on April 9 , 2013 .
Harpercollins describes it as a " stunning prequel novella to the New York Times bestselling I Am Number Four series " .
It is set on Lorien before it was attacked by the Mogadorians , and is told from the perspective of Sandor ( Nine 's Cêpan ) .
THE FORGOTTEN ONES Section::::The Forgotten Ones .
The Forgotten Ones was released on July 23 , 2013 .
It is told from the first person perspective of Adamus Sutekh .
It is the third and final of Pittacus Lore 's novellas told by the son of a mogadorian general turned to the Loric side .
HIDDEN ENEMY Section::::Hidden Enemy .
Hidden Enemy was released on July 22 , 2014 , in the US and August 14 , 2014 , in the UK .
Hidden Enemy is the third compilation of Lost Files in one book .
It is a collection of three novellas , originally published as separate e - novellas .
The stories are " Five 's Legacy , " " Return to Paradise , " and " Five 's Betrayal . " FIVE 'S
LEGACY Section::::Five 's Legacy .
The seventh Lost Files book , initially scheduled to be released on December 23 , 2013 , was released as an E - Book on February 11 , 2014 .
Called " Five 's Legacy , " the novella centers around the origins of Number Five , including the short amount of time he spent with his Cepan , Rey , and his eventual " capture " by Mogadorians .
RETURN TO PARADISE Section::::Return to Paradise .
In this thrilling one - hundred - page prequel companion novella , discover what happened in the aftermath of the Mogadorians ' attack on Paradise , Ohio , from Mark James — Number Four 's bully - turned - ally .
After Four leaves town to find the rest of the Garde , Mark is left behind to pick up the pieces .
His school has been destroyed , his home burned down , and , worst yet , Mark now knows the horrifying truth : aliens live among us and some of them seek to destroy us .
Even with the FBI tailing him and Sarah Hart , Mark tries to return to a normal life .
But when Sarah goes missing , he knows he can no longer sit back and do nothing .
His quest to find her will lead him to new allies and a startling revelation about the Mogadorians ' plan for invasion .
It was released April 15 , 2014 exclusively as an e - Book .
FIVE 'S
BETRAYAL Section::::Five 's
Betrayal .
This sequel to Five 's Legacy finds Number Five entering the ranks of the Mogadorian army .
The Mogs have convinced him that they will be the victors in the war for Earth , and Five decides he would rather be on the winning side , realizing that the only thing that matters is his survival .
REBEL ALLIES
THE FUGITIVE Section::::Rebel Allies .
Section::::The Fugitive .
Follows Mark James as he tries to track down Sarah Hart , evade the Mogadorians and the FBI , and discover the identity of the mysterious blogger he knows only as GUARD .
THE NAVIGATOR Section::::The Navigator .
Reveals the truth about the crew of the two Loric spaceships who escaped to Earth and shows what happened to the pilots after they arrived and parted ways with the Garde .
THE GUARD Section::::The Guard .
Tells the story of the hacker who has been aiding the Lorien survivors from the shadows for years .
She 's determined to defeat the Mogs — and she just found her secret weapon .
ZERO HOUR
LEGACIES REBORN Section::::Zero Hour .
Section::::Legacies Reborn .
Gives a look at the Mogadorian invasion from the perspective of Daniela Morales , a human teen who 's shocked to discover aliens are attacking New York — and that she suddenly has the power to fight back .
LAST DEFENSE Section::::Last Defense .
Reveals what happens to Malcolm Goode after the warships descend .
To get to the president 's secret bunker near Washington , DC , he 'll have to fight his way through a war zone .
HUNT FOR THE GARDE Section::::Hunt for the Garde .
Picks up after the events of The Fate of Ten , following the stories of three different Mogadorians .
One will do anything for redemption .
One has a thirst for blood .
One questions everything .
JOURNALS & NOTEBOOKS Section::::Journals & Notebooks .
These very short works are meant to be read in line with the seven main novels .
You can find the recommended order here .
PITTACUS LORE 'S TRANSMISSIONS
* Eight 's Origin * Sarah 's Journal
* Sam 's Journal * Malcolm 's Journal
*
The Scar CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
John Smith ( Number Four ) , Number Five , Number Six , Marina ( Number Seven ) , Number Eight , Number Nine , Sandor ( Nine 's Cepan )
Ella ( Number Ten ) , Sarah Hart ( John 's girlfriend ) , Mark James ( Sarah 's ex - boyfriend ) , Sam Goode(John 's friend ) , Malcolm Goode ( Sam 's father ) , Adam Sutekh ( mog with legacies ) , Setrakus Ra ( main antagonist , Mogadorian leader ) , Phiri Dun Ra , Agent Karen Walker , Henri
( John 's Cepan ) , Daniela Morales , Lexa ( GUARD ) .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Reception to the series has been mostly positive .
The first two books , I Am Number Four and The Power of Six , both reached # 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list , collectively spending ten weeks in the top spot .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
In 2009
DreamWorks Pictures bought the rights to I Am Number Four and released the movie on February 18 , 2011 .
The movie was the first DreamWorks film to be distributed by Disney 's Touchstone Pictures and received generally negative reviews from critics , with review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes giving a score of 32 % based on 156 reviews .
The movie had a worldwide gross of $ 145,982,798 and a budget of $ 50 million , but still fell short of expectations .
Plans for any future installments for the series have been shelved .
Director D. J. Caruso confirmed that he would like to direct a sequel , but in an interview with MTV Hollywood Crush Lore has stated that any questions or requests for a sequel should be directed to producer Michael Bay .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Lorien Legacies official site UK
*
The Lorien Legacies official site