GUN LAWS IN WEST VIRGINIA Gun laws in West Virginia regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the U.S. state of West Virginia .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes ยง 61 - 7 - 7
As of May 24 , 2016 , West Virginia became a constitutional carry state .
Any person 21 years or older who is legally able to own a handgun may carry the weapon concealed without the need of obtaining a permit .
A permit is required for individuals 18 - 20 years old who wish to carry a handgun concealed .
Carry permits are still issued on a " shall issue " basis to anyone who would like one for reciprocity purposes .
As of October 2016 , there are 37 states that recognize WV permits for those 21 years or older , and of those 35 states , 16 recognize WV permits issued to persons 18 years or older .
Note : 2 of the 37 states do n't officially recognize the WV permit , but are constitutional carry states , so no permit is required .
Shall Certify ?
Yes
Yes ยง 61 - 7 - 16 Shall certify within 30 days .
}
The Constitution of West Virginia protects the right of the people to keep and bear arms .
West Virginia preempts local regulation of several aspects of firearms , though local regulations which were in effect prior to 1999 were grandfathered .
Further , State agencies and institutions are not precluded from enacting laws which regulate firearms .
Charleston , Dunbar , and South Charleston are known to have grandfathered local ordinances which prohibit weapons on city property and in city buildings .
The City of Martinsburg is known to have a local ordinance that was passed after 1999 , which prohibits weapons in city buildings , that is not grandfathered .
There are no firearms known to be prohibited by State law .
Prohibited places include correctional facilities , primary and secondary school property ( excluding firearms within a vehicle ) ; buses ; and events , courthouses , the State Capitol Complex and grounds , private property where posted , certain areas in Charleston , Dunbar , and South Charleston .
There are age restrictions on the possession of firearms and some people are prohibited from possessing firearms due to certain criminal convictions or naturalization status .
Private sales of firearms , including handguns , are legal and do not require the seller to perform a background check ; however , it is unlawful to sell a firearm to a prohibited person .
Open carry of a handgun without a permit is legal in West Virginia at age 18 , withstanding other applicable laws .
No permit is necessary for concealed carry of a handgun for any individual over the age of 21 who is legally allowed to own a handgun .
A permit is required for individuals 18 - 20 to carry a concealed handgun assuming they are otherwise legally allowed to own the firearm .
West Virginia enacted the castle doctrine on April 10 , 2008 .
REFERENCES