GUN LAWS IN VERMONT Gun laws in Vermont regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the U.S. state of Vermont .
Vermont formerly had very few gun control laws .
But in 2018 , the state enacted laws requiring background checks for private sales , raising the minimum age to purchase firearms to 21 , banning the sale of handgun magazines that hold more than 15 rounds and rifle magazines that hold more than 10 rounds , banning the possession of bump stocks , and allowing police to seek a court order to seize guns from anyone deemed an extreme risk .
The open or concealed carry of firearms is allowed without a permit .
The state 's rural character , along with its strong hunting and outdoor sports traditions , had contributed to the state 's historical permissive gun policies .
Gun dealers are required to keep a record of all handgun sales .
It is illegal to carry a gun in a school building or bus , or in a courthouse .
State law preempts local governments from regulating the possession , ownership , transfer , carrying , registration or licensing of firearms .
The State neither issues nor requires a permit to carry a weapon on one 's person , openly or concealed .
This is known in the U.S. as constitutional carry , since one 's " permit " is the United States Constitution .
Vermont is the only state where this has always been the case ( hence the alternative term Vermont carry ) .
Vermont law does not distinguish between residents and non - residents of the state ; both have the same right to carry permit - free while in Vermont .
The Vermont Constitution of 1777 , dating well before the Bill of Rights to a time when Vermont was an independent republic , guarantees certain freedoms and rights to the citizens : " That the people have a right to bear arms for the defense of themselves and the State – and as standing armies in time of peace are dangerous to liberty , they ought not to be kept up ; and that the military should be kept under strict subordination to and governed by the civil power .
"
The Vermont Supreme Court established the right to carry firearms without a permit in its 1903 State v. Rosenthal decision .
In January 2013 , the City of Burlington , Vermont 's most populous municipality , approved an ordinance banning assault weapons and certain magazines within its limits .
An attempt at gun control at the local level , the ordinance would likely be challenged in court if enforced because Vermont has State preemption of local restrictions .
The proposed ordinance was never fully enacted .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes Red flag law ?
Yes Yes } REFERENCES