GUN LAWS IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Gun laws in the District of Columbia regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the U.S. federal district of District of Columbia .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant statutes ! !
Notes } CONCEALED AND OPEN CARRY Section::::Concealed and open
carry .
A License to Carry a Handgun is required to legally carry a concealed handgun in the District of Columbia .
Licenses are issued to qualified applicants on a " shall issue " basis by the Metropolitan Police Department .
Licenses are granted to residents and non - residents .
Concealed carry licenses issued by other jurisdictions are not valid in
D.C. A license to carry is required for possessing a loaded handgun in a vehicle .
Open carry is not allowed in District of Columbia .
The law declares that areas within 1,000 feet of a school , college , day care center , playground , library , public housing complex and other public gathering spot to be gun free zones .
However , the Metropolitan Police Department claims that this restriction does not apply to those who have concealed carry permits , and only acts as a penalty enhancement against those who are carrying illegally .
POSSESSION OF FIREARMS Section::::Possession of firearms .
In District of Columbia , all firearms must be registered with the police , by the terms of the Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975 .
The same law also prohibited the possession of handguns , even in private citizens ' own homes , unless they were registered before 1976 .
However , the handgun ban was struck down by the U.S. Supreme Court in the 2008 case District of Columbia v. Heller .
The Supreme Court ruled that the Second Amendment acknowledges and guarantees the right of the individual to possess and carry firearms , and therefore D.C. 's ban on handguns was unconstitutional .
Following the Heller decision , the Council of the District of Columbia enacted a set of rules regulating the possession of handguns and long guns in citizens ' homes .
Reductions were made to the DC laws in 2012 and 2015 under threat of lawsuits from gun owners and prospective gun owners .
On September 18 , 2015 , a federal appeals court struck down some parts of the District 's gun registration law as unconstitutional , while upholding other parts of the law .
In addition to each firearm being registered with the police , the rules require that applicants undergo an NCIC background check and submit to fingerprinting .
The firearms registry photographs the applicant .
Applicants must take an online gun safety course .
Applicants must also declare at what address it will be kept .
Each firearm is registered to an individual only , meaning couples who wish to own firearms must purchase two separate firearms .
Handgun registrants must be at least 21 years old .
Long gun registration is allowed for persons 18–21 years of age with a NCIC qualified adult co - registering .
Handgun models are limited to any handgun appearing on any one of the California , Massachusetts , Maryland or DC Police " approved rosters " by make / model .
Long guns are controlled by an allowed / not - allowed attributes list .
Non residents , with a place of business or employment in DC may register a firearm to be maintained at that place of business or employment .
There is a 10-day waiting period from purchase of firearm to possession .
AMMUNITION Section::::Ammunition .
An individual may not possess ammunition without also holding a valid firearms registration .
Until May 2012 , registrants were limited to possessing ammunition of the caliber of their registered weapon only .
The ammunition laws in DC were relaxed in May 2012 and valid registration holders may now purchase and transport ammunition of any caliber excepting 50BMG ( 50 BMG weapons are prohibited in DC ) and protective armor penetration ammunition .
Interstate sale and shipment of ammunition to valid registration holders is legal .
In DC , as in jurisdictions such as Massachusetts , any usable constituent part of ammunition is considered ammunition .
E.g. Expended center - fire casings capable of being reloaded are ammunition under current DC police interpretation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In June 1976 , eighteen months after Congress established home rule for the District , the D.C. Council voted 12 to 1 to restrict city residents from acquiring handguns .
Congress attempted to block this in September 1976 but failed .
In February 2003 , D.C. was sued in Parker v. District of Columbia for the ban on keeping guns at home .
This case eventually morphed into the District of Columbia v. Heller case .
In 2007 , the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals found the law unconstitutional .
The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case .
On June 26 , 2008 , it ruled the law unconstitutional .
Further challenges ensued in Heller II and Heller III .
On October 4 , 2011 , the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals , in Heller II , upheld D.C. 's registration requirements and ban on assault weapons and high capacity magazines .
The case was sent back to the district court for further proceedings .
The case returned to the appeals court as Heller III and on September 18 , 2015 , the court invalidated the following requirements : ( 1 ) re - registration of firearms every three years , ( 2 ) not being able to register more than one gun per month , ( 3 ) passing a written exam on D.C. gun laws before being allowed to register firearms , and ( 4 ) bringing firearms to the registration office for inspection at the time of registration .
It also upheld the following requirements : ( 1 ) registration of long guns , ( 2 ) applicants personally appear at the Firearms Registration Office to be photographed and fingerprinted , ( 3 ) applicants view a one - hour gun safety training video in order to register a firearm ( DC had , under pressure of the lawsuits , already substituted this free video for the prior $ 200 mandated live fire training course ) , and ( 4 ) registration and fingerprinting fees .
On July 24 , 2014 , D.C. 's ban on open and concealed carry was struck down as unconstitutional in Palmer v. District of Columbia .
Initially Judge Frederick Scullin , Jr. did not issue a stay of his ruling .
For a brief period of time , Judge Scullin 's ruling effectively legalized permitless open and concealed carry with a valid firearm registration card , and non - residents without felony convictions could carry openly or concealed in the District .
But on July 29 , 2014 Scullin issued an order that retroactively stayed the ruling until October 22 , 2014 .
In response to the ruling , a Restrictive May - Issue concealed carry licensing law was enacted in September 2014 .
Under the new law , an applicant must show " good reason , " to qualify for a concealed carry permit .
However , on May 18 , 2015 , the " good reason " requirement was ruled as likely unconstitutional and a preliminary injunction was issued against D.C. from enforcing that requirement in Wrenn v. District of Columbia .
This effectively required the District to grant licenses on a Shall - Issue basis to qualified applicants who have passed a criminal background check and completed the required firearms safety training .
Judge Scullin did not issue a stay of his ruling , but the Appeals Court did so on June 12 , 2015 , effectively leaving the restrictive " good reason " requirement in place while litigation continues .
It was later ruled that Judge Scullin , a visiting judge from New York , was outside his jurisdiction because he was only appointed to decide the Palmer case , not the follow - up Wrenn case .
The Wrenn case was subsequently reassigned to a new judge who denied the request for a preliminary injunction .
On May 17 , 2016 a separate case ( Grace v. District of Columbia ) was decided by District Court Judge Richard J. Leon .
The Court issued a preliminary injunction that the " good reason " requirement was likely be unconstitutional and enjoined its enforcement .
The order said that anyone who met the eligibility requirements for a concealed carry license absent the good reason stipulation can not be denied the license ; the order was not stayed originally , but was subsequently stayed on May 27 , 2016 .
Both the Wrenn and Grace cases were consolidated before the U.S. Court of Appeals in D.C. and oral arguments were held on September 20 , 2016 .
On July 25 , 2017 , in a 2 - 1 decision , the court invalidated the " good reason " requirement .
The decision was put on hold to allow D.C. to appeal .
D.C. filed its appeal for rehearing en banc on August 24 , 2017 but its request was denied on September 28 , 2017 .
D.C. declined to appeal to the Supreme Court .
REFERENCES