BIRTH ( AMERICAN HORROR STORY )
" Birth " is the eleventh episode of the of the television series American Horror Story , which premiered on the network FX on December 14 , 2011 .
The episode was written by Tim Minear and directed by Alfonso Gomez - Rejon .
This episode is rated TV - MA ( LV ) .
The episode was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Miniseries or a Movie .
In this episode , Vivien ( Connie Britton ) gives birth and Violet ( Taissa Farmiga ) learns that Tate ( Evan Peters ) is the biological father to one of her new siblings .
Kate Mara and Zachary Quinto guest star as Hayden McClaine and Chad Warwick , respectively .
PLOT 1984 Section::::Plot .
Section::::1984 .
Nora ( Lily Rabe ) protects a young Tate ( Paul Butler ) from the Infantata ( Ben Woolf ) , whom she still refers to as her son , Thaddeus .
She tells Tate that if he tells them to " go away " , the ghosts will listen and leave him alone .
Tate grows closer to her , telling her that he wished he had her as a mother .
2011 Section::::2011 .
Tate ( Evan Peters ) can not promise Vivien 's baby to Nora , for fear of revealing to Violet that he raped her mother , but Nora is resolved to take the child anyway .
Ben ( Dylan McDermott ) picks up Vivien ( Connie Britton ) to take her from the ward to her flight to Florida , not understanding why Violet ( Taissa Farmiga ) refuses to leave with him .
The doctor strongly warns Vivien and Ben that , despite only being six months in the womb , one of the twins is ready to be born any minute , and the other twin is dying because the dominant twin is taking all the nutrients .
In the house , Violet and Tate encounter Chad ( Zachary Quinto ) and Patrick ( Teddy Sears ) preparing a nursery and cribs , and they reveal they plan to take the twins .
Violet objects and contacts Constance ( Jessica Lange ) for help .
Constance confronts Chad and says he can have Ben 's child , but her grandson is her own .
Learning that Tate is the father of the other twin , Chad mocks her and remains resolved to take both children .
Constance and Violet enlist the help of Billie Dean ( Sarah Paulson ) , who senses Violet is dead , but keeps it a secret from Constance at her request .
She tells Violet that she can banish a spirit if she burns one of its close possessions and recites the word " Croatoan " .
Tate obtains Patrick 's ring when Patrick attacks him , while screaming that he could have been " free " of Chad and the house if Tate had n't killed him , which Chad overhears , leaving him heartbroken .
Ben enters the house to get Vivien 's bags and Violet .
Violet tells him that she is dead from suicide and that " once you die in this house you do n't get to leave " , and urges him to take Vivien far away from the house and its ghosts before she gives birth , but Ben refuses to listen to her and takes her to the car .
Meanwhile , Vivien goes into labor in the car and Constance appears , and takes her into the house .
The power goes out and ghosts destroy the car , forcing Ben and Vivien to have the babies there .
Dr. Charles Montgomery ( Matt Ross ) handles the delivery , with the nurses ' Maria and Gladys ( Celia Finkelstein and Rosa Salazar ) assistance .
Constance urges Ben to accept the house 's help with the birth .
In the basement , Violet burns Patrick 's ring and Chad 's watch , and recites the spell , but Chad mocks her , saying that " banishment spells " are all fake .
When she asks why he is destroying the cribs , he explains that he now knows that Patrick no longer loves him and has given up .
He then tells her that Tate killed him and Patrick and also raped Vivien , which Violet refuses to believe .
While Vivien gives birth , Ben helps her with her breathing , remembering the day Violet was born .
The first twin is stillborn , and Dr. Montgomery hands it to Nora .
Constance takes the second twin , and she and Moira ( Frances Conroy ) gush over it , until Hayden ( Kate Mara ) appears and demands the child .
Vivien begins to postpartum hemorrhage due to the larger child , and Violet appears , and apologizes to her , and urges her to let go and join her in death .
Ben , unaware of Violet 's presence , urges Vivien to live , promising her that they can still have a happy life together .
Vivien dies and Ben finds himself alone .
Violet confronts Tate , revealing that she knows everything he has done and she forces him to remember the school massacre .
Then asks why he raped her mother .
Distraught , Tate begins sobbing and begs her for forgiveness , saying that Violet has changed him .
She believes him , but can not forgive him because Vivien is dead and Ben is alone .
She states that he must pay for what he did and that , therefore , she can not be with him anymore .
She forcefully banishes him by saying " Go away " and Tate screams "
You 're all I have " in a last effort for forgiveness , and then he disappears .
Violet , alone and heartbroken , is soon comforted by Vivien 's ghost , who tells her she was brave and that she is proud of her .
Violet says she 's sorry that she and the baby died , and Vivien states that she did n't lose her baby – referring to Violet .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The episode was written by consulting producer Tim Minear , while Alfonso Gomez - Rejon directed .
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , series co - creator Ryan Murphy stated that he had told Connie Britton , early on , that her character Vivien would die this season .
" We 've really had the whole season mapped out from the beginning , " he said .
" In the meetings with the core actors , the three leads being Connie , Dylan [ McDermott ] and Jessica [ Lange ] , as we tried to snare them we were able to say this is where you start , this is the middle , and this is where you end up .
So , yes , I was able to tell Connie really the whole run of the series . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes reports a 100 % approval rating , based on 9 reviews .
James Queally of The Star - Ledger commented about the episode , " For 10 episodes American Horror Story has ranged from ridiculous to ghoulish fun ... but " Birth " is all execution , and quite frankly , that might be exactly what this show needs to be .
"
The A.V. Club Todd VanDerWerff stated , " In general , I thought " Birth " was basically fine , just my kind of genre hokum / guilty pleasure .
But at the same time , it was just a touch too sedate . "
In its original American broadcast , " Birth " was seen by an estimated 2.59 million household viewers and earned a 1.4 rating share among adults aged 18–49 , according to Nielsen Media Research .
The episode was up in number of viewers but down in the age range from the previous episode .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Birth " at TV.com
* " Birth " at TV Guide.com