JASON WALLACE Jason Wallace ( born 1969 ) is an author living in South West London .
He is the author of Out of Shadows , the 2010 Costa Children 's Book of the Year .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life . Jason Wallace was born in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire , South - West England .
He has quite an interesting family tree as he is a descendant of Lord George Sanger , a world - famous Victorian circus owner , an International English cricketer , and he is also loosely related ( through a marriage in the family tree ) to J.R.R. Tolkien .
Jason lived in London , England in his younger years with his family before residing and attending Peterhouse Boys ' School , a boarding school in 1983 in Zimbabwe , Africa .
The family emigrated after his mother remarried .
At the age of seventeen he aspired for a career as an author and although determined he knew it would be a challenging ambition .
Jason spent any free time he had writing and in his younger years he read many non - fiction books and comic books .
He was a fan of comic books such as The Adventures of Tintin and Asterix and authors including Dr .
Seuss and Richard Scarry .
In his childhood , among some of his favorite books were James and the Giant Peach and Danny the Champion of the World .
In his adolescent and adult life , he was a fan of Stephen King and James Herbert .
Ironically , his least favorite types of literature were history and politics - something he now enjoys reading in great quantities .
His experiences in a Zimbabwean boarding school following the Zimbabwe War of Liberation / Rhodesian Bush War laid the building blocks of his first and Costa Children 's Book Award winning novel Out of Shadows .
Jason currently resides in South West London , England .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Jason Wallace had a challenging journey to becoming a published author .
Jason Wallace stated that " getting published did n't happen overnight , and writing had to become " the other job " for which I did n't get paid while life continued " .
Jason Wallace 's natural talent as a writer was motivated through education .
He says he had " always had a fertile imagination , but as far as I 'm concerned
it 's the school I need to thank for inadvertently nurturing my will to write through strong discipline
( there was no such thing as an excuse .
" Out of Shadows was published in March 2010 and is currently his only published novel .
Jason Wallace 's Out of Shadows has received extensive recognition ( international rights currently sold to USA , Norway , Turkey , Brazil and France ) and has established him as a successful published author .
Jason Wallace 's second novel , Encounters , has been a long time coming but is finally due to be published on 4 May 2017 .
The novel is also set in Zimbabwe , but is very different to Out of Shadows .
It was inspired by astonishing true events in the 1990s .
INSPIRATION FOR OUT OF SHADOWS Section::::Inspiration for Out of Shadows .
Out of Shadows took one year and six months to complete .
While he attended a boarding school in Zimbabwe not too long after the Rhodesian Bush War / Zimbabwean War of Liberation ended , Jason Wallace wanted to write a story of what he had seen or experienced .
The political scene in Zimbabwe was declining and troubled .
This inspired Jason Wallace and he began writing fictional stories of what he was encountering .
Though the characters in the novel are not real they served to demonstrate the attitudes or personalities " a very few people " were portraying .
Wallace notes that he " came up with the idea of " What if ... ? " and took it from there " when he was writing Out of Shadows .
There may be many similar aspects that his story may share with real life but they are very general details and there is nothing very specific .
OUT OF SHADOWS BACKGROUND Section::::Out of Shadows Background .
Out of Shadows is set Zimbabwe during the 1980s and is historically accurate due to the experiences Wallace shared in the novel .
Wallace focused on several themes in the novel Out of Shadows such as bullying , racism , politics and morality .
The book is cross - over novel , written for both adults and a younger audience of 13 + due to some difficult topics that are being dealt with .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
" Zimbabwe : 1980s - The war is over , independence has been won and Robert Mugabe has come to power offering hope , land and freedom to black Africans .
It is the end of the Old Way and the start of a promising new era .
For Robert Jacklin , it 's all new : new continent , new country , new school .
And very quickly he is forced to understand a new way of thinking , because for some of his classmates the sound of guns is still loud , and their battles rage on ... white boys who want their old country back , not this new black African government .
Boys like Ivan .
Clever , cunning , wicked Ivan .
For him , there is still one last battle to fight , and he 's taking it right to the very top ...
" REVIEWS * " … a children 's classic ... " - Daily Express *
" ... gripping ... something that schools should study and readers read . "
-
The Times *
" ... entirely convincing ... a powerful , devastating read ... "
- Patrick Ness , writing for The Guardian *
" Honest , brave and devastating , Out of Shadows is more than just memorable .
It 's impossible to look away . "
- Markus Zusak , author of The Book Thief *
" ... excellent ... read on if you have the courage . "
- Nick Tucker , Independent on Sunday * " ... a provocative story , powerfully written . "
- Keith Gray , The Scotsman *
" This novel excels , bringing readers up to the grim , uncertain present with mastery " - Kirkus Magazine , starred review *
" ... original ... thought - provoking and ultimately shocking " -
Good Book Guide *
" ... one of those rare , outstanding books ... " - Browns Books for Students * " ... one of the best debut novels I 've ever read " - www.wondrousreads.com *
" ... extraordinary ... startlingly original ... " - Jake Hope , writing for The Bookseller * " ... expert and disturbing ... " -
Booktrust *
" ... memorable , moving and disturbing ... " - Lovereading4kids February 2010 ' new gen ' Debut of the Month title * " ... a gripping story ...
" - Write Away AWARDS * WINNER - Costa Children 's Book of the Year 2010 -
Costa Book Awards - " ... a unanimous winner ...
A stunning debut novel without a false note .
Accomplished and powerful , it changes the way you think . "
* WINNER - the Branford Boase Award 2011 - Branford Boase Awards
* WINNER - the UKLA Children 's Book Award 2011 - UKLA
* Shortlisted for the CILIP Carnegie Medal 2011 -
The CILIP Carnegie Children 's Book Awards
* Shortlisted for the Booktrust Teenage Prize 2010
- Booktrust
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Jason Wallace at Library of Congress Authorities — with 2 catalogue records