GUN LAWS IN ILLINOIS
Gun laws in Illinois regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of Illinois in the United States .
To legally possess firearms or ammunition , Illinois residents must have a Firearm Owners Identification ( FOID ) card , which is issued by the Illinois State Police to any qualified applicant .
Non - residents who may legally possess firearms in their home state are exempt from this requirement .
The state police issue licenses for the concealed carry of handguns to qualified applicants age 21 or older who pass a 16-hour training course .
However , any law enforcement agency can object to an individual being granted a license " based upon a reasonable suspicion that the applicant is a danger to himself or herself or others , or a threat to public safety " .
Objections are considered by a Concealed Carry Licensing Review Board , which decides whether or not the license will be issued , based on " a preponderance of the evidence " .
Licenses issued by other states are not recognized , except for carry in a vehicle .
Open carry is prohibited in most areas .
When a firearm is being transported by a person without a concealed carry license , it must be unloaded and enclosed in a case , or broken down in a non - functioning state , or not immediately accessible .
For private sales , the seller must verify the buyer 's FOID card , and keep a record of the sale for at least 10 years .
Lost or stolen guns must be reported to the police .
There is a waiting period of 72 hours to take possession after purchasing a firearm .
Possession of automatic firearms , short - barreled shotguns , or suppressors is prohibited .
Possession of short - barreled rifles is permitted only for those who have an ATF Curios and Relics license or are a member of a military reenactment group .
The state does not restrict the sale or possession of firearms that have been defined as assault weapons , or of magazines that can hold more than a certain number of rounds of ammunition , but some local jurisdictions do restrict them .
Illinois has state preemption for certain areas of gun law , which overrides the home rule guideline in those cases .
Some local governments have enacted ordinances that are more restrictive than those of the state in areas not covered by state preemption .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes } FOID
CARDS Section::::FOID cards .
To legally possess or purchase firearms or ammunition , Illinois residents must have a Firearm Owner 's Identification ( FOID ) card , which is issued by the Illinois State Police .
The police must issue FOID cards to eligible applicants .
An applicant is disqualified if he or she has been convicted of a felony or an act of domestic violence , is the subject of an order of protection , has been convicted of assault or battery or been a patient in a mental institution within the last five years , has been adjudicated as a mental defective , or is an illegal immigrant .
Applicants under the age of 21 must have the written consent of a parent or legal guardian who is also legally able to possess firearms .
When a firearm is sold or transferred , the buyer is required to present their FOID card .
This applies to private sales between individuals as well as to sales by Federal Firearms License ( FFL ) holders .
For firearm sales by an FFL holder , or at a gun show , the seller must perform an automated dial - up check with the State Police , to verify that the FOID card is valid , and to redo the background check of the buyer .
This additional checking is known as the Firearm Transfer Inquiry Program ( FTIP ) .
For private sales not at a gun show , the seller must also verify the buyer 's FOID card with the state police , and receive a transfer approval number , either via a web site or with a phone call .
The buyer is also required to present their FOID card when purchasing ammunition .
In 2011 , in the case of People v. Holmes , the Illinois Supreme Court ruled that non - Illinois residents who are permitted to possess a firearm in their home state are not required to have an Illinois FOID card .
Non - Illinois residents do not qualify to obtain a FOID card , but the FOID statute does make provisions for applicants who are employed in Illinois as law enforcement officers , armed security officers , or by the U.S. military .
A FOID card does not authorize the carrying of a concealed firearm , but having a FOID card is a prerequisite for obtaining a concealed carry license .
CONCEALED AND OPEN CARRY Section::::Concealed and open carry .
The Illinois State Police Department issues licenses for the concealed carry of handguns to qualified applicants age 21 or older who pass a 16-hour training course .
Illinois law says that the state police " shall issue " a license to a qualified applicant .
However , any law enforcement agency can object to an individual being granted a license " based upon a reasonable suspicion that the applicant is a danger to himself or herself or others , or a threat to public safety " .
Objections are considered by a Concealed Carry Licensing Review Board , which decides whether or not the license will be issued , based on " a preponderance of the evidence " .
Under revised rules implemented in July 2014 , the Review Board notifies the applicant by mail of the basis of the objection and identifies the agency that brought it .
In order to apply for a license the applicant must have in their possession the certificate from the required training , a valid drivers license or state ID card , a valid FOID card , a head and shoulder electronic photograph taken in the last 30 days , ten years of documented residency , fingerprints ( optional , but submitting an application without prints increases the potential processing time from 90 to 120 days ) , and the application fee .
Permits cost $ 150 for residents or $ 300 for non - residents , and are valid for five years .
An Illinois resident is defined as someone who qualifies for an Illinois driver 's license or state identification card due to establishment of a primary domicile in Illinois .
A non - resident is someone who has not resided in Illinois for more than 30 days and resides in another state or territory .
Non - residents may apply if their state is on a list of states with laws related to firearm ownership , possession , and carrying , that are " substantially similar " to the requirements to obtain a carry license in Illinois .
A non - resident applicant must also possess a carry license or permit from his or her state of residence , if applicable .
Prior to February 2017 , the Illinois State Police considered only Hawaii , New Mexico , South Carolina , and Virginia to qualify as substantially similar .
In February 2017 , the list of substantially similar states changed to Arkansas , Mississippi , Texas , and Virginia .
Illinois concealed carry licensees from the three states removed from the list of approved states received letters stating that their Illinois licenses were no longer valid .
Concealed carry permits or licenses issued by other states are not recognized , except that non - residents in possession of a carry permit or license from their home state may carry in a vehicle while traveling through Illinois .
Concealed carry is prohibited on public transportation , at a bar or restaurant that gets more than half its revenue from the sale of alcohol , at a public gathering or special event that requires a permit ( e.g. a street fair or festival ) , at a place where alcohol is sold for special events , and on private property where the owner has chosen not to allow it ( and , unless the property is a private residence , has posted an appropriate sign ) .
Concealed carry is also not allowed at any school , college or university , preschool or daycare facility , government building , courthouse , prison , jail , detention facility , hospital , playground , park , Cook County Forest Preserve area , stadium or arena for college or professional sports , amusement park , riverboat casino , off - track betting facility , library , zoo , museum , airport , nuclear facility , or place where firearms are prohibited under federal law .
However , concealed carry license holders who are in the parking lot of a prohibited location ( except a nuclear facility ) are allowed to carry a concealed firearm when they are in their vehicle , and to store their gun locked in their vehicle and out of plain view .
On February 1 , 2018 , the Illinois Supreme Court unanimously ruled that the state 's ban on possession of a firearm within 1,000 feet of a public park was unconstitutional .
When a license holder is carrying a concealed handgun , and is asked by a police officer if they are carrying , there is a duty to inform the officer that they are .
This can be done with a verbal reply , or by showing their concealed handgun license .
In accordance with federal law , persons who have been convicted of a felony , or of a misdemeanor act of domestic violence , are ineligible to receive a concealed carry license .
In Illinois persons who , within the last five years , have been convicted of a misdemeanor involving the use of force or violence , or received two convictions for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs , or been in residential or court - ordered treatment for substance abuse , are also ineligible to receive a license .
There are other conditions that make an applicant ineligible under state law , including having been a patient in a mental health facility in the last five years .
In compliance with the federal Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act , off - duty and retired police officers who qualify annually under state guidelines are allowed to carry concealed .
Open carry of firearms is generally illegal , except when hunting , or in a fixed place of business with the owner 's permission , or in one 's abode .
When a firearm is being transported it must be ( a ) unloaded and enclosed in a case , firearm carrying box , shipping box , or other container , or ( b ) broken down in a non - functioning state , or ( c ) not immediately accessible , or ( d ) carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm Concealed Carry Act by a person with a valid concealed carry license .
HISTORICAL STATE PROHIBITION OF CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Historical state prohibition of concealed carry .
Illinois was the last state to pass a law to allow the concealed carry of firearms by citizens .
The state 's original handgun carry
ban was enacted in 1949 , with the ban 's most recent revision being enacted in 1962 .
The pre - existing law forbade concealed carry , and generally prohibited open carry , except in counties that had enacted ordinances allowing open carry .
On December 11 , 2012 , a three - judge panel of the U.S. Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals , in the case of Moore v. Madigan , ruled that Illinois ' concealed carry ban was unconstitutional , and gave the state 180 days to change its laws .
Subsequently , the court granted a 30-day extension of the deadline .
On July 9 , 2013 , Illinois enacted the Firearm Concealed Carry Act , which established a system for the issuing of concealed carry licenses .
On September 12 , 2013 , the Illinois Supreme Court , in the case of People v. Aguilar , also ruled that the state 's Aggravated Unlawful Use of a Weapon law , which completely prohibited concealed carry , was unconstitutional .
On January 5 , 2014 , the state police began accepting applications for licenses to carry concealed handguns .
On February 28 , 2014 , the state police announced that they had begun issuing concealed carry licenses .
OTHER STATE LAWS
Section::::Other state laws .
Article 1 section 22 of the Illinois Constitution states , " Subject only to the police power , the right of the individual citizen to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed . "
When purchasing a firearm in Illinois there is a 72-hour waiting period after the sale before the buyer can take possession .
When a firearm is sold by a licensed dealer , the seller is required to provide a gun lock , unless the firearm itself includes an integrated locking mechanism .
For private sales , the seller is required to keep a record of the transfer for at least 10 years .
Lost or stolen guns must be reported to the police within 72 hours .
A gun owner can be charged with a crime if a minor under the age of 14 gains access to their firearm when it is unsecured ( i.e. not locked in a box or secured with a trigger lock ) and causes death or great bodily harm .
Regarding Title II weapons , the possession of automatic firearms ( such as machine guns ) , short - barreled shotguns , and suppressors is prohibited .
Possession of short - barreled rifles is allowed for ATF Curios and Relics license holders , or , if the rifle is historically accurate has an overall length of at least 26 inches , for members of a bona fide military reenactment group .
While possession of a large - bore destructive device itself is not prohibited , possession of an artillery projectile , shell or grenade with over 1/4 ounce of explosive is prohibited .
There is no prohibition against non - sporting shotguns ( such as the Armsel Striker )
deemed destructive devices by the ATF , nor is there one for AOWs ( Any Other Weapons ) .
There is a specific prohibition against the possession of firearms designed to appear as a wireless telephone .
In Illinois , muzzleloaders and black powder guns are considered firearms .
Air guns that are larger than .18 caliber and that have a muzzle velocity greater than 700 feet per second are also regulated as firearms .
To purchase or possess a Taser or stun gun , a Firearm Owners Identification ( FOID ) card is required .
There is a 24-hour waiting period between purchase and taking possession .
Illinois has no stand - your - ground law , however there is also no duty to retreat .
The use of force is justified when a person reasonably believes that it is necessary " to prevent imminent death or great bodily harm to himself or another , or the commission of a forcible felony .
" There are some additional protections for defense against unlawful entry into a dwelling .
Illinois has a red flag law that allows family members or police to petition a judge to issue an order to confiscate the firearms of a person deemed an immediate and present danger to themselves or others .
The petitioner must prove by clear and convincing evidence that the person poses a danger by having a firearm .
The hearing for issuing the order may be done without the person being present , but the person may then request a hearing , to be held within two weeks , where they may defend themselves .
If the order of confiscation is upheld , the person 's guns may be taken away , and their FOID card suspended , for up to six months .
After that the person 's guns must be returned to them , and their FOID card reinstated , unless the court finds grounds to renew the suspension .
If a qualified medical examiner , law enforcement official , or school administrator determines that a gun owner 's mental state makes them " a clear and present danger " to themselves or to others , they must report this to the Illinois State Police ( ISP ) within 24 hours .
The ISP may then revoke the person 's Firearm Owners Identification ( FOID ) card , making them ineligible to legally possess firearms .
LOCAL LAWS Section::::Local laws .
Illinois has state preemption of firearm laws for " the regulation , licensing , possession , and registration of handguns and ammunition for a handgun , and the transportation of any firearm and ammunition " .
There is also state preemption for " the regulation of the possession and ownership of assault weapons " , except for laws passed before July 20 , 2013 , which are grandfathered in .
In other areas of gun law , some local governments have passed ordinances that are more restrictive than those of the state .
Chicago has banned the possession of certain semi - automatic firearms that it defines as assault weapons .
Chicago residents must " immediately " report a firearm that is stolen or lost , and must report the transfer of a firearm within 48 hours of such transfer .
In a home where a person younger than 18 is present , all guns must be secured with a trigger lock , or stored in a locked container , or secured to the body of the legal owner .
Chicago formerly prohibited the sale of firearms within city limits , but on January 6 , 2014 , a federal judge ruled that this was unconstitutional .
The judge granted the city 's request for six months to pass new laws regulating gun shops .
On June 25 , 2014 , the city council passed a new law , allowing gun stores but restricting them to certain limited areas of the city , requiring that all gun sales be videotaped , and limiting buyers to one gun per 30-day period .
Store owners must make their records available to the police , and employees must be trained to identify possible straw purchasers .
With the passage of the gun shop ordinance , Chicago also struck a previous ban on the transfer of ammunition .
On January 18 , 2017 , a federal appeals court ruled that the city 's revised gun shop law was unconstitutional .
Cook County has banned the possession of certain semi - automatic firearms that it has defined as assault weapons .
Residents must report to the county sheriff within 48 hours any firearms that are stolen , lost , destroyed , or sold or otherwise transferred .
The sheriff may share this information with other law enforcement agencies .
Licensed firearms dealers must provide information to the county regarding purchasers and the guns they purchase , and receive approval before conducting sales .
An individual may not purchase more than one firearm in a 30-day period .
In a home where a person younger than 21 is present , all guns must be secured with a trigger lock , or stored unloaded in a locked container separate from the ammunition , or secured to the body of the legal owner .
In Cook County , local laws , such as those of Chicago , take precedence over county laws that regulate similar matters .
Cook County imposes a twenty - five dollar tax on the sale of any firearm by a retail dealer , in addition to the usual county sales tax .
The county also has a tax on the sale of ammunition — five cents per round for centerfire ammunition and one cent per round for rimfire ammunition .
The possession of firearms that have been variously defined as assault weapons is also illegal in Lincolnwood , Skokie , Evanston , Highland Park , North Chicago , Melrose Park , Riverdale , Dolton , Hazel Crest , Homewood , and the part of Buffalo Grove that 's in Cook County .
The storage or transportation of assault weapons is restricted in Morton Grove , Winnetka , Country Club Hills , and University Park .
Sales and transfers of assault weapons are prohibited in Niles .
In December 2015 the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the case of Friedman v. Highland Park , a challenge to that city 's assault weapons ban .
Deerfield had passed an ordinance in 2013 that regulated the storage and transportation of assault weapons and high capacity magazines ; in April 2018 the ordinance was amended to ban possession .
In June 2018 the law was blocked from going into effect by a Lake County Circuit Court judge who held that the ordinance violates a state preemption statute .
Other municipalities have also enacted various firearm restrictions .
HISTORICAL RESTRICTIONS ON THE POSSESSION OF HANDGUNS Section::::Historical restrictions on the possession of handguns .
Formerly some Illinois municipalities had laws restricting the possession of handguns .
By the late 1980s , several Illinois municipalities had banned the possession of handguns .
Chicago required the registration of all firearms but did not allow handguns to be registered , which had the effect of outlawing their possession , unless they were grandfathered in by being registered before April 16 , 1982 .
Additionally , several Chicago suburbs had enacted outright prohibitions on handgun possession .
On June 26 , 2008 , the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Washington , D.C. 's handgun ban in the case of District of Columbia v. Heller .
Chicago and the other municipalities came under legal pressure to change their laws .
In the months following the Heller decision , handgun bans were repealed in the suburbs of Wilmette , Morton Grove , Evanston , and Winnetka , but Chicago and Oak Park kept their laws in effect .
On June 28 , 2010 , in the case of McDonald v. Chicago , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the handgun bans of Chicago and Oak Park to be unconstitutional .
On July 12 , 2010 , a new Chicago city ordinance took effect that allowed the possession of handguns with certain restrictions .
Residents were required to obtain a Chicago Firearms Permit .
To get the permit they were required to complete a 5-hour firearms training course , pass a background check ( including fingerprinting ) , and pay a $ 100 permit fee .
Chicago 's gun registration requirement was retained , with new registrations beling allowed for the first time since 1982 .
Possession of firearms was permitted only inside a dwelling , not in a garage or on the outside grounds of the property .
Only one gun at a time was allowed to be kept in a usable state .
On July 19 , 2010 , Oak Park amended its town ordinance to allow handgun possession in one 's home , leaving no remaining town in Illinois that completely banned handguns .
On July 9 , 2013 , Illinois enacted the Firearm Concealed Carry Act , which set up a permitting system for the concealed carry of firearms .
Another provision of this law is state preemption for " the regulation , licensing , possession , and registration of handguns and ammunition for a handgun , and the transportation of any firearm and ammunition " .
This invalidated Chicago 's requirements for gun registration and for an additional permit for the possession of firearms .
On September 11 , 2013 , the Chicago City Council repealed the law requiring the registration of firearms and the law requiring a city issued firearm owners permit .
They also changed the law to allow the carrying of firearms on the grounds of one 's property outside as well as inside the home .
KNIVES Section::::Knives .
In Illinois , it is illegal to possess a throwing star or ballistic knife .
A knife with a blade more than three inches in length is considered a dangerous weapon , and it is illegal to carry such a knife with an intent to inflict harm on another person 's well being .
Some local governments have knife laws that are more restrictive than those of the state .
In Chicago it is illegal to carry a knife with a blade more than two - and - a - half inches in length .
SEE ALSO
* FOID ( firearms ) * Law of Illinois * McDonald v. Chicago
* Moore v. Madigan *
People v. Aguilar REFERENCES