GUN LAWS IN NEW MEXICO Gun laws in New Mexico regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of New Mexico in the United States .
New Mexico is among states with some of the least restrictive firearms laws in the country .
State laws governing the possession and use of firearms include those in New Mexico Statutes Chapter 30 , Article 7 , " Weapons and Explosives " .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes } CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND STATE PREEMPTION Section::::Constitutional provisions and state preemption .
New Mexico has state preemption of firearms laws , so local governments may not restrict the possession or use of firearms .
However , local jurisdictions may restrict or ban the discharge of firearms within their boundaries .
In 1986 , Article 2 , Section 6 of the state constitution was amended to say , " No law shall abridge the right of the citizen to keep and bear arms for security and defense , for lawful hunting and recreational use and for other lawful purposes , but nothing herein shall be held to permit the carrying of concealed weapons .
No municipality or county shall regulate , in any way , an incident of the right to keep and bear arms . "
State gun laws do not pre - empt tribal laws on Native American reservations , which cover a significant portion of the state .
The only exception to this is when one is traveling through the reservation on a state - owned highway ( includes US and Interstate highways ) , in which case state firearms policies and protections under the federal Firearm Owners ' Protection Act ( FOPA ) do apply .
While some tribes have established gun control policies that match New Mexico state law and honor New Mexico concealed carry permits , other tribes do not recognize any concealed carry permit regardless of where it was issued , and have far more restrictive gun control laws .
Tribes with laws that do not match New Mexico state law have policies on open and concealed carry that vary from No - Issue to Shall - Issue , depending on the tribal nation .
Some Native American reservations that do allow open or concealed carry ( but do not honor the New Mexico Concealed Handgun License ) typically have established their own permitting systems , where applications for concealed carry permits are processed and adjudicated by the respective tribal council or tribal police .
Permits on such reservations may be available to the general public or limited to tribal members , depending on the tribal nation policies .
OPEN AND CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Open and Concealed
carry .
New Mexico is a Shall - Issue state for the concealed carry of handguns , and permits the open carry of loaded firearms without a permit .
A New Mexico Concealed Handgun License ( CHL ) is required by in - state residents to carry in a concealed manner a loaded handgun while on foot .
Per state law , a firearm is considered " loaded " when a magazine with live ammunition is inserted into the weapon and/or a live round is in the firing chamber .
( citation needed )
Additionally , state law ( NMSA 29 - 19 - 2 ) defines a concealed handgun as " a loaded handgun that is not visible to the ordinary observations of a reasonable person .
" This definition creates legal ambiguity for partially - exposed weapons , as the firearm may be visible to one person and thus no violation of law occurs since it would be viewed as open carry .
However , the same partially - exposed weapon may not be readily visible to a second person , thus potentially placing the carrying person in violation of the state 's concealed carry law if the individual carrying does not have a valid license for concealed carry .
A CHL is not required for open carry , concealed carry of an unloaded firearm on foot , or concealed carry of a loaded or unloaded firearm while in a vehicle ( including motorcycles , bicycles , off - road vehicles , motor homes , or riding a horse ) .
An applicant for a concealed carry permit must be a resident of New Mexico and at least 21 years of age .
Each permit specifies the category and caliber of handgun that may be carried , but is also valid for a smaller caliber .
The applicant must complete a state approved training course that includes at least 15 hours of classroom and firing range time , and must pass a shooting proficiency test for that category and caliber of handgun .
A permit is valid for four years , but license holders must pass the shooting proficiency test every two years .
An applicant may appeal the denial of a Concealed Handgun License by requesting a hearing before the Department of Public Safety within 35 days of receipt of an Order of Denial for a CHL .
An unfavorable ruling on the appeal by the DPS may be further appealed through the New Mexico courts .
New Mexico currently recognizes concealed carry permits from or has reciprocal agreements with the following states : Alaska , Arizona , Arkansas , Colorado , Delaware , Florida , Idaho , Kansas , Louisiana , Michigan , Mississippi , Missouri , Nebraska , Nevada , North Carolina , North Dakota , Ohio , Oklahoma , South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , West Virginia , and Wyoming .
New Mexico does not issue CCW permits to non - residents , except for Active Duty military members permanently assigned to a military installation within the state .
Part - time residents with a valid New Mexico ID or Driver 's license may apply for a New Mexico CHL .
New Mexico does not recognize out - of - state nonresident permits held by in - state residents for concealed carry ; in other words , New Mexico residents must hold a New Mexico CHL to lawfully carry a concealed , loaded handgun while on foot within the state .
New Mexico is a Permissive Open Carry state .
Open carry of a loaded firearm without a license is legal statewide , except for restricted places listed in the section below .
Provisions in the New Mexico Constitution prevent counties or municipalities from enacting ordinances restricting or banning open carry .
HISTORY Section::::History .
New Mexico 's current concealed carry permit law was enacted in 2003 .
Prior to 2003 , New Mexico was a hybrid No - Issue / Unrestricted state , where concealed carry was completely banned in incorporated cities and towns ( although open carry without a permit has always been permitted statewide ) .
In unincorporated rural areas , concealed carry without a license was legal .
In 2001 , state lawmakers passed a May - Issue concealed carry law that would have allowed cities and counties to opt out of honoring concealed carry permits and maintain outright bans on concealed carry .
At the time , officials in most larger cities , notably Albuquerque and Santa Fe , strongly opposed the legalization of statewide concealed carry .
After the May - Issue law was enacted but before it could go into effect , the City of Albuquerque filed a lawsuit ( Baca v. New Mexico Department of Public Safety ) to block implementation of the concealed carry law .
Ultimately the May - Issue concealed carry law was struck down by the New Mexico Supreme Court before it could go into effect .
The current Shall - Issue law , which pre - empted any existing local restrictions on firearms carry , was passed in 2003 , with the issuance of Concealed Handgun Licenses beginning later that year , after surviving its own legal challenge by concealed carry opponents .
RESTRICTED PLACES
Section::::Restricted Places .
Additionally , New Mexico law prohibits the carrying of firearms with or without a permit in the following locations or circumstances : * K-12 schools ( although a firearm may be kept in a vehicle while picking up or dropping off a passenger at a K-12 school ) * State and federal courthouses , unless specifically authorized by the presiding judge * State colleges and university campuses , although firearms may be kept in locked vehicles while on campus * Military installations , except when authorized by the Installation Commander
* As of July 1 , 2010 , 30 - 7 - 3 NMSA a person licensed to carry a concealed handgun in New Mexico is allowed to legally carry into a licensed liquor establishment that DOES NOT sell alcohol for consumption on the premise .
Further a person licensed to carry a concealed handgun in New Mexico is allowed to carry into a restaurant licensed to sell only beer and wine that derives no less than sixty percent of its annual gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the premises , unless the restaurant has a sign posted , in a conspicuous location at each public entrance , prohibiting the carrying of firearms , or the person is verbally instructed by the owner or manager that the carrying of a firearm is not permitted in the restaurant .
*
Aboard public transportation ( e.g. , city buses and Rail Runner Express )
* Private property where owners or tenants state that no firearms are permitted on premises * Secure areas of airports
* Native American reservations , unless permitted by the respective Tribal Council * While under the influence of alcohol or drugs , including certain prescription or over - the - counter medications Even with a concealed carry permit , it is not legal to carry a firearm into a federal building , school , or restaurant that serves alcohol .
Carrying of a concealed weapon into a store that sells alcohol for off site consumption is legal , but open carry is not allowed in these locations .
The state also has an " opt - out " statute , allowing home and business owners the ability to legally forbid firearms on their property and/or in their buildings with appropriately displayed signage stating such prohibition .
While violating these " gun free " areas is a 4th Degree Felony that is punishable by up to 18 months imprisonment and/or a $ 5,000 fine , it is more common for those who inadvertently carry into such areas to be reprimanded by law enforcement officials and possibly have their concealed carry license suspended or revoked .
New Mexico has an " extended domain " law , which means that a person 's vehicle ( including motorcycles , bicycles , all - terrain vehicles , RVs , and while riding a horse ) is considered an extension of their home .
It is therefore legal to carry a loaded firearm without a permit , openly or concealed , anywhere in a vehicle .
On foot , no permit is required to carry a firearm unless it is both loaded and concealed .
Concealed carry of an unloaded firearm is legal without a permit in New Mexico , however the same restrictions that apply to openly carried firearms apply .
Persons under age 19 can not carry in this manner unless traveling to certain sporting , recreational or training events as defined in law or on property controlled by parents , grandparents or guardians and under their supervision .
CASTLE DOCTRINE Section::::Castle Doctrine .
Court precedents and New Mexico 's 1907 self - defense law allow someone to use deadly force to stop an attack inside one 's own home ( to include lawfully - occupied apartments , condominiums , RVs and hotel rooms ) , but the state courts have ruled that the use of lethal force is not justifiable for the defense of property alone .
The use of lethal force to protect one 's life or that of a third party outside of the home remains a legal gray area in New Mexico , and such situations are handled by authorities on a case - by - case basis .
A 1946 ruling by the New Mexico Supreme Court ( State v. Couch ) held that defense of habitation alone , without specific statute , gave a homeowner the right to meet force with force " for a man 's house is his castle . "
As a result of this ruling , judges provide a specific instruction to juries in self - defense cases , which states , " A person who is threatened with an attack need not retreat .
In the exercise of his right of self defense , he may stand his ground and defend himself . "
As applied to self - defense situations inside the home , the Couch ruling establishes the presumption that an aggressor unlawfully entering an occupied dwelling intends to inflict bodily harm on a homeowner or lawful occupant , thereby justifying the use of lethal force in such situations .
Authorities currently conduct investigations to determine on a case - by - case basis if the use of lethal force in self - defense was justified , particularly for situations occurring outside of the home .
Factors that authorities consider in determining whether or not the use of lethal force was justified include : 1 ) whether the aggressor acted without provocation by the defender ; 2 ) the aggressor reasonably posed a risk of bodily harm to the defender ( or third party subject to the attack )
; 3 ) whether there was an avenue of escape available to the defender in order to avoid or evade the aggressor ; and 4 ) whether the amount of force used to stop the attack was reasonable .
It must be noted that those who lawfully use lethal force in self - defense may still face prosecution and have to reference the 1946 Couch decision as an affirmative defense to any criminal charges arising from the incident .
Additionally , one using lethal force in lawful self - defense does not have immunity either through statute or court precedents from potential lawsuits by the aggressor and/or his or her surviving relatives .
REFERENCES