GUN LAWS IN VIRGINIA Gun laws in Virginia regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the Commonwealth of Virginia in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes § 18.2 - 287.4§ 18.2 - 282 For open carry in a vehicle , the firearm must be " properly secured in a container or compartment within the vehicle " ( ie glove box , center console , trunk , etc ) .
The container / compartment does not have to be locked , the firearm may be within the reach of the driver or a passenger , and the firearm may be loaded .
This does not preempt an employer from prohibiting firearms " at a place of employment if there is a company policy or signage prohibiting firearms on the premises . "
Furthermore , a " county or city may by ordinance make it unlawful for any person to transport , possess or carry a loaded shotgun or loaded rifle in any vehicle on any public street , road , or highway within such locality . "
However , this does not " apply to duly authorized law - enforcement officers or military personnel in the performance of their lawful duties , nor to any person who reasonably believes that a loaded rifle or shotgun is necessary for his personal safety in the course of his employment or business . "
In addition , a firearm may be considered " open carry " in a vehicle if the firearm is openly visible , though this is not as well established as the " secured in a container / compartment " rule .
§ 18.2 - 308.2:01 § 18.2 - 308.7 § 18.2 - 282 . }
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The Constitution of Virginia protects the right of the people to keep and bear arms from government infringement .
The Commonwealth of Virginia preempts local regulation of several aspects of firearms , though some local regulation is explicitly permitted .
Virginia passed the Uniform Machine Gun Act , which was drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws .
The only firearms in Virginia that are prohibited are the Armsel Striker , also known as the Striker 12 , similar shotguns , and any " plastic firearms .
" Firearms must contain at least 3.7 ounces of electromagnetically detectable metal in the barrel , slide , cylinder , frame or receiver , and when subjected to x - ray machines , generate an image that accurately depicts their shape .
For example , Glock pistols which have polymer frames and metal slides and barrels are legal .
There are no magazine capacity limitations , except that a concealed handgun permit ( CHP ) is required in order to carry magazines with more than 20 rounds in some urban , public areas .
Prohibited places include courthouses , air carrier terminals , schools , Capitol and General Assembly buildings ( open carrying only , members of the General Assembly and those with a valid CHP are permitted in the Capitol General Assembly buildings ) , and churches , though some exceptions apply , including a 2011 Attorney General opinion that personal protection constitutes good and sufficient reason to carry at a church .
George Mason University , Virginia Commonwealth University , and Virginia Polytechnic University ( Virginia Tech )
currently possess rules that prohibit firearms on school property .
A 2006 opinion issued by State Attorney General Robert F. McDonnell stated " ...
the governing boards of Virginia 's public colleges and universities may not impose a general prohibition on the carrying of concealed weapons by permitted individuals ...
Pursuant to specific grants of statutory authority , however , it is my opinion that colleges and universities may regulate the conduct of students and employees to prohibit them from carrying concealed weapons on campus . "
In 2011 , the Virginia Supreme Court found that the language used by George Mason University ( GMU ) to " ... not impose a total ban of weapons on campus .
Rather , the regulation is tailored , restricting weapons only in those places where people congregate and are most vulnerable – inside campus buildings and at campus events .
Individuals may still carry or possess weapons on the open grounds of GMU , and in other places on campus not enumerated in the regulation . "
There are age restrictions on the possession of firearms and some people are prohibited from possessing firearms due to certain criminal convictions .
Licensed dealers must have the Virginia State Police conduct a background check prior to completing the sale of certain firearms .
Persons who are not in the business of selling firearms , but make occasional , private sales , are not required to perform a background check before selling their firearms .
Before July 1 , 2012 , a person could not purchase more than one handgun per 30-day period , though some exceptions applied ; most significantly , holders of valid Concealed Handgun Permits ( CHP ) from Virginia were exempt from this restriction .
The bill that repealed the " one - handgun - a - month law " was signed into law by Governor Bob McDonnell on February 28 of that year .
Open carry of a handgun without a permit is legal in Virginia at age 18 , withstanding other applicable laws .
Concealed carry of a handgun is allowed for persons who hold a valid CHP ( concealed handgun permit ) , comply with certain restrictions , or who hold certain positions .
Virginia shall issue a CHP to applicants 21 years of age or older , provided that they meet certain safety training requirements and do not have any disqualifying criminal convictions .
Consuming an alcoholic beverage in ABC on - premises licensed restaurants and clubs , while carrying a concealed handgun , is prohibited ; nor may any person carry a concealed handgun in a public place while under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs .
Any person permitted to carry a concealed firearm may not carry one in such manner in a public place while intoxicated .
Possession of a firearm can compound the penalty for various other offenses , including illegal drug possession .
Open carry while intoxicated is not addressed in the law and can presumed to be legal unless otherwise specified .
There are some restrictions on the use of weapons .
Brandishing a firearm is punishable by up to a year in jail .
CONCEALED CARRY RECIPROCITY Section::::Concealed carry reciprocity .
VA code 18.2 - 308.014
( reciprocity ) states : SEE
ALSO
* Law of Virginia EXTERNAL LINKS * "
" Crimes Involving Health and Safety " .
Legislative Information System .
Virginia General Assembly .
* " Virginia Gun Laws Summary " .
National Rifle Association Institute for Legislative Action .
March 2 , 2016 .
* Jouvenal , Justin ; Lamothe , Dan . "
Senior Navy official charged with pointing gun at men during argument " .
The Washington Post .
July 19 , 2016 .
REFERENCES