GUN LAWS IN MASSACHUSETTS Gun laws in Massachusetts regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes } LICENSING PROCESS Section::::Licensing process .
Massachusetts Law requires firearm owners to be licensed through their local Police Department or the Massachusetts State Police if no local licensing authority is available .
A license is required by state law for buying firearms and ammunition .
An applicant must have passed a State approved firearm safety course before applying for a license .
All applications , interviews , fees , and fingerprinting are done at the local Police Department then sent electronically to the Massachusetts Criminal History Board for the mandatory background checks and processing .
All approved applicants will receive their license from the issuing Police Department .
All licensing information is stored by the Criminal History Board .
Non residents who are planning on carrying in the state must apply for a temporary license to carry ( LTC ) through the State Police before their travel .
TYPES OF FIREARM LICENSES Section::::Types of firearm licenses .
As of January 1 , 2015 , Massachusetts will no longer issue A and B Licenses to Carry , there will be just a single LTC which is identical to the old LTC - A. * FID ( Firearms Identification Card )
: Permits the purchase of rifles and shotguns with a capacity of no more than 10 rounds and their carrying for hunting and sporting purposes .
FIDs are " Shall issue , " except if the applicant fails a background check or is deemed " unsuitable " by the Police Chief .
* LTC - A :
This license allows purchase any firearm legal in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , are authorized to own " large capacity " firearms holding greater than 10 rounds assuming the magazine is " pre - ban " ( Manufactured prior to September 13 , 1994 )
post ban
high - capacity magazines are not legal in Massachusetts with the exception of Law Enforcement .
An LTC - A is the only permit that allows concealed carry in Massachusetts assuming it has not had any restrictions placed on it by the Chief of Police or issuing authority .
* LTC - B :
This license allows purchase / possession of all high capacity rifles / shotguns and standard ( not high ) capacity handguns .
One may only purchase / possess handguns that are not on the Large Capacity Weapons Roster , nor in the presence of a magazine with a capacity of greater than 10 rounds .
Handguns must be transported unloaded and locked in a case at all times with this license ; no CCW is permitted .
This license is no longer being issued as of 2015 .
* " Machine gun " license :
A machine gun license , granted on a may - issue basis , is required to purchase / possess a machine gun .
Issuance is at the discretion of the police chief of the city or town , and criteria vary widely .
Machine gun licenses are generally only issued to collectors ( C&R FFL holders ) and police instructors .
Additionally , LTC permits may have the following restrictions , however , none of these restrictions have been clearly defined by state law , and are subject to each Chief of Police 's definition of such .
Violation of the restrictions imposed by the licensing authority shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license and a fine of $ 1,000 to $ 10,000 .
* Employment : restricts possession to business owner engaged in business activities or to an employee while engaged in work - related activities , and maintaining proficiency , where the employer requires the carry of a firearm ( i.e. armored car , security guard , etc . ) .
Includes travel to and from activity location .
* Target and hunting : ( Most Common restriction ) – restricts possession to the purpose of lawful recreational shooting or competition ; for use in the lawful pursuit of game animals and birds ; for personal protection in the home ; and for the purpose of collecting ( other than machine guns ) .
Includes travel to and from activity location
*
Sporting :
restricts possession to the purpose of lawful recreational shooting or competition ; for use in the lawful pursuit of game animals and birds ; for personal protection in the home ; for the purpose of collecting ( other than machine guns ) ; and for outdoor recreational activities such as hiking , camping , cross - country skiing , or similar activities .
Includes travel to and from activity location .
* Other : ( Very Rare )
Issuing Chief has special reason or direction for the restriction of the permit .
Can vary greatly .
ASSAULT WEAPONS Section::::Assault weapons .
Assault weapons are defined ( with no exceptions , except pre 1994 models ) as : ( i ) Avtomat Kalashnikov ( AK ) ( all models ) , Action Arms Israeli Military Industries UZI and Galil , Beretta Ar70
( SC-70 ) ,
Colt AR-15 , Fabrique National FN / FAL , FN / LAR and FNC , SWD M-10 , M-11 , M-11/9 and M-12 , Steyr AUG
, INTRATEC TEC-9 , TEC - DC9 , TEC-22 , revolving cylinder shotguns , Street Sweeper , and the Striker 12 .
Assault weapons are also defined as : * A semiautomatic , centerfire rifle that has the capacity to accept a detachable magazine and any two of the following : * * A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon .
* A folding or telescoping stock .
* A grenade launcher or flare launcher .
* A flash suppressor or threaded barrel designed to accommodate a flash suppressor ; *
A bayonet lug * A semiautomatic pistol that has the capacity to accept a detachable magazine and any two of the following : * * A threaded barrel , capable of accepting a flash suppressor * A second handgrip .
* A shroud that is attached to , or partially or completely encircles , the barrel that allows the bearer to fire the weapon without burning his or her hand , except a slide that encloses the barrel .
*
The capacity to accept a detachable magazine at some location outside of the pistol grip .
* A semiautomatic shotgun that has two of the following : * * A folding or telescoping stock .
* A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon .
* A fixed magazine capacity in excess of 5 rounds
*
The ability to accept a detachable magazine .
*
Any shotgun with a revolving cylinder .
* MACHINE GUN LICENSE Section::::Machine gun license .
A license to possess or carry a machine gun may be issued only to a firearm instructor certified by the Criminal Justice Training Council for the sole purpose of firearm instruction to police personnel , or to a bona fide collector of firearms upon application or renewal of such license .
A " bona fide collector of firearms , " for the purpose of issuance of a machine gun license , shall be defined as an individual who acquires firearms for such lawful purposes as historical significance , display , research , lecturing , demonstration , test firing , investment or other like purpose .
For the purpose of issuance of a machine gun license , the acquisition of firearms for sporting use or for use as an offensive or defensive weapon shall not qualify an applicant as a bona fide collector of firearms .
All private sales are required to be registered through an FA-10 form with the Criminal History Board , Firearm Records division .
The state has an assault weapons ban similar to the expired Federal ban .
Massachusetts is a " may issue " , as such the LTC - A is issued in a discretionary manner .
TRAVELERS AND FIREARMS Section::::Travelers and firearms .
While Massachusetts ' firearms laws are some of the most strict in the United States , they are not applicable to travelers who comply with the Firearm Owners Protection Act 's traveler 's exemption .
FIREARM STORAGE Section::::Firearm storage .
Unless carried or under the control of the owner , state law requires all firearms to be stored in a locked container , or equipped with a tamper - resistant mechanical lock or other safety device ( see trigger lock ) , properly engaged so as to render such weapon inoperable by any person other than the owner or other lawfully authorized user .
If in a vehicle , firearm must be unloaded and contained within the locked trunk of such vehicle or in a locked case or other secure container , unless the licensee has a Class A license , in which case the firearm must be under the licensee 's direct control .
Any firearms that are found to be unsecured may be confiscated by law enforcement officers and license may be revoked .
In the event a license is revoked for any reason , law enforcement will confiscate all weapons and store them for 1 year before destroying them unless the revoked licensee transfers ownership to a properly licensed party who then claims the firearms .
Also , gun license holders may encounter licensing issues when moving from one town to another .
While one city or town police chief may have issued a license , the chief of police in the city or town where the license holder may move does not have to authorize it , and may require that guns be surrendered .
If a gun license is not authorized , and the police determine that the resident also holds a license in a different state , they may contact law enforcement in that state and inform them of the action , which could lead to the loss of the out - of - state license as well .
ALIEN PERMITS
Section::::Alien permits .
Aliens who reside in Massachusetts can apply for a " permit to possess non large capacity rifles and shotguns pursuant M.G.L. 140 s. 131H " directly with the Massachusetts Firearms Record Bureau .
The applicants must receive firearms education at the FID or LTC - level and pass a 20-fingerprint FBI background check and interview .
This permit is a " may issue " document similar to the FID but expiring December 31 of each year .
The procedure requires about 16 weeks from application to delivery of the permit .
There is no 90-day grace period for the renewal of alien permits .
Both nonresident ( i.e. visa - holders ) and permanent resident ( i.e. green - card holders )
aliens are lumped together by Massachusetts law .
The alien permit allows the possession of non - high capacity ( 10 rounds or less ) shotguns , rifles , and ammunition .
This includes .22 caliber rifles with tubular magazines holding more than 10 rounds , but it excludes high capacity rifles , assault rifles , and handguns .
FID and LTC are generally not issued to aliens even though Massachusetts law grants some latitude to the Colonel of Massachusetts State Police , who may be petitioned directly .
A recent lawsuit , Fletcher v. Haas , has expanded Massachusetts aliens ' gun rights by allowing possession and purchase of handguns for permanent resident aliens ( green card holders ) .
Alien permits are still in existence and required for all non - permanent resident aliens in Massachusetts .
As of April 30 , 2012 , all lawful permanent resident aliens ( green card holders ) are eligible to apply for a Massachusetts resident license to carry ( " LTC " ) or firearms identification card ( " FID " ) .
OTHER LAWS
Section::::Other laws .
Massachusetts enacted a red flag law in 2018 .
A judge may issue an order to temporarily confiscate the firearms of a person who appears to be at risk of harming themselves or another person .
A hearing must be held within ten days of the order being issued .
At the hearing , if there is sufficient evidence to substantiate the risk , the person 's firearms may be confiscated for up to one year .
SEE ALSO
* Law of Massachusetts REFERENCES