GUN LAWS IN NORTH DAKOTA Gun laws in North Dakota regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of North Dakota in the United States .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes
Shall Certify ?
Yes
Yes 62.1 - 05 Shall certify within 30 days .
}
CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Concealed carry .
North Dakota is a " shall issue " state for concealed carry .
The North Dakota Bureau of Criminal Investigation ( BCI ) shall issue a concealed weapon permit to a qualified applicant .
The applicant must pass a written exam and submit an application to the local law enforcement agency , which conducts a local background check before forwarding the application to the BCI .
The permit is valid for five years .
A concealed weapon permit is required when transporting a loaded firearm in a vehicle .
Concealed carry is not allowed in the part of an establishment that is set aside for the retail sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages .
Concealed carry is allowed in the restaurant part of a liquor establishment if an individual under twenty - one years of age is not prohibited in that part of the establishment .
Concealed carry is also not allowed , unless permitted by local law , at a school , church , sporting event , or public building .
CONSTITUTIONAL CONCEALED
CARRY
Section::::Constitutional concealed carry .
On March 23 , 2017 , a bill permitting constitutional carry was signed by Governor Burgum .
As of August 1 , 2017 , people carrying concealed without a concealed weapons license will need to carry a form of state - issued photo ID , must be a North Dakota resident for at least 1 year , must inform police about their handgun upon contact , and must not otherwise be prohibited from possessing a firearm by law .
The existing concealed weapons licenses , Class 1 & 2 , will continue to be available to allow cross state reciprocity .
Open carry of a loaded handgun will still require a permit .
Carrying in a vehicle was originally thought of as requiring a permit but Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem issued an opinion interpreting the law as allowing for constitutional carry within vehicles .
OTHER LAWS
Section::::Other laws .
North Dakota has state preemption of firearms laws .
No political subdivision may enact any ordinance relating to the purchase , sale , ownership , transfer of ownership , possession , registration , or licensure of firearms and ammunition which is more restrictive than state law .
Firearms manufacturers , distributors , and sellers are not liable for any injury suffered because of the use of a firearm by another .
However , they may be sued for breach of contract or warranty , or for defects or negligence in design or manufacture .
REFERENCES