GUN LAWS IN MARYLAND Gun laws in Maryland regulate the sale , possession , and use of firearms and ammunition in the U.S. state of Maryland .
SUMMARY TABLE Section::::Summary table . !
Subject / Law ! !
Long Guns ! !
Handguns ! !
Relevant Statutes ! !
Notes Red flag law ?
Yes
Yes }
STATE CONSTITUTION Section::::State constitution .
The Constitution of Maryland contains no provision protecting the right for individuals to keep and bear arms .
The state preempts some local firearm regulations , though local governments may regulate firearms with respect to minors and areas of public assembly .
Annapolis , Anne Arundel County , Montgomery County , Gaithersburg , and Baltimore are known to have local firearm regulations .
The Constitution of Maryland , Declaration of Rights , Art .
2 .
The Constitution of the United States , and the Laws made , or which shall be made , in pursuance thereof , and all Treaties made , or which shall be made , under the authority of the United States , are , and shall be the Supreme Law of the State ; and the Judges of this State , and all the People of this State , are , and shall be bound thereby ; anything in the Constitution or Law of this State to the contrary .
Maryland state law currently blocks anyone who has been in a mental facility or has been reported or coded at mentally ill from buying a gun notwithstanding .
REGULATED FIREARMS Section::::Regulated firearms .
The Maryland State Police maintain a registry of " regulated firearms " that are allowed to be sold within the state .
Residents may only purchase handguns manufactured after January 1 , 1985 that are on the approved handguns list from the Maryland Handgun Roster .
INTEGRATED BALLISTICS
IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM
Section::::Integrated Ballistics Identification System .
Until 2016 , dealers were required to forward the manufacturer - included shell casing ( or one provided by the federally licensed gun shop ) in its sealed container to the Department of State Police Crime Laboratory upon sale , rental , or transfer of a " regulated firearm " for inclusion in their ballistics database , known as the Integrated Ballistics Identification System ( IBIS ) .
The program was shut down in 2015 due to its ineffectiveness .
LAWS PROHIBITING FIREARMS Section::::Laws prohibiting firearms .
On April 4 , 2013 , the Maryland General Assembly approved legislation imposing significant new restrictions on gun ownership .
The bills ban the sale of certain semi - automatic firearms that they define as assault weapons , limit magazine capacity to ten rounds , require that handgun purchasers be fingerprinted and pass a training class in order to obtain a handgun license , and bar persons who have been involuntarily committed to a mental health institution from possessing firearms .
Martin O'Malley Governor at the time , signed the legislation into law on May 16 , 2013 .
Regarding ten round magazine limits for rifles purchased in Maryland , ' standard ' 30 round magazines may be purchased outside Maryland and brought into the state for personal use .
Those standard magazines may not be transferred , given , sold or manufactured inside Maryland .
As of October 1 , 2013 , detachable magazines for semi - automatic handguns and semi - automatic centerfire rifles which are capable of holding more than 10 rounds may not be purchased , manufactured or sold , though they may be possessed ( but not transferred within the state ) by persons who already owned them prior to enactment of the 2013 changes .
Magazines greater than ten rounds may be purchased or acquired outside the state and carried into Maryland and used within the state .
Certain pistols are classified as " assault pistols " , and banned from ownership if not registered prior to August 1 , 1994 .
Only handguns on the official handgun roster may be sold in the state .
Private sales of " regulated firearms , " which includes handguns , are permissible , but must be done at a local Maryland State Police barracks .
As of 1 Oct , a Handgun Qualification License ( HQL ) is required for the sale , as well as a background check and a mandatory seven - day waiting period .
A person must obtain a safety training certificate prior to purchasing " regulated firearms " and present that certificate prior to each purchase .
With some limited exceptions for designated firearms collectors , only one " regulated firearm " may be purchased in any 30-day period .
Handguns manufactured on or before December 31 , 2002 , must be sold or transferred with an external safety lock .
Handguns manufactured after December 31 , 2002 may only be sold or transferred if they have an internal mechanical safety device .
Firearms advocates challenged the 2013 law .
The District Court ruled that the law was constitutional based on intermediate scrutiny .
On February 1 , 2016 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit overruled the reasoning used to uphold the law in a 2-to-1 vote .
The appellate court said that the ban on semi - automatic weapons and high - capacity magazines should be subject to strict scrutiny , not intermediate scrutiny , because they " are in common use by law - abiding citizens .
"
The court acknowledged that the state has a right to limit the use of or ban citizen possession , sale , or transfer of " dangerous and unusual " weapons ( such as hand grenades ) , but the weapons and ammunition barred by the 2013 law did not fall under that provision .
The appellate court remanded the case to a federal district court , leaving the ban temporarily in place pending a review by the district court .
The state said it would appeal the decision .
On March 4 , 2016 , Fourth Circuit agreed to rehear the case en banc and oral arguments took place on May 11 , 2016 .
The full court ruled that such assault weapons and magazines holding more than 10 bullets are not protected by the Second Amendment ; the Supreme Court refused to hear the case .
Firearms are prohibited from certain places , including schools and demonstrations .
OPEN AND CONCEALED CARRY Section::::Open and Concealed Carry .
Carrying a handgun , whether openly or concealed , is prohibited unless one has a permit to carry a handgun or is on their own property or their own place of business .
The Maryland State Police may issue a permit to carry a handgun at their discretion and based on an investigation .
In practice , very few applicants are granted carry permits , and approval typically requires the applicant to provide proof of a clear and imminent threat on his or her life .
For example , police reports submitted by an applicant documenting a recent assault , attempted kidnapping , carjacking , or home invasion , particularly when the assailant remains at - large , have generally been accepted as sufficient " good reason " for issuance of a carry permit .
If the State Police deny the permit application , the applicant may appeal the denial to the Handgun Permit Review Board .
The review board , staffed by gubernatorial appointees , has the discretion to grant or deny an appeal on a case - by - case basis .
Permits are not automatically renewed , and the permit - holder must justify the continued need for the permit when applying for renewal .
Out of a total population of 6 million , there were 14,298 active carry permits as of April 2014 .
No permit is required to openly carry a rifle or shotgun in Maryland .
On March 5 , 2012 , a federal judge ruled in
Woollard v
Sheridan that Maryland 's " may issue " concealed carry law is unconstitutional , writing , " A citizen may not be required to offer a ' good and substantial reason ' why he should be permitted to exercise his rights .
"
The Maryland Attorney General 's office appealed the ruling .
On March 21 , 2013 , a three judge panel of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals ( U.S. Federal ) unanimously overturned the District Court ruling , holding that the " good & substantial cause " requirements imposed by Maryland law are permissible without violating the 2nd Amendment .
Maryland police have been accused of targeting drivers from other states including Florida because they hold concealed - carry permits .
REFERENCES