2012 NBA FINALS
The 2012 NBA Finals was the championship series of the 2011–12 season of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , and the conclusion of the season 's playoffs .
The Eastern Conference champion Miami Heat defeated the Western Conference champion Oklahoma City Thunder 4 games to 1 to win their second NBA title .
Heat Small forward
LeBron James was named the Finals MVP .
This marked the fourth time in franchise history that the Oklahoma City Thunder appeared in the NBA Finals , and the first time since the Seattle SuperSonics relocated from Seattle , Washington to Oklahoma City , Oklahoma in 2008 .
The franchise had previously appeared as the SuperSonics in 1996 , where they lost to the Michael Jordan - led Chicago Bulls .
It also marked the Miami Heat 's third appearance in the NBA Finals .
The Heat previously appeared in 2006 and 2011 , both times against the Dallas Mavericks .
It was the first NBA Finals in 14 seasons that was not held in either the states of California or Texas ; the 3 teams that won the previous 13 Western Conference titles the Dallas Mavericks , the Los Angeles Lakers and the San Antonio Spurs were eliminated by Oklahoma City in that order .
The series began on June 12 , five days later than its originally planned June 7 start .
This delay was due to the lockout that pushed the start of the season to late December and shortened the regular season to 66 games .
The series then ended on June 21 .
Under the 2–3–2 rotation , the Thunder had home - court advantage , since they had a better regular season record than the Heat , and thus hosted the first two games .
The Heat also became the first team since the 2008–09 Los Angeles Lakers to win the NBA title after losing the previous year , and the first Eastern Conference team to do so since the 1988–89 Detroit Pistons .
BACKGROUND
MIAMI HEAT Section::::Background .
Section::::Miami Heat .
This was the second consecutive appearance for the Heat , after losing to the Dallas Mavericks in .
This was also their second Finals appearance in the " Big Three " era .
Their other Finals appearance was in when they defeated the Mavericks to win their first NBA title .
In the regular season , the Heat finished with 46 victories , then defeated the New York Knicks ( 4–1 ) , Indiana Pacers ( 4–2 ) and Boston Celtics ( 4–3 ) on their way to the Finals .
Along the way , they managed to overcome series deficits that nearly sent them home but they had strings of victories to let them survive .
The first was against the Pacers in the Conference Semifinals when they trailed in the series , 1–2 .
The Heat responded by taking three straight victories to defeat the Pacers .
The second was against the Celtics in the Conference Finals when they trailed , 2–3 , in the series .
They responded by winning a decisive game 6 in Boston , taking the last two games of the series to advance to the Finals .
The Heat retained much of the same cast from the previous year , save for Shane Battier , rookies Terrel Harris and Norris Cole , Eddy Curry , and Ronny Turiaf , who was a member of the Los Angeles Lakers team that lost in the Finals to the Boston Celtics in .
OKLAHOMA CITY THUNDER Section::::Oklahoma City Thunder .
This was the Thunder 's first NBA Finals appearance since the team relocated from Seattle in 2008 .
Including their seasons as the Seattle SuperSonics , this was also the club 's fourth Finals appearance , and first since , when they lost to the Michael Jordan - led Chicago Bulls .
The team was seeking their first NBA championship since .
The Thunder finished with 47 wins , second in the Western Conference .
During the playoffs , they defeated the defending champion Dallas Mavericks ( 4–0 ) , the Los Angeles Lakers ( 4–1 ) , and the # 1 West Seed San Antonio Spurs ( 4–2 ) .
The Thunder came into the Finals as the second - youngest finalists in NBA history .
With the exception of Derek Fisher ( with the Los Angeles Lakers ) , Nazr Mohammed ( with the San Antonio Spurs ) and Kendrick Perkins ( with the Boston Celtics ) , all players from the Thunder were playing in their first NBA Finals .
They were the first Western Conference team in fourteen years to play in the NBA Finals without coming from the states of California or Texas .
ROAD TO THE FINALS Oklahoma City Thunder ( Western ConferenceMiami Heat ( Eastern Conference champion ) align =
right 2nd seed in the West , 3rd best league record !
colspan=2Regular season 2nd seed in the East , 4th best league record align =
rightDefeated the 7th seeded Dallas Mavericks , 4–0 !
colspan=2First round align =
leftDefeated the 7th seeded New York Knicks ,
4–1 align =
rightDefeated the 3rd
seeded Los Angeles Lakers , 4–1 !
colspan=2Conference
Semifinals align =
leftDefeated the 3rd seeded Indiana Pacers , 4–2 align =
rightDefeated the 1st
seeded San Antonio Spurs , !
colspan=2Conference
Finals align =
leftDefeated the 4th seeded Boston Celtics , REGULAR SEASON SERIES Section::::Regular season series .
The season series was tied , 1–1 , with both teams winning at their home floor .
SERIES SUMMARY Section::::Series summary . !
Game ! !
Date ! !
Home team ! !
Result ! !
Road team GAME SUMMARIES GAME 1 Section::::Game summaries .
Section::::Game 1 .
The Thunder defeated the Heat , 105–94 , in Game 1 .
Miami held the lead for most of the first three quarters , including a 13-point lead at one point during the second quarter .
The Heat made five three - pointers to jump to a 29–22 lead by the end of the first quarter , but Oklahoma City kept on pace with Miami to keep the score at 54–47 by halftime .
The Thunder then took the lead for good with 16 seconds left in the third quarter after Russell Westbrook made a free throw to make it 74–73 .
Kevin Durant led Oklahoma City with 36 points , while Westbrook had 27 .
LeBron James led the Heat with 30 points , but was held to one basket during the first eight minutes of the fourth quarter .
GAME 2 Section::::Game 2 .
The Heat defeated the Thunder 100 - 96 in Game 2 , tying the series at one game a piece and giving the Thunder their first home playoff loss of the season .
Miami never trailed , building a 27–15 first quarter lead , and holding a 17-point advantage at one point .
The Thunder attempted a comeback in the fourth quarter , and with 37 seconds left in the game , Oklahoma City 's Kevin Durant made a three - pointer to cut the deficit , 98–96 .
Durant would miss a game - tying jumper in the closing seconds as Miami held off Oklahoma City for the Game 2 win .
LeBron James led the Heat with 32 points , while Durant scored 32 of his own to lead the Thunder .
GAME 3 Section::::Game 3 .
Miami won Game 3 , 91 - 85 , to go up two games to one in the series .
Miami had a slim 47–46 halftime lead before Oklahoma City began the third quarter with a 10–4 run , eventually building a 10-point lead midway through the period .
However , Miami scored the last seven points in the third quarter to regain the lead at 69–67 .
With 7:36 remaining in the game , the Thunder came back to retake the lead at 77–76 , but the Heat then scored eight unanswered points to build an 84–77 advantage with 3:47 left .
A 6–0 run by Oklahoma City pulled them within one point of Miami with 90 seconds left , but the Thunder could not score again for the rest of the game while the Heat made five insurance free throws .
LeBron James led the Heat with 29 points and 14 rebounds , while Kevin Durant scored 25 points to lead the Thunder .
GAME 4 Section::::Game 4 .
Miami won Game 4 , 104–98 , to go up three games to one in the series .
The Thunder jumped to a 33–19 lead by the end the first quarter , but the Heat rallied to cut the score to 49–46 at halftime , thanks to two huge three - pointers by Heat rookie Norris Cole .
The two teams remained neck - and - neck throughout most of the third quarter , with Miami holding a 4-point lead at the start of fourth period .
However , for the final 16 minutes of the game , Russell Westbrook ( who led the Thunder with 43 points ) and Kevin Durant ( who had 28 points ) were the only two Oklahoma City players able to score .
With the other Thunder players struggling to make their shots , Miami was able to pull away in the end , largely thanks to late - game heroics from LeBron James , Mario Chalmers and Dwyane Wade .
LeBron James led the Heat with 26 points , including the go ahead three pointer , but had to sit out during the final two minutes of the game due to leg cramps .
Mario Chalmers scored 25 points and made two key plays to seal Miami 's win : a driving layup around a well - positioned Serge Ibaka and two free throws after a rare mistake by Westbrook ( he fouled Chalmers after the point guard recovered Shane Battier 's tip on a jump ball with less than 1 minute left , thinking that the shot clock would reset , while NBA rules do not reset at that point in a 4th quarter if the team that previously had the ball re - gains possession off the tip ) .
GAME 5 Section::::Game 5 .
Miami won Game 5 , 121–106 , to win the series , four games to one .
After keeping it a close game in the first half , the Thunder were outscored 36–22 in the third quarter , with Miami leading as much as 27 at one point .
Miami was fueled by strong performances by LeBron James , Dwyane Wade , and Chris Bosh , as well as by Mike Miller , who was 7 for 8 for three - pointers , ending the night with 23 points .
Miller only entered the game because Wade encountered foul trouble in the first half , with Coach Erik Spoelstra telling the variously - injured veteran the Heat just needed him to hold the fort until the 2nd quarter began ; when Miller hit two three - pointers , Spoelstra asked him if he could keep playing and Miller said yes , leading to 23 minutes on the court that were critical in blowing the game open for Miami .
The team tied an NBA Finals record for most 3-pointers in a game with 14 .
With three minutes remaining in the game , both teams took their starters out of the game , with the Heat still leading by more than 20 points .
With their Game 5 win , the Heat won their second NBA championship in team history , and the first for several Heat players , including James , who was named the NBA Finals MVP after averaging 28.6 points , 10.2 rebounds and 7.4 assists in the finals , capping it all off with his first triple double of the season in the final game .
For the Thunder , Kevin Durant had 32 points , and 11 rebounds ; Russell Westbrook had 19 points and 6 assists ; and James Harden led the bench with 19 points , 5 assists , and 4 rebounds .
The Heat became just the third home team to sweep the middle three games of a Finals series since the NBA switched to the 2–3–2 format in 1985 , the other two being their 2006 team and the 2004 Detroit Pistons .
They also joined the 2004 Pistons and 1995 Houston Rockets as the only lower seeded team to win the Finals in 5 games or less .
In addition , they became the first team to win the NBA Finals after trailing in three different series in the postseason , 1–2 against Indiana , 2–3 against Boston , and 0–1 against Oklahoma City .
Dwyane Wade and Udonis Haslem are the only Heat players to win both 2006 and 2012 NBA championships for the Miami Heat , while head coach Erik Spoelstra earned a second ring to go with the one he earned as an assistant for the 2006 team .
The Heat 's second title also made them the first franchise in the NBA 's Southeast Division with multiple titles
( the Atlanta Hawks won the title in 1958 while they were based in St. Louis , and the Washington Wizards won in 1978 when they were known as the Bullets , while the Orlando Magic and Charlotte Hornets have not won any NBA titles as of 2018 ) and they remain the only expansion team in the past 25 years to ever win a title .
STATISTICAL LEADERS Section::::Statistical leaders . !
rowspan=2Category ! !
colspan=3High ! !
colspan=4Average !
Player ! !
Team ! !
Total ! !
Player ! !
Team ! !
Avg . ! !
Games played ROSTERS
MIAMI HEAT
OKLAHOMA CITY THUNDER
PLAYER STATISTICS Miami Heat Oklahoma City Thunder align="left
" 1 0 4.7
1.000 .000 .000 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.0 BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In the United States , the NBA Finals aired on ABC and Mike Breen and Jeff Van Gundy served as commentators .
ESPN Radio aired it as well and had Jim Durham , Jack Ramsey and Hubie Brown as commentators . !
Game ! !
Ratings(households ) ! !
Share(households ) ! !
American audience(in millions ) !
1 !
2 ! 3 !
4 ! 5
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Days before the start of the 2012–13 season , the Thunder traded James Harden to the Houston Rockets after failing to come up with a contract extension .
Despite losing Harden , the Thunder won 60 games for the first time since moving to Oklahoma City , in the process claiming the top seed in the Western Conference .
Kevin Durant , despite finishing second to Carmelo Anthony in scoring , became the youngest member of the 50–40–90 club by shooting 51 % from the field , 42 % from three - point range , and 91 % from the free throw line .
In the playoffs , the Thunder eliminated former teammate Harden and the Rockets in six games in the first round .
During that series , however , Russell Westbrook slightly tore his right meniscus , ending his season .
The loss of Westbrook proved crucial , as the Thunder lost to the defensive - minded Memphis Grizzlies in five games of the conference semifinals .
The Heat repeated as champions the next season by defeating the San Antonio Spurs in a tough seven - game series .
Before the season began , the Heat acquired veteran sharpshooter Ray Allen from the Boston Celtics , then added energetic forward Chris Andersen midway through the season .
The Heat won a league second - best 27 consecutive games before finishing with a franchise - record 66 wins and the top overall seed .
In the playoffs , the Heat swept the Milwaukee Bucks in the first round , defeated the Chicago Bulls in five games of the second round , overcame the Indiana Pacers in seven games of the conference finals , before winning the championship against the Spurs .
The next season the Heat failed to win a third straight championship , losing to the Spurs 4 - 1 in a rematch of the previous season 's finals .
The Spurs had defeated the Thunder in the Western Conference finals prior to the NBA finals .
After the Heat lost the 2014 Finals , LeBron James to returned to the Cleveland Cavaliers to join with Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love .
James led the Cavaliers to four straight NBA Finals from 2015 - 2018 , all against the Golden State Warriors .
The Cavaliers won only one Championship during this stretch , in 2016 in which the Cavaliers beat the Warriors in seven games , rallying from a 3–1 series deficit for the Cavaliers ' first ever championship .
Meanwhile , Durant would join the Warriors , after they lost in a grand showdown between Thunder and Warriors as the Warriors recovered from 3 - 1 deficit from the Thunder .
The Warriors with Durant returned to the Finals with 12 - 0 record in the playoffs leading to the third straight rematch against the Cavaliers , which they won with a 16 - 1 record in the 2017 playoffs .
Durant would avenge his 2012 Finals loss to James as his Warriors defeated James ' Cavaliers in five games for his first NBA championship in his career .
Durant would go on to win his second championship as well as his second Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award the following year , this time in a 4 game sweep over James 's Cavaliers .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official website of the 2012 NBA Finals * 2012 NBA Finals at ESPN * 2012 NBA Finals at Basketball - Reference.com