BIRTHDAY CAKE ( SONG )
" Birthday Cake " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna , from her sixth studio album , Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) .
After it leaked onto the internet , fans expressed interest in the track being included on Talk That Talk , but it was later revealed that the 1:18 ( one minute , 18 seconds ) length that leaked was in fact the final cut and was not being considered for inclusion on the album .
Due to a high level of fan interest , the song was included on the album as an interlude .
The full length version , also known as the official remix of the track , featuring Rihanna 's ex - boyfriend Chris Brown , was premiered online on February 20 , 2012 , to coincide with Rihanna 's 24th birthday .
The song peaked in the top fifty .
The lyrics to " Birthday Cake " express the desire to have spontaneous sex .
Music critics were divided on " Birthday Cake " , with the majority both praising and criticising the song 's sexual lyrical content .
Several critics compared the song to the previous track on the album " Cockiness ( Love It ) " , which also consists of sexually explicit lyrics .
Upon the release of Talk That Talk , the song debuted on the lower regions of the singles charts in South Korea , the United Kingdom , and the United States .
BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Background and development .
" Birthday Cake " was written by The - Dream , Rihanna , Marcos Palacios , and Earnest Clark , with production helmed by Da Internz and The - Dream .
The interlude was recorded in room 1306 of the Radisson Blu Royal Hotel in Copenhagen , Denmark .
In an interview for The Boom Box , producer answered a question about fans being disappointed that " Birthday Cake " would not be featured on Talk
That Talk ( 2011 ) after it leaked online before the album 's November 2011 release ; the producer explained that only an interlude had been produced , and that a full length version of the song would be released at some point during the Talk
That Talk era , saying : COMPOSITION AND LYRICS Section::::Composition and lyrics .
" Birthday Cake " is an R&B interlude which lasts for one minute and 18 seconds , appearing as the sixth track on the album .
The instrumentation of " Birthday Cake " consists of a heavy bass , schoolbells , engine sounds , claps , and electro beats .
It also samples the song " Dominator " by Human Resource .
The track also consists of hoover synths , synth handclaps , an Eastern - inspired tone and chants .
In the song , Rihanna adopts a sensual tone in her vocals , as she chants the song 's provocative and sexually explicit lyrics .
The majority of the interlude is rapped by Rihanna .
A reviewer for Flavour described the singer 's vocal performance in " Birthday Cake " as " sultry " .
Nathan S. of DJ Booth concurred that Rihanna sounds " sultry " as well as " playful " on the song .
The lyrical content of the interlude is spare and largely revolves around Rihanna chanting , " cake cake cake cake cake cake . "
Aside from the repetitive chant of " cake " , the interlude consists of multiple sexual metaphors .
The lyric " I know you wanna bite
this/
It 's so enticing/ Nothing else like this
, I 'm a make you my bitch/
And it 's not even my birthday/
But you wanna put your name on it
" is a metaphor referring to a vagina .
Rihanna sings about the desire to have spontaneous sex .
Rihanna promises her lover that she will make him do whatever she pleases , singing " I'mma make you my bitch . "
T'Cha Dunlevy of The Montreal Gazette described the lyric as a " promise " , with Rihanna intending to act upon her desires .
The interlude ends mid - verse and mid - lyric with a fade at 1:18 .
Katherine St. Asaph of Popdust described the fade as " ungraceful " , as well as writing that it makes the track appear as though it is not finished .
Upon the fade , Rihanna puts forward the line " Ooh , I wanna fuck you right now . "
Dunlevy and St. Asaph were critical of the final line , with the former labelling it as " blatant " , and the latter noting that " cursing makes everything obvious . "
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
" Birthday Cake " garnered mixed reviews from music critics .
Jayson Lipshutz of Billboard praised the interlude , writing " We 're all for birthday - themed naughtiness in pop music form , but only 78 seconds of ' Birthday Cake ' is just not enough of a celebration ! "
Lipshutz continued to compare the song 's lyrical message to Jeremih 's " Birthday Sex " .
Sam Lansky of MTV Buzzworthy was complimentary of " Birthday Cake " , writing , " The only misstep on the album – not because it 's not amazing ( it is ! ) , but because it 's only 78 seconds long . '
Birthday Cake ' is more decadent Rihanna filth ,
this time courtesy of sensual R&B - master The - Dream .
Have any Rihanna Navy members made an hour - long mix yet ?
We need to keep the bump ' n ' grind going all night . "
Pip Ellwood of Entertainment - Focus noted that " Birthday Cake " , along with " Cockiness ( Love It ) " , " leave you under no misunderstanding that Rihanna is as sexual as she 's ever been throughout her career . "
Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Birthday Cake " , along with " Cockiness ( Love It ) " , were the most provocative songs on the album , describing them as " I - like - it - rough tracks " , but criticized them for being album fillers designed to get the listener out of the bedroom and on to the dance floor .
Adrian Thrills of the Daily Mail wrote that after listening to " Cockiness ( Love It ) " and then " Birthday Cake " , " the double entendres have grown tiresome " after having listening to the latter .
Giovanny Caquias of CultureBlues expressed distaste for " Birthday Cake " , calling the track " horrendous " , but referred to it being " only a minimal waste of time " due to its short length .
Mike Diver of BBC Music was equally critical , writing that " Birthday Cake " is a " wholly pointless minute - something in the company of star producer The - Dream , wasted on the boring profanities of Birthday Cake . "
A reviewer for Flavour had a mixed reaction to the lyrical content , writing , " I ca n't exactly say it is a bad song .
In fact , I will probably be singing it over the next few weeks .
But at this point its like , ' we get it – you like sex . '
Chill out about it and sing about education or something – your younger fans need more SUBSTANCE . "
[ sic ]
Nathan S. of DJ Booth noted that the song resembles a real life " quickie " , continuing to write that the overtly sexual lyrics in the song earned Talk That Talk the Parental Advisory sticker .
Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times commented that the lyrics on " Birthday Cake " " would n't seem out of place on Spinal Taps ' Smell the Glove ' .
" Roberts continued to note that " Birthday Cake " appeared to be an afterthought , writing , CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
Upon the release of Talk That Talk , " Birthday Cake " debuted on several world charts .
The song entered the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 67 on November 26 , 2011 , with sales of 6,661 digital downloads .
In the United Kingdom , " Birthday Cake " debuted at number 172 on December 3 , 2011 .
In the United States , the song charted at number 22 on the US Bubbling
Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which represents the 25 songs which failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 .
On March 3 , 2012 , " Birthday Cake " made its first appearance on the US Digital Songs chart at number 62 , following the release of the official remix featuring Brown , and has peaked at number 30 .
Due to strong airplay spins , the interlude of " Birthday Cake " peaked at number 4 on the Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs chart . "
Birthday Cake " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of over 500,000 units .
LIVE PERFORMANCE Section::::Live performance .
Rihanna performed the song for the first time on May 5 , 2012 , on Saturday Night Live , as part of a medley with " Talk That Talk " .
The performance started with the original interlude version " Birthday Cake " and featured Rihanna in an all black outfit with a giant spiders web as the backdrop behind her .
After she performed a short section of the song , it transitioned into " Talk That Talk " , where she performed her part of the song in full , without the rap vocal by Jay - Z.
The remix of the song was included on her Diamonds World Tour as part of her first act in 2013 .
TRACK LISTING
* Album version * " Birthday Cake " – 1:18 * CREDITS AND PERSONNEL Recording *
Recorded at Radisson Blu Royal Hotel , Room 1306 , Copenhagen , Denmark .
Personnel * Songwriting – Terius Nash , Robyn Fenty , Marcos Palacios ,
Earnest Clark * Production –
Da Internz , The - Dream * Vocal engineering and recording –
Kuk Harrell , Marcos Tovar
*
Assistant vocal recording – Jennifer Rosales
*
Mixing – Kevin " KD " Davis
* Assistant mixing – Calvin Bailiff Credits adapted from the liner notes of Talk
That Talk , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records .
CHARTS Gaon Chart ) !
scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row " US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles ( BillboardBillboard Hot 100 ! scope="row " US Hot Digital Songs ( Billboard ) ! scope="row " US Hot R&B / Hip - Hop Songs ( Billboard ) CERTIFICATIONS REMIX FEATURING CHRIS BROWN Section::::Remix featuring Chris Brown .
" Birthday Cake " was remixed with vocals from American recording artist Chris Brown , and is a full length version of the interlude which was originally included on Talk That Talk .
It was sent to radio as the fourth US single from the album on March 6 , 2012 .
At first , it was rumored that Christina Aguilera would feature on the remix version after Rihanna posted a message on Twitter saying that she wanted someone " Dirrrty " on the re - recording , a supposed reference to Aguilera 's 2002 song " Dirrty " .
However , the singer later tweeted that she wanted a male vocalist , not a female vocalist , to accompany her on the remix via Twitter with a tweet reading ' No girls allowed on # CAKE ' .
It was later revealed that Brown was the featured artist on the full length version .
Despite receiving negative attention regarding Rihanna 's choice of collaborator from the media and fans alike , the singer defended her decision saying that it is simply music .
The remix of " Birthday Cakes lyrics are similar to the interlude , but with new lyrics provided by Brown .
Critical reception of the collaboration was met with a mixed response from music critics , many of whom were shocked at the fact that Rihanna and Brown had collaborated on a song together despite their relationship history , but cited the remix as an improvement upon the original interlude .
The remix peaked at number 24 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and number two on the R&B / Hip - Hop Songs chart .
American rappers Fabolous , Rick Ross and Busta Rhymes appeared on additional remixes of the song .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Due to the high level of demand by the singer 's fans to release a full length of " Birthday Cake " , Rihanna posted a message via her official Twitter account , promising that it was at the top of her agenda to record and release it .
Despite fans wanting to hear the updated version , Katherine St. Asaph of PopDust criticized the notion , writing " Honestly , at this point Rihanna and Def Jam would be better off just calling ' Birthday Cake ' an interlude , not an incomplete version , because otherwise that 's saying the album is released but essentially unfinished . "
Beck Bain of Idolator noted that the release of the full length song is " doubtful " , writing " the song is already too dirty in its current minute - and - twenty - second version .
But if ' S&M ' could be a single , is anything too risque for the radio these days ? "
In February 2012 , it was speculated that Christina Aguilera would appear as the featured artist on the release after Rihanna posted a message on Twitter saying , " I need somebody # DIRRRTY on my Birthday # CAKE , " a supposed reference to Aguilera 's 2002 song " Dirrty " , which contains lyrical content relating to various sexual activities .
The singer later confirmed that she did not want a female artist to feature on the collaboration , stating , " No girls allowed on # CAKE . "
On February 15 , 2012 , Kosine of Da Internz , who produced the interlude , revealed that the featured collaborator will " shock the world , " and that the full length version would premiere between February 16 , and February 20 , 2012 .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
On February 16 , 2012 , it was speculated that former boyfriend Chris Brown was the featured artist on the full length version .
Reports surfaced after the pair were photographed leaving Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles at separate times and Brown being invited to Rihanna 's birthday party .
Rumors were also fueled when Rihanna and Brown spent time together at the 2012 Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2012 .
The reports gained worldwide media controversy , because Brown and Rihanna were involved in a physical altercation on the evening of the 2009 Grammy Awards .
The full length version , eventually revealed to feature Brown , was released on Rihanna 's birthday , February 20 , 2012 .
In an interview with Billboard , The - Dream stated that he believed Rihanna and Brown 's past together should not be judged and that " Birthday Cake " is simply a song , saying , " For me , it 's just music - two talented people doing a record together , doing two records together , and that 's what it was .
It was n't about an incident that happened .
The true thing really is to forgive , and you want to believe in people . "
" Birthday Cake " impacted US Urban contemporary radio on March 6 , 2012 , serving as the fourth U.S. single from Talk That Talk .
On March 15 , 2012 , Rihanna explained her collaboration with Brown on " Birthday Cake " and the remix of his song " Turn Up the Music " to Ryan Seacrest during his morning show : " The first song that came about was ' Birthday Cake ' .
I mean , we ended up recording them at the same time and executing them together .
But I reached out to him about doing ' Birthday Cake ' because that 's the only person that , really , it made sense to do the record .
Just as a musician , despite everything else , that was going to be the person .
You know I thought about rappers , and I 've done that so many times , and the hottest R&B artist out right now
is Chris Brown .
So I wanted him on the track , and then in turn he was like , ' Why do n't you do the remix to my track ? '
and it was a trade - off .
We did two records .
One for my fans , one for his fans , and that way our fans can come together .
There should n't be a divide .
You know ?
It 's music , and it 's innocent . "
In March 2012 , American rapper Fabolous released his own verse to the " Birthday Cake " remix .
The following month , Rick Ross also released the track featuring an added rap verse from himself , along with the previously incorporated Chris Brown verses .
Busta Rhymes released his own freestyle to the song along with rapper Reek da Villian .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Brown 's verse begins with the lyric " Girl , I wanna fuck you right now , " which is the antithesis of how Rihanna concludes the original interlude , sing " Ooh , I wanna fuck you right now .
"
Brown 's verse continues with " Been a long time I 've been missing your body/ Turn the lights down/
When I go down
it 's a private party .
" Brown delivers his vocals in an aggressive and manipulative manner as he sings " Give it to her in the worst way , ca n't wait to blow her candles out . "
At the end of the song , Rihanna performs new lyrics which were not included on the original 1 minute and 18 second interlude ; " Remember how you did it/
If you still wanna kiss it/
Then come and get it . "
According to Ben Rayner of the Toronto Sun , the instrumentation of " Birthday Cake " consists of " snaky , slurpy , bass - droppin ' beats .
" The song 's lyrics revolve around sadomasochistic sexuality and dominance over men , and consists mainly of oral sex metaphors , including the lyric " Doggy want the kitty . "
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Beth Hardie for the Daily Mirror wrote that the remix came as a shock , because of how Brown " beat her virtually senseless in a car three years ago just before the Grammys , " and noted that Rihanna would face harsh criticism from journalists and fans alike for not setting a good example to younger girls .
Hardie continued to state that although the collaboration came as a surprise , " We have to admit , it 's a pretty amazing stroke of genius in terms of publicity and messing with people 's minds .
" Regarding the collaboration on the remix Jo Usmar from Daily Mirror compared the collaboration to the physical altercation between Rihanna and Brown at the 2009 Grammy Awards , writing " In case you 've been living in a cave for the last two years this is extraordinarily controversial as Brown was convicted of assaulting Rihanna in 2009 and there was a restraining order issued against him . "
Ben Rayner for the Toronto Sun was complimentary of the remix , writing that it was an improvement upon the original interlude , " What was empty , unfinished titillation before , then , has become empty , overstated , boardroom - written pseudo - pornography for the pop charts . "
Jon Caramanica for The New York Times commented that the remix of " Birthday Cake " , as well as the original , was " very much so " a good song .
However , Caramanica was critical of the collaboration itself , due to Rihanna and Brown 's history , writing " You want to forget ?
Fine .
But do n't forgive .
" Caramanica continued to explain his distaste , writing " It displays an advanced understanding of marketing and an understanding of moral obligations and ethics that 's not much more than rudimentary .
It is a woman publicly accepting her abuser - nothing more , nothing less . "
J. Bryan Lowder for The Huffington Post labelled the song as " innuendo - iced " with regard to the song 's explicit lyrics .
Lowder provided an explanation for what he thought the reason was behind Rihanna asking Brown to collaborate on " Birthday Cake " , writing : LIVE PERFORMANCE Section::::Live performance .
Rihanna performed " Birthday Cake " Remix at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on May 24 , 2012 , as the fifth song on the set list .
She performed the remix in its entirety , and sang Brown 's lyrics .
The song was later included on her Diamonds World Tour in 2013 during the first act .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance .
The remix version of " Birthday Cake " debuted at number 20 on the US Billboard R&B /
Hip - Hop Songs chart on chart issue dated March 10 , 2012 , and received both the Airplay and Greatest Gainer honours .
The following week , it ascended to number 17 .
In its third week on the chart , the song ascended to number seven , and received the Airplay Gainer honor .
The song ascended to number four the following week , and was awarded with the Airplay Gainer honor again .
It has so far reached a peak of number two .
It debuted at number 63 on the US Billboard Hot 100 on the chart issue dated March 10 , 2012 .
In its fourth week on the chart , the song climbed to number 39 and became the fourth top forty single from Talk That Talk . "
Birthday Cake " ( Remix ) has reached a peaked of number 24 .
The remix of " Birthday Cake " debuted at number 73 on the Radio Songs chart , generating a 372 % increase in spins , on the chart issue dated March 10 , 2012 .
It has so reached a peak of number 16 .
CHARTS Weekly Charts Year - end charts
{ class="wikitable sortable " !
scope="col"Chart ( 2012 ) !
scope="col"Position US
Billboard Hot 100
US Billboard R&B /
Hip - Hop Songs
align="center"15 PREMIERE AND RADIO
HISTORY Section::::Premiere and radio history . !
scope="col"Country !
scope="col"Date !
scope="col"Format !
scope="col"Label !
scope="row " rowspan="2"United States February 20 , 2012
Premiere
rowspan="2"Def
Jam Recordings March 6 , 2012
Urban contemporary radio REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS