ENDEAVOUR ( TV SERIES )
Endeavour is a British television detective drama series .
It is a prequel to the long - running Inspector Morse and , like that series , is set primarily in Oxford .
Shaun Evans portrays the young Endeavour Morse beginning his career as a Detective Constable , and later as Detective Sergeant , with the Oxford City Police CID .
The series is produced for ITV as a Mammoth Screen and Masterpiece co - production for ITV Studios .
After a pilot episode in 2012 , the first series was broadcast in 2013 , and four more series have followed .
A fifth series with six episodes set in 1968 began on 4 February 2018 and finished on 11 March 2018 .
A sixth series was later announced , set to air in 2019 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Set in the mid to late 1960s in Oxford , England , the series centres on the early career of Endeavour Morse ( Shaun Evans ) after he has left Lonsdale College of Oxford University late in his third year without taking a degree , spent a short time in the Royal Corps of Signals as a cipher clerk , and then joined the Carshall - Newtown Police .
FILM ( 2012 )
Section::::Film ( 2012 ) .
In the pilot episode , having been transferred to CID after only two years as a uniformed police constable , the young DC Morse soon becomes disillusioned with law enforcement and begins writing a resignation letter .
Before he can resign , Morse is sent with other detectives from the Carshall - Newtown Police to the Oxford City Police 's Cowley Police Station to assist in investigating the case of a missing fifteen - year - old schoolgirl .
Having studied at Oxford gives Morse advantages and disadvantages when dealing with Oxford 's " town and gown " divide .
During the pilot episode , he tenders his resignation but his superior , veteran Detective Inspector Fred Thursday ( Roger Allam ) , the " guv " at the Oxford City Police 's CID , sees in him an unblemished detective whom he can trust and takes him under his wing to be his new " bag man " meaning assistant , replacing a corrupt Detective Sergeant .
SERIES 1 ( 2013 )
Section::::Series 1 ( 2013 ) .
Series 1 begins with Morse transferring to the Oxford City Police in 1965 following a double - murder investigation that took place during the pilot episode .
Morse is taken under the wing of Inspector Thursday .
Thursday names Morse his designated " bag man " and shows him the ropes as Morse begins to solve a string of complex multiple - murders , much to the envy and annoyance of some of his superiors , particularly Detective Sergeant Jakes and Chief Superintendent Bright .
Morse displays his obvious genius in solving intricate murders , including several with opera connections .
Thursday and fellow officer , Police Constable Strange , try to steer the young Endeavour into taking his Sergeant 's exam , so that he may be relieved of " General Duties " and become Thursday 's official " bag man " with the appropriate rank and title .
In the Series 1 finale , Morse is shot while attempting to apprehend a murderer and is placed on light - duty .
At the same time , Morse comes to terms with the December 1965 death of his cold and unfeeling father .
SERIES 2 ( 2014 )
Section::::Series 2 ( 2014 ) .
Series 2 begins in 1966 with Morse returning to active duty at Cowley Police Station , after spending several months on light duty at Oxfordshire ( County )
Police 's Witney Station , under the direction of D.I. Bart Church .
Morse is received warmly by C.S. Bright and D.S. Jakes , as D.I. Thursday begins to keep a more watchful eye on the young Endeavour .
As a result of the shooting , Morse begins to suffer from delayed stress and paranoia , as well as an increase in alcohol consumption .
Despite making several mistakes in the investigation , Morse solves the cases , impressing his superiors .
During the investigation he suffers a concussion after being struck over the head and is cared for by his nurse neighbour , Monica Hicks , in whom he takes an interest .
At the same time , P.C. Strange enters into Freemasonry with many of Oxford 's elite , and D.I. Thursday 's daughter , Joan , begins to take an interest in Endeavour .
During the course of several cases , pieces of circumstantial evidence go missing , and a murder suspect threatens Morse by claiming association with powerful men who will not take kindly to interference .
In the final episode , the looming merger of city and county police and misgivings about corruption , lead Thursday to consider retirement , in response to strong hints from C.S. Bright about age and health .
Disheartened by this , Morse speculates to Monica about leaving the police and going abroad with her .
Assistant Chief Constable Clive Deare asks Thursday and Morse to covertly investigate corruption within the police and council .
Morse is sent to a rendezvous where he is ambushed by corrupt officers and Thursday is lured to Blenheim Vale , a derelict former wayward boys home , where there was rampant sexual and physical abuse ( of which Jakes was a victim ) .
Morse escapes the ambush and goes to support Thursday , who is shot by Deare , a participant in the abuse at Blenheim Vale .
Deare tells Morse he has framed him for the murder of Chief Constable Rupert Standish .
Deare is about to kill Morse when he is shot dead by a girl who had also been abused at Blenheim Vale , who then kills herself .
Bright and Strange arrive with backup and an ambulance .
As Thursday is being loaded into an ambulance , Morse is arrested by officers from another force for the murder of Chief Constable Standish .
The series ends with Thursday 's fate unknown and Morse in a gaol cell .
SERIES 3 ( 2016 )
Section::::Series 3 ( 2016 ) .
Series 3 begins in Spring 1967 .
D.C. Morse is cleared of the murder of Chief Constable Standish and the records in the case of Blenheim Vale are sealed for 50 years .
D.I. Thursday is discharged from hospital , but the bullet could not be taken out of him and has resulted in recurring coughs .
Monica has come to realize that she and Morse have gone their separate ways .
Strange is promoted to Sergeant and Morse considers his future after his time in prison , but with Thursday 's encouragement , Morse returns to active duty investigating a murder following a disappearance at a funfair on Cowley Green .
After solving a faked kidnapping and tainted fruit being sold at a local supermarket , D.S. Jakes survives a time - bomb and retires from the Force and leaves Oxford .
W.P.C. Shirley Trewlove joins the station , to the obvious delight of Chief Superintendent Bright .
Strange takes Jakes ' place as Detective Sergeant but assures Morse that they 're still friends even though he 's now his superior .
Thursday shows frequent signs of outbursts against suspects unwilling to co - operate during the investigations , and even uses violence as a way of extracting information .
Although Morse is unsure about becoming Sergeant , Thursday assures him he 's more of an Inspector .
In the final episode , Morse finally sits his Sergeant 's exam and completes his paper well within the time allowed .
An armed robbery takes place at a bank where Joan Thursday works and the armed robbers become trapped themselves along with Morse during an investigation into a killing and payroll robbery .
After the robbers are arrested , Joan , emotionally affected by the ordeal , leaves Oxford despite encouragement from Morse to stay .
Realizing that Joan has gone , Thursday encounters Morse outside his house , and figures that he saw Joan leave .
SERIES 4 ( 2017 )
Section::::Series 4 ( 2017 ) .
Starts in the summer 1967 and ends in the autumn of the same year .
Joan Thursday is still away and Morse finds out
his Sergeant 's exam went " missing " which meant automatic failure .
Bright makes inquiries and tells Morse that his exam paper was the only one that went astray .
After solving another complex murder case , Morse refuses to be affected by failing his Sergeant 's exam and stays in Oxford .
He locates Joan in Leamington , in a relationship with a married man .
Joan declines Morse 's offer to return to Oxford , and he accedes to her request not to tell her father where she is .
D.I. Thursday discovers Morse 's note of Joan 's address and also pays her a visit .
He confronts Joan 's lover and afterwards asks Morse why he did not reveal her whereabouts .
Thursday admits they both had a wasted journey .
After averting disaster at a nuclear power plant , Thursday is promoted to Chief Inspector and Morse is promoted to Detective Sergeant .
They are both awarded the George Medal for their actions .
Morse gets a phone call to tell him that Joan is in hospital and finds out from a doctor that she has had a miscarriage .
SERIES 5 ( 2018 )
Section::::Series 5 ( 2018 ) .
Picking up the narrative in April 1968 , the various investigations continue during the creation of Thames Valley Constabulary from the city and county police forces .
The Cowley police station has its future in question along with some of the key members of the team there .
Morse , now a DS , is assigned with a new DC , George Fancy , and becomes annoyed with his lack of focus initially .
Joan is back in town and bumps into Morse off and on around Oxford .
DCI Thursday 's plans for retirement hang in a balance .
The final episode , with the gang rivalry looming all over town , includes the death of DC George Fancy ( who gets hit by bullets that do not match any of those of the crossfire between gangs that occurred where he was found ) and the departure of WPC Shirley Trewlove to Scotland Yard , while the rest come to terms with the death and the closure of the Cowley Station .
The series concludes with Morse asking Joan Thursday if her offer to go for coffee was still open ( when he had said no to having coffee with her when asked by her earlier in the series ) .
The last scene is them looking at one another before Joan 's response .
SERIES 6 ( 2019 )
Section::::Series 6 ( 2019 ) .
Series 6 of Endeavour is scheduled to air in 2019 .
EPISODES CAST Section::::Cast .
valign = bottom !
Actor !
Character !
Position PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
ITV broadcast a television film in the UK on 2 January 2012 ; in the United States , PBS aired it on 1 July 2012 .
It starred Shaun Evans as the eponymous police detective in his early career .
Abigail Thaw , daughter of original Morse actor John Thaw , played the part of Dorothea Frazil in a scene at the Oxford Mail newspaper .
ITV commissioned a first series of four new episodes , filmed during summer 2012 , and aired them from 14 April to 5 May 2013 .
It was announced on 5 June 2013 that due to the success of series 1 , including consistently high ratings , ITV had commissioned a second series of four episodes .
Filming commenced in Oxford in September 2013 .
On 24 September 2014 , ITV confirmed that a third series of Endeavour had been ordered .
Before that third series of Endeavour screened on ITV , Evans told the Oxford Mail : " It 's not like we have a six - year contract , there 's none of that .
It 's day by day , year by year .
I think this one is really good .
We 'll know when it airs if there 's an audience for it and if we feel there 's another place to take these characters . "
In February 2016 , ITV announced that a fourth series of Endeavour had been commissioned , which Roger Allam confirmed to the Oxford Mail , with filming to begin in late spring 2016 .
To mark the 30th anniversary of Morse on television , the series features several early Morse characters and cameos by actors from the original series .
The fourth series debuted on 8 January 2017 , and the fifth series began on 4 February 2018 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
A region 2 DVD of the pilot at 89 minutes long was released on 9 January 2012 , but , as reviewers on Amazon.co.uk have noted , does not contain the full show and many scenes aired on ITV have been cut out .
A complete edition running at 98 minutes was released on 26 January 2012 .
Series 1 was released on DVD on 6 May 2013 , Series 2 on 5 May 2014 , Series 3 on 1 February 2016 , and Series 4 on 30 January 2017 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Noting that the series received upwards of 6.5 million viewers , Mark Sweeny writing in The Guardian stated that any decision to commission a subsequent series should be easy .
Upon its US premiere , Los Angeles Times critic Robert Lloyd called it a " suitably complicated and pictorially engaging work of period suburban mystery . "
Critics have been generally favourable , though even positive reviews have commented that the show 's murder - mystery plots are occasionally unsatisfying convoluted puzzles or come to a " rushed , melodramatic and fairly preposterous conclusion . "
REFERENCES TO EARLIER SERIES Section::::References to earlier series .
Endeavour includes a number of references to both Inspector Morse and Lewis .
TV FILM Section::::TV film .
A number of references to the Inspector Morse series were included in the TV film of Endeavour , serving to introduce younger versions of characters who appeared in the original series or to place iconic series or character elements into the film .
Among these are : *
In the first scene , Morse is seen listening to opera ( specifically , " Un bel di " from Puccini 's Madama Butterfly ) , and operatic themes were introduced into the score by Barrington Pheloung , who scored and conducted the music for both Inspector Morse and Lewis .
Morse 's taste in opera would later evolve into a preference for Germanic composers , particularly Mozart and Wagner .
* Morse appears to use his first name , which is known by some of the people who work with him .
The episode does not explore why his unwillingness to tell anyone his first name arises , a habit continued in the Endeavour series and throughout the Inspector Morse series .
He tells all to call him Morse .
* As Morse and the other officers from Carshall Newtown are being bussed in to Oxford at the beginning of the Pilot , " In Paradisum " from Faure 's Requiem plays , the same piece of music used when Morse collapsed in " The Remorseful Day " .
*
In a flashback , a young woman with long blonde hair is seen , draped only in a blanket and viewed from the back , staring out of a window .
Later , Morse and Alex Reece have a discussion of their competition over " Wendy " , as Reece refers to her , reminding Morse that she preferred Morse to himself .
Morse corrects him , saying she prefers " Susan " .
This is a reference to Wendy Spencer , Morse 's girlfriend at university , in the book " The Riddle of the Third Mile " , and to Susan Fallon ( married name ) , her equivalent in the television series .
In Morse Episode 21 , " Dead on Time " , Morse says he lost Susan to a prior relationship , which would have been Henry Fallon , whose death is investigated in this Morse episode .
Susan is played by Joanna David , a blonde woman of similar stature to the one shown in the flashback .
* Max de Bryn , featured as the Home Office pathologist until his retirement in Inspector Morse is introduced when the body of the college student is found .
In a later scene , Morse 's horror at the sight of blood is shown and emphasised when he faints during a post mortem procedure .
* Early in the episode , Morse states that he abstains from alcohol .
After he faints at the mortuary , Fred Thursday encourages him to drink a glass of real ale , after which Morse is shown drinking several pints before the close .
*
The red Jaguar Mark 2 car with the registration 248 RPA is shown prominently at a car showroom , attracting interest from Morse ; this is the car Morse drove in the original series .
* Christopher Brandon plays Alexander Reece , a college friend of Morse , later played by Barry Foster in the 1989 Inspector Morse episode , " The Last Enemy " .
*
As was traditional in the original series , writer Colin Dexter who created Morse , made cameo appearances in each episode until his death , for example , reading a newspaper on a bench in one scene and in another , sitting on the upper deck of an Oxford bus .
*
In the closing moments , as Thursday asks Morse where he sees himself in twenty years , Endeavour looks in the rear view mirror and sees the face of John Thaw .
At the same time , the original series music begins and plays through the credits .
*
In addition to the face - in - the - mirror scene , Endeavour includes another recognition of John Thaw .
His daughter , Abigail , appears as the crossword editor for the Oxford Mail , whom Morse questions .
At the end of the scene she pauses for a moment , then asks if she 's met him before , eventually noting it may have been " in another life . "
* Red letters are highlighted in names in the closing credits when the series is shown as part of Masterpiece Mystery !
on PBS , but not the original ITV release .
At the end of the pilot episode , the red letters spell out " Lonsdale " , Morse 's ( fictional ) college .
As in the original series and Lewis , Brasenose College , near the Radcliffe Camera , serves as Lonsdale .
SERIES 1
*
In Episode 1 of Series 1 ( " Girl " ) , Morse mentions ' DI Hillian from Robbery ' to another character .
This is a reference to Charlie Hillian , the distinguished retired senior officer murdered just prior to publishing his memoirs in Morse Episode 1 of Series 5 ( " Second Time Around " ) .
* The character Police Constable Jim Strange played by Sean Rigby in Endeavour appears as Chief Superintendent Strange played by James Grout in the Inspector Morse series .
*
In Episode 4 of Series 1 ( " Home " ) , Morse receives a leg injury when shot by a female character during the denouement .
While having the wound treated he 's told that he may experience a slight intermittent limp when he gets older thus explaining John Thaw 's limp as Inspector Morse .
SERIES 2
* As Morse and Thursday wait for the trap to close upon them near the end of " Neverland , " and their possible deaths , Morse quotes from A.E. Housman 's poem , " May " : " Past touch and sight and sound /
Not further to be found,/
How hopeless under ground / Falls the remorseful day .
"
The final episode of Morse , of course , is titled " The Remorseful Day . "
*
In Neverland , the young Morse is recommended by his boss to seek out ' Inspector McNutt ' as a possible replacement for him when he retires .
McNutt features in the Morse episode , when he is murdered by dangerous conman Hugo de Vries .
*
In Episode 1 of Series 2 ( " Trove " ) , Oxford Don Matthew Copley - Barnes appears , and references are made to his daughter Imogen and her friend Sylvie .
These characters form the core of Morse Episode 1 of Series 4 ( " The Infernal Serpent " ) .
* Also in Episode 1 ( " Trove " ) , one of the judges of the poolside beauty contest is " racing driver , Danny Griffin " , the late husband , brother and father of protagonists in Lewis episode
1 / Pilot ( " Reputation " ) , who has since been killed in a car accident .
SERIES 3
*
In the first episode , " Ride " ,
Endeavour 's friend is Anthony Donn from the Morse episode " Deceived by Flight " .
Morse and Anthony Donn lived together in college and shared a flat in St John 's Wood .
Bruce Belborough calls Endeavour " Pagan " referencing " Deceived by Flight " where we first found out Morse was called Pagan by Roland Marshall .
There is also a brief reference to Julius Hanbury , a murder victim in " Ghost in the Machine . "
*
In the second episode , " Arcadia " , enquiries by WPC Trewlove discover that a deceased character is described as having had his daily pint of Radford 's .
The Radford Brewery was at the centre of the mystery in " Sins of the Fathers . "
*
In the third episode , " Prey " , the young gardener at the Mortmaigne estate is Philip Hathaway , who will become the father of James Hathaway , Lewis ' partner .
Hathaway himself returned to the Mortmaigne estate , where he grew up , in the Lewis episode " The Dead of Winter " .
* The fourth episode , " Coda " , portrays the bank robbery that set up the Inspector Morse episode " Promised Land " .
It also features Jerome Hogg in a small role ; Hogg was also seen in the Morse episode " Greeks Bearing Gifts " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Endeavour at Masterpiece