ATM ( 2012 FILM ) ATM is a 2012 American horror thriller film directed by David Brooks and starring Brian Geraghty , Alice Eve , and Josh Peck .
The films centers on three people trapped in an ATM booth by a psychopathic hooded figure .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
David Hargrove ( Brian Geraghty ) is a stockbroker having trouble asking out his co - worker Emily Brandt ( Alice Eve ) , who is resigning for a position with the MPO .
At a Christmas party , David offers to drop Emily home .
Reluctantly , David also agrees to drive home his other co - worker Corey Thompson ( Josh Peck ) , who accompanies them .
During the car ride at midnight , Corey forces David to stop at a local ATM booth , needing to withdraw cash to buy pizza at a restaurant .
David spites Corey by parking some distance away , making him walk .
However , David and Emily join Corey inside when he encounters card problems .
When the three are about to leave , they spot a hooded figure ( Mike O'Brian ) in a parka coat lurking outside in the parking lot .
They panic and
Corey suggests they return to the car , but David and Emily suspect the figure to be a robber .
They also discover he can not enter without an ATM card .
When the hooded man kills a dog walker , they attempt to phone the police , only to realize that their cellphones were left in the car .
The hooded man shuts down the booth 's heater , rendering the booth cold to match the weather .
David opts to negotiate their safety by giving the killer $ 500 , earrings and a watch .
He uses this to escape to his car , where he finds out that wires are severed , and the car can not start .
David attempts to call 911 but is attacked by the pursuing figure .
He accidentally drops the phone as he escapes .
Trying to attract assistance , Emily then uses her lipstick to write " HELP " on the booth 's window , as the hooded figure tidies the scene outside .
David , Emily and Corey are freezing when a security guard ( Ernesto Griffith ) locates them .
When the guard tries to call the cops , the hooded man beats him to death using a tire iron from David 's car trunk , leaving the three witnesses in shock .
When a man with a similar coat abruptly enters the booth , he is overpowered and killed by David and Corey , but is revealed to be only an innocent janitor .
Frustrated , Corey takes the janitor 's coat and leaves , but gets caught and stabbed by the hooded man , and seemingly killed .
After several hours , David and Emily realize Corey is still alive .
They retrieve him from outside , narrowly managing to return to the booth before the hooded man can get to them .
The hooded man then blocks the booth door with David 's car and tries to freeze them to death , by filling the booth with cold water .
Corey eventually dies of blood loss and hypothermia .
David lifts Emily on his shoulders to successfully trigger the fire sprinkler system alarm using the janitor 's lighter , a trash can , and some paper ; but David slips , causing Emily to fall and fatally break her neck .
Relentless , the hooded man sends the security guard 's car into David 's car , which slams into the booth and breaks it down .
Angered , David improvises a Molotov cocktail and throws it at the hooded killer , but the figure he sets ablaze turns out to be the dead security guard in a parka coat .
The police arrive but David is arrested as the hooded man hides himself .
As David is driven away , he sees many unknown figures wearing parka coats in the crowd at the crime scene .
The killer among the crowd spies on David and leaves the scene .
The police recover surveillance recordings of the events within the ATM booth , but it is made clear the killer had planned his actions so as not to appear in the footage , framing David for the killer 's crimes .
The killer has also planted other evidence against David .
In the final scene of the film , the hooded man , whose face is still unseen , returns to his headquarters , where he begins to map out similar attacks on a mini - mart , a farm house , and other ATMs .
CAST
* Brian Geraghty as David Hargrove - A stockbroker who seems to have trouble with work , especially when a phone call with his customer " Mr. Dean " ended .
* Alice Eve as Emily Brandt - David 's love - interest and co - worker .
* Josh Peck as Corey Thompson - David 's lazy best friend and other co - worker .
* Mike O'Brian as The Man * Robert Huculak as Robert * Ernesto Griffith as Security Guard * Bryan Clark as Jerry
* Daniel De Jaeger as Luke
* Omar Khan as Christian * Aaron Hughes as Patrolman * Will Woytowich as Sargent * Glen Thompson as Harold PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming began September 2010 in Winnipeg , Manitoba .
Actress Margarita Levieva was set to play the female lead before being replaced by Alice Eve .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
On the review website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 9 % , based on 22 reviews .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released to video on demand services such as Comcast and Zune on March 6 , 2012 .
On July 31 , 2012 , the film was released on DVD and Blu - ray .
Both formats feature the 90-minute R - rated version of the film as well as an 85-minute unrated Director 's cut .
They also both include a behind - the - scenes featurette and the trailer .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS