JACK AND THE CUCKOO - CLOCK HEART Jack and the Cuckoo - Clock Heart is a 2013 French animated fantasy film based on the concept album by the French rock band Dionysos , and on the illustrated novel La Mécanique du cœur written by the band 's lead singer Mathias Malzieu .
The music of the film was entirely composed by Dionysos .
The original French language version , Jack et la mécanique du cœur , which translates literally as Jack and the Mechanics of the Heart , was released in October 2013 , with English- , German- , Finnish- and Spanish - language versions following in 2014 .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
In Edinburgh , Scotland 1874 , Jack is born on the coldest day ever .
Due to the extreme cold he is born with a frozen heart which will not beat .
The attendant midwife Madeleine saves his life by replacing his heart with a fragile but working cuckoo clock .
She then advises him of three rules to prevent his untimely death ; he must never play with the hands of the clock , he must never lose his temper , and finally he must never fall in love .
Jack 's mother , for reasons known only to her , quickly decides her child would be better raised by Madeleine and departs , leaving Jack .
Madeleine , incapable of bearing children of her own , raises and loves him as her own .
On Jack 's tenth birthday , Madeleine repeats the three rules before taking him into town for the first time .
He meets a girl in town named Miss Acacia and becomes infatuated with her .
After starting school shortly afterward , he also meets Joe , a bully who is in love with Miss Acacia as well .
Jealous , the older boy and his gang of students torment Jack for the next four years .
During an assault from Joe , the cuckoo of Jack 's clock heart gouges Joe 's eye , and Jack runs home believing he had murdered Joe .
Madeleine , believing Jack to be a fugitive , helps him to escape .
Jack only wants to see Miss Acacia again and eventually meets up with Georges Méliès , a magician attempting to operate an early film camera .
Georges helps repair his heart and agrees to join Jack in the search for Miss Acacia .
They proceed to Andalusia , Spain in search of her .
After a long journey they arrive at a circus in Andalusia .
Jack finds Miss Acacia
but Georges advises him against revealing his identity to her .
He proceeds to befriend her and foolishly avoids sharing his feelings .
She hints that her heart belongs to someone from her past .
It turns out that Jack was that person from her past .
Jack eventually finds a way to reveal himself and gives a key to Miss Acacia which can be used to wind his heart .
Before Jack and Miss Acacia could run away together , Joe , the bully from Jack 's past , shows up .
He had been looking for an opportunity to further punish Jack and explains to her the three rules of Jack 's cuckoo clock heart in an attempt to sabotage them .
Miss Acacia , after talking with Joe , decides she does n't want to risk being the cause of death of Jack by allowing him to fall in love .
She rejects him , and leaves with Joe .
Jack , after being rejected , tears at the screws of his heart .
In the carriage with Miss Acacia and Joe , he tells her that soon after Jack escaped with Madeleine 's help , Madeleine was sent to prison .
There , she died soon afterwards .
Rumors said that she died of a broken heart .
Miss Acacia eventually realizes she holds the key to Jack 's survival and returns to search for him .
She finds out quickly Jack had departed for home in Edinburgh and follows behind him .
She knows she has only a short time to reach him .
When he reaches home , he is told what happened to Madeleine .
They also tell him that Jack gave her the joy of being a mother and she worried at the thought of how he will grow up .
Miss Acacia finds Jack in front of Madeleine 's grave , shivering in the cold .
She tries to use the key to turn his clock but he throws away the key , choosing to die from not using the key .
Then they finally kiss .
When Jack breaks the kiss , time has stopped for him .
Jack sings a song about climbing to Heaven while using the frozen snowflakes as a ladder , ascending into the sky as the film fades to black .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The directors are Stéphane Berla ( the director of the band 's previous video clips ) and Mathias Malzieu .
The film was originally set to be released on 17 October 2012 in France but was delayed until October 2013 by unrevealed causes .
It was later revealed that the bankruptcy of the French animation studio Duran Duboi ( from Quinta group ) led to the delay .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS