CINNAMON CHALLENGE
The cinnamon challenge was a viral internet food challenge .
The objective of the challenge is to film oneself eating a spoonful of ground cinnamon in under 60 seconds without drinking anything , then upload the video to the Internet .
The challenge is difficult and carries substantial health risks because the cinnamon coats and dries the mouth and throat , resulting in coughing , gagging , vomiting and inhaling of cinnamon , leading to throat irritation , breathing difficulties , and risk of pneumonia or a collapsed lung .
The challenge has been described online since 2001 , and increased in popularity in 2007 , peaking abruptly in January 2014 and falling off almost as sharply through the first half of that year , then tapering off almost to its previous level by 2014 .
By 2010 , many people had posted videos of themselves attempting this challenge on YouTube and other social networking websites .
The cinnamon challenge continues to be active , with Twitter mentions peaking at nearly 70,000 per day in January 2012 .
It is similar to the saltine cracker challenge , which involves ingesting at least six saltine crackers – also known as soda crackers – within 60 seconds without drinking anything , the Gallon challenge , and the Banana Sprite challenge .
HEALTH DANGERS
Section::::Health dangers .
The stunt can be dangerous , as there is a risk of gagging on the cinnamon , especially if it forms a clump and clogs one 's airways .
Accidental inhalation of cinnamon can seriously damage the lungs by causing inflammation and leading to infection .
The usual result of this stunt is " a coughing , gagging fit involving clouds of cinnamon " which " leaves some people gasping for air " .
Sometimes those performing the stunt may gag , choke or cough and accidentally exhale the cinnamon through their noses , coating their skin and mucous membranes in cinnamon .
As cinnamon is rich in the compound cinnamaldehyde , the challenge often results in considerable irritation , discomfort , burning , or itching of the affected nasal tissue and nostrils .
On YouTube , people have been seen " coughing , choking and lunging for water , usually as friends watch and laugh . "
Vomiting is also known to have occurred .
The risks can be worse , even fatal .
In the first three months of 2012 , American poison control centers had received over a hundred phone calls as a result of the cinnamon challenge .
A high - school student in Michigan spent four days in a hospital after attempting the cinnamon challenge .
Pneumonia , inflammation and scarring of the lungs , and collapsed lungs are further risks .
In July 2015 a four - year - old boy died of asphyxiation after ingesting cinnamon .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The cinnamon challenge was aired on the twelfth series of the reality television show Big Brother UK , in which show participants were to ingest ground cinnamon without the aid of water .
Radio programmes have also aired segments of people performing this stunt , and others in the public limelight have been reported as airing the stunt for public display , including NBA players Nick Young and JaVale McGee .
Many people upload their cinnamon challenge to YouTube .
Comedian Colleen Ballinger told The Wall Street Journal that she took the challenge in character as Miranda Sings , in 2012 , to increase her YouTube traffic after hundreds of her fans had asked her to take the challenge .
Her video received more than 2 million views , even though it is on a discontinued YouTube channel .
Another comedian , GloZell Green , has attracted more than 50 million views with her cinnamon challenge video , in which she uses a soup ladle full of cinnamon instead of the usual tablespoon .
A large group attempt at the cinnamon challenge was held in 2012 at RMIT University in Australia and involved 64 participants in quick succession .
In a 2012 episode of the Discovery Channel series MythBusters , each member of the Build Team attempted the challenge .
Kari Byron and Grant Imahara failed , while Tory Belleci completed it by tucking his spoonful into his cheek and letting saliva accumulate in his mouth until he could swallow .
However , it took him more than 60 seconds to do so .
In the 2013 episode of Chicago Fire titled " Defcon 1 " , a cinnamon challenge is held to determine who will get to live in Severide 's new apartment .
The challenge is abandoned , and the team is reprimanded by the chief .
In 2015 , Freddie Flintoff took the challenge on A League of Their Own ( S9 ep1 ) , and Criminal Minds actor Matthew Gray Gubler was recorded taking the challenge unsuccessfully .
The challenge is also featured on Fox 's Family Guys 14th - season opener , " Pilling Them Softly " , in which Peter Griffin makes numerous attempts .
SEE ALSO
* Banana Sprite challenge
* Gallon challenge
* Saltine cracker challenge * Salt and ice challenge
* Consumption of Tide Pods REFERENCES