SONS OF ANARCHY ( SEASON 3 )
The third season of the American television drama series Sons of Anarchy created by Kurt Sutter about the lives of a close - knit outlaw motorcycle club operating in Charming , a fictional town in California 's Central Valley .
The show centers on protagonist Jackson " Jax " Teller ( Charlie Hunnam ) , the then – vice president of the club , who begins questioning the club and himself .
Sons of Anarchy premiered on September 7 , 2010 , on cable network FX .
Season three attracted an average of 4.9 million viewers per week , making it FX 's highest rated series ever at the time , surpassing FX 's other hits The Shield , Nip / Tuck , and Rescue Me .
Sons of Anarchy is the story of the Teller - Morrow family of Charming , California , as well as the other members of Sons of Anarchy Motorcycle Club , Redwood Original ( SAMCRO ) , their families , various Charming townspeople , allied and rival gangs , associates , and law agencies that undermine or support SAMCRO 's legal and illegal enterprises .
In 2018 , Universo announced the season 3 premiere of Sons of Anarchy in Español on 29 October 2018 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Gemma has been hiding in Rogue River , Oregon with Tig at the home of Gemma 's father , Nate ( Hal Holbrook ) , who suffers from dementia .
Gemma struggles when she takes Nate to his new assisted living home , and he pleads to be taken back to his house .
She returns to Charming to reunite with her grandson , unaware he has been kidnapped .
The return of A.T.F. agent Stahl twists the facts about the murder of Donna , Stahl attempts to make a deal with Jax behind the club 's back .
Father Kellan Ashby 's sister , Maureen , contacts Gemma at Ashby 's request and tells her Abel is safe in Belfast .
Upon learning of her grandson 's abduction , Gemma suffers a cardiac arrhythmia and collapses in the Teller - Morrow lot .
After the club returns from Ireland and brings home Abel , agent Stahl double crosses Jax and tells the club about the side deal Jax made with her , unaware that Jax and the club had it planned all along knowing Stahl would back out of the deal .
Jax , Clay , Bobby , Tig , Juice and Happy are hauled away to jail .
While Opie , Chibbs , and the Prospects are all en route following Stahl .
Chibs finally gets revenge on Jimmy by killing him and Opie kills Stahl to avenge the death of his wife , Donna .
CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters .
MAIN CAST
* Charlie Hunnam as Jackson
" Jax " Teller * Katey Sagal as Gemma Teller Morrow * Mark Boone Junior as Robert " Bobby Elvis " Munson * Dayton Callie as Wayne Unser
* Kim Coates as Alex " Tig " Trager * Tommy Flanagan as Filip
" Chibs " Telford * Ryan Hurst as Harry " Opie "
Winston
* William Lucking as Piermont " Piney " Winston * Theo Rossi as Juan - Carlos " Juice " Ortiz * Maggie Siff as Dr. Tara Knowles
* Ron Perlman as Clarence " Clay " Morrow SPECIAL GUEST CAST
* Paula Malcomson as Maureen Ashby * Ally Walker as Agent June Stahl * Kenny Johnson as Herman Kozik
* Mitch Pileggi as Ernest Darby * Stephen King as Bachman
* Sonny Barger as Lenny
" The Pimp " Janowitz RECURRING CAST
* David LaBrava as Happy Lowman * McNally Sagal as Margaret Murphy * Jose Pablo Cantillo as Hector Salazar * Michael Marisi Ornstein as Chuck Marstein * Titus Welliver as Jimmy O'Phelan * James Cosmo as Father Kellan Ashby
* Jeff Kober as Jacob Hale , Jr. * Zoe Boyle as Trinity Ashby
* Winter Ave Zoli as Lyla Winston * Andrew McPhee as Keith McGee * Arie Verveen as Liam O'Neill
* Pamela J. Gray as Agent Amy Tyler
* Marcello Thedford as Lander Jackson * Michael Beach as T.O. Cross * Joel Tobeck as Donny * Hal Holbrook as Nate Madock * Patrick St. Esprit as Elliott Oswald * Darin Heames as Seamus Ryan * Q'orianka Kilcher as Kerrianne Larkin - Telford
* Bellina Logan as Fiona Larkin * Emilio Rivera as Marcus Alvarez * Jamie McShane as Cameron Hayes * Monique Gabriela Curnen as Amelia Dominguez * Kristen Renton as I m
a * Taryn Manning as Cherry / Rita * Michael Fairman as Lumpy Feldstein * Robin Weigert as Ally Lowen * Marcos de la Cruz as Agent Estevez * Taylor Sheridan as Deputy Chief David Hale
* Tory Kittles as Laroy Wayne * Kenneth Choi as Henry Lin * Kurt Sutter as " Big " Otto Delaney * Keith Szarabajka as Victor Putlova GUEST STARS
* Leo Fitzpatrick as Prospect Shephard
* Bob McCracken as Brendan Roarke * Dorian Missick as Pony Joe
* Olivia Burnette as Homeless Woman PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Although Sons of Anarchy is set in Northern California 's Central Valley , it is filmed primarily at Occidental Studios Stage 5A in North Hollywood .
Main sets located there include the clubhouse , St. Thomas Hospital and Jax 's house .
The production rooms at the studio used by the writing staff also double as the Charming police station .
External scenes are often filmed nearby in Sun Valley and Tujunga .
Interior and exterior scenes set in Northern Ireland during season 3 were also filmed at Occidental Studios and surrounding areas .
A second unit shot footage in Northern Ireland used in the third season .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Some critics felt the third season was dragged down by the previous season 's cliffhanger .
James Poniewozik of TIME called the season three premiere " breathtaking " and praised Sagal 's performance with Holbrook .
He later stated that Abel 's disappearance helped return the show to its central problem : Jax 's allegiance to the club .
Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker agreed that Holbrook and Sagal 's scenes were " beautiful " .
He also commented that the series handled themes of loyalty and family especially well .
Maureen Ryan commented that the third season divided critics and fans alike , suggesting the expanded Belfast cast made it harder for the audience to invest in the characters ' journeys .
Ryan later questioned the credibility of Hector Salazar 's story , noting that he was inferior to other villainous characters such as Stahl , Zobelle and Weston .
However , she praised Ally Walker 's performance , comparing her character to The Shields Vic Mackey .
Critic Alan Sepinwall said the season was " interesting but uneven " , noting that the plot gained traction in later episodes .
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter said " Sutter should be applauded for shaking things up " , calling the slower pace a " creative necessity " .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
HOME MEDIA RELEASE Section::::Home media release .
The third season was released on DVD and Blu - ray in region 1 on August 30 , 2011 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sons of Anarchy at FXNetworks.com