WOULD YOU
RATHER ( FILM )
Would You Rather is a 2012 American psychological horror - thriller film starring Brittany Snow and Jeffrey Combs .
It is based on the party game "
would you rather " , and centers on Snow 's character , Iris , as she attends a dinner party , where she must partake in a life - threatening game to help her sick brother secure a donor .
The film premiered at Screamfest 2012 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Iris , a young woman caring for her sick brother Raleigh , is unable to afford the costs of his treatment for leukemia .
Her brother 's oncologist , Dr. Barden , introduces Iris to Shepard Lambrick , a philanthropist , who offers her a deal : if she wins a parlour game at a dinner party , his charitable foundation will pay for Raleigh 's treatment and locate a bone marrow donor for him immediately .
Dr. Barden tells Iris that he once played the game and won .
Iris reluctantly accepts .
The next day at Lambrick 's manor , Iris is introduced to his son Julian and the other contestants : Lucas ; Travis , a war veteran ; Linda , a paralyzed elderly woman ; Peter , a gambling addict ; Cal ; Amy ; and Conway , an alcoholic debtor .
A steak and foie gras dinner is served but Iris , a vegetarian , initially declines to eat it .
Shepard then offers her $ 10,000.00 to compromise her principles ; she reluctantly accepts his offer and eats the steak .
When Shepard realizes Conway is a recovering alcoholic , he offers him $ 10,000.00 to drink a glass of wine .
When Conway declines , Shepard offers him $ 50,000.00 to drink an entire decanter of Scotch .
Conway accepts the $ 50,000.00 and reluctantly drinks the Scotch .
After dinner ends , the game begins .
Shepard reveals it to be a version of the party game " would you rather " in which players must choose between two options .
Shepard gives his guests the opportunity to leave without playing , but everyone stays .
After Shepard 's butler , a former MI5 agent named Bevans , wheels in an electric shock machine , Conway attempts to leave but is shot dead .
Each contestant is then given 15 seconds to choose between shocking themselves or another person .
Cal shocks himself instead of Amy .
Amy shocks Linda , who temporarily passes out .
Linda shocks Peter , who attempts to leave but is threatened by Bevans .
Lucas is shocked next by Travis ; then Lucas refuses to shock Iris , instead , he shocks himself for the second time in a row and passes out .
Iris then chooses to shock herself instead of Cal .
During the break , Travis and Julian get into an argument .
In the second round , each contestant has 30 seconds to choose between stabbing someone in the thigh with an ice pick or whipping Travis three times with a sjambok .
After Iris debates her options of stabbing Cal or whipping Travis , Travis willingly submits to being whipped by Iris and Lucas to save anyone from being stabbed .
Julian smirks and snickers as Travis is whipped , revealing that Julian is behind Travis ' fate .
Travis is then given the option to either stab Lucas or take three lashes from Bevans .
He chooses to take the lashings , despite Lucas ' attempts to stop him from doing so .
Knowing Travis will not survive another whipping , Peter stabs Linda in the femoral artery and tries to stop the bleeding .
Linda stabs
Amy and Amy elbows her in the nose .
Amy , who is more focused on eliminating everyone else , is allowed to stab any player she wants and chooses Iris .
Instead of stabbing Iris in the leg she stabs her on her side , close to her lung , trying to get Iris eliminated by killing her .
With Travis and Lucas ' help , Iris lives .
However , it is then revealed that Linda has died from her wound .
Cal chooses to whip Travis
so he 'll have a higher chance of winning by rendering Travis unresponsive .
Lucas causes a distraction , and everyone but Amy attempts to escape the room .
Cal advances on Shepard with the sjambok as Lucas attacks the guards and Iris escapes .
After Shepard shoots and kills Cal , the others surrender .
Shepard sends Bevans and Julian after Iris .
Julian finds Iris first and attempts to rape her , but she stabs him with the ice pick .
Dr. Barden , who has had second thoughts about sending Iris to Shepard , breaks into the mansion to save her .
Drawn by her cries , Barden and Bevans converge on her .
Bevans kills Dr. Barden , escorts Iris back to the game , and sends Julian upstairs .
After Bevans and Shepard apologize to Iris for Julian 's behavior , the third round begins with a 30-second choice between getting dunked in a barrel for two minutes or an unknown task written on a card sealed until after the player chooses .
Peter chooses his card , which requires him to light a firecracker in his hand .
Shepard has Bevans secure a quarter stick of dynamite in place with duct tape .
The explosion destroys Peter 's hand , causing a heart attack , and he dies .
Lucas ' card forces him to slit open his own eye within 30 seconds ; he does so and survives .
Iris chooses the barrel and survives ; her card is revealed to have been the extraction of all her teeth .
Amy , whose ex - husband drowned her daughter , chooses her card and finds that she must be dunked for four minutes .
She drowns .
Only Iris and Lucas remain for the fourth round .
Iris wins a coin toss to go first .
She is given the choice to either shoot and kill Lucas to win the game , or spare him which would result in both walking away empty - handed .
As Lucas attempts to talk her into sparing him and explains the struggles of his family , she abruptly shoots and kills him .
Shepard crowns her the champion , gives her a bag full of money and explains that a donor has already been located for her brother and he will have surgery later that week as well as financial support to her continuing her studies .
When Iris arrives home , she finds Raleigh asleep on his bed
so she heads to shower the blood off her .
After the shower , she goes to her brother 's room only to find Raleigh was not sleeping but had committed suicide by overdosing on his medication , causing her to cry out in anguish .
CAST
* Brittany Snow as Iris * Jeffrey Combs as Shepard Lambrick * Jonny Coyne as Bevans
* Lawrence Gilliard Jr. as Dr. Barden * Logan Miller as Raleigh * Enver Gjokaj as Lucas * Sasha Grey as Amy
* John Heard as Conway * Charlie Hofheimer as Travis * Eddie Steeples as Cal * June Squibb as Linda * Robin Lord Taylor as Julian Lambrick * Robb Wells as Peter * Larry Cedar as Driver * Ptolemy Slocum as Shift Manager * Bobby C. King as Steward 1 * Adam Mayfield as Steward 2 PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film 's shooting began in July 2011 .
It was filmed on location in Pasadena , Woodland Hills , and Los Angeles , CA .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , reports that 57 % of 21 surveyed critics gave it a positive review ; the average rating is 5/10 .
Metacritic rated it 20/100 based on 11 reviews .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS