FLIGHT OF FEAR Flight of Fear ( previously known as The Outer Limits :
Flight of Fear ) is an enclosed launched roller coaster at two Cedar Fair parks – Kings Dominion and Kings Island .
Both locations opened in 1996 and were the world 's first roller coasters to feature a linear induction motor ( LIM ) launch .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Kings Dominion began teasing the new attraction in the summer of 1995 by cutting a " crop circle " in a nearby field which featured a UFO , the face of an alien and the letter " F " written in binary .
Premier Rides and Paramount 's Kings Dominion performed the first successful launch of the ride on April 11 , 1996 at 5:33 p.m. , proving that linear induction motors could be used to accelerate a roller coaster train using magnetic fields with enough force to complete a full circuit .
The launch requires 3 megawatts of electric power , which caused frequent voltage sags to neighboring utility customers .
Square D by Schneider Electric developed a complex solid - state capacitor bank to reduce the load on the electric utility .
Both ride locations held a media day on June 17 , 1996 and opened to the public as The Outer Limits : Flight of Fear on June 18 , 1996 .
When the rides opened , both had the fastest acceleration of any roller coaster in the world .
The attraction was awarded top honors for Major Theme / Amusement Park Ride / Attraction and Technology Applied to Amusements at the November 1995 International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions trade show .
The ride was originally themed to the television show The Outer Limits , but due to the license for using the name and theming of The Outer Limits expiring , the ride 's name changed to Flight of Fear at the start of the 2001 season .
The Kings Dominion location was closed for much of the 2006 season , only reopening on August 18 , 2006 after the park was purchased by Cedar Fair .
At Kings Island , the ride is located in the X - Base subsection of Coney Mall .
For years it was the only ride on the east side of The Racer .
With the addition of Firehawk in the 2007 , the area took on a theme center on experimental flight and propulsion systems .
During the 2007 season , the ride was equipped with on - board video cameras that recorded riders with the option to purchase the video at the ride exit .
These cameras were removed at the end of the season .
Premier Rides built other LIM Catapult models from 1996 to 1999 , including Joker 's Jinx at Six Flags America , Poltergeist at Six Flags Fiesta Texas , and Crazy Cobra at Discoveryland .
The two Flight of Fear rides are the only indoor versions .
All share a similar layout and have the same technical specifications .
RIDE EXPERIENCE LAYOUT Section::::Ride experience .
Section::::Layout .
Riders are launched from the station , accelerating from 0 to 54 mph in four seconds down a 220-foot launch tunnel .
The ride emerges into a " spaghetti bowl " of track inside of the 110-foot tall ride building .
Following the launch , the train immediately enters a cobra roll , which contains two of the ride 's four inversions .
The ride layout continues with a sidewinder and multiple turns .
After passing through the mid - course brake run , riders spiral downward to the left , continuing to maneuver through the twisted ride structure .
The train picks up speed as riders dive at the floor of the building , finally passing through a corkscrew before arriving at the final brake run .
TRAINS Section::::Trains .
The trains on the ride originally featured over - the - shoulder restraints , but these were changed to individual lap bar restraints for the 2001 season .
Each train also originally featured six cars , but that was later reduced to five .
Kings Dominion operates three trains , while Kings Island typically operates two trains despite owning four .
THEME Section::::Theme .
The queue building is designed to represent an Area 51 military installation .
The outside of the hangar is marked with the number 18 , referencing Hangar 18 at Wright - Patterson Air Force Base .
Hangar 18 supposedly stores evidence from the Roswell crash site which serves as a base for the ride 's storyline .
A UFO was spotted crashing into a field not far from the park and the press along with civilians are now permitted to enter the base to view its contents for themselves .
Riders enter the line through a " press area " located under an awning to the side of the building .
Various announcements regarding the operation of the base and broadcasts from WERD ( " weird " ) , a fictitious radio station , are played over speakers in the outside queue area .
The queue leads down a narrow tunnel , entering the hangar .
The interior of the hangar contains a full - sized mockup of one - half of a UFO which appears to be complete as one of the walls of the building is completely covered in mirrors .
A video is played over multiple screens explaining how the spacecraft was recovered not far from the park .
While some base personnel are running tests on the vessel , others are convinced that it is a hoax and decide to allow the press in to view it .
The hangar contains lighting effects which are synchronized with the video .
At Kings Dominion , much of the interior of the queue building was converted into a space for the " Lockdown " Halloween Haunt maze , although much of the UFO - related theming remains .
The line winds around the inside of the hangar before entering the underside of the UFO up a short flight of stairs .
The inside of the saucer features a display with alien markings and various sound effects .
The queue makes a right turn and then sharp left turn into the boarding area .
The loading and unloading stations are separate , so riders in the loading side of the building see an empty train returning .
The loading station features " cryotubes " containing mannequins dressed in the park 's souvenir clothing and wrapped in plastic to look as if they have been captured by the aliens .
While the train is loading and waiting to be dispatched , a sound effect imitating a jet engine warming up is played and as the train launches , a take off sound is played .
The two stations are the only parts of the ride which have much lighting ; most of the ride is in the dark .
As such , the ride buildings are also used to store trains and parts for other rides ; the building at the Kings Island location formerly held the trains for the now - defunct stand - up coaster , King Cobra , and still holds some of the seats removed from The Crypt .
The ride originally used The Outer Limits - based theming .
However , after the Paramount 's licensing to use the show expired , all references to the television show were removed for the start of the 2001 season .
The attraction features an original soundtrack composed by Rob Pottorf and theming co - designed by Bob Dennis and David Ferguson of Paramount Parks Design & Entertainment .
INCIDENTS KINGS ISLAND
*
At approximately 2:45 p.m. on June 2 , 2014 , emergency crews received a report of a fire at the ride .
Smoke from an overheated electrical motor had filled the ride building .
Two of the eighteen people exposed to the smoke were treated at the scene .
Emergency crews cleared the building around 3:45 p.m.
* Smoke coming from a panel outside of the ride building was reported at 10:35 a.m. on June 14 , 2014 .
The panel was the only part of the building to suffer damage ; the ride was unaffected , with no flames or injuries reported .
The ride later reopened around 12:15 p.m. REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Flight of Fear page at Kings Dominion
* Flight of Fear page at Kings Island * Flight of Fear at Kings Dominion at the Roller Coaster DataBase
* Flight of Fear at Kings Island at the Roller Coaster DataBase
* COASTER - net Ride Gallery