ENGLISH WORDS WITHOUT VOWELS English orthography typically represents vowel sounds with the five conventional vowel letters , as well as , which may also be a consonant depending on context .
However , outside of abbreviations , there are a handful of words in English that do not have vowels , either because the vowel sounds are not written with vowel letters or because the words themselves are pronounced without vowel sounds .
WORDS WITHOUT WRITTEN VOWELS Section::::Words without written vowels .
There are very few lexical words ( that is , not counting interjections ) without vowel letters .
The longest such lexical word is tsktsks , pronounced .
The mathematical expression nth , as in delighted to the nth degree , is in fairly common usage .
Another mathematical term without vowel letters is rng , derived from ring by deleting the letter .
A more obscure example is ln .
Vowelless proper names from other languages , such as the surname Ng , may retain their original spelling , even if they are pronounced with vowels .
In the Middle English period , there were no standard spellings , but was sometimes used to represent either a vowel or a consonant sound in the same way that Modern English does with , particularly during the 14th and 15th centuries .
This vocalic generally represented , as in wss ( " use " ) .
However at that time the form was still sometimes used to represent a digraph ( see W ) , not as a separate letter .
This practice exists in modern Welsh orthography so that words borrowed from Welsh may use this way , such as : * The crwth ( pronounced or and also spelled cruth in English ) is a Welsh musical instrument similar to the violin : * cwtch ( a hiding place or cubby hole ) is also from Welsh ( albeit a recent word influenced by English , and used almost exclusively in the variant of English spoken in Wales , not in standard English ) , and crwth and cwtch are the longest English dictionary words without according to Collins Dictionary .
* A cwm ( pronounced ) is used in English in a technical geographical or mountaineering context to mean a deep hollow in a mountainous area , usually with steep edges on some sides , like a corrie or cirque , such as the Western Cwm of Mount Everest .
It is also sometimes used , by way of more recent borrowing from Welsh , in a more general sense of a valley .
The spellings coombe , combe , coomb , and comb come from the Old English cumb , which appears either to be a much earlier borrowing from a predecessor of modern Welsh , or to have an even earlier origin , given that there was an ancient Greek word κὑμβη ( kumbē ) meaning a hollow vessel .
In English literature , one can find the spellings combe ( as in Ilfracombe and Castle Combe ) , coomb ( as in J. R. R. Tolkien ) or comb ( as in Alfred , Lord Tennyson ) .
There are also numerous vowelless interjections and onomatopoeia found more or less frequently , including brr ( brrr is occasionally accepted ) , bzzt , grrr , hm , hmm , mm , mmm , mhmm , pfft , pht , phpht , psst , sh , shh , zzz .
WORDS WITHOUT VOWEL SOUNDS Section::::Words without vowel sounds .
Weak forms of function words may be realized without vowel sounds , as in I can go and I must sell .
Some of these forms are reflected in orthography as contractions , such as s , ll , d , and n't .
SEE ALSO
* Words without consonants
* Wiktionary : List of words that comprise a single sound REFERENCES