NASHVILLE ( 2012 TV SERIES )
Nashville is an American musical drama television series .
It was created by Academy Award winner Callie Khouri and produced by R. J. Cutler , Khouri , Dee Johnson , and Steve Buchanan through season four , Connie Britton through season five , and Marshall Herskovitz and Ed Zwick
from season five on .
The series chronicles the lives of various fictitious country music singers in Nashville , Tennessee starring Connie Britton as Rayna Jaymes , a legendary country music superstar , whose stardom begins fading , and Hayden Panettiere as rising younger star Juliette Barnes .
Britton left the show in season five .
The series premiered on ABC , on October 10 , 2012 , and had more than 8.93 million viewers .
In May 2016 , ABC cancelled the show .
In June 2016 , it was picked up by CMT for a fifth season .
On December 1 , 2016 , it was announced that a preview of episode one would air on December 15 , 2016 , with the season starting on January 5 , 2017 , along with a set of new producers , writers , and showrunners .
A live aftershow , NashChat , began airing live across social media platforms on Thursday , January 5 , and aired immediately after every new episode during season five .
On April 10 , 2017 , CMT renewed Nashville for a 16-episode sixth season that debuted on January 4 , 2018 .
Filming began on September 27 , 2017 .
On November 17 , 2017 , it was announced that the sixth season would be the show 's final season , as CMT moved to all unscripted programming .
The 124th and final episode aired on July 26 , 2018 .
PLOT SERIES OVERVIEW Section::::Plot .
Section::::Series overview .
In the first episode , the series focuses on the rivalry of Rayna Jaymes and Juliette Barnes .
Rayna Jaymes is the established " Queen of Country Music " .
However , her latest album is not selling well and her tour is playing to half empty venues .
Her record label suggests that she open for Juliette Barnes , the young and sexy best selling singer of bubble gum country pop .
However , Juliette , seeing Rayna as privileged , purposefully alienates her .
Rayna , who dislikes Juliette 's style of music , rejects a joint tour out of hand .
The two women come into conflict as each tries to get guitarist Deacon Claybourne , Rayna 's bandmate and former lover , to sign on to their tour .
Rayna 's life is further complicated when her estranged father , millionaire businessman Lamar Wyatt , convinces her husband , Teddy Conrad , to run for Mayor of Nashville .
For later episodes through season four , the series follows the lives of country musicians , focusing on three female leads : country superstar Rayna Jaymes , rising problematic star Juliette Barnes , and newcomer singer - songwriter Scarlett O'Connor .
From mid - season five , the series follows the lives of country musicians , focusing on two female leads : rising star Maddie Conrad , Rayna James ' daughter , and fading star Juliette Barnes , as well as focusing on recurring characters .
The premise beginning with season six followed country stars Juliette Barnes , Deacon Claybourne , and the Highway 65 record label family as they strive to keep Rayna Jaymes ' dream alive and pursue their music while juggling relationships , family , and the ever - changing industry .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN Section::::Cast and characters . Section::::Main .
The show features an ensemble cast .
For the first season , nine actors received the star billing : Connie Britton as Rayna Jaymes , a 40-year - old country music superstar singer whose stardom is beginning to fade ; Hayden Panettiere as Juliette Barnes , a bubblegum country pop singer and former teen star sensation who is determined to replace Rayna as the top superstar of country music ; Clare Bowen as Scarlett O'Connor , a poet and songwriter Deacon 's niece , and musician partner with Gunnar who works at the Bluebird Cafe which is where she is first noticed and performs ; Eric Close as Theodore " Teddy " Conrad , Rayna 's husband who , after a business failure , is now living on his wife 's income .
He runs for mayor with help from his father - in - law and wins election , later divorcing Rayna ; Charles Esten as Deacon Claybourne , songwriter , lead guitar player , Rayna 's former lover and biological father of her oldest child .
; Jonathan Jackson as Avery Barkley , an aspiring musician with a bad - boy streak .
He and Scarlett are in a relationship when the series begins , but soon separate ; Sam Palladio as Gunnar Scott , a kind - hearted aspiring musician who dates Scarlett in season one , and dates Zoey in season two ; Robert Wisdom as Coleman Carlisle , a one - time mayoral candidate , and later Deputy Mayor , close friend of Rayna , and serves as Deacon 's sobriety sponsor ; and Powers Boothe as Lamar Wyatt , Rayna 's father and a wealthy , powerful and controlling patriarch and local politician who disapproves of his daughter 's career as a country singer .
Powers Boothe and Robert Wisdom were reduced to recurring status , in the second season for creative reasons .
After recurring basic in season one , three actors were promoted to the regular cast in the second season : Chris Carmack as Will Lexington , a rising country star struggling with the realization that he might be gay , as well as Scarlett and Gunnar 's new neighbor ; Lennon Stella as Maddie Conrad , Rayna 's older daughter , legal daughter to Teddy , and biological daughter to Deacon ; and Maisy Stella as Daphne Conrad , Rayna and Teddy 's younger daughter .
For the third season , two actors were upped to regulars : Will Chase as Luke Wheeler , the biggest male country artist and a love interest for Rayna ; and Oliver Hudson as Jeff Fordham , a record company executive who clashes with Rayna and Juliette .
For season four , Hudson was downgraded to recurring status and then his character was killed off while Aubrey Peeples , introduced in season two as reality competition second - place winner ( and later Will 's wife ) Layla Grant , was promoted to regular .
Aubrey Peeples and Will Chase were dropped from the cast after season four by the series ' new showrunners .
However , Chase made a guest appearance .
Connie Britton left the show in season five .
Rachel Bilson was announced to have joined the cast on March 9 , 2017 as a series regular .
Bilson plays Alyssa Greene , a Silicon Valley marketing expert brought in to take Highway 65 to the next level , who hates country music .
Adding another series regular , it was announced that , after appearing in almost every episode in the first half of season five , Cameron Scoggins , who plays Zach Welles , a wealthy tech - billionaire would be upgraded to series regular .
Scoggins exited in season six .
Kaitlin Doubleday , who portrays Jessie Caine — a musician who returns to town to focus on her career and take back the son who was taken from her — was upped from recurring to series regular near the end of season five , and she returned as a regular for the sixth season .
Another season five recurring player , Jeff Nordling , was also upped to series regular for season six .
Nordling plays Brad Maitland , the charming and narcissistic owner of the most successful record label in Nashville , and Jessie 's ex husband who is up to no good .
RECURRING Section::::Recurring .
In addition to main cast , several actors appearing in Nashville in a supporting roles .
The most notable are Judith Hoag as Tandy Hampton , Rayna 's sister , the daughter and protégé of Lamar Wyatt , who plays referee to Rayna and Lamar ; Sylvia Jefferies as Jolene Barnes ( season 1 , 3 , and 5 ) , Juliette 's overprotective and overbearing mother ; a drug addict who later commits a murder - suicide ;
Chaley Rose as Zoey Dalton ( seasons 2 , 3 , and 4 ) , Scarlett 's childhood best friend who moves to Nashville , and starts dating Gunnar ; Aubrey Peeples as Layla Grant ( seasons 2–4 ) , a runner - up in a singing competition and a new singer in Nashville who is a new rival for Juliette .
She gets dropped from the label , after her single tanks , though she strikes up a romance with Will , and they eventually get engaged .
She is a participant in a reality show featuring her and Will , and their impending nuptials ; Laura Benanti as Sadie Stone ( season 3 ) , a country star who is a friend of Rayna 's ; Brette Taylor as Pam ( seasons 3 & 4 ) , as Luke 's new backup singer ; Derek Hough as Noah West ( seasons 3 & 4 ) , an actor who lands a role about a famous country singer ; Kimberly Williams - Paisley as Margaret " Peggy " Kenter ( seasons 1 & 2 ) , Teddy 's former co - worker at the credit union who helped him hide his embezzlement .
They begin dating after Teddy and Rayna separate and marry after she lies to Teddy that she is pregnant .
She is shot and killed while someone was attempting to kill Teddy ; Michiel Huisman as Liam McGuinnis ( seasons 1 & 2 ) , Rayna 's new music producer , who also has a brief fling with Rayna and Scarlett ; Jay Hernandez as Dante Rivas ( season 1 ) , Jolene 's sober companion and Juliette 's lover , who , after attempting to blackmail Juliette , is killed by Jolene in a murder - suicide ; Charlie Bewley as Charles Wentworth ( season 2 ) , a married confident business man , who owns many radio stations across the country , and has an affair with Juliette ; Alexa PenaVega as Kiley ( season 3 ) , Gunnar 's first love who is now a struggling single mother ; Dana Wheeler - Nicholson as Beverly O'Connor ( seasons 2–4 ) , Scarlett 's abusive mother who has a strained relationship with her brother , Deacon ; Christina Chang as Megan Vannoy ( season 2 ) , Deacon 's lawyer at the beginning of season two ; Deacon and Megan were in a romantic relationship in season two until Deacon found out that she cheated on him with Teddy .
Also appearing in many episodes are several background characters , including Ed Amatrudo as Glenn Goodman ( seasons 1–present ) , Juliette Barnes 's protective manager and father - figure , often tasked with cleaning up the messes that Juliette leaves behind ; David Alford as Bucky Dawes ( seasons 1–present ) , Rayna 's long - time seasoned and caring manager ; Todd Truly as Marshall Evans ( season 1 ; 11 episodes ) , former president and CEO of Edgehill Republic Records .
In the beginning of season two he gets fired by the board of Edgehill Records and is replaced by Jeff Fordham ; Kourtney Hansen as Emily ( seasons 1–present ) , Juliette 's assistant ; Melvin Ray Kearney II as BO ( season 1-present ) , Juliette Barnes 's Bodyguard and one of the limited few that she trusts .
J. Karen Thomas as Audrey Carlisle ( season 1 ) , Coleman 's wife ; and Derek Krantz as Brent McKinney ( season 2 ) , an openly gay marketing and public relations employee who works for Jeff 's record company who once dated Will ; Kyle Dean Massey as Kevin Bicks ( season 3–5 ) , an openly gay country music singer - songwriter .
For the fifth season , folk - Americana singer Rhiannon Giddens and indie - pop singer Bridgit Mendler joined the cast as Hallie Jordan and Ashley Wilkenson .
Giddens held a major recurring role .
Joseph David - Jones as Clay , Maddie 's boyfriend and musician , Christian Coulson as a music video director , and the possible father of Scarlett 's baby , all joined the cast in major recurring roles .
Cameron Scoggins , a wealthy tech - entrepreneur who helps Rayna out with struggling Highway 65 , was originally cast in a recurring role , but was upgraded to a series regular .
Other recurring roles include Linds Edwards as Carl Hockeny , Rayna 's stalker , Ben Taylor as Flynn Burnett , a love interest for Daphne , and Katrina Norman joined the second half of the season as Polly , a stunning road manager .
Five major recurring characters were announced for season six ; part one , in addition to the returning recurring characters from the series ' fifth season .
Josh Stamberg will play Darius , an extremely charismatic founder of a self - actualization movement that has transformed many lives .
Jake Etheridge will play Sean , a recent military veteran suffering from severe PTSD who has yet to embrace his talent and passion for music .
Rainee Lyleson will play Alannah , who is a newcomer to the Nashville music scene , and a beautiful singer - songwriter who starts out as a backup singer but will soon be discovered for the star that she actually is meant to be .
Nic Luken is set to play Jonah Ford , a famous male pop star who 's very handsome , extremely confident , and charming .
Finally , Dylan Arnold will play Twig , a childhood friend to Jonah .
He navigates this lifestyle by guarding his anxiety and pain with a caustic , brilliant sense of humor .
In addition , it was revealed that Dutch singer Ilse DeLange would have a recurring role as Ilse de Witt , a female coach on a talent show .
For the second half of the season , Mia Maestro and Ronny Cox joined the cast as Rosa and Gideon , respectively .
Maestro will play Rosa , a dedicated follower of Darius ' cult who now is having doubts about her role in it .
Cox will play Gideon , a crusty , frustrated , would - be musician and recently reformed lifelong alcoholic who resented his son Deacon 's success .
PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT AND FILMING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Development and filming .
The series was created by Callie Khouri , who won an Academy Award for Thelma & Louise .
Khouri lived in Nashville from 1978 to 1982 .
In an interview for The New York Times she said " This is a place that can be mocked and made fun of , and sometimes it deserves it , like any place .
But it also is an incredibly beautiful , cosmopolitan city , and I wanted to show that to the world .
I want to represent it in a way that everybody who lives here would find completely realistic .
" Nashville was the first television series in Khouri 's career , after working for two decades as a film writer and director creating strong female characters .
The production began in 2011 .
In October 2011 , ABC bought the original concept from Khouri .
Documentary filmmaker R. J. Cutler also joined the project as executive producer alongside Khouri .
Nashville was produced by Lionsgate Television with ABC Studios .
ABC ordered the pilot on January 27 , 2012 .
The pilot episode was filmed in March 2012 and directed by series producer R. J. Cutler .
The series was picked up by ABC on May 11 , 2012 , and premiered on the network on October 10 , 2012 as part of its 2012–13 television season .
Dee Johnson joined the series as executive producer and showrunner as of the fourth episode , replacing Jim Parriott .
On November 12 , 2012 , the series was picked up for a full season run , which was shortened by one episode by the producers ( due to production difficulties ) rather than the network .
A number of television critics characterized Nashville as " Dallas in Tennessee .
" The original concept was focused on the backdrop of the real country music world .
ABC 's promotional campaign for the series premiere was primarily focused on the rivalry between a young and ruthless country pop diva ( Panettiere ) and a past - her - peak superstar ( Britton ) .
Nashville was filmed on location and on soundstages in Nashville .
The Bluebird Cafe , an important local performance arena , is a frequent setting ; the show 's art department , headed by production designer Jeff Knipp , precisely replicated its exterior and interior in a Nashville sound stage .
After weeks of rumors that production would move elsewhere , it was announced that season two would also be filmed on location in Nashville .
Nashville budget hovered in the neighborhood of $ 4 million per episode in season one .
The budget for each season of the series was roughly $ 39.7million , $ 90.2million , $ 91.7million , $ 85.6million , $ 86.6 million , and $ 62.4million respectively , with the series ' budget as a whole totaling $ 456million .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
British actor Sam Palladio was the first regular member to be cast , being announced on February 14 , 2012 .
Australian actress and singer Clare Bowen was the next addition to the pilot , as Scarlett O'Connor , on February 17 , 2012 .
On February 22 , General Hospital cast member Jonathan Jackson joined the cast in the role of Avery Barkley .
On February 23 , Emmy Award winner Powers Boothe joined the cast as Lamar Wyatt , father of lead character .
On February 29 , it was announced that Hayden Panettiere had landed the role of Juliette Barnes , originally planned as the primary antagonist of the series .
On March 1 , 2012 Robert Wisdom was cast as Coleman Carlisle , one of the supporting regular characters .
On March 5 Eric Close joined the ensemble cast as Teddy Conrad , Rayna 's husband .
On March 6 , it was announced that Connie Britton would play leading role of Rayna Jaymes , 40-year - old fading country superstar .
Britton also serves as a co - executive producer of the series .
On March 13 , 2012 , Charles Esten joined the cast in the final regular role of Deacon Claybourne , Rayna 's bandmate and former lover .
Britton stated that her character , Rayna was based on several country singers , including Faith Hill , Reba McEntire , and Bonnie Raitt .
Panettiere denied that her character resembled Taylor Swift , and stated that Juliette was instead based on herself — a young woman in the entertainment industry — and Carrie Underwood .
Alongside the nine regular cast members during the first season , several actors were cast in recurring roles .
Judith Hoag appeared in the series as Tandy Hampton , Rayna 's sister .
Sylvia Jefferies played the role of Jolene Barnes , Juliette 's mother .
On August 29 , 2012 , it was announced that Kimberly Williams - Paisley joined the cast as Margaret " Peggy " Kenter .
J. D. Souther , Rya Kihlstedt , Tilky Montgomery Jones , Wyclef Jean , Susan Misner and Michiel Huisman also had major recurring roles during the first season .
For the second season , Chris Carmack , who recurred in six episodes of season one as Will Lexington , the rising country star struggling with the realization that he might be gay , as well as Lennon Stella and Maisy Stella as Rayna 's daughters , were promoted to regulars .
Aubrey Peeples and Chaley Rose joined the cast in major recurring roles as Layla Grant , a runner - up in a singing competition and a new singer in Nashville who is a new rival for Juliette , and Zoey , Scarlett 's childhood best friend who moves to Nashville .
Oliver Hudson was cast as Jeff Fordham , the new CEO of Edgehill .
Christina Chang also joined the cast as Megan Vannoy , love interest for Deacon , and Will Chase as Luke Wheeler , love interest for Rayna and currently the biggest male country artist .
Charlie Bewley also appeared in the multiple - episodes arc as Charles Wentworth , a married business man , who had an affair with Juliette .
For the third season , Will Chase and Oliver Hudson were promoted to regulars after recurring performances in season two .
Tony Award winner Laura Benanti was cast in the recurring role of country star Sadie Stone .
Singer Brette Taylor was cast as Pam York , Luke 's new backup singer , and Alexa PenaVega for a multi - episode arc as Kiley , Gunnar 's first love .
Dancing with the Stars ' Derek Hough also joined the cast for a multi - episode arc as Noah West .
Grammy winner , Christina Aguilera joined the show later in season three as pop superstar Jade St. John for a multi - episode arc .
on May 31 , 2015 it was announced Eric Close would not be returning for the fourth season , his character was sent to prison .
On July 22 , 2015 , it was announced that Aubrey Peeples was promoted to regular , and Oliver Hudson moved from regular to recurring .
On October 13 , 2015 , it was announced that Panettiere was taking medical leave from the series for treatment for postpartum depression , which her character was also suffering from .
In June 2016 , it was announced that Aubrey Peeples and Will Chase would not continue on the series after its shift to CMT .
They were the first two cast members to be cut as producers tried to bring down production costs .
Britton chose to leave the series halfway through the fifth season .
Later series regulars included Rachel Bilson , as Alyssa Greene who joined halfway through season five , and Cameron Scoggins as Zach Welles , who was promoted to a series regular halfway through the season .
Kaitlin Doubleday was added to the main cast partway through the fifth season , as Jessie Caine , a mother and singer who returns to the scene .
Jeffrey Nordling , who recurred during season five , was upped to a series regular for the sixth season , and plays Jessie 's ex - husband , record label owner , and Jake 's dad .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Creative executive producer Callie Khouri 's husband T - Bone Burnett was the show 's executive music producer and composer for the first season .
When departing the series , his manager cited commitments to other projects , although Burnett later stated that he was also upset with television executives ' treatment of his wife .
His assistant and the managing producer Buddy Miller took over for Burnett in season two .
On October 2 , 2012 , it was announced that Big Machine Records will release all covers and original songs from the series .
Some songs are written by John Paul White of The Civil Wars , Hillary Lindsey , and Elvis Costello .
On November 13 , 2012 , Big Machine announced the release of Original Soundtrack on December 11 , 2012 .
An album of the music performed on the TV concert special Nashville :
On the Record by many of the cast and the songwriters was released to digital download on April 22 , the day before the special aired on ABC .
The following compilation albums have also been released to download :
* Clare Bowen As Scarlett O'Connor :
Season One ( April 29 , 2014 ; featuring 13 tracks )
* Hayden Panettiere As Juliette Barnes :
Season One ( May 6 , 2014 ; featuring 16 tracks , including two versions each of " Undermine " and " Consider Me " )
* Hayden Panettiere As Juliette Barnes :
Season Two ( May 13 , 2014 ; featuring 9 tracks )
* Clare Bowen As Scarlett O'Connor :
Season Two ( May 13 , 2014 ; featuring 9 tracks )
* The Nashville Cast
Featuring Lennon & Maisy Stella
As Maddie & Daphne Conrad ( November 20 , 2015 ; featuring 11 tracks )
Christmas With Nashville , an album featuring seasonal music performed by most of the main cast , was released on November 4 , 2014 .
Unlike the other albums , the music was not heard on the series ( with the exception of " Baby , It 's Cold Outside , " performed by Britton and Will Chase ) .
Nashville : On the Record 2 aired on March 25 , 2015 , featuring most of the main cast plus Deana Carter and Reba McEntire .
An album of the music performed ( other than McEntire 's ) was released to digital download .
One of the most intriguing features of this album was Charles Esten 's songwriting debut with Deana Carter on " I Know How To Love You Now " which he performed live during the season three premiere .
Nashville : On the Record 3 ( Live ) , featuring performances from many of the cast in concert , was released on December 16 , 2015 to digital download .
Starting with season six , an EP was released each week digitally containing that week 's songs .
The Music of Nashville :
Season 6 , Volume 1 was released on February 23 , 2018 .
The Music of Nashville :
Season 6 , Volume 2 was released on July 27 , 2018 .
The Best of Nashville , a compilation CD of the series ' entire catalog , was released on November 2 , 2018 .
The show 's entire score was released digitally on November 2 , 2018 .
TOURS Section::::Tours .
After successful American tours in 2014 and 2015 , dates in the United Kingdom and Ireland were announced along with further US performances in 2016 .
More UK performances followed in 2017 .
Another U.S. tour in the summer of 2017 , and a final UK tour came in spring 2018 ; the tour was kicked off with a final season celebration at the Grand Ole Opry on March 25 , 2018 .
CANCELLATION AND MOVE TO CMT Section::::Cancellation and move to CMT .
On May 12 , 2016 ABC cancelled the country music drama after a season of flagging ratings .
The cancellation came as a surprise due to the fact that the network had named new show runners Marshall Herskovitz and Ed Zwick prior to the cancellation , and previous network president Paul Lee had stated that " Nashville has a lot more story to tell " during the TCA winter press tour .
Amidst the cancellation , Lionsgate TV was so confident in its efforts to find a new home for Nashville that the studio opted to forgo the happily - ever - after alternative series ending it had planned in order to give closure to fans , and go instead with a cliffhanger ending in the season 4 finale .
Fans began to doubt the efforts of Lionsgate when actress and executive producer Connie Britton began to embark on what seemed to be a swan song of nighttime talk show appearances .
Over 174,000 signatures were received on a # BringBackNashville petition .
The night of the season finale Lionsgate tweeted " # Nashies What a cliffhanger !
But we wo n't leave you hanging .
There 's more story to be told .
# BringBackNashville .
" The producing partner had already been fielding offers from four or five networks .
As the negotiations began to draw to a close , it was rumored that the announcement would be made during the high - profile CMT Music Awards .
When no announcement was made , fans began to doubt the show 's return .
On June 10 , 2016 , CMT released a press statement stating that a deal had been made with CMT and Hulu .
CMT would air a full season of 22 episodes , and Hulu would make them available the next day as well as carry the entirety of the shows backlog .
The pick - up was assisted by $ 11 million in economic incentives : $ 8.5 million coming via the State of Tennessee Film Office , $ 1 million from the City of Nashville , $ 1 million from the Nashville Convention & Visitor Corp. , and $ 500,000 from Ryman Hospitality .
It was announced on June 29 , 2016 that all cast members with the exception of Will Chase and Aubrey Peeples would return for season 5 .
AFTERSHOW Section::::Aftershow .
On January 4 , 2017 , CMT announced that there would be a Nashville aftershow entitled NashChat .
Nashchat aired live across social media platforms immediately following every new episode .
It was interactive with the fans , and featured a cast member appearing each week .
The host of Nashchat is a co - host of the morning radio show
The Bobby Bones Show , Amy Brown .
NashChat did not return for season six .
RECEPTION RATINGS 12012–2013 !
22013–2014 !
32014–2015 !
42015–201652016–20172017–2018 CRITICAL RECEPTION
Rotten
TomatoesMetacritic SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season received critical acclaim .
Metacritic gave the show a rating of 84 out of 100 or " universal acclaim " based on 32 reviews .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a rating of 92 % based on 49 reviews , and the average rating is 8.6/10 .
The consensus on the site reads " Nashville promotes catchy pop - western tunes and plays to non - fans of the genre with its sharp atmosphere and its stellar narratives . "
Season one was called one of the most exciting new series of the 2012 Fall season .
Alan Sepinwell stated that the series was " a smart mix of soap opera , music and political intrigue .
" The series drew more soap comparison , with David Hiltbrand drawing comparisons to hit - soap , Dynasty , and praising the dynamic of leads Rayna , and Juliette .
The performances of Britton , Panettiere and Boothe received critical acclaim .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season received positive reviews , with a rating of 100 % based on five reviews on Rotten Tomatoes .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Season three also earned positive reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes gave the season a rating of 100 % based on 5 reviews , the average rating is 8/10 .
Critics praised the season 's continuing good quality , with Rolling Stone saying " It 's nice to call Nashville – and to have Nashville – home . "
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
The fourth season opened to positive reviews , scoring a 86 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
Critics praised Hayden Panettiere 's performance , with Lindsay MacDonald stating " First of all , a round of applause for Hayden Panettiere and her amazing range .
She portrayed the full spectrum of emotion , from flirty to bitchy to carefree to decimated .
She might be all over the board , but she owns every single scene .
" , and the general consensus praising the show 's soap elements , and the general music focus .
Kaitlin Thomas from TV.com claimed that the series was " the greatest modern soap the world has ever seen " .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
The season five premiere was well received .
Most critics praised the season premiere , stating " The original tenor of the series is one of the things that made it so appealing in the first place .
Add to this that the tempo of the narrative is ideal , and episodes never drag .
" , though Gwen Ihnat from The A.V. Club criticized the season , stating " Nashville now almost always bums me out , even more so because it used to be a show I once looked forward to every week .
But I have n't felt that way in quite a while now . "
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Reviews for the sixth season were generally positive .
Entertainment Weeklys Kristen Baldwin gave the season a B+ , and stated " In the end , Nashville remained true to its central love story . "
Ken Tucker of Yahoo !
TV gave a positive review , and wrote " When you combine this bubbly soap opera material with amusingly lively scenes of Will , Avery , and Gunnar getting together to form the band you did n't know you 'd always wanted , Nashville seems to be going out with an enjoyable blast .
"
New York Magazine gave the season premiere a 3/5 .
Conversely , Savannah Brooks of The Young Folks claims that " the characters used to be happy and have a purpose .
It 's time to stop letting one character 's death dictate the rest of the series " , in regards to the sixth season , rating it a 4/10 .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
In June 2012 , Nashville was one of five honorees in the Most Exciting New Series category at the Critics ' Choice Television Awards , voted by journalists who had seen the television pilots for the 2012–13 season .
The pilot episode received critical acclaim , specifically praising Callie Khouri 's writing , casting , and the performances of Connie Britton and Hayden Panettiere .
At the 70th Golden Globe Awards , Britton was nominated for Best Actress and Panettiere was nominated for Best Supporting Actress , while the series was nominated for Favorite New TV Drama at the 39th People 's Choice Awards and Best New Series at the 65th Writers Guild of America Awards ; Britton was also nominated for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series at the Primetime Emmy Awards .
At the 71st Golden Globe Awards , Panettiere received a second nomination for Best Supporting Actress .
At the 6th Critics ' Choice Television Awards , Panettiere was nominated for Best Supporting Actress in a Drama Series and Jonathan Jackson was nominated for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series .
Best Supporting Actor – Series , Miniseries or Television Film Powers Boothe Choice TV Actress : Drama
Hayden Panettiere Female Performance in a Drama Series Multi - Episode Storyline
Hayden Panettiere Choice TV Actress : Drama
Hayden Panettiere
GLAAD Awards Outstanding Drama Series
Nashville SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
Hulu acquired the streaming rights to all seasons of the show for the United States for its subscription tiers .
Later , AXS TV secured a deal for off - network cable rights for the series and currently airs repeats .
During the transition from ABC to CMT , Hulu acquired the exclusive streaming rights to Nashville catalogue .
This was a part of a $ 30 million deal between Hulu and CMT .
Episodes are also being aired after they first air on CMT on TVLand , and Nick at Nite .
Reruns have also started to air on VH1 and MTV .
HOME MEDIA
DVD release date !
Region 1 !
Region 2 !
Region 4 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS