PUBLIC HEALTH
ENGLAND
Public Health England ( PHE ) is an executive agency of the Department of Health and Social Care in the United Kingdom that began operating on 1 April 2013 .
Its formation came as a result of reorganisation of the National Health Service ( NHS ) in England outlined in the Health and Social Care Act 2012 .
It took on the role of the Health Protection Agency , the National Treatment Agency for Substance Misuse and a number of other health bodies .
MISSION AND RESOURCES Section::::Mission and resources .
PHE 's mission is " to protect and improve the nation 's health and to address inequalities " .
It employs 5,000 staff ( full - time equivalent ) , who are mostly scientists , researchers and public health professionals .
It announced plans to move its headquarters and 2,750 staff to Harlow on a former GlaxoSmithKline site in 2017 .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Initially , aside from back office functions such as personnel and finance or management functions such as strategy and programme management , PHE has the following divisions : * Health protection : * Chemical , radioactive , and environmental hazards
* Research * National poisons database
* Services for those working with hazardous materials * Harm reduction in relation to polluted environments
* Operations * Field epidemiology
* Contagious disease surveillance and control * Major incident response *
Health improvement : * Substance misuse treatment programmes * Health promotion ( such as healthy diet or anti - smoking marketing ) * Health screening programmes ( such as cancer screening , STD checks , cardiovascular disease screening , etc . )
* Reducing health inequalities * Specialist healthcare commissioning ( in relation to major incidents , etc . )
* National Cancer Intelligence Network ( and other networks )
* Knowledge and Information * Substance misuse treatment monitoring
* Disease registration * Research and development * Operations : * Microbiology unit * Microbe production * Research * References * Specialist services * Regional units ( South / Midlands / North / London ) * Preparation and response against major incidents
* Local centres ( several centres per regional unit , except London ) * Local health protection * Substance misuse treatment services ( over more than one centre )
* Local specialist commissioning ( in relation to major incidents , etc . )
and advice Duncan Selbie is the Chief Executive .
CAMPAIGNS Section::::Campaigns .
PHE took over the responsibility for Be Clear on Cancer campaigns after it was created in the Health and Social Care Act 2012 .
Campaigns have been run on Lung Cancer , Bowel Cancer , Oesophago - gastric and Kidney & Bladder Cancer .
PHE is also responsible for Change4Life and ACT FAST .
In January 2014 it launched a new campaign against smoking called Smokefree Health Harms on television and billboards across England .
CRITICISM AND OTHER PUBLISHED COMMENT Section::::Criticism and other published comment .
Public Health England has been criticised for its underweighting of mental health within its overall resourcing and agenda ; in 2011 the Royal College of Psychiatrists stated its concern that there appeared to be " few , or no , commitments or resources within either the Department of Health or Public Health England to take the public mental health agenda forward . "
The agency was criticised by Professor Martin McKee , in January 2014 , who said that continuing health inequalities among London boroughs was a scandal and claimed coalition reforms had left it unclear who was supposed to analyse health data and tackle the problems highlighted .
The agency was criticised by Lancet for allegedly using weak evidence in a review of electronic cigarettes to endorse an estimate that e - cigarette use is 95 % less hazardous than smoking .
Lancet wrote " it is on this extraordinarily flimsy foundation that PHE based the major conclusion and message of its report " .
Lancet found this " raises serious questions not only about the conclusions of the PHE report , but also about the quality of the agency 's peer review process . "
Authors of the PHE report subsequently published a document clarifying that their endorsement of the 95 % claim did not stand on the single study criticised in the Lancet , but on their broad review of toxicological evidence .
The agency has also been criticised for " serious questions about transparency and conflicts of interest " regarding this review , that PHE 's response " did not even begin to address the various relationships and funding connections " in question , and that this " adds to questions about the credibility of the organisation 's advice " .
The integrity of Public Health England was recently thrown into question when a question in the House of Lords revealed that a position underpinning UK Government policy , namely " that well run and regulated modern municipal waste incinerators are not a significant risk to public health remains valid " was asserted in advance of the results having been obtained from a study commissioned by Public Health England to answer the question whether municipal waste incinerators did , in fact , constitute a significant risk to public health .
SEE ALSO
* Health in the United Kingdom * List of national public health agencies REFERENCES