WENTWORTH ( TV SERIES )
Wentworth is an Australian television drama programme .
It was first broadcast on SoHo on 1 May 2013 .
The series serves as a contemporary reimagining of Prisoner , which ran on Network Ten from 1979 to 1986 .
Lara Radulovich and David Hannam developed Wentworth from Reg Watson 's original concept .
The series is set in the modern day and initially focuses on Bea Smith 's ( Danielle Cormack )
early days in prison and her subsequent rise to the top of the prison 's hierarchy .
Following Cormack 's departure from the show at the end of the fourth season , the series shifted its focus onto a more ensemble format .
For the first three seasons , Wentworth was filmed on purpose - built sets in the suburbs of Clayton , Victoria .
Production moved to Newport , Victoria , starting with the fourth season .
The show has received a mostly positive reception from critics , and the first episode became the most watched Australian drama series premiere in Foxtel history .
The series was picked up by several countries , including New Zealand and the UK , where it has been retitled Wentworth Prison .
A seventh season was commissioned in April 2018 , before the sixth - season premiere , with filming commencing the following week and a premiere set for 2019 .
In December 2018 , it was confirmed that a further 20 episodes had been commissioned , with production beginning in September 2019 , and the episodes set to be broadcast through 2020 and 2021 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Wentworth is set in modern - day Australia and focuses on Bea Smith ( Danielle Cormack ) when she first enters prison after being charged with the attempted murder of her husband .
Bea is separated from her daughter and sent to Wentworth on remand , where she lives in " an uncertain limbo " until she is sentenced .
Starting at the bottom of Wentworth 's hierarchy , Bea is forced to learn how to survive in prison .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN * Danielle Cormack as Bea Smith ( seasons 1–4 ) * Nicole da Silva as Francesca " Franky " Doyle ( seasons 1–6 ) * Kris McQuade as Jacqueline " Jacs " Holt ( season 1 ) * Leeanna Walsman as Erica Davidson ( season 1 )
* Kate Atkinson as Vera Bennett ( season 1 – ) * Celia Ireland as Elizabeth " Liz " Birdsworth ( season 1 – ) * Shareena Clanton as Doreen " Dor " Anderson ( seasons 1–5 )
* Aaron Jeffery as Matthew " Fletch " Fletcher ( seasons 1–3 ) * Robbie J. Magasiva as Will Jackson ( season 1 – )
* Catherine McClements as Meg Jackson ( season 1 )
* Katrina Milosevic as Susan " Boomer " Jenkins ( recurring season 1 ; main season 2 – )
* Pamela Rabe as Joan " The Freak " Ferguson ( main season 2–5 ; special guest season 6 )
* Socratis Otto as Maxine Conway ( recurring seasons 2–3 ; main seasons 4–5 )
* Tammy MacIntosh as Karen " Kaz " Proctor ( recurring season 3 ; main season 4 – )
* Kate Jenkinson as Allie Novak ( season 4 – ) * Sigrid Thornton as Sonia Stevens ( special guest season 4 ; main season 5–6 )
* Bernard Curry as Jake Stewart ( season 4 – ) * Leah Purcell as Rita Connors ( season 6 – ) * Susie Porter as Marie Winter ( season 6 – ) * Rarriwuy Hick as Ruby Mitchell ( season 6 – ) RECURRING * Ra Chapman as Kim Chang ( seasons 1–5 ) * Jacqueline Brennan as Linda Miles ( season 1 – ) * Libby Tanner as Bridget Westfall ( seasons 3–6 ) * Sally - Anne Upton as Lucy " Juicy Lucy " Gambaro ( seasons 3 – )
* Martin Sacks as former acting Governor Derek Channing ( seasons 1 – )
* Bessie Holland as Stella Radic ( seasons 2 – ) * Charli Tjoe as Tina Mercado ( seasons 3–5 )
* Madeleine Jevic as Lee Radcliffe ( seasons 4–6 ) * Sophia Katos as Mel Barrett ( seasons 4–5 )
* Steve Bastoni as Don Kaplan ( seasons 4 - 5 )
* Hunter Page - Lochard as Shayne Butler ( seasons 4–5 ) * Daniielle Alexis as Dana Malouf ( seasons 5 )
* Zahra Newman as Iman Farah ( seasons 5 )
* Natlia Novikova as Zara Dragovich ( seasons 6 ) * Artemis Ioannides as Vicky Kosta ( seasons 6 – ) * Louise Harris as Ronnie Katsis ( season 1 )
* Rondah Dam as Phillipa " Pip " Turner ( season 1 ) * John Bach as Vinnie Holt ( season 1 ) * Melitta St Just as Megan Summers ( season 1–2 ) * Steve Le Marquand as Colin Bates ( season 2 )
* Tony Briggs as Steve Faulkner ( season 2 )
* Lynette Curran as Rita Bennett ( seasons 1–2 )
* Jada Alberts as Toni Goodes ( seasons 1–2 ) * Annie Jones as Rachel Sanger ( seasons 1–2 ) *
Katherine Halliday as Sarah Briggs ( season 2 )
* Kathryn Beck as Sky Pierson ( season 2 ) * Reef Ireland as Brayden Holt ( seasons 1–2 ) * Benne Harrison as Rosalind " Roz " Jago ( seasons 1–3 ) * Cassandra Magrath as Hayley Jovanka ( seasons 1–3 )
* Kasia Kaczmarek as Lindsay Coulter ( seasons 2–3 )
* Miles Paras as Cindy Lou ( season 3 )
* Christen O'Leary as Kelly Bryant ( seasons 2–3 )
* Pia Miranda as Jodie Spiteri ( season 3 ) * Jake Ryan as Harry Smith ( recurring seasons 1–2 ; cameo season 3 )
* Ally Fowler as Simone
" Simmo " Slater ( recurring seasons 1–2 ; cameo season 3 )
* Alex Menglet as Ivan Ferguson ( seasons 2–3 )
* Edwina Samuels as Sophie Donaldson ( seasons 2–3 )
* Scott Parmeter as Chris Bakula ( seasons 1–3 ) * Damien Richardson as Michael Mears ( season 3 )
* Maggie Naouri as Rose Atkins ( seasons 2–3 )
* Georgia Chara as Jess Warner ( seasons 2–3 )
* Richard Sutherland as Alan Doyle ( seasons 1 , 4–6 ) * Georgia Flood as Debbie Smith ( seasons 1–2 , cameo season 4 )
* Tony Nikolakopoulos as Nils Jasper ( seasons 2–4 ) * Katerina Kotsonis as Brenda Murphy ( seasons 4 – ) * Luke McKenzie as Nash Taylor ( seasons 2–5 )
* Marta Kaczmarek as Marge Nowak ( seasons 2 , 5 ) * Tasia Zalar as Jianna Riley ( Seasons 2 , 3 )
PRODUCTION
CONCEPTION
Section::::Production .
Section::::Conception .
In March 2012 , it was announced that a contemporary re - imagining of Prisoner had been commissioned by Foxtel .
Brian Walsh , the executive director of television at Foxtel , stated that Wentworth would not be a remake of Prisoner , which ran for 692 episodes on Network Ten from 1979 to 1986 .
He continued : " Wentworth will be a dynamic and very confronting drama series , developed and stylised specifically for subscription television audiences .
We have told producers to push all boundaries and honestly depict life on the inside as it is in 2012 . "
Lara Radulovich and David Hannam have developed Wentworth from Reg Watson 's original concept .
FremantleMedia and director of drama Jo Porter will produce Wentworth .
The first episode , and several subsequent episodes , were written by Pete McTighe .
Television critic Michael Idato acted as series consultant and Kerry Tucker acted as consultant on authenticity .
Porter commented that the series would explore " the politics of women in a world with few men , and how the experience both challenges and changes them , sometimes for the better .
" Wentworth is set in the modern - day and centres on Bea Smith 's early days in prison .
The storylines include a mix of original inmates and staff from Prisoner with characters developed especially for Wentworth .
Foxtel told a reporter from The Sydney Morning Herald that the original characters from Prisoner would be a contemporary interpretation in the new series .
It was initially reported that none of the original cast from Prisoner would appear in the first season of Wentworth , however Anne Charleston , who had a number of small roles in the original series , made a cameo appearance as Liz Birdsworth 's mother - in - law , also Alex Menglet and Gloria Ajenstat who played Ray Proctor and Tammy Fisher in the original series will have guest roles in the new series .
Foxtel revealed that the producers were looking at how they might incorporate the Prisoner theme tune , " On The Inside " , into the new series .
On 5 June 2013 , it was confirmed that Wentworth had been renewed for a second season .
A reporter for the Australian Associated Press said production would begin later in the year , and the season would air in 2014 .
Porter stated : " We have assembled an extraordinary team of writers who ca n't wait to get started on series two .
We have so many more stories to tell . "
In January 2014 , it was announced that a third season of Wentworth had been ordered , before the second had aired .
In a similar manner , a 12-episode fourth season was announced before the airing of the third season on 27 February 2015 .
It began airing from 10 May 2016 .
Cormack confirmed a fifth season had been commissioned on 19 July .
The twelve - part series premiered on 4 April 2017 .
On 9 May 2017 , Showcase announced that the series has been renewed for a sixth season , which premiered on 19 June 2018 .
A seventh season was commissioned in April 2018 , before the sixth - season premiere , with filming commencing the following week and a premiere set for 2019 .
On 5 December 2018 , it was confirmed that a further 20 episodes had been commissioned , with production beginning in September 2019 , and the episodes set to be broadcast through 2020 and 2021 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On 4 October 2012 , a reporter for The West Australian revealed that Celia Ireland and Kate Atkinson had joined the cast of Wentworth , while Shareena Clanton would make her acting debut as Doreen Anderson .
Danielle Cormack was cast in the role of Beatrice " Queen Bea " Smith and she stated " I am absolutely rapt to be part of the reboot of such an iconic drama .
Prisoner left an indelible mark on fans and I really hope that the re - imagining of this series will be just as popular with viewers now as it was back then . "
Actors Robbie Magasiva and Aaron Jeffery play corrections officers in the detention centre .
David Knox from TV Tonight revealed that Nicole da Silva , Kris McQuade , Catherine McClements and Leeanna Walsman had also joined the cast .
Following the end of the first season , it was revealed that iconic Prisoner character Joan " The Freak " Ferguson , a sadistic , lesbian prison officer , would be introduced in the second season .
Porter commented " Prisoner offered up a very rich well of amazing characters to draw upon and the Wentworth writers are very excited about revisiting the character of
prison officer Joan ' The Freak ' Ferguson in our second season . "
Erin McWhirter from TV Week reported that former All Saints actress Tammy MacIntosh was one actress rumoured to have been offered the role .
On 21 September 2013 , it was confirmed that Pamela Rabe had been cast as " The Freak " .
McQuade , McClements and Walsman did not reprise their respective roles of Jacs Holt , Meg Jackson and Erica Davidson for the second season .
Katrina Milosevic , who portrays Boomer Jenkins , was upgraded to the main cast .
Actresses Pia Miranda , Libby Tanner and Tammy MacIntosh joined the cast from the third season as inmate Jodie Spiteri , psychologist Bridget Westfall and vigilante Karen Proctor respectively .
Sigrid Thornton , who played Ros Coulson on Prisoner , will be joining the cast for season four .
She will not be reprising her former role , but will play another Prisoner based character Sonia Stevens .
In November 2015 , Kate Jenkinson and Bernard Curry were announced to be appearing in the show as Allie Novak , an inmate , and Jake Stewart , a correctional officer , respectively .
In April 2018 , it was announced that Indigenous Australian actress Leah Purcell had joined the cast as Rita Connors , a role originally played by Glenda Linscott in Prisoner .
Also joining the cast were Susie Porter as criminal matriarch Marie Winter , a role originally played by Maggie Millar in Prisoner , and Rarriwuy Hick as young boxer Ruby Mitchell .
Shane Connor also joined the cast in a recurring role .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Foxtel confirmed that Wentworth would not be shot at the original ATV-10 studios in Nunawading , Victoria where Prisoner was filmed .
Wentworth was instead filmed on a purpose built set in the suburb of Clayton .
The shoot employed 300 cast and crew .
The ten - part season began filming for four months from 10 October 2012 .
Wentworth began airing on Foxtel 's SoHo channel from 1 May 2013 .
Filming for the second season began on 23 September 2013 and wrapped on 13 February 2014 .
The second season began airing on 20 May 2014 .
Production for the third season resumed in March and filming was completed in late July .
In the same month , it was announced that the property in which Wentworth was filmed had been sold , and the set would be knocked down .
A new alternative was being sought and a TV Week reporter commented that it was unclear if the loss of the set would be written into future storylines .
The third season began airing on 7 April 2015 .
Production on the fourth season began in the second half of 2015 .
The fifth season was filmed in Melbourne from August 2016 .
On 9 May 2017 , Showcase announced that the series has been renewed for a sixth season , which began filming a week later .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
Wentworth has been sold to more than 90 countries .
On 2 April 2013 , it was confirmed that TVNZ had signed a deal to broadcast Wentworth in New Zealand .
Later that month , it was announced that Wentworth would be broadcast on Channel 5 in the UK .
The head of acquisitions for the channel , Kate Keenan , commented " Wentworth will be a great addition to Channel 5 's drama output this autumn .
This compelling cast of female characters packs an emotional punch and will appeal to the Channel 5 viewers who love our range of crime output from dramas to factual series . "
A trailer for the series began airing on the channel and its website in August 2013 and premiered on Channel 5 on 28 August .
Channel 5 also re - titled the show , Wentworth Prison .
The second season began on Channel 5 on 3 September 2014 and season Three , which commenced broadcast on 22 July 2015 , concluded with a two - hour season finale which consisted of episodes 11 and 12 of the season on 30 September 2015 .
Season four of Wentworth premiered on Channel 5 on 27 June 2016 .
In July , following declining ratings , the series was moved from its Monday night timeslot on Channel 5 to Tuesday 's on sister channel 5Star .
Season 5 premiered on 5Star on 23 May 2017 .
Season 6 of Wentworth premiered on 5Star on 23 June 2018 , just four days following the Australian premiere ; however , the series has been moved to Saturday nights at 10:00 pm .
The series premiered in the Republic of Ireland broadcasting as Wentworth on TV3 from June 2014 .
Season 2 premiered on TV3 on 15 January 2015 .
In Canada the first two seasons broadcast on Aboriginal Peoples Television Network in late 2015 .
Although the series has a strong fan base in many countries , Angela Perez of Australia Network News said , in 2016 , that Foxtel was considering cancelling the show [ after the then current fourth season ] due to audiences viewing new episodes via pirate websites following the Australian premiere .
Foxtel stated that the piracy is " a serious problem in terms of recouping money to help pay for future seasons " .
ABC 1 started broadcasting Wentworth from season 1 in April 2018 .
STREAMING Section::::Streaming .
In December 2014 , Wentworth first premiered on Netflix in the United States and added seasons one and two to its streaming service .
In April 2016 the third season was released to US audiences via the platform .
Season 4 was released on Netflix in July 2016 .
The show features on the " 50 Best TV Shows on Netflix " list according to Netflix Life .
Seasons one to three are available to view via Amazon Video in the U.S.
In the United Kingdom , all five seasons are available for streaming on Amazon Video , while additional services include Google Play and YouTube .
In Australia , Foxtel Now provides a catch - up service for the Wentworth , while the series is made available for catch - up viewing via TVNZ OnDemand in New Zealand and My5 in the United Kingdom for a limited time .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The show has received critical acclaim throughout its run .
Following a screening of the pilot episode for the media in February 2013 , Ben Pobjie from The Age called Wentworth " a triumph " .
He praised the writing and the cast , saying " So rarely in Australian TV do we see well - written characters collide with dead - on casting and tense , atmospheric direction as they have here . "
He added that Wentworth is " a powerful , almost cinematic drama " with its own identity , that incorporates " echoes " of the original Prisoner series .
Holly Byrnes , writing for the Herald Sun , quipped " this brilliant retelling picks up where the pioneering series left off and then takes the kind of shocking plot detours contemporary TV viewers would expect from award - winning US dramas like Breaking Bad or Sons of Anarchy . "
Byrnes also praised the cast 's performances , particularly Cormack .
Following its North American debut the critics drew comparisons with US prison dramedy Orange Is the New Black , though Liz Raftery of TV Guide said she believed the show was more gritty and did not " sugarcoat " prison life .
They branded it " edge - of - your - seat television " and singled out Sue ' Boomer ' Jenkins as one of the show 's standout characters and reasons to watch .
Margaret Lyons from New York magazine called it a " ruthlessly dark drama " similar to Breaking Bad , a comparison which TV Guide 's critics also made .
Lyons added that Wentworth 's careful plotting of storylines gave meaningful payoffs and triumphed into making it a " smart and competent " series .
Gerard O'Donovan from The Daily Telegraph opined that the show has a cast of " fabulously strong , variably humane female characters .
" They believed it did not try to appeal to " mainstream tastes " , adding " the series sticks more closely to its violent , soapy , sexploitation Prisoner :
Cell Block H roots than is strictly necessary in 2016 .
"
O'Donovan branded it a rare example of fictional work portraying lesbianism as " not only normal , but the norm . "
He concluded the show depicts a world in which " women hold virtually all the power , albeit to no obviously edifying ends .
"
Matt Baylis from the Daily Express criticised the show for not being original and having a " mandatory number of unnecessary scenes " .
They preferred the original series Prisoner and accused Wentworth of being everything the original was not .
The first episode of Wentworth attracted 244,000 viewers , making it the most watched Australian drama series premiere in Foxtel history .
The UK premiere of the show attracted 1.67 million viewers , a 10.3 % share of the audience for the 10 pm time slot .
RATINGS ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Wentworth has received several awards and nominations since its debut in 2013 .
The series has received 18 Logie Award nominations , winning six in total , in which Danielle Cormack , Celia Ireland and Pamela Rabe have been recipients respectively , while the show has won the award for Most Outstanding Drama Series in 2015 and 2018 , and again for Most Popular Drama Program in 2018 .
The shows has also received nominations and wins from the AACTA Awards , the ASTRA Awards , Australian Directors Guild Awards , and Australian Writers Guild Awards , while additional nominations have come from the Australian Screen Editors and the Equity Awards .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
In Australia , Wentworth is available on both DVD and Blu - ray formats , where in 2013 the first season was released via Shock Records .
The series was however acquired by Roadshow Entertainment in 2014 for distribution of subsequent seasons , and a re - release of the first season in 2016 .
Fremantle Home Entertainment initially held the rights for distribution in the United Kingdom , where the series is only available on DVD , and under the " Wentworth Prison " title .
The first season was made available in a standard set and a Deluxe Edition , for which it included special features ; both the second and third seasons received only Deluxe Edition releases , after which , Network distribution acquired ownership of all home media rights for all previous seasons and subsequent seasons from 2016 onwards .
Furthermore , multiple season sets are available on DVD and Blu - ray in Australia and on DVD in the United Kingdom .
The Seasons 1−6 set in Australia will only be available on DVD format .
In the United States , the series commenced releasing on DVD in 2016 in which the first three seasons are currently available from Acorn Media .
As of yet , there is no news as to whether Acorn Media will release subsequent seasons .
DVD and Blu - ray sets commenced releasing in Germany from early 2017 .
From Season 4 onwards , the series will only receive DVD sets in Germany .
+
Overview ! rowspan="2 " Season !
rowspan="2 " Episodes !
colspan="4 " Release date !
colspan="2 " Rating !
rowspan="2 "
Additional !
width="190 " Region 1
DVD !
width="190 " Region 2
DVD !
width="180 " Region 4
DVD !
width="180 " Region B Blu - ray !
BBFC !
ACB !
colspan="12
" Individual releases !
colspan="12
" Multiple releases REMAKES * Block B :
Under Arrest , a German remake was the first in 2014 which screened on RTL for one season .
* Celblok H , a Dutch remake of Wentworth for Dutch TV Network , SBS 6 , starring Isa Hoes , Eva van de Wijdeven , Bo Mearten , and Inge Ipenburg , began airing on 3 March 2014 .
The series is virtually a scene - for - scene remake of Wentworth , with the exception of character name changes and the fourth season .
The fourth season was made by the Dutch producers .
Four seasons and 46 episodes were produced , and the final episode was broadcast on 27 March 2017 .
* A Belgian remake of " Wentworth " is being made by the Belgian TV channel Vier .
Filming is scheduled to start in July 2016 , release is planned for 2018 .
* Avlu , a Turkish remake , is being made by the Turkish TV channel Star TV .
The first episode date was March 29 , 2018 .
The season two began September 20 , 2018 .
Not everything was used , for example Kudret ( Jacs ) was attacked by Deniz ( Bea ) with a knife .
In the second season Kudret ( Jacs ) still lives .
SEE ALSO
* Bad Girls , British drama with a similar premise
*
Orange Is the New Black , American drama with a similar premise
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS