THE GOVERNOR ( THE WALKING DEAD )
The Governor ( real name Philip Blake in the TV series , and Brian Blake in the comics and novels ) is a fictional character and a primary antagonist from The Walking Dead comic book and television series .
On television , he is portrayed by David Morrissey .
Created by Robert Kirkman and artists Charlie Adlard and Cliff Rathburn , the character made his comics debut in The Walking Dead # 27 on April 2006 and his television debut in season 3 .
In both series , The Governor is the ruthless , charismatic leader of the town of Woodbury , Georgia , who comes into conflict with protagonist Rick Grimes and is responsible for the deaths of several primary characters .
The Governor 's origins are explored in the novel , written by Kirkman and Jay Bonansinga .
In the television series , The Governor 's disturbing motives are reflected in his authoritarian ways in dealing with threats to his community , primarily by executing most large groups and only accepting lone survivors into his community .
His dark nature escalates when he comes into conflict with Rick Grimes and the latter 's group , who are occupying the nearby prison .
The Governor vows to eliminate the prison group , and in that pursuit , he leaves several key characters dead both in Rick 's group and his own .
The Governor has a romantic relationship with Andrea , who unsuccessfully seeks to broker a truce between the two groups .
In season 4 , The Governor attempts to redeem himself upon meeting a new family , to whom he introduces himself as Brian Heriot .
However , he commits several brutal acts to ensure the family 's survival .
This leads to more characters ' deaths and forces Rick and his group to abandon the prison .
In 2009 , the Governor was ranked as IGN 's 86th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time and was ranked # 28 on TV Guides list of The 60 Nastiest Villains of All Time .
For his performance as the Governor , Morrissey was nominated for Best Supporting Actor at the 39th Saturn Awards .
APPEARANCES
FICTIONAL
CHARACTER BIOGRAPHY
COMIC BOOK SERIES
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Fictional character biography .
Section::::Comic book series .
Aside from simply " The Governor , " the character 's name appeared to be Philip Blake ; however , with the release of the novel , it was revealed that his actual name was Brian Blake , and Philip was revealed to be his deceased brother .
When the dead began to rise , Brian and Philip gathered a small group , which included Brian 's niece Penny , and the group were constantly on the run when unsecured locations were breached ; the planned community called the Wiltshire Estates , where Rick 's group coincidentally stayed , was one of these .
Eventually , Brian 's group came upon Woodbury , Georgia , a ravaged town being led by a group of National Guardsmen under Major Gene Gavin , who used fear to assert his authority .
After becoming the last of his group , Brian rallied the townspeople against Gavin and the Guardsmen and afterward declared himself " Governor " of the four blocks making up the settlement .
Initially appearing to be a fair and strong leader , he became increasingly more ruthless and power - hungry .
He kept the zombified Penny tied up in his apartment , feeding her severed body parts of those who displeased him .
Following Woodbury 's capture and the murder of stranded refugees from Atlanta , The Governor is met by Rick Grimes , when Grimes ' band of survivors explores the town .
After initially acting hospitable , The Governor turns on the group .
Attempting to find the location of Rick 's prison refuge in order to collect supplies for Woodbury , The Governor proceeds to cut off Rick 's hand , torture Glenn , and rape and torture Michonne .
To learn the location of the prison , the Governor allows the survivors to escape the premises with the help of one of his guards , Caesar Martinez .
However , Michonne stays behind and finds her way to The Governor 's apartment , where she brutally tortures him , severing his right arm , fingernails , penis , and left eye .
When Michonne rejoins the group and they ask her if The Governor is still alive , Michonne is uncertain .
The Governor survives with the help of Bob Stookey , a citizen who had medical experience , and is eventually able to find the prison .
The Governor uses Rick 's murder of Martinez to rally Woodbury 's townspeople against the prison 's inhabitants .
Things do not go according to plan , however , as Rick 's group puts up a tenacious defense that forces Woodbury 's humiliating retreat .
After a failed attempt to gain his way into the prison , by using Tyreese as a hostage and subsequently decapitating him with Michonne 's katana , The Governor crushes the fences with a tank .
A bloody massacre ensues , leading to a high death toll and ultimately making the prison less secure and less habitable .
Tensions steadily rise within The Governor 's group , as their remaining ammunition is limited , and a handful of Woodbury residents ' moral consciences come into play , especially regarding the killing of defenseless or young members of the prison group .
Both factors lead to the remnants of The Governor 's army turning on him , and to Lilly 's killing him , throwing his corpse to the zombies , and making a last - ditch attempt to fortify the prison .
TELEVISION SERIES Section::::Television series .
Before the outbreak , Philip and Brian Blake were raised by an abusive father .
As an adult , Philip worked an office job with a boss he did n't get along with , was married , and had a daughter named Penny .
Eighteen months before the outbreak , Philip lost his wife in a car accident .
During the early days of the outbreak , Philip and Penny survived and found a community in Woodbury .
Penny was bitten , however , and turned into a zombie .
Unable to accept her death , Philip locked her up in a private room in his office .
When the community was leaderless , they picked Philip to lead and began calling him " The Governor " , a nickname which stuck .
Determined not to lose the community , he executed any outsider groups he saw as a threat .
He allowed some smaller groups to move into Woodbury if he deemed them to be an asset and not a threat to his leadership , but still took precautions and had them monitored by his lieutenants until he deemed them trustworthy .
At some point during the first and second season The Governor encounters a dying Merle Dixon , whom The Governor enlisted , along with Caesar Martinez and Milton Mamet , as his lieutenant and advisers .
He also tasks Milton , a scientist , with researching a means to reverse the virus in the hopes of saving Penny .
The Governor was also known to have had affairs with many of the Woodbury women .
PERSONALITY Section::::Personality .
The Governor is charming and charismatic , but also murderous , violent , sociopathic , power - hungry , completely sadistic , and horrifically ruthless .
He sees himself as the community 's only hope for survival , and is thus willing to imprison , abuse and/or kill anyone he sees as a threat to his authority ; for him , torture and mass murder are a means to an end .
One example of this is when he and his men massacre a group of National Guardsmen , take their supplies .
Later , he is proven to be completely cruel , heartless , and aggressive , willingly decapitating Hershel Greene with not even a single shred of remorse or mercy , even when Rick offers to make peace between the two factions , and ordering his men to kill Rick and his survivor group after mercilessly killing a little girl when she was bitten by a walker and dying .
APPEARANCES IN THE TELEVISION SERIES
SEASON 3
Section::::Appearances in the television series .
Section::::Season 3 .
The Governor first appears in " Walk with Me " , season 3 , episode 3 , having forcibly taken Andrea and Michonne from the woods after Merle discovers them near a downed military helicopter .
Woodbury , under The Governor 's rule , is a functioning community that even bears some resemblance to the world before the virus struck .
The townspeople are unaware that the Governor and his men massacred a platoon of National Guardsmen to get their supplies .
In the episode " Killer Within " , The Governor befriends Andrea , and he reveals some of his past to her , including his real name .
In the episode " Say the Word " , it is shown that The Governor has a zombified daughter named Penny , whom he keeps hidden , feeds body parts to , and grooms affectionately while playing the lullaby " Bye , baby Bunting " .
The Governor allows Michonne to leave town , but she is unable to convince Andrea to leave with her .
The Governor leads Andrea to a gathering for the townsfolk : a sparring match between Merle and Martinez surrounded by chained , toothless walkers .
The spectacle shocks Andrea , who describes it as " barbaric " , but the Governor insists it is " fun " , and it teaches the residents to not be afraid .
In the episode " Hounded " , the Governor and Andrea begin a sexual relationship .
He sends Merle to find and kill Michonne , and although Merle fails to kill her , he returns with two captives , Glenn Rhee and Maggie Greene .
In the episode "
When the Dead Come Knocking " , the Governor interrogates Maggie and eventually sexually assaults her , and leaves Glenn to be brutalized by Merle .
When he threatens to shoot Glenn , Maggie gives The Governor the information about the prison and their group .
In the mid - season finale " Made to Suffer " , during Rick Grimes ' foray into Woodbury to rescue Glenn and Maggie , Michonne kills Penny .
Enraged , the Governor attacks Michonne , and in self - defense she stabs him in the hand and the right eye with a glass shard .
The Governor calls a town meeting , where he claims the town has been attacked by terrorists brought by Merle , and he brings forth Merle 's brother Daryl Dixon in chains .
The Governor orders them to fight to the death , and the town calls for their blood as a way to force the two brothers to fight each other .
In the mid - season premiere " The Suicide King " , the fight between Merle and Daryl is broken up when the prison group attacks , allowing the brothers to escape .
The Governor withdraws to his apartment , and the town is in a state of unrest after the attack .
Andrea confronts him about her friends ' presence in town , and then goes out to calm and inspire the townspeople .
In the episode " Home " , The Governor asks Milton Mamet where his loyalties lie , and asks him to keep tabs on Andrea .
The Governor and his men then attack the prison ; Rick Grimes ' group runs for cover , and gunfire erupts on both sides .
When a herd of walkers charge through town , the Governor gleefully sprays machine gun fire in the air and then drives off as the survivors struggle with the walkers .
In the episode " I Ai n't a Judas " , the Governor proceeds to rally Woodbury against the prison survivors , labeling them terrorists and raiders .
Andrea wants to leave to negotiate peace with the prison group , but the Governor discourages her , implying that she will not be welcomed back if she leaves .
When Milton tells the Governor that Andrea asked him to help her sneak out , the Governor tells him to go with her .
The Governor welcomes Tyreese , Sasha , Allen , and Ben to Woodbury , after Rick kicked them out of the prison .
Andrea returns to Woodbury and warily resumes her place at the Governor 's side .
In the episode " Arrow on the Doorpost " , encouraged by Andrea , the Governor meets with Rick in a secluded grain silo to offer him peace in exchange for turning over Michonne , giving him two days to think about it .
The Governor returns to Woodbury and secretly orders Martinez to set an ambush at the barn , to kill all of Rick 's group and bring Michonne to Woodbury so The Governor can torture her .
In the episode " Prey " , Andrea flees for the prison , and the Governor hunts her down personally , bringing her back to Woodbury and strapping her in the dentist 's chair that he meant to use on Michonne .
In the episode " This Sorrowful Life " , Merle kidnaps Michonne at Rick 's suggestion to turn her over to the Governor , but lets her go and instead lures walkers to the Governor 's meeting place to ambush the Woodbury army .
Then , the Governor maims , shoots , and kills Merle , leaving his body to reanimate as a walker , which Daryl later kills , out of pure anger , remorse , and pain .
In the season finale " Welcome to the Tombs " , the Governor brutally beats Milton up after learning that he burned the walkers that the Governor had been corralling ; he then orders him to kill Andrea .
Milton tries in vain to kill the Governor , but the Governor stabs him and locks him in with Andrea , so that Milton will reanimate and kill Andrea .
The Governor then leads his army into the prison to kill Rick 's entire group , but Tyreese and Sasha wants nothing to do with it , and stay behind at Woodbury .
Rick and the others have set a trap at the prison , expecting the Woodbury army 's arrival .
Ambushed and outgunned by Maggie and Glenn , the Governor 's army flees the prison in terror .
The Governor stops the fast - fleeing convoy , and , in response to their protests against returning to the prison , he opens fire and slaughters them all , sparing only Martinez and Shumpert , his two primary henchmen .
Only Karen escapes his rampage ( by playing dead under a corpse ) .
The Governor , Martinez , and Shumpert are last seen driving off as Rick and Tyreese bring everyone from Woodbury to the prison , and leave Woodbury to be overrun .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
" Live Bait " reveals that , just after massacring his own people , the Governor sets up camp with Martinez and Shumpert .
Martinez and Shumpert abandon him after he does nothing to protect himself from a walker , believing him to have lost his nerve .
The next day the Governor drives back to Woodbury , which is overrun with walkers , and burns down the entire town .
After several months alone , intentionally trying to let the walkers kill him , he finally collapses on the street .
He looks up to see a young girl , about the same age as Penny , in the window of a nearby apartment building ; he pulls himself back to his feet and investigates .
He finds the Chambler family residing inside , consisting of sisters Lilly and Tara , their father David , and Lilly 's daughter Meghan .
Lilly and Tara initially hold the Governor at gunpoint , but they later confiscate his pistol and allow him to stay in an apartment across the hallway .
After hearing about how the Governor has survived the last few months , they ask him his name .
He tells them that it is " Brian Heriot " , a name he saw painted on the side of a barn while staggering aimlessly through the countryside .
He runs some errands for the family , and risks his life to get David two oxygen tanks from a walker - infested nursing home .
When David dies and reanimates , the Governor saves the rest of the family by bashing in David 's head with one of the oxygen tanks .
After he buries David , he burns his photo of his wife and Penny .
That night , he goes to the Chamblers to say goodbye , but Lilly insists that he stay .
He and Lilly become lovers , and he saves Meghan when she falls into a pit of walkers , killing them with his bare hands .
Moments later , he encounters Martinez and his group .
In the episode " Dead Weight " , Martinez takes in the Governor , accepting his new facade as " Brian " , and the girls and lets them join their camp .
Among the camp are brothers Pete and Mitch Dolgen , who have a working tank .
When it becomes clear that Martinez may not be able to keep them safe , the Governor kills him by throwing him into a pit of walkers .
Pete takes command , but the Governor later kills him as well after he displays an inability to kill a group of other survivors to take their belongings .
The Governor plans to rally the camp and use the tank in a second attack on the prison .
In the mid - season finale " Too Far Gone " , the Governor encounters Michonne and Hershel Greene , and takes them hostage , intending to use them as leverage over Rick .
The Governor then rallies the camp to take over the prison .
Upon arriving at the prison with his army and tank , the Governor tells Rick that he is going to give their group a chance to leave without anyone getting killed .
Rick says that they can co - exist peacefully , but the Governor calls him a liar and beheads Hershel .
During the ensuing gunfight , Lilly arrives in time to see him murder Hershel .
She is carrying Meghan , who has been bitten by a walker .
He dispassionately shoots Meghan to prevent her from becoming a walker before ordering his people to kill everyone in the prison .
The Governor uses the tank to roll over the fences and goes into the fight himself , only to be tackled by Rick .
The two of them fight , and the Governor eventually pins Rick and brutally beats him before beginning to choke him to death .
At that moment , Michonne stabs the Governor and leaves him to die .
Lilly then shoots him in the head , killing him .
His corpse is briefly visible at the beginning of " After , " lying in the middle of the field with a bullet hole in his head .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
In the mid - season premiere "
What Happened and
What 's Going On " , the Governor appears , along with Beth Greene , Bob Stookey , Martin , and Lizzie and Mika Samuels , during Tyreese 's hallucinations after Tyreese is bitten by a walker .
While Beth , Bob , and the girls comfort Tyreese , the Governor taunts him about his past actions and inability to do what is " necessary " .
The Governor , especially , criticizes Tyreese 's choices , particularly in forgiving Carol for murdering Karen .
The Governor reminds Tyreese that he promised to do what it took to earn his keep , but he failed to adapt .
However , Tyreese stands up and confronts him .
However The Governor " pushes " Tyreese to the ground while still pressing his point .
Tyreese ultimately dies in peace , and the vision of the Governor fades away .
CASTING AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Casting and development .
On television , the character is portrayed by British actor David Morrissey .
Glen Mazzara , when asked about the character 's direction for season 3 of the show , described The Governor as a narcissist , who sees himself as the future savior of civilization and is willing to resort to the most extreme of measures to achieve his ultimate goal .
Despite making few appearances , The Governor 's daughter , Penny , plays a key role in his mentality and actions .
He secretly cares for the undead Penny in his apartment , as revealed in the episode " Say the Word " , brushing her hair and singing to her , and tells Michonne that she does not need to suffer , implying that he believes Penny is still alive and is " under the grip of a terrible , terrible illness " .
The Governor 's eye patch in the television series was placed on the opposite side from that of his comic book counterpart .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In 2009 , the Governor was ranked as IGN 's 86th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time and was ranked # 28 on TV Guide 's list of The 60 Nastiest Villains of All Time .
David Morrissey has been well received for his performance as the Governor , and was nominated for Best Supporting Actor at the 39th Saturn Awards .
REFERENCES