LORI GRIMES
Lori Grimes is a fictional character from the comic book series
The Walking Dead and is portrayed by Sarah Wayne Callies in the American television series of the same name .
Created by writer Robert Kirkman and artist Tony Moore , the character made her debut in The Walking Dead # 2 in 2003 .
In both forms of media , she is the wife of protagonist Rick Grimes and mother of Carl and Judith .
The character escapes the zombie apocalypse with Carl , and Rick 's partner Shane Walsh .
Believing her husband to be dead , she starts a relationship with Shane .
For her performance as Lori , Callies was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television in 2010 , and was among the cast members of The Walking Dead winning the Satellite Award for Best Cast - Television Series in 2012 .
APPEARANCES
COMIC BOOK SERIES
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Comic book series .
Lori Grimes is an average middle - class housewife living in Cynthiana , Kentucky .
As the outbreak begins , she and her son , Carl , are evacuated out of the city with help from her husband Rick 's best friend and work partner , Shane Walsh , in hopes of getting to where her parents live .
During the evacuation , the guilt that she has been wracked with over abandoning Rick leads her to have a sexual relationship with Shane , which she deeply regrets afterward .
She continually brushes off Shane 's attempts at advancing and ignores him even more when Rick miraculously arrives at their campsite .
Lori soon finds out , after counting her missed periods , that she is pregnant ; however , she hesitates to tell anybody until after Shane 's death and their move back onto the road .
Lori faces typical pregnancy issues such as morning sickness and mood swings throughout the first few months of her term .
She and everyone else find relative stability at an abandoned prison , with hot showers , supplies , and security .
While at the prison , she also begins to deepen her bond with fellow survivor Carol Peletier .
Lori is frequently concerned with the well - being of both her family and the rest of the group .
After giving birth to an infant girl that she and Rick name Judith , she remains extremely protective over her .
During the final stages of the prison assault led by The Governor , Lori suffers a fatal shotgun blast to the back by Lilly Caul while she is carrying Judith .
When Lori falls , Judith is crushed to death beneath her weight .
Lori 's death leaves Rick and Carl emotional wrecks .
Rick suffers frightening hallucinations , both visual and auditory , at one point even using a phone to have what he believes are actual conversations with his deceased wife .
He confides in Michonne , who has also talked to a deceased loved one to help the coping process .
Carl frequently blames Rick for Lori and Judith 's deaths .
TELEVISION SERIES
SEASON 1 Section::::Television series .
Section::::Season 1 .
Lori 's husband Rick is wounded in the line of duty and left in a coma during the outbreak .
Lori , believing him to be dead , takes Carl and accompanies Rick 's best friend Shane as they head to Atlanta .
They befriend Carol and her family while on the road , and later both groups settle with other survivors on the outskirts of Atlanta near an abandoned quarry .
Lori , convinced of Rick 's death by witnessing the military bomb Atlanta , eventually succumbs to her distraught state and embarks on a sexual relationship with Shane .
Rick eventually wakes from his coma , and makes his way to Atlanta , and rescued there by members of the quarry group .
When Rick is brought back to the camp , he and Lori have a tearful reunion .
However , Lori comes to feel guilty with her affair with Shane , and abruptly ends it , as well as discouraging Carl from hanging around Shane .
The group eventually abandons the quarry to head for the CDC in Atlanta , where its one remaining scientist , Dr. Jenner , allows them in , and they enjoy the relative luxury of the facilities .
During the night , a drunken Shane attempts to sexually assault Lori , but she fights him off .
The group is forced to evacuate the CDC and continue on .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
Rick 's group is stalled by a traffic jam of cars on a highway , and Carol 's daughter , Sophia , goes missing in the midst of a passing walker horde .
Rick , Carl , and others go searching for her ; Shane tells Lori at this that he plans to leave the group , getting into argument , but just then they are met by Maggie Greene from a nearby farmstead , asking for Lori , as Carl had accidentally been shot , and is being cared for by her father , Hershel .
While Hershel is able to stabilize Carl , he lacks the equipment to remove the bullet .
Shane goes with Hershel 's farmhand , Otis , to get supplies from a nearby school infested with walkers .
Shane shoots Otis purposely to give himself time to escape , but does not tell this to the others when he returns with the supplies .
This leaves him with an emotional scar , and he shaves his head , partially to hide the clump of hair Otis had torn out from it ; these actions trouble Lori .
Lori feels some illness as Carl recovers , and discretely asks Glenn to find a pregnancy test on his next supply run .
The test turns up positive , and Lori fears that her child may be Shane 's and not Rick 's .
Again she confides in Glenn about this , and asks him to get her some " morning after " pills on his next run .
Once she has them , she tries to take them , but has last - second thoughts and spits them out .
Rick discovers the box for the pills and confronts her about it .
She admits to being pregnant , and having an affair with Shane when she had no idea
Rick was alive , and fears how they can raise a child in this world .
Rick helps her come to terms with the situation , and she decides she will keep the child and she and Rick will raise it as their own , regardless of who the father is .
Lori 's pregnancy comes out to the rest of the group , and creates a rift between Shane and Rick over who fathered the child that creates tension throughout the group .
Later , Rick and Glenn go off to look for Hershel but do n't return after a while .
Concerned , Lori goes to look for them but gets into an accident .
Shane comes and rescues her , claiming Rick had returned , thus giving Shane the time to talk about his true feelings for Lori , and that they should be together .
Once back at the farm , Lori talks to Dale , learning that he feels Shane is progressively becoming paranoid
and he believes that Shane likely killed Otis at the school .
Later , Lori helps Maggie stop Maggie 's sister Beth from committing suicide .
When Dale is attacked by a walker and the group forced to euthanize him , Lori apologizes to Shane for how she had been treating him .
Events at the farm lead to a confrontation between Rick and Shane , and Rick is forced to shoot and kill Shane when Shane attacks him .
In the aftermath , a horde of walkers , drawn by the gunfire , swarm the farmstead , and Rick 's group is forced to abandon it .
As they regroup on the highway , Lori learns of the circumstances around Shane 's death , and becomes troubled by Rick 's actions . SEASON 3 Section::::Season 3 .
Over the next several months , Lori finds that both Rick and Carl have grown distant from her .
Lori is near the end of her pregnancy as the group finds an abandoned prison they decide to clear out for their own .
They deal with roaming walkers as well as five living prisoners , two who quickly fall into line with the group , but the others they are forced to kill , while Rick leaves the fifth , Andrew , outside in a pack of walkers , though unknown to them , Andrew manages to escape .
Lori fears that the baby may have rotated in her womb to make normal childbirth impossible , and has the group practice Caesarean section on dispatched walkers .
Sometime later , Andrew lures a group of walkers back to the prison to get his revenge .
The group is forced to scatter as the walkers flood ; the fright causes Lori to enter into labor , and she , Carl , and Maggie take shelter in a boiler room .
Lori 's fears are affirmed about the birth , and she instructs Maggie to perform an improvised Cesarean section on her , knowing that without painkillers or anesthetic , this will likely be fatal for her .
She says her goodbyes to Carl before Maggie starts .
Lori 's daughter is recovered alive , but as she expected , Lori succumbs to the procedure .
Carl insists on being the one to put down Lori before she can reanimate .
Maggie and Carl take the baby outside once the walkers have been cleared , and Rick , on seeing the child but not Lori , breaks down .
He races to the boiler room , and sees a bloated walker that he believes ate Lori 's body , and stabs it over and over .
Rick starts having hallucinations of Lori and other survivors that had previously died , leading to him struggling to keep leadership of the group .
As the group deals with attacks from The Governor from the nearby Woodbury community , Rick struggles with continuous visions of Lori , which makes him doubt his abilities as a leader .
However , he eventually makes a stand against the Governor , reunited his group , and finds that he no longer sees visions of Lori .
He accepts her daughter , which Carl named Judith , as his own , despite believing that she may have been fathered by Shane .
DEVELOPMENT CASTING Section::::Development .
Section::::Casting .
Lori Grimes is portrayed by Sarah Wayne Callies , who was cast in the series in April 2010 .
Callies saw an issue of the comic book series while at a bookstore in Vancouver .
" I was looking through for the latest issue that had just come out and the owner of the comic book store came up to me and said , ' I see you 're checking out The Walking Dead , " she stated .
" It 's amazing . '
I said , ' Yeah , I 'm a huge fan . '
And he said , ' You know they 're making a television show for AMC .
It 's supposed to be really good . '
I kind of looked at him
and I froze .
I just went , ' I 'll keep an eye out for it . '
And I ran out of the store . "
In the comics , Kirkman resolved the love triangle between Lori , Shane , and Rick very quickly , but in the TV show he decided to spend more time exploring this relationship .
Callies was in favor of Lori dying while in the Prison , just like the comic character .
In an interview she stated , " I argued that it was necessary to kill Lori
and I feel very strongly that for all of the other deviations we may have from the comic book , killing Lori does something to Rick that is vital for the story and ca n't be done any other way . "
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Regarding the television adaptation of the character , Lori received generally negative reviews , with Sarah Wayne Callies ' performance receiving a mixed response from critics .
Critics were polarized with the characters ' reaction to Lori opting for an abortion in the episode " Secrets " .
Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen criticized the character 's opposing views on the matter , and stated that their reasoning was invalid .
Handlen wrote .
" I 'm not even sure it would be possible for her to abort the pregnancy at this point , but the show 's working on the assumption that having a child in a world where death literally lurks around every corner is an unequivocal good .
The only person who 's been anti - pregnancy is Lori , and the show has n't managed to cast her in a very good light , so it 's not like her arguments hold much water — which is also ridiculous , because ultimately , her opinion is the only one that matters . "
HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall reflected similar thoughts , and stated that Rick 's arguments against Lori 's attempts were obsolete .
The love triangle involving Lori , Rick , and Shane , however , was commended .
Meslow felt that the interactions between Lori and Rick possessed " as much rawness and honesty as could be hoped for . "
Commentators criticized the character development of Lori Grimes in the episode " Nebraska " .
Eric Goldman for IGN was angry upon viewing the crash sequence , avouching that it stunted any development intended for the scene .
He stated , " The Walking Dead really needs to work on strengthening its female characters , and it does n't help when Lori has a major accident for such a stupid reason , getting distracted as she looked at a map while she drove .
Yeah ,
yeah , there was a zombie in the road , but it could have been an animal [ ... ]
just as easily , and it really undercut the intended drama of her situation when it just seems so stupid that it happened at all . "
Zack Handlen for The A.V. Club thought that the foundation set up for furthering the storyline progression was contrived , while Aaron Rutkoff of The Wall Street Journal said that the premise of the dilemma made no sense .
Critics were divided upon the interaction between Rick and Lori after she discovers Shane had died .
Commentators were critical of the performance of Sarah Wayne Callies .
Although The Huffington Post Maureen Ryan reacted positively to Lincoln 's performance , she affirmed that the contradictory nature of Lori almost ruined the scene .
Similarly , New York Starlee Kine criticized Callies ' facial expressions during the sequence .
Josh Jackson , who writes for Paste wrote , " If that was a challenge from the writers , though , Sarah Wayne Callies has to feel like they 're just messing with her at this point .
Her character , Lori , basically tells Rick that Shane needs to be put down , and then treats him like a monster when he 's forced to follow through with it . "
The fates of Lori and the character of T - Dog in the episode
" Killer Within " garnered favorable reviews from television commentators .
According to HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall , the moment when Lori and Carl share their goodbyes was the most heartbreaking event since the ending of the second season episode " Pretty Much Dead Already " .
Los Angeles Times columnist Laura Hudson felt it was a grim departure for a character who endured long bouts of grief for reasons beyond her control .
Erik Kain from Forbes magazine found Lori 's death especially difficult to watch , and was shocked by T - Dog 's " sudden " death despite the fact that he " was never as prominent a figure " on the program .
" As hard as these deaths were to watch , " Kain wrote , " they also give me faith in the show .
" Even though he stated that T - Dog died " a hero 's death " , Michael Rapoport of the Wall Street Journal concluded that Lori 's " gut - churning " demise was the more memorable .
Lori 's demise was featured in The Huffington Post list of " The Biggest ' OMG ' TV Moments of 2012 " , and placed nineteenth in Slate article covering the year 's most noteworthy television moments .
Journalist Chris Kirk said that the segment was " utterly surprising " , and pointed out that the writers beguiled viewers by shedding light onto Lori 's crumbled relationship with Rick .
In contrast , Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club in his review felt the episode " stumble[d ] " in how [ ... ] Lori [ was ] eliminated and in how the Woodbury storyline repeated what was already known .
Handlen commented in his B+ review that " killing [ ... ]
Lori earned the show an immediate thrill , but it also meant crossing off [ a ] potential source [ ... ] of drama , [ someone ] who had a history on the series , however thin or poorly developed that history might have been . "
Sarah Wayne Callies ' performance in the episode was unanimously praised , however .
IGN writer Eric Goldman commended Callies Sepinwall added that Callies " absolutely sold " the portrayal of a mother saying " goodbye to the son who had to grow up much too quickly " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Lory Grimes on IMDb