STATE OF DECAY ( VIDEO GAME )
State of Decay is an action - adventure survival horror stealth video game developed by Undead Labs and published by Microsoft Studios .
It places emphasis on how the player 's leaderships skills fare against an onslaught of problems , such as diminishing survival resources , group trust and morale , zombie extermination , base defenses , and people 's lives .
The game combines elements of shooters , stealth , role - playing and strategy games and the game challenges players to survive by exploring , scavenging , and fighting the undead .
It was released for the Xbox 360 on June 5 , 2013 and was met with positive reviews .
A Microsoft Windows version was released on September 20 , 2013 via Steam 's Early Access , with a release following on November 5 , 2013 .
A remastered version called the Year - One Survival Edition was released on April 28 , 2015 for Microsoft Windows and Xbox One with mixed reviews .
State of Decay 2 was announced at Xbox 's E3 2016 .
The game , which introduced cooperative multiplayer , which was the first in its series .
The game was released on May 22 , 2018 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
State of Decay contains elements of third person combat and simulation ( building base and outposts ) .
The player is in charge of a small group of survivors and can either follow the storyline or perform tasks that ensure their community 's survival .
The game world is 16 square kilometers , 8 square kilometers of which is playable .
The player can choose from several locations to build a base , then reinforce and improve it with various facilities like watch towers , gardens , sleeping quarters , kitchens , workshops , medical bays , etc .
to help keep survivors safe and healthy .
Part of the game is balancing the use of resources : food , medicine , ammo , and construction materials .
They can be obtained by scavenging , trading with NPCs , only food can be grown at the base .
The player can interact with survivors outside of their group : trading with them , helping them or recruiting them .
The game features two relationship meters , the first determines if a survivor can be recruited , and the second dictates if they can be controlled .
Only one survivor can be controlled at a time , though the player can ask an AI - controlled survivor to accompany them , and in certain missions , one or more AI - controlled survivors will accompany the player .
The Storyline mode features around 150 characters , with varying facial features and clothing .
Each character has a fixed set of " traits " which give them advantages or flaws ( such as tire out more easily , or can improve a certain skill faster ) .
Except for the story - related characters , most characters can be assigned to survivor groups and be recruited .
Each character also has an " attitude " parameter , affected by game events ( a near death experience , death of another character , or having accomplished a difficult task ) .
These attitudes can affect their behaviors , sometimes requiring player intervention .
Zombies are the main threat in State of Decay .
They respawn infinitely ( unless the player establishes an outpost , which prevents spawns ) , are attracted to noise , and are capable of sprinting nearly as fast as the characters .
The player can choose to confront them directly , use stealth to sneak past them , or divert them using items like firecrackers .
In addition , there are special types of zombies , such as the animal - like " Ferals " or the tank - like " Juggernauts " that are quite dangerous in one - on - one confrontations .
The game does n't have human enemies , only zombies .
The game features over 100 different weapons , including around 30 melee weapons that can be found while scavenging ( they can not be crafted ) .
Melee weapon and firearms are further divided into sub - categories , which have different attack animations and effects .
All weapons have a durability rating , and will break when used excessively without repairs .
Besides weapons , the player can find or create various consumables to improve their chances of survival , such as painkillers and pipe bombs .
Besides walking , the player has access to several types of cars , each with its own characteristics like maneuverability and speed .
All vehicles can be damaged and destroyed when running over zombies or hitting obstacles , although they can be repaired at the home base .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story takes place in the fictional Trumbull Valley .
The first playable character is Marcus Campbell , a store clerk .
After returning from a fishing trip with his friend and a Trumbull local , Ed Jones , he finds that the world has degenerated into a zombie apocalypse .
The two are soon joined by Maya Torres , a soldier .
They acquire a walkie - talkie and make contact with Lily Ritter .
Following her direction , they make their way to a church called the Church of the Ascension , where Lily and several other survivors have made a home base .
With Ed wounded , the trio accept Lily 's offer to let them stay .
As the game progresses , the survivors become aware of the United States Army 's presence in Trumbull Valley , led by Sergeant Erik Tan and Captain Diane Montressor .
They soon learn that the army 's top priority is not to evacuate the survivors , but to contain and try to find the cause of the outbreak .
The players also find the local civic leader , Judge Lawton , has barricaded the courthouse with the local law enforcement .
She places citizens in her care under martial laws , planning to rebuild after the zombie incursion blows over .
Finally , the players are also introduced to The Wilkersons , a group of hillbilly gun - runners who are using the apocalypse to profit and exploit other survivors .
Near the end , the courthouse falls to a zombie attack and Judge Lawton dies .
Captain Montressor is evacuated , leaving behind Sergeant Tan and his men .
The player , along with Tan , discovers numerous dead bodies dumped at the reservoir , explaining the cause of the , " Black Fever , " that has plagued numerous survivors in Trumbull Valley .
With their only water source contaminated and long term survival no longer an option , they plan to leave the valley .
After raiding a zombie - infested warehouse to get explosives , the group head to the only road leading out of the valley , now blocked with a massive concrete wall .
While Tan sets up the explosives , the player holds off incoming zombies .
Tan realizes the detonator has malfunctioned , and the explosives can not be detonated from a safe distance .
He volunteers to manually detonate it , claiming he 's already infected .
He sacrifices himself and sets off the explosives , which destroys the wall .
As the smoke clears , the player sees the other side is also filled with destroyed cars and bodies , implying the apocalypse has already spread outside Trumbull Valley .
The survivors leave the valley and the game ends .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT
BREAKDOWN Section::::Downloadable content .
Section::::Breakdown .
On July 20 , 2013 , in conjunction with the PC development for State of Decay , Undead Labs announced an upcoming downloadable content ( DLC ) titled " Breakdown " for both PC and console users .
The DLC adds a " Sandbox Mode " , where the player leads a group of survivors in repairing an RV in order to escape the valley .
The DLC allows infinite gameplay and no story line , simply allowing players to put their survival skills to the test .
Breakdown adds 6 levels / tiers for players to survive in , and as players progress from one level to the next , the difficulty increases , resulting in numerous faster and stronger zombies , along with higher numbers of special zombies , forcing players to sneak their way around the map and use distractions in order to survive the higher levels .
To continue on to the next level , the player needs to find the RV , which spawns in random locations throughout the map with each level .
The players are only allowed to take a total of six characters ( Lily included ) with them to the next level .
On November 15 , 2013 , Undead Labs officially announced the Breakdown release date for November 29 , 2013 .
LIFELINE Section::::Lifeline .
Not long after the release of Breakdown , Undead Labs announced that a second DLC was in development .
On February 4 , 2014 , an addition on the Steam Database confirmed the DLC to be named " Lifeline . "
On February 11 , 2014 , Undead Labs officially announced news of the " Lifeline " DLC , also confirming it to include the fictional city of Danforth that can be seen just outside Fairfield .
On February 27 , it was explained that the DLC will explore the military 's side during the first days of the outbreak .
The player will play the role of a military unit by the name of Greyhound One in Danforth City .
The player will be tasked with keeping a group of survivors alive long enough to get them to safety , as well as defending the main base by setting traps and planning tactics .
But unlike the typical survival only bases that deal with just excesses of hordes , there is a new threat called raids that get progressively harder with each one that passes .
The DLC is set on more of a time - based approach instead of the never - ending approach seen in the Breakdown DLC .
At the Pax East 2014 convention , Undead Labs expected it to be released on June 6 , 2014 .
The release date was revealed to be Friday , May 30 , earlier than was previously expected .
The DLC features a new map and narrative .
The DLC has been priced the same as the first DLC , Breakdown , which is $ 6.99 / £ 5.59 .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
State of Decay was first announced in 2011 as an Xbox Live Arcade exclusive title originally titled Class 3 .
Jeff Strain , the founder of ArenaNet and co - creator of World of Warcraft , wanted a game where individual players could make up their own zombie survival plans and put them to the test .
Then , he set out to create the game , which runs on CryEngine 3 .
On May 16 , 2013 , Undead Labs announced that State of Decay had gone into the final certification process and is now ready for testing by the game 's publisher , Microsoft Studios .
State of Decay was envisioned as a step towards Undead Labs ' full online console game , Class4 . Class4 will be one of the first zombie massively multiplayer online games ( MMOs ) to come to the Xbox One .
In a 2014 interview , Undead Labs founder Jeff Strain stated that State of Decay had officially become a franchise , with the company 's partnership with Microsoft Studios confirmed .
He stated that the first State of Decay was " just the start of ( Undead Labs ' ) long - term ambitions " .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
State of Decay has received positive reviews from critics .
Sanya of Undead Labs stated that " 2013 Was a Damned Good Year " in terms of the positive reviews the game received .
Metacritic scores range from 60/100 to 100/100 , with an average score of 78/100 .
The game sold more than 250,000 copies in its first 48 hours of release to the Xbox Live Arcade .
As of June 17 , 2013 , the game has sold more than 550,000 copies .
Within the end of June the game had sold more than 700,000 copies , making it the second - fastest - selling XBLA game of all time .
On October 4 , 2013 Undead Labs announced that the game had sold one million copies .
The figure combined both XBLA and Steam Early Access sales .
On November 30 , Undead Labs had sold more than one million copies of State of Decay .
Polygon gave a positive review , praising the survival and role - playing aspects of the game .
Reviewer Arthur Gies wrote , " State of Decay is one of the most cohesive , terrifying and engaging open - world games I 've ever played . "
The Australian Classification Board refused classification because " [ the game ] contains the option of self - administered drugs throughout , in order to restore players ' health or boost their stamina " .
Jeff Strain said " we are going to come up with options , including changing names of certain medications in the game to comply with ratings requirements .
Whatever our path forward , it 's going to take a bit . "
On July 11 , 2013 State of Decay was rated R18 + for high impact violence .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
A sequel , State of Decay 2 , was announced live at Xbox 's 2016 E3 live conference .
The game was released on May 22 , 2018 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website * State of Decay at MobyGames