DIDIER DELSALLE Didier Delsalle ( born May 6 , 1957 , in Aix - en - Provence , France ) is a fighter pilot and helicopter test pilot .
On May 14 , 2005 , he became the first ( and only ) person to land a helicopter , the Eurocopter AS350 Squirrel , on the summit of Mount Everest .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Didier Delsalle joined the French Air Force in 1979 as a fighter pilot .
Two years later he became a helicopter pilot , participating in search and rescue operations for the next ten years .
Delsalle then worked for five years as a test pilot and instructor at the EPNER test pilot school in Istres , France .
Delsalle was then hired by Eurocopter , the world 's largest helicopter supplier and a subsidiary of the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company , as chief test pilot responsible for small helicopters of the single - engine family , and later for the larger NH90 helicopters that were being developed ( now in service ) for numerous armed forces .
MOUNT EVEREST SUMMIT LANDING Section::::Mount Everest summit landing .
On May 14 , 2005 , at 07:08 NPT in the early morning ( 01:23 UTC ) , Delsalle set the world record for highest altitude landing of a helicopter when his Eurocopter AS350 Squirrel touched down on the 8,848 m ( 29,029 ft ) summit of Mount Everest .
The flight and the summit landing were captured by a battery of cameras and other equipment to validate the record .
After sitting on top of the world for 3 minutes and 50 seconds , Delsalle lifted off and returned to the Tenzing - Hillary Airport at Lukla , Nepal .
This accomplishment had required extensive testing on site , especially because of the low atmospheric pressure available for the helicopter rotors , winds over at these altitudes , and oxygen depletion for both Delsalle and his helicopter 's engine .
Delsalle had to find areas of downdrafts and updrafts to complete the flight , stating : " I found an updraft so strong that I could rise up with almost no power . "
Delsalle repeated the Everest summit landing the next day , May 15 , 2005 , to prove that the previous day had not been simple luck .
Conditions the second day were much more difficult , but Delsalle chose not to wait any longer so as not to squander the opportunity for ' conventional ' climbers waiting to summit Everest during the limited good weather conditions available in May.
Delsalle used a virtually standard version of the Eurocopter AS350 Squirrel B3 , only removing unnecessary elements , such as passenger seats , to reduce the standard weight by and thus extend the 1-hour fuel range .
WORLD RECORDS FOR
HELICOPTER FLIGHT
* Speed record of ascension to , 2 min 21 sec , set April 14 , 2005 .
* Speed record of ascension to , 5 min 06 sec , set April 14 , 2005 .
* Speed record of ascension to , 9 min 26 sec , set April 14 , 2005 .
* Record of highest take - off , , from the summit of Mount Everest , set May 14 , 2005 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official report by Eurocopter * Official pictures of the accomplishment of May 14 , 2005 , on Eurocopter 's website .