DARYL DIXON Daryl Dixon is a fictional character from AMC 's horror drama series The Walking Dead .
The character was created for the television series by writers Frank Darabont , Charles H. Eglee and Jack LoGiudice specifically for Norman Reedus , and does not have a counterpart in the comics , on which the series is based .
The character was introduced in the first season as a southerner , expert tracker , living in the shadow of his older brother , Merle .
Despite his ill temper and volatility , he is tolerated by the core group of survivors due to his skills in hunting animals and fearless efficiency in killing walkers .
This is particularly important in the early days of the apocalypse , when people with survival skills and the moxie to confront the undead are in short supply .
After Merle 's disappearance , Daryl sheds his aloof personality and starts to bond with the group , particularly Carol Peletier after her daughter 's disappearance , and Beth Greene after the two split off together in season 4 .
The character becomes the cooperative right - hand man and protector of protagonist Rick Grimes and leads several supply runs .
He is one of the longest - surviving characters of the television series .
His origin is explored in the 2013 video game , and he stars in the mobile game
The Walking Dead : No Man 's Land .
Daryl has been well received by fans and critics .
Initially a member of the recurring cast , Reedus was upgraded to series regular after season one .
CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY Section::::Character biography .
In their childhood , Daryl and his older brother , Merle , lived with an abusive , alcoholic father , Will .
He was raised by Merle , though Merle was often away ( serving time in juvenile institutions ) .
Daryl had significant periods of time alone and , throughout these lonely periods , learned to fend for himself and adopted a hard - boiled survivalist mindset .
When the outbreak occurs he and Merle fend for themselves and drift around , avoiding walkers .
Unlike his brother , Daryl has never been to prison ( as an inmate ) , and was offended when Beth revealed to him that she had believed he had during a drinking game in season 4 .
It is implied in season 1 that he shares his brother 's racist beliefs , but Daryl has not expressed overt racism , leaving the question ambiguous for the viewer .
In much of season 2 , Daryl rides his brother Merle 's Triumph Bonneville chopper with the Nazi German ᛋᛋ ( Schutzstaffel ) insignia prominently displayed on the fuel tank .
In the final episode of season 2 , Daryl jokes that he could identify Glenn by his driving , due to Glenn being Korean .
Daryl usually has a serious demeanor , but occasionally makes wry comments and jokes to break the tension .
By season 3 , he has become a responsible , trusted and loyal member of the group .
His priorities are tested when he learns that his brother is still alive and working for an opposing group .
SEASON 1
Section::::Season 1 .
Daryl is first introduced in the Season 1 episode "
Tell It to the Frogs " .
Having been a hunter to secure wildlife for nourishment of the survivor group outside of Atlanta , he is furious to learn they left Merle handcuffed to plumbing atop a skyscraper in the city , and puts most of his anger on Rick , the newcomer of the group .
Daryl joins Rick and others to return to the city , finding that Merle may have escaped by cutting off his hand .
Daryl becomes one of the group 's key fighters , but falls in under Rick 's orders as they abandon Atlanta , driving his brother 's motorcycle .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
In Season 2 , the group settles onto Hershel Greene 's farmstead as they look for Carol 's missing daughter Sophia after a walker attack .
Daryl aids in the search , and tries to help Carol cope with her feelings .
During one solo outing , he is knocked from a horse and suffers hallucinations of Merle , complaining that he is spending time searching for Sophia and not for him , before returning to the group .
After Sophia is discovered to have already been turned in a walker and hidden away in Hershel 's barn , Daryl helps Carol to cope with her loss .
He helps protect the group as they deal with a potential threat of hostile survivors nearby , and to help evacuate the farm when it is overrun by walkers .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
Rick 's group find and secure a prison as a new shelter at the start of Season 3 .
In dealing with this , Rick 's wife Lori dies after giving birth to her daughter , and Rick is devastated , having hallucinations of her and unable to make decisions .
Daryl steps up to help lead the group alongside Hershel during Rick 's lapse .
His friendship with Carol strengthens after she was feared lost dealing with the walkers .
The group is forced to deal with the Governor from the nearby Woodbury community , who seeks to kill them and take their supplies for himself .
In rescuing two of their allies kidnapped by the Governor , Daryl discovers Merle is still alive , having escaped Atlanta , but working for the Governor .
After the Governor considers Merle a traitor , Daryl helps him to escape and returns with him to the prison .
Rick 's group knows the Governor seeks to capture Michonne or else attack the prison , but Rick 's hallucinations leave him unable to make the decision , and Merle takes Michonne himself to the Governor , with Daryl following him after discovering his absence .
Merle had a change of heart , lets Michonne go , and sacrificially ambushes the Governor 's men .
Daryl arrives to find the reanimated corpse of Merle , killed by the Governor , and cries as he is forced to put his brother down .
Rick 's group fends off a major attack by the Governor , driving him away , and bring the survivors of Woodbury to the prison .
SEASON 4
Section::::Season 4 .
Rick has recovered from Lori 's death , and he , Daryl , and Hershel lead the growing population .
A flu - like epidemic strikes the prison , killing many before a cure is found .
Carol takes initiative to kill two who have shown signs of the flu in secret , and when Rick discovers this , evicts her from the group , upsetting Daryl .
The Governor , having obtained more men , launch a fatal assault on the prison , forcing the survivors to flee in separate groups .
Daryl rescues Beth who is catatonic after watching the Governor behead her father Hershel .
After days of traveling , Beth opens up to Daryl , and the two get drunk on moonshine as they talk about and let go of their pasts .
A few days later , the two are briefly separated while fleeing walkers , and Daryl sees Beth kidnapped by men in a car with a white cross on it .
He tries to follow them but is caught by Joe and a small group of bandits , the Claimers , and they force him to stay with them .
The group later captures Rick , Carl , and Michonne , but Rick and Daryl fight back when they attempt to rape Carl and Michonne , killing all of the Claimers .
The four travel to Terminus , a safe haven according to signs along a railroad track .
Though the community seems open , they find evidence that their friends have been captured .
The four are taken prisoner and taken to the others , with Rick asserting they messed with the wrong group .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
Rick 's group escapes Terminus after discovering they engage in cannibalism , and with the help of Carol , who had launched a walker horde on the site .
After meeting Fr .
Gabriel Stokes at his church , the group makes plans to head to Washington D.C. While Daryl and Carol are catching up , they see a car drive by with a similar white cross on it , and they give chase .
This leads them to find that Beth was taken to Gracy Memorial Hospital , where she was forced to work on patients there by corrupt cops .
After Carol is captured , Daryl lead Rick 's group to try to rescue them .
Carol is saved but Beth is killed in a standoff with the cops , and Daryl returns her body to the church to bury her .
The group continues on , eventually meeting Aaron , a recruiter for the Alexandria Safe - Zone in Virginia , who offers them sanctuary there .
Like Rick , Daryl remains skeptical given the lack of survival experience the residents have , but accepts Aaron 's offer to assist them in finding more recruits .
Daryl and Aaron find the community is being watched by the Wolves , exiles from Alexandria that seek revenge .
After walking into a Wolves trap , they are rescued by Morgan Jones , Rick 's friend before he met the rest of the group in Atlanta , and they bring him back to Alexandria .
SEASON 6 Section::::Season 6 .
Rick and the others of his group are put in charge of Alexandria after proving their survival skills .
To get rid of a walker horde trapped in a nearby quarry , Rick plans to parade them far away from Alexandria .
Daryl , along with Abraham and Sasha , lead the parade .
However , the Wolves launch a surprise attack , breaking the parade , through Rick instructs Daryl to lead the remaining away .
The attack breeches the Alexandria walls , allowing walkers to swarm in .
After leading the remaining walkers away , Daryl is briefly waylaid by Dwight and his wife Sherry .
He finds a fuel truck , and regroups with Abraham and Sasha , and quickly deals with a group of men working for Negan .
They ignite the truck in Alexandria to lure the walkers away from the citizens to dispatch them .
As Alexandria is recovering , Carol opts to leave on her own , concerned about seeing others she cares for die , leaving Daryl upset .
Rick and Daryl meet Jesus and are introduced to the Hilltop community .
They request help dealing with the Saviors , a brutal group that demand supplies as a periodic offering .
Rick , Daryl and others launch an attack on a Savior outpost , appearing to kill Negan and all of the Saviors .
Later , Daryl encounters Dwight again with other men who claim to be Saviors working for Negan .
After reporting this to Rick and the others , Daryl patrols to track down the Saviors but is soon captured .
He is brought to a clearing along with Rick and several others of the group that has been captured by the Saviors , and they met the real Negan , who wields a baseball bat wrapped with barbed wired named " Lucille " .
Negan prepares to kill one of the group in retaliation for the attack on the Savior compound and force them to swear loyalty to him .
SEASON 7 Section::::Season 7 .
After Negan chooses Abraham to kill , Daryl attacks him but he is held back by the Saviors .
Negan proceeds to kill Glenn , and then convinces Rick to agree to his terms .
Daryl is taken prisoner by Dwight back to Sanctuary , the Savior 's base .
Dwight attempts to convert him to join Negan , but Daryl refuses .
Later , Sherry helps Daryl to escape , and he is helped to Hilltop by Jesus , where Rick and others are meeting to discuss the situation with Negan .
After a tearful reunion , they all agree Daryl is a fugitive from Negan and Jesus suggest he go to the Kingdom run by King Ezekiel for safety as well as to try to convince Ezekiel to help .
There , Ezekiel remains non - committed as his deal with Negan is amicable , but offers Daryl shelter .
While there , one of Ezekiel 's men , Richard , suggests a plan to lure Ezekiel into fighting the Saviors , by having the Savior kill a woman that Ekeziel has taken a liking to but staying outside of the Kingdom .
Daryl realizes this is Carol , and refuses to go along with the plan .
He opts to return to Hilltop , but stops to reunite with Carol on his way out .
After debriefing the Hilltop community , he apologizes to Maggie for Glenn 's death , but she forgives him .
Daryl then returns to Alexandria , and helps prepare for a plan to attack Negan when he next comes .
However , they find Dwight has arrived , who swears that he wants to help them stop Negan , despite Daryl 's reservations .
Negan does launch a surprise attack on Alexandria , but the timely arrival of the Hilltop and Kingdom communities allow them to overpower the Saviors and their allies , the Scavengers , and the three communities agree to go to war against Negan .
Daryl finds a note from Dwight swearing he did not know what Negan had planned .
SEASON 8 Section::::Season 8 .
Daryl is first seen in the season premiere " Mercy " , where he is key to their plan to attack the Sanctuary by luring a massive walker herd using placed explosives and his motorcycle .
After their plan succeeds , he splits off with Rick to attack a compound housing Savior weaponry .
" Monsters " shows Daryl and Rick searching the compound for the guns to no avail ; unlike Rick , who is beginning to question their decision to go to war , Daryl has zero qualms about their mission , killing former Atlanta survivor Morales and executing a Savior who Rick promised mercy to .
He is still distrusting of Dwight .
When Rick and Daryl have a misunderstanding , their newly acquired weapons are accidentally set ablaze as they fight .
After Dwight is later exposed as a mole , one Savior gets away after the rest are shot , and then Dwight asks to be spared .
As he is lead away , Daryl takes back his vest .
Despite this , Daryl remains hostile to Dwight and expressly states his intention of killing him once the war is over .
Though Tara initially agrees with him on this , she changes her mind after Dwight saves her life twice .
In the season finale , Daryl takes part in the final battle with the Saviors and survives .
Afterwards , he drives Dwight out into the woods where Dwight expects Daryl to execute him .
Instead , Daryl exiles Dwight on threat of death if he ever returns and encourages his former enemy to seek out his wife Sherry .
SEASON 9
Section::::Season 9 .
Eighteen months have passed since Rick defeated Negan .
The communities of Alexandria , the Hilltop , the Kingdom , Oceanside , and the Sanctuary have rebuilt what they can to make more viable societies .
Daryl and Eugene oversee the remaining Saviors at the Sanctuary , where infertile ground makes it difficult to grow anything .
Justin , a Savior , tries to take more than his share and pushes Henry .
Daryl rushes in to subdue Justin before Rick can assert his control on the group .
Rick and Daryl realize the Saviors are starting to get out of hand , due to Rick 's hurry to finish the bridge and the lack of food .
Later , they set off the dynamite , and track the nearby walker horde as it diverts towards the first siren .
However , when the second siren , manned by Justin , fails to sound , Rick realizes the group of men at a logging site nearby are in trouble .
There , Daryl sees the horde and orders everyone to flee , but in the haste , Aaron 's arm is crushed under a giant log .
Rick and the others arrive to help defend them , allowing Daryl to rush Aaron to the medical tent .
Enid is flummoxed at the injury and determines the only action they can take is to amputate Aaron 's arm .
The surgery is successful , but Rick takes full blame for Aaron 's loss .
As word of Justin 's murder spreads , tempers start to flare at the construction camp between the Saviors and the other groups .
Rick arrives in time to stop any immediate violence and promises the Saviors they will investigate .
Rick starts talking to his own people to see if they saw anything .
Fr .
Gabriel , who was to be on watch with Anne but had secretly stepped away , reports seeing nothing .
Daryl is somewhat affronted when Rick suggests he might have killed Justin .
WEAPONS Section::::Weapons .
Daryl used a Horton Scout HD 125 crossbow for the first three seasons .
The character 's use has inspired reviews of the weapon at Amazon.com referring to the show .
It was replaced by a more powerful Stryker StrykeZone 380 during Season 3 .
In season 6 episode 9 , Daryl uses an Airtronic RPG-7 to take out a biker gang working for Negan .
In Season 7 Episode 10 , Daryl was given a new crossbow , which is a PSE Fang 350 .
Although he only used the PSE Fang 350 for a short time until he finally took back the Stryker StrykeZone 380 from Dwight in Season 8 Episode 11 .
DEVELOPMENT AND RECEPTION Section::::Development and reception .
Reedus read the script for the show and wanted to be a part of it so badly that he begged to audition even for a day role .
He was asked to come in and read lines .
They picked Merle 's lines , which is why the rumor still abounds that he read for the role of Merle , but Rooker already had the part .
They liked his audition and gave him the role of Daryl .
Daryl was originally a recurring character but was upgraded to the main cast in season two .
Reedus originally asked the writers and crew if Daryl could get a dog .
His request was denied , and Daryl instead got a new crossbow .
In season 9 , Daryl does get a dog who is first introduced in " Stradivarius . " After being fourth place in top billing for the third season , Daryl was promoted to second place in top billing for every season since the fourth , having become one of the main protagonists of the series .
He got top billing following the departure of Andrew Lincoln in season 9 .
Fans follow the character , and Reedus in other roles .
They have debated Daryl 's sexual orientation and sexuality , especially with regard to Caryl ( Carol and Daryl ) and Bethyl ( Beth and Daryl ) shippers ; some fans argue that he is heterosexual , while others argue that he is gay or bisexual .
The Walking Dead creator Robert Kirkman stated that Daryl is heterosexual , but that the show has portrayed him as somewhat asexual .
" I think that he 's a very introverted character
and I think that 's somewhat his appeal .
I do have to clear something up , though , " said Kirkman .
" In the Walking Dead letters column in the old comic book that I do , there was a question that made me mention that there was a possibility early on about making Daryl Dixon 's character gay
and it caused quite a hubbub online .
I just wanted to make it clear that I was saying that the possibility is there
and I would 've been fine with it , the network would have been fine with it , but we ultimately did n't do that . "
Entertainment Weekly featured Reedus as Daryl on the cover of an issue previewing season three of The Walking Dead .
Additionally , Daryl won IGN 's " Best TV Hero " of 2012 , and the character was featured in a Super Bowl XLVII commercial for Time Warner Cable .
For his performance as Daryl , Reedus won the People 's Choice Award for Favorite TV Hero in 2014 and was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television in 2011 .
TV Guide listed Daryl as the best character on The Walking Dead , ranking the top twenty four characters in the first five seasons .
His transformation from a " selfish loner to an integral member of the survivors " was highlighted as well as being an " excellent hunter " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Daryl Dixon on IMDb