GRAVITY FALLS
Gravity Falls is an American animated television series produced by Disney Television Animation for Disney Channel and Disney XD from June 15 , 2012 , to February 15 , 2016 .
Created by Alex Hirsch , the series follows the adventures of Dipper Pines ( voiced by Jason Ritter ) and his twin sister Mabel ( voiced by Kristen Schaal ) who are sent to spend the summer with their great - uncle ( or " Grunkle " )
Stan ( voiced by Hirsch ) in Gravity Falls , a mysterious town full of paranormal forces and supernatural creatures .
The kids help Stan run " The Mystery Shack " , the tourist trap that he owns , while also investigating the local mysteries .
On June 14 , 2014 , it was confirmed that Season 2 would premiere on August 1 and on August 4 of the same year on Disney Channel and Disney XD respectively , with most of the season two episodes airing first on Disney XD , as it is considered the new home for the series .
On November 20 , 2015 , Hirsch announced that the series would finish with its second season , stating that he chose to do it for the show to end with " a real conclusion for the characters " .
The show culminated with a one - hour finale , " " , that first aired on February 15 , 2016 .
A 68-hour marathon was broadcast on Disney XD from February 12 , 2016 , up until the finale on February 15 , 2016 , with the entire series airing in order .
Due to only having 39 episodes before its airing , the show was looped four times to fill the 68-hour slot .
Hirsch has stated he remains open to continuing the series with additional episodes or specials .
In February 2018 , on the second anniversary of the final episode of the show , Hirsch used a cipher to announce Gravity Falls : Lost Legends , a continuation of the Gravity Falls story in a new graphic novel .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
For their summer vacation , 12-year - old Dipper Pines and his twin sister Mabel are dropped off from their home in Piedmont , California , to the fictitious town of Gravity Falls , Roadkill County , Oregon to spend the summer with their Great Uncle Stan Pines ( often shortened to Grunkle Stan ) , who runs a tourist trap called the ' Mystery Shack ' .
Things are not what they seem in this small town , and with the help of a mysterious journal that Dipper finds in the forest , they begin unraveling the local mysteries .
With appearances from Wendy Corduroy ,
Mystery Shack cashier ; Soos Ramirez , a friend of Dipper and Mabel and handyman to Grunkle Stan ; plus an assortment of other characters , Dipper and Mabel always have an intriguing day to look forward to .
CHARACTERS MAIN * Dipper Pines ( voiced by Jason Ritter ) – The 12-year - old twin brother of Mabel Pines .
* Mabel Pines ( voiced by Kristen Schaal ) – The 12-year - old twin sister of Dipper Pines who wears various sweaters .
*
Grunkle Stan ( voiced by Alex Hirsch ) –
The greedy , grumpy , yet loving , great - uncle of Dipper and Mabel Pines .
* Soos Ramirez ( voiced by Hirsch ) – The 22-year - old handyman at the Mystery Shack who mostly says , " dude(s )
"
whenever he begins or ends a sentence .
* Wendy Corduroy ( voiced by Linda Cardellini ) – A 15-year - old girl who is a part - time employee at the Mystery Shack , on whom Dipper also has a crush .
RECURRING
* Stanford Pines , also known as The Author , Ford and Grunkle Ford ( voiced by J. K. Simmons ) –
Grunkle Stan 's six - fingered long - lost twin brother .
He is introduced in the eleventh episode of season 2 , having briefly appeared in a silent capacity in previous episodes .
* Waddles ( voiced by Dee Bradley Baker ; Neil deGrasse Tyson as guest ) – Mabel 's pet pig .
* Candy Chiu and Grenda ( voiced by Niki Yang and Carl Faruolo , respectively ) –
Mabel 's best friends .
*
Fiddleford Hadron " Old Man " McGucket ( voiced by Hirsch ) – The " local kook " of Gravity Falls , and former friend of Stanford .
* Bill Cipher ( voiced by Hirsch ) – A powerful dream demon from another plane of existence that can influence or control citizens of Gravity Falls through a trans - dimensional mindscape .
* " Li'l " Gideon Gleeful ( voiced by Thurop Van Orman ) – A young con artist and rival of Grunkle Stan .
*
Toby Determined ( voiced by Gregg Turkington ) – Homely proprietor of and sole editor for the Gravity Falls ' Gossiper .
*
The Northwests ( voiced by Jackie Buscarino [ Pacifica ] , Nathan Fillion [ Preston ] , and Kari Wahlgren [ Priscilla ] ) – The most popular and wealthy family in Gravity Falls .
The family consists of Preston , his wife Priscilla , and their daughter Pacifica .
* Robert " Robbie " Stacy Valentino ( voiced by T.J. Miller ) – A local teenage Emo boy who is Dipper 's primary rival for Wendy 's affections .
* Tambry , ( voiced by Jessica DiCicco ) , Thompson ( voiced by Michael Rianda ) , Nate ( voiced by Scott Menville in season 1 and by Hirsch in season 2 ) , and Lee ( voiced by Rianda ) – Wendy 's four friends .
* Manly Dan ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) – A lumberjack , Wendy 's father .
* Lazy Susan ( voiced by Jennifer Coolidge ) – The owner of Greasy 's Diner who always has one eye closed , and is Stan 's crush .
* Tyler Cutebiker ( voiced by Will Forte ) – " Local Enthusiasm Enthusiast " , the current mayor of the town .
* Shandra Jimenez ( voiced by Wahlgren ) – The reporter of Gravity Falls .
* Sheriff Blubs and Deputy Durland ( voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson and Keith Ferguson ) –
The two police officers of Gravity Falls .
* Bud Gleeful ( voiced by Stephen Root ) – Stan 's rival , Gideon 's father , and a car dealer .
* Abuelita ( voiced by Matt Chapman ) – Soos 's grandma , who lives with Soos .
* Gnomes ( voiced by Hirsch ) – Living garden gnomes that wanted Mabel to be their queen .
* Gompers ( voiced by Frank Welker ) – A goat who lives on the Mystery Shacks 's property .
* Blendin Blenjamin Blandin ( voiced by Justin Roiland ) – a worker at the Time Anomaly Correction Unit who has frequent encounters with Dipper and Mabel .
* Agent Powers and Agent Trigger ( voiced by Nick Offerman and Brad Abrell ) – Two government agents that investigated Stan 's portal and the town itself .
* Ghost - Eyes ( voiced by Richardson ) – An inmate at the Gravity Falls Prison who is friends with Gideon .
* Xyler and Craz ( voiced by John Roberts and Greg Cipes ) – The two main characters of Mabel 's favorite movie , " Dream Boy High " , who often appear in her daydreams .
* Time Baby ( voiced by Dave Wittenberg ) – A time giant and the last of his kind , Time Baby serves as leader of the Time Anomaly Correction Unit until he is vaporized by Bill Cipher .
According to a cryptogram , it will take Time Baby 1,000 years to re - assemble his molecules , and when he is back , he is going to be very cranky .
DEVELOPMENT CONCEPT Section::::Development .
Section::::Concept .
Prior to working on the series , series creator Alex Hirsch 's primary inspiration growing up was the popular animated sitcom The Simpsons , where he observed that " animation could be funnier than live - action .
That animation did n't have to just be for kids .
That it could be satirical and observational and grounded in a sense of character interaction " .
Hirsch graduated from the California Institute of the Arts , and was hired to work as writer and storyboard artist for the Cartoon Network series
The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack , where he was paired up with Pendleton Ward , the creator of Adventure Time .
Afterwards , he moved on to co - develop the Disney Channel animated series Fish Hooks ; shortly before he pitched ( and was subsequently green - lit ) Gravity Falls .
Hirsch says he was at the California Institute of the Arts when he turned down DreamWorks Animation executive Jeffrey Katzenberg out of a desire to work for Disney .
He first coined the concept for the show in an 11-minute low - budget student film which he made at the Institute .
Hirsch was called in to do a pitch for Disney Channel for a show based on the short pilot .
Disney Channel bought the idea and started airing the series in the summer of 2012 .
The series was inspired by Hirsch 's own childhood experiences with his twin sister during their summer vacations , while Stan was based on his own grandfather of the same name .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Hirsch explained in an interview with The A.V. Club during production of season 1 , that a typical episode is conceived in a room reserved for writers , where a simple synopsis is presented , and from then on dramatic structure is defined , and the plot is modified to include a character - driven subplot , which Hirsch expresses as " the hardest thing ... to find a character story that actually uncovers , explores , or pushes tension — on something our characters care about — that is properly explored via the magic or monster or impossibility of the week . "
B- and A - stories are created , and are given to a writer to produce an outline , which is then subsequently checked - off by Hirsch for feedback .
The writer produces a draft from these edits , where more notes may be given .
Hirsch states that he and creative director Mike Rianda may personally create a draft for themselves before a final script is produced , in which the dialogue from the draft received from the writer is majorly revised ; Hirsch states that the revising process " is not a discredit to our writers
— it 's just we have a very particular vision .
In particular , I usually rewrite almost all of Dipper 's dialogue and most of Mabel 's dialogue , just because I have them in my head .
Me and Mike will stay up for about 24 hours prior to the delivery of every script .
We 'll take the weekend , we 'll work all night , we 'll drink Red Bull , we 'll sleep on the couch in shifts like maniacs , we 'll slap each other in the face . "
A script is delivered , which then gets translated into a storyboard , where feedback is received from Hirsch to the board artists if a certain element , such as a gag , does n't work .
Afterwards , a pitch for the episode is given to the network , where they do a read - through , and then the episode is either checked out by the network , or retooled in the small amount of time allocated before an animation studio must receive something to work with .
Animated by Rough Draft Studios , Digital eMation and Yearim Productions .
INITIAL BROADCAST Section::::Initial broadcast .
The first twelve episodes of Gravity Falls aired in a regular weekly slot on Disney Channel starting in mid-2012 , but subsequent episodes were broadcast without similar regularity ; it took until August 2013 to broadcast the remaining eight episodes of the first season .
The second season began airing a year later in August 2014 , transitioning over to Disney XD , but again without any regularity to when new episodes would be first broadcast .
The first nine episodes aired from August to November 2014 , the following two in February and March 2015 , the next eight from July to November 2015 , and the finale aired in February 2016 .
According to Disney XD , as each episode took about six months of work to complete , they opted against stockpiling episodes to show weekly but instead take advantage of the serial nature of the show , broadcasting each episode as it was completed and making an event out of it .
On April 2 , 2018 , reruns of the show started airing on Disney Channel , although reruns of the show still airs on Disney XD .
EPISODES BROADCAST DISNEY CHANNEL Section::::Broadcast .
Section::::Disney Channel .
The series began airing on Disney Channel Canada on September 1 , 2015 , following Corus Entertainment 's acquisition of Disney Channel rights in Canada .
In Canada the show began airing on Disney XD starting on December 1 , 2015 , following the launch of Disney XD .
The show started broadcasting in the United Kingdom and Ireland on July 20 , 2012 , as a preview and officially premiered on September 7 , 2012 .
In Australia and New Zealand
it previewed on August 17 , 2012 , and premiered on September 24 , 2012 .
It also premiered in Southeast Asia on October 27 , 2012 .
In India it premiered on September 16 , 2013 .
In the Middle East region , the series was previewed on October 19 , 2012 , and premiered on November 10 , 2012 .
OTHER Section::::Other .
The series preview debuted in Canada on June 15 , 2012 , and premiered on July 6 , 2012 , on Family Channel , until January 2016 when it moved to the local Disney XD channel following Corus Entertainment 's acquisition of Disney Channel rights in Canada from Family 's owner DHX Media .
In Australia , the show airs on Disney XD and 7mate while in Chile , the show was broadcast on Canal 13 on November 24 , 2013 , under its programming block CuBox .
In the Philippines , the show was shown on TV5 beginning on May 4 , 2014 , while in Brazil , the show also began airing on Rede Globo on May 10 , 2014 .
In Indonesia , the show premiered on RCTI on August 17 , 2014 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
+ Region 1 !
Format !
colspan=2Title !
Season(s ) !
Episode count !
Release date !
Episodes On March 27 , 2018 , Shout !
Factory announced that they would release the complete series as a box set on July 24 , 2018 , on DVD and Blu - ray Disc .
The box set is available in a " Collector 's Edition " which includes an exclusive bonus features disc .
The complete series has only been released in the United States and Canada .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Gravity Falls received critical acclaim .
Brian Lowry of Variety stated : " The show has a breezy quality that should play to kids , and tickle some twinges of nostalgia among their parents . "
Los Angeles Times Robert Lloyd referred to the program as " ... gently twisted , with some Disneyfied action and heart - warming folded in " .
In his review , David Hinckley of New York Daily News called Gravity Falls " quirky and endearing " , and offered praise for the character of Mabel Pines .
Matt Blum , writing for Wired , favorably compared the show to Cartoon Network 's animated program Regular Show and Disney Channel 's animated program Phineas and Ferb , hailing Gravity Falls as " clever , strange , and somewhat poignant " .
Erik Kain of Forbes called Gravity Falls " the best thing on TV at the moment " .
Kayla Cobb of Decider called Gravity Falls " one of the most structurally smart shows ever created " .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
A special preview of the series following the Disney Channel Original Movie
Let It Shine was watched by 3.4 million viewers .
The series garnered high views on its fifth episode , which aired on July 13 , 2012 , and attracted 3.6 million viewers .
On March 15 , 2013 , the episode " The Deep End " was watched by 4.5 million viewers after the premiere of Wizards of Waverly Place , becoming the highest - rated episode of the series .
Later moving on to Disney XD , the episode " A Tale of Two Stans " became the highest - rated telecast ever on Disney XD , with 1.91 million viewers .
The series finale " " beat that record , being watched by 2.47 million viewers in the United States .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result Outstanding Achievement , Writing in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production Shion Takeuchi , Mark Rizzo , Jeff Rowe , Josh Weinstein and Alex Hirsch for " Weirdmageddon Part 3
: Take Back the Falls " Outstanding Achievement , Editorial in an Animated TV / Broadcast Production Kevin Locarro , Andrew Sorcini , Nancy Frazen and Tony Mizgalski for " Weirdmageddon Part 3 : Take Back the Falls " NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS