WIN , LOSE , OR DRAW ( PARKS AND RECREATION )
" Win , Lose , or Draw " is the twenty - second episode and season finale of the fourth season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 68th overall episode of the series .
It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 10 , 2012 .
In the episode , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and the Parks staff await the results of the city council election .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
It is Election Day in Pawnee and Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and Bobby Newport ( Paul Rudd ) are neck - and - neck in the latest poll .
Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) is organizing the results party because he had a dream that Ann ( Rashida Jones ) will get back together with him if she enjoys the party .
Bobby 's campaign manager Jennifer Barkley ( Kathryn Hahn ) , impressed with Leslie 's campaign , offers Ben ( Adam Scott ) a job working for a congressional reelection campaign in Washington , D.C. , but he will need to leave in two days and be there for six months .
Ben brings it up with Leslie , who is upset by the news since Ben will move away just as their lives return to normal .
Chris ( Rob Lowe ) has finally emerged from his depression after having sex numerous times with Jennifer , but he is oblivious that the sex is meaningless to her .
At the results party , Jerry ( Jim O'Heir ) – who did not have time to vote – panics when the first few rounds of results give Bobby a slight lead , worrying that Leslie will lose by one vote .
Leslie and Ben seek advice about Ben 's job offer : Ann suggests Leslie asks Ben to stay , and Ron ( Nick Offerman ) tells Ben to also remain , citing his own love for routine .
Ben reminds him that if Leslie wins , Ron 's routine will change since he will become Assistant City Manager .
Leslie later asks Ben to stay and he agrees .
The final results are in and Bobby is declared the winner , but Ben correctly says that Bobby 's small margin of victory is low enough to trigger an automatic recount .
Leslie goes missing but Ron finds her in the city council chambers , where she laments letting her friends down after they worked so hard for her .
Ron tells her that he and the parks department joined her campaign because they care about her and her dream , not the reward of winning .
Hearing this , Leslie tells Ben he should accept the job .
The recount eventually comes in and it is official :
Leslie has won , to Leslie 's overwhelmed jubilation and Jerry 's ( and Bobby 's ) relief .
Ben accepts Jennifer 's offer and she leaves without saying goodbye to Chris .
Ron turns down the Assistant City Manager position , content with his life ; Jean - Ralphio ( Ben Schwartz ) asks Chris for the job , but he is turned down immediately .
Leslie thanks her friends and supporters with a heartfelt speech ; she previously asked Ben about the concession speech that he wrote , but he reveals that he never wrote it .
Later , a drunk Ann gets back together with Tom and even agrees to move in with him , fulfilling his dream .
In a B plot , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) asks for Andy 's ( Chris Pratt ) help after she accidentally deletes all of the department 's files .
When their attempts to recover them fail , they jokingly plan to move away , change their identities , and get new careers , with all of Andy 's careers revolving around law enforcement ( like his often used alter ego , FBI agent Burt Macklin ) .
The day is saved when Donna ( Retta ) reveals that she has a back - up copy of the files because Jerry always accidentally deletes files .
April later suggests that Andy actually join the police department .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Amy Poehler submitted this episode for consideration due to her nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series at the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards .
For his work on this episode , Michael Schur was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS