ROLLER COASTER PHOBIA
Roller coaster phobia is a colloquial and slang term describing an individual 's fear of roller coasters and other rides which involve excessive heights , restraints or g - forces on the body .
While roller coasters are a popular theme park attraction , certain people feel nauseated , afraid , dizzy , or unsafe when riding roller coasters .
In many cases , this fear is related to other phobias – such as acrophobia , claustrophobia or emetophobia – a condition like vertigo , or to a traumatic event .
While not an officially recognized phobia , some cases have been treated successfully with a specialized therapy program .
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS ACROPHOBIA Section::::Contributing factors .
Section::::Acrophobia .
Most roller coasters combine substantial heights with seemingly insignificant support , as well as free - falls and the illusion of uncontrolled drops .
Because acrophobia involves an extreme fear of heights and falling , these conditions could cause someone who is an acrophobic to have an extremely negative reaction to riding roller coasters .
CLAUSTROPHOBIA Section::::Claustrophobia .
Claustrophobia involves two parts , fear of physical restraint and fear of suffocation .
The safety harnesses and enclosures on some rollercoaster and other rides are very restrictive , in order to protect the riders from harm .
In addition , the speed of these rides can cause air displacement that makes it difficult for riders to catch their breath .
Both of these issues can trigger claustrophobic responses in riders .
VERTIGO Section::::Vertigo .
Vertigo is a type of dizziness where a person feels as if they or the objects around them are moving when they are not .
Common causes of vertigo include looking down from a great height and persistent movement , hence it contributing to a phobia of riding rollercoasters .
EMETOPHOBIA Section::::Emetophobia .
Emetophobia is the fear of vomiting .
Individuals who suffer from any degree of motion sickness are more likely to become nauseous and vomit during or after riding a rollercoaster .
If they also experience anxiety as a result of the need to vomit , this can contribute to a fear of rides that can involve fast and erratic movements .
TRAUMATIC EXPERIENCE
Section::::Traumatic experience .
If an individual does not have other phobias which can elicit fear responses on a rollercoaster , it 's possibly the result of an intense , frightening event that happened while on a ride – in particular being on a ride that experienced a mechanical failure , or witnessing such a failure .
It could also result from someone being allowed to ride a rollercoaster when they were too young to be able to process the sensations they experienced .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Coasterphobia , like most recognized and unrecognized phobias , is an anxiety condition .
Therefore its main symptom is a panic attack , which can include shortness of breath , rapid breathing , irregular heartbeat , sweating , nausea , heart palpitations , and dizziness , and a sense of dread .
Fear of these rides is similar to a fear of flying in an airplane , in that while statistically it is rare for someone to be injured or die from riding on a rollercoaster , it is an activity which carries some risk .
Therefore they fall under phobias that are extreme over - reactions to normal self - preservation instincts .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
In 1999 , Dr. Michael Otto , Ph.D. - director of the Translational Research Program at the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders and Professor of Psychology at Boston University – was hired by Universal Studios in Orlando , Florida to come up with a solution to rollercoaster aversion caused by fear .
Michael Otto worked with fellow psychologist Brian Newmark to develop the " Coasterphobia Stress Management Program .
" The intent was to teach " coasterphobics " techniques that they could use before and during the ride to reduce their anxiety .
The program included muscle tension and breathing techniques in line with other forms of anxiety management , and simulating specific sensations associated with riding rollercoasters , while in a controlled and safe environment .
The program was successful with the initial test group .
Similar self - help techniques can be found online , for reducing the phobic reaction to rollercoasters and similar rides .
REFERENCES