EVERYBODY DIES ( HOUSE )
" Everybody Dies " is the last episode of the eighth season of the American television medical drama series House , and the final episode of the series .
It aired on Fox in the United States on May 21 , 2012 .
The series finale aired immediately following a retrospective episode , entitled " Swan Song " , which made for a two - hour special .
The title is a reference to the pilot episode which was called " Everybody Lies " .
The episode featured cameos from characters in previous seasons including Remy " Thirteen " Hadley , Allison Cameron , Martha Masters , Dominika Petrova , and Stacy Warner , as well as Lawrence Kutner and Amber Volakis who both died in previous seasons but appeared as hallucinations .
Notably , Lisa Edelstein who played Dr. Lisa Cuddy in the first seven seasons of House , did not return for the series finale .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
House wakes up next to a dead body in an abandoned building that is slowly burning down .
He starts to suffer hallucinations of former colleagues Stacy Warner and Dr. Allison Cameron , as well deceased colleagues Dr. Lawrence Kutner and for the second time , Dr. Amber Volakis , and realises he is arguing with his own subconscious on whether he should escape or die in the fire .
Flashbacks show that in the days prior , House took up the case of Oliver ( James LeGros ) , a heroin addict , claiming it was the only thing that made him happy .
Oliver overheard that House is facing felony vandalism charges , which both Wilson or Foreman refused to lie about to help House .
He offered to take the blame for House as he believed he was about to die , but House discovered a symptom that indicates the patient will likely live , and told him this .
In the present , House recognizes the dead body as Oliver .
Meanwhile , Wilson and Foreman have not seen House for several days , and fear that he might be suicidal .
Discovering that Oliver is also missing from the hospital , they suspect House may have gone with him to take heroin .
They track down Oliver 's address , and see the burning building nearby .
They see House trapped inside , moments before the building explodes .
Later , a coroner confirms from dental records that a burnt body from the building is House 's .
A funeral is held for House .
While most of his colleagues call House a positive force in their lives , Wilson uses his eulogy to call House arrogant and that he never cared for his friends .
Suddenly , a phone in Wilson 's pocket rings , with a text message stating " SHUT
UP
YOU IDIOT " .
Wilson finds House alive waiting at his home .
House admits he switched his dental records with his patient to allow him to fake his death ; an astonished Wilson states that he just destroyed his life , he will go to jail and will never be able to practice medicine again , House then just says , " I 'm dead , Wilson " .
House then asks Wilson how he would like to spend his last months before he dies from his terminal cancer .
In post - script , a montage of House 's colleagues is shown accompanied by Warren Zevon 's " Keep Me in Your Heart " .
Chase has replaced House as head of diagnostics medicine , with Adams and Park working with him .
Taub is at a restaurant spending time with Rachel , Ruby and his daughters .
Cameron returns to work as the head of the emergency room in a Chicago hospital .
She gazes at a photo of the old team before leaving to join her husband and child .
Foreman discovers House 's hospital ID stuck under a wobbly table leg in his office , which he had previously complained to House about , and chuckles to himself , realising House is still alive .
The final scene shows House and Wilson travelling the country on touring motorcycles , House telling Wilson to live for the now as they ride off , accompanied by Louis Prima 's " Enjoy Yourself ( It 's Later than You Think ) " , a song which Amber previously sang in the season 5 episode , " Under My Skin " .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In April 2012
it was announced that David Shore would direct and co - write the final episode of the show and also that Olivia Wilde would return as Thirteen for the penultimate episode and the series finale .
It was also reported that Lisa Edelstein would not be returning for the series finale while Kal Penn would return as Dr. Kutner and Jennifer Morrison would return to the series in a cameo appearance as Dr. Cameron .
In March 2012 Amber Tamblyn was confirmed to reprise her role as Martha Masters for the finale .
Anne Dudek , Sela Ward and Andre Braugher also reprised their previous roles as Amber , Stacy Warner and Dr. Nolan respectively .
Shore told Entertainment Weekly that the series finale is " a different kind of episode , but at its core I think it 's still a House episode ...
It 's still about a character looking to figure things out .
We still have a medical case , but beyond that — that 's what they all are .
The medical case allows us to explore the nature of the characters .
It 's an ending . "
Shore also said , " I still believe we 're doing interesting stories , but I really wanted to make sure that we 're doing that at the end
and we 're still happy .
As Hugh [ Laurie ] says , Dr. House is the guy who leaves the party before people want him to . "
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Critical reaction to the episode was generally positive .
Lisa Palmer of TV Fanatic gave the finale an excellent rating of 4.8/5 and stated that " I feel satisfaction at this ending ...
I can move on from this show without hesitation . "
However Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a D+ rating , stating " ' Everybody Dies ' is a failure of ambition " .
Morgan Jeffery of DigitalSpy gave the episode a positive review stating " ' Everybody Dies ' probably wo n't go down in TV history as one of the great series finales , but it does get a hell of a lot right .
House gets his happy ending with Wilson and , perhaps more importantly , there 's the implication that he 'll be okay once his friend is gone . "
Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " House had , in its final seasons , become a rather sentimental show " and the final episode was a " satisfying " and " fitting ending " .
In New York Magazines blog Vulture , Margaret Lyons wrote , " More than a hospital drama or a character piece or anything else , House is a complex meditation on misery , " but there is a line between " enlightened cynicism " and " misery - entropy " and , " As the show wore on , its dramatic flare dimmed while its agony flare burned ever brighter . "
She concluded that " it 's hard not to wish that the show was going out on more of a high note , rather than the middle - range note it 's been playing , and playing , and playing , for years . "
Entertainment Weekly ranked House faking his death at number three for " Single Most Clever Twist " for the 2012 TV Season Finale Awards .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The series finale drew in an audience of 8.72 million in the US , finishing 1st on its hour and 3rd on the night .
Its 18 - 49 rating was 2.9 , which was tied for second place on the night .
In the US , " Everybody Dies " finished 8th in the week for adults 18–49 and finished 11th overall .
In Canada the series finale finished 3rd in the weekly viewership with 2.13 million viewers .
In the United Kingdom the episode had 688,000 viewers upon airing .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" Everybody Dies " at Fox.com
* Medical review of " Everybody Dies "