THE CARRIE DIARIES ( TV SERIES )
The Carrie Diaries is an American teen comedy - drama television series that aired for two seasons on The CW from January 14 , 2013 , to January 31 , 2014 .
It is a prequel to the HBO television series Sex and the City and based on the 2010 book of the same name by Candace Bushnell .
The first season focuses on Carrie Bradshaw ( AnnaSophia Robb ) during her junior year of high school in 1984 as she explores life in New York City while interning at a law firm office , and also secretly working at a magazine company , while the second season focuses more on her expanding life in the city as well as the lives of her friends and boyfriend .
The pilot was picked up by The CW to a series order of 13 episodes in May 2012 .
Four months into the first season , the network renewed The Carrie Diaries for a second season , which premiered in October 2013 .
In May 2014 , The CW canceled the series after two seasons .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* AnnaSophia Robb as Carrie Bradshaw ; The protagonist and voice - over narrator of the series .
She is a 16-year - old high school student living in the fictional town of Castlebury , Connecticut , who dreams of being a famous writer .
Carrie 's mother recently died from cancer and as a result , Carrie 's younger sister , Dorrit , is more rebellious than ever , and their father , Tom , is overwhelmed with the responsibility of suddenly having to care for two teenage girls on his own .
Instead of attending school on one day during the week , Carrie takes an internship at a law firm in New York City which she relishes as a stepping stone in her quest to leave her small town behind her .
She left this position to work for Larissa Loughlin at Interview magazine .
Towards the end of high school , Larissa offers Carrie a full - time job at the magazine , which she accepts over going to NYU .
Unfortunately , when Larissa is fired , so is Carrie .
She decides to stay in New York , rather than going to Malibu with Sebastian .
In the Season 2 finale , she moves into Larissa 's apartment with Samantha .
* Austin Butler as Sebastian Kydd ; The new kid at Castlebury High School and Carrie 's love interest .
Sebastian moves to Castlebury after getting kicked out of his old high school for having sex with his art history teacher .
He lives with his divorced mother who is never around .
He and Carrie date during the second half of the first season , before breaking up ( after a fight resulting in Sebastian kissing Maggie , Carrie 's best friend ) .
They are constantly going back and forth from a couple to singles and back , which is much more known as an on and off relationship , but it is clear that they both have feelings for each other .
At the end of Season 2 , Sebastian moves to Malibu to run his company , and it seems that he and Carrie may have broken up .
* Ellen Wong as Jill " Mouse " Chen ; Jill is Carrie 's nerdy and sweet best friend from high school and the ex - girlfriend of a college guy she still loves , and lost her virginity to .
They broke up because both of their grades were getting low , because they were only focusing on eachother .
In school , she is an academic overachiever who is said to be under pressure and driven to be the best at everything by her stern parents .
Mouse accepts an offer to go to Harvard towards the end of Season 2 .
* Katie Findlay as Maggie Landers ; Carrie 's best friend , and Walt 's sexually active ex - girlfriend .
She is a sarcastic and self - assured underachieving student who barely passes her classes and is said to have an unhappy home life where her parents neglect and ignore her , who are not able to pay for her college life .
She cares about Carrie , and will sacrifice her own happiness for Carrie 's .
Maggie is proposed to by Pete in the last episode of Season 2 , and she accepts .
* Stefania LaVie Owen as Dorrit Bradshaw ; Carrie 's troubled , 14-year - old , rebellious younger sister .
She openly resents Carrie for being close with their mother , and for not having more time with her .
She is rebelling by dyeing her hair and wearing too much eye make - up as well as seeing a guy older that Carrie called Miller .
* Brendan Dooling as Walter " Walt " Reynolds ; Carrie 's other best friend .
He is Maggie 's ex - boyfriend .
He does n't know that she is cheating on him with a cop .
In the ending of the first episode , it 's implied that Walt is secretly gay .
In later episodes it is clear he is confused about his sexuality , he even sparks an interest in a man named Bennet Wilcox ( an employee at Interview Magazine ) .
At the end of the first season he and Maggie break up , and she ( as well as the rest of the group ) finds out about his homosexuality .
In season 2 he begins dating Bennett and his mom sees a picture of them in a local newspaper and kicks him out .
He lives at Carrie 's for 3 episodes before being scared off by the potential to get AIDS , breaking up with Bennett and moving back in with his parents , denying his sexuality again .
By the end of Season 2 , his parents finally accept Walt 's homosexuality .
* Chloe Bridges as Donna LaDonna ; The school 's most popular girl , and the leader of a cliques called " The Jens " , which is made up of all of the school 's shallow and narcissistic " mean girls " .
She was Carrie 's chief rival in the first season and also had a crush on Walt .
When she found out that Walt was gay , she protected his secret by telling the whole school that they had sex , and pretending that they were dating for real .
She is currently frenemies with Carrie .
* Freema Agyeman as Larissa Loughlin ; A hip , British , cutting - edge style editor at Interview magazine and party girl , who acts as Carrie 's mentor in New York City , while she is working at the law firm .
It is later revealed that Larissa is an African princess who ran away from her family and found financial support from a British lord before moving to America .
Carrie introduces Larissa to Harlan , her father Tom 's friend , and Larissa and Harlan get married in the Season 2 finale .
* Matt Letscher as Tom Bradshaw ; Carrie 's overprotective father .
He loosens up a bit as the series progresses .
When Carrie chooses a job at Interview over going to NYU , Tom disapproves and cuts her off financially .
In the Season 2 finale , Tom and Carrie mend their relationship when she tells him that she will stay in New York and support herself .
* Lindsey Gort as Samantha Jones ; Donna 's brash and outgoing older cousin whom Carrie befriends .
She is part of Manhattan 's music scene , where she used to work at a bar as a bouncer .
Samantha and Carrie move in together at the end of Season 2 .
RECURRING CAST
* Josh Salatin as Simon Byrnes , a former local policeman and Maggie 's former casual sexual partner .
Maggie ended up pregnant with Simon 's child but lost it when she experienced complications .
He is fired by Maggie 's father when he finds out .
* Jake Robinson as Bennet Wilcox , Larissa 's co - worker and Walt 's former boyfriend .
Walt broke up with him when he realised that he wants all the things that gay people ca n't have , after a health scare with AIDS .
Towards the end of second season Walt decides that he can not live a lie and reconciles with Bennet , realising that he missed him .
* Scott Cohen as Harlan Silver , Tom 's friend who encourages him to begin dating , who is also Larissa 's fiance .
* Nadia Dajani as Deb , Tom 's ex - girlfriend .
* R.J. Brown as Thomas West , Mouse 's academic rival and former boyfriend .
The two broke up after West explained that he was tired of competing with Mouse after she got accepted in Harvard .
* Whitney Vance and Alexandra Miller as the Jens , Donna LaDonna 's two minions .
They follow her around in explosions of neon doing whatever their leader tells them to .
* Evan Crooks as Miller , Dorrit 's former boyfriend who works at the Record store .
* Chris Wood as Adam Weaver ( 4 episodes ) , a guy who Carrie meets while trying to get an interview for the magazine , took her virginity , and is currently her ex .
* Giullian Yao Gioiello as Scott , Dorrit 's friend who later becomes her boyfriend .
They meet at the Bradshaw house party .
He eventually becomes her boyfriend near the end of Season 2 upon being tricked to go to prom with him .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In September 2011 , it was officially announced that The CW was moving forward with a television series as a prequel to the original series , based on The Carrie Diaries .
The project is produced by Gossip Girl producers Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage .
Former Sex and the City writer Amy B. Harris penned the adaptation .
On January 18 , 2012 , The CW ordered a pilot of The Carrie Diaries .
The project will continue to be helmed by executive producers Josh Schwartz , Stephanie Savage , Len Goldstein and Candace Bushnell .
On May 11 , 2012 , the pilot was picked up to series .
On May 9 , 2013 , The CW renewed The Carrie Diaries for a second season .
It received an order for 13 episodes .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On February 15 , 2012 , the series ' first role was cast .
Stefania Owen has landed the part of Carrie Bradshaw 's 14-year - old sister Dorrit .
She 's described as rebelling in the most obvious of ways : dyeing her hair , getting arrested , acting out .
Dorrit is desperate for attention and willing to get it any way she can .
On February 27 , 2012 , it was announced that AnnaSophia Robb had won the role of the young Carrie Bradshaw .
On February 28 , Katie Findlay and Ellen Wong joined her .
Wong will play Carrie 's best friend in high school , Jill Chen .
Also known as ' The Mouse ' , Jill is said to be intelligent and loyal .
Findlay will star in the project as Carrie 's oldest friend Maggie Landers , the police chief 's daughter .
Whereas Carrie is beginning to explore Manhattan , Maggie has no desire to leave her town .
On March 2 , 2012 , Deadline reported that Austin Butler has been cast as the male lead .
Butler will play Sebastian Kydd , a brooding heartthrob and ultimate insider who always plays the outsider .
His presence at Carrie 's school will shake things up in a big way .
On March 4 , 2012 , Deadline announced that Freema Agyeman has been cast in the pilot as Larissa , a hip , cutting - edge editor and party girl who works at Interview magazine and is Carrie 's mentor .
On the same day , Brendan Dooling , who originally auditioned for the role of Sebastian , joined the cast as Walt , Carrie 's gay friend .
On March 9 , 2012 , Deadline reported that Matt Letscher had been cast as Carrie 's father .
On March 14 , 2012 , it was announced that Chloe Bridges had been cast as Carrie 's nemesis Donna LaDonna .
On July 20 , 2013 , E ! News reported that actress Lindsey Gort was cast as Samantha Jones for the second season .
English model Poppy Delevingne also auditioned for the role .
After the show 's cancellation , showrunner Amy B. Harris revealed that had the show been renewed for a third season , Miranda Hobbes would have been introduced as Mouse 's roommate at Harvard .
EPISODES
ET(in millions ) !
Season 1Season 2 RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The Carrie Diaries has received mixed reviews .
Metacritic gave the first season a score of 57 % based on 23 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews , " based on 23 critics .
Rotten Tomatoes gave season 1 a score of 63 % based on reviews from 30 critics .
Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post - Dispatch said " The CW 's attempt to capture the magic of Sex and the City in a prequel , set in 1984 , could have gone very wrong .
But The Carrie Diaries is surprisingly right . "
Marisa LaScala of PopMatters says " The rest of the show goes on to prize sweetness over superficiality . "
Alan Sepinwall of Hitfix describes " The new series succeeds on its own nostalgic terms . "
The second season opened with generally more favorable reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes gave it score 100 % , based on 5 reviews , and praised the introduction of Lindsey Gort as the iconic Sex and the City character , Samantha Jones .
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Awards and accolades .
+ Awards and accolades for The Carrie Diaries !
Year !
Result !
Award !
Category !
Recipients 2013 Teen Choice Awards
Choice TV Breakout Show 2013
Teen Choice Awards
Choice TV :
Breakout AnnaSophia Robb 2014
Young Artist Awards
Best Performance in a TV Series - Recurring Young Actor 17 - 21 Evan Crooks 2014 Dorian Award Unsung TV Show of the Year 2015 Teen Film / TV Series International Awards Outstanding Comedy Series , Drama or Musical
2015 Teen Film / TV Series International Awards
Best TV Actress : Comedy , Drama or Musical AnnaSophia Robb BROADCASTS Section::::Broadcasts .
In the United States , on its first season , The Carrie Diaries aired on The CW on Mondays at 8:00 pm as a lead - in for 90210 and then streamed on The CW 's website .
The show moved to Fridays for its second season and it premiered on October 25 , having been paired with America 's Next Top Model .
In Canada , the series airs on Citytv , and premiered January 14 , 2013 .
In Latin America , the series premiered on Boomerang on May 20 , 2013 .
In Asia - Pacific , The Carrie Diaries started airing in Australia on January 15 , 2013 , on FOX8 .
In Malaysia , the series premiered on March 5 , 2013 on 8TV , in New Zealand , the show aired on TV2 and in the Philippines , the series premiered on ETC on January 21 , 2013 .
In Bulgaria the series aired for the first time from July 1 to August 5 , 2015 on bTV Lady .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS