OUT OF THE FURNACE
Out of the Furnace is a 2013 American drama film , directed by Scott Cooper , from a screenplay written by Cooper and Brad Ingelsby .
Produced by Ridley Scott and Leonardo DiCaprio , the film stars Christian Bale , Casey Affleck , Woody Harrelson , Zoe Saldana , Forest Whitaker , Willem Dafoe , and Sam Shepard .
The film is about a Pennsylvania steel mill worker Russell Baze ( Bale ) and his Iraq war veteran brother Rodney ( Affleck ) , who can not adjust to civilian life .
While Rodney makes some money doing bareknuckle fights for bar owner and small - time criminal John Petty ( Dafoe ) , who runs illegal gambling operations , Rodney becomes so indebted due to his own gambling losses that he begs Petty to let him do a big money fight .
After Petty reluctantly arranges for Rodney to do a fight for a ruthless criminal gang in the backwoods , Rodney disappears , and his brother tries to find out what has happened to him .
The film received a limited release in Los Angeles and New York City on December 4 , 2013 , followed by a wide theatrical release on December 6 .
The film earned $ 15.7 million against its $ 22 million budget and it received mixed reviews .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
After getting off work at a North Braddock , Pennsylvania , steel mill , Russell Baze catches his brother Rodney at a horse racing simulcast , where Rodney had just bet on a losing horse .
Rodney reveals John Petty loaned the money to him .
Petty owns a bar and runs several illegal games .
Russell visits Petty , pays off some of Rodney 's debt , and promises to pay Petty the rest with his next paycheck if Rodney has not yet paid it off .
Driving home intoxicated , Russell hits another car , killing its occupants , including a little boy .
He is incarcerated for vehicular manslaughter .
While in prison he is informed that his ailing father has died and his girlfriend
Lena has left him for the small town police chief , Wesley Barnes .
Upon his release from prison , Russell returns home and resumes his job at the mill .
The same day , Rodney participates in an illegal bare - knuckle prizefight .
Rodney was supposed to take a " dive " for Petty as a way to repay some of the gambling debt he owes Petty , but during the fight , Rodney becomes enraged against his opponent and wins the fight .
The next morning , Russell finds Rodney 's bloodied knuckle tapes in the trash and confronts him about it .
Russell wants him to work in the mill , but Rodney , a four - tour Iraq war veteran , is too mentally scarred to take a regular job .
Rodney tells Petty that these " nickel and dime " fights will never earn him enough money to pay Petty back .
Rodney then insists that Petty call and organize a more lucrative fight .
Petty reluctantly arranges a fight with Harlan DeGroat , a sociopathic drug dealer from rural New Jersey to whom Petty owes a lot of money .
Russell wants Lena back , but she is pregnant with Wesley 's baby .
Russell unsuccessfully feigns happiness to Lena , saying she will be a great mom , but both know that her pregnancy makes their getting back together an impossibility .
Rodney is told he must purposely lose the fight in New Jersey .
When DeGroat seeks assurances Rodney will lose , Petty promises he will .
Rodney briefly knocks out his opponent , but when hearing Petty pleading with him , Rodney helps the fighter get up , takes a dive , and lets the man pummel his face into a bloody mess .
After the fight , DeGroat asks for the rest of his money , but Petty reminds DeGroat they had agreed in advance that this fight made them even , and DeGroat drops the subject .
While driving back home , DeGroat and his men ambush Petty and Rodney .
DeGroat first shoots and kills Petty , has Rodney dragged into the woods , and kills him , too .
Unknown to anyone , Petty had accidentally dialed his cell phone , which fell onto the car seat and connected to his bartender Dan 's voicemail while recording DeGroat as clear evidence of his murdering Petty .
That night , Russell finds a letter from Rodney , stating this will be his last fight and he wants to work with Russell at the mill .
Wesley informs Russell about Rodney 's disappearance , and Russell and his uncle , Red , set off to find him .
In DeGroat 's town , Russell and Red are stopped by the sheriff , who informs them that DeGroat 's men would kill them if they knew why the two were in town , and , as a favor to Sheriff Wesley , he will escort them to the state line rather than searching and arresting them for illegally carrying concealed weapons .
Upon returning to the mill , Wesley visits Russell and confirms Rodney 's death .
Russell goes to Petty 's office , finds a phone number for DeGroat , and calls him without identifying himself , enticing him to come collect Petty 's debt .
At the bar , Russell sabotages DeGroat 's van to prevent his escape and confronts him .
DeGroat escapes to a nearby , shutdown mill , where Russell shoots him in the thigh .
Russell then follows DeGroat to a field outside the mill as he hobbles off and shoots him in the back .
Russell informs DeGroat that he is Rodney 's brother , as Wesley approaches the field in a squad car .
Wesley pleads for Russell to put down his gun , but Russell proceeds to carefully aim his hunting rifle and shoots DeGroat in the head .
The film cuts to Russell sitting at home at the dining table- Wesley having arranged matters so that Russell avoided prison- and fades to black .
CAST
* Christian Bale as Russell Baze
* Woody Harrelson as Harlan DeGroat * Casey Affleck as Rodney Baze , Jr. * Forest Whitaker as Wesley Barnes * Willem Dafoe as John Petty * Tom Bower as Dan Dugan
* Zoë Saldana as Lena Taylor * Sam Shepard as Gerald " Red " Baze
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film was produced by Relativity Media , Appian Way Productions , Red Granite Pictures , and Scott Free Productions , with Jeff Waxman , Tucker Tooley , Brooklyn Weaver , Riza Aziz , Joey McFarland , Joe Gatta , Danny Dimbort , and Christian Mercuri serving as executive producers .
Director Scott Cooper read an article about Braddock , Pennsylvania , a declining steel industry town outside of Pittsburgh , and the efforts to revitalize it , led by mayor John Fetterman .
After visiting , Cooper was inspired to use the borough as the backdrop for a film .
Cooper developed the story from The Low Dweller , a spec script written by Brad Ingelsby that had actor Leonardo DiCaprio and director Ridley Scott attached .
The studio offered the script to Cooper , which he rewrote , drawing on his experience of growing up in Appalachia and losing a sibling at a young age .
DiCaprio and Scott stayed on as producers of the film .
The story has no relation to Out of This Furnace , a 1941 historical novel by Thomas Bell , set in Braddock .
The Hollywood Reporter reported the film 's budget was $ 22 million .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area on April 13 , 2012 , and wrapped on June 1 , 2012 .
The majority of filming took place in Braddock , and additional filming was in nearby North Braddock , Imperial , Rankin , and Swissvale .
Cinematographer Masanobu Takayanagi shot the feature in anamorphic format on Kodak 35 mm film .
Prison scenes were filmed in the Northern Panhandle of West Virginia , at the former State Penitentiary in Moundsville .
Filming also took place in rural Beaver County , including a deer hunting scene in Raccoon Creek State Park and a mill scene in Koppel .
Independence Township doubled for Bergen County , New Jersey .
The Carrie Furnace , an abandoned blast furnace near Braddock , served as the location for the film 's finale .
Christian Bale wore a tattoo of Braddock 's ZIP code , 15104 , on his neck as a homage to the town 's mayor John Fetterman , who has the same design on his arm .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score to Out of the Furnace was composed by Dickon Hinchliffe .
Originally , it was announced that Alberto Iglesias had reached an agreement to compose the score for the film .
However , Hinchliffe later took over scoring duties .
Pearl Jam frontman Eddie Vedder re - recorded the song Release from Pearl Jam 's debut album Ten for the film , which can be heard during the opening scenes and end credits .
A soundtrack album featuring Hinchliffe 's score was released digitally on December 3 , 2013 by Relativity Music Group .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film premiered at the TCL Chinese Theatre on November 9 , 2013 in Hollywood , California as part of the American Film Institute 's AFI Fest .
It received a limited release in Los Angeles and New York City on December 4 , 2013 , followed by a wide theatrical release in the U.S. on December 6 .
Director Scott Cooper won the award for best first or second film for Out of the Furnace at the 2013 Rome Film Festival .
The Pearl Jam song " Release " is featured during the opening title and features in a newly recorded edition during the end credits .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Out of the Furnace was the only new film to receive a wide release in the U.S. on December 6 , 2013 , and earned an estimated $ 1.8 million on its opening day .
The film took in an estimated $ 5.3 million over its opening weekend .
The film came in third behind the animated Disney film Frozen , which brought in $ 31.6 million , and , which had $ 27 million in ticket sales that weekend .
Relativity Media had pre - sold the film to foreign distributors for $ 16 million , which offset its costs .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an average approval rating of 53 % based on 182 reviews and an average rating of 5.9/10 .
The general consensus for the site says : " While it may not make the most of its incredible cast , Out of the Furnace is still so packed with talent that it 's hard to turn away .
" The film holds a score of 63 ( indicating " generally favorable reviews " ) out of 100 on Metacritic , based on 40 critics .
TOP TEN LISTS Section::::Top ten lists .
Despite its mixed critical reception , Out of the Furnace appeared on several critics ' top ten lists of the best films of 2013 .
* 2nd – Richard Roeper , Chicago Sun - Times
* 2nd –
Clint O'Connor , Cleveland Plain Dealer
* 4th – Marc Doye , Metacritic
* 6th – Chris Nashawaty , Entertainment Weekly *
7th –
Kristopher Tapley ,
Hitfix
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit .
Town officials from Mahwah , New Jersey , urged a boycott of the film due to negative depictions of the Ramapough Mountain Indians , an indigenous people living around the Ramapo Mountains , characterizing the film as a hate crime .
Relativity Media responded that the film " is not based on any one person or group " and is " entirely fictional " .
Nine members of the group , eight of whom have the surname of the film 's lead character , DeGroat , filed suit against the makers and other involved parties , claiming that Out of the Furnace portrays a gang of " inbreds " living in the Ramapo Mountains who are " lawless , drug - addicted , impoverished and violent .
"
The lawsuit asserts that " The Defendants , and each of them , knew or should have known that their actions would place Plaintiffs , and/or any person so situated in a false light . "
The suit continues , " The connection between the ethnic slur of ' Jackson Whites ' , with the location of the Ramapo Mountains of New Jersey ' , with a Bergen County Police patrol car , with the surnames ' DeGroat ' and ' Van Dunk ' , is too specific to the Ramapough plaintiffs to be chance , coincidence or happenstance , and implies an element of knowledge on the part of the Defendants , or some of them . "
On May 16 , 2014 , U.S. District Court Judge William Walls , sitting in Newark , New Jersey , dismissed the lawsuit , saying that the film did not refer directly to any of the plaintiffs .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS