FIFTY
SHADES FREED Fifty Shades Freed is the third and final installment of the erotic romance Fifty Shades Trilogy by British author E. L. James .
After accepting entrepreneur CEO Christian Grey 's proposal in Fifty Shades Darker , Anastasia Steele must adjust not only to married life but to her new husband 's wealthy lifestyle and controlling nature .
The paperback edition was first published in April 2012 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Anastasia
' Ana ' Steele and Christian Grey return to Seattle after a long honeymoon .
Christian is upset to find that Ana has kept her maiden name , Steele , at work .
After some resistance , Ana relents and changes her name at work to Grey after realizing how important it is to Christian .
As a belated wedding gift , Christian gives Seattle Independent Publishing to Ana , who plans to rename it Grey Publishing .
While Christian is on a business trip in New York , Anastasia goes out for a drink with longtime friend , Kate Kavanagh , doing so against Christian 's wishes .
Returning home , she finds that her former boss , Jack Hyde , who was fired for attempting to sexually assault Ana , has been apprehended by the security staff .
Duct tape is found in his pocket and in his van there are tranquilizers and a ransom note — all indications that he intended to kidnap her .
Jack is arrested .
Angry with Ana for defying him , Christian cuts short his New York business trip and returns to Seattle .
Furious that Ana reneged on her promise to have Kate over rather than go out , an upset Christian sulks while Ana sleeps .
Eventually , the two argue and Ana berates him for being overly controlling and possessive .
She demands more freedom and access to her friends .
Christian finally relents after realizing how much Ana 's friends mean to her and that Ana did the right thing by staying with Kate rather than at home .
Soon after , Christian surprises her with a trip to Aspen , with Kate , Elliot , Mia , and Kate 's brother , Ethan .
While there , Elliot proposes to Kate , and she accepts .
Ana 's step - father , Ray , is in a medically - induced coma after a car accident .
When he awakens a few days later , Ana and Christian arrange to move him to Seattle to recover .
It is also Ana 's birthday weekend , and Christian surprises her with all her family and friends at a dinner .
He gives her a charm bracelet with the charms representing all their " firsts " including an ice cream cone to represent their " vanilla " relationship .
Christian also gifts her with an Audi R8 .
Soon after , Ana learns she is pregnant .
Christian angrily accuses her of getting pregnant on purpose and leaves .
He returns early the next morning drunk , claiming Ana will choose the baby - whom he believes to be a boy - over him .
Ana says it could be a girl , though Christian refuses to accept that due to his sexist and chauvinistic nature .
Ana becomes furious when she discovers a text message on Christian 's phone from Elena Lincoln , the woman who seduced him when he was fifteen and introduced him to the BDSM lifestyle .
The message indicates they met for a drink .
The next two mornings , Anastasia and Christian barely speak to each other : Christian is angry over the unplanned pregnancy ; Anastasia is upset about his late - night encounter with Elena , though Christian insists their relationship is long - since over .
When Christian is away on a business for a few days , Ana receives a call from Jack Hyde .
He has kidnapped Mia Grey and demands $ 5 million in two hours .
He warns Ana not to tell anyone or he will kill Mia .
Anastasia feigns illness and returns home to escape her bodyguard , Sawyer .
She takes a gun and goes to the bank .
While collecting the money , the suspicious bank manager calls Christian .
who believes Ana is leaving him .
To protect Mia 's life , Ana lies to Christian , saying she is leaving him to raise the baby alone .
Hyde instructs Ana to leave her phone
but she tricks him by taking the bank manager 's phone instead and dropping it in the trash .
She leaves via the back entrance to a waiting car , shocked that Hyde 's accomplice is Elizabeth Morgan , her co - worker .
When handing over the money , Hyde tries to kill Ana out of vengeance for losing his job , causing Elizabeth to feel guilty for being involved .
Angered by his behavior and his hurting Ana , she and Hyde argue .
On the ground and bruised , Ana shoots Hyde in the leg .
When Ana starts to black out
she hears Christian calling her name .
Ana wakes three days later in the hospital with Christian at her side .
Though he is angry at Ana 's recklessness and still anxious about fatherhood , he realizes how important their baby is to her , and they reconcile .
Ana returns home the next day .
Christian learns from his private investigator , Welch , that he and Hyde had the same foster family .
He tells Ana about how he met and was seduced by Elena .
By introducing him to the world of BDSM , Elena helped Christian learn to take control of his life .
If she had not intervened , he would still be plagued with horrible memories of his mother and would never have been able to control his life .
Ana feels guilty for her behavior when he explains that he had been looking for his psychiatrist , Dr. Flynn , because he needed help .
When he could not contact Flynn , Christian wound up at Elena 's salon and they then had a drink at the bar .
Although she made a pass at him , Elena realized that Christian loved Ana and finally agrees to leave on good terms .
The next day , a furious Christian discovers that Elena 's ex - husband , Eric Lincoln , has bailed Jack from jail out of spite for her affair with Christian .
Christian tells Ana that after learning about the affair , Eric severely beat Elena and divorced her .
Despite Christian 's urging , Elena refused to press charges against Eric out of guilt .
Christian retaliated by buying out Eric Lincoln 's logging company to sell it off .
It is also learned Elizabeth confessed to police that she was blackmailed by Hyde to be his accomplice .
( However , her ultimate fate remains a mystery . )
Two years later , Ana and Christian have a son named Theodore Raymond Grey , nicknamed Teddy , and Ana is six months pregnant with their second child , a daughter whom they decide to name Phoebe .
Elliot and Kate have married and have a two - month - old daughter named Ava .
At the end , after having BDSM sex , Ana and Christian are getting ready to celebrate Teddy 's second birthday with their family and friends .
CHARACTERS RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Fifty Shades Freed entered The New York Times Best Seller list at number three .
In the UK the novel sold over two million copies .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Sam Taylor - Johnson , the director of the film adaptation of the first installment of the book series , Fifty Shades of Grey , confirmed on 6 February 2015 that both Fifty Shades Freed and the second book in the trilogy , Fifty Shades Darker , will also be adapted for film .
The film was released on 9 February 2018 .
In November 2015 , Universal Studios announced that both films will be shot back - to - back with principal photography scheduled to commence in early 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Official author page