ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT ( SEASON 4 )
The fourth season of the television comedy series Arrested Development premiered on Netflix on May 26 , 2013 and consists of 15 episodes .
It serves as a revival to the series after it was canceled by Fox in 2006 .
The storyline centers on the Bluth family , a formerly wealthy , habitually dysfunctional family , and the show incorporates hand - held camera work , narration , archival photos , and historical footage .
Each episode of the season occurs over approximately the same stretch of time , but focuses on a different character .
Information on events depicted in a given episode is often partial and filled in by later episodes .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Six years after the series was canceled by Fox , filming for a revived fourth season began on August 7 , 2012 .
The season consists of 15 new episodes , all debuting at the same time on Netflix on May 26 , 2013 , in the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , Ireland , Latin America , and the Nordics .
Several actors who had recurring roles in the original series returned to reprise their roles , including Henry Winkler as Barry Zuckerkorn , Mae Whitman as Ann Veal , Ben Stiller as Tony Wonder , Scott Baio as Bob Loblaw , Judy Greer as Kitty Sanchez , and Liza Minnelli as Lucille Austero , while new characters are played by John Slattery , Terry Crews and Isla Fisher .
The plot of the season focuses on the fictional production of a film based on the Bluth family scandal and what the characters have been doing since 2006 .
There were plans to have George Clooney make a cameo appearance for a joke centered on Mitt Romney but it never came together .
The show format is different compared to previous seasons : each of the fifteen episodes focuses on one individual character — with every episode happening at the same time within the show 's universe — showing the character 's activities since the conclusion of the third season .
According to Jason Bateman , " If I 'm driving down the street in my episode and Gob 's going down the sidewalk on his Segway , you could stop my episode , go into his episode , and follow him and see where he 's going " .
Part of the reason for this format was the challenge with getting the cast together to shoot on the same dates .
" We shot for Netflix and of course everybody was busy , so everybody had a different shooting schedule .
I did scenes with light stands with an X in tape put on them .
I would have a conversation with Jeffrey Tambor , then I would turn to my right and have a conversation with Jessica Walters , but both of them were light stands instead , " said Henry Winkler in a November 2017 interview with Uproxx .
Michael Cera joined the writing crew for season 4 , the first cast member to do so .
Netflix CEO Reed Hastings and creator Mitchell Hurwitz previously stated that season four would be the final season of the show , and that the revival serves as a " one - off " and " act one of a movie " .
However , a Netflix spokesperson later went on to say , " We 're hopeful there will be more seasons " and " ... by no means is this the end of it .
We 're definitely planning to do more with them . "
In October 2014 , Hurwitz said that a re - edit of season 4 was being done to tell the story in chronological order .
Ron Howard recorded new voice - over material for the recut .
On May 1 , 2018 , Hurwitz announced via Twitter that the chronological re - edit would be released on May 4 , 2018 .
The recut is titled Arrested Development Season 4 Remix :
Fateful Consequences , and Hurwitz stated that it will " shuffle the content from 15 individualized stories into 22 interwoven stories the length of the original series . "
Following the remixed release on Netflix , several of the cast members , including Jason Bateman , Will Arnett , Michael Cera and David Cross , requested additional compensation for the remixed episodes , which they state include unused footage shot for the original format of the season 's episodes .
Representatives for the actors also consider that the remixed version makes it a potential vehicle for syndication that would lead to financial gain for 20th Century Fox Television but not for the actors .
According to these representatives , 20th Century has stated that they have the right to reedit the episodes as they see fit without consulting the actors .
CAST MAIN * Jason Bateman as Michael Bluth * Portia de Rossi as Lindsay Bluth Fünke
* Will Arnett as Gob Bluth
* Michael Cera as George - Michael Bluth
* Alia Shawkat as Maeby Fünke * Tony Hale as Buster Bluth * David Cross as Tobias Fünke * Jeffrey Tambor as George Bluth ,
Sr./Oscar Bluth * Jessica Walter as
Lucille Bluth RETURNING GUEST
CAST
NEW GUEST CAST MARKETING AND PROMOTION Section::::Marketing and promotion .
In October 2012 , Netflix chief content officer Ted Sarandos premiered footage from the fourth season for the attendees of TheWrap 's annual conference TheGrill .
The clip featured Buster Bluth ( Tony Hale ) helping his mother Lucille Bluth ( Jessica Walter )
smoke a cigarette , because the ankle - bracelet monitor she 's wearing under house arrest prevents her from leaving her hotel room .
Following that , a set photo was released showing the Bluth company stair car , now having the Austero - Bluth Company logo referencing to Liza Minnelli 's character , Lucille Austero , having more stake in the company .
Set photos showing Tony Hale as Buster Bluth saluting at someone 's funeral were released online .
The first promotional images of the entire cast together were released in the October 12 , 2012 , issue of Entertainment Weekly magazine .
These included a cover picture , along with two pictures of the entire cast in restoration - era outfits .
The first official teaser poster for the new season was released on April 4 , 2013 , on the show 's Facebook page , along with the announcement that the 15-episode season would premiere on Netflix on May 26 , 2013 .
Netflix released the first trailer for the fourth season online on May 12 , 2013 .
In March 2013 , series executive producer and narrator Ron Howard stated that " We 're still hoping to build to a movie and in a lot of ways , getting the Bluth family on people 's radar , in a kind of contemporary way , so we can move forward with it as a movie " .
He stated that the film had not yet been green - lit , saying , " It 's not a happening thing , but it 's something that is being discussed " .
The same month , Hurwitz stated that he was " confident that we will succeed at [ making the film ] " , saying " there is a bigger story out there that does exist " for the film .
EPISODES ORIGINAL RELEASE ( 2013 )
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Original release ( 2013 ) .
SEASON
4 REMIX :
FATEFUL CONSEQUENCES ( 2018 )
Section::::Season 4
Remix : Fateful Consequences ( 2018 ) .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Reviews of the fourth season were generally positive .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it holds an approval rating of 76 % with an average score of 7.93/10 , based on 31 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Though this new incarnation of the hit series is n't quite as effective , Arrested Developments fourth season still delivers the dark humor and running gags we 've come to expect .
" On the review aggregator website , Metacritic , the fourth season has a weighted average score of 72 out of 100 , based on 21 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Mike Hale , writing for The New York Times after watching the first eight episodes , said that " Along the way there are doses of self - referential and metafictional humor that have made the show a cult item — enough for fans to compile lists , but not enough to re - enliven the episodes or distract from the story 's dullness " .
Robert Lloyd , writing for the Los Angeles Times , praised the series , suggesting that it improves after several episodes .
The A.V. Clubs Todd VanDerWerff graded the season overall with a ' B ' , writing that " It is , in places , masterful .
It is also , in other places , at once weirdly pleased with itself and too ready to hold the audience 's hand where that hand need n't be held " , and that " The scope of the whole project is hard to deny for its ambition and audacity . "
David M. Cook of WhatCulture !
gave the new season a positive review calling it " The Triumphant Return Of The Bluths " .
He said " it was great to see the Bluths return in such fine form " and that he " found a lot of the season to be funnier than anything that had come before it " .
Gem Wheeler of Den of Geek argued that the fourth season was " Arrested Developments best yet " , and " the Bluths officially rule the pop culture landscape .
Long may they reign . "
Brian Lowry of Variety gave the season a negative review , writing , " Ultimately , this ' Arrested ' revival plays a bit like a reunion special , where the individual cast members come out and take their curtain calls .
After the warmth of seeing them reunited ( or semi - reunited , given how rarely more than one or two are featured in a scene together ) , there 's a sort of awkwardness to it , as if nobody really has much to say .
We 're meant to bask in the nostalgia , while the particulars are of relatively little consequence .
"
Nathan Rabin of The Wall Street Journal similarly wrote , " Arrested Development has lost a step or two in its long stint on the sidelines .
The pacing is notably slower than during its original run and the show lacks the breathtaking density that characterized its glorious past .
At its worst , the new / old Arrested Development is reduced to doing a shaky imitation of itself : the characters and themes are there but the beats are slightly off , as is the tone " .
David Pierce of The Verge also gave it a mixed review , writing " Season four
is kind of a confused mess , but then so is the Bluth family — and both somehow work despite all the chaos .
From the way it was shot to the way it was released , the show was an experiment — covering a few events many ways , showing us the world through every character 's eyes .
It 's very clearly just set - up in the larger sense , building toward something bigger for Arrested Development .
But the question is , what 's next ? "
He also commented positively , saying , " Season four is absolutely worthy of the Arrested Development name , though you 'll have to slog through three episodes before it becomes so " .
The season 4 remix , Fateful Consequences , received generally negative reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it holds an approval rating of 27 % with an average score of 5.3/10 , based on 11 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Arrested Development :
Season 4 Remix takes the worst elements of the show 's fourth season , rearranges them , and presents them as something new -- an experiment that is neither intriguing or entertaining . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The fourth season earned the series three Primetime Emmy Award nominations for the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , including Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series for Jason Bateman , Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series , and Outstanding Music Composition for a Series .
For the 20th Screen Actors Guild Awards , the cast was nominated for Best Comedy Ensemble and Jason Bateman was nominated for Best Comedy Actor .
Bateman also received a nomination for Best Comedy Actor for the 71st Golden Globe Awards .
FUTURE FILM Section::::Future .
Section::::Film .
Show creator Mitchell Hurwitz said that the fourth season will serve as the precursor to a future full - length Arrested Development film .
Rumors of a film circulated after the possibility was suggested in the final episode of the third season , " Development Arrested " .
In 2008 , it was reported that production of Arrested Development : The Movie would begin after the completion of the fourth season , with a script to be written by Hurwitz .
In 2008 , Ron Howard was slated to direct the film , though it is not clear whether he still is .
Reportedly , all original members of the main cast are expected to reprise their original roles .
In August 2013 , Hurwitz commented " I 'm working on the movie right now " and his plan is to do another season after the film is completed .
FIFTH SEASON Section::::Fifth season .
Netflix confirmed on May 17 , 2017 , that a fifth season featuring the full cast had been ordered and the fifth season will include 16 episodes split into two eight - episode parts ; the first half was released on May 29 , 2018 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The fourth season was released on DVD in region 1 on December 16 , 2014 , in region 2 on June 9 , 2014 , and in region 4 on August 27 , 2014 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS