THE GOOD DINOSAUR
The Good Dinosaur is a 2015 American 3D computer - animated adventure film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures .
The film is directed by Peter Sohn in his directorial debut from a screenplay by Meg LeFauve from an original idea by Bob Peterson .
Set on a fictional Earth in which dinosaurs never became extinct , the film follows a young Apatosaurus named Arlo , who meets an unlikely human friend while traveling through a harsh and mysterious landscape .
The film features the voices of Raymond Ochoa , Jack Bright , Sam Elliott , Anna Paquin ,
A.J. Buckley , Steve Zahn , Jeffrey Wright , and Frances McDormand .
Peterson , who came up with the idea for the story , directed the film until August 2013 .
In October 2014 , Sohn was announced as the new director .
The film , along with Inside Out , marks the first time that Pixar has released two feature films in the same year .
The Good Dinosaur premiered on November 10 , 2015 , in Paris and was released in the United States on November 25 , 2015 .
The film grossed $ 332 million worldwide , making it Pixar 's lowest - grossing film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In an alternate history , the asteroid that would have caused the extinction of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago passes safely over Earth .
Millions of years later
, Apatosaurus farmers Henry and Ida have children Libby , Buck , and the runt Arlo , who has trouble adjusting to farm life .
While his successful siblings are allowed to " make their mark " ( a mud - print on the family 's corn silo ) , Arlo 's timid nature makes tasks difficult for him .
Henry attempts to give Arlo a sense of purpose by putting him in charge of guarding their silo , and helps him set a trap .
It captures a feral caveboy , but Arlo does n't have the heart to kill him , and sets him free .
Disappointed , Henry takes Arlo to track the caveboy , leading them into a ravine .
Henry saves Arlo from a flash flood before being swept away and killed .
Without his father , Arlo shoulders more of the workload .
He spots the same caveboy inside the silo and , blaming him for his father 's death , chases him until both fall into a river .
Arlo can not swim , and is swept downstream where he hits his head on a rock and is knocked unconscious .
Awakening , he finds himself far from home and tries to survive on his own , but becomes trapped when a boulder pins his leg .
The next day Arlo wakes to find his leg has been freed , and the caveboy appears with food for him .
The caveboy then leads Arlo to a berry tree , where the caveboy fends off a large snake , amazing Arlo and impressing a nearby eccentric Styracosaurus who wants to keep the boy .
He forces Arlo to compete with him to give the boy a name he will respond to , which Arlo finally wins when he calls him " Spot " .
Arlo and Spot bond as Arlo laments his lost family , and Spot reveals that his own parents are dead .
Later , when a storm strikes , Arlo runs away in fear and loses the riverbank he has been following home .
The next morning , Arlo wakes to find Spot at his side .
They are noticed by a band of pterodactyls , led by Thunderclap , who appear to be conducting a rescue operation but turn out to be savagely carnivorous .
When the pterodactyls try to take Spot , Arlo and Spot flee , happening upon a pair of Tyrannosaurus named Nash and Ramsey , who ward off the pterodactyls .
Nash , Ramsey , and their father Butch have lost their herd of longhorns , so Arlo offers Spot 's help in sniffing them out .
They locate the herd , but Butch recognizes the work of cattle rustlers , and uses Arlo as a lure .
Arlo and Spot attract the attention of rustler Velociraptor , allowing Butch and his family to attack .
During the fight , Arlo musters his courage and fends off two raptors who have overwhelmed Butch , helping to turn the fight in their favor .
Having gained their respect , Arlo joins the Tyrannosaurus in driving the cattle south when he sees the familiar mountain peaks of his homeland in the distance , and leaves with Spot to return home .
Along the way , they encounter an adult feral caveman in the distance , and though Spot shows interest , Arlo dissuades him and they continue on .
As another storm approaches , Thunderclap and the pterodactyls return and attack and carry Spot away .
Arlo becomes entangled in vines , where he has a vision of Henry leading him home .
Arlo instead resolves to save Spot , making the vision of his father proud before it fades away .
Arlo finds and attacks the pterodactyls , who have cornered Spot at the river .
Arlo and Spot together plunge Thunderclap and the pterodactyls into the water , where they are swept helplessly downstream .
When another flash flood occurs , Arlo leaps into the water to rescue Spot as the two are swept away toward a waterfall .
Arlo protects Spot as the two plummet down the fall , and carries him to shore .
As they approach Arlo 's home , the two again hear the unknown caveman call , and are approached by an entire cave family .
With great reluctance , Arlo pushes Spot to join his adoptive family , and the two of them share a tearful goodbye .
Arlo finally arrives home to his mother and siblings , and makes his mark on the silo between those of his mother and father .
VOICE CAST
* Raymond Ochoa as Arlo , a young Apatosaurus * Jack McGraw as Young Arlo
* Jack Bright as Spot , a 6 - 7-year - old human caveboy who befriends Arlo .
* Sam Elliott as Butch , a Tyrannosaurus who runs a " ranch " filled with prehistoric " longhorns " .
* Anna Paquin as Ramsey , Butch 's daughter * A. J. Buckley as Nash , Butch 's son * Jeffrey Wright as Poppa Henry , the father of the Apatosaurus family , until his death .
* Frances McDormand as Momma Ida , the mother of the Apatosaurus family .
* Marcus Scribner as Buck , Arlo 's brother * Ryan Teeple as Young Buck * Maleah Padilla as Libby , Arlo 's sister * Steve Zahn as Thunderclap , the leader of a gang of pterodactyls .
* Mandy Freund as Downpour , a pterodactyl who is a member of Thunderclap 's flock * Steven Clay Hunter as Coldfront , a pterodactyl who is a member of Thunderclap 's flock
* Peter Sohn as Forrest Woodbush , a Styracosaurus who has various animals perched on his horns .
* Dave Boat as Bubbha , the leader of a gang of Velociraptor rustlers * Carrie Paff as Lurleane , a Velociraptor who is a member of Bubbha 's pack .
* John Ratzenberger as Earl , a Velociraptor who is a member of Bubbha 's pack .
* Calum Mackenzie Grant as Pervis , a Velociraptor who is a member of Bubbha 's pack .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Bob Peterson and Peter Sohn started working on the film in 2009 , when Peterson came up with the idea .
The film 's first release date of November 27 , 2013 , was first announced in June 2011 .
The plot , director and co - director , producer , and other small details were announced at the D23 Expo on August 20 , 2011 .
Peterson and John Walker announced the film as The Untitled Pixar Movie About Dinosaurs .
On April 24 , 2012 , Pixar announced that it would be titled The Good Dinosaur .
The filmmakers wanted to explore what dinosaurs represent today , and how they are represented in stereotypes .
Peterson stated : " It 's time to do a movie where you get to know the dinosaur , what it 's really like to be a dinosaur and to be with a dinosaur . "
Peterson said the inspiration for the project came from a childhood visit to the 1964 New York World 's Fair where he was impressed by some dinosaur Audio - Animatronics .
On the film 's title , Sohn stated , " The title is deceptively simple .
It has more meaning than it seems .
" He additionally explained : " Arlo has a lot of issues when he 's born .
He 's fearful and he 's weak
and he 's disconnected from the family because of these issues
and he feels like he 's not worthy ,
and so he finds a way to become worthy . "
In April 2012 , Pixar announced that the film 's release date had been shifted from November 27 , 2013 , to May 30 , 2014 .
On August 9 , 2013 , it was announced at the D23 Expo that Lucas Neff , John Lithgow , Frances McDormand , Neil Patrick Harris , Judy Greer , and Bill Hader had joined the cast of the film .
REVISIONS Section::::Revisions .
By summer 2013 , Peterson and Walker had been removed from the film due to story problems .
Peterson , who could not crack the film 's third act , was absent from the D23 Expo , where Sohn and producer Denise Ream presented footage from the film .
Pixar 's president Ed Catmull explained the departure : " All directors get really deep in their film .
Sometimes you just need a different perspective to get the idea out .
Sometimes directors … are so deeply embedded in their ideas it actually takes someone else to finish it up . "
Peterson moved on to another project he is developing at Pixar , while Ream replaced Walker , who left to work on Disney 's Tomorrowland .
On the subject of changing directors , Ream stated , " Sadly , it happens more often than any of us would like …
It 's given a lot of thought and care .
Bob still works at Pixar [ and ] he 's a beloved member of the studio .
He helps out on a lot of the movies .
We care about him , but he just needed help getting the movie done . "
John Lasseter , Lee Unkrich , Mark Andrews , and Sohn stepped in temporarily to work on various sections of the film .
In September 2013 , The Good Dinosaur was pushed back from May 30 , 2014 , to November 25 , 2015 ( the scheduled release date for Pixar 's Finding Dory ) .
According to Ream , the primary reason for the rescheduling was " the story was not working , period , full stop , it just was not where it needed to be . "
In November 2013 , due to the delay , Pixar laid off 67 employees of its 1,200-person workforce , following the closure of Pixar Canada a month before , when about 80 employees had been laid off , officially to refocus Pixar 's efforts at its main headquarters .
In the footage shown at the 2013 D23 Expo , Arlo was a huge dinosaur , Sohn recalled : "
In the original version of the film , Spot was so tiny , we really wanted to make him feel like a bug .
But people had a tough time connecting that these two had a relationship , because Arlo was so large .
It was fun , but at the same time we never believed the growth that they could have together .
It was really like , ' I 'm best friends with a bee ! '
Bob Peterson , the original director , his first pitch was just a boy and his dog , and so when I took it I said , ' I want to honor that as much as I can . ' "
In August 2014 , Lithgow revealed in an interview that the film had been dismantled and " completely reimagined " and that he was expected to re - record his role in the next month , while mentioning that McDormand was still part of the film .
In November 2014 , it was reported that new elements had been added to the story , such as treating nature as the film 's antagonist .
Pixar 's general manager and president Jim Morris stated , " We all liked the movie from the beginning , but … the story had some kind of fatal flaws in it that none of us really saw .
It was kind of a Billy Elliot story .
It was a very different kind of movie — there was a whole dinosaur culture and community and so forth .
It was one where the Arlo character was kind of repressed by the community .
It never quite felt right .
It always felt like that we were vilifying this group [ of dinosaur characters ] that was otherwise a very likeable group .
It just did n't feel like it resonated truly . "
Morris additionally explained : " We give people the chance to work on a story , and we give them our support , but it does n't always work out … there were story issues that were just not solvable .
So we changed the story to make it better , and we 're very proud of the film we have now . "
In October 2014 , Sohn was announced as the new director of the film .
In June 2015 , it was announced that the majority of the cast had been revised .
Of the original cast , only McDormand retained her role in the film .
It was revealed that Neff had been replaced by Raymond Ochoa , and Lithgow had been replaced by Jeffrey Wright .
Arlo 's three siblings , to be voiced by Harris , Hader , and Greer had been cut down to a single brother named Buck , voiced by Marcus Scribner , and later , a sister named Libby , voiced by Maleah Padilla .
On the cast revisions , Sohn explained : " It was all about finding a younger Arlo , it was really about finding a boy [ to play Arlo ] , so that we could push into that idea of him growing up and becoming a man , so the actor previous — who is a great actor — he was already a man , and
so I needed to push that arc and find that compassionate kid , so that was the major kind of change .
Then everything else , all the other characters that supported that story came in and out and changed and evolved and through that evolution , some of those performers changed out of it .
" It was also confirmed that the farmer aspect was still part of the film .
DESIGN AND SETTING Section::::Design and setting .
The filmmakers wanted nature to be the antagonist for the main character Arlo .
Ream noted " Nature can overcome anything , including a massive dinosaur . "
In order to achieve the needed realism , the film 's team traveled to the American Northwest , spending time in Jackson Hole , Wyoming , Juntura , Oregon , and southern Montana .
Production designer Harley Jessup stated : " The area has a fantastic variety of landscapes , ranging from the Jackson Valley and the Tetons to the amazing geysers and waterfalls in Yellowstone , we studied the grasslands of Montana and the Red Desert , then incorporated all of it in Arlo 's journey . "
To use the landscapes that they had experienced , the filmmakers used data from the U.S. Geological Survey , and satellite images from Google Earth .
The geographical data provided a foundation that the team then built on .
According to supervising technical director Sanjay Bakshi , this gave Sohn " the freedom to shoot in any direction he wanted to make the world feel big and real .
"
In addition , The Good Dinosaur features three - dimensional , volumetric clouds .
In previous Pixar films , clouds have been " painted " onto the sets .
Light and photography director Sharon Calahan explained : " Storm clouds are almost like a villain in the film .
Plus , it 's very labor - intensive to paint clouds , and they 're in almost every scene .
"
Calahan also noted " These particular clouds can be rendered and we can light them , which we 've never been able to properly do before . "
According to the filmmakers , the environments and landscapes in the film are not photo - realistic , they are just detailed in a way that advanced technology and style decisions allow .
In terms of animating Arlo , animators Rob Thompson and Kevin O'Hara went to a zoo and shot video of elephants in motion .
Thompson stated : " One of the most intimidating things to animate is a quadruped , because there 's so much to them and there 's so much to manage .
It 's very easy to make it not work if you do n't know what you 're managing .
Locomotion is all about efficiency , a lot of times you think , ' We 're animating a big , heavy character .
We should slam those feet .
That 'll make it feel heavy . '
The truth is , that 's not efficient .
That would n't be great for the legs .
"
A system where Arlo 's head goes up and his chest goes down when his hips goes up , was therefore created .
To get an idea of the scale of Arlo , a complete full - size model was built out of card and foam core .
In total The Good Dinosaur took up 300 TB of server space , ten times as much space as Monsters University ( 2013 ) .
Arlo was designed so that the audience could identify with him and be able to see the " boy " inside the dinosaur .
Sohn explained " When Arlo gets lost in the wilderness , you need to worry that he 's out of his element and in danger of getting killed , rather than just thinking ' You 're an animal .
Why do n't you just turn around and eat some leaves ? '
"
He additionally stated " If you put like a realistic dinosaur in the woods , eat some leaves , you 're fine … But we really wanted to play with that twist of this is a boy out there .
A dinosaur boy for sure , but trying to infuse those qualities into him … And also keeping him in a world that had an arc to itself .
That it would start off being beautiful and then become dangerous .
When we had these designs of the trees where they were a little bit more blocky and a little bit more graphic .
We put Arlo in front of it , it 's like ' ooh that kind of is cool , but boy , it does n't feel like it 's that dangerous . '
Like when we get a rock stuck on him , it did n't feel like anything 'cause when we went on our research trips , boy that idea of like you can get , you could die by a small thing like having a rock on your foot .
Or you could die by a huge thing like an avalanche , which we tried to kind of explore in the film .
So that was one of our main intents . "
In terms of the film 's setting , Sohn stated " Pixar is all about the '
what if ' question … ' What if the asteroid missed the earth ? '
Yeah , we went down the road of : they could be cooking in a dino diner ; they could be in space ; they could be in anything .
But then there was a drawing of a dinosaur farming that kind of sparked people of the idea of ' he 's working hard and this character needs to survive out there . '
All of the American dinosaur bones are found in the northwest — from Montana , to Oregon , to Wyoming , and the Dakotas , so the combination of hardworking farm families and the west really brought us into that frontier world immediately …
[ S]o we started doing research .
We started finding all of these people who were surviving out there on the land .
They were either cultivating the cattle , or were ranchers in Oregon , or were farmers in the Midwest .
It just kept teaching us how much we want to honor this world , and how hard it is to survive out there .
It started dictating the world itself . " Since The Good Dinosaur is set in a world in which dinosaurs never became extinct , they were instead able to evolve .
Herbivores like Arlo and his family become farmers , and carnivores like the T. rex become ranchers .
Because they are meant to be reminiscent of cowboys , when the T. rex run , their lower bodies mimic a galloping horse , while their upper bodies have the feel of a riding cowboy .
To help inspire Butch 's physical look and performance , the filmmakers looked at classic film cowboys such as characters portrayed by Clint Eastwood and Jack Palance .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's score was composed by Mychael Danna and his brother , Jeff , replacing Thomas Newman , who was originally attached to score the film when it was set to be directed by Bob Peterson .
It marks the first Pixar film to be scored by two composers .
Danna was approached by Sohn and Ream due to his score for Life of Pi , which won an Academy Award .
Having a lot of work , he invited his brother as a co - writer .
Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack on November 20 , 2015 .
Track listing VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A figure of Spot and Power Discs of Arlo , Ramsey , Nash , and Butch have been released for Disney Infinity 3.0 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Good Dinosaur was theatrically released on November 25 , 2015 .
Before the rescheduling from 2014 to 2015 , a Monsters University short film titled Party Central was set to accompany the film , but was instead shown with the theatrical release of Disney 's Muppets Most Wanted .
In April 2015 , it was announced that a new Pixar short , Sanjay 's Super Team , directed by Sanjay Patel , would be shown in front of The Good Dinosaur instead .
The film 's teaser trailer was released on June 2 , 2015 , and the first official trailer was released on July 21 , 2015 .
The film received an exclusive run at The Grand Rex in Paris a week before its U.S. and European premiere .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Good Dinosaur was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu - ray ( 2D and 3D ) , DVD , and digital download in the United States on February 23 , 2016 .
Blu - ray bonus features include Sanjay 's Super Team , audio commentary , behind - the - scenes featurettes , deleted scenes , and the " Hide and Seek " short promotional clip .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Good Dinosaur grossed $ 123.1 million in the United States and Canada and $ 209.1 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 332.2 million against a production budget of $ 175–200 million , making it Pixar 's lowest - grossing film .
Adding in the marketing budget , the film had a cost of $ 350 million , which it was not able to recoup .
However , the film proved to be much more financially successful in terms of home video sales .
In North America , The Good Dinosaur opened on Wednesday , November 25 , 2015 alongside Creed and Victor Frankenstein , as well as the wide releases of Brooklyn , Spotlight , and Trumbo .
The film was projected to gross $ 60–65 million from 3,749 theaters in its first five days , including $ 45 million in its opening weekend .
It made $ 1.3 million from its Tuesday night previews and $ 9.8 million on its first day .
The film ended up grossing $ 55.6 million in its first five days , including $ 39.2 million in its opening weekend , finishing second at the box office behind the second weekend of .
Outside North America , it earned $ 28.7 million from 39 markets , including 8 significant markets .
Unlike the US , where it had the benefit of the Thanksgiving weekend , it did not have the same benefit internationally .
Rather , its release date was designed to set it up to run through the December holiday .
The top openings were in the United Kingdom ( $ 4.3 million ) , Mexico ( $ 3.6 million ) , France ( $ 3.2 million ) , Argentina ( $ 2.2 million ) , and Russia ( $ 2.1 million ) .
Of those , it opened at No . 1 in Mexico , Argentina and Russia .
In terms of total earnings , its leading markets are the United Kingdom ( $ 10.1 million ) , Mexico ( $ 8.7 million ) , and France ( $ 8.1 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 76 % , based on 202 reviews , with a rating average of 6.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Good Dinosaur delivers thrillingly beautiful animation in service of a worthy story that , even if it does n't quite live up to the lofty standards set by Pixar , still adds up to charming , family - friendly entertainment .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 66 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews .
"
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described it as " antic and unexpected as well as homiletic , rife with subversive elements , wacky critters and some of the most beautiful landscapes ever seen in a computer animated film . "
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times felt the film " has a few things on its mind , but its tone is overwhelmingly playful , not hectoring . "
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal opined that " As Pixar productions go , this one is n't a groundbreaker , but it 's heartfelt and endearing , as well as visually splendiferous , and kids will love it for sure . "
" Clever and cloying by turns , it 's a movie that always seems to be trying to evolve beyond its conventional trappings , and not succeeding as often as Pixar devotees have come to expect , " wrote Justin Chang of Variety .
Many of the reviewers praised the sophistication of its nearly photorealistic backgrounds .
Christopher Orr of The Atlantic felt it to be the studio 's first film explicitly targeted towards children , though it is " by no means a bad movie [ … ] It 's a simple story , well - told . "
Mark Feeney , writing for The Boston Globe , felt similarly , deeming it a " very middling movie [ … ]
The Good Dinosaur generally features a sort of sentimentality and emotional reductiveness that make it seem meant for small children as no previous Pixar movie has .
"
The Washington Post Stephanie Merry dubbed it " a nice , conventional story , but it 's not Pixar - level imaginative . "
Richard Roeper , for the Chicago Sun - Times , felt it " one strange , aggressively gross and dark adventure [ … ]
Inconsistent and weird , The Good Dinosaur is second - level Pixar all the way . "
Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter derided its " disappointingly derivative " screenplay .
ACCOLADES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website at Pixar