COMPANY OF HEROES 2 Company of Heroes 2 is a real - time strategy video game developed by Relic Entertainment and published by Sega for Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux .
It is the sequel to the 2006 game Company of Heroes .
As with the original Company of Heroes , the game is set in World War II but with the focus on the Eastern Front , with players primarily controlling the side of the Soviet Red Army during various stages of the Eastern Front , from Operation Barbarossa to the Battle of Berlin .
Company of Heroes 2 runs on Relic Entertainment 's proprietary Essence 3.0 game engine .
In January 2013 , Sega acquired Relic Entertainment and along with it the Company of Heroes intellectual property from THQ .
The game was released on June 25 , 2013 in North America and Europe .
GAMEPLAY
RESOURCES Section::::Gameplay .
Section::::Resources .
The resource - generation system from the first game has been modified .
Players will still capture specific flagged points all over the map to collect munitions and fuel credits , which will be invested in assembling their units .
Most armies can construct caches to increase the fuel or munitions income from these points , though some points produce a higher income of one material but can not have caches built on them .
Instead of the soldier units actually gathering at the flagged point itself , capturing the point is possible if the player 's units are inside a specific zone with no enemy units in the same zone .
The accumulation of these resources and the size of the player 's army can be much faster if players capture various flagged points all over the map .
In order for a player to receive the benefits of a captured flagged point , it must be part of a continuous area of captured territory , thus allowing an unbroken chain ( " supply line " ) connected to the headquarters .
Thus , the resource intake will be curtailed if the opposing side captures territory that isolates ( " cuts off " ) owned points from other allied sections in the map .
Manpower is used to build common units , and the amount will decrease the larger a player 's army grows .
BUILDINGS Section::::Buildings .
Units can occupy a civilian building and use it as a temporary strongpoint .
However , the occupants can be flushed out through attacks by artillery or soldiers using flamethrowers and grenades .
The building - damage system from Company of Heroes is retained and enhanced ; wooden buildings set afire will continue burning until they are reduced to cinders .
Furthermore , buildings can be damaged by tanks and light vehicles driving into them .
The Soviets ' main structure is the Regimental Field Headquarters , which is used to produce conscripts and field engineers .
The Special Rifle Command , Support Weapon Kampaneya , Mechanized Armor Kampaneya , and the Tankoviy Battalion Command are the respective Soviet equivalents of the original game 's barracks ; weapons support center , vehicle center , and tank hall .
A field hospital can help treat seriously injured soldiers .
The Wehrmacht 's main structure is the Kampfgruppe Headquarters , which is used to produce pioneers and MG42 Heavy Machine Gun teams and to upgrade battle phases to allow for more advanced units and structures .
COMBAT MECHANICS Section::::Combat mechanics .
Combat includes controllable units that are recruited and ordered directly by the player ( through the user interface at player - controlled buildings , or through a doctrine ability ) , as well as activated support actions , such as artillery bombardment or air cover suppression .
Every controllable unit type , whether infantry or vehicle , has an associated construction cost and recruitment time , as well as a range of fighting abilities .
Vehicles and infantry can eventually be upgraded by purchasing specific capabilities .
Upgrades generally improve the unit 's effectiveness .
Some upgrades are global , granting immediate benefits to all deployed units , while others must be purchased on a unit by unit basis .
Most combat takes place through direct , line - of - sight engagements .
As with the original Company of Heroes , colored dots will show locations that provide varying degrees of cover for soldiers and support units .
Soldiers can also climb over low terrain obstacles such as fences and walls while vehicles , depending on their type , can simply smash through obstacles .
Occasionally if a vehicle takes too much damage , it will be abandoned rather than destroyed ; the crew is killed but the vehicle remains mostly intact .
Abandoned vehicles can be repaired by engineer units and recovered or captured by sending an infantry squad of sufficient size to crew it , or they could be destroyed by collateral fire to deny them to the enemy .
The game also offers the player a chance to complete side quests in a mission , which are denoted by an inverted triangle icon .
TRUESIGHT
Section::::TrueSight .
The game 's Essence 3.0 engine introduces a new line - of - sight feature called the TrueSight system , which aims to better emulate troop visibility in real combat .
In contrast to overhead visibility seen in other strategy games , TrueSight more accurately represents a unit 's visibility range based on environmental conditions and type of unit .
WEATHER Section::::Weather .
Weather conditions are a major factor in Company of Heroes 2s gameplay , under the new ColdTech weather - simulation system .
Since many battles in the Eastern Front occurred in winter weather , troops can die of frostbite if caught in the outside during severe weather , especially when pinned by enemy fire ; a thermometer - shaped bar to the left side of the unit icon denotes a soldier 's body temperature .
The soldiers can recover their body heat if they are close to a bonfire or have found a building to shelter in , though soldiers in cover outside will not lose or gain body heat .
Players moving through deep snow will move at a reduced speed unless they are on a road ; their footprints are also visible to the enemy .
Certain maps have frozen bodies of water , allowing for more movement options .
However , players face the danger of being attacked from the other side ; as a result , the ice can buckle under the weight of the units in movement or shattered by explosions .
THEATRE OF WAR Section::::Theatre of War .
The game introduces the " Theatre of War " , a series of single - player and cooperative missions detailing various aspects of the Eastern Front campaign from both German and Soviet sides .
Eighteen missions set in 1941 will be part of the game upon release with the missions from 1942 onward available as downloadable content .
The first of these offerings is Case Blue , a package only free to pre - ordered copies and Red Star editions of the game , featuring the Axis forces during the Fall Blau campaign on the Eastern Front .
Later releases include Victory at Stalingrad , taking place around the city of Stalingrad during 1942 , and Southern Fronts , focusing on events surrounding the spring rasputitsa in 1943 .
ORDER 227 Section::::Order 227 .
Company of Heroes 2s campaign also tackles Joseph Stalin 's Order No . 227 , which prohibits retreating except under the direction of senior officers .
Starting from the fifth mission set in Stalingrad , Order 227 will be in effect if the player deploys Fresh Conscripts , Frontovik Squads , or Penal Battalions .
A time bar appears on the left side of the map display ; for that duration , players must not have their soldiers go into full retreat back to headquarters or else said soldiers will be executed for doing so .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The game 's story focuses on the Eastern Front campaign as narrated through flashbacks by Lev Abramovich Isakovich , a Soviet Army lieutenant locked up at a gulag in Siberia in 1952 .
Colonel Churkin – his old commanding officer – shows him a book and interrogates him about his experiences during the war , including the Battle of Stalingrad , the Battle of Moscow , combat in the outskirts of Leningrad , fighting in Poland , up to the Fall of the Reichstag .
Lev Isakovich first reminisces the Battle of Stalingrad in 1942 , where he , as a Lieutenant , motivates his men to break through the German lines .
As the Soviets reach Red Square , a wave of conscripts is pushed back by heavy defenses .
The commissar orders a Maxim gunner to gun down the retreating men as part of Order 227 ; Not One Step Back .
The Soviets attack again , this time the Germans are defeated .
As Lieutenant Isakovich and his men inspect the carnage , they stumble upon a lone German survivor trying to surrender , only to be killed .
His next experience details when he first met with Colonel Churkin of the NKVD .
Churkin orders the Soviet forces to hold the line against the Germans and destroy / burn anything of value that can not be evacuated to keep it out of enemy hands , including several houses and fields .
As the rest of the supplies are evacuated , the Germans bring in Panzers IVs and the Soviets are ordered to fall back to the bridge .
As a few soldiers run towards the bridge , Lieutenant Isakovich regrettably detonates the explosives , leaving the men at the mercy of the pursuing Germans .
As winter began to roll in , the Soviets under Lev defend Mtsensk from German soldiers and StuGs long enough for T‑34 reinforcements to arrive .
Soon later , temperatures dropped to an extreme low ; the Soviets were far better prepared for these conditions than the Germans , whose vehicles stalled and suffered more losses to frostbite .
Outside of Moscow , a small Soviet force struggles through the snow while destroying several disabled vehicles .
Returning to Stalingrad , Lev recalls that the only thing driving the Soviet soldiers to fight was Order 227 , in which soldiers caught retreating would be executed as traitors .
As the fighting in Stalingrad was coming to an end , Lev Isakovich , now a captain , searches for German intel .
As he discovers a map on an officer , a German Tiger Heavy Tank flattens the building , burying Lev alive under the rubble .
Yuri , one of the survivors of the expedition , goes back to HQ to ask to save Captain Isakovich before the Germans reach him .
The Soviet forces then move into the area and hold their ground long enough for the captain to be freed .
Upon returning to HQ , Major Polivanov shoots Yuri for leaving his post to save Lev , and orders Lev to placed on the next train to Moscow while the remaining soldiers that helped him are executed .
As Lev is recovering at the hospital , he is holding a conversation with Sergeant Ivan Pozharsky , who discusses the Siege of Leningrad , which was completely cut off from the Germans for over a year , until the Soviets manage to break through the siege .
As fighting in Leningrad continued , a Soviet armored squadron investigates the site of a recent tank battle .
However , they are ambushed by a Tiger Heavy Tank .
Despite losing their armor , the Soviets manage to kill the Tiger 's crew and drive it back to their base .
After recovering from his wounds , Lev abandons his military career in favor of journalism but found nothing inspiring of the war , except for the heroism demonstrated by the soldiers on the battlefields .
As the war went on , the Soviets fight the Germans in Lublin , Poland .
After the ISU-152s break down the gate of a suspected prison camp , Lev realizes that this was Majdanek , a Nazi concentration camp and a glimpse into the Holocaust .
Soon afterwards , Sergeant Pozharsky , who had recently returned to active service , introduces Lev Isakovich to Ania Zielinska , a leader of the Polish partisans .
After she returns with a captured German officer , Pozharsky directs her to the supplies that were promised .
But Lev watches in horror as Pozharsky betrays Ania and her fellow partisans , claiming that once the war with the Germans ended , the Polish would be fighting the Russians , before executing her .
Lev then decides to publish his findings , only to be stopped by Churkin , who promptly assigns him to the 8th Guards penal battalion .
As the Soviets enter Germany , they encircle a town full of Germans and prevent most of them , including civilians , from escaping .
Soon , the Soviets began to lay siege to Berlin fighting the remaining Germans through the streets and ruined buildings , ultimately capturing the Reichstag , signaling final German defeat .
Ironically , the Reichstag was disused since Hitler first came to power and millions of Soviets died to raise the flag .
These experiences have left Isakovich shaken as he reveals he tried to defect after the war in order to show the world the truth .
He was captured and sent to the gulag on Churkin 's orders .
Isakovich claims that " The first casualty of war is Truth " and the truth is in the pages of the book .
A man then steps forth and prepares to execute Isakovich , only to be killed by Churkin .
Churkin then allows Isakovich to escape the gulag to spread the truth before committing suicide , stating that he never looked at the pages of the book ever since it was recovered and he was not to survive Joseph Stalin 's next purge .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
THQ first announced the sequel to the acclaimed Company of Heroes in May 2012 .
THQ executive vice president of core games Danny Bilson noted that the publisher will continue working on Company of Heroes 2 following its launch next year .
On December 19 , 2012 , publisher THQ filed for bankruptcy just after postponing the release date of the video game .
The following month , on January 23 , 2013 , it was announced that THQ had sold Relic Entertainment to Sega for as part of an auction of the company 's properties in result of the bankruptcy .
Company of Heroes 2 takes advantage of DirectX 11 but also supports DirectX 10 .
The game also utilizes Valve 's Steamworks technology with matchmaking and achievements .
On March 6 , 2013 , Sega announced that Company of Heroes 2 would be released in North America and Europe on June 25 , 2013 .
A few weeks later , the company announced that the first closed beta will begin April 2 , 2013 .
The open beta was released to the public on June 4 , 2013 after the stress tests and the closed beta sessions were finished .
DOWNLOADABLE CONTENT Section::::Downloadable content .
Relic has released downloadable content for the game aside from the Theatre of War packs .
Commanders : Add new abilities and units to a players arsenal , which are available in skirmish and multiplayer matches .
A player can choose up to 3 commanders of which he can choose one during a skirmish .
This commander will then give access to 5 unique units / abilities .
However , some commanders have been given away for free at certain events by Relic .
Vehicle skins allow to alter the camouflage pattern of certain vehicles and tanks and are a purely cosmetic change .
Faceplates are another cosmetic change only visible in the main menu or loading screen .
With the release of the Western Front Armies DLC , the playable factions of the U.S. Forces ( USF ) and Oberkommando West ( OKW ) are available .
Relic had released The Western Front Armies and Ardennes Assault DLCs , which was released on June 24 , 2014 and November 18 , 2014 respectively .
Ardennes Assault added a new , non - linear campaign taking place in Belgium as the USF .
The third expansion of the game , titled The British Forces , was released on September 3 , 2015 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
PCWorld gave the game 3.5 out of five stars .
PC Gamer rated the game at 80 concluding , " Company of Heroes 2 is the USSR of real - time strategy games : huge , powerful and just a little bit broken .
"
IGN gave the game an 8.4 , saying , " More sequel - sized expansion than true successor , Company of Heroes 2 repeats many of the original Company of Heroes feats .
As of March 31 , 2014 , the game has sold 680,000 copies in Europe and North America .
The Ardennes Assault DLC received a similar score on Metacritic , with a score of 81 compared to the game 's score of 80 .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
Relic has been questioned by critics and historians about accuracy of its portrayal of the Eastern Front in World War II .
An article written for video game website Polygon by Colin Campbell reflecting on the subject stated that the " comments on forums and on Metacritic are testament to the strong feelings that the war still generates " .
In the same article , it cites the game 's director Quinn Duffy who in regards to the creative direction of the first and second game felt that " the second game is painted on a broader canvas " , whereas " in contrast , the first game focused on a small group of soldiers and did not seek to take a wider view " .
RECEPTION AND CRITICISM
IN RUSSIA Section::::Reception and criticism in Russia .
In Russia and Post - Soviet states the game was found offensive by many users and critics for portraying the Red Army commanders as cruel , using their own soldiers in an almost cold - blooded way , exaggerating brutal war tactics .
After the video made by the Russian blogger BadComedian ( real name - Evgeny Bazhenov ) , thousands of people have signed a Change.org petition demanding Steam to block the game in CIS countries .
The petition brands the game as " disgusting " .
In 2013 the sale of the game was banned in Russia .
Russian game publisher 1C - Softclub stopped distribution of the game on 26 July 2013 due to the strong negative feedback ( notably a petition to stop the sale that was filed by the game players ) .
Following the news , the game 's publisher SEGA released a statement that they were " taking this issue very seriously and are investigating these concerns thoroughly with all relevant partners " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS