I'LL HAVE ANOTHER
I 'll Have Another ( foaled April 1 , 2009 )
is a North American Thoroughbred race horse , bred in Kentucky , owned by Canadian businessman J. Paul Reddam and trained by Doug O'Neill .
In May 2012 , ridden by Mario Gutierrez , he won the first two legs of the Triple Crown by taking the Kentucky Derby with a time of 2:01.83 .
and the Preakness Stakes in 1:55.94 .
On the day before the Belmont Stakes , he was scratched due to tendonitis , ending his chances of winning the Triple Crown , and retired from racing .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
I 'll Have Another
is a chestnut horse sired by the Travers Stakes winner Flower Alley .
Flower Alley 's sire , Distorted Humor , was also the sire of 2003 Kentucky Derby winner Funny Cide .
In September 2010 , as a yearling , I 'll Have Another was sent to the Keeneland sales where he was bought for $ 11,000 by Victor M. Davila .
Davila , an exercise rider , broke and trained the colt before selling him as a two - year - old to J. Paul Reddam for $ 35,000 at the Ocala Breeder 's sale .
According to Reddam , the colt 's name is inspired by his reply when his wife asks if he wants more of her fresh - baked cookies : " I 'll Have Another . "
RACING CAREER 2011 : TWO - YEAR - OLD SEASON Section::::Racing career .
Section::::2011 : two - year - old season .
After winning on his racecourse debut in July 2011 , I 'll Have Another finished second to Creative Cause in the Grade II Best Pal Stakes at Del Mar in August .
He ran sixth of the ten runners behind Currency Swap in the Grade
I Hopeful Stakes on a sloppy track at Saratoga .
2012
: THREE - YEAR - OLD SEASON Section::::2012 : three - year - old season .
I 'll Have Another
began his three - year - old season by winning the Robert B. Lewis Stakes at Santa Anita on February 4 , as a 43/1 outsider .
In April , he won the Santa Anita Derby , staying on gamely to beat the favorite Creative Cause by a nose .
I 'll Have Another 's lead pony in the Kentucky Derby post parade on May 5 , 2012
was the retired gelding Lava Man , whom Doug O'Neill had trained previously .
As of Derby Day 2012 , Lava Man was the 27th - leading Thoroughbred money earner of all time , having won $ 5,268,706 in his racing career .
Lava Man had also accompanied I 'll Have Another to the post for his win in the Santa Anita Derby , the colt 's final Kentucky Derby prep .
Lava Man led I 'll Have Another to the post again at Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore , Maryland on May 19 , 2012 for the Preakness Stakes .
TRIPLE CROWN RACES Section::::Triple Crown races .
In the Kentucky Derby on May 5 , I 'll Have Another
started at odds of 15–1 in what was considered an unusually strong field .
In front of a record crowd of 165,307 , I 'll Have Another produced a strong finish to catch the front - running Bodemeister in the closing stages and win by one and a half lengths in a final time of 2:01.83 for 1 1/4 miles .
He is the first horse in the history of the Kentucky Derby to have won from post position 19 .
It was the Derby debut for his 25-year - old jockey Mario Gutierrez , who had not previously ridden in any of the Triple Crown races .
After the race , Gutierrez described I 'll Have Another as " an amazing horse " , and said that " from the first time I met him , I knew he was the one " .
In the Preakness Stakes on May 19 , I 'll Have Another was sent off at odds of 3–1 with Bodemeister starting favorite at 8–5 .
Gutierrez settled the colt in fourth place as Bodemeister set the pace from Creative Cause .
On the turn into the straight , I 'll Have Another passed Creative Cause to move into second place , and caught Bodemeister in the final strides to win by a neck , finishing the 1 3/16-mile race in a final time of 1:55.94 .
INJURY AND RETIREMENT Section::::Injury and retirement .
I 'll Have Another was drawn to run from the eleventh post position of the twelve runners , meaning that he would start on the outside of the field .
On the Friday before the Belmont Stakes was to run , trainer Doug O'Neill indicated that the horse was officially out of the race due to a tendon injury , ending his hopes of a Triple Crown .
At a news conference , the track veterinarian described the injury as slow - healing , requiring up to three to six months for recovery , and if the horse had raced , the risk of a bowed tendon would be very high .
Thus , trainer O'Neill announced that he and Reddam decided to retire the horse from racing .
He became the third horse , after Burgoo King in 1932 and Bold Venture in 1936 , to be scratched from the Belmont Stakes after having won the first two legs of the Triple Crown .
On July 11 the New York Times carried a report on the veterinary records of I 'll Have Another , which O'Neill had been required to submit to the New York racing authorities .
The records showed that the colt had been suffering from osteoarthritis .
Three veterinarians interviewed by The Blood - Horse magazine , stated that the medications used were phenylbutazone , dexamethazone and polyglycan , a glucosamine - based medication , all of which were routine and appropriate .
STUD CAREER Section::::Stud career .
On June 23 , 2012 , it was announced that I 'll Have Another had been sold with the intent that he would be exported to stand at stud at the Big Red Farm , located in Hokkaido , Japan , for the 2013 breeding season .
J. Paul Reddam stated on June 9 that Big Red Farm paid $ 10 million for
I 'll Have Another after he received only two offers from American breeding farms : one for $ 3 million , the other $ 2.5 million .
Reddam thought I 'll Have Another stood a better chance of success at stud in Japan , where he would receive higher - quality books of mares than he would have attracted in the U.S.
Reddam added that he would like to someday reacquire I 'll Have Another , if possible .
In 2013 , his first season in Japan , I 'll Have Another covered 152 mares , about 80 percent of whom became pregnant .
He commanded stud fees of 3.2 million yen , or about $ 31,000 .
On November 6 , 2018 , it was announced that I 'll Have Another would return to the U.S. for the 2019 breeding season to stand at stud at the Ballena Vista Farm in Ramona , California .
PEDIGREE
* I 'll Have Another
is linebred 4 × 4 to Mr. Prospector and Danzig , meaning that both these stallions appear twice in the fourth generation of his pedigree .
REFERENCES