TAKEN 2
Taken 2 is a 2012 English - language French action thriller film directed by Olivier Megaton and starring Liam Neeson , Maggie Grace , Famke Janssen , Rade Šerbedžija , Leland Orser , Jon Gries , D.B. Sweeney and Luke Grimes .
The film follows Bryan Mills taking his family to Istanbul , only to be kidnapped , along with his ex - wife , by the father of one of the men he killed while saving his daughter two years prior .
It is the sequel to the 2008 film Taken and the second installment in the Taken trilogy .
Released on 5 October 2012 , the film grossed over $ 376 million at the box office , but received largely negative reviews from critics .
A third film , Taken 3 , was released on 9 January 2015 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
At the funeral of his son Marko and associates in Tropojë , Albanian mafia head and low - lying freelance terrorist Murad Hoxha vows to seek vengeance on his son 's killer .
Travelling to Paris with his men , he interrogates and tortures former intelligence agent Jean - Claude Pitrel , whose business card was found at the scene of Marko 's death , but finds no information .
He then bribes a corrupt police official for Pitrel 's files and deduces that Pitrel 's old friend Bryan Mills was responsible and is in Istanbul .
Meanwhile , Bryan has just finished his three - day security job for a wealthy Arabian sheikh in Istanbul and is surprised by his ex - wife Lenore and daughter Kim .
While going out for lunch with Lenore the next day , Bryan spots Murad 's men following them .
He tells Lenore to run and tries to shake the Albanians , but finally surrenders when they capture Lenore .
Realizing that Kim is also a target , Bryan calls her at the hotel and tells her to hide , but then he is captured and knocked out .
She narrowly avoids capture when the kidnappers are forced to flee after shooting two security guards .
Regaining consciousness
, Bryan finds himself zip tied to a pipe over his head in an empty basement .
He uses a concealed miniature cell phone hidden in his sock to contact Kim and instruct her to alert the American Embassy ; instead she convinces him to let her help .
Opening her father 's equipment case , Kim takes a grenade and detonates it on a nearby rooftop ; the resulting sound allows Bryan to instruct her on triangulating his location .
The mobsters bring in Lenore , cut her throat slightly , and hang her upside down to bleed out .
As soon as they leave , Bryan frees himself and then her .
He next has Kim detonate two more grenades and releases some steam through a chimney to guide her to his location .
Kim tosses a gun down the chimney , which Bryan uses to kill his guards .
He rescues Kim , but watches Lenore get recaptured .
Stealing a taxi , Bryan and Kim pursue the kidnappers ' van , whereupon an SUV , driven by one of the kidnappers ' henchmen , arrives to distract them .
A chase and shootout ensue , alerting Turkish police and ending when Bryan manages to lure the SUV into the path of an oncoming train , taking it out .
Leaving Kim at the U.S. Embassy , Bryan uses his memory to find Murad 's hideout .
He rescues Lenore and pursues the surviving mobsters to a bathhouse , where he kills them .
Confronting Murad , Bryan offers to let him walk if he agrees to return home and cease his desire for revenge .
Murad agrees and Bryan drops his gun , but the former goes back on his word and tries to kill Bryan , only to find the gun unloaded .
Realizing that Murad will never drop his vendetta against him , Bryan kills him by impaling him onto a sharp towel hook .
Three weeks later , the Mills family is at a diner back in Los Angeles , having milkshakes to celebrate Kim passing her driving test .
They are joined , much to Bryan 's surprise , by Kim 's boyfriend Jamie , to which she jokingly tells her father not to " shoot this one " .
ALTERNATE VERSION Section::::Alternate Version .
In an alternate version , Bryan rescues Lenore after she is recaptured .
The taxi chase then takes place with Bryan , Kim and Lenore eventually making it to the U.S. Embassy .
He then leaves them both at the Embassy to " finish it " .
Olivier Megaton decided against this version as questions arose over Bryan 's motivation for pursuing Murad .
It is included as an extra on the DVD and Blu - ray releases .
CAST
* Liam Neeson as Bryan Mills * Maggie Grace as Kim Mills
* Famke Janssen as Lenore " Lennie " Mills - St .
John * Rade Šerbedžija as Murad Hoxha
* Leland Orser as Sam Gilroy * Jon Gries as Mark Casey
* D. B. Sweeney as Bernie Harris * Luke Grimes as Jamie Conrad * Olivier Rabourdin as Jean - Claude Pitrel * Kevork Malikyan as Inspector Durmaz
* Luenell as Kim 's driving instructor PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming took place throughout early 2012 ; Neeson and Grace shot their scenes in January in Los Angeles .
The Istanbul scenes were shot in November 2011 .
Some scenes were filmed during a week at the new film studios of the Cité du Cinéma founded by Luc Besson in Saint - Denis in France .
MUSIC Section::::Music . composed the score for Taken 2 , which was released on 1 October 2012 .
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing .
All songs written and composed by Nathaniel Méchaly except where noted .
RELEASE
Section::::Release . was screened on 7 September 2012 at the 38th Deauville American Film Festival .
It was theatrically released in more than 25 international markets , including North America , on 5 October 2012 .
The film was released under the title of " Busca Implacável 2 " in Brazil , " Venganza :
Conexión Estambul " in Spain , " Taken - La vendetta " in Italy and " Заложница 2 " in Russia .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Taken 2 grossed $ 139,854,287 in North America and $ 236,287,019 in other territories , which brings the film 's worldwide total to $ 376,141,306 against a budget of $ 45 million .
For its opening day in the North America , the film topped the box office and earned $ 18.4 million , $ 1.5 million of which came from midnight showings .
In its opening weekend , grossed $ 49.5 million in North America , playing in 3,661 theaters , with a $ 13,525 per - theatre average and debuting in the No . 1 spot , setting a new record for the highest - ever October opening in North America of a film rated PG-13 , and earned about $ 55 million in other markets .
During its second weekend at the North American box office , the film dropped 55.8 % from its first weekend and grossed $ 21.9 million while holding onto the No . 1 spot .
The film grossed a total of $ 3,385,094 in the Philippines by its fifth week .
The biggest market in foreign market in other territories being UK , France , Australia and South Korea where the film grossed $ 37.8 million , $ 24.4 million , $ 20.2 million and $ 15.5 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 21 % based on 165 reviews and an average rating of 4.2/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : " Taken 2 is largely bereft of the kinetic thrills — and surprises —
that made the original a hit .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 45 out of 100 , based on 35 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Roger Ebert , of the Chicago Sun - Times , gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , writing , " ' is slick , professional action " and concluding , " The cast is uniformly capable and dead serious , and if you 're buying what [ co - writer and producer ]
Luc Besson is selling , he 's not short - changing you . "
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " At a beefy 6-foot-4 , Liam Neeson certainly looks physically imposing , but it was the notion of casting someone who can actually act in an action hero role that was the counter - intuitive concept that made both films — ' is more a remake than a sequel — so successful . "
Bernard Besserglik of The Hollywood Reporter reviewed the film after its screening at Deauville , concluding , " There 's a touch of vigilante advocacy in the movie that will displease some , with Liam Neeson as a more gentlemanly version of the Charles Bronson of the Death Wish series , but clearly there 's still a market for such fantasies .
Moviegoers who liked Taken and want more of the same will get precisely that . "
John Anderson of The Wall Street Journal wrote that there is a " blind adherence to formula evident in most of ' .
As they might say in the advertising department , it 's an adrenaline - fuelled thrill ride .
But it could have been much more . "
Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C grade , writing , " You know what happens in ' , do n't you ?
The same thing that happened four years ago in Taken , but different .
( But the same . )
" and that ' " is simultaneously silly , nasty , a lazy festival of stereotypes , and a cleverly made piece of merchandise — i.e . , it 's the devil we know . "
Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times wrote that much of ' " seems like a nonstop car and foot chase , with Albanian after Albanian falling victim to Bryan 's remarkable aim and hand - fighting skills .
Foreigners bad , Americans good , box office busy . "
Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the film a C grade , writing , " What begins as a family outing , with a hint of rekindled romance between the parents , devolves into kidnapping ( the word ' taken ' gets thrown about liberally ) , torture , high - speed chases , and other misadventures probably not smiled upon by the Turkish Board of Tourism .
None of it is particularly novel or exciting . "
Scott Bowles of USA Today gave the film 2 1/2 stars out of 4 , writing , " The first half of ' is a serviceable action flick , but the second half descends into cliches " and " [ a]t times , ' even steps from the shadows of the original with some terrifying imagery and an improved relationship between father and daughter .
Alas , the movie ca n't help but descend into a pat part two , bereft of much suspense or tension . "
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film 2 stars out of 5 , concluding , " In the first movie , from the tailend of the Bush era , Liam was not shy about using Jack Bauerish torture techniques , wiring up evil - doers to the mains and zapping them with righteous volts .
None of that now .
That was a 15 ; this is a 12A , a bit tamer , just as ridiculous , but the premise is looking pretty tired . "
Joe Neumaier of the Daily News also gave the film 2 stars out of 5 , writing , " ' has a plot that could have been written by a GPS program , and contains all the technical charm that conjures up .
Yet somehow , Liam Neeson growls through this just - acceptable action sequel with his dignity intact , his wallet bigger and his movie family oblivious to all that occurred in 2009 's Taken . "
Neil Smith of Total Film gave the film 2 stars out of 5 , concluding , "
Yet while it 's fun to watch him take out the Eurotrash , we 've seen him do it better . "
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film 1 star out of 4 , writing , " You ca n't blame Liam Neeson , or the Taken producers , for trying to catch lightning in a bottle again .
What you can blame them for is ' , a sequel every bit as clumsy , ham - handed , outlandish and laughable as the original was sleek , tough and efficient . "
Audiences polled by the market research firm CinemaScore gave the film a B+ grade on average .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Award !
Category !
Recipient(s ) and nominee(s ) !
Result 39th
Saturn Awards
Best Action / Adventure Film Taken 2
39th People 's Choice Awards Favorite Dramatic Movie Actor Liam Neeson
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Taken 2 was released on DVD and Blu - ray on 16 January 2013 .
The Blu - ray version was released with both the theatrical and unrated extended edition .
, the film has sold 2,823,133 DVDs and 1,053,690 Blu - ray Discs and grossing $ 44,136,725 and $ 19,915,776 respectively totaling $ 64,052,501 in North America .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
Principal photography for Taken 3 began on 29 March 2014 , and was released on 9 January 2015 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Taken 2 at The Numbers