BABY DADDY
Baby Daddy is an American sitcom created by Dan Berendsen that premiered on June 20 , 2012 on ABC Family ( later Freeform ) .
The series follows Ben , a man in his twenties , who gets the surprise of his life when a one - night stand leaves his baby at his doorstep .
Ben decides to raise his little girl with the help of his brother , Danny , his two close friends , Riley and Tucker , and his sometimes - overbearing mother , Bonnie .
The show was inspired by an American film Three Men and a Baby which was released in 1987 .
Six seasons were produced in total , with the 100th , and final episode airing on May 22 , 2017 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Ben Wheeler , a twenty - something bachelor , suddenly becomes a father when his baby daughter Emma is left at his doorstep .
With the help of his overbearing mother Bonnie , his older brother Danny , and his two best friends Tucker and Riley , Ben works to turn his life around in order to provide for his daughter .
CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS
* Benjamin Bon Jovi " Ben " Wheeler ( Jean - Luc Bilodeau ) : The lead character of the series .
He was living the life of a bachelor as a bartender in New York City with his buddy Tucker and his older brother Danny .
His life was turned upside down when he opened his apartment door to find a baby girl left at his door by a one night stand .
The baby turned out to be his daughter Emma .
At the beginning of the series , Ben 's job was the same throughout the series , with the difference in season 4 when he and Danny became owners of the bar .
He and Riley , next - door - neighbor and childhood friend of Ben , dated briefly twice .
The relationship fails because Ben did n't live up to Riley 's expectations .
Eventually , it is revealed how strong Danny 's feelings are for Riley .
Ben initially denies this until Bonnie intervenes and points out that " Danny has loved Riley nearly his whole life " and tries to get the two together .
Throughout Season 6 , Ben constantly tries to find Elle , a girl he has fallen for after seeing her three times in the same day during the season 5 finale .
In the series finale , Elle is seen looking for Ben throughout the series as well .
At the conclusion of the series finale , Elle walks in to deliver Riley 's son and Ben immediately recognizes Elle and they end up going out .
* Tucker Thurgood Marshall Dobbs ( Tahj Mowry ) : Ben 's best friend and roommate .
Tucker is friendly towards everybody as long as they do n't eat his food .
Tucker has a love - hate and somewhat teasing relationship with Mrs. Wheeler .
Ben encouraged Tucker to drop out of law school to pursue a career in television .
When his father , Marshall Dobbs ( Phil Morris ) , finds out about this he is at first furious and disowns Tucker .
Mr. Dobbs later approves of Tucker 's career in the same episode .
Tucker has multiple relationships throughout the series but ultimately ends up with Sondra , a talkative fellow tenant whose voice is extremely shrill .
* Daniel Mellencamp " Danny " Wheeler ( Derek Theler ) : Ben 's older brother , who is a professional hockey player for the New York Rangers .
His little brother looks up to him , and is sometimes envious of Danny being better at everything .
It is mentioned many times that Danny is their mother 's favorite son , so much so that Mrs. Wheeler sometimes says she only has one son .
In Season 4 , Danny purchases Ben 's place of employment , " Bar on B " , for Ben .
Danny has also been in love with Riley ever since he was six .
Danny and Riley eventually end up together in seasons 5 .
In the season 5 finale , it is revealed that Riley is pregnant after Danny and Riley become very serious .
During Season 6 , Danny and Riley get married , and have a son .
* Bonnie N. Walker ( née Prapinski ; previously Wheeler ) ( Melissa Peterman ) : Ben and Danny 's mother .
She is a happy , outgoing , loud , and dramatic person who has a kind heart .
Bonnie loves her kids and her granddaughter more than anything .
She loves to drink ; her favorite wine is chardonnay .
It is hinted many times throughout the series that Bonnie might have a drinking problem .
Bonnie has an on and off relationship with Brad Walker since season 3 .
She later marries Brad in an elevator .
She had originally wanted to be a model but those plans changed after having Danny .
She later became a realtor .
Bonnie is in love with Bon Jovi , so much so that she named her second son " Benjamin Bon Jovi Wheeler " .
She describes herself as " a beautiful young woman with goals and ambitions . "
* Riley Perrin ( Chelsea Kane ) : Ben 's close friend and Danny 's best friend since they were little .
Although Riley dates Ben on and off during the first few seasons of the show , she falls for Danny towards the end of Season 4 , and subsequently begin a relationship with him .
During the Season 5 season finale , it is revealed that Riley is pregnant .
Danny and Riley get married in Season 6 , and she gives birth to their son in the series finale .
It has been said that she was extremely overweight in high school and , in the season 3 episode " Romancing the Phone " she says she lost 90 pounds .
When they were kids , her nickname was " Rigantor " and could beat up the boys , enjoyed watching professional wrestling with Danny , and played field hockey as well as street hockey .
She is highly intelligent .
Despite having some difficulty with the LSATs , she did well enough to get accepted into law school .
Riley is also extremely competitive .
She has liked Ben ever since they were young , but only Danny initially knew .
In the episode " Send in the Clowns " , it is revealed that her aunt was her real mother .
In the episode " House of Cards , " she mentions a sister , presumably her cousin in reality , whom she claims to " hate " .
* Emma Wheeler ( Ali Louise and Susanne Allan Hartman in season 1 ; Mila and Zoey Beske in season 2 ; Ember and Harper Husak in season 3 ; Sura and Kayleigh Harris in seasons 4–6 ) : Ben 's daughter , who was left at his door by a one night stand .
Angela , Emma 's mother , and Ben went on with their lives until she realized she was pregnant and gave birth to the child .
Deciding that her acting career was more important than raising a child , she left Emma at Ben 's front door and gave him full custody of Emma .
RECURRING CHARACTERS
* Brad Walker ( Peter Porte ) : A handsome real estate agent who had an on and off relationship with Bonnie since season 3 .
He had a twin brother named Tad .
On the season 4 episode " Parental Guidance " , Brad proposed to Bonnie , with her saying yes .
Brad and Bonnie officially got married in season 5 .
*
Dr. Amy Shaw ( Lacey Chabert ) : A psychologist for the New York Rangers and Danny 's girlfriend in season 2 .
She cares deeply for Danny but is constantly worried his feelings for Riley will drive him away .
She eventually realizes Danny still has feelings for Riley and breaks up with him in the episode " Surprise ! " .
In season 3 , Amy shows up and announces that she is engaged to another man .
* Fitch Douglas ( Matt Dallas ) : Son of a millionaire and Riley 's boyfriend in season 2 .
Fitch does not speak to his family for he feels their money corrupts them .
He constantly travels to Africa to help the children and orphanages , having a long distance relationship with Riley .
He is seemingly killed in Africa but later turns up alive at his memorial and proposes to Riley .
She regretfully declines claiming she is not the one for him .
In season 3 , he comes back and Riley attempts to make him her rebound to forget Ben .
* Philip Farlow ( Christopher O'Shea ) : A college professor whom Riley briefly dated in season 3 .
* Georgie Farlow ( Mallory Jansen ) :
Philip 's sister who briefly dated Ben , but later developed feelings for Danny in season 3 .
She is a fashion photographer for Vogue magazine .
She does n't like Riley , but begins to accept her for Danny 's sake in the episode " Foos it or Lose It " .
She breaks up with Danny via voicemail at the beginning of season 4 .
* Angela ( Mimi Gianopulos ) : The mother of Emma and the ex - girlfriend of Ben .
When her daughter was 3 months old , she abandoned her on Ben 's doorstep .
She 's an aspiring actress who had since moved to California .
Although she appears in several episodes , Angela never took the role of Emma 's mother as she would often place her career first .
* Megan ( Grace Phipps ) : A day care worker whom Ben dated in season 2 .
She broke up with him after he almost lost her dog .
* Ray Wheeler ( Greg Grunberg ) : Ben and Danny 's father .
He is divorced from Bonnie and does n't get along with her .
He makes amends with Bonnie by finally telling his family that he 's in a relationship with a man named Steve ( Robert Gant ) .
*
Sondra ( Rachna Khatau ) : A neighbor who 's known for her talkativeness and distinctive high - pitched voice .
* Robyn ( Christa B. Allen ) : Riley 's co worker and Danny 's girlfriend in season 4 .
*
Zoey ( Jonna Walsh ) : A single mother living in the same building as Ben , introduced in season 5 .
She shares the same interests as Ben , but is reluctant to give in to her romantic feelings because of Ben 's immaturity .
* Sam Saffe ( Daniella Monet ) : The manager of the Bar on B in season 5 .
She went to highschool with Ben , Danny and Riley .
Ben had a crush on her in high school
but she never reciprocated his feelings .
She and Riley did not like each other , despite frequent attempts in both ends to become friends .
Sam briefly dates Ben in season 5 .
* Elle ( Katie Gill ) : A woman that Ben has met a few brief times and is convinced is his soulmate .
* Carter ( Jase Whitaker ) : Ben 's bartender co - worker at the bar Ben eventually ends up owning .
EPISODES DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
The series was given a green - light on February 2 , 2012 and began production on March 28 , 2012 .
On August 17 , 2012 , the series renewed for a second season , which premiered on May 29 , 2013 .
On March 22 , 2013 , ABC Family announced that Baby Daddy was renewed for a third season , two months before the second season premiered .
The third season premiered on January 15 , 2014 .
Baby Daddy was renewed for a fourth season on March 17 , 2014 .
It premiered on October 22 , 2014 , with the series ' first Halloween episode " Strip or Treat " .
On February 27 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a fifth season .
It premiered on February 3 , 2016 .
On June 27 , 2016 , Freeform renewed the show for a sixth season .
It premiered on March 13 , 2017 .
On May 13 , 2017 , TVLine announced that the series would end at the conclusion of its sixth season .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series premiered in the United States on June 20 , 2012 , on ABC Family .
In New Zealand , the show premiered on TVNZ 's TV2 beginning on December 14 , 2013 .
In Australia , the series airs on Fox8 , with season 1 premiering 29 September 2013 , with season 2 returning on 4 May 2014 , and season 3 returning 24 August 2014 .
In the United Kingdom , the series began airing on E4 on February 16 , 2015 .
The second season started on March 2 , 2015 .
Series 3 aired in April 2015 .
Series 4 aired in September 2015 .
Series 5 will premiere 5th September 2016 .
In Israel , the series airs weeknights ( two episodes each ) since July 2016 .
In South Africa , the series aired on 5 September 2015 .
In Italy , the series began airing on Joi Premium , pay channel on the DTT platform Mediaset Premium from 22 February 2013 to 22 March 2013 .
The second , third , fourth and fifth seasons were broadcast on the streaming platform Mediaset Infinity from 2015 to 2016 .
The sixth season were made entirely available on October 4 , 2017 on the streaming platform Mediaset Infinity .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
+ Awards and nominations for Baby Daddy !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Nominee !
Result RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Baby Daddy received mixed reviews .
On Metacritic , the first season of the show holds a 51 out of 100 Metascore based on 8 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the series holds a 36 % approval rating based on 11 reviews , with an average rating of 5.08/10 .
Audience score holds 84 % ( Season 1 ) , 86 % ( Season 2 ) , 90 % ( Season 3 ) , 93 % ( Seasons 4 and 5 ) , 100 % ( Season 6 ) .
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Baby Daddy on TheTVDB