HARLEY - DAVIDSON INDIA
Harley - Davidson India is a wholly owned subsidiary of Harley - Davidson , based in Gurgaon , Haryana , India .
Harley - Davidson India commenced operations in August 2009 and appointed its first dealership in July 2010 .
Harley - Davidson offers a range of 11 models in India from each of its six platforms – Sportster , Dyna , Softail , V - Rod , Touring and Street – in addition to a full range of parts , accessories , and general merchandise , available through authorized dealerships .
The company has 16 dealership facilities across India : New Delhi , Gurgaon , Chandigarh , Mumbai , Hyderabad , Bangalore , Chennai , Kochi , Kolkata , Ahmedabad , Indore , Pune , Goa , Guwahati and Jaipur .
In 2011 , The company has also set up an assembly unit at Bawal , Haryana .
In 2011 , Harley - Davidson India began the assembly of its Sportster line followed by the assembly of the Dyna line in 2012 and Softail line in 2013 .
In 2014 , Harley - Davidson began manufacturing the Street 750 and 500 motorcycles in India - at Bawal , Haryana India , its only manufacturing facility outside of the US .
The Street platform is jointly manufactured at Harley - Davidson 's US and India plants .
The Street 750 is also exported to Europe and Asia markets from India .
Harley - Davidson India also sponsors the country 's Harley Owners Group ( H.O.G. ) .
The company organizes five big rides across the north , south , east and west zones along with the India H.O.G. Rally that takes place every year in Goa .
In 2009 , Harley - Davidson India also established its annual rock music tour – Harley Rock Riders .
Harley Davidson will expand its reach in small cities in India .
" We are expanding our footprints in tier - II cities in India , " Vikram Pawah , Harley Davidson 's Managing Director for Indian operations , told PTI .
The United States ambassador to India , Timothy J. Roemer , attended the opening ceremonies for H - D India 's Gurgaon headquarters on May 6 , 2010 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 2009 , Harley - Davidson announced plans to establish a subsidiary to be located in Gurgaon , near Delhi .
Plans to enter the Indian market were delayed for several years , due to high tariffs and emissions regulations .
The pollution regulations have recently changed , but the tariff problem is yet unresolved .
In 2007 , U.S. Trade Representative Susan Schwab and the Minister for Commerce and Industry of India , Kamal Nath , had agreed that Harley - Davidson motorcycles will be allowed access to the Indian market in exchange for the export of Indian mangoes .
One Indian commentator called this " mango diplomacy . "
However , India had not specified emission standards for motorcycles over 500 cc displacement , effectively prohibiting the import of Harley - Davidsons , along with most models of other manufacturers .
Plans to export to India were also held up by import duties of 60 % and taxes of 30 % , which effectively doubled the sale price .
A Harley - Davidson spokesman said the company thinks demand is high enough to overcome the tariffs , and ( then ) chief operating officer Matthew Levatich said they would continue to push for lower tariffs .
Levatich has since been promoted to chief executive officer .
Harley - Davidson is introducing 12 models in India from the range of five motorcycle families , namely Sportster , Dyna , VRSC , Softail and CVO .
The motorcycles are completely built units and will be imported to India , thus attracting a tax over 100 % in the price range of 695,000 rupees and 3,495,000 rupees ex - showroom .
The bookings might start from April 2010 and the motorcycle delivery will commence from June 2010 .
To begin with , Harley - Davidson would have five dealerships ( Delhi , Mumbai , Bangalore , Hyderabad and Chandigarh ) with the aim of increasing the dealerships to more than 20 in the next five years .
In November 2010 , Harley - Davidson said that it will start an assembly facility for complete knock down ( CKD ) kits of its motorcycles in India by the first half of 2011 , making it only the second CKD facility outside the US .
In 2014 Harley began production of their Harley - Davidson Street 500 and 750 models in India for domestic sales and export .
REFERENCES