DAWN OF THE PLANET OF THE APES Dawn of the Planet of the Apes is a 2014 American science fiction film directed by Matt Reeves and written by Mark Bomback , Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver .
It stars Andy Serkis , Jason Clarke , Gary Oldman , Keri Russell , Toby Kebbell , and Kodi Smit - McPhee .
It is the sequel to the 2011 film Rise of the Planet of the Apes , which began 20th Century Fox 's reboot of the original Planet of the Apes series .
Dawn is set ten years after the events of Rise , and follows a group of people in San Francisco who struggle to stay alive in the aftermath of a plague that is wiping out humanity , while Caesar tries to maintain dominance over his community of intelligent apes .
Dawn of the Planet of the Apes was released in the United States on July 11 , 2014 and was met with highly positive reviews , with critics praising its visual effects , story , direction , acting , musical score , action sequences and emotional depth .
It was also a box office success , grossing over $ 710 million worldwide , and making it the eighth - highest - grossing film of 2014 .
The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects .
It was also nominated for eight Saturn Awards , including Best Science Fiction Film , Best Director for Reeves , and Best Supporting Actor for Serkis .
A third installment , titled War for the Planet of the Apes , was released on July 14 , 2017 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ten years after the pandemic of the deadly ALZ-113 virus , later called Simian Flu , the worldwide human population was drastically reduced , with only about one in five hundred genetically immune to the virus .
Meanwhile , the apes , under the chimpanzee Caesar , all bestowed with genetically enhanced intelligence by the virus , have long established a colony in the Muir Woods near San Francisco .
One day , a group of humans led by a man named Malcolm enter the apes ' territory from San Francisco in search of a hydroelectric dam that would restore power to the city .
An encounter by Caesar 's son Blue Eyes and his friend Ash leads to the latter 's injury by a man named Carver .
Malcolm manages to prevent further escalation while Caesar orders the humans to leave .
Prompted by Koba , a scarred bonobo who holds a grudge against humans for his mistreatment as a test subject , Caesar brings his army to the humans ' community at an unfinished tower as a display of strength .
Caesar announces his intent to fight the humans if forced to while demanding the humans to stay in their territory .
Malcolm convinces his fellow leader Dreyfus to give him time to take a small team to the forest and reconcile with the apes so they can access the dam .
He meets with Caesar , who allows them to work on the generator on the condition that they surrender their guns .
As Malcolm , his wife Ellie , and son Alexander work , they bond with the apes .
The fragile bonding is greatly helped when Ellie , a nurse , effectively treats Caesar 's wife Cornelia 's illness .
Meanwhile , Dreyfus arms his community using the Fort Point armory .
Koba discovers the armory and confronts Caesar of this , but accuses him of loving humans more than apes .
Caesar beats Koba in response but refrains from killing him .
Koba later returns to the armory and takes an assault rifle , killing two guards and then Carver as the humans succeed in repairing the generator and restoring power to the city .
Koba takes advantage of their celebration to covertly set fire to the apes ' home .
He then shoots Caesar , who falls into the underbrush below , and frames the humans for Caesar 's apparent death in order to wage war .
Koba quickly takes command and leads the apes into San Francisco , where they plunder the armory and mount an assault on the tower .
The apes breach the building and imprison the humans as Dreyfus flees underground .
When Ash refuses Koba 's orders to kill unarmed humans , citing Caesar 's teachings , Koba throws the ape to his death and has any other ape loyal to Caesar imprisoned .
Malcolm 's family finds Caesar barely alive and transports him to his former house in San Francisco .
Caesar reveals that Koba shot him and confesses that apes can be as corrupt and violent as humans .
When Malcolm sneaks into the settlement to find medical supplies for Caesar , he encounters Blue Eyes , who spares him before learning that his father is still alive and that it was Koba who shot him , not the humans .
After reconciling with Caesar , Blue Eyes returns to the tower and frees the imprisoned humans and apes .
Malcolm escorts the apes into the tower , and then finds Dreyfus .
He learns that the return of electricity allowed Dreyfus ' men to make radio contact with survivors at a military base , who are now coming to fight the apes .
Caesar confronts Koba at the top of the tower ; as they fight , Dreyfus detonates C-4 charges that destabilize the tower in a failed attempt to kill the apes , at the cost of his own life .
Koba starts angrily shooting at the apes , but Caesar tackles him off a ledge .
While clinging on a metal girder , Koba is disowned as an ape by Caesar and dropped to his death .
Malcolm and Caesar acknowledge their friendship , with Malcolm warning of the approaching human military .
Caesar responds that the humans will never forgive the apes for their attack and convinces Malcolm to leave with his family .
He then stands before a kneeling mass of apes , preparing for war .
CAST APES * Andy Serkis as Caesar , a common chimpanzee and leader of the evolved ape tribe .
* Toby Kebbell as Koba , a scarred bonobo and Caesar 's treacherous lieutenant ; previously played by Christopher Gordon in Rise .
* Judy Greer as Cornelia , a common chimpanzee and Caesar 's wife , mother of Blue Eyes and a newborn son ; previously played by Devyn Dalton in Rise .
* Terry Notary as Rocket , a common chimpanzee , Caesar 's former rival turned friend and loyal lieutenant .
* Karin Konoval as Maurice , a Bornean orangutan and Caesar 's loyal friend and adviser .
* Nick Thurston as Blue Eyes , a common chimpanzee and Caesar and Cornelia 's first son .
* Doc Shaw as Ash , a common chimpanzee , son of Rocket , also Blue Eyes ' best friend .
* Lee Ross as Grey , a common chimpanzee and a follower of Koba .
HUMANS
* Jason Clarke as Malcolm , the leader of the small group that forms a strong bond with Caesar and the other apes * Gary Oldman as Dreyfus , the leader of the remaining human survivors * Keri Russell as Ellie , a former nurse at the CDC , and Malcolm 's wife
* Kodi Smit - McPhee as Alexander , Malcolm 's son from a previous marriage * Kirk Acevedo as Carver , a former San Francisco water worker and a member of Malcolm 's group .
* Jocko Sims as Werner , the colony 's radio operator * Enrique Murciano as Kemp , a member of Malcolm 's group * Keir O'Donnell as Finney , an ally of Dreyfus * Lombardo Boyar as Terry , a guard at the colony 's armory * Kevin Rankin as McVeigh , a guard at the colony 's
armory
* Jon Eyez as Foster , a member of Malcolm 's group
* James Franco ( uncredited ) as Will Rodman from Rise of the Planet of the Apes , in a cameo via a video from Caesar 's childhood
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
After the release of Rise of the Planet of the Apes , director Rupert Wyatt commented on possible sequels : " I think we 're ending with certain questions , which is quite exciting .
To me , I can think of all sorts of sequels to this film , but this is just the beginning . "
Screenwriter and producer Rick Jaffa also stated that Rise featured several clues as to future sequels : " I hope that we 're building a platform for future films .
We 're trying to plant a lot of the seeds for a lot of the things you are talking about in terms of the different apes and so forth . "
In an interview recorded after the release of Rise , Wyatt stated , " We want to grow and evolve , in the films that will [ hopefully ] come after this , to the ' 68 original . "
Wyatt also stated that he wants it to take place eight years after Rise , as a whole new ape generation can be born , and explore the dynamics of Caesar and Koba 's relationship .
According to screenwriter Rick Jaffa , a version of the spaceship from the 1968 Planet of the Apes under the name Icarus was in Rise as a deliberate hint to a possible sequel .
In November 2011 , Andy Serkis was the first to be announced as having closed a deal for a sequel to Rise .
It was reported to be a " healthy seven - figure deal " for him to reprise his role as Caesar , the ape leader .
On May 15 , 2012 , it was announced Scott Z. Burns had been hired to do rewrites on the original screenplay by Rise writers Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver .
On May 31 , 2012 , 20th Century Fox announced that the sequel would be titled Dawn of the Planet of the Apes .
On September 17 , 2012 , there were reports that director Wyatt was considering leaving the sequel due to his concern that a May 2014 release date would not give him enough time to make the film properly .
On October 1 , Cloverfield director Matt Reeves was confirmed as his replacement .
Reeves had been working on developing a new Twilight Zone film .
On October 18 , Mark Bomback , writer of Live Free or Die Hard , was reported to be doing a re - write for Reeves .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In December 2012 , after the departure of director Wyatt , James Franco speculated that he would not be returning for the sequel , saying , " Now Rupert 's not a part of it
so I do n't know .
My guess is I wo n't be in it .
Nobody 's talked to me since Rupert left . "
Later , Matt Reeves revealed that Franco would be seen in a cameo in the film .
Freida Pinto , who played primatologist Caroline Aranha in Rise , confirmed that she would not be returning for Dawn .
In April 2014 , when asked by IGN about the fate of Franco and Pinto 's characters , producer Dylan Clark said , " I mean , they 're the ones that died ...
They were ground zero of the virus . "
In February 2013 , actors Gary Oldman , Jason Clarke , and Kodi Smit - McPhee were cast in lead roles for the sequel , set ten years after the events from the first film .
In March 2013 , actress Keri Russell was cast in a role .
That same month , Judy Greer was cast as Cornelia , a female chimp and love interest for Caesar .
Toby Kebbell , Enrique Murciano and Kirk Acevedo joined the cast during filming .
On May 15 , 2013 , Jocko Sims was cast in a supporting role of military operative Werner .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming began in April 2013 around the town of Campbell River , British Columbia .
The location of Vancouver Island was chosen for its similarity to the locations depicted in the film , the forests , and the variety of landscapes .
Filming in New Orleans started in May 2013 and continued in July 2013 at various locations such as the former Six Flags park Six Flags New Orleans .
VISUAL EFFECTS Section::::Visual effects .
Like Rise , visual effects for Dawn were done by Weta Digital .
In addition to the apes , Weta created other digital animals , such as a herd of elk , a grizzly bear , and CG doubles of the live horses .
The elk were created using key - frame animation and the digital crowd enhancement software MASSIVE , the bear through key - frame animation , and the horses with a mixture of key - frame animation and motion capture .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's score was composed by Michael Giacchino .
The soundtrack was released by Sony Masterworks on July 8 , 2014 .
Track listing RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On May 31 , 2012 , Fox announced that Dawn of the Planet of the Apes was scheduled for release on May 23 , 2014 .
It was announced on June 20 , 2013 that the release date for Dawn was being pushed back two months to July 18 , 2014 .
On December 10 , 2013 , the film was pushed up one week to July 11 , 2014 .
The film premiered at the Palace of Fine Arts in San Francisco , California on June 26 , 2014 .
The film closed the 36th Moscow International Film Festival on June 28 .
In Hungary , the largest cinema chain called Cinema City could not agree with the film 's distributor , InterCom , and as a result it opened on July 17 , 2014 on 45 screens , significantly fewer than similar big - budget productions .
However , the film still managed to top the weekend box office chart of the country beating , which had been leading the chart for three weeks ( on 105 screens distributed by UIP Duna ) .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A viral marketing campaign for the film launched in July 2013 included a " simian flu " website and mock PSA videos .
20th Century Fox and Vice Media 's Motherboard released three short films online in July 2014 which document the ten - year gap between the events of Rise of the Planet of the Apes and Dawn of the Planet of the Apes .
A novel titled Dawn of the Planet of the Apes : Firestorm which is also set between the events of the first two films was published in May 2014 by Titan Books .
A partnership with 20th Century Fox and Ndemic Creations saw mobile / PC game Plague Inc. get a Dawn of the Planet of the Apes - themed update on July 10 , 2014 .
It allows players to create and customize a simian flu virus to infect the world and eradicate humanity whilst helping apes survive .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Dawn of the Planet of the Apes was a success at the box office with many critics calling it " the summer 's best popcorn film " , and Deadline Hollywood commented saying it is " a franchise that will keep going and going , unless they screw it up " .
The film grossed $ 208,545,589 in the USA & Canada , and $ 500,290,000 in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 708,835,589 .
Calculating in all expenses and revenues , Deadline Hollywood estimated that the film made a net profit of $ 182.18 million .
It had a worldwide opening of $ 103.3 million which was the 11th - highest of 2014 .
Worldwide it is the highest - grossing film in the Planet of the Apes franchise and the eighth - highest - grossing film of 2014 .
In the United States and Canada , the film is the highest - grossing film in the Planet of the Apes franchise , unadjusted for inflation and the eighth - highest - grossing film of 2014 .
It opened on July 11 , 2014 across 3,967 theaters and topped the box office on its opening day earning $ 27.7 million ( including previews ) .
During its traditional three - opening , the film debuted at number one earning $ 72.6 million , which was 33 % higher than its predecessor .
Box Office Mojo pointed out that the film 's good word of mouth as well as its predecessors ' , its darker tone , attachment of new characters and the first film 's way of ending were all determining factors in the film 's strong opening .
It remained at the summit for two consecutive weekends in North America despite facing competition with in its second week .
Dawn of the Planet of the Apes earned $ 31.3 million during its opening weekend internationally from 4,913 screens in 26 markets where it opened at No . 1 in 14 of those .
International opening weekend tallies of more than $ 5 million were witnessed in the UK ( $ 14.88 million ) , Mexico ( $ 12.94 million ) , South Korea ( $ 11.5 million ) , Russia ( $ 9.99 million ) , Brazil with ( $ 9.2 million ) and Australia ( $ 6.6 million ) .
The film topped the box office outside North America for two non - consecutive weekends .
The film became a massive financial success in China where it opened with $ 47 million on its opening weekend there .
The robust debut helped the film top the international charts for the first time dethroning Guardians of the Galaxy and aided the film in passing $ 400 million internationally and $ 600 million globally .
Fox reported that the sequel 's debut in China was one of the best in history for a Western title , save for Iron Man 3 , and at that time .
After playing for a month in theaters , it passed $ 100 million on its fourth weekend and became the fourth Hollywood film of the year to achieve such a milestone .
In total , it went on to make $ 107.4 million there , of which the studio received $ 26.8 million profit .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Dawn of the Planet of the Apes received critical acclaim upon release .
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , it holds a score of 90 % based on 295 reviews with a rating average of 7.9/10 .
The website 's consensus reads : " With intelligence and emotional resonance to match its stunning special effects , Dawn of the Planet of the Apes expands on its predecessor with an exciting and ambitious burst of sci - fi achievement . "
On review aggregator Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average , the film has a " generally favorable " rating score of 79 out of 100 based on 48 reviews .
Guy Lodge of Variety said , " An altogether smashing sequel to 2011 's better - than - expected Rise of the Planet of the Apes , this vivid , violent extension of humanoid ape Caesar 's troubled quest for independence bests its predecessor in nearly every technical and conceptual department , with incoming helmer Matt Reeves conducting the proceedings with more assertive genre elan than Rise journeyman Rupert Wyatt . "
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter stated that the film " manages to do at least three things exceptionally well
that are hard enough to pull off individually : Maintain a simmering level of tension without let - up for two hours , seriously improve on a very good first entry in a franchise and produce a powerful humanistic statement using a significantly simian cast of characters .
In the annals of sequels , Dawn is to Rise of the Planet of the Apes what The Empire Strikes Back was to Star Wars — it 's that much better . "
Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph said , " There 's evident patience and intelligence to the filmmaking all over , as well as an engagement with genuine ideas about diplomacy , deterrence , law and leadership .
However often it risks monkey - mad silliness , it 's impressively un - stupid .
"
Drew McWeeny of HitFix awarded the film an " A+ " grade and said " Dawn is not just a good genre movie or a good summer movie .
It 's a great science - fiction film , full - stop , and one of the year 's very best movies so far . "
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that " in bearing , speech , and agonized expressiveness , Serkis 's Caesar conveys the conflicts of a king with almost Shakespearean grandeur . "
A. O. Scott of The New York Times praised the film for being able to balance out the action sequences and special effects with strong storytelling , writing that " Dawn is more than a bunch of occasionally thrilling action sequences , emotional gut punches and throwaway jokes arranged in predictable sequence .
It is technically impressive and viscerally exciting , for sure , but it also gives you a lot to think , and even to care , about . "
Less favorable reviews included Andrew O'Hehir at Salon.com who wrote , " Here 's a rule that has gradually become clear to me :
Any film that begins with one of those fake - news montages , where snippets of genuine CNN footage are stitched together to concoct a feeling of semi - urgency around its hackneyed apocalypse , already sucks even before it gets started .
This one makes a dutiful attempt to struggle back from that suckage , but it all ends in yelling . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Dawn of the Planet of the Apes was released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu - ray 3D , Blu - ray , and DVD on December 2 , 2014 .
According to Nielsen VideoScan , it subsequently became the best - selling home video release for the week .
ACCOLADES
THIRD FILM
Section::::Third film .
After seeing his cut of Dawn , 20th Century Fox and Chernin Entertainment signed Matt Reeves to return as director for a third installment of the reboot series .
On January 6 , 2014 , Fox announced Reeves to direct as well as co - write along with Bomback , with a planned July 2016 release .
Peter Chernin , Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver will produce .
In January 2015 , Fox delayed the release to July 14 , 2017 .
On May 14 , 2015 , the title was given as War of the Planet of the Apes .
In September 2015 , it was announced that Woody Harrelson had been cast as the film 's antagonist .
In October 2015 , Steve Zahn was cast as a new ape in the film , retitled as War for the Planet of the Apes .
SEE ALSO * Uplift ( science fiction )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS