MARCO POLO ( TV SERIES )
Marco Polo is an American drama web television series inspired by Marco Polo 's early years in the court of Kublai Khan , the Khagan of the Mongol Empire and the founder of the Yuan dynasty ( 1271–1368 ) .
The show premiered on Netflix on December 12 , 2014 .
The series was written and created by John Fusco and stars Lorenzo Richelmy in the title role with Benedict Wong as Kublai Khan .
The series is produced by The Weinstein Company .
On January 7 , 2015 , Marco Polo was renewed by Netflix for a 10-episode second season , which premiered on July 1 , 2016 .
On December 12 , 2016 , Netflix announced they had canceled Marco Polo after two seasons .
Sources told The Hollywood Reporter that the series ' two seasons resulted in a $ 200 million loss for Netflix , and the decision to cancel the series was jointly taken by Netflix and The Weinstein Company .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN Section::::Cast and characters . Section::::Main . ! scope="col " rowspan="2 " Actor ! scope="col
" rowspan="2 " Character ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Seasons 1 2
Lorenzo Richelmy
Marco Polo Benedict Wong Kublai Khan
Joan Chen Empress Chabi
Remy Hii Crown Prince Jingim
Uli Latukefu
Byamba Zhu Zhu Nergui / Princess Kokachin
Mahesh Jadu
Ahmad Tom Wu
Li Jinbao a.k.a .
" Hundred Eyes " Olivia Cheng Jia Mei Lin Rick Yune Kaidu Khan Pierfrancesco Favino Niccolò Polo Amr Waked Vice Regent Yusuf Chin Han Chancellor Jia Sidao Claudia Kim Princess Khutulun Jacqueline Chan Shabkana Khatun Ron Yuan Prince Nayan Leonard Wu Prince Orus Michelle Yeoh Lotus Thomas Chaanhing Gerel Khan Chris Pang Arban Khan Gabriel Byrne Pope Gregory X RECURRING Section::::Recurring .
!
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Actor !
scope="col " rowspan="2 " Character ! scope="col " colspan="2 " Seasons 1 2 Chloe Luthi & Jaime Chew +
Princess Ling Ling
Max Kellady Emperor Gong of Song Esther Low
Princess Kokachin
Tan Kheng Hua
Empress Dowager Xie
Daoqing Patrick Teoh General Red Brow Lawrence Makoare
Za Bing
Nicholas Bloodworth Tulga
Shu An Oon
Jing Fei
Vanessa Vanderstraaten
Princess Sorga
Corrado Invernizzi
Maffeo Polo Baljinnyamyn Amarsaikhan Ariq Böke
Jason Chong
General Kasar
Daniel Tuiara
Sukh + Luthi portrays Ling Ling in season 1 ,
Chew in season 2 .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series was originally developed at Starz , which had picked up the series in January 2012 .
After attempts to film in China failed , the project was released back to The Weinstein Company .
Netflix then picked up the series for a 10-episode season , for approximately $ 90 million , making it one of the most expensive TV shows in the world , second to Game of Thrones .
The project was officially announced at Netflix in January 2014 .
Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg serve as executive producers and directed the pilot and second episodes , " The Wayfarer " and " The Wolf and the Deer " , respectively .
The series was filmed in Kazakhstan , Italy , and at Pinewood Studios in Malaysia , not to mention at outdoor locations in Malaysia , particularly tropical wilderness , as well as Slovakia and Hungary .
Kazakhstan doubled as the steppes of Mongolia , Malaysia was the base of operations as well as serving as a location , Hungary provided a setting for Renaissance Rome , and Slovakia provided some mountain settings for Season 2 .
Stuntman Ju Kun was working on the show alongside fight choreographer Brett Chan , but went missing with the disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 during pre - production .
To prepare for her role as Chabi , Joan Chen read the book The Secret History of the Mongol Queens by Jack Weatherford , as she wanted her performance to reflect the culture of the time period .
During his extensive research , show creator John Fusco traveled the Silk Road by horseback and also crossed the Ming Sha Dunes of Western China on camel .
In Venice , Italy he sought out and studied the Last Will and Testament of Marco Polo .
While some Mongolian viewers and experts view it as " riddled with historical errors " , many have praised the series .
Orgil Narangerel , who played Genghis Khan in a BBC documentary , said it was more accurate than any previous foreign portrayal of Mongolian culture . "
As a Mongol and an artist , Marco Polo makes me feel like our dreams are coming true , " he told AFP .
" I watched all 10 episodes in just one day . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The series featured music by Mongolian bands Altan Urag and Batzorig Vaanchig of Asia 's Got Talent , who cameoed as a singer .
Daniele Luppi composed the main theme , whilst Peter Nashel and Eric V. Hachikian are composers of the original score .
EPISODES SEASON 1 CHRISTMAS SPECIAL SEASON 2
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The first season of Marco Polo was met with negative reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the first season holds a rating of 24 % , based on 33 reviews , with a rating average of 4.7/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " An all - around disappointment , Marco Polo is less entertaining than a round of the game that shares its name . "
On Metacritic , the show 's first season has a score of 48 out of 100 based on 21 reviews by critics , indicating " mixed reviews " .
In his review for Entertainment Weekly , Jeff Jensen gave the first season a " B− " rating , calling the premise " stale " , but added " Somewhere in the middle of episode 2 , though , Marco Polo becomes surprisingly watchable .
The filmmaking becomes bolder .
" Writing for People , Tom Gliatto praised the series , calling it " ... a fun , body - flinging , old - fashioned epic " .
USA Today reviewer Robert Bianco gave the series 1 stars out of 4 , saying , " Clearly what Netflix hopes you 'll see a [ sic ] big - bucks , prestige entertainment along the lines of that HBO fantasy epic , but in truth , Marco is far closer to one of those cheesy international syndicated adventures . "
In 2015 , the President of Mongolia Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj presented John Fusco and the Marco Polo creative team with an award , honoring their positive portrayal and global presentation of Mongolian subject matter .
Fusco , himself , has described the series as historical fiction , based on the accounts of the Venetian traveler Marco Polo .
ACCOLADES Primetime Emmy Awards
Outstanding Original Main Title Theme Music
Daniele Luppi rowspan="2"2016 rowspan="2"American Society of Cinematographers Awards Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Regular Series Vanja Cernjul rowspan="2 " Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Television Movie / Mini - Series / Pilot Romain Lacourbas 2017
Golden Reel Awards
Best Sound Editing – Short Form Sound Effects and Foley in Television SEE
ALSO
* Europeans in Medieval China
* Mongol conquest of the Song dynasty
* History of the Song dynasty REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Marco Polo on Netflix