GEARS OF WAR 4 Gears of War 4 is a third - person shooter video game developed by The Coalition and published by Microsoft Studios for Microsoft Windows and Xbox One .
It is the fourth main installment in the Gears of War series , and the first mainline entry not to be developed by Epic Games .
The game was released worldwide on October 11 , 2016 .
The sequel , Gears 5 , is under development .
Upon release , the game received generally positive reviews , with critics praising the game 's combat , visuals and set pieces , while criticism was directed towards the campaign and writing .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Many gameplay elements from the previous games are reintroduced , along with new elements such as the Dropshot weapon that fires explosive drills and the Buzzkill
that fires ricocheting sawblades at enemies .
Players can also perform a short distance shoulder charge , knocking enemies off balance and enemies can also pull players out of cover and perform their own takedowns .
The game features 4 categories of weather : from heavy breeze ( trees , leaves , dust kicking up ) and can grow into violent category 3 windstorms that can affect combat and weapon usage .
Like previous entries in the series , the story campaign can be played through co - operatively with a second player in a local or online co - operative mode .
STORY
SETTING
Section::::Story . Section::::Setting .
Gears of War 4 takes place 25 years after the events of Gears of War 3 .
Although the use of the Imulsion Countermeasure weapon destroyed all Imulsion on the planet Sera , killing the Locust and the Lambent in the process , the weapon forced humanity to adapt to new ways of survival after knocking out the use of fossil fuels , and bringing across the planet powerful windstorms called " Windflares " .
To protect the surviving human population from decline , estimated to be hundreds of thousands , the reformed Coalition of Ordered Governments ( COG ) established walled - off cities to protect its citizens from the dangers outside , while declaring martial law to prevent any travel outside the cities .
However , some human survivors rejected the viewpoints of the COG and formed a group called the " Outsiders " that live outside of the COG jurisdiction , conducting raids on COG territory to gather resources .
The game 's main story focuses on J.D. Fenix ( Liam McIntyre ) , the son of Marcus Fenix and Anya Stroud , who , alongside his friends Delmont " Del " Walker ( Eugene Byrd ) and Kait Diaz ( Laura Bailey ) , deal with a new threat to humanity 's survival .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The leader of the reformed Coalition of Ordered Governments , First Minister Jinn ( Angel Desai ) , commemorates the 25th anniversary of humanity 's victory over the Locust .
Meanwhile , an elderly Hoffman who is present at the ceremony recounts past battles at Aspho Fields , Emergence Day , and Anvil Gate .
Meanwhile , J.D. and Del have recently deserted the COG after disagreeing with Jinn 's hardline policies and join a group of Outsiders led by Reyna ( Justina Machado ) .
In order to help their village , J.D. and Del decide to raid a nearby COG settlement under construction to steal a special fabricator .
They are accompanied by Kait , Reyna 's daughter , and her uncle Oscar ( Jimmy Smits ) , a former Gear and Locust War veteran .
Though they are forced to battle the COG 's new robotic DeeBee soldiers , J.D. and his group manage to successfully steal the fabricator and escape back to their village .
They are then confronted by Jinn ( broadcasting via a DeeBee ) , who accuses them of kidnapping her people , much to their confusion , before launching an all out assault on the village .
J.D. and his friends manage to repel Jinn 's forces and get to work repairing the village 's power generator .
However , in the midst of repairs , unknown creatures raid the village , capturing everybody including Reyna and Oscar .
As her last act , Reyna locks J.D. , Del , and Kait inside the power station to protect them .
Dubbing the unknown attackers the " Swarm " , J.D. reluctantly asks his father Marcus Fenix ( John DiMaggio ) for help .
Marcus , who is still angry at J.D. for joining the authoritarian COG and then endangering himself by abandoning it , is reluctant to help J.D. until he shows him that the Swarm is not human .
Suspicious , Marcus decides to lead the group to Fort Reval where thousands of Locust corpses were buried to dispose of them .
After escaping another attack by Jinn 's forces , the group reaches inside the city , where they are ambushed by a Snatcher that captures Marcus .
As J.D. and his friends pursue the Snatcher , they find evidence of the Swarm being responsible for the abduction of COG citizens , whose bodies are being harvested to create more Swarm creatures .
They also hypothesize that when the Locust were hit by the Imulsion Countermeasure , they did not die .
Instead , their bodies underwent a long term metamorphosis over the last 25 years until the Locust evolved into the Swarm .
J.D. eventually manages to track down Marcus and free him .
Marcus reveals that the Swarm operates on a hive mind and that he was briefly connected to it .
Reyna is still alive and being kept at another Locust burial site , but none of the other villagers survived .
Determined to save her mother , Kait demands that Marcus lead them to her .
He takes the group to Tollen Dam , where they discover that the burial site has been converted into a Swarm hive .
Realizing that the hive 's defenses are too formidable for them to breach on their own , the group fights their way to a radio antenna , where Marcus calls for the assistance of Augustus Cole ( Lester Speight ) , Damon Baird ( Fred Tatasciore ) and Samantha Byrne ( Claudia Black ) , with the latter two now being lovers .
Baird , now a famed industrialist and the creator of the DeeBees , brings a pair of mech suits that J.D. and Kait use to fight their way into the hive .
Inside , they find Reyna has been forcefully integrated into the hive 's network , and removing her would result in her death .
Despite this , Reyna requests that Kait end her life , which she tearfully does .
She then inherits her mother 's amulet , which had belonged to Kait 's grandmother .
However , upon closer inspection , it bears a resemblance to the symbol of the Locust Queen Myrrah - implying that Reyna was her daughter and Kait is her granddaughter .
In a post credits scene , it is revealed that Oscar managed to survive his abduction by the Swarm by cutting himself out of the Snatcher that had captured him .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Gears of War 4 was originally being developed by Epic ; selected aspects of their work were incorporated into Coalition 's work .
During E3 2013 , Microsoft Studios vice president Phil Spencer said he thought more Gears of War games were possible .
On January 27 , 2014 , Microsoft announced that they had purchased the rights of the franchise from Epic Games , and a new game would be developed for Xbox One by Black Tusk Studios , an in - house studio which was later renamed The Coalition to better signify its responsibility for the Gears of War franchise .
Rod Fergusson , former Director of Production at Epic Games on the Gears of War franchise , joined Microsoft and plays a key studio leadership role at The Coalition on the development of the franchise going forward .
Epic Games ' Ray Davis admitted that " having been through shipping hell with Rod Fergusson on past Gears of War games I can say that I 'm absolutely confident he 'll do a great job with the franchise at Microsoft . "
On April 1 , 2015 , The Coalition producer Allie Henze confirmed that Gears of War 4 would not be released for Xbox 360 .
Gears of War 4 was presented for the first time during Microsoft 's E3 2015 press conference .
Studio head Rod Fergusson stated that the gameplay presented during the press conference was meant to reflect the overall tone of the game , returning to the franchise 's roots as being a " monster game " , and " something personal , intimate , dark , and mysterious " ; and the setting 's design took heavy inspiration from Northern Italy .
Gears of War 4 would be set on Sera , nearly 25 years after the events of Gears of War 3 , with Marcus Fenix 's son JD Fenix as the lead character .
Owing to the people of Sera rebuilding their society after the Locust war , the game 's new weapons are inspired by construction equipment .
The game features a new enemy faction known as " the Swarm " ; the Swarm 's " Drones " behave similarly to the Locusts of previous games , " Juvies " are fast moving and their screams can burst " pods " that contain more enemies , while Pouncers can pin the player to the ground and fire quills from their tails .
The multiplayer components of the game are being co - developed by Splash Damage , who also developed the multiplayer components of A multiplayer beta was released on April 25 , 2016 ; those who purchased Ultimate Edition received early access to the beta beginning on April 18 , 2016 .
The campaign will support local and online co - op with two players .
Gears of War 4 was the first game to make use of SGX developed by Speech Graphics to automatically animate gameplay dialogue .
Speaking about the future of the game , and the Gears of War series itself , Fergusson stated that " one of the things that 's nice about Microsoft 's investment is that we know , unless this does horribly , we 're probably going to do another one . "
Gears of War 4 will run at 30 frames per second in its single player modes , and 60 in its multiplayer modes , both at 1080p .
The game uses Unreal Engine 4 .
Similarly to , the game will employ a dynamic scaling system to maintain a consistent frame rate , under which the resolution will be automatically decreased and upscaled back to 1080p during more intensive scenes .
Ferguson stated that the Xbox One S had an improved CPU and GPU which would be capable of more consistent resolution on Gears of War 4 .
During its E3 2016 press conference , Microsoft announced that Gears of War 4 would be released on PC exclusively for Windows 10 Windows Store .
It will be an Xbox Play
Anywhere game , with digital cross - buys and cross - platform multiplayer available between Windows 10 and Xbox versions .
In August 2016 , Game of Thrones composer Ramin Djawadi confirmed he would be involved as the main creator of Gear of War 4s soundtrack .
In an interview , Djawadi spoke about the sound of the score , " Obviously , I want to make it very different to Game of Thrones .
" Whenever I approach a new project , I want to make sure I 'm setting up a new sound - even though we 're still using a lot of orchestra and percussion . "
On September 19 , 2016 , The Coalition announced that the game had " gone gold " , meaning development had finished and manufacturing production had begun .
Microsoft at its E3 keynote on July 11 , 2017 , explained that several Xbox titles would be receiving a free 4 K visual update .
The Coalition 's technical director Mike Rayner said that The Coalition had been working with Microsoft 's Xbox One X console for some time now .
Gears of War 4 will support native 4 K resolution , with higher resolution textures across the entire game including characters , environments , visual effects , and more on the Xbox One X console .
Combined with the 4 K resolution , Gears of War 4 on the Xbox
One X will also feature High Dynamic Range ( HDR ) colors with Wide Color Gamut Support .
Two technical improvement to the visuals beyond higher resolution textures are fully dynamic shadows and improved reflections .
With this new update comes support for Dolby Atmos 7.1.4 sound technology that adds additional sound channels for a more immersive game environment .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Gears of War 4 received " generally favorable " reviews , according to review aggregator Metacritic .
Ryan McCaffery of IGN gave the game 9.2 out of 10 , stating in his verdict : " I never expected to compare Gears of War 4 to , but I could n't be happier to do so .
Like the latest chapter in the story from a time long ago in a galaxy far , far away , Gears of War 4 is directed by a new generation of creators , shares a lot of similar narrative structures to the beloved first piece of the trilogy it succeeds , and is an experience you 'll walk away from with a big smile on your face – in campaign , Versus , and Horde modes alike .
It 's about as good of a franchise reawakening as I could 've hoped for . "
He also added " Gears of War 4 plays it fairly safe but brilliantly executes on a variety - packed campaign and meaty multiplayer suite . "
Mike Mahardy of GameSpot rewarded Gears of War 4 a score of 7 out of 10 , reasoning " This is a shooter teetering on the edge of something greater , but despite the improvements it makes to the storied franchise , its missteps hold it back .
There is inspiration here , and creativity in the way Gears of War 4 rethinks its multiplayer modes .
But the lackluster campaign and technical issues are blights on an otherwise exhilarating shooter .
The result is a whole that does n't reflect the quality of its often stellar parts . " .
Arthur Gies of Polygon scored the game with a 9 out of 10 .
Gies stated at the end of his review : " When I was finished with Gears of War 4s campaign , I remember wondering why it did n't do more .
The next morning , I was playing the game again , not out of obligation , but because I wanted to .
Taken all together , Gears of War 4 does n't completely reinvent the genre , and it 's not always " bigger . "
But it 's a remarkably consistent , complete package with the kind of refinement and focus few other games can manage , providing excellent solo , cooperative , and competitive options that rank it as one of the best action games of 2016 . "
SALES Section::::Sales .
Gears of War 4 was the second best - selling retail game in the UK in its week of release , only behind FIFA 17 .
In the United States , it was the third best selling game in the month of October , behind Battlefield 1 , and Mafia III .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards . !
Year ! !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Result ! !
Ref 15th
Annual Visual Effects Society Awards Outstanding Visual Effects in a Real - Time Project NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS