RICHARD BENJAMIN HARRISON Richard Benjamin Harrison Jr.
( March 4 , 1941 – June 25 , 2018 ) , also known by the nicknames The Old Man and The Appraiser , was an American businessman and reality television personality , best known as the co - owner of the World Famous Gold & Silver Pawn Shop , as featured on the History Channel series Pawn Stars .
Harrison was the co - owner of the pawn shop with his son Rick Harrison .
They opened the store together in 1989 .
Harrison was usually referred to by his nickname , " The Old Man " , which he earned at the age of 38 .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Richard Benjamin Harrison Jr. was born in Danville , Virginia , on March 4 , 1941 , and was of Irish descent .
Harrison 's grandson , Corey , has mentioned his grandmother said they are related to Presidents William Henry Harrison and Benjamin Harrison .
Harrison indicated that he did not give much credence to this idea .
When Harrison was one year old , his family moved to Lexington , North Carolina , where they lived at 115 Peacock Avenue , just off South Main Street .
Harrison attended Lexington High School , but left during his junior year .
Harrison 's family was poor , and to make money , Harrison drove a school bus when he was 14 , parking the bus at his house every night , and getting up early in the morning to pick up the schoolchildren , for which he was paid five or six dollars a week .
MARRIAGE AND THE NAVY Section::::Marriage and the Navy .
When he was 17 , Harrison attended a barn dance , where he met his future wife , Joanne Rhue , the daughter of Joseph Rhue , a county judge , who later became one of the lead attorneys for Philip Morris in North Carolina .
They married in 1960 .
Before they married , however , Harrison stole a car , and after he was arrested , was given a choice by the judge to go to prison or the military .
Harrison chose the latter .
JoAnne became pregnant with their first child immediately after they married , and Sherry , their first child , was born with Down syndrome .
They also had three sons , Joseph , Rick , and Chris .
Harrison left the Navy in February 1962 , but re - enlisted fourteen months later in order to obtain the health care benefits necessary to meet Sherry 's medical expenses .
She died when she was six years old .
Harrison ultimately served in the U.S. Navy for 20 years , including stints as a paymaster , and attaining the rank of petty officer first class .
Harrison served on four ships , including his final five years on fleet tug ATF 100 USS Chowanoc , from 1972 to 1976 .
In 1967 Harrison was transferred by the Navy to San Diego , California .
He continued to serve in the Navy , while JoAnne obtained her real estate license in 1970 and opened her own office in 1973 .
After Harrison was discharged from the Navy , he worked part - time in his wife 's office .
Declining real estate sales caused by interest rates as high as 18 percent cost Harrison $ 1,000,000 and the collapse of this business in 1981 .
BUSINESS CAREER
Section::::Business career .
In April 1981 , Harrison and his wife , having only $ 5,000 left , moved with their three sons to Las Vegas , Nevada , where Harrison and his son Rick opened Gold & Silver Coin Shop in a 300 square foot shop at 1501 Las Vegas Boulevard .
In 1986 , he relocated the business to a larger building at 413 Fremont Street .
In 1987 , he obtained a license to buy and sell second - hand goods .
The business 's lease expired in 1988 .
In 1989 , Rick opened what would become the World Famous Gold & Silver Pawn Shop at 713 Las Vegas Boulevard South , located less than two miles from the Las Vegas Strip .
The most common item brought into the store is jewelry .
As of July 2011 , the store had 12,000 items in its inventory , 5,000 of which are typically held on pawn .
Even when absent from the show , according to an episode of Pawn Stars , Harrison usually was the first to arrive at the shop in the morning , and by 2010 , had not had a sick day since 1994 .
From July 19 , 2009 until his death , Harrison and his son Rick , along with his grandson Richard Corey " Big Hoss " Harrison and Corey 's childhood friend and employee Austin " Chumlee " Russell , starred in the reality television program Pawn Stars on the History Channel .
Harrison was depicted as saying little and easily angered .
Chumlee has stated that he is " old and cranky " , while Harrison himself indicates : " My role on the show is to be an old grump . "
Within ten weeks of its debut , Pawn Stars was the highest - rated program on the History Channel , and second highest - rated reality show program behind Jersey Shore .
In that same period , the average number of customers in the Gold & Silver Pawn Shop increased from 70 to 700 per day .
By February 2012 , between 3,000 and 5,000 people visited the store each day .
In 2014 Harrison 's net worth was estimated to be $ 5 million USD .
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION Section::::Awards and recognition .
In March 2010 , Harrison , his son , grandson and Austin " Chumlee " Russell were awarded the key to the city of Las Vegas by Mayor Oscar Goodman .
Harrison and the other stars of Pawn Stars served as grand marshals for the History 300 NASCAR race at the Charlotte Motor Speedway on May 26 , 2012 .
On May 29 , 2012 , Harrison was awarded a key to the city of Lexington , his hometown , by Lexington Mayor Clark Newell , in the Lexington City Council Chamber , and the day was also officially " Richard Harrison 's Day " .
On July 17 , 2012 , the Clark County Commission declared that day to be " Pawn Stars / Gold & Silver Pawn Day " .
At the Commission meeting , Harrison donated $ 1000 to the Clark County Museum , and lent the U.S. Senate floor chair used by Senator Patrick McCarran ( sold to the Gold and Silver in the Pawn Stars episode " Take a Seat " ) to the museum as part of a display on Senator McCarran .
Harrison and his son Rick were nominated for the 2012 Time 100 list .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
On December 5 , 2011 , Harrison made a special appearance at the American Country Awards 2011 , giving a speech on stage .
On February 25 , 2012 , he was a guest star at a Celebrity Bingo Bow Wow charity event , which was held at the Silverton Casino Lodge .
LEGAL ISSUES DANIEL CALLAHAN Section::::Legal issues .
Section::::Daniel Callahan .
In May 2012 , Daniel Callahan filed a lawsuit in the District Court in Las Vegas claiming that Harrison and his son Rick failed to provide " reasonable and necessary " security at their store , seeking around $ 20,000 for injuries he allegedly suffered from being " dragged out of the pawn shop and tossed onto the sidewalk " after an argument over a rifle he had brought .
Harrison 's grandson , Corey , defended them both , stating that they were never in direct contact with Callahan and " it was in our best interests to get him out of there . "
INTERFERENCE WITH BUSINESS PRACTICES
Section::::Interference with business practices .
In October 2012 , A&E Network and the History Channel , along with Harrison and the rest of the show 's cast , were sued in Clark County District Court in Las Vegas for interference with business practices by Wayne F. Jefferies , a Las Vegas promoter and the Harrisons ' manager , who represented them and " Chumlee " Russell in their television business dealings .
Jefferies , who managed and operated the Las Vegas world cuisine restaurant Seven in 2001 , and who , as an event promoter , put up to $ 75,000 in support of the 2005 and 2006 Las Vegas Red , White and Boom Independence Day event , was instrumental in helping to launch the series .
Jefferies stated that after the show premiered , his influence in the show was increasingly reduced , and that he was ultimately fired and left without his promised share of fees and merchandising royalties from the series , purportedly due to network executives after a January 2012 report on TMZ that indicated that the Pawn Stars cast were taken aback by the History Channel 's launch of the spinoff Cajun Pawn Stars , of which the cast had been unaware .
PERSONAL LIFE AND DEATH Section::::Personal life and death .
Harrison was particularly passionate about automobiles , showing an interest in all types of cars .
Cars he owned or expressed an interest in on the television series include his 1966 Imperial Crown , which took him fifteen years to convince the previous owner to sell , and was subsequently restored by his son and grandson for his 50th wedding anniversary ; a 1957 Chevy 150 sedan given to him by the stars of two other History shows , American Restoration and American Pickers ; and the mid-1960s B&Z Electra - King electric car shown to them in Pawn Stars season
3 episode 14 ( " Honest Abe " ) , which he suggested could be converted into a golf cart .
Harrison died on June 25 , 2018 , after a battle with Parkinson 's disease .
His funeral was held July 1 , with his casket draped in an American flag on account of his service in the Navy .
His son Rick eulogized him thus : "
He was my hero and I was fortunate to get a very cool ' Old Man ' as my dad .
That I got to share him with so many others and they got to see what a great family man he was is something I am grateful to have experienced with him .
"
Harrison was survived by wife JoAnne , three sons , 10 grandchildren and five great - grandchildren .
Harrison placed his son Rick in charge of his estate .
Christopher Keith Harrison , the youngest of Harrison 's three sons , was intentionally omitted as a beneficiary in his father 's will .
Following his death , Pawn Stars ran a commemorative episode , " A Treasure Remembered " , featuring clips from the show and interviews about him .
In the episode , a family photograph is briefly shown ; Christopher 's face is blurred out .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS