RIGHT TO FOOD GUIDELINES
The Voluntary Guidelines to support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security , also known as the Right to Food Guidelines , is a document adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in 2004 , with the aim of guiding states to implement the right to food .
It is not legally binding , but directed to states ' obligations to the right to food under international law .
In specific , it is directed towards States Parties to the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights ( ICESCR ) and to States that still have to ratify it .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1945 , the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) is founded .
In 1996 , the FAO organises the 1996 World Food Summit , in Rome .
It requested that the right to food be given a more concrete and operational content .
This resulted in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action .
" We pledge our political will and our common and national commitment to achieving food security for all and to an ongoing effort to eradicate hunger in all countries , with an immediate view to reducing the number of undernourished people to half their present level no later than 2015 . "
In 1999 , Committee on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights adopted General Comment No.12 ' The Right to Adequate Food ' and described the various State obligations derived from the ICESCR regarding the right to food .
It places three types of obligation on States Parties : the obligation to respect , to protect and to fulfil the right to food ( which includes the obligations to facilitate and to provide ) .
In 2002 , at the World Food Summit in June , the FAO adopted the calling for the establishment of an intergovernmental working group to prepare a set of guidelines on the implementation of the right to food .
In November , the FAO Council set up an Intergovernmental Working Group which drafts the Right to Food Guidelines .
In 2004 the Right to Food Guidelines are adopted by 187 Member States of the General Council of the FAO .
The Guidelines build on international law and are a set of recommendations States have chosen on how to implement their obligations under Article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The Food and Agriculture Organization summarised the Right to Food guidelines in six phases or aspects to realizing the right to food :
* Providing basic prerequisites , such as : good governance , democracy , non - discriminating markets , engaging in a multi - stakeholder approach including the private sector and civil society , and allocating sufficient national financial resources to anti - hunger and poverty .
*
* Provide an enabling environment by adopting relevant strategies and policies , such as : diverse and sustainable economic development in support of food security , adopting a legal " human - rights - based approach " , developing the relevant institutions , making access to natural secure and non - discriminatory , setting indicators for monitoring and evaluation .
*
* Implementing a legal framework to enforce the right to food and the three state obligations of respecting , providing and fulfilling , such as : immediate and progressive implementation of policies , making states accountable , guaranteeing autonomous and independent human rights institutions , and educating in particular children and women .
*
* Guaranteeing on the market the availability of food which is adequate and healthy .
*
* Provide extra support for vulnerable populations , including providing food for those who do not have access to adequate food for reasons beyond their control .
Measures include : implementing safety nets for the weakest .
*
* Prepare for emergencies , man made or natural disasters , and obligations to provide international food aid .
* SEE ALSO
*
Right to food REFERENCES Citations Bibliography
* .
* .
EXTERNAL LINKS *
" The Right to Food : The Voluntary Guidelines in Brief " ( 2006 )
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .
* " Methodological Toolbox on the Right to Food " , Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .
A tool kit to help implementing the Right to Food Guidelines .