RAINWATER HARVESTING IN THE UNITED KINGDOM Rainwater harvesting ( RWH ) is a practice of growing importance in the United Kingdom , particularly in the South East of England where there is less water available per person than in many Mediterranean countries .
Rainwater harvesting in the UK is both a traditional and reviving technique for collecting water for domestic uses .
This water is generally used for non - hygienic purposes like watering gardens , flushing toilets , and washing clothes .
There is a growing demand for larger tank systems collecting between 1000 - 7500 litres of water .
The two main uses for harvested rainwater are botanical uses , like gardening for plant irrigation , and domestic uses , like flushing toilets and running washing machines .
Rainwater is almost always collected strictly from the roof , then heavily filtered using either a filter attached to the down pipe , a fine basket filter or for more expensive systems like self - cleaning filters placed in an underground tank .
UK homes using some form of rainwater harvesting system can reduce their mains water usage by 50 % or more , although a 20 - 30 % saving is more common .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Prior to the widespread use of water mains , RWH was a traditional means of getting water in the UK .
Even as far back as the 2nd - century AD , archaeological evidence shows that rainwater harvesting was being used by Housesteads Roman Fort in Northumberland as a way to flush the latrines .
English castles from the 12th and 13th - century also have notable rainwater harvesting systems , such as Carreg Cennen , Orford , and Warkworth Castle .
In the 19th and the early 20th century , prior to widespread access to water mains , most large middle - class homes got their drinking water from springs and wells , but this water was usually hard which made it unsuitable for washing .
Thus , such homes were usually designed to also harvest rainwater to be used in washing .
During the interwar period , houses in hard water areas were sometimes built with rainwater storage tanks forming the roof of a scullery .
Rainwater was led down to a third tap for washing purposes .
Rainwater harvesting declined in popularity as water mains became more widespread through the early 20th century onwards .
CURRENT STATUS
Section::::Current status .
In recent years , rainwater harvesting has become more common due to increasing water prices .
While rainwater harvesting has been employed in high - profile facilities like the velodrome of the London Olympic Park , the UK 's ongoing revival has lagged behind other countries such as Germany ( the present world leader in modern rainwater harvesting ) .
At present , only about 400 RWH systems are installed in the UK every year .
Some large retail developments are now incorporating rainwater harvesting even in some of the wetter parts of the UK .
Rainwater harvesting was being encouraged by the government of the UK through the Code for Sustainable Homes .
The code ranked homes on a scale of one through six and requires new homes to have a score of at least three .
One way to raise the score of a newly designed home is to incorporate a rainwater harvesting system .
The code was revoked in 2015 .
The Environment Agency has noted that water resources in the UK are under increasing pressure because of the growing population .
In addition , the agency has warned that the South East of England is facing more serious water scarcity than anywhere else in England or Wales , such that the per - capita water supply is lower than many Mediterranean countries .
The agency encourages a two - pronged approach to both reduce demand and increase supply , such as through the use of rainwater harvesting .
However , there is a fundamental mismatch between supply and demand ; the areas of the UK suffering water scarcity are in most cases also areas with low rainfall , which means the economics of installing a domestic RWH system are less favourable .
The environmental impacts of domestic RWH systems in energy terms are questioned since the water supply accounts for a very small proportion of total energy use ( approximately 4 % ) .
For a UK household , the CO impact of supplying water to the house is around 100 g of CO per day , around 1/600th of your total daily impact .
However , in countries without widespread mains water supplies , or where the environmental impact of mains water is very high , RWH may have more merit .
The installation of rainwater harvesting systems in the UK should be done according to the Water Supply ( Water Fittings ) Regulations and BS8515 , in order to ensure safety .
BS8515 also provides details on how to size the storage tank and allows estimation of the potential water savings .
If you install a RWH system , you will need to inform your water company .
Rainwater harvesting at large scale may well be appropriate for farms as part of a catchment management strategy to decrease flood risk and diffuse pollution .
SEE ALSO
* Rainwater harvesting
* Climate of the United Kingdom * Northern Ireland water shortages
* Drought in the United Kingdom
* Air well ( condenser ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Map of average annual rainfall in the UK from 1971 to 2000