PLAYSTATION 2
ONLINE FUNCTIONALITY Selected games on Sony 's PlayStation 2 video game console offer online gaming or other online capabilities .
Games that enable the feature provide free online play through the use of a broadband internet connection and a PlayStation 2 Network Adaptor .
Since the service has no official name , it is sometimes referred as either PS2 Network Play , PS2 Network Gaming , or PS2 Online .
The service was launched in July 2001 in Japan , August 2002 in North America , and in June 2003 in Europe .
On " slimline " models , a network adapter is integrated into the hardware .
Some games also allowed online gameplay using a dial - up connection ( not available on all models ) , or LAN play by connecting two network adapters / slimline consoles together directly with an Ethernet cable or through the same router network .
Instead of having a unified online service like SegaNet or Xbox Live , online multiplayer on the PS2 was the responsibility of the game publisher and was run on third - party servers .
However , later PS2 online games required the console to be authorized through Sony 's Dynamic Network Authentication System ( DNAS ) before connecting to the server .
Unofficial servers also exist which could be connected by setting up the DNS settings to connect to an unofficial DNS server .
Most recent PS2 online games have been developed to exclusively support broadband internet access .
The last official online server , which was for Final Fantasy XI , was ultimately shut down on March 31 , 2016 , with the DNAS following it a couple of days later on April 4 , indirectly shutting down several remaining unofficial servers , with the exception of ones that support non - DNAS PS2 titles such as and Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater 3 .
Despite the DNAS shutdown , several fan created servers still exist ; most require a DNAS workaround to connect , with some exceptions such as Call of Duty 3 and .
ADAPTER Section::::Adapter .
For the older models ( non - Slim ) of the PlayStation 2 console , a network adapter was needed to play online and use a hard drive .
All versions of the Network Adapter provide an Ethernet port , while some North American versions also featured a phone - line port for dial - up connection .
The newer slimline versions , however , have an Ethernet port built into them , making the Network Adapter unnecessary and hard drive use nearly impossible , as well as ruling out any need to keep the network adapter in production .
Playing online games requires that users set up the system 's network connection configuration , which is saved to a memory card .
This can be done with the network Startup Disk that came with the network adapter or using one of the many games that had the utility built into them , such as Resident Evil Outbreak , to set up the network settings .
The new slimline PlayStation 2 came with a disk in the box by default .
The last version of the disk was network startup disk 5.0 , which was included with the newer SCPH 90004 model released in 2009 .
However , as of December 31 , 2012 , the PlayStation 2 has been discontinued , and the servers for games have all since been shut down .
GAMES Section::::Games .
Released in 2002 , Final Fantasy XI is the first ever console game to offer cross - platform play , connecting PlayStation 2 and personal computer .
, released in August of the same year , was one of the first video games that allowed voice chat on a console .
COMPATIBILITY Section::::Compatibility .
PAL games that supported online gaming display a WITH NET PLAY logo on their cover .
North American games feature an " Online " icon in the lower right corner of the cover ; on games that do not support dial - up connectivity , " broadband only " is also found on the logo .
LAN TUNNELING Section::::LAN tunneling .
Over time , most game servers have been shut down .
However , a computer program called XLink Kai allows users to achieve online play for some PS2 games by using a network configuration that simulates a worldwide LAN ; because of this only games with LAN functionality may be played in this way .
SEE ALSO
* PlayStation Network REFERENCES