THE OFFICE ( U.S. SEASON 9 )
The ninth and final season of the American television comedy
The Office premiered on NBC on September 20 , 2012 , and concluded on May 16 , 2013 , consisting of 25 episodes .
The Office is an American adaptation of the British comedy series of the same name , and is presented in a mockumentary format , portraying the daily lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictitious Dunder Mifflin Paper Company .
The ninth season of The Office aired on Thursdays at 9:00 p.m. ( Eastern ) in the United States , as part of the Comedy Night Done Right television block .
This is the second season not to star Steve Carell as lead character Michael Scott , although he returned for a cameo appearance in the series finale .
The ninth season largely focuses on the relationship between Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) .
After Jim decides to follow his dream and start a sports marketing company in Philadelphia , Pam begins to worry about moving , and the couple 's relationship experiences stress .
Meanwhile , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) abandons the office for a three - month boating trip , and eventually quits his job to pursue his dream of becoming a star , although he soon becomes famous for a viral video .
Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) is finally promoted to regional manager .
The documentary airs , and a year later , the members of the office gather for Dwight and Angela 's marriage as well as a final round of interviews .
Following the decline in ratings from the previous year , the ninth season of The Office managed to stabilize around 4 million viewers per episode .
The series finale , however , was watched by over 5.69 million viewers , making it the highest - rated episode that the show had aired in over a year .
The season ranked as the ninety - fourth most watched television series during the 2012–13 television year and saw a decrease in ratings from the previous season .
Critical reception was moderately positive ; although some critics took issue with certain aspects , such as the reveal of the in - series documentary crew , many argued that it was an improvement over the previous season .
Others lauded the way the show was able to successfully wrap - up its story arcs .
" Finale " was nominated for three awards at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , and won for Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The ninth season of the show was produced by Reveille Productions and Deedle - Dee Productions , both in association with Universal Television .
The show is based on the British comedy series of the same name , which was created by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant for the BBC .
In addition , the two are executive producers on the show .
On May 11 , 2012 , NBC renewed The Office for a ninth season .
Series developer Greg Daniels returned as showrunner this season .
Daniels stated that the season would feature more big season arcs , saying " I 'll tell you that the last couple of years , I do n't think we did any big arc - type things in the way that we used to in the beginning , I think the thing we 're going to do is bring back a lot of arcs . "
Brent Forrester , who had been a consulting producer and writer since the third season was promoted to executive producer , alongside new series writer Dan Sterling .
In a conference call on August 21 , 2012 , Daniels announced that this would be the final season of the series .
Daniels said , " This year feels like the last chance to really go out together and make an artistic ending for the show that pays off a lot of the stuff that matters most to fans . "
Daniels also said all the questions would be answered , such as who was behind the documentary , and why they had been filming it for so long , as well as the reveal of the Scranton Strangler .
A central point during the season was the romance between Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) and Pete Miller ( Jake Lacy ) .
According to Michael Ausiello of TVLine , the nature of their relationship was heavily debated by the writers and producers ; he noted that " the triangle [ between Andy , Erin , and Pete ] has stirred up a number of debates in the writers room , which tells me even they do n't know at this point which guy Erin will choose .
" Daniels consulted with Kemper and asked for her input , as he felt she had the best understanding of Erin 's characterization .
For the season , cast members John Krasinski , Jenna Fischer , Rainn Wilson , and Ed Helms were credited as producers .
Krasinski also directed an episode .
Guest directors for the season included noted actor Bryan Cranston , who directed the episode " Work Bus " , and filmmaker Jon Favreau , who directed the episode "
Moving On " .
Daniels directed the first episode , which he also wrote .
This marked the first time that he had both written and directed an episode of The Office since the fourth season entry " Fun Run " .
Ken Kwapis directed the series finale ; he also directed the show 's pilot episode .
While The Office was mainly filmed on a studio set at Valley Center Studios in Van Nuys , California , the city of Scranton , Pennsylvania , where the show is set , was also used for shots of the opening theme .
Angela Kinsey and Rainn Wilson , during an interview , expressed the hope to film an episode of the season in Scranton .
Although this never came to fruition , exterior shots of the real Scranton bar
The Bog were featured in the tenth episode " Lice " .
Originally , the season was supposed to contain 24 episodes , which would have meant that the series aired exactly 200 episodes .
However , the series ' penultimate episode was elongated into 2 separate episodes , resulting in " Finale"—which was announced previously as an hour - long special — being the 24th and 25th episodes of the season .
This meant that the last part of " Finale " is the series ' 201st episode .
On March 19 , 2013 , the official Office fansite OfficeTally launched a campaign on Change.org to " super - size or extend " the finale ; this campaign was motivated by a statement made by Daniels , in which he mentioned he would " beg " the studio to air a longer episode .
On May 2 , 2013 the petition amassed 20,000 signatures .
On May 7 , NBC announced the series finale would be extended , and air in a 75-minute time slot .
A one - hour retrospective of the series aired prior to the one - hour series finale on May 16 .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The Office employs an ensemble cast .
Most of the main characters , and some supporting ones , are based on characters from the British version of The Office .
While these characters normally have the same attitudes and perceptions as their British counterparts , the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show .
The show is known for its large cast size , many of whom are known particularly for their improvisational work .
Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute , who , based upon Gareth Keenan , is the Assistant to the Regional Manager , although the character frequently fails to include " to the " in his title .
John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert , a sales representative and prankster , who is based upon Tim Canterbury , and is married to Pam Halpert , the office administrator .
Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) , who is based on Dawn Tinsley , is shy , but is often a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight .
Ed Helms plays Andy Bernard , the preppy manager — who was previously a salesman — and boastful Cornell alumnus whose love for a cappella music and awkward social skills generates mixed feelings from his employees .
Krasinski and Helms appeared in fewer episodes in order to film several upcoming movies .
Helms was temporarily written out of the series with a storyline that saw his character travel to the Caribbean with his brother on a boat .
As such , Helms made only a small appearance in " The Whale " and was absent from the following eight episodes .
He returned in the episode " Couples Discount " .
According to TVLine , he returned to work right before the show 's Christmas break .
Wilson was initially slated to appear in only 13 episodes before leaving for a planned Dwight - centric spin - off , but the spin - off was not picked up by NBC .
Mindy Kaling and B. J. Novak have much lesser roles as Kelly Kapoor and Ryan Howard , respectively .
Both Kaling and Novak appeared in the season opener " New Guys " , and both returned for the series finale .
Actress Catherine Tate , who joined the series as a series regular midway through season eight portraying Nellie Bertram , continued with the series .
Clark Duke and Lacy joined the cast as customer service representatives hired to deal with the many neglected customer service complaints Kelly has amassed over the years ; Lacy 's character , Pete , is also a love interest for Erin .
Kinsey and Wilson also noted that the cast and crew could neither " confirm nor deny " but were " hoping " for a return of Steve Carell as Michael Scott .
In mid - December , Krasinski later revealed that he was optimistic about a return ; in an interview with E !
Online Krasinski said that the producers were supposedly " still trying to figure out [ Carell 's ] schedule " and that the finale " just would n't be the same without him " .
However , NBC chairman Robert Greenblatt later admitted during an interview that while he is " hopeful " , he does not think Carell will return ; he noted that Carell was satisfied with his character 's exit and did not want to tarnish it .
On January 16 , Daniels revealed that Carell would not appear in the finale in any capacity , a decision that Carell later reiterated .
Three months later , however , the producers for The Office mounted " an 11th - hour effort last month " to get Carell to make a cameo in the show 's final episode , according to TVLine .
Carell 's personal representative confirmed that Carell was on the set for the final episode , but that he did not film any scenes .
However , an anonymous source " close to the show " said " do n't rule anything out " .
TVLine later reported on May 6 , that Carell would appear in a cameo , although NBC declined to comment and Carell 's representatives continued to deny the reports .
Carell , however , did end up returning for the finale ; his character , Michael Scott , becomes Dwight 's best man at his wedding .
A month after the episode aired , Carell explained in an interview with TVLine that he " lied for months to the press , to almost everyone , really " .
He noted that he " felt terribly for the cast and for [ executive producer ]
Greg Daniels , because they all lied , too . "
Krasinski , on the other hand , explained that " It was so thrilling .
We all just flat - out lied …
It was just one of those things that we all vowed and had to protect " .
In addition to Carell , the season also saw the return of several " veteran cast members " .
Former series regular David Denman was the first to do so , appearing as Roy Anderson in the second episode of the season " Roy 's Wedding " ; he was last seen as part of the Threat Level Midnight film in season seven .
Josh Groban reprised his role as Andy 's brother , Walter Jr , appearing in the episode " The Boat " .
Melora Hardin returned as Jan Levinson in the episode " The Whale " and had a small vocal cameo in the episode " Couples Discount " .
" Junior Salesman " saw the return of several minor characters , including Lance Krall as Sensei Ira ( who first appeared in the second - season episode " The Fight " ) , Noel Petok as Troy Underbridge ( who first appeared in the fourth - season episode
" Night Out " ) , Beth Grant as Dwight 's babysitter ( who first appeared in the fourth - season episode " Dinner Party " ) , and James Urbaniak as Rolf ( who first appeared in the fifth - season episode " Company Picnic " ) .
Although cast member Zach Woods ' series regular contract was not renewed for the season , he returned to the series as a guest star , in the episode " Moving On " .
David Koechner returned as Todd Packer in " The Farm " .
" Finale " also featured the return of several recurring characters , such as Nancy Carell as Carol Stills ( who played the recurring role of Michael 's real - estate agent and short - time girlfriend ) , Sendhil Ramamurthy as Ravi , Jackie Debatin as Elizabeth ( who first appeared in the third season episode " Ben Franklin " ) , Devon Abner as Devon ( who was a former Dunder Mifflin employee fired in " Halloween " ) , and Spencer Daniels as Jake Palmer ( who first played Meredith 's son in the season two episode " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " ) .
Stephen Colbert guest starred in the Halloween episode as Broccoli Rob , a former member of Here Comes Treble , Andy 's a cappella group .
The episode " Lice " guest starred Julius Erving playing himself as an investor in Jim 's sports marketing business .
Former NBC co - chairman and The Office executive producer Ben Silverman had a minor recurring role as one of Jim 's colleagues .
He appeared in the episodes "
Here Comes Treble " , " Suit Warehouse " , " Customer Loyalty " , and " Moving On " .
The fourteenth episode , " Junior Salesmen " , featured several guest stars .
These included Eric Wareheim as Gabor , Matt L. Jones as Zeke , and Will McCormack as Wolf .
In the episode " Promos " , athlete Ryan Howard played a version of himself .
Comedian Roseanne Barr had a two - episode arc as a talent agent named Carla Fern , and first appeared in the episode " Stairmageddon " .
Michael Imperioli guest starred in the episode " Livin ' the Dream " as Sensei Billy , acting as a foil for Dwight .
The episode " A.A.R.M. " guest starred Aaron Rodgers , Clay Aiken , Mark McGrath , Santigold , and Jessica St. Clair , all playing themselves .
The series finale guest starred :
Rachael Harris as Angela 's sister ; Joan Cusack and Ed Begley Jr. as Erin 's biological parents ; Malcolm Barrett as Stanley 's replacement ; and Bill Hader and Seth Meyers as themselves .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The season aired on Thursdays at 9:00 p.m. , as part of the Comedy Night Done Right programming block .
The season premiere , " New Guys " received a 2.1/6 percent share in the Nielsen ratings among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 2.1 percent of viewers aged 18 to 49 watched the episode , and 6 percent of viewers watching television at the time watched the episode .
The episode was viewed by 4.28 million viewers and became the lowest - rated season premiere for the series .
In addition , it marked a 46 percent drop in viewership from the season eight premiere " The List " .
For the first sixteen episodes , the series was able to maintain roughly 4 million viewers .
However , starting with the seventeenth episode " The Farm " , ratings began to drop below this threshold .
The series hit an all - time low with the twentieth episode , " Paper Airplane " , which was viewed by only 3.25 million viewers , and received a 1.7 rating/5 percent share .
The series finale was viewed by 5.69 million viewers and received a 3.0 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 .
This made it the highest - rated episode of the season ; it also marked an increase in the previous season finale , which garnered only 4.49 million viewers .
" Finale " was the most watched episode of The Office since the eighth season episode " Pool Party " , but ranked as the third - least watched finale of the series , following the eighth- and first - season finales .
Although in its ninth season , The Office no longer was NBC 's highest - rated scripted comedy series — it was surpassed by Go On — it often ranked as the highest - rated scripted NBC series on Thursday nights .
Rainn Wilson argued that the show 's lower ratings were a combination of the overall trend in lower television ratings in 2012 , as well as the fact that " NBC did n't promote [ the series ] one bit " .
NBC increased their usual ad - price by 200 percent for the finale , asking for $ 400,000 per commercial .
This was largely due to the anticipated increase in viewership that the finale would bring .
The season ranked as the ninety - fourth most watched television series during the 2012–13 season , with an average of 5.061 million viewers .
The season also tied with the CBS series Rules of Engagement and the Fox series American Dad !
to be the forty - third most watched television series in the 18- to 49-year - old demographic .
In this category , the show received a 2.6 rating .
This meant that , on average , the season was viewed by 2.6 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds .
It was viewed by 3.32 million in this demographic .
In terms of viewers , the ninth season ranked as the lowest - rated season of The Office , although it beat the first season 's ranking , which was the 102nd most watched program for the 2004–05 year .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The ninth season of The Office received moderately positive reviews from television critics .
Based on seven critiques , review aggregation website Metacritic gave the ninth season of the show a 64 out of 100 rating , which denotes " generally favorable reviews " .
Entertainment website Holy Moly named the series one of the best shows during the 2012–13 season , writing that " this final season of The Office has been great " largely due to the fact that " every single relationship in the show rings true with the audience . "
Michael Tedder of Vulture commented that he was " willing to call it the fourth best season of the show overall , which is by no means faint praise . "
He explained that this was largely due to the fact that the " final season was a chance to see how everyone else would end up " .
Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote that " the tension between Jim and Pam in the final season ended up being highly controversial for a number of reasons ...
but it also provided the most hopeful moments of the series ' final stretch " ( although he did note that it was clear that the writers had " blatantly " set up the drama ) .
He concluded that the finale was able to successfully return the series " to what had always been its heart — to have true fulfillment " .
Roth Cornet of IGN awarded the season an 8.5 out of 10 , denoting a " great " year .
She felt that the character growth in the final few episodes was particularly well executed , and the last stretch of the season helped raise it after a rocky start ; ultimately , she felt that the writers were able to craft the proper ending for the show .
She was , however , critical of Andy 's characterization , noting that he was merely used as a plot device when convenient .
Many critics argued that the season was an improvement , in both writing and humor , over the previous season .
Several specific episodes received praise .
Andrea Reiher of Zap2it named " Dwight Christmas " the best comedy TV episode of 2012 .
She wrote that the episode " was not only funny but had a huge nostalgia factor " , and continued the show 's trend of strong Christmas episodes .
Reiher also praised the episode 's two subplots , writing that " drunk Darryl and Die Hard " helped produce " a classic episode of The Office that brought back the warm and fuzzy feelings of the early seasons of the show .
" The season 's penultimate entry , " A.A.R.M. " , received a glowing response from many critics .
Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote that the episode was " surprisingly ... terrific in most areas . "
Roth Cornet of IGN noted that " The interplay between Jim , Dwight , and Pam has been the core of the series since Michael Scott 's departure , and it was good to see the trio front and center once again as The Office comes to a close .
" The series finale , in particular , was praised by critics .
Sepinwall called it " a tremendously satisfying conclusion to a show that could make us gasp with laughter , but that could also make us cry or smile " .
Cornet wrote that it " was a strong hour of television [ and ] the finale shone and delivered on all of its promise . "
Nick Campbell of TV.com wrote that the episode was " just right " for the series .
Other episodes were not received as positively .
" Lice " , for instance , was called " terrible " by Campbell , as well as the " epitome of filler " by Brett Davinger of The California Literary Review . "
The Farm " was largely derided due to its uneven nature , and the broad humor that it used .
The reveal of the in - series documentary crew in " Customer Loyalty " received large amounts of critical attention .
E !
Online named the reveal one of the " Best TV Moments of the Week " .
Verne Gay of Newsday called the scene a " historic " moment for the show .
Conversely , Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club wrote an article that argued that the mockumentary format made the camera " an audience surrogate " , and that by revealing the documentary crew , " the audience no longer felt welcome " .
The subplot involving Brian ( played by Chris Diamantopoulos ) , a boom mic operator for the in - series documentary , was met with mostly negative reviews .
Michael Tedder of Vulture called it " the least interesting way this camera crew reveal could have gone " .
Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic criticized the reintroduction of the character in the episode " Promos " , noting that his reappearance felt " forced " .
McNutt called it " an abandoned novelty " .
Daniels later revealed in an interview that the subplot was a red herring to keep viewers emotionally invested in Pam and Jim 's story .
He explained , " we never intended him to actually [ interfere with Pam and Jim 's marriage ] , but wanted people to worry about it so they would be engaged in the story . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
On December 12 , 2012 , the series was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series , but lost to Modern Family .
Michael Scott 's return was nominated and won the fan - voted " Best TV Moment " at the 3rd Critics ' Choice Television Awards on June 10 , 2013 .
Greg Daniels was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards for " Finale " .
" Finale " was also nominated for an Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series Emmy and an Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series Emmy ; David Rogers and Claire Scanlon for " Finale " won the latter , marking the fifth win for The Office at the Emmys overall and the series ' first win since 2009 .
Rogers and Scanlon also won an American Cinema Editors award for Best Edited Half - Hour Series for Television .
In addition , the web documentary " The Office : The Farewells " , which aired on NBC.com prior to the series ' conclusion , was nominated for an Outstanding Special Class Program Creative Arts Emmy Award .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
In the following table , " U.S. viewers ( million ) " refers to the number of Americans who viewed the episode on the night of broadcast .
Episodes are listed by the order in which they aired , and may not necessarily correspond to their production codes .
HOME MEDIA RELEASE
* 25 episodes
* 5-disc DVD set/4-disc Blu - ray set
* 1.78:1 aspect ratio
* Subtitles : English , Spanish * English ( Dolby Digital ) colspan="4 " align="left
" width="400 "
* 2003 Casting Tapes *
" The Office :
A Look Back
" Retrospective * " Finale " Table Read * " Autotune Andy " music video * Blooper Reel
* Deleted scenes from every episode * Behind - the - Scenes Panel Discussion ( Blu - ray exclusive )
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Episode guides at NBC.com