MY MAD FAT DIARY
My Mad Fat Diary was a British comedy - drama television series that debuted on E4 on 14 January 2013 .
It is based on the novel My Fat , Mad Teenage Diary by Rae Earl .
The second series started on 17 February 2014 and ended on 31 March 2014 , with each episode posted on 4oD a week prior to the television release .
In November 2014 , it was announced that a final three - episode third series would be made , set in 1998 .
After three series and sixteen episodes , My Mad Fat Diary broadcast its final episode on 6 July 2015 .
The series was nominated for multiple BAFTA awards , with Sharon Rooney winning in 2015 for Best Drama Actress .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Set in Stamford , Lincolnshire in the mid-1990s ,
My Mad Fat Diary follows the story of 16-year - old , 16 stone ( 106 kg ) ( 224 lb ) girl , Rae Earl , who has just left a psychiatric hospital , where she has spent four months .
She begins to reconnect with her best friend , Chloe , who is unaware of Rae 's mental health and body image problems , believing she was in France for the past four months .
Rae attempts to keep this information from her while also trying to impress Chloe 's friends Finn , Archie , Izzy and Chop .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* Sharon Rooney as Rachel ' Rae ' Earl , a 16-year - old who has spent four months in a psychiatric hospital .
She struggles to hide her mental health and body image problems from her new friends and finds it hard to fit in .
She becomes romantically involved with Finn Nelson , whom she dates in the second series .
* Claire Rushbrook as Linda Earl - Bouchtat , Rae 's mum .
She marries Karim Bouchtat in the finale of series 1 .
She becomes pregnant during the second series and gives birth to a girl in the series finale .
* Ian Hart as Dr. Kester , Rae 's therapist who helps her deal with her issues .
* Nico Mirallegro as Finley " Finn " Nelson , a boy whom Rae clashes with at first , but who later becomes her main love interest .
Finn and Rae are in a relationship for most of the second series , before breaking up .
They reunite after the birth of Rae 's baby sister at the end of Series 2 .
In Series 3 , they separate again , although Rae says to Finn that it " could happen again one day " .
* Jodie Comer as Chloe Gemell , Rae 's attractive , popular best friend from childhood .
* Dan Cohen as Archie , Rae 's close friend .
He is later revealed to be gay and is victim of homophobia and bullying .
* Jordan Murphy as Arnold " Chop " Peters , the party animal of their group of friends .
He begins a relationship with Izzy at the end of series one .
Initially uncomfortable with Archie 's homosexuality , the two reconcile when Chop stands up for Archie when the latter gets picked on at the pub .
* Ciara Baxendale as Izzy , the sweet but ditzy girl of the group .
Often cheerful and optimistic , Rae describes her as never having a negative thought .
She is in a relationship with Chop .
* Darren Evans as Danny Two Hats , a resident of the psychiatric hospital and later , due to the death of Tix at the end of series one , Rae 's friend .
* Sophie Wright as Tix ( series 1 & 3 ) , a resident of the psychiatric hospital and Rae 's other best friend .
In the series 2 opener , it is revealed that she died due to over - exercising and refusing to eat at the end of the previous series .
She makes a cameo appearance in the final episode of series 3 as Rae reflects on her teenage years and when rae sees everyone in the reflection of the train window .
* Turlough Convery as Liam Owen ( series 2 & 3 ) , Rae 's new friend / love interest who attends group therapy with her in Series 2 .
He makes a cameo appearance in the final episode of series 3
When rae sees everyone in the reflection of the train window .
* Faye Marsay as Katie Springer ( series 3 ) , a former student at Rae 's school who comes back to Stamford to speak about her experiences at university RECURRING CAST * Bamshad Abedi - Amin as Karim Bouchtat , the Tunisian undocumented immigrant boyfriend , and later husband , of Rae 's mum .
* Shazad Latif as Dr. Nick Kassar ( series 1 ) , a doctor at the psychiatric hospital .
* Eliot Otis Brown Walters as Big G ( series 1 ) , a bully who often picks on Rae , calling her Jabba .
* Keith Allen as Victor Earl ( series 2 - 3 ) , Rae 's father .
* Sacha Parkinson as Stacey Stringfellow ( series 2 ) , a popular girl who used to date Finn and bullies other girls .
* Susie Potter as Amy Malone , a tough girl in Stacey 's clique .
She falls out with Stacey after she said she looked ' proper rough ' .
She later ends up dating Liam , and even threatens Rae whenever she sees her with Liam .
* Jodie Hamblet as Vicky , a popular girl in Stacey 's clique .
She has a skin condition , although she dislikes talking about it .
She later becomes an enemy of Rae and Chloe , regularly insulting them at school .
* Kirsty Armstrong as Lois , a sweet girl in Stacey 's clique .
She is revealed to be Archie 's ' girlfriend ' .
After Rae " outs " Archie to Lois , she threatens to tell her friends that Archie is gay if he does n't tell everyone first .
* Cameron Moore as Stephen Carrisford , a PE Teacher in Rae 's school .
EPISODES CRITICAL RECEPTION
Section::::Critical reception .
Throughout its run , My Mad Fat Diary received critical acclaim , particularly for its accurate and honest portrayal of mental illness and Sharon Rooney 's performance .
The Guardians Sam Wollaston called it a " lovely drama – honest and painful , real , and very funny , " going on to say " Sharon Rooney 's performance in the lead is natural , effortless and utterly believable ; she should win something for it . "
The Stage called it " a comedy drama that actually satisfies the criteria of both genres , My Mad Fat Diary offers a unique and uncompromising perspective on adolescent angst that distresses and delights by turns .
Visual gimmicks – flashbacks , fantasies and animated squiggles leaping from the page – are used sparingly but effectively , allowing the focus to stay fixed on Rae and Rooney 's commanding and engagingly natural central performance .
"
The Art Desk said " the first episode of this six - part comedy drama is touching , hilarious and perfectly cast . "
Claire Webb of the Radio Times said the plot is " as uplifting as it is moving , although the banter and gimmicks wo n't be to everybody 's taste . "
The show also received praise for its honest portrayal of mental health .
Brian Semple of The Independent calls the show " surprisingly honest , funny and even moving account of what it 's like for a teenage girl to live with serious mental health problems , free of many of the clichés that often inform how mental illness is portrayed on TV , " going on to say that Rae " has a mental illness , but it does n't define her .
It 's just something that she has to deal with and try to manage on a daily basis , just like the one in ten young people in the UK who have a mental illness . "
Semple refers to My Mad Fat Diary as a " breath of fresh air and will do a lot to change the way young people think about mental health .
"
The mental health charity Mind praised the My Mad Fat Diary , with the show 's depiction of mental health leading it to win the Drama category at their annual Media Awards in both 2014 and 2016 .
In a more mixed review , Robert Epstein of The Independent criticised E4 for relating the programme to its other teen shows : " If such comparisons are unfair , blame it on E4 , whose continuity announcer declared : ' If you like Skins , The Inbetweeners and Misfits , you 'll like this . '
Well , sorry , I do like those three shows , but , even with a great soundtrack
( if only the Mack really would return … ) and the odd nice line , My Mad Fat Diary is a long way from the equal of that trio in invention , edge or humour . "
My Mad Fat Diary star Sharon Rooney was chosen as one of the first group of BAFTA " Breakthrough Brits " in 2013 .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
The first episode of the third and final series attracted 548,000 viewers on E4 , whilst the second episode attracted 537,000 viewers .
The final episode of the series attracted 450,000 viewers .
All viewing figures exclude those who watched on All 4 and on E4 + 1 .
AMERICAN REMAKE Section::::American remake .
Tom Bidwell , the writer of the show , mentioned in April 2014 in an interview with the Chorley Guardian that MTV has commissioned him to work on an American remake of the show .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
My Mad Fat Diary at Channel 4
*
My Mad Fat Diary at IMDB
* My Mad Fat Diary On Facebook