COMEDIANS IN CARS
GETTING COFFEE Comedians in Cars
Getting Coffee is an American web series talk show directed and hosted by comedian Jerry Seinfeld , distributed for the first nine seasons by digital network Crackle , then moving to Netflix for season ten .
The series premiered on July 19 , 2012 .
Episodes feature Seinfeld introducing a vintage car selected for a guest comedian , followed by a drive to a pre - selected café or restaurant for coffee .
Episodes diverge from the format spontaneously , as when Michael Richards implores Seinfeld to take a side street , when Seinfeld returns after coffee with Carl Reiner to join him for dinner with Mel Brooks — or when car trouble arises .
As of May 2015 , the series had been streamed nearly 100 million times .
In January 2017 , it was announced that Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee would migrate from Crackle to Netflix starting with the show 's tenth season .
In January 2018 , most of the show 's previous episodes became available on Netflix ( the episode with Jason Alexander in character as George Costanza was not included ) .
The series ' 12-episode tenth season premiered on July 6 , 2018 .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Seinfeld has stated that the roots of the concept traced to a DVD extra he made for his 2002 documentary Comedian along with a later trip he made after purchasing an old VW Beetle in New Mexico , subsequently filming the return trip to the east coast with a friend .
Later , describing the birth of the series , Seinfeld said the series birth was " an experiment"—as " kind of a guess . "
Prior to development of the series , Seinfeld was told by leading social network advisers , including those at Facebook and Yahoo , that a show length exceeding five minutes had little chance of success on the web .
Howard Schultz , coffee magnate and Chairman of Starbucks , turned down the opportunity to sponsor the show .
Acura eventually sponsored the show , giving Seinfeld creative license with creating the commercials and product placements .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
Episodes are estimated to cost roughly $ 100,000 , with guests being paid in cash and the initial raw shoot lasting on average three - and - a - half hours , which is then edited over a two - week period down to a 12–20 minute episode .
The process uses a lean production staff involves a minimum of network interaction , and is designed as an edited and unscripted talk show without an audience that can be comfortably watched on a smart phone .
The show 's format around the car drive and " movement , " specifically because " when attempting to show the meandering , silly and sometimes deep conversations that comedians share , you have to remove the audience to keep the participants from dropping into their acts , " adding that " part of what makes the show watchable is that it 's always moving .
There 's no narrative [ to ] drive the story .
We know what happens .
We know they 're going to get coffee .
You need a kinetic energy to move it along , moving people around keeps them awake . "
Bob Einstein became the first repeat guest on the show , appearing in the first season and again in the ninth season .
Jimmy Fallon 's appearance in the fifth season was split into two episodes .
Several episodes have featured multiple guests appearing together including : Carl Reiner and Mel Brooks , Colin Quinn and Mario Joyner , and Kathleen Madigan and Chuck Martin .
Colleen Ballinger appeared in - character as Miranda Sings as a guest on an episode , and Jason Alexander reprised the role of George Costanza from Seinfeld for an episode .
EPISODES
SEASON 1
( 2012 )
SEASON 2
( 2013 )
SEASON 3 ( 2014 )
SEASON 4 ( 2014 )
SEASON 5 ( 2014 )
Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Season 5 ( 2014 ) .
A serialized yet separated storyline started in this season , featuring Michael Richards as Crackle President Dick Corcoran .
Joan Rivers had been asked by Seinfeld to be the fifth season 's first guest , however she postponed the appearance due to a scheduled medical procedure .
Rivers died as a result of that procedure .
SEASON 6 ( 2015 )
SEASON 7
( 2015–16 ) SEASON 8 ( 2016 )
SEASON 9 ( 2017 )
SEASON 10
( 2018 )
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Brian Lowry of Variety said the series is the kind of short - form concept that feels stretched even at 18 minutes .
David Hinckley of The New York Daily News gave the series 3 out of 5 stars .
Mike Hale of The New York Times said : " The [ series ' segments ] ... are presented in a clean , elegant template with a studiously casual pencil - drawn logo .
And the filming and editing are , if you break them down , impressively complex and artful for a Web series . "
The New York Timess Anand Giridharadas critiqued the show as being out of touch with the everyman , and more of a showcase of Seinfeld 's wealth .
Giridharadas wrote : " The democracy of observational humor has become , in Mr. Seinfeld 's reincarnation , an oligarchy of mutual admiration " .
Other publications have been more positive in their opinion .
The New York Daily News wrote of the show 's format and first three seasons that , " It all sounds random , which it is , and trivial , which it is and is n't .
In the end , the fun is contagious . "
Newsday then graded season four of the series with an " A " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
!
scope="col " width="5 % " Year ! scope="col " width="25 % " Award ! scope="col " width="40 % " Category ! scope="col " width="20 % " Recipients !
scope="col " width="5 % " Result SEE ALSO * Carpool – similar web series hosted by English actor and comedian Robert Llewellyn
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee on TV.com