ONTARIO
PLACE Ontario Place is a park and former theme park in Toronto , Ontario .
The grounds are located on the shore of Lake Ontario , south of Exhibition Place and southwest of Downtown Toronto .
It opened on May 22 , 1971 and consists of three artificially constructed landscaped islands .
The grounds are owned by the Government of Ontario and is administered as an agency of the Ontario Ministry of Tourism and Culture .
It is planned for redevelopment by the City of Toronto since the closure of the theme park .
Currently the site is home to the Budweiser Stage , a marina , and the geodesic dome that contains the Cinesphere , the world 's first IMAX theatre .
In 2018 , Ontario Premier Doug Ford 's government announced plans to dissolve the Ontario Place Corporation .
This follows the province indicating interest in establishing a casino on the lands .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Ontario Place theme park was an entertainment and exhibition complex located in Toronto , Ontario , Canada .
It operated annually during the summer months from 1971 until 2011 .
Designed originally to promote the Province of Ontario through exhibits and entertainment , its focus changed over time to be that of a theme park for families with a water park , a children 's play area , and amusement rides .
Exhibits in the pods were discontinued and the building became a venue for private events .
The concert stage was turned over to a private concert operator and rebuilt as the Amphitheatre .
After a long period of declining attendance , the Government of Ontario closed the facility except for its music venue and marina .
It plans to re - open the facility after redevelopment into a year - round multiple - use facility .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Built in 1926 , the CNE Ontario Government Building displayed exhibits about Ontario at the annual Canadian National Exhibition ( CNE ) .
After the success of Expo 67 in Montreal , the Government of Ontario decided to replace the facility with a new state - of - the - art showcase .
The park itself was originally conceived as an onshore exhibit , but this idea was discarded in favour of five large , architecturally unique , three - level Pods .
Each Pod would be approximately 8,000 square feet ( 743 m² )
in area , and suspended by steel cables from four large central pylons driven deep into the lake bed .
These Pods would initially house various Ontario - themed exhibits in an aquatic setting somewhat similar in concept to Montreal 's Expo 67 grounds ( which were in the middle of the Saint Lawrence River ) .
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION Section::::Design and construction .
During the design phase , a difficult design problem developed .
The cost of the open - water Pod foundations alone ( at the time , estimated at C$ 9 million ) would consume almost the entire budget for the Pods ' construction .
Architect Eb Zeidler was faced with a dilemma : how to construct the Pods without the necessary budget .
Zeidler developed an innovative solution : after a trip to the Caribbean , he realized that a " barrier reef " concept would cut down on wave action from the lake enough to reduce the cost of the Pods ' foundation to 1/10 of the original open - water estimate .
After some quarrels with the Toronto Harbour Commission ( due to the dangers of the unseen reef to shipping ) , the reef plan was modified to incorporate three artificial " barrier islands " made from city landfill .
Ironically , the barrier islands were to be so well crafted , they became an integral part of the Ontario Place experience .
The five steel and aluminum pavilion pods are square with sides .
The pods are supported on four pipe columns , rising above the lake .
Tension cables support the short - span trusses .
They sit on concrete filled caissons , driven into the lake 's bedrock .
Each of the pavilions is connected to one another and the land by glazed steel bridges .
Ontario Place was designed to have a modular use and appearance .
Zeidler says that the structures were designed to " give an illusion of dimensionless space , exploiting technology to shape the society of tomorrow . "
The Forum , an outdoor concert venue , was featured on a central hub - island , while a children 's village would occupy an eastern island .
A commercial section overlooked the water , with modular construction for shops and restaurants to the west .
All would be connected by an intricately planned set of walkways and bridges .
In addition , each island would have a unique colour scheme , and the entire complex was later infused with the brilliant colours and graphic design that were typical of the late 1960s and early 1970s .
The children 's village was designed by Eric McMillan .
The Forum theatre sat 3,000 and had additional grass ' seats ' .
The roof structure was a hyperbolic paraboloid positioned on cement bastions .
It covered a revolving stage , giving near 360 degree sightlines .
The roof was made out of tongue and groove plywood , covered by copper sheathing .
Landscape architect Michael Hough overlaid a scale model of the University of Toronto 's excellent walking paths onto the Ontario Place plans to check for appropriate walking distances .
This ensured that comfortable rest areas were placed appropriately , so that children and the elderly would not need to walk too far without a comfortable seat .
Soon after opening in 1971 , a rubber - wheeled tractor train was used to take visitors between key points on the various islands , though this has long since been discontinued .
Prevailing wind and wave conditions were also considered in the design , a scale model of which was tested in the University of Toronto 's wind tunnel .
Large earthwork berms planted with tall native Ontario trees were created to shelter walkways from the prevailing southwesterly winds .
To the south , a cost - effective and theme - congruent plan to sink three large obsolete Great Lakes shipping vessels was implemented , which sheltered the artificial harbour from intense open - lake waves .
( The same technique would later be used on Toronto Island and the Outer Harbour . )
The first phase of construction was the sinking of the ships onto a stone bed , then covered in concrete forming a long breakwater .
Once the perimeter was finished , work began on the of the three artificial islands .
There was originally some controversy about allowing a public facility to house an upscale boating dock within the new artificial harbour .
However , supporters of the plan believed that the dock 's integration into Ontario Place would tie the location closer to the lake via boating activity , and improve the general ambiance .
At Expo 67 , the new IMAX movie technology was first exhibited .
A great success , it was decided to build the first permanent IMAX installation at Ontario Place .
The Cinesphere , an 800-seat theatre , was built .
Its building is a ' spherical triodetic dome ' , with a outer radius , and a inner radius .
The dome is supported by prefabricated steel aluminum alloy tubes .
The final cost of construction was 29 million ( $ in dollars ) .
PROMOTION Section::::Promotion .
To commemorate the opening of the theme park and promote the province of Ontario , a multi - media exhibition was created and presented inside the pavilion .
Dolores Claman wrote the music and Richard Morris wrote lyrics for the music to this presentation , entitled " Theme from Ontario Place " .
" Theme from Ontario Place " was subsequently released by the Ontario Department of Trade and Development as a double sided 45 manufactured by Quality Records ( OP1971 ) ,
side A containing a " Pop " version and Side B an " Easy Listening " recording .
A photo of the still under construction
Ontario Place was used on the cover .
OPENING FACTS AND FIGURES
*
Construction start date :
March 17 , 1969
* Opening day : May 22 , 1971
* Total cost : $ 29,000,000 ( Canadian funds , not adjusted for inflation )
* Client : Ontario Department of Trade and Development
* Architects : Craig , Zeidler ; Strong * Structural Engineers : Gordon Dowdell Associates
* Landscape Architects :
Hough , Stansbury and Associates
* Contractor : Secant Construction * Initial park size : 360,000 m² ( 96 acres ) , 206,000 m² ( 51.4 acres ) created by landfill * First - year admission price : $ 1.00 Adults , $ 0.50 for Children
* Seating :
The Forum : 8,000 , Molson Amphitheatre : 16,000 * Attendance : 2.5 million ( 1971 ) , 1 million ( 2009 ) CHANGES OVER TIME Section::::Changes over time .
The park was altered considerably since its inception .
Redevelopment occurred on all three islands of the park ; the pod buildings themselves were eventually closed to exhibit space and rented out as the " Atlantis " private event facility .
In the 1980s , the west island was redeveloped with the " Ontario North Now " exhibit being installed to showcase Northern Ontario .
It was a combination of inter - connected silo - like buildings , topped with domes reminiscent of the Cinesphere , connected by overhead walkways , and a smaller domed movie theatre .
A boat - based water ride was added , along with a smaller exhibition center consisting of three concrete silo - like buildings .
A large reflecting pool nearby was drained and used to house the addition of a major " climber " structure , a smaller stage for kids shows and several other kid - oriented attractions , reducing the complete separation of areas that had been featured in the original design .
The popular outdoor concert stage , The Forum , was torn down in the mid-1990s and replaced with the Molson Canadian Amphitheatre , a much larger facility based on a bandshell design .
An additional " Echo Beach " outdoor music venue was added to the north shore of the east island .
On the east island , the original children 's area , which was primarily " non - powered " , has largely been removed .
The large wood - and - rope climber area was replaced with the large " Soak City " waterpark , the first water park in Ontario .
Several small fair - ground rides were later added .
The large tension structure tent that covered most of the children 's park was removed in 2009/10 , leaving a large open area with a new stage .
Many of the concrete bollards used to secure the various tents and structures can still be seen .
2010 REFURBISHMENT Section::::2010 refurbishment .
From the fall of 2010 through to the fall of 2011 , Ontario Place embarked upon an aggressive period of remediation and renewal .
Over $ 10,000,000 in provincial capital funds were spent on the property during this 12-month period .
These investments were directed toward : * a significant refreshing and expansion of the waterpark .
Froster Soak City added a new " family " waterslide , an outdoor " spa pool " and waterfall , and over 100 metres of new landscaped beach and public promenades .
These upgrades expanded Soak City 's variety , and added new views of the Toronto downtown waterfront .
The new slide , called " Topsy Turvy " , was purchased from ProSlide Technology of Ottawa , Ontario .
Topsy Turvy was recognized as the " 2010 Best New Waterslide " from the International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions ( IAAPA ) .
The installation of Topsy Turvy and the engineering systems needed for its operation were completed in October 2011 , too late for the 2011 final season ; * a restoration of the Cinesphere .
The original projection system was replaced by state - of - the - art IMAX 3D film technology , making Cinesphere the largest 3D theatre in Canada and second largest in North America .
New sound systems , seats , concession areas , and interiors were also added ; * introduction of an " in - habitat " ecology , conservation , and animal care exhibit called the Eco - Learning Centre .
A former arcade building , the Eco - Learning Centre was established in a lagoon area of Ontario Place as a fun and informative " edutainment " attraction , and was created with displays by the World Wildlife Fund , the Toronto and Region Conservation Authority , the Royal Ontario Museum , Parks Canada , the Toronto Humane Society , and the Ministry of Natural Resources .
The Eco - Learning Centre attracted over 300,000 visitors in its first year of operation .
* Echo Beach , a 5000-person capacity outdoor concert venue on the east side of Ontario Place .
Developed in collaboration with concert promoter Live Nation , Echo Beach is a general - admission concert venue designed to help re - create the popular ambience of the original Ontario Place Forum , minus the revolving stage but introducing a real sandy beach section with views of the Toronto nighttime skyline .
Some of the first performers Echo Beach in 2011 included Sloan , Robyn and Platinum Blonde .
Toronto Life Magazine wrote , " The new Echo Beach is a reason to love Toronto because music sounds better under the stars " .
For 2012 , based on strong reviews and rising attendance , Live Nation increased substantially the number of concerts scheduled for Echo Beach , including Our Lady Peace , Sam Roberts , and Counting Crows .
* a new , digitally - based , point - of - sale system installed throughout the park .
This modernization was undertaken to reduce retail transaction times , improve accounting efficiency , and enable significantly - enhanced data analytics .
* a new website , that would more easily enable in - house publishing , and new social marketing and mobile technology applications .
* general cleanliness of the park was also upgraded significantly , including the removal of over 1,000 feet of obsolete fencing .
Over and above these capital and cleanliness projects , Ontario Place also made significant investments in entertainment , marketing and sponsorship for its 40th anniversary celebrations .
Free grounds admission was offered to the public for the first time in 20 years .
Live entertainment performances were quadrupled , to over 2,000 .
Advertising was reinstated , with a new ad campaign developed by Draft FCB of Toronto .
And a significant sponsorship of the 40th birthday celebration by CTV generated over $ 1,500,000 in extra advertising value .
Ontario Place was recognized in 2011 by IAAPA as a worldwide finalist for a " Brass Ring Award " in the category of " Best Integrated Marketing Campaign . "
The results of this considerable and broad - based effort generated a significant , measurable , and immediate turnaround in the attendance numbers , park revenues , and public perceptions of Ontario Place in 2011 .
Total park attendance increased 9 % to 880,001 despite a below average year for concerts at the Molson Canadian Amphitheatre and a decline in cross - over attendance from the Canadian National Exhibition .
Core park attendance , however , increased 72 % to 563,362 .
First - time visitor attendance increased even more , at 89 % .
Revenues in all categories increased by double digit figures , despite the fact that there was no charge for actual admission to the grounds .
Scores from interview - based research into visitor perceptions also improved strongly .
Favourable response to the question , " Ontario Place has changed for the better " , increased by 43 % , as did , " Ontario Place is my favourite entertainment park in the GTA " , at 50 % up .
Perceptions of park cleanliness and general upkeep improved , by 34 % and 37 % , respectively .
FROSTER SOAK
CITY Section::::Froster Soak City .
Froster Soak City was the water park located in the Ontario Place theme park before its closure .
The waterpark began with a concrete waterslide , Canada 's first , opened in 1978 on the East Island infill .
It was expanded with new water attractions ( Hydrofuge in 1993 and Rush River Raft Ride , Pink Twister waterslide and Purple Pipeline waterslide in 1995 ) and eventually to the current Soak City theme in 2001 .
In the Splash Pad area of the park , many of the features are interactive and controlled by user - operable valves .
The valves are free - turning ball - valves connected to large handwheels .
ATTRACTIONS * Hydrofuge - open 1993
* Lakeside Beach Spa Pool
*
Pink Twister - open 1995
* Purple Pipeline - open 1995
* Rush River - open 1995
* Topsy Turvy - open August 2011
* Tipping Bucket *
Splash Pad FORMER ATTRACTIONS AND VENUES * is a decommissioned Second World War destroyer that was open to the public .
In the early 1960s , the ship was going to be scrapped , but volunteers raised enough money to have it saved and towed to Toronto .
It opened as an attraction in August 1965 at the pier on York Street .
The city had planned to build a ' Serviceman 's Memorial Park ' near Prince 's Gates at Exhibition Place .
When the organization ' Haida Inc. ' ran into financial problems , the ship was taken over by the Government of Ontario and moved in 1970 to the Ontario Place site , where it was turned into an attraction .
It was also used as a Sea Cadet training camp .
In 2002 , it was bought by Parks Canada and taken to a new home in Hamilton , Ontario and incorporated into a new marine museum in that city .
*
The Forum was an outdoor concert venue that was an architectural landmark torn down to make way for the Molson Amphitheatre : it featured covered seating under a unique tent - like , metal framed , solid roof , with extra seating on the open surrounding , grassy hills .
While having only half the seating capacity of the current Amphitheatre , it had ( arguably ) better sound , bench seating , and offered a far more intimate theatre in the round experience ; featuring a rotating stage which gave every seat in the house , in turn , an excellent view .
It also had the benefit of being generally free with park admission .
Featured events included an annual Toronto Symphony rendition of Tchaikovsky 's 1812 Overture , complete with the firing of the guns from the nearby HMCS Haida , and often performances by well established acts , such as BB King , Glen Campbell , Kenny Rogers , Johnny Cash , Dizzy Gillespie , Pat Metheny and Canadian acts like Lighthouse , Bruce Cockburn , The Nylons , Luba , James Brown , Men Without Hats , Doug and the Slugs , Parachute Club and Red Rider .
Unfortunately , due to a riot by Teenage Head fans in 1981 ( purportedly instigated by their manager , who allegedly was interested in the publicity ) harder rock acts were thereafter banned from the venue .
In summer of 1983 , the Forum was ahead of the curve by bringing in acts like Paul Young and the Royal Family and Tina Turner just before her huge comeback the following year .
* " Future Pod " opened in 1982 in Pod 5 , featuring displays and exhibits in technology , communications and energy , including a full - sized replica of the Canada Arm .
*
The Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum originally opened in Ontario Place before moving to its permanent home in St. Marys , Ontario .
* " Ontario North Now " made up the bulk of the west island , including the wilderness adventure ride , a simulated mine , and Muskeg Pete 's Main Street .
The mine exhibit became a weather exhibit in the 2000s .
FINAL ATTRACTIONS East Island Section::::Final attractions .
An acrobatic stage show , within the Heritage Square , played for part of the final season .
Numerous midway rides were temporarily installed at the park in its final season .
* Power Wheels –
This ride was closed in June 2011 , early in the final season of the first era of the park .
* Cyclone * Mini Bumper Boats * First Flight * Free Fall
* Tilt - A - Whirl
* Mini Greens ( mini golf )
* Super Slide * 4D Ontario
* Cyclone Speedway
* Aquajet Racers
* Froster Soak City
* Waterplay Splash
Pad
Marina Village
*
Cinesphere in IMAX 3D * Atlantis – Restaurant / Club * OP Driving School
* Bumper Boats * Cool Hoops – Closed as of June 2011 * Marina with Lake Ontario access * Boat School * Eco - learning center
* Earth Ranger *
Mega Bounce * OP Driving School
* Wacky Worm –
Ontario Place 's first roller - coaster West Island
* Wilderness Adventure ride
* 3D F / X Adventure Theatre
* National Helicopters
* Megamaze
* The Go Zone
*
Treehouse Live !
Waterfall Stage , previously on the East Island
REDEVELOPMENT 2010
REQUEST FOR INFORMATION
Section::::Redevelopment .
Section::::2010 request for information .
In the summer of 2010 , the provincial government issued a Request for Information calling for ideas from private bidders to completely redevelop the park .
Ontario
Place general manager Tim Casey told the Toronto Star that " 2011 will be our 40th anniversary .
It definitely needs a revitalization , that 's no surprise .
It 's a blank slate , we 're open to just about anything . "
A formal Request for Proposals process began that fall .
The government intends to transform the park from a largely seasonal facility to a year - round attraction .
Redevelopment was to have included the tearing down of the Cinesphere as well as other long standing attractions .
2012
CLOSURE Section::::2012 closure .
On February 1 , 2012 , the government announced that the public sections of the park would be closed and redeveloped , which was completed in 2017 , in time for Canada 's 150th anniversary .
John Tory was announced as the chair of a Minister 's Advisory Panel on Revitalization .
All Ontario Place facilities were closed except for the marina , the Molson Canadian Amphitheatre , the Atlantis entertainment venue and parking .
2014 Section::::2014 .
Following the provincial elections in June , the government announced the plans in July for Ontario Place to be developed as an urban parkland with Molson Canadian Amphitheatre , Cinesphere and the pods retained .
2015
Section::::2015 .
The West Channel at Ontario Place was a venue for the 2015 Pan American Games ( Athletics -marathon / race walk , cycling ( road race ) , triathlon ( cycling / run ) , open water swimming , triathlon ( swim ) , water skiing and 2015 Parapan American Games ( Cycling ) .
Minor and temporary upgrades were made to accommodate use during the games .
Construction was begun in March on the park and a waterfront path , which was named the William G. Davis Trail , after the Ontario premier who opened the original Ontario Place in 1971 .
2017
Section::::2017 .
Portions of the East Island have been transformed from a parking lot into Trillium Park and the William G. Davis Trail , which opened in June 2017 .
IN POPULAR
MEDIA Section::::In popular media .
Ontario Place served as a filming location for the episode " Angel of Death " from the TV series War of the Worlds .
It was the setting for a shootout where Dr. Harrison Blackwood , his team , and a supposed alien ally confront the evil aliens which are personally led by the alien advocacy .
SEE ALSO
* Venues of the 2015
Pan American and Parapan American Games REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Ontario Place * Ontario Place Revitalization * Ontario Place Revitalization report ( PDF )
* Theme from Ontario Place – A side * Theme from Ontario Place – B side * Promotional video for Ontario Place , 1971 , Archives of Ontario YouTube Channel