THE FALL ( TV SERIES )
The Fall is a British - Irish crime drama television series filmed and set in Northern Ireland .
The series , starring Gillian Anderson as Detective Superintendent Stella Gibson , is created and written by Allan Cubitt and features Jamie Dornan as serial killer Paul Spector .
It is produced by Artists Studio , and shown on RTÉ One in the Republic of Ireland and BBC Two in the UK .
The series premiered in the Republic of Ireland on RTÉ One on 12 May 2013 , and in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on 13 May 2013 .
The second series began in the Republic of Ireland on 9 November and in the UK on 13 November 2014 .
The third series premiered on RTÉ One on 25 September and on BBC Two on 29 September 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Metropolitan Police Superintendent Stella Gibson , a senior investigating officer tasked with reviewing investigations , is seconded to the Police Service of Northern Ireland ( PSNI ) in order to assess the progress of a murder investigation that has remained active longer than 28 days .
When it becomes apparent a serial killer is on the loose , local detectives must work with Stella to find and capture Paul Spector , who is attacking young professional women in the city of Belfast .
As time passes Stella 's team works tirelessly to build a case , but they are met with complications both inside and outside the PSNI .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Cubitt said that he originally was researching another show he was planning on writing and read a book on the BTK ( " Bind , Torture , Kill " ) serial killer , Dennis Rader .
Cubitt found the structure of the book , which began with a structured look at the BTK Killer 's attack that was possible because of Rader 's own testimony , documentary evidence that he had left , and the extensive forensic evidence that was gathered from the scene of the crime .
Inspired by this , Cubitt created a structure where the killer is identified immediately , eliminating the whodunit aspect of many stories .
The focus could then become on the motivation and underlying reasons for the killings and a focus on the insights that might be gained about the psychology of the killer , even in the face of what might be considered a normal , functioning person with a job , wife , and children .
Cubitt said this was the starting point that interested him : how this supposedly normally functioning person would then be connected to the crimes .
SERIES 1
Section::::Series 1 .
On 3 February 2012 , BBC Two picked up The Fall series with a five episode order .
The series was written by Allan Cubitt and produced for BBC Two by Artists Studio and BBC Northern Ireland , with funding from Northern Ireland Screen and the European Regional Development Fund .
Gub Neal and Julian Stevens produced , with Cubitt , Justin Thomson - Glover , Patrick Irwin , and Stephen Wright serving as executive producers .
Jakob Verbruggen directed the first series .
Cubitt cast Gillian Anderson first , then cast Jamie Dornan .
The series premiered in the Republic of Ireland on RTÉ One on 12 May 2013 , and in the UK on BBC Two on 13 May 2013 . SERIES 2
Section::::Series 2 .
BBC Two renewed the show for a second series on 27 May 2013 .
On 21 October 2013 , it was announced that Jakob Verbruggen would not be returning to direct The Fall second series .
Instead Cubitt would direct , with production due to begin in February 2014 .
Series star Gillian Anderson became an executive producer for the programme from its second series .
Production of series 2 ended in June 2014 .
Series 2 began in the Republic of Ireland on Sunday , 9 November on RTÉ One and in the United Kingdom on BBC Two Thursday , 13 November 2014 .
SERIES 3
Section::::Series 3 .
In March 2015 , it was announced that the BBC had commissioned a third series of The Fall .
Cubitt stated that this series was conceived " in the hope of further exploring the characters and themes that are at the heart of [ the drama ] " .
Cubitt stated that he has already envisaged how the show 's third series will conclude .
Carol Moorhead replaced Julian Stevens as second producer of the third series .
Filming took place in Belfast between December 2015 and April 2016 .
The third series got an exclusive look at the Edinburgh International Television Festival on 25 August 2016 .
It premiered in the Republic of Ireland on Sunday , 25 September on RTÉ One and in the UK on Thursday , 29 September 2016 on BBC Two .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
It was reported that Cubitt has ideas for several seasons past Spector 's arc .
In September 2016 , Cubitt confirmed that the third series is Dornan 's last , but expressed intention for future series .
Cubitt added that the fourth series " is n't going to be straight away . "
Anderson stated : " I 'm excited by the idea of potentially revisiting it in a few years , to see what transpires in Stella 's life afterwards . "
CASTING SERIES 1
Section::::Casting .
Section::::Series 1 .
Casting announcements began in February 2012 , with Gillian Anderson first to be cast in the series as Detective Superintendent Stella Gibson .
Next to join the series was Northern Irish actor Jamie Dornan as serial killer Paul Spector .
Archie Panjabi , Emmett Scanlan and Karen Hassan were next to be cast , with Panjabi playing Reed Smith , Scanlan playing DC Glen Martin and Hassan playing Annie Brawley .
It was later announced that Niamh McGrady , Bronagh Waugh , John Lynch , and Séainín Brennan had joined the series .
SERIES 2
Section::::Series 2 .
In 2014 , it was announced that Colin Morgan and Bronagh Taggart had joined the cast in starring roles as Tom Anderson and Gail McNally , respectively .
Jonjo O'Neill later joined the main cast , while Claire Rafferty was cast in a recurring capacity .
Ian McElhinney departed the series in episode 1 , whilst lead actress Archie Panjabi departed following the series ' penultimate episode .
SERIES 3
Section::::Series 3 .
Anderson , Dornan , Lynch , Waugh , Franciosi , Kane , O'Neill , and Morgan all returned as regulars for the third series , alongside new cast members Aisling Bea , Richard Coyle , Barry Ward , Richard Clements , Ruth Bradley , Genevieve O'Reilly , Aidan McArdle , Denise Gough , Martin McCann , Conor MacNeill and Krister Henriksson .
Former main cast members Niamh McGrady , Stuart Graham and Bronagh Taggart returned in guest arcs .
MAIN CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Main cast and characters .
Cubitt was inspired by guitar manufacturing companies when naming some of his characters ; both Stella and Gibson are brands of guitar , as are Benedetto , Brawley , Breedlove , Burns , Eastwood , Hagstrom , Kay , Martin , Music Man , Paul Reed Smith , Spector , Stagg and Tom Anderson .
EPISODES INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST
* The first series aired on Bravo in Canada .
Reruns have aired on M3 since June 2014 .
*
The series also aired across Latin America during September 2013 for subscribers to the TV satellite provider DirecTV .
The Fall was aired on the exclusive channel OnDIRECTV in high definition .
The entire series was aired on OnDirectv , an exclusive TV channel for DirecTV subscribers and as of 2017 it is also available on Netflix in the region .
* HBO Europe has picked up the series to air on their Cinemax channels in the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Poland , Romania , Moldova , Bulgaria , Croatia , Slovenia , Serbia , Montenegro , Kosovo , Macedonia , Bosnia - Herzegovina and Albania .
* Estonian National Broadcasting started to run the series in Estonia on channel ETV ( Eesti Televisioon ) on 7 December 2014 .
*
Hot ( Israel ) started screening the series on its video on demand service in February 2014 .
*
In Australia , the first series was shown on UKTV ( Foxtel ) in April / May 2014 .
The series began airing on SBS One starting 23 October 2014 .
Series 2 was shown on BBC First in November / December 2014 – within 48 hours of the first broadcasts in the UK , and on SBS One in November 2015 .
*
In New Zealand , the series began airing on the Sky channel SoHo on Thursday 29 August 2013 .
*
In Italy the first series was shown on Sky Atlantic .
*
In the Netherlands the first series was aired by KRO in HD on public channel NPO 1 between 14 March 2015 and 11 April 2015 .
Series 2 began airing on KRO in HD on public channel NPO 1 on 29 August 2015 .
*
In Germany , the show was given the title ( " Death in Belfast " ) ; the first two series aired together in Germany on ZDF from 15 November to 16 December 2015 .
The two series were shown in a recut containing 6 episodes with each being 90 minutes long and a total of 540 minutes altogether .
This equates to approximately 120 minutes of the whole material of series 1 and 2 being cut .
The uncut version was later shown in re - runs by channels ZDFneo and Sky Krimi .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Fall received positive reviews from critics .
Both the first and the second series received a rating of 100 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
The third series has a rating of 71 % .
The first series has a score of 81 out of 100 on Metacritic , indicating " universal acclaim " .
The third series has a score of 60 out of 100 , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Jupiter Award HOME MEDIA RELEASES Section::::Home media releases .
The first series was made available in full in the United States via Netflix 's " Watch Instantly " service starting 28 May 2013 , and airs on Bravo and Netflix in Canada .
The second series was broadcast on Netflix 's " Watch Instantly " service , starting in January 2015 , in the United States .
It was also broadcast on Netflix in Canada .
In Latin America , Netflix began broadcasting the season on 16 January 2015 , at 12:01am .
The third series was made available to non - UK Netflix subscribers on 29 October 2016 . !
colspan=2 rowspan=2 Series !
colspan=2 Originally aired !
colspan=3 DVD release dates !
colspan=3 Blu - ray disc release date !
First aired !
Last aired !
Region 1 !
Region 2 !
Region 4 !
Region A !
Region B
bgcolor="A62821 " height="10px " bgcolor="000000 " height="10px " FRENCH REMAKE Section::::French remake .
In August 2016 , it was announced that the French private national TV channel TF1 is producing a remake of the series , titled Insoupçonnable ( " unsuspected " ) .
The French adaptation will star Emmanuelle Seigner and Melvil Poupaud as the leads , and supporting cast that will include : Jean - Hugues Anglade , Claire Keim , Patrick Chesnais , Bérengère Krief and Sofia Essaïdi .
Filming began in Lyon on 12 September 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Fall on RTÉ
* The Fall on Netflix