STALINGRAD ( 2013 FILM ) Stalingrad ( ) is a 2013 Russian war film directed by Fedor Bondarchuk .
It was the first Russian movie released in IMAX .
The film was released in September 2013 in Volgograd ( formerly " Stalingrad " ) and October in Russia before its international release in subsequent months ( all releases were handled by the foreign - language arm of Columbia Pictures ) .
The film was selected as the Russian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 86th Academy Awards , but it was not nominated .
Stalingrad received the I3DS ( International 3D and Advanced Imaging Society )
Jury Award for Russia in 2014 .
The film is a love story set in November 1942 during the Battle of Stalingrad , three months into that six month conflagration that caused nearly 2,000,000 total casualties ( wounded , killed , captured ) for the two opponents , including tens of thousands of Russian civilians .
The story follows soldiers from both sides as they fight to survive while saving the lives of their loves , and struggle with retaining their humanity in the face of certain death and the unspeakable horrors of war .
The plot seems to be somewhat influenced by chapter 57 of Life And Fate , by Vasily Grossman , and therefore does have a literary antecedent .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film opens in Japan in the wake of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami .
As emergency personnel work to reach some victims trapped underground , one rescuer tries to keep the victims calm by telling the story of how he came to have five fathers , all killed during the Great Patriotic War ( World War II ) .
The trapped victims are young German students and the rescuers are Russian .
In 1942 , after the initial attack on Stalingrad , a small group of Russian soldiers take cover in a large five story residential building that happens to provide cover for a Russian crossing point on the Volga river .
Five of these soldiers become the five fathers in the story : Polyakov ( " Angel " ) who had become embittered when his wife and daughter were killed in an air raid ; Chvanov , whose hatred of the Germans comes from their cruel treatment and methodical murder of his family ; Nikiforov , a talented tenor singer before the war , who had become a cruel and vicious fighter ; Sergey , drafted into the war as a spotter ; and Captain Gromov , a veteran and hero who leads the group after finding them .
The soldiers encounter a young girl named Katya , living alone in the building after her family had been killed .
As they spend the next few days together , the soldiers grow fond of her , and she of them .
Germans encamped near the crossing are led by Hauptmann Kahn ; a highly decorated , but disillusioned soldier who falls in love with a Russian woman named Masha , who resembles his late wife .
She at first detests him , but soon begins to reciprocate his love , although they can not speak each other 's language .
Oberstleutnant Henze arrives to take command of the Germans .
He chides Kahn both for his attraction to Masha , as well as his failure to eradicate the Russian soldiers .
Henze decides to set an example by rounding up the Russian civilians living in the bombed out buildings , then burning a woman and her daughter alive .
This enrages the Russian soldiers who ambush the Germans , killing several , but losing several of their own men in the process .
The Germans and Russians then retreat to their own shelters to wait the others out .
One afternoon , Chvanov teaches Katya how to aim her gun at a German washing himself at a water faucet and startled , accidentally shoots him , which causes retaliation that injures Chvanov .
During one of his visits to Masha , Kahn promises to take her to safety when the time comes .
On her 19th birthday , Katya is presented with a handmade cake from the soldiers , with a song by Nikiforov , whom she had earlier recognized as a famous singer .
She is then given the gift of a bathtub filled with hot water , a luxury no one has experienced since the siege began .
Sergey takes Katya to his old lookout spot , located in a building not occupied by either the Germans or the Russians .
The two spend the night together , unknowingly creating the narrator of our story .
After Polyakov ricocheted an artillery shell into the German complex , Kahn is ordered to begin the attack on them ; he takes Masha to an abandoned building , hoping to save her from the coming fight .
As she begs him to stay with her , she is shot by Chvanov for being a collaborator , enraging Kahn .
Nikiforov is taken captive by the Germans , where he manages to brutally stab Henze before being killed himself .
Henze 's death puts Kahn back in charge .
German reinforcements arrive with tanks that have the range to take out the Russian soldiers and their building .
They open fire , fatally injuring Chvanov .
Kahn and his soldiers attack , shooting Polyakov to death .
Kahn then finds Gromov on the second floor trying to use a radio .
The two of them shoot each other several times before collapsing .
Sergey reaches them and uses the radio to order an air strike on their building , which is being overrun by German soldiers .
Katya watches with a broken heart as the building is leveled , leaving no one inside alive .
Back in the present day , the Germans are freed from the building .
The girl to whom Sergey ( who had been named after his biological father ) had told his story seeks him out , and they share a moment of understanding before he is driven away .
CAST
* Pyotr Fyodorov as Capt .
Gromov * Dmitriy Lysenkov as Sgt .
Chavanov * Alexey Barabash as Nikiforov * Andrey Smolyakov as Polyakov * Sergey Bondarchuk Jr. as Lt .
Sergey
Astakhov
* Oleg Volku as Krasnov * Philippe Reinhardt as Gottfried * Georges Devdariani as Klose
* Yanina Studilina as Masha * Maria Smolnikova as Katya * Thomas Kretschmann as Hauptmann Peter Kahn * Heiner Lauterbach as Oberstleutnant Henze * Polina Raikina as Natashka * Yuriy Nazarov as Navodchik * Daniel Moorehead as Sergey BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The original script by Ilya Tilkin does not have any literary source .
The screenwriter studied diaries of the participants of the Battle of Stalingrad .
He also used museum archives , documents and recorded stories of its participants .
The prototype of this house is the legendary Pavlov 's House in Stalingrad .
On the eve of the filming , the script was significantly rewritten by the director and screenwriter Sergey Snezhkin including the plot and dialogues .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The first part of filming took place in autumn 2011 and lasted 17 days .
During that time , two key episodes of the battle were shot , in which 900 extras and historical reenactors took part in crowd scenes .
The main shooting process began at the end of May 2012 and ran until 27 July 2012 .
Colossal scenery was constructed especially for Stalingrad filming at the former factory " Krasny Treugolnik " in St. Petersburg , and the Third North Fort near Kronstadt .
Every detail for the movie sets depicting the centre of Stalingrad and the east bank of the Volga were faithfully and painstakingly reproduced , reflecting the vast scale of the battle .
The budget for its construction was more than 120 million rubles ( US$ 3.5 million ) , and it took over 400 people working for 6 months to build .
Unusually though , for all the attention to detail the film - makers took , the Panzers reproduced for a major scene late in the film were modeled on a much different later type of the German Mk .
IV that did not enter service until around a year after the battle ( the Mk .
IV G /
H)- a major oversight by the historical advisors and production team .
The film was produced in 3D using equipment provided by a Hollywood company , 3ality Technica .
It was released in 3D , IMAX 3D , and 2D.
For the reason that I continue to work on this project , I read all the history of the Battle of Stalingrad .
From " Stalingrad " by Antony Beevor and " In the Trenches of Stalingrad " by Nekrasov to " Iron Cross " by Wilhelm Heinrich and " Life and Fate " by Vasily Grossman .
–
Fedor Bondarchuk , the director of Stalingrad
It is planned that all German speech will not be dubbed into Russian in favour of subtitles instead .
Fedor Bondarchuk and Thomas Kretschmann have already starred in films with the name Stalingrad around the same time .
Kretschmann played a Leutnant in the 1993 German film , and Bondarchuk was in the 1989 Russian film , which was directed by Yuri Ozerov .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Reception of the film was mixed .
It was praised for stunning visuals , sound editing , music , and acting , but at the same time criticized for direction and melodramatic plot .
According to Russian review aggregator Kritikanstvo.ru , its average critical score in Russian media is 63 out of 100 .
Such media as Rossiyskaya Gazeta , Vedomosti , Izvestia , Kommersant , and Expert were positive about the film .
Several others , including Argumenty i Fakty , Ogoniok , and web publicist
Dmitry Puchkov gave negative reviews .
Some critics were disappointed by the film 's plot on patriotic grounds : they felt it did not pay sufficient tribute to the heroes of the Stalingrad battle , but rather concentrated too much on the love story .
According to VTsIOM poll , Stalingrad was the most popular film of 2013 in Russia .
12 % of respondents named it as " Film of the year " , which is far above 4 % for the runner - up , sport drama
Legend № 17 .
On American film aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 51 % rating , with an average score of 5.6/10 , based on reviews from 69 critics .
The site 's consensus states : " There 's no arguing with its impressive production values , but Stalingrad should have devoted more attention to the screenplay and spent less on special effects - enhanced spectacle . "
On another American aggregation website , Metacritic , the film has a 49/100 ( citing " mixed or average reviews " ) , based on reviews from 23 critics .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
In Russia , Stalingrad was a huge box office success earning a total of US$ 51,700,000 , which set a new box office record for contemporary Russian films .
It also set the record for opening weekend takings there , with a revenue of US$ 16,120,000 .
In the USA , the movie grossed just over US$ 1,000,000 .
Overall , the film earned over $ 68 million dollars worldwide .
It was the highest - grossing non - Hollywood , non - English language film in China until surpassed by India 's PK in 2015 .
SEE ALSO
* Cinema of Russia * List of submissions to the 86th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
* List of Russian submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Deserted " Stalingrad " movie set