CAPTAIN AMERICA : THE WINTER SOLDIER Captain America
: The Winter Soldier is a 2014 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Captain America , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures .
It is the sequel to 2011 's and the ninth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) .
The film was directed by Anthony and Joe Russo , with a screenplay by the writing team of Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely .
It stars Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America , alongside Scarlett Johansson , Sebastian Stan , Anthony Mackie , Cobie Smulders , Frank Grillo , Emily VanCamp , Hayley Atwell , Robert Redford , and Samuel L. Jackson .
In Captain America : The Winter Soldier , Captain America , Black Widow , and Falcon join forces to uncover a conspiracy within S.H.I.E.L.D. while facing a mysterious assassin known as the Winter Soldier .
A major influence in The Winter Soldier was conspiracy fiction from the 1970s such as Three Days of the Condor , with the script also drawing from the Winter Soldier story arc written by Ed Brubaker .
The script was written in 2011 , with the Russo brothers entering negotiations to direct in June 2012 and casting beginning the following month .
Principal photography commenced in April 2013 in Los Angeles , California before moving to Washington , D.C. and Cleveland , Ohio .
While the directors aimed for more realism , with focus on practical effects and intense stunt work , 2,500 visual effects shots were done by six different companies .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier premiered in Los Angeles on March 13 , 2014 , and was released in the United States on April 4 , 2014 , in 2D , 3D , and IMAX 3D.
The film became a critical and commercial success , receiving praise for its action sequences , musical score , acting , direction , storyline , themes , stunt work , and visuals .
It grossed over $ 714 million worldwide , making it the seventh highest - grossing film of 2014 , and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects .
A sequel titled , also directed by the Russo brothers , was released on May 6 , 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Two years after the Battle of New York , Steve Rogers works in Washington , D.C. for the espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D. under Director Nick Fury , while adjusting to contemporary society .
Rogers and Agent Natasha Romanoff are sent with S.H.I.E.L.D. 's counter - terrorism S.T.R.I.K.E. team , led by Agent Rumlow , to free hostages aboard a S.H.I.E.L.D. vessel from Georges Batroc and his mercenaries .
Mid - mission , Rogers discovers Romanoff has another agenda : to extract data from the ship 's computers for Fury .
Rogers returns to the Triskelion , S.H.I.E.L.D. 's headquarters , to confront Fury and is briefed about Project Insight : three Helicarriers linked to spy satellites , designed to preemptively eliminate threats .
Unable to decrypt the data recovered by Romanoff , Fury becomes suspicious about Insight and asks senior S.H.I.E.L.D. official and Secretary of Internal Security Alexander Pierce to delay the project .
On his way to rendezvous with Maria Hill , Fury is ambushed by assailants led by a mysterious assassin called the Winter Soldier .
Fury escapes to Rogers ' apartment , and warns Rogers that S.H.I.E.L.D. is compromised .
Fury is gunned down by the Winter Soldier , before handing Rogers a flash drive containing data from the ship .
Fury is pronounced dead during surgery , and Hill recovers the body .
The next day , Pierce summons Rogers to the Triskelion .
When Rogers withholds Fury 's information , Pierce brands him a fugitive .
Hunted by S.T.R.I.K.E. , Rogers meets with Romanoff .
Using data in the flash drive , they discover a secret S.H.I.E.L.D. bunker in New Jersey , where they activate a supercomputer containing the preserved consciousness of Arnim Zola .
Zola reveals that ever since S.H.I.E.L.D. was founded after World War II , Hydra has secretly operated within its ranks , sowing global chaos with the objective of making humanity surrender its freedom in exchange for security .
The pair narrowly escape death when a S.H.I.E.L.D. missile destroys the bunker , and realize that Pierce is Hydra 's leader within S.H.I.E.L.D. Rogers and Romanoff enlist the help of former USAF pararescueman Sam Wilson , whom Rogers befriended , and acquire his powered " Falcon " wingpack .
Deducing that S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Jasper Sitwell is a Hydra mole , they force him to divulge that Zola developed a data - mining algorithm that can identify individuals becoming threats to Hydra .
The Insight Helicarriers will sweep the globe , using satellite - guided guns to eliminate these individuals .
Rogers , Romanoff , and Wilson are ambushed by the Winter Soldier , who kills Sitwell .
During the fight , Rogers recognizes the Winter Soldier as Bucky Barnes , his childhood best friend who supposedly fell to his death on a mission , but was actually captured and experimented upon after WWII .
Hill manages to extract the trio to a safehouse where Fury , who had faked his death , is waiting with plans to sabotage the Helicarriers by replacing their controller chips .
After the World Security Council members arrive for the Helicarriers ' launch , Rogers broadcasts Hydra 's plot to everyone at the Triskelion .
Romanoff , disguised as one of the Council members , disarms Pierce .
Fury arrives and forces Pierce to unlock S.H.I.E.L.D. 's database so that Romanoff can leak classified information , exposing Hydra to the public .
Following a struggle , Fury kills Pierce .
Meanwhile , Rogers and Wilson storm two Helicarriers and replace the controller chips , but the Winter Soldier destroys Wilson 's suit and fights Rogers on the third .
Rogers fends him off and replaces the final chip , allowing Hill to take control and have the vessels destroy each other .
Rogers refuses to fight the Winter Soldier in an attempt to reach his friend , but as the ship collides with the Triskelion , Rogers is thrown out into the Potomac River .
The Winter Soldier rescues the unconscious Rogers before disappearing into the woods .
With S.H.I.E.L.D. in disarray , Romanoff appears before a Senate subcommittee and Fury , under the cover of his apparent death , heads to Eastern Europe in pursuit of Hydra 's remaining cells .
Rogers and Wilson decide to find the Winter Soldier , while Rumlow , who was a double agent for Hydra , is hospitalized following the Triskelion 's destruction .
In a mid - credits scene , Baron Wolfgang von Strucker , at a Hydra lab , proclaims that the " age of miracles " has begun as scientists examine an energy - filled scepter and two test subjects : one with superhuman speed , the other with telekinetic powers .
In a post - credits scene , Barnes visits his own memorial at the Smithsonian Institution .
CAST
* Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America :
* Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow :
* Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier :
* Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson
/ Falcon : * Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill :
* Frank Grillo as Brock Rumlow :
* Emily VanCamp as Sharon Carter / Agent 13 :
* Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter :
* Robert Redford as Alexander Pierce :
* Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury : Section::::Cast .
Additionally , Toby Jones , Maximiliano Hernández , and Garry Shandling reprise their roles from previous MCU films as Arnim Zola , Jasper Sitwell , and Senator Stern , respectively .
Georges St - Pierre plays Georges Batroc , a mercenary and a master of the French form of kickboxing known as savate .
Callan Mulvey plays Jack Rollins , a member of S.H.I.E.L.D. 's S.T.R.I.K.E. unit .
Chin Han , Jenny Agutter ( who previously appeared in The Avengers ) , Alan Dale , and Bernard White appear as members of the World Security Council .
Comedic actors
Danny Pudi and DC Pierson have small roles as a S.H.I.E.L.D. technician and an Apple Store employee , respectively .
Gary Sinise narrates a Captain America - themed Smithsonian Institution exhibit , and Stan Lee cameos as a security guard there .
Winter Soldier creator Ed Brubaker makes a cameo as a scientist working on the Winter Soldier .
Co - director Joe Russo cameos as a doctor , and Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely cameo as two S.H.I.E.L.D. interrogators .
Thomas Kretschmann , Henry Goodman , Elizabeth Olsen and Aaron Taylor - Johnson appear , uncredited , as Baron Wolfgang von Strucker , Dr. List , the Scarlet Witch , and Quicksilver , respectively , in the mid - credits scene .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In April 2011 , before was released in theaters , screenwriters Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely announced that Marvel had already hired the duo to work on the film 's sequel .
In September 2011 , Chris Evans said that a sequel may not be released until 2014 .
In January 2012 , Neal McDonough , who played Dum Dum Dugan in Captain America : The First Avenger , mentioned that a sequel would likely be filmed after the completion of , which would likely have been before the end of 2012 .
By March 2012 , Marvel whittled down the possible directors for the sequel to three candidates : George Nolfi , F. Gary Gray , and brothers Anthony and Joseph Russo .
Walt Disney Studios announced the planned release of the sequel to Captain America : The First Avenger on April 4 , 2014 .
Disney stated , " The second installment will pick - up where ...
The Avengers leaves off , as Steve Rogers continues his affiliation with Nick Fury and S.H.I.E.L.D. and struggles to embrace his role in the modern world . "
Markus later elaborated , " I think S.H.I.E.L.D. is the water [ Rogers is ] swimming in .
It 's definitely a Captain America movie .
You know , if the first movie was a movie about the US Army , then this is a movie about S.H.I.E.L.D ...
You will learn about S.H.I.E.L.D.
You will learn about where it came from and where it 's going and some of the cool things they have . "
In April , F. Gary Gray withdrew his name from consideration , choosing instead to direct the N.W.A biographical film Straight Outta Compton .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
McFeely said the writing process began in the middle of 2011 , around the release of The First Avenger , with him and Markus " noodling on in hopes that there would be a second one and we did a lot of just throwing stuff at the wall and seeing what stuck " .
The first few months of writing were a back and forth process with Marvel , but after an outline was finished , the story did not change much .
They opted to set the story in the present day , and , after " experimenting with flashback elements for more period World War II stuff " , decided to abandon the flashbacks as " it became unwieldy .
" The film would be " Cap versus the world we all live in today " , while averting excessive comedy regarding the hero 's time displacement , as Markus considered the Captain " the most adaptive man on the planet . " The tone would be more grounded in reality despite the advanced technology to contrast the fantasy elements from both the first Captain America and The Avengers .
Despite that , the comic book origins guaranteed that the film would not have verisimilitude .
This still proved a challenge in the reveal of Arnim Zola , that had to be extensively rewritten to convey how " this grounded espionage paranoid thriller suddenly screeches to a halt and you switch gears really quickly with this ghost in the machine " that introduces more science fiction elements .
Markus and McFeely wanted to adapt Ed Brubaker 's Winter Soldier storyline from the comics , which they described as " the tone of Cap 's modern franchise " , but it took the duo six months to convince themselves that they could do it .
In the meantime , while thinking how to progress from the war film tone of The First Avenger , the writers settled on the conspiracy genre for the screenplay , and cited Three Days of the Condor , The Parallax View , and Marathon Man as influences , feeling it better conveyed Captain America 's trust issues and contrasting values in the new world he was living in , with Markus saying , " If you put that 1940s man into present day geo - politics everything is going to seem like a conspiracy .
It 's just going to seem dirty and underhanded and shifty , and people wo n't be telling the truth .
" Three Days of the Condor in particular was used as the main source of the script structure , following the idea that the protagonist is being chased by a threat they , along with the audience , only discover halfway through the film .
The writers felt this approach was similar to how Stan Lee reinvented Captain America in the 1960s and 1970s , with " the Captain dealing with all sorts of the same things that the country [ was ] dealing with – Vietnam , Watergate and all that stuff – so he gets to have opinions on that " , thus making the " guy who is ostensibly from the more black and white 1940s react to this ultimately grey world that we live in . "
Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige described the film as a political thriller , and as the duo struggled to figure out a third act , Feige suggested that S.H.I.E.L.D. be brought down and have Captain America fight the agency .
The writers thought this was a great story point , for implementing " the physical manifestation of Cap changing the world . "
Markus even noted how the 1970s comics had similar conspiracies .
The Hydra reveal made sure to include returning characters among the undercover villains , as well as references to the comics such as Arnim Zola being kept alive as a machine .
Feige later elaborated on the political thriller nature of the film saying ,
In our attempt to make all of our films feel unique and feel different we found ourselves going back to things like [ Three Days of the Condor ] .
Also the other political thrillers of the ' 70s : The Parallax View , All the President 's Men .
This was a time that Cap existed in the comics .
He found himself in the swinging ' 60s followed by the Watergate Era followed by the Reagan Era followed by where we are today .
In the comics it was a hell of a journey for Steve .
And we could n't take him through those years because in our cinematic universe he was asleep .
But we wanted to force him to confront that kind of moral conundrum , something with that ' 70s flavor .
And in our film that takes the form of S.H.I.E.L.D. Feige stated that Steve Rogers would be paired with other characters from The Avengers like Black Widow and Nick Fury , because unlike Tony Stark and Thor , who could return to their own supporting casts , Rogers had nowhere else to go , " and it just made sense that he was the one that stayed with what remains of the Avengers at the end of the film .
"
The writers considered including Hawkeye , but " he did n't have enough to do and
suddenly it seemed like we were giving him short shrift " , leading all of his parts to be fulfilled by Black Widow , and Joe Russo added that Jeremy Renner 's schedule could not be worked out for him to appear .
As to why the Red Skull from The First Avenger did not appear in The Winter Soldier , Joe Russo explained , " I know we have a guy in a computer , but the tone we were chasing was sort of that conspiracy thriller .
And we wanted to try and ground the movie as much as we could .
And Red Skull , he 's a fantastical character and did n't necessarily fit for Cap 2 and especially because it was about the fall of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Certainly Hydra exists and that 's his legacy , but there 's something interesting about the fact that his legacy outlived the skull .
And they 're still dealing with the demons of it , but not necessarily him . "
Chris McKenna , who worked with the Russo brothers on the sitcom Community , contributed to the script by writing jokes for the film .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
By June 2012 , the Russo brothers entered negotiations to direct the sequel , and Samuel L. Jackson was confirmed to return as S.H.I.E.L.D. leader Nick Fury .
Feige sought out the Russos after watching the genre - parodying season 2 finale of Community which they directed , and for the additional ideas they brought to the initial story pitch .
Joe Russo detailed that since the intent was for a political thriller , " all the great political thrillers have very current issues in them that reflect the anxiety of the audience . "
Thus the brothers opted to include references to drone warfare , targeted killing and global surveillance .
Joe even noted how during principal photography , the issues became more topical due to the disclosure of several National Security Agency surveillance - related documents .
At the 2012 San Diego Comic - Con International , it was announced that the official title for the sequel was Captain America : The Winter Soldier , and that the Russo brothers would direct the film .
After signing on to direct , the Russo brothers met with Ed Brubaker to learn more about where the Winter Soldier character came from , his thinking and the themes behind the character .
In July 2012 , Anthony Mackie entered negotiations to star as Falcon alongside Chris Evans in the sequel .
Sebastian Stan was also confirmed to be reprising his role as James Barnes .
By August 2012 , Anna Kendrick , Felicity Jones , and Imogen Poots were being considered front - runners for a leading role in the film .
In September 2012 , Chris Evans stated that filming would begin in March 2013 .
Evans also stated that Rogers ' adjustment to the modern world , which was originally set to be included in The Avengers , would be better suited for Captain America : The Winter Soldier .
At the end of the month , The Greater Cleveland Film Commission announced that Captain America : The Winter Soldier would film in Cleveland , Ohio after the production was approved for a $ 9.5 million tax credit .
Producer Nate Moore said that after also serving as a location in The Avengers , Cleveland 's government was helpful in providing large locations for filming , which " provided production value which we probably could not have built in a backlot . "
McFeely joked that while writing ambitious action scenes " I did not realize a great American metropolis would say ' Sure , shut down three miles of freeway and go to town ' .
" Portions of the film were also scheduled to be shot in California and Washington , D.C.
By October , Emilia Clarke , Jessica Brown Findlay , Teresa Palmer , Imogen Poots , and Alison Brie were being considered for Rogers ' love interest in the film , and Scarlett Johansson was brought back to reprise her role as Black Widow .
Later in the month , Frank Grillo was testing for the role of the villain Crossbones in the film , and by the end of the month , Grillo closed a deal to portray the character and Cobie Smulders signed on to reprise her role as Maria Hill from The Avengers .
In January 2013 , Hayley Atwell , who played Peggy Carter in Captain America : The First Avenger , said that she would not appear in the sequel .
However Stanley Tucci , who played Dr. Abraham Erskine in the previous film , later said that Atwell would reappear in a flashback scene .
Also in January , Marvel Studios announced that the film would be released in 3D , and Anthony Mackie said filming would begin on April 1 , 2013 .
Later that month , Toby Jones , who portrayed Arnim Zola in the first film , said that he would reprise the role in the sequel .
By the end of the month , stages were being built for a shoot at Raleigh Manhattan Beach Studios in Los Angeles .
In February 2013 , Emily VanCamp entered negotiations to play a female lead in the film .
By March 2013 , Maximiliano Hernández was signed to reprise his role as S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Jasper Sitwell from Thor and The Avengers and Robert Redford entered in talks to join the cast , as a high - ranking member of S.H.I.E.L.D , which he later confirmed .
Toward the end of March , UFC fighter Georges St - Pierre was cast as a character based on the comics ' Batroc the Leaper in the film .
Captain America 's uniform was altered from the ones seen in previous films , with a Kevlar - based ballistic component that would protect Captain America but at the same time function like a military uniform .
Joe Russo said , " We wanted to use his Super Soldier outfit from the [ Steve Rogers : Super Soldier series ] as a way to represent , thematically , his place in the world of S.H.I.E.L.D. and the difference between working for S.H.I.E.L.D. and being Captain America . "
For the Falcon costume , the filmmakers were interested in adding more of a tactical design than was represented in the comic books , by including real - world webbing , straps and gear and stripping away the more comic book elements .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began on April 1 , 2013 , at the Raleigh Manhattan Beach Studios in Los Angeles , under the working title Freezer Burn .
Scenes taking place on the Lemurian Star were filmed on the Sea Launch Commander , docked in Long Beach , California .
In early May , Dominic Cooper confirmed he would return as Howard Stark .
On May 14 , 2013 , production moved to Washington , D.C. with filming taking place at the National Mall and the Theodore Roosevelt Bridge .
The following day , Garry Shandling was spotted on set reprising his Iron Man 2 role of Senator Stern .
Other filming locations in Washington , D.C. included the Willard Hotel and Dupont Circle .
Filming in Cleveland began on May 17 and was scheduled to last until mid - June with locations scheduled on the West Shoreway , the Southerly Wastewater Treatment Plant in Cuyahoga Heights and the Lakeview Cemetery Dam .
Cleveland was chosen as a stand - in for Washington , D.C , with the city 's East 6th Street doubling as 7th and D Streets in
Southwest D.C. Other locations in Cleveland included the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland , the Cleveland Public Library , Cleveland State University , the Cleveland Arcade , Tower City Center , the Cleveland Museum of Art , and the Western Reserve Historical Society .
Interior shots were also filmed inside private homes and the Pilgrim Congregational Church in Tremont .
Filming in Cleveland concluded on June 27 , 2013 .
Trent Opaloch , best known for his work on District 9 and Elysium , was brought in as the director of photography .
Opaloch stated that while attempting to emulate the 1970s thrillers that served as inspiration for the writers and directors , the staging and lighting tried to bring realism through " classic framing and naturalistic lighting " , and the filming was done with hand - held cameras .
To achieve this , Opaloch used Arri Alexa Plus 4:3 cameras with Panavision anamorphic lenses and Codex Digital recorders .
Stunt work aimed for realistic action , prioritizing practical effects .
The fight scenes were staged for months , with a choreography that aimed to highlight Captain America 's superhuman qualities , and " move away from impressionistic action into specificity " : the raid on the S.H.I.E.L.D. vessel had stealthiness as the Captain knocked out enemies to avert detection , and the freeway fight with Winter Soldier was more " last minute " to highlight the characters ' struggle to survive .
In contrast to the quick editing and moving cameras of modern action films , The Winter Soldier aimed to feature longer action scenes that felt more visceral and dangerous .
The Russos mentioned the bank robbing scene of Heat as a major influence , which they described as " the most intense eight minutes of filmmaking I 've seen in a movie theater " , and action scenes directed by Brian De Palma , such as the vault heist in , where " very likable characters are put in impossible situations that the audience is put on the edge on how they 'd escape " .
Examples of these types of scenes include the ambushes on Nick Fury in the street and Captain America in the elevator .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Additional photography was filmed in December 2013 and January 2014 , in order for the Russos to accurately show the state of each character after the defeat of S.H.I.E.L.D. , having read the script of to guide their choices .
Joss Whedon , director of The Avengers and Avengers : Age of Ultron , wrote and directed the mid - credits scene , which featured Quicksilver , the Scarlet Witch , and Baron Wolfgang von Strucker .
The title sequences were created by design firm Sarofsky , who had worked with the Russos since Community .
Sarofsky collaborated with comic book artist David W. Mack on the sequences .
Anthony Mackie said the Russo brothers relied on minimal use of computer - generated imagery , stating , " The Russos , what they did that was so great was , they wanted to stay with live action , which is a dying art form .
If they can build it , they built it .
If we could do it , we did it .
They wanted to do as little CGI as possible .
That 's why the movie looks so great .
" Nevertheless , six special effects companies are involved in creating the visual effects of the film , including Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , Scanline VFX , Lola VFX , Luma Pictures , Whiskytree and The Embassy , with previsualization completed by Proof .
The film contained 2,500 visual effects shots , with 900 worked on by ILM .
The film featured extensive use of digital doubles .
Russell Earl , ILM visual effects supervisor , said , " The character that we did the most work on was Falcon .
We knew we were going to do CG wings .
We also did some shots with wires and some with stunt doubles and head replacement .
And we needed a very good digital double . "
Lola VFX , who worked on the pre - serum Steve Rogers scenes in this film and Captain America :
The First Avenger , also worked on shots featuring an elderly Peggy Carter .
This involved digitally transposing the facial features of an elderly actress onto the face of actress Hayley Atwell who had performed her lines with no make - up and only a few tracking markers .
The Helicarriers in the film were completely digital .
Earl said , " In [ The Avengers ] it was more like an aircraft carrier , now it 's an aircraft carrier with the addition of battle ship - sized guns .
We were all over the carriers [ with the virtual camera ] .
We were on the decks ; we were flying next to them .
We had a lot of close ups and different angles .
And we did n't just have one ; we had three .
On top of that , we had to destroy them all .
"
This CGI environment was also used in close ups .
Earl said , " The challenge was to get in all of the detail to make it feel like it is a real , working ship .
We created details down to the railings and all the human - scale stuff . ...
For the shots in which we were destroying them , we had to have the internals as well –
the hallways , the storage areas .
" Many of the shots of Washington , D.C. were digitally created due to numerous flight restrictions in the city which necessitated that locations be recreated by computer .
However , aerial footage of the city was filmed and used for live action plate photography for shots involving the Triskelion , which is located on Theodore Roosevelt Island on the Potomac River .
350 different versions of the film were made , to accommodate for the different formats it would be released in domestically , while also accounting for international localization and formats .
The versions had to be completed in 17 days , versus a normal turnaround time of three to four weeks for contemporary films , to make its theatrical release date .
One of the various changes for localization was the contents of Captain America 's notebook list seen at the beginning of the film .
The first five items were different depending on where the film was released , while the final five items were the same across all prints .
Marvel held online polls allowing fans to select the items featured in each country 's release .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In June 2013 , Henry Jackman announced that he would compose the film 's score .
About the score Jackman said , " ... it 's 50 % production and all the tricks I 've learnt from spending years in the record industry
but then it 's also got the kind of injection of symphonic , thematic , heroic music that all kind of merges into one musical , and hopefully coherent piece " .
A soundtrack album was released by Hollywood Records on April 1 , 2014 .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
In July 2013 , Marvel Studios released a teaser poster depicting a damaged and discolored Captain America shield .
The Los Angeles Times said , " the image suggests that [ Captain America ] might see some serious battle in the sequel " while Rolling Stone said , " the image hints at darker themes in the sequel " .
Later that month , Marvel Studios head and producer Kevin Feige , directors Joe and Anthony Russo , and cast members Chris Evans , Scarlett Johansson , Samuel L. Jackson , Sebastian Stan , Anthony Mackie , Cobie Smulders , Emily VanCamp , and Frank Grillo held a panel at 2013 San Diego Comic - Con International and presented footage from the film .
In addition , Marvel had booths depicting a Smithsonian - type exhibit showing Captain America and the Howling Commandos from Captain America : The First Avenger .
At the end of the month , audiences were shown a glimpse of the film along with some of Marvel 's other Phase
Two slate of films at Disney XD 's Disney Fandom event .
In August 2013 , Feige , Evans , Stan , and Mackie presented a clip of the film at Disney 's D23 Expo .
In September 2013 , Marvel announced that it is again partnering with Harley - Davidson , continuing their relationship from Captain America :
The First Avenger , with Captain America riding the company 's Softail Breakout motorcycle in the film .
In October 2013 , Marvel released the first trailer for Captain America : The Winter Soldier .
The Hollywood Reporter said , " it looks like it 'll live up to the ' political thriller ' that 's been promised for months now . "
The Los Angeles Times said , " [ the ] trailer runs 2½ minutes and teases plenty of action , conspiracy and clever banter between Captain America and his S.H.I.E.L.D. colleagues , with a smattering of the previously released Comic - Con International and D23 footage . "
The Los Angeles Times also noted that the day before the release of the trailer , the studio released " a teaser for a trailer .
" The trailer received 23.5 million views in the 24 hours after its release .
In November 2013 , Jed Whedon , the co - creator of the television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , said that there are plans to reference events from the film into the show , stating , " Nick Fury is in [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] , and S.H.I.E.L.D. makes an appearance , so we will definitely try to tee - up some stuff and probably play a little bit of the fallout from that film . "
In January 2014 , Disney announced that in honor of the film , Captain America would be making appearances at Disneyland .
The meet and greet experience opened March 7 , 2014 and is called Captain America : The Living Legend and Symbol of Courage , located at Innoventions in Tomorrowland .
Also in January , Marvel Comics released a prelude digital comic titled , Marvel 's Captain America :
The Winter Soldier Infinite Comic , written by Peter David , with art by Rock - He Kim .
The comic sees the return of the " Zodiac " , the mysterious weapon first seen in the One - Shot Agent Carter , which has fallen into the wrong hands .
Captain America , Black Widow , and Rumlow must track the weapon down and put it back in S.H.I.E.L.D. protection .
The first televised advertisement for Captain America :
The Winter Soldier aired during Super Bowl XLVIII on February 2 , 2014 .
According to The Hollywood Reporter , Disney paid over $ 4 million per 30-second spot .
The Los Angeles Times said , " The clip promoting the April 4 release had a recognizably melancholy tone as Chris Evans ' patriotic hero grapples with the moral ambiguities of the modern age . "
Also in February , Gameloft announced that a mobile video game , titled Captain America : The Winter Soldier – The Official Game , would be released in conjunction with the release of the film in late March 2014 for iOS and Android platforms .
A few days later General Motors announced that Chevrolet partnered with Marvel Entertainment and provided a specially designed Corvette Stingray C7 for use by the Black Widow in the film .
The vehicle debuted at the 2014 Chicago Auto Show , where fans received limited - edition Captain America comic books .
Evans was named the grand marshal of the 2014 Daytona 500 to promote the film 's release .
Later in the month , a 30-second television spot received " a lot of attention on social media " for a line featured in the clip .
The line , which was said by Captain America , suggests that Nick Fury would die in the film .
The Hollywood Reporter noted that it all seemed " a bit too obvious " , noting the fact that Jackson , who plays Fury , is reprising the role in , although pointing out that it could be in a postmortem flashback appearance .
In March 2014 , Marvel released the Captain America Experience app , that allowed fans to capture a pictures of themselves with Captain America , and let them share it on Instagram and Twitter using specific hashtags to unlock 10 early screenings of the film across the United States , which took place on March 20 .
On March 18 , ABC aired a one - hour television special titled , Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe , which included a sneak peek of Captain America : The Winter Soldier .
On April 1 , 2014 , Evans and Stan rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange in honor of the film 's theatrical release .
Jackson appeared in advertisements for Sky Broadband .
RELEASE
THEATRICAL Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier was released in 32 markets on March 26 , 2014 and in North America on April 4 , 2014 , in 2D , 3D and IMAX
3D.
The film debuted on 668 IMAX screens worldwide , a record for films releasing in April .
The world premiere took place on March 13 , 2014 at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California .
The Paris premiere occurred on March 17 at Le Grand Rex , the London premiere took place on March 20 at Westfield London , the Beijing premiere took place on March 24 and the Cleveland premiere took place on April 1 .
Chris Evans and Scarlett Johansson auctioned off passes to one of the premieres for charity .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment for digital download on August 19 , 2014 and on Blu - ray , Blu - ray 3D , and DVD on September 9 , 2014 .
The physical media releases include behind - the - scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , and a blooper reel .
The film was also collected in a 13-disc box set , titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe :
Phase Two Collection " , which includes all of the Phase
Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
It was released on December 8 , 2015 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier earned $ 259.8 million in North America and $ 454.5 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 714.3 million .
It became the seventh - highest - grossing film of 2014 worldwide .
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit for the film to be $ 166.2 million , when factoring together " production budgets , P&A , talent participations and other costs , with box office grosses , and ancillary revenues from VOD to DVD and TV , " placing it ninth on their list of 2014 's " Most Valuable Blockbusters " .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier made $ 10.2 million in Thursday night showings , more than double the midnight gross of its predecessor .
It set an April single - day ( $ 36.9 million ) and April opening - weekend record ( $ 95.0 million ) , while its opening weekend was a 46 % increase over .
The film held the number one spot at the box office for three consecutive weekends , before being overtaken by The Other Woman in its fourth weekend .
It achieved the largest total gross among films released in the month of April .
At the end of its theatrical run , the film became the fourth highest - grossing film of 2014 behind American Sniper , , and Guardians of the Galaxy .
Captain America : The Winter Soldier topped the box office on its opening weekend with $ 75.2 million from 32 overseas markets .
The film debuted at number one in many territories , including Australia , China , and Russia and set a 3-day opening - weekend record in China among Disney films , with $ 38.81 million .
It topped the box office outside North America on two consecutive weekends , followed by two weeks in second , behind Rio 2 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 89 % approval rating with an average rating of 7.6/10 based on 283 reviews .
The website 's consensus reads , " Suspenseful and politically astute , Captain America : The Winter Soldier is a superior entry in the Avengers canon and is sure to thrill Marvel diehards . "
Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 70 out of 100 based on 48 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
CinemaScore audiences gave Captain America :
The Winter Soldier an " A " grade rating on an A+ to F scale .
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said the film " takes the bold ( for Marvel ) step of reducing CGI spectacle to a relative minimum in favor of reviving the pleasures of hard - driving old - school action , surprising character development and intriguing suspense .
" Scott Foundas of Variety said it is " chockfull of the breathless cliffhangers dictated by the genre , but equally rich in the quiet , tender character moments that made the first film unique among recent Marvel fare . "
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun - Times said , " While not on a par with The Avengers or the first and third Iron Man movies , this is another rock - solid chapter in the big - screen story of Marvel . "
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly noted the topicality of the film , stating , " Captain America : The Winter Soldier is the first superhero film since the terrorist - inflected The Dark Knight that plugs you right into what 's happening now .
"
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe said the film " delivers all the 3D CGI mayhem audiences have come to expect from the Marvel entertainment juggernaut , but there 's darkness and confusion just under its comic - book surface . "
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal said , " What makes The Winter Soldier so enjoyable , and what will make it so profitable , is its emotional bandwidth — all the vivid , nuanced life lived by its characters in between their frenzied escapades , " and felt it fixed all the shortcomings of The First Avenger " and then some " .
Conversely , Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said , " [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] is everything a big budget superhero film should be – except inspired . "
Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said , " Like many others of its type , [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] gets off to a kinetic start only to lose steam before blowing everything up . "
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said , " You ca n't help but feel disappointment that a film with a relatively spicy premise becomes , in the end , so risk - averse . "
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said the film " has the usual overlong running time [ for the comic book superhero genre ] , the halfhearted feints in the direction of human feeling and the obligatory action sequences that are big without being either exciting or particularly legible . "
Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post Dispatch felt " On paper this sequel has some promising elements , but on screen it retreats from the very issues that it raises , and on a shelf next to Captain America :
The First Avenger , The Winter Soldier is pale .
"
Jake Coyle of the Associated Press said the film 's biggest misstep was the handling of Stan 's Winter Soldier , and that it was " getting difficult to tell the Marvel movies apart " .
ACCOLADES SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
Captain America :
Civil War was released on May 6 , 2016 , and again is directed by the Russo brothers .
Evans , Johansson , Stan , Mackie , VanCamp and Grillo reprise their roles from The Winter Soldier and they are joined by Robert Downey , Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man , Paul Bettany as Vision , Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye , Don Cheadle as James " Rhodey " Rhodes / War Machine , Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch , Paul Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant - Man , and William Hurt as Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross , all reprising roles from previous MCU films .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring surveillance
* List of films featuring drones NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS