THE MORTAL INSTRUMENTS : CITY OF BONES
The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones is a 2013 urban fantasy action - adventure film based on the first book of The Mortal Instruments series by Cassandra Clare .
The story takes place in an urban and contemporary New York City .
Directed by Harald Zwart , the film stars an international cast , including Lily Collins , Jamie Campbell Bower , Robert Sheehan , Kevin Zegers , Jemima West , Godfrey Gao , Lena Headey , Jonathan Rhys Meyers , Aidan Turner , Kevin Durand , and Jared Harris .
It was released in theaters on August 21 , 2013 , by Screen Gems in the United States and Entertainment One in the United Kingdom .
The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones earned $ 91 million against a $ 60 million production budget .
The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones was released on DVD and Blu - ray on December 3 , 2013 , by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
New York City teenager Clary Fray begins seeing a strange symbol , worrying her mother Jocelyn Fray and her mother 's friend Luke Garroway .
Later , at a nightclub with her friend , Simon Lewis , Clary is the only person who sees Jace Wayland killing a man , who he claims is a demon .
Meanwhile , Jocelyn is abducted by two men , Emil Pangborn and Samuel Blackwell , but she is able to call Clary and warn her about someone named Valentine .
Jocelyn drinks a potion putting her in a comatose state .
Returning home , Clary finds her mother missing and is then attacked by a demon .
Clary kills it , and then Jace appears .
Jace explains that he and her mother Jocelyn are both Shadowhunters ( also called Nephilim ) , half human half angel warriors that slay demons and rule over the downworlders .
Clary has inherited her powers , including the ability to use runes .
Madame Dorothea , the Fray 's neighbor and a witch , deduces that Pangborn and Blackwell seek the Mortal Cup , one of the three Mortal Instruments given to the first Shadowhunter by the Angel Raziel .
It allows normal humans to become half - Angel Shadowhunters .
Simon , now able to see Jace , arrives and they go to Luke 's bookstore .
Pangborn and Blackwell are interrogating Luke there , who claims he cares nothing for Jocelyn and only wants the Mortal Cup .
The trio escapes to the Shadowhunters ' hideout , the Institute , where Clary and Simon meet two other Shadowhunters Alec and Isabelle Lightwood , and their leader , Hodge Starkweather .
He reveals that Valentine Morgenstern , an ex - Shadowhunter who betrayed the Nephilim , now seeks the Mortal Cup to control both Shadowhunters and demons .
Hodge instructs Jace to take Clary to the City of Bones so the Silent Brothers can probe Clary 's mind for the Mortal Cup 's location .
The Brothers uncover a connection to Magnus Bane , the High Warlock of Brooklyn .
Bane says Jocelyn had him block the Shadowhunter world from Clary 's mind .
Vampires then kidnap Simon from Magnus ' party for downworlders .
Clary , Jace , Alec , and Isabelle trail them to their hideout and rescue him but are outnumbered .
Werewolves ( that share a truce with the Shadowhunters ) intervene and save them .
These are led by Luke .
At the Institute , Clary shares a romantic evening with Jace , ending in a kiss .
When Simon confronts Clary about it , she downplays the incident , angering Jace .
Simon confesses to Clary that he is in love with her , leaving her feeling guilty because she does not reciprocate his feelings .
Clary realizes the Mortal Cup is hidden inside one of Madame Dorothea 's tarot cards that were painted by her mother .
The group goes to Dorothea 's apartment but she has been replaced by a demon sent to steal the Cup .
Simon and Jace kill it , but Alec is critically wounded .
Clary retrieves the Mortal Cup and they return to the institute .
Clary gives the Mortal Cup to Hodge who betrays them by summoning Valentine Morgenstern and giving him the cup .
Valentine reveals he is Clary 's father and wants her to join him .
She escapes through a portal that transports her to Luke 's bookstore .
Luke , revealed to be a werewolf , confirms that Valentine is her father , and says Clary had an older brother named Jonathan who was killed .
Luke and his werewolf pack return to the Institute with Clary to fight Valentine , who has summoned an army of demons through a portal he created .
Simon and Isabelle close the portal with help from a repentant Hodge , who sacrifices himself .
Meanwhile , Magnus Bane arrives and heals Alec .
Clary and Jace fight Valentine , who claims both are his children eventhough Jace is not .
They refuse to join him and , following a battle , Clary pushes him through the portal after giving him a fake Mortal Cup .
The portal is destroyed , and Jocelyn is rescued , but she remains in a coma at the hospital .
Clary tells Simon that someday someone will love him .
Clary heads back home and uses her new - found powers to repair the apartment .
Jace appears on his motorcycle , confessing he needs her and wants her to return to the Institute .
Realizing that she belongs in the Shadowhunter world , she goes with him and they ride into the distance .
CAST * Lily Collins as Clarissa Fray / Clarissa Morgenstern * Jamie Campbell Bower as Jace Wayland
* Robert Sheehan as Simon Lewis * Kevin Zegers as Alec Lightwood * Jemima West as Isabelle Lightwood
* Lena Headey as Jocelyn Fray / Jocelyn Fairchild * Aidan Turner as Luke Garroway
* Godfrey Gao as Magnus Bane * C. C. H. Pounder as Madame Dorothea
* Jared Harris as Hodge Starkweather * Jonathan Rhys Meyers as Valentine Morgenstern * Kevin Durand as Emil Pangborn * Chris Ratz as Eric * Robert Maillet as Samuel Blackwell
* Stephen R. Hart as Brother Jeremiah * Elyas M'Barek as Raphael Santiago * Chad Connell as Lambert
* Harry Van Gorkum as Alaric / Werewolf PRODUCTION PRE - PRODUCTION
Section::::Production . Section::::Pre - production .
While shopping the film prospect around , author Cassandra Clare had difficulty finding a studio interested in making a film with a female in the lead role .
Studios asked her to switch the lead to a male character , which she refused .
On December 9 , 2010 , it was announced that Lily Collins had been cast in the role of Clary Fray .
Alex Pettyfer was originally offered the role of Jace Wayland , but turned it down .
Alexander Ludwig , Ed Speleers and Leebo Freeman tested for the role but it went to Jamie Campbell Bower .
Xavier Samuel , Nico Tortorella , Max Irons , and Douglas Booth were also in consideration .
The film is a co - production of the Germany company Constantin Film Produktion GmbH and Canadian company Don Carmody Productions and a co - production with Unique Features .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography took place between August 20 and November 7 , 2012 , on location in Toronto and Hamilton , Ontario , and New York City .
MUSIC SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music .
Section::::Soundtrack .
The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones ( Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) was released by Republic Records in stores and digital retailers on August 20 , 2013 .
It is headlined by Demi Lovato , Zedd , Colbie Caillat , AFI remixed by LA Riots , and Jessie J among others .
The soundtrack is a collaboration between trance DJs Myon & Shane 54 with Seven Lions , as well as a song by Bryan Ellis , produced by Brian West .
Some songs , including Lovato 's " Heart by Heart " and Caillat 's " When the Darkness Comes " , were recorded specifically for City of Bones .
Zedd " scored for a key scene in the film " .
" Almost Is Never Enough " , performed by Ariana Grande and Nathan Sykes was released as promotional single from the album on August 19 , 2013 .
The album peaked at # 32 on the US Billboard 200 .
" Almost is Never Enough " , performed by Ariana Grande and The Wanted 's Nathan Sykes , debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 84 .
Beth Crowley had also written a song inspired by the movie called " Warrior " .
" All I Need " by Radiohead was the song used in the trailer for the film .
SCORE
Section::::Score .
The official score was composed by Atli Örvarsson , and was released on August 20 , 2013 for physical purchase and digital download .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
A teaser trailer was released in November 2012 , and a second trailer was released March 2013 .
The film was originally due for release on August 23 , 2013 , but was pushed back two days earlier , on August 21 , 2013 .
The film secured broad European distribution deals at Cannes .
The film premiered on August 12 , 2013 , at the Cinerama Dome in Hollywood .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
According to the Los Angeles Times , $ 60 million was spent on marketing .
Kulzer , Constantin 's co - president , stated " $ 60 million has been spent worldwide on prints and advertising ... " and went on to explain the importance of managing expectations .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones was released on DVD and Blu - ray on December 3 , 2013 , by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 13 % based on 119 reviews and a rating average of 3.9/10 .
The site commented that " The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones borrows ingredients from seemingly every fantasy franchise of the last 30 years — but ca n't seem to figure out what to do with them . "
At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 , the film has a score of 33 % based on reviews from 35 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews . "
The Telegraphs Robbie Collin gave the film one out of five stars , saying , " This gothic teen fantasy is one of the most disastrous page - to - screen adaptations in memory " .
Collin added " the plot is an incomprehensible tangle of dead ends and recaps , and afterwards you realise only two things have stuck : the story 's countless unsubtle borrowings from very recent pop culture ... and a brief aside in which we learn one of the earliest demon - hunters was Johann Sebastian Bach . "
Michael Rechtshaffen from The Hollywood Reporter also gave it a negative review , saying , " Certainly not the first and very unlikely the last studio attempt at launching a Twilight / Hunger Games franchise of their very own , The Mortal Instruments :
City of Bones is a bona fide saga all right — just not in a good way " adding " Despite the overstuffed assortment of vampires , werewolves , warlocks and demons of all shapes and sizes , The Mortal Instruments seldom feels like anything more than a shameless , soulless knockoff .
" New York Daily News also gave it a negative rating of 1 star out of 5 ; critic Jordan Hoffman wrote , " This one is by far the worst of the Twilight copies .
And when that bunch includes The Host and I Am Number Four , that 's saying something . "
Hoffman added , " Despite an avalanche of back story , the film is merely an excuse to hop from one spookily dressed set to another .
Alas , the titular City of Bones is more of a basement .
Other than a gag about a cache of weapons beneath every church altar , there 's hardly a moment of levity or imagination .
For a film that is wall - to - wall fantasy , you 've seen all of this before , in much better movies . "
Tom Keogh of The Seattle Times also gave it a negative review , stating , " City of Bones is so overwhelmed by CGI effects that it amounts to white noise for the eyes .
Far worse is the way director Harald Zwart ca n't establish a mature tone to support some of the story 's genuinely bold and challenging elements , especially a forbidden - love theme that deserves a more serious context " .
A more average review came from film critic Stephanie Merry of The Washington Post , who said , " To be fair , there are elements worth celebrating .
The film is thankfully less self - serious than the mopey Twilight films .
The Mortal Instruments revels in its own camp .
"
She added , "
But there is plenty of room for improvement .
The action flick is overly long , complicated and , even by teen romance standards , cringe - worthy in its cheesiness . "
David Blaustein from ABC News also gave the film an average review of two - and - a - half out of five stars , saying , " Director Harald Zwart unsuccessfully tries to compress teen angst , love , passion , unfulfilled dreams and action into an overzealous , over - the - top , never - ending finale which seems about as well planned as throwing rocks and sand into a blender in the hope that if you blend it long enough at high - enough speed , you might wind up with a delicious milkshake . "
He then added , " The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones is not a very good film by any stretch of the imagination .
However , it does possess a slick , beautiful , young - adult aesthetic and a supernatural , emotional yet nonsensical love triangle that the film 's target demographic goes crazy for . "
Venetia Falconer of MTV News gave the film a positive review , with a score of 4 out of 5 stars , posting , "
The Mortal Instruments more than lives up to its hype of ' The New Twilight ' .
The special effects are impressive , the battle scenes enthralling and there is solid acting from all members of the cast .
The film 's main strength is that it perfectly hits the right balance between drama and comedy . "
Cinema audiences responded more positively than critics .
Viewers who saw the film on the opening Wednesday , gave an average grade of B+ , according to market research firm CinemaScore .
The audience was 68 % female and 46 % under the age of 21 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
City of Bones grossed $ 9.3 million for the three - day weekend in the U.S. and $ 18.2 million worldwide , debuting in # 3 place as the highest ranked new release , although losing out on the top two spots to holdovers from previous weeks ( Lee Daniels ' The Butler and We 're the Millers ) .
For the five - day cumulative total , it grossed $ 14,088,359 in the U.S. and $ 23,188,359 worldwide , placing it below estimates of Variety at $ 18 million , The Hollywood Reporter at $ 15 million , and Sony itself who predicted $ 15 million .
According to The Wrap , the film " failed to connect " and is on the same course as other misfires Beautiful Creatures and The Host .
Forbes also made comparisons with Beautiful Creatures and The Host , and called the five - day weekend gross " a full - blown disaster " as well as " the biggest bomb of the weekend " .
Executive producer Martin Moszkowicz blamed the weak opening in the United States on " a strongly competitive environment " , including competition from You 're Next and The World 's End , as well as strong holdovers
The Butler and
We 're the Millers .
Moszkowicz was confident , saying it was still too early to call , with the film still rolling out release in more territories worldwide .
As of October 10 , 2013 , it grossed $ 31,165,421 at North American box offices and $ 59,400,000 internationally , bringing the worldwide gross to $ 90,565,421 .
The Hollywood Reporter described the film as a " major in - house flop " and contributing to studio Constantin 's losses for the 2013 year .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The Mortal Instruments won four Canadian Screen Awards : Achievement in Make - Up , Achievement in Overall Sound , Achievement in Sound Editing and Achievement in Visual Effects .
It was also nominated for Achievement in Costume Design and Achievement in Art Direction / Production Design .
The film was nominated at the 2014 Teen Choice Awards for Choice Movie : Action , Choice Movie : Actor Action , and Choice Movie : Actress Action , but lost to Divergent in all categories .
SEQUEL CANCELED SEQUELS Section::::Sequel .
Section::::Canceled sequels .
On May 8 , 2013 , before the film was released , it was announced that a film adaptation of the second book City of Ashes , would start production on September 23 , 2013 with a 2014 release date .
In August 2013 , after the film opened below expectations , Kulzer , Constantin 's co - president , explained that a sequel was still warranted given increasing book sales and soundtrack revenues .
Sigourney Weaver was set to join the cast while Lily Collins , Lena Headey , Jonathan Rhys Meyers , Jemima West , and Jamie Campbell Bower were set to reprise their roles .
On September 10 , 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter claimed that the sequel " had been pushed in the wake of a lackluster box - office opening " and The Wrap claimed the film had been postponed indefinitely .
Moszkowicz responded " ...
Constantin is committed to making the sequel , the company did not want to rush into production with an unfinished screenplay , preferring to take the time to get right " .
Cassandra Clare responded , saying the draft screenplay she saw was " very far from the book " and that the original schedule would not have allowed time for changes , and she thought the delay could therefore be a good thing .
On October 23 , 2013 , Moszkowicz told The Hollywood Reporter that production on the sequel would resume in 2014 , explaining that Constantin was determined to continue the franchise due to the positive response from fans to the adaptation , though noted that the marketing campaign for City of Bones was too narrowly focused on teenage fans , proving to be a detriment of Clare 's older readers .
Moszkowciz also admitted that nothing had been finalized nor confirmed , saying " It is an ongoing discussion that we are having , and it is not done .
We have n't made a final decision .
But we will only move forward — and we plan to move forward — when we feel we are going to get it right " .
Moszkowicz later revealed the intention to shoot the film at some time in 2014 .
On May 20 , 2014 , Harald Zwart revealed that the studio still had intentions to make the sequel , but explained that he would not direct it , so that he could focus on other projects , although he complimented the first film as " a good window [ for him ] to show off " .
Scott Mendelson of Forbes magazine expressed surprise that a sequel was in production : " The Mortal Instruments : City of Bones received neither positive reviews nor box office large enough to justify its production and marketing expenses .
Yet , against all odds and arguably against all logic , ... it 's getting a sequel ! "
TELEVISION SERIES Section::::Television series .
On October 12 , 2014 , at Mipcom , Constantin confirmed that The Mortal Instruments would return as a television series , abandoning previous plans for a film sequel , with Ed Decter as showrunner to start production for next year on at least two or three international shows .
Constantin Film and TV head Martin Moszkowicz told The Hollywood Reporter that " It actually makes sense to do ( the novels ) as a TV series .
There was so much from the book that we had to leave out of the Mortal Instruments film .
In the series we 'll be able to go deeper and explore this world in greater detail and depth . "
GAMES Section::::Games .
To tie in with the film , Sony Pictures worked with developers PlayFirst to release a game on August 15 , 2013 .
The game , available free for Android and iOS , allows players to hunt demons and supernatural monsters like the Shadowhunters of the story .
That includes cross - platform features , allowing users to sign in on Facebook and save their progress across Android and iOS devices .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS