BAD EDUCATION ( TV SERIES )
Bad Education is a British television sitcom that was produced by Tiger Aspect Productions for BBC Three .
It stars Jack Whitehall as young teacher Alfie Wickers – " the worst teacher ever to grace the British education system " – at the fictional Abbey Grove School , in Hertfordshire .
At the time of the series launch in August 2012 it broke BBC Three 's record for the highest viewing figure for a first episode of a comedy , which was previously held by Horne & Corden , but is now held by Cuckoo .
The second series premiered on BBC iPlayer on 27 August 2013 .
A week before the television air date of 3 September , as part of BBC Three 's plans to premiere all its scripted comedy programmes online .
This experiment proved successful , as the first episode of the second series received 1.5 million requests prior to its television airing .
A Christmas special aired on 17 December 2013 .
The third series of Bad Education began transmission on 16 September 2014 .
Due to its success , the show was later adapted into a movie , which was released on 21 August 2015 .
In late 2014 , Whitehall confirmed that the show would not receive a fourth series .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
The series focuses on Alfie Wickers ( Jack Whitehall ) , a posh , newly graduated secondary school History teacher at the fictional Abbey Grove School , in Watford or Tring , Hertfordshire .
Ever determined to impress his crush , Rosie Gulliver ( Sarah Solemani )
Alfie makes repeated efforts to appear " cool " , such as coaching the school football team , organising a weapons amnesty and fielding a candidate for the school elections .
Usually , in these efforts , he turns to his mismatched class for help , despite them often disapproving of his actions .
They are teacher 's pet Joe ( Lawrence ) , tough guy Mitchell ( Wernham ) , wheelchair - bound rudeboy Rem Dog ( Binstead ) , inappropriately flirtatious Chantelle ( Runeckles ) , camp Stephen ( Williams ) , studious Jing ( Alexander ) and outwardly fiery Cleopatra ( Opia ) .
At the same time , Alfie finds himself having to deal with the shenanigans of his eccentric headmaster , Shaquille " Simon " Fraser ( Horne ) and meet the expectations of a string of deputy heads : at first demanding dictator Isobel Pickwell ( Gomez ) , then the ruthless yet cringeworthy Professor Celia " Pro Green " Green ( Spiro ) , and then his own father , dramatically inappropriate Martin Wickers ( Enfield ) .
It is clarified in the final series that the entire show spans a single academic year .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The first series started airing on 14 August 2012 .
On 23 August 2012 , it was announced that Bad Education would have a second series .
The second series began airing on BBC Three on 3 September 2013 .
Part of the second series was filmed at St. Michael 's Catholic High School , Finchley , London .
Bad Education was also partly filmed at the former site of Ashmount Primary School on Hornsey Lane on 12 and 13 May 2013 .
Scenes were also filmed at the former Salesian College in Battersea , south west London .
Parts of Series 3 were filmed at Ricards Lodge High School in Merton .
CHARACTERS STAFF
* Alfie Wickers ( portrayed by Jack Whitehall ) –
Alfie is a 23-year - old History teacher at Abbey Grove School .
He has difficulty managing and disciplining his students , some of whom treat him with contempt , is often harassed by them and is even bullied by one pupil , but frequently recruits them to help save him from difficult situations .
His classes are eccentric , using teaching techniques such as Class Wars ( re - enacted battles with tables as trenches and wheelchairs as tanks ) and séances to summon the spirit of Adolf Hitler in his lessons .
Though he pretends in front of the staff that he fully respects school rules , he frequently lets his students break them and regularly breaks them himself .
Born on 17 June 1988 , he attended the posh Middleton House school , where he was often bullied by pupils and staff , which he is still troubled by .
His pupils wrongly maintain that it was a posh , upper - class boarding school where homosexuality was commonplace .
Before coming to Abbey Grove , he worked at a B&Q home improvement store .
He is poor at football and athletics in general , but is an accomplished Irish dancer , and does manage to win the " Parent vs Teacher " race in " Sports Day " .
Alfie has a crush on one of his fellow teachers , Rosie Gulliver , and spends a lot of time trying to figure out ways to impress her , though he is frequently unsuccessful .
By the end of Series 1 , he had begun a relationship with her , but when Series 2 began , the relationship had been over for some time .
In the first episode of series 3 , he and Rosie are cohabiting , but she moves out after he wrongly accuses her of cheating .
Alfie openly agrees that he does not know if his relationship with Rosie is over or not .
He was disgusted when his father Martin Wickers ( Enfield ) started a relationship with his old flame and Abbey Grove 's short - lived Deputy Headmistress Professor Celia Green .
Alfie later learnt that Martin and Celia were engaged .
Though opposed to this at first , he later accepted it , since Celia makes his father happy .
He briefly felt sorry for his father when the relationship ends , allowing his father to move in with him , and annoying Rosie .
But this quickly turned into a rivalry when his father becomes the new Deputy Headmaster .
He is also shown to be a fan of Michael Bublé and was given his album Christmas by Rosie in the Christmas Special .
He returns to his old job for one week because he finds saying goodbye to graduating students too difficult .
But he is persuaded by his students and Rosie to return to teaching .
He is often called " Dickers " by people who detest him , besides Mitchell who ends up respecting him .
* Shaquille Banter " Simon " Fraser ( portrayed by Mathew Horne ) – Shaquille Fraser , usually referred to by his surname , is the headmaster of Abbey Grove .
He is immature , irresponsible and generally incapable for the position which he held .
He thinks of himself as an intelligent person and enjoys wordplay and metaphor , though it embarrasses his staff frequently .
In the first episode of series 1 , he shows some romantic interest in Rosie Gulliver , but does not pursue it throughout future episodes and series .
On several occasions he shows that he is bad at communicating with parents and is insensitive to religious and racial issues , such as when he mistakenly believes England had instituted a religious items ban in the school and went around confiscating crucifixes from students , and when he said the word " nigger " to a black person , later remarking that " that word is probably best left to rappers " .
He was generally unfazed by such incidents and had a very casual attitude about them .
He legally changed the spelling of his surname to " Fra$er " , but it often appears on signs as " Fraser " or " Frazer " .
In the Bad Education Handbook , it is implied that he legally changed his middle name to " Banter " , a word that he is obsessed with .
In the Series 1 finale , he undergoes a review by the educational board when a video of him accidentally showing an inappropriate video to students
goes viral .
He retains his job , but admits in series 3 that he is no longer allowed to supervise exams .
In series 2 , he is conned for all the school 's remaining finances , meaning that they are forced to make ' swingeing ' cuts .
In series 3 , it is revealed that he lost all of the money raised in " Fundraiser " at the end of series 2 by investing in his own clothing range .
As a result , one member of staff is going to be fired , but when Alfie resigns , he sells his flat so that Alfie could keep his job .
He is continually undermined by his deputies and does not , with the exception of Martin , have a good relationship with them .
In the final episode , he becomes inconsolable about Alfie leaving the school , hiding his upset behind childish insults .
* Isobel Pickwell ( portrayed by Michelle Gomez ) ( series 1 – 2 ) – Miss Pickwell is the Deputy Headmistress at Abbey Grove .
She is a very strict woman who believes in rigid discipline .
Alfie often compares her to an SS Officer and makes fun of her fascist views .
She was deeply conservative and religious , with contempt for what she believes are Rosie 's attempts to turn the school into a " hippie commune " : during her own sex education class , she reads passages from the Bible to her students that forbid premarital sex .
Her classroom and office are dark and bleak , with the only decorations being various pictures of dictatorial heads of state .
She frequently schemes for more power , and nearly succeeds in unseating Fraser as headmaster in the final episode of Series 1 , until Jing proved that she had been stealing money from the school by lying about her expenses .
Alfie and Rosie blackmail her into telling the board that Fraser is an excellent headmaster in exchange for them not exposing her .
In the same episode , she reveals that she has not cried since 1990 – " when Thatcher was hounded out of office by her own party . "
In Series 2 , upon learning of Rosie 's lesbian relationship with Alex Scott , she secretly confesses to having previous lesbian relationships and attempted unsuccessfully to flirt with Rosie .
Although in the Bad Education Handbook , she ( correctly ) predicts that Rosie 's sexuality was a phase and that she would soon return to heterosexuality .
In Funeral , she is believed to have died after committing suicide over the abuse received from Alfie 's class , culminating in her being covered in glue whilst being distracted when answering a staged " phone a friend " .
In her suicide note , she directly blamed Alfie for her decision .
However , she revealed to Alfie that she faked her death in order to escape debtors and to live with her penpal , " The Beast of Bergendorff " , a German dentist in his nineties who lives in Argentina .
In the same episode , her ringtone is revealed to be California Love .
She returns in the final episode of Series 2 and buys Alfie at a man auction for £ 25,000 , more than enough to save Abbey Grove .
She reveals she became a millionaire after the German died
and she inherited his fortune .
It is not known what Pickwell does with Alfie after she won him in the man auction ; but the only relating shot showed Pickwell riding on Alfie like a horse complete with saddle , while both were in their underwear .
She is never mentioned and never appears again after that .
* Rosie Gulliver ( portrayed by Sarah Solemani ) –
Rosie is the Biology teacher and former interim Deputy Headteacher at Abbey Grove School .
She is openly bisexual and was one of the few teachers who takes pride when inspiring and teaching her students .
She is passionate about charity work , animal rights , human rights , feminism , and the struggles of people with disabilities .
When teachers were asked to do a sex education class , she is the only one who leads an honest discussion of human sexuality and shows acceptance and patience of the changes that the students were going through .
When mistakenly believing Alfie was sexually abused by a teacher at Middleton House when he attended it , she urges him to accept that he was a victim and speak for all those who have had their " voices silenced " .
In " Funeral " , Fraser asks her to become interim Deputy Headteacher , and , to Alfie 's alarm , begins to develop similarities to Pickwell 's dictatorial style .
Her tenure ended with the appointment of Professor Green in " Valentine 's Day " .
At the beginning of series 1 , she breaks up with her boyfriend , stating she was too " physical " for him .
At first , she finds Alfie callow and does not share his feelings for her , though over time she warms to him .
At the school dance in the finale of series 1 , she compares him to a student who really frustrates her , but has potential and is " perfect " after all , and kisses him in front of most of the student body .
In the second series , however , Alfie is upset to learn that they are not together , and that she has formed a lesbian relationship with her former student , Alex Scott .
In the fourth episode of the second series , this relationship comes to an end , and Rosie 's feelings for Alfie return .
She gets a job offer in Soweto in the final episode of series 2 , but decides to decline it when Alfie declares his feelings for her , and she returns them .
They share another kiss .
By the beginning of series 3 , they are living together , but she moves out after Alfie wrongly accuses her of cheating .
She refuses to acknowledge the status of their relationship until " Prom " , when the thought that Alfie will no longer be around shows her that she still cares deeply about him .
* Professor Celia " Pro Green " Green ( portrayed by Samantha Spiro ) ( Series 2 ) –
Green is Mrs Pickwell 's replacement as Deputy Headmistress after Pickwell 's ( faked ) death .
It is quickly revealed that Fraser hired her because he thought she was the British rapper Professor Green , and she retains the nickname " Pro Green " in tribute .
When Alfie and she first met , she came across as very friendly , but in reality she was just as strict about the school rules as Miss Pickwell was , with Alfie even at one point saying that he preferred Pickwell .
Later in the episode , she ended up sleeping with Alfie 's Dad , Martin ( whom she went to teacher school with ) , when he invited her over to Alfie 's apartment for a Valentine 's Day dinner .
She continued to act like a dictator , and continued her relationship with Martin , often tormenting Alfie with it .
She became increasingly extremely obnoxious , pompous , sanctimonious and derisive , taunting other staff in insensitive ways .
She also saw herself as a higher category of importance than anyone else , questioning why she should suffer for the school 's ' profligacy ' , when she flaunted her own state of profligacy and ensured that she was the only person to benefit from the situation .
In the Series 2 finale they got engaged .
She is absent from the Christmas special due to her and Martin being on their honeymoon , but by the first episode of Series 3 , she left Martin and took his money , causing Martin to live at first in his car , then alongside Alfie and Rosie .
* Martin Wickers ( portrayed by Harry Enfield ) ( Series 2 – 3 ) –
Martin Wickers , né Martin Stool , is Alfie 's father .
His wife left him for a Spanish man named Javier .
He started a relationship with Celia who went to teacher training with him and in the Series 2 finale they got engaged .
He was absent from the Christmas special due to him and Celia being on their honeymoon , but by the first episode of Series 3 , Celia and Martin had already married , and she had already left him , taking all his money .
Martin has been living in his car and moves in with Alfie and Rosie .
He got a job as the new deputy head at Abbey Grove .
He eventually began a relationship with Frank Grayson 's mother , implying that he planned to move in with and marry her .
However , it appears that this relationship is over in " Exam " when it looks like a student accidentally killed her dog Coco while she was in Martin 's care ( Coco is shown to be alive and unharmed in his office after the incident , but it is never mentioned if she was returned ) .
* Olive Mollinson ( portrayed by Leila Hoffman ) ( Series 1 ) –
Olive was the Art teacher and Head of Maths at Abbey Grove .
She was the oldest staff member , having worked at the school since at least the 1970s .
She does not appear in Series 2 and 3 .
PUPILS
* Chantelle Parsons ( portrayed by Nikki Runeckles ) –
Chantelle was the sultry female pupil in Alfie 's form .
She appeared to be sexually promiscuous and this was often remarked on by both herself and her fellow pupils .
She also had an obvious crush on Alfie and attempted repeatedly to seduce him , as does her mother in " Parents ' Evening " .
In " Valentine 's Day " , she had self - confidence issues , and just wanted Alfie to notice her , so she pretended to have fallen pregnant .
She is obviously jealous of Miss Gulliver due to her relationship with Alfie .
*
Jing Hua ( portrayed by Kae Alexander ) –
Jing was a Chinese pupil , who often spoke in her native language to insult Alfie ( which he interpreted as a compliment , a question about ' English Culture , ' or a correct answer to a question ) .
Jing appeared to be the most intelligent and the most serious of the group and had previously taken the register , carried on working while everyone else was asleep , and helped Alfie take down Pickwell at the end of Series 1 .
In Series 1
she was constantly frustrated that Alfie hardly taught them anything , but in Series 2 she came to Alfie 's aid and commented that he was a " good and decent man " .
She had previously helped Fraser keep his job by exposing Pickwell had been stealing money from the school .
In Series 3 , she underwent a personality change , having become much more moody and quoting various artists and writers .
She reveals in " Exam " that her attitude change is not because of Alfie , but because of the pressure from her parents .
She intentionally sabotages her biology GCSE to avoid being sent to the university that her parents want her to attend .
In the finale , she is believed to be the only person in the class who would stay in school to do their A levels , but she admits that she applied to a creative writing class in Paris .
She helps Alfie one last time by convincing him that he was a good teacher and insisting he should continue teaching .
* Joe Poulter ( portrayed by Ethan Lawrence ) –
Joe appeared to be Alfie 's closest ally in the class , almost always calling him by his first name .
He often helped out his teacher , having falsely come out , pretended
his mum had a life - threatening illness , and cooked for Alfie 's father .
He is often the butt of jokes and pranks by other pupils , although they did seem to have affection for him .
In Series 2 , he had a " bowl cut " haircut that is not fixed , and then in Series 3 he had a shaved head , but the hair slowly grew back .
Also in Series 3 , he appeared to grow in confidence and intelligence .
* Mitchell Harper ( portrayed by Charlie Wernham ) –
Mitchell appeared to be the tough guy of Alfie 's class .
He often poked fun at fellow pupils and his teacher .
However , Alfie would usually get his own back by poking fun at Mitchell 's family life , commenting that he did n't know who his dad was and how he lived in a caravan .
He is a huge WWE fan and he cried at the end of Toy Story 3 .
He had a friendship with Rem Dogg which sees them constantly making insulting comments about each other and their respective mothers .
Despite not liking Alfie , Alfie describes him as one of his favourite students in the Bad Education Handbook , and they develop a friendship during Series 2 .
In Series 3 , they get along much better after Alfie successfully helps Mitchell impress Cleopatra , whom Mitchell is infatuated with .
In the second episode of Series 3 , Mitchell left Abbey Grove after his father 's fairground is shut down by the council .
It is implied that he had moved and transferred to another school , but by " The Exam " , Mitchell is shown in a youth detention centre .
* Leslie " Rem Dogg " Remmington ( portrayed by Jack Binstead ) –
Rem Dogg is a pupil who uses a wheelchair and constantly wears a pair of headphones and baseball cap .
He came across as a cheeky chap who poked fun at Alfie , and is very close friends with Mitchell .
In Series 3 , he became an emo and rarely spoke , going some episodes without saying a word , which could often lead to him putting himself in compromising situations : in " Strike " he spent 24 hours chained to the school gates .
He becomes emotional when Mitchell gives him an impassioned goodbye , but is called " gay " in response , as a reference to the nature of their friendship .
He takes offense when a teacher pretends to be paralysed , and when a careers advisory computer program said he should become a stunt man , then a male escort .
In the Bad Education Handbook , it is revealed that he does n't get along with his father , who is blind in one eye .
* Stephen Carmichael ( portrayed by Layton Williams ) –
Stephen is a camp , gay member of the class .
It is not known if he had ever openly came out , but offered to in " Sex Education " in order to aid Alfie 's sex education class .
That said , it was a well known fact to Alfie and other students , and he made no effort to hide his camp nature .
This was best expressed in " Prom " when he ignored common advice and attended the prom in his drag queen persona .
He has a passion for dancing , musicals and films .
He was best friends with Chantelle and in the Christmas special began a relationship with Frank Grayson after they were both in Alfie 's Christmas Play , " Robocracker " ( a mash - up of Robocop and The Nutcracker ) .
He appears to not get on with Frank in season 3 , but Frank agrees to be his date for the prom and they are later crowned Prom King and Queen .
In series 2 Frank gives Stephen a West Ham United ticket .
At first Stephen was ungrateful and did n't want the ticket because he said he was " Millwall for life " .
He then finds out Frank gave him it
so he decided he should maybe go .
He often stuns people by being good at things that homosexuals are stereotypically believed to be bad at ; including football and advanced martial arts .
* Frank Grayson ( portrayed by Jack Bence ) – Frank Grayson , usually referred to by his surname only , is the school bully , who intimidates his fellow pupils as well as Alfie , having once stolen his shoes and on another occasion forced him to buy him and his friends cider after it was originally confiscated by Miss Pickwell .
After Pickwell 's departure , he was controlled by Professor Green .
At times , however , he appeared to be insecure about himself , breaking down in Alfie 's arms after Pickwell dies ( not knowing she was actually alive ) and exploring his sexuality in the Christmas special , beginning a relationship with Stephen when Frank buys Stephen a ticket to watch West Ham United .
In " Fundraising " , Frank had been held back at school , but had been held back so many times that he was therefore the same age as Alfie .
In the same conversation , he was officially moved to Alfie 's class .
The same episode revealed that Martin moved him in order to avoid expelling him , which would have upset his new girlfriend , Grayson 's mother , meaning that Alfie and Grayson could become step - brothers if they married .
In " The Exam " , Grayson and his mother have moved in with Alfie and Martin , despite Martin saying that he would move in with her .
But this arrangement appeared to be over by the next episode .
In the same episode , he finally bonds with Alfie for real .
In Series 3 , he appears to no longer get along with Stephen , but agrees to be his date to the prom and they are crowned Prom King and Queen .
It is revealed in the final episode that he has an older brother named Dean who now works at Alfie 's old DIY workplace .
* Cleopatra Ofoedo ( portrayed by Weruche Opia ) ( Series 3 ) – Cleopatra is a female pupil in Alfie 's class , introduced at the start of Series 3 .
She was aggressive and did not like Alfie or Mitchell in particular .
She is black , and , as is oversensitive to racial issues and accused people of racism at every opportunity , even when no such inflection was made .
She accused Alfie of assuming she is a good sprinter because she is black when her name was drawn randomly to run the 100 metres in " Sports Day " .
She agreed to make out with Mitchell , but still did not like him .
After Mitchell leaves , she began making jokes at Alfie 's expense like Mitchell used to .
Despite her hostility , she admits in the final episode that she liked Abbey Grove .
She claims to have been to 12 schools , but plans to get kicked out and sent to a new one ( even though she was no longer required by law to stay in school ) .
GUEST CHARACTERS
* Mrs Carmichael ( portrayed by Hillary Whitehall ( mother of Jack Whitehall ) ) is Stephen 's mother who wanted him to leave Abbey Grove thinking it was n't the right school for him but
in the end let him stay .
She is later seen attending Abbey Grove 's fundraiser where she gets one of Fraser 's band members in the Man Auction , and supporting her son at " Sports Day " .
* Richard Carmichael ( portrayed by Delroy Brown ) is Stephen 's father who wanted him to leave Abbey Grove thinking it was n't the right school for him but
in the end let him stay .
* India ( portrayed by Phoebe Waller - Bridge ) is a drug counsellor who came to talk about drugs at Abbey Grove but actually took drugs herself .
* Kevin Schwimmer ( portrayed by Kyle Soller ) is employed as a new history teacher in Series 2 , who claims to be American and had lots of wild experiences that impress Mr Fraser .
His short tenure at the school ends after Alfie and Jing expose him as a fraud and is actually from Dudley .
* Mr Harper ( portrayed by Sam Douglas ) is Mitchell 's father who works at a fun fair and rents out his stalls for Abbey Grove 's fundraiser .
*
Alfie 's Mum ( portrayed by Frances Barber ) is Alfie 's mother .
She left Alfie 's father Martin and now lives in Spain with her new husband Javier .
She appears in the Christmas special where she was told by Fraser that Alfie was in a car crash so she would come to Abbey Grove 's Christmas play .
* Javier Garcia - Ramires ( portrayed by Jake Canuso ) is the new husband of Alfie 's mother .
He appears in the Christmas special where he at first mistakes Rem Dogg for Alfie .
* Bonehead ( portrayed by Greg McHugh ) is a homeless man who appears in the Christmas special .
He was first seen at a soup kitchen Alfie and Rosie are volunteering at and later attends Abbey Grove 's Christmas play .
*
Preet van der Plessis ( portrayed by Harry Peacock ) first appeared in " Self Defence " as an Afrikaner self - defense tutor hired to teach self - defense lessons at Abbey Grove .
However , he was arrested for genuinely attacking Alfie and bringing dangerous weapons into the school .
He later appeared in " Sports Day " where he is hired as the school 's new P.E. teacher .
Alfie strongly objected to his hiring due to the previous incident , and concern that Preet sought revenge against him .
However , he asked Preet to train him to defeat Rosie 's ex - boyfriend Richard in the " Parents vs Teacher " race .
Just before the race , Preet cornered Alfie in the changing room and admitted that he hated Alfie for getting him put in jail .
However , he realised that his aggression towards Alfie was out of frustration for not being able to express his romantic feelings for Alfie .
During the aforementioned race , Preet tries to shoot Richard with a tranquilliser gun , but ends up accidentally shooting Alfie instead and is last seen being taken away by police .
* Mrs Katherine Grayson ( portrayed by Katherine Kingsley ) is Frank 's mother who appeared in " Fundraising " and " The Exam " .
She was very keen for her son to stay at Abbey Grove despite nearly every class not wanting him .
At the end of the episode , she is revealed to be in a relationship with Alfie 's father Martin .
She has a pedigree chihuahua called Coco who she considers a princess , showing more affection towards Coco than Frank .
She and Frank briefly live with Alfie and Martin for one episode , despite Martin saying that he was going to move in with her .
This arrangement comes to an abrupt end when it appears that a student may have killed Coco while it was in Martin 's care ( Coco is later shown to be unharmed ) .
In the final episode " Prom " , it is revealed that she has another son named Dean who works at a DIY store that Alfie briefly worked in .
* Coco who appeared in " The Exam " is Katherine Grayson 's pedigree chihuahua who is considered a princess by her and receives more affection than Frank .
She is accidentally burned to death inside a handbag whilst she is in Martin 's care .
* Richard ( portrayed by James Fleet ) is an ex - boyfriend of Rosie 's who first appears in " After School Clubs " .
He , along with Rosie , attended the same reading club , which Alfie also briefly attended , where he thought that one of the other club 's members , Orlando , was Rosie 's ex - boyfriend but was surprised to learn it was Richard ( owing to the age gap between him and Rosie ) .
He later appeared in " Sports Day " where he took part in the " Parents vs Teacher " race .
He did not appear after this , but is referred to often .
* Dean Grayson ( portrayed by Tom Davis ) is Frank 's older brother who works at a DIY store that Alfie also briefly worked in .
It is also revealed that he also went to Abbey Grove and was taught by Rosie .
EPISODES
AMERICAN ADAPTATION Section::::American adaptation .
A pilot for a U.S. adaptation of Bad Education , named An American Education , was ordered by ABC with Whitehall set to reprise his role as Alfie Wickers .
The pilot began filming in Los Angeles in January 2014 .
However , ABC passed on the pilot on 22 May 2014 , but Whitehall would continue with the original UK series of the show , until Whitehall started making more episodes of the UK Bad Education .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
On 27 February 2015 , Whitehall confirmed that a feature film edition of Bad Education was in production .
Filming took place in Cornwall with the majority of the main cast all reprising their roles for the film .
The film is titled The Bad Education Movie and was released on 21 August 2015 in the UK .
The film saw ineffectual teacher Alfie Wickers travelling to Cornwall with his students .
Entertainment Film Distributors , who also handled the release of the box - office 2011 hit The Inbetweeners Movie dealt with the release of the Bad Education Movie .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The series received mixed reviews from the British press .
The Guardian called it " in poor taste " and accused Whitehall of " phoning it in " .
The Daily Telegraph gave the show a rating of 2 out of 5 , claiming that the show " uses too many stereotypes " and that Whitehall " tends to repeat many jokes " rather than creating new ones .
Both the Daily Mirror and The Sun gave the sitcom a rating of 2 out of 5 .
Despite this , the show currently holds a 7.7 out of 10 rating on IMDb , and a 4.11 rating out of 5 on SideReel from their respective users .
Rotten Tomatoes gave 71 % to Bad education , a critic said " The script is patchy and the story is too silly for its own good but there are enough laughs to make this a hit with the target audience " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS