RELATIONSHIP OBSESSIVE – COMPULSIVE DISORDER
In psychology , relationship obsessive – compulsive disorder ( ROCD ) is a form of obsessive – compulsive disorder focusing on intimate relationships .
Such obsessions can become extremely distressing and debilitating , having negative impacts on relationships functioning .
OBSESSIVE –
COMPULSIVE DISORDER Section::::Obsessive – compulsive disorder .
Obsessive
– compulsive disorder comprises thoughts , images or urges that are unwanted , distressing , interfere with a person 's life and that are commonly experienced as contradicting a persons ' beliefs and values .
Such intrusive thoughts are frequently followed by compulsive behaviors aimed at " neutralizing " the feared consequence of the intrusions and temporarily relieve the anxiety caused by the obsessions .
Attempts to suppress or " neutralize " obsessions increase rather than decrease the frequency and distress caused by the obsessions .
Common obsessive themes include fear of contamination , fears about being responsible for harming the self or others , doubts , and orderliness .
However , people with OCD can also have religious and sexual obsessions .
Some people with OCD may experience obsessions relating to the way they feel in an ongoing relationship or the way they felt in past relationships ( ROCD ) .
Repetitive thought about a person 's feelings in intimate relationships may occur in the natural course of the relationship development ; however , in ROCD such preoccupations are unwanted , intrusive , chronic and disabling .
SYMPTOMS RELATIONSHIP - CENTERED SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Section::::Relationship - centered symptoms .
People may continuously doubt whether they love their partner , whether their relationship is the right relationship or whether their partner really loves them .
When they know they love someone or that someone loves them , they constantly check and reassure themselves that it is the right feeling .
When they attempt to end the relationship , they are overwhelmed with anxiety .
By staying in the relationship , however , they are haunted by continuous doubts regarding the relationship .
PARTNER - FOCUSED SYMPTOMS Section::::Partner - focused symptoms .
Another form of ROCD includes preoccupation , checking , and reassurance - seeking behaviors relating to the partner 's perceived flaws .
Instead of finding good in their partner , they are constantly focused on their shortcomings .
They often exaggerate these flaws and use them to prove the relationship is fundamentally bad .
The fact that they are unable to concentrate on anything but their partner 's flaws causes the sufferer great anxiety , and often leads to a strained relationship .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Like other forms of OCD , psychological and biological factors are believed to play a role in the development and maintenance of ROCD .
In addition to the maladaptive ways of thinking and behaving identified as important in OCD , models of ROCD suggest that over - reliance on intimate relationships or the perceived value of the partner for a person 's feelings of self - worth and fear of abandonment ( also see attachment theory ) may increase vulnerability and maintain ROCD symptoms .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* ROCD : Relationship OCD and the Myth of " The One " * Relationship OCD professional resources website
* Relationship OCD symptoms
* Relationship Obsessive – Compulsive Research Unit * Relationship Obsessive – Compulsive French website