THE PARADISE ( TV SERIES )
The Paradise is a British television costume drama series co - produced by BBC Studios and Masterpiece .
The Paradise premiered in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 25 September 2012 and premiered in the United States on PBS on 6 October 2013 .
The series is an adaptation of Émile Zola 's novel Au Bonheur des Dames that relocates the story to North East England .
( Zola 's novel itself is a retelling of the story of Aristide Boucicaut , the Bellême - born founder of Le Bon Marché . )
A second series was commissioned by BBC One in late October 2012 and was broadcast on 20 October 2013 on BBC One .
On 12 February 2014 , the BBC confirmed that The Paradise would not return for a third series .
They cited that the programme had lower figures than other relatively new dramas such as Death in Paradise , Sherlock and Silk .
Furthermore , its ITV rival Mr Selfridge was performing better .
The BBC also commented that the show was enjoyable : " However , in order to make room for new dramas to come through , The Paradise wo n't be returning . "
PLOT SERIES 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Series 1 .
Series 1 begins in 1875 , and portrays the lives and loves of the people who work , shop and trade , in and around the first English department store .
The owner of The Paradise department store is widower John Moray .
Moray was once a draper 's boy in Emersons , the small shop that grew under his managership into The Paradise , which has come to dominate the high street to the detriment of small shopkeepers nearby .
Into this world comes Denise Lovett , from the small town of Peebles in Scotland , whose uncle Edmund is one of the shopkeepers struggling to survive .
Denise takes a job at The Paradise and is soon seen by Moray as a rising star , to the annoyance of Miss Audrey , the head of ladies ' fashion , and of Clara , a fellow shopgirl .
Moray is financially dependent on Lord Glendenning , whose daughter Katherine is determined to marry Moray and sees Denise as a direct threat to her ambitions .
SERIES 2
Section::::Series 2 .
Lord Glendenning has died and Katherine Glendenning has inherited The Paradise .
She now has a husband , Tom Weston , and a young stepdaughter , Flora .
Katherine asks Moray , who has been exiled to Paris , to return to revive the fortunes of The Paradise , and save it from being sold .
Weston is determined to control his wife and The Paradise , overruling Moray to his own advantage .
Moray 's position at the Bon Marche is a reference to Octave Mouret 's derision and constant competition with the same .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series was filmed at Lambton Castle , which was converted into an 1870s bustling upmarket department store .
Alongside , a Victorian street with shops and a tavern were constructed .
Biddick Hall , also on the Lambton estate , was used as Lord Glendenning 's house .
CAST MAIN CAST Section::::Cast .
Section::::Main cast . !
rowspan="2 " Character ! !
rowspan="2 " Portrayed by ! !
rowspan="2 " Based on ! !
colspan="2 " Seasons !
width="5 % " 1 ! !
width="5 % " 2 RECURRING AND GUEST
CAST Section::::Recurring and guest cast .
Guest stars who played a major part in an episode were credited in the opening credits , amongst the main cast , for that specific episode .
The following actors ' names were included in the opening credits in at least one episode : * Olivia Hallinan as Jocelin Brookmire , a wealthy but unhappy friend of Katherine 's * Mark Bonnar as Peter Adler , a wealthy philanthropist and suitor to Katherine * Arthur Darvill as Bradley Burroughs , a barber who is Moray 's business partner for a short time * David Bamber as Charles Chisholm , a milliner with a shop across the street from The Paradise * Adrian Scarborough as Joseph Fenton , one of the Fenton brothers , wealthy businessmen intent on buying The Paradise * Kevin Guthrie as Nathaniel , one of the boys working in the loading bays at The Paradise , who is secretly employed by Mr Fenton * Branka Katic as Clémence Romanis , a free - thinking Parisian supplier and friend of Moray 's * Julia Ford as Ruby Bell , Susy 's estranged mother * John Duttine as Campbell Balentine , the wealthy owner of a successful beer brewery
* Liz White as Lucille Balentine , a former nurse who has recently married Campbell * Nathan Stewart - Jarrett as Christian Cartwright , a renowned photographer EPISODES SERIES 1 ( 2012 ) SERIES 2 ( 2013 ) SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A soundtrack , featuring music by composer Maurizio Malagnini from the series , was released by Silva Screen Records on 26 August 2013 .
The music was performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra and recorded at Air Studios , Lyndhurst Hall , London , UK .
The score won a Music + Sound Award 2013 .
TRACK LISTING
RELEASES DVD Section::::Releases .
Section::::DVD .
Series 1 was released by BBC Worldwide in a region
2 three - disc set on 3 December 2012 .
Series 2 was released by 2Entertain in a region 2 three - disc set on 9 December 2013 .
Series 1 and 2 were released by 2Entertain as a six - disc box set on 9 December 2013 .
BLU - RAY Section::::Blu - ray .
Series 1 was released by BBC Home Entertainment in a Zone
A two - disc set on 12 November 2013 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Paradise PBS program page