WHITE HOUSE
DOWN White House
Down is a 2013 American political action thriller film directed by Roland Emmerich about an assault on the White House by a paramilitary group and the Capitol Police Officer who tries to stop them .
The film 's screenplay is by James Vanderbilt , and it stars Channing Tatum and Jamie Foxx , with Maggie Gyllenhaal , James Woods , Jason Clarke , Joey King , and Richard Jenkins in supporting roles .
The film was released on June 28 , 2013 and grossed US$ 205 million worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
President of the United States James Sawyer ( Jamie Foxx ) generates controversy over a proposed peace treaty between the allied nations to remove military forces from the Middle East .
Divorced US Capitol Police officer John Cale ( Channing Tatum ) is currently assigned to Speaker of the House Eli Raphelson ( Richard Jenkins ) after saving his nephew 's life during a tour in Afghanistan .
Cale hopes to impress his politically obsessed daughter Emily ( Joey King ) by getting a job interview for the Secret Service Presidential Detail , while also getting tickets for the two of them to tour the White House .
However , his interviewer , Secret Service Special Agent Carol Finnerty ( Maggie Gyllenhaal ) , a former college acquaintance of his , believes him to be unqualified due to his disrespect towards authority , and subsequently deems him ineligible for the job .
Disguised as a janitor , a man detonates a bomb at the center of the US Capitol building , causing the White House to be on lockdown .
Finnerty is sent to escort the Speaker to an underground command center in the Pentagon , while Vice President of the United States Alvin Hammond ( Michael Murphy ) is taken aboard Air Force One .
At the same time , mercenaries led by Emil Stenz ( Jason Clarke ) , having infiltrated the White House by disguising themselves as audio - visual repairmen , quickly overwhelm the Secret Service , take the tour group hostage and seize the White House .
Cale manages to escape to go find his daughter , who was separated from him during the tour .
Retiring Head of the Presidential Detail Martin Walker ( James Woods ) escorts Sawyer and his detail to the Presidential Emergency Operations Center .
Once they gain access , Walker kills his detail , revealing himself to be the real leader of the attack on the White House .
He wants vengeance against Sawyer after a botched black ops mission resulted in the death of his son .
Cale kills a mercenary , takes his gun and radio , and rescues Sawyer .
Walker and Stenz bring in Skip Tyler ( Jimmi Simpson ) to hack into the defense system , but still require Sawyer to activate the nuclear football .
One of the mercenaries , Carl Killick ( Kevin Rankin ) , catches Emily recording a video of the mercenaries and takes her hostage .
Cale and Sawyer contact the command structure , which uses Emily 's video to discover the identities of the mercenaries , who used to work for various government agencies .
Cale and Sawyer try to escape via a tunnel but find the exit gate rigged with explosives .
They are forced into the garage and escape in the presidential limo , which is attacked by Stenz and flips into the White House pool .
After Sawyer and Cale are presumed dead in an explosion , Hammond is sworn in as the 47th President of the United States .
Cale and Sawyer are still alive and learn that Hammond ordered an aerial incursion to take back the White House , but the mercenaries shoot down the choppers .
Having already learned of Emily from the video , Stenz takes her to Walker in the Oval Office .
Tyler finishes hacking into NORAD and launches a missile to shoot down Air Force One , killing Hammond and everyone else on board .
Raphelson is sworn in as the 48th President of the United States and orders an air strike on the White House .
Sawyer surrenders himself to Walker to save Emily .
Walker attempts to force Sawyer to use the football to launch the nuclear missiles against the various cities in Iran ; Walker blames the Iranian regime for killing his son in combat .
Sawyer refuses at first , while Cale sets various rooms on fire as a diversion .
Down in the tunnels , Tyler inadvertently triggers the explosives and dies when they detonate .
After killing most of the remaining mercenaries and freeing the hostages , Cale confronts Stenz and blows him up with a grenade belt during a fight .
Sawyer attacks Walker , who uses Sawyer 's handprint to activate the football .
Walker locks Iran 's targets with the football when Cale enters the Oval Office by crashing a reinforced Chevrolet through the wall .
When Walker reaches to launch the missiles , Cale opens fire on Walker with the car 's rotary cannon , violently killing Walker who is thrown against the wall in the gunfire .
Emily waves a presidential flag on the front lawn , convincing the incoming fighter planes to call off the air strike .
Raphelson is revealed to have conspired with Walker in orchestrating the attack .
Sawyer has Raphelson arrested for treason and names Cale as his new special agent and takes him and Emily on a personal aerial tour of DC .
CAST
* Channing Tatum as John Cale , a United States Capitol Police officer .
* Jamie Foxx as James Sawyer , the President of the United States .
* Maggie Gyllenhaal as Carol Finnerty , Secret Service Presidential Detail .
* Jason Clarke as Emil Stenz , an ex - Delta Force and CIA operative .
Leader of the mercenaries .
* Richard Jenkins as Eli Raphelson , Speaker of the United States House of Representatives .
* Joey King as Emily Cale , the daughter of John Cale .
* James Woods as Martin Walker , Head of the Secret Service Presidential Detail .
* Nicolas Wright as Donnie Donaldson , White House Tour Guide .
* Jimmi Simpson as Skip Tyler , a computer hacker and the technical specialist in Stenz 's group .
* Michael Murphy as Alvin Hammond , the Vice President of the United States .
* Rachelle Lefevre as Melanie , the ex - wife of John Cale and the mother of Emily Cale .
* Lance Reddick as General Caulfield , Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
* Matt Craven as Kellerman , Capitol Police officer .
* Jake Weber as Ted Hope , Secret Service agent .
* Peter Jacobson as Wallace , Vice President Chief of Staff .
* Barbara Williams as Muriel Walker , Martin Walker 's wife .
* Kevin Rankin as Carl Killick , a right - wing militant and one of Stenz 's henchmen .
* Garcelle Beauvais as Alison Sawyer , First Lady of the United States .
* Falk Hentschel as Motts , one of Stenz 's henchmen .
* Romano Orzari as Mulcahy , one of Stenz 's henchmen .
* Jackie Geary as Jenna , assistant to the Vice President .
* Anthony Lemke as Captain Hutton , an analyst in the Pentagon .
* Vincent Leclerc as Ryan Todd , Secret Service agent .
* Kyle Gatehouse as Conrad Cern , a right - wing white supremacist and one of Stenz 's henchmen .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
White House
Down is directed by Roland Emmerich and based on a screenplay by James Vanderbilt , who is also one of the film 's producers .
Sony Pictures purchased Vanderbilt 's spec script in March 2012 for , in what The Hollywood Reporter called " one of the biggest spec sales in quite a while " .
The journal said the script was similar " tonally and thematically " to the films Die Hard and Air Force One .
In the following April , Sony hired Roland Emmerich as director .
Emmerich began filming in July 2012 at the La Cité Du Cinéma in Montreal , Quebec , Canada .
Cinematographer Anna Foerster shot the film with Arri Alexa Plus digital cameras .
In 2012 , Sony competed with Millennium Films , who were producing Olympus
Has Fallen ( also about a takeover of the White House ) to complete casting and to begin filming .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
White House
Down was originally scheduled for a November 1 , 2013 release , but was moved up to a June 28 , 2013 release .
The film was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc on October 22 , 2013 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
White House
Down received mixed reviews from critics .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 50 % , based on 191 reviews , with a weighted average of 5.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " White House
Down benefits from the leads ' chemistry , but director Roland Emmerich smothers the film with narrative clichés and choppily edited action .
"
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score to reviews , the film has an average score of 52 out of 100 , based on 43 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Roth Cornet of IGN gives it a 6.5/10 , concluding : " White House Down is a pretty silly rehashing of previously tread action movie territory , but if you 're willing to laugh along with ( or even at )
it , it can be a highly entertaining experience . "
Andrew Chan of the Film Critics Circle of Australia writes , " I am not entirely sure , whether I should be happy or sad that I laughed when someone got shot or bombed , but such is the manner of how the film is played out .
Therefore , I prefer Olympus for this one . "
Richard Roeper , however , gave the film an F , stating that " Everyone in White House Down is an idiot , clinically insane , a cliché , or a vehicle for shameless exploitation . "
He later named it the worst film of 2013 .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film grossed $ 73.1 million in the United States and $ 132.3 million internationally for a total gross of $ 205.4 million , against a budget of $ 150 million .
On its opening weekend in the U.S. , the film disappointed and came in at 4th at the box office .
It earned $ 24.9 million , less than March 's similarly themed Olympus Has Fallen ( $ 30.4 million opening ) .
In its second weekend , the film made $ 13.4 million .
In October 2013 , Sony announced it lost $ 197 million for June , July , and August 2013 , and largely blamed " the box office flop of the movie White House Down as a key reason for the weakness " .
SEE ALSO * Transfer of Power ( 1999 )
* Olympus Has Fallen ( 2013 )
* London Has Fallen ( 2016 )
* Air Force One ( 1997 )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS *
by Jason Buchanan