ALL IS LOST
All Is Lost is a 2013 survival drama film written and directed by J. C. Chandor .
The film stars Robert Redford as a man lost at sea .
Redford is the only cast member , and the film has very few spoken words .
All Is Lost is Chandor 's second feature film , following his 2011 debut Margin Call .
It screened out of competition at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival .
Among many honors , the film was nominated for Academy Award for Best Sound Editing ( Steve Boeddeker and Richard Hymns ) and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score ( Alex Ebert ) .
Redford was nominated for his own Golden Globe and won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the Indian Ocean , a man ( Robert Redford ) wakes to find water flooding his boat .
He has collided with a wayward shipping container , ripping a hole in the hull .
He uses a sea anchor to dislodge the container , then changes course to tilt the boat away from the hole .
He patches the hole and uses the manual bilge pump to remove the water from the cabin .
The boat 's navigational and communications systems have been damaged by saltwater intrusion .
The man tries to repair the marine radio and connects it to one of the boat 's batteries .
When he climbs the mast to repair an antenna lead , he sees an oncoming tropical storm .
When the storm arrives , he runs before the wind .
He intends to bring the boat into a hove - to position , but as he crawls to the bow to hoist the storm jib , he is thrown overboard and regains the deck after a struggle .
The boat capsizes , turtles after a further 180-degree roll and is dis - masted , and most of the equipment is destroyed .
With the boat badly sinking , the man abandons ship in an inflatable life raft , salvaging whatever he can to survive .
As the man learns to operate a sextant , he discovers he is being pulled towards a major shipping lane by ocean currents .
He survives another storm but his supplies dwindle , and he learns too late that his drinking water has been contaminated with sea water .
He improvises a solar still from his water container and a plastic bag to produce freshwater .
The man is passed by two container ships , which do not see him , despite his use of signaling flares .
He drifts out of the shipping lane with no food or water .
On the eighth day , he writes a letter , puts it in a jar , and throws it in the ocean as a message in a bottle .
Later that night , he sees a light in the distance .
He tears pages from his journal along with charts to create a signal fire .
The fire grows out of control and consumes his raft .
He falls into the water and allows himself to sink .
Underwater , he sees the hull of a boat with a search light approaching his burning raft .
He swims towards the surface to grasp an outstretched hand .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
All Is Lost was written and directed by J. C. Chandor , his second feature film , following 2011 's Margin Call .
During his time commuting from Providence , Rhode Island to New York City , Chandor developed the idea for All Is Lost .
After meeting Robert Redford at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival where Margin Call premiered , Chandor asked the veteran actor to be in the film .
On February 9 , 2012 , Redford 's casting was confirmed for All Is Lost as its only cast member .
In addition to there being only one actor in the film , Redford also stated that the film has no dialogue , although there are a few spoken lines .
For these reasons , the shooting script was only 31 pages long .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began in mid-2012 at Baja Studios in Rosarito Beach in Mexico .
Baja Studios was originally built for the 1997 film Titanic .
Filming took place for two months in the location 's water tank .
In addition the crew spent " two or three days " filming in the actual ocean .
Chandor would later remark that completing the film was " essentially a jigsaw puzzle " and that the crew spent less time on the actual ocean than the film would have viewers believe .
At a press conference after the film 's screening at Cannes 2013 , Redford revealed that his ear was damaged during the production .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film score to All Is Lost is composed by Edward Sharpe and the Magnetic Zeros ' frontman Alex Ebert , who signed on to the film in November 2012 .
Speaking of the experience of working on the film , Ebert said , " This project was a dream — an open space to play in but also space to listen to the elements — wind , water , rain , sun , are the story 's other characters to me .
I knew I had quite a task ahead of me : to at once allow the elements to sing and to give Redford a voice with which to , once in a while , respond .
" The " extra features " of the Blu - ray Disc explain the unique development of the sound track , music , script and other production considerations .
A soundtrack album featuring ten original compositions and one new song all written , composed , and produced by Ebert was released on October 1 , 2013 by Community Music .
On September 12 , 2013 , the song " Amen " from the soundtrack was made available for streaming .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
All Is Lost screened out of competition at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival on May 22 .
The film was distributed theatrically by Lionsgate and Roadside Attractions jointly in the United States .
FilmNation Entertainment handled foreign sales for the film .
In February 2012 , Universal Pictures purchased distribution of the film for the UK , Australia , France , Italy , Spain , Belgium , Netherlands , South Korea , Russia and Scandinavia .
Other deals were made with HGC in China , Square One Entertainment in Germany , Sun Distribution in Latin America , Paris Filmes in Brazil , Audio Visual Entertainment in Greece and Pony Canyon in Japan .
It began a limited release in the United States on October 18 , 2013 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 94 % of critics gave the film a positive review based on 219 reviews ; the average score is 8/10 .
The site 's consensus states : " Anchored by another tremendous performance in a career full of them , All Is Lost offers a moving , eminently worthwhile testament to Robert Redford 's ability to hold the screen .
" On Metacritic the film has a score of 87 based on 45 reviews , considered to be " universal acclaim " .
After the screening of the film at the Cannes Film Festival , Redford received a standing ovation .
Writing for The Independent , Geoffrey Macnab said the film was " utterly compelling viewing " .
Andrew Pulver , writing for The Guardian , said that " Redford delivers a tour de force performance : holding the screen effortlessly with no acting support whatsoever . "
Justin Chang of Variety said of Redford 's performance that he " holds the viewer 's attention merely by wincing , scowling , troubleshooting and yelling the occasional expletive " .
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph said , " The film 's scope is limited , but as far as it goes , All Is Lost is very good indeed : a neat idea , very nimbly executed . "
Conveying Peter Bradshaw 's review , The Guardian said , " Redford 's near - mute performance as a mysterious old man of the sea adrift and utterly alone makes for a bold , gripping thriller . "
Having spotted a possible metaphor , Bradshaw concludes : " What a strikingly bold and thoughtful film . "
Alan Scherstuhl of The Village Voice writes that the film is " a genuine nail - biter , scrupulously made and fully involving , elemental in its simplicity . "
David Morgan of CBS News gave the film a positive review , stating , " Four decades ago Redford demonstrated a similar capacity for survival skills as the mountain man Jeremiah Johnson .
Today , at age 77 , without a supporting cast and performing virtually all of his water stunts himself , Redford proves he is still up to the task , shining in what is an extremely physical but also an intellectually demanding role . "
However , the film has been criticized in the sailing world for being unrealistic , in particular for the lack of certain safety equipment deemed standard for sailboats navigating the open ocean such as an EPIRB , and other bad decisions of the main character .
An exception to this criticism is English Yachting Monthly , for which Dick Durham claimed : " Certainly the film is authentic and grippingly realistic . "
Director Chandor himself , who says he went sailing with his parents when young and later a few times as an adult , stated in an interview with German sailing magazine Segeln that everything that happened in the film could have happened in reality .
His only reservations were the probability of crossing the Indian Ocean single - handed and of not evading the storm with modern technology and due attention .
TOP TEN LISTS Section::::Top ten lists .
All Is Lost was listed on many critics ' top ten lists .
* 2nd – Robert Horton , Seattle Weekly *
3rd – Genevieve Koski ,
The Dissolve * 3rd – Steve Davis ,
Austin Chronicle * 3rd –
Ty Burr ,
Boston Globe * 3rd – Mark Savlov , Austin Chronicle * 4th – Lou Lumenick , New York Post *
5th –
Ann Hornaday ,
The Washington Post * 5th –
Mark Mohan ,
The Oregonian * 5th – Alonso Duralde ,
TheWrap * 5th – Brian Miller , Seattle Weekly
* 6th – Stephen Schaefer , Boston Herald
* 6th – Rex Reed , New York Observer
* 6th –
Marjorie Baumgarten , Austin Chronicle
* 6th – Mike D'Angelo , The A.V. Club
* 6th – Noel Murray , The Dissolve
* 6th – Barbara Vancheri , Pittsburgh Post - Gazette
* 6th – Joshua Rothkopf , Time Out New York
* 6th –
A.O. Scott ,
The New York Times * 7th – David Edelstein , Vulture * 7th – Scott Feinberg , The Hollywood Reporter
* 7th – Keith Phipps , The Dissolve
* 7th – Sasha Stone , Awards Daily *
7th –
Christopher Orr , The Atlantic * 7th – Kristopher Tapley , HitFix
* 8th –
Richard Roeper , Chicago Sun - Times * 9th – Lisa Schwarzbaum , BBC * 9th – Chris Nashawaty , Entertainment Weekly * 9th – Elizabeth Weitzman , New York Daily News *
Top 10
( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) – David Denby , The New Yorker
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) – James Verniere , Boston Herald
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) – Claudia Puig , USA Today
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) –
Stephen Whitty , The Star - Ledger
* Top 10 ( listed alphabetically , not ranked ) – Steven Rea , Philadelphia Inquirer ACCOLADES AARP Annual Movies for Grownups Awards
86th Academy Awards
Best Sound Editing Steve Boeddeker , Richard Hymns
Chicago Film Critics Association
Best Actor
rowspan=3Robert Redford Critics ' Choice Movie Awards Best Actor Detroit Film Critics Society
Best Actor 2013
Deauville American Film Festival
Prix du Jury
( Jury Special Prize )
J. C. Chandor
rowspan=271st Golden Globe Awards
Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Robert Redford
Best Original Score Alex Ebert
Gotham Awards
Best Actor Robert Redford rowspan=4Independent Spirit Awards
Best Feature Neal Dodson , Anna Gerb , J. C. Chandor
Best Director J. C. Chandor
Best Male Lead Robert Redford
Best Cinematography Frank G. DeMarco
Best Sound Editing : Sound Effects & Foley in a Feature Film Richard Hymns , Steve Boeddeker New York Film Critics Circle
Best Actor rowspan=3Robert Redford Phoenix Film Critics Society Best Actor in a Leading Role rowspan=2San Francisco Film Critics Circle Best Actor
Best Editing Pete Beaudreau
rowspan=4Satellite Awards
Best Motion Picture Neal Dodson , Anna Gerb , J. C. Chandor
Best Actor – Motion Picture Robert Redford Best Sound ( Editing and Mixing ) Brandon Proctor , Richard Hymns , Steve Boeddeker Best Visual Effects Brendon O'Dell , Collin Davies ,
Robert Munroe Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Best Actor Robert Redford SEE ALSO
* Survival film , an article about the film genre , with a list of related films
* The Old Man and the Sea NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS