BATES MOTEL ( TV SERIES )
Bates Motel is an American psychological horror drama television series that aired from March 18 , 2013 to April 24 , 2017 .
It was developed by Carlton Cuse , Kerry Ehrin , and Anthony Cipriano , and is produced by Universal Television and American Genre for the cable network
A&E.
The series , a contemporary prequel to Alfred Hitchcock 's 1960 film Psycho ; based on Robert Bloch 's 1959 novel of the same name , depicts the lives of Norman Bates ( Freddie Highmore ) and his mother Norma ( Vera Farmiga )
prior to the events portrayed in the novel and film , albeit in a different fictional town ( White Pine Bay , Oregon , as opposed to Fairvale , California ) and in a modern - day setting .
However , the final season loosely adapts the plot of Psycho .
Max Thieriot and Olivia Cooke both starred as part of the main cast throughout the series ' run .
After recurring in the first season , Nestor Carbonell was added to the main cast from season two onward .
The series begins in Arizona with the death of Norma 's husband , after which Norma purchases the Seafairer motel located in a coastal Oregon town so that she and Norman can start a new life .
Subsequent seasons follow Norman as his mental illness becomes dangerous , and Norma as she struggles to protect her son , and those around him , from himself .
The series was filmed outside Vancouver in Aldergrove , British Columbia , along with other locations within the Fraser Valley of British Columbia .
A&E chose to skip a pilot of the series , opting to go straight - to - series by ordering a 10-episode first season .
On June 15 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a fourth and fifth season , making Bates Motel A&E 's longest - running original scripted drama series in the channel 's history .
The series ' lead actors , Vera Farmiga and Freddie Highmore , received particular praise for their performances in the series , with the former receiving a Primetime Emmy Award nomination and winning a Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television .
Bates Motel also won three People 's Choice Awards for Favorite Cable TV Drama , and for Favorite Cable TV Actress ( Farmiga ) and Actor ( Highmore ) .
SERIES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1 Section::::Series overview .
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season follows Norma and Norman Bates as they buy a motel after Norman 's father dies .
On one of the first nights of the two owning the motel , the former owner breaks in and sexually assaults Norma .
Norman knocks the attacker out , and Norma stabs him to death .
She decides it 's best not to call the police and to cover up the murder .
She and Norman dispose of the body .
He complicates the cover - up by keeping a belt that belonged to the victim .
When the town sheriff and his deputy notice that a man has gone missing , Norma and Norman must keep them from digging too far .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season follows the aftermath of Norman 's teacher 's murder , as her mysterious past comes to light .
Meanwhile , Norma finds herself making dangerous decisions in order to keep the motel running and preventing the impending bypass .
Bradley 's search for her father 's killer leads to the extremes , and Dylan learns the disturbing truth about his parentage .
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The third season focuses on Norman 's waning deniability about what 's happening to him , and the lengths he will go to gain control of his fragile psyche .
The dramatic events of last season leave Norma more aware of her son 's mental fragility and fearful of what he is capable of .
Meanwhile , Sheriff Romero begins to distance himself from the Bates family after he suspects Norma is lying to him about her husband 's death .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
The fourth season follows Norma as she becomes increasingly fearful of Norman , going to great lengths to find him the professional help he needs .
This complicates their once unbreakable trust as Norman struggles to maintain his grip on reality .
Meanwhile , Sheriff Romero once again finds himself drawn into Norma and Norman 's lives .
He agrees to marry Norma because his insurance will enable her to place Norman in an expensive psychiatric hospital .
His generosity backfires , however , when Norman learns of the marriage .
Norman bitterly resents Romero for coming between him and his mother and at one point threatens the sheriff with an axe .
SEASON 5
Section::::Season 5 .
The fifth season begins two years after the death of Norma .
Publicly happy and well - adjusted , Norman struggles at home , where his blackouts are increasing and " Mother " threatens to take him over completely .
Meanwhile , Dylan and Emma find themselves drawn back into Norman 's world , and Romero hungers for revenge against his stepson , Norman .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Vera Farmiga as Norma Louise Bates * Freddie Highmore as Norman Bates * Max Thieriot as Dylan Massett
* Olivia Cooke as Emma Decody * Nicola Peltz as Bradley Martin ( main season 1 ; recurring seasons 2–3 )
* Nestor Carbonell as Sheriff Alex Romero ( recurring season 1 ; main seasons 2–5 )
* Kenny Johnson as Caleb Calhoun ( recurring seasons 2 and 5 ; main season 3 ; guest season 4 )
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On January 12 , 2012 , it was reported that A&E were developing a television series titled Bates Motel that would serve as a prequel to the Alfred Hitchcock film Psycho .
The first script was written by Anthony Cipriano .
In March 2012 , Carlton Cuse and Kerry Ehrin joined the project as executive producers and head writers .
Cuse has cited the drama series Twin Peaks as a key inspiration for Bates Motel , stating , " We pretty much ripped off Twin Peaks ...
If you wanted to get that confession , the answer is yes .
I loved that show .
They only did 30 episodes .
Kerry [ Ehrin ] and
I thought we 'd do the 70 that are missing . "
On July 2 , 2012 , A&E gave Bates Motel a straight - to - series order .
Chris Bacon was hired to score the music for the series in January 2013 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On August 27 , 2012 , Vera Farmiga was the first to be cast in the leading role of Norma Louise Bates .
On September 14 , 2012 , Freddie Highmore was cast as Norman Bates .
That same day , Max Thieriot was cast as Norman 's half - brother , Dylan Massett .
Shortly after , on September 19 , 2012 , Nicola Peltz was cast as Bradley Martin , a possible love interest for Norman .
Finally , on September 20 , 2012 , Olivia Cooke was the final main cast member to join the series , in the role of Emma Decody , Norman 's best friend .
Nestor Carbonell was cast in a recurring role as Sheriff Alex Romero in the first season , but was upgraded to the main cast at the beginning of the second season .
In July 2014 , Kenny Johnson , who recurred as Norma 's brother Caleb Calhoun in the second season , was promoted to a series regular for the third season .
It was announced on July 22 , 2016 at San Diego Comic - Con International that Rihanna would appear in the iconic role of Marion Crane for the fifth and final season .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
A replica of the original Bates Motel set from the film Psycho was built on location at approximately 1054 272nd Street in Aldergrove , British Columbia , where portions of the series were filmed .
The original house and motel is located in Universal Studios , Hollywood , Los Angeles .
Additional filming for the series took place in multiple areas in Metro Vancouver , including Steveston , Coquitlam , Horseshoe Bay , West Vancouver and Fort Langley .
In February 2017 , after filming was completed for the series , the Bates Motel exterior set in Aldergrove was demolished .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The first season of Bates Motel received a score of 66 on Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 83 % of 42 critics gave the first season a positive review .
The site 's consensus reads , " Bates Motel utilizes mind manipulation and suspenseful fear tactics , on top of consistently sharp character work and wonderfully uncomfortable familial relationships .
" The second season of Bates Motel received a score of 67 out of 100 on Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Rotten Tomatoes reported that 90 % of 21 reviews gave the second season a positive review .
The site 's consensus reads , " Bates Motel reinvents a classic thriller with believable performances and distinguished writing . "
The third season of Bates Motel received a score of 72 out of 100 on Metacritic , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Rotten Tomatoes reported a 95 % rating from 21 reviews .
The site 's consensus reads , " Bates Motel further blurs lines around TV 's creepiest taboo mother / son relationship , uncomfortably darkening its already fascinating tone .
" The fourth season of Bates Motel was met with critical acclaim .
Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100 % positive rating from 17 reviews .
The site 's consensus reads , " Bates Motel fulfills its menacing potential in a fourth season that confidently careens toward the mother - son duo 's ghastly destiny .
"
The fifth and final season of Bates Motel received a score of 81 out of 100 on Metacritic , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100 % rating from 21 reviews .
The site 's consensus reads , " Bates Motel 's final season brings the franchise full circle , with a satisfyingly creepy conclusion to the trials and tribulations of Norman Bates . "
RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
!
rowspan="2 " Season ! rowspan="2 " Time slot ( ET(in millions ) !
Date !
Premiere viewers(in millions ) !
Date !
Finale viewers(in millions )
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media . !
Season !
Episodes !
Release date !
Special features
* Deleted Scenes * Paley Center Panel Discussion with the Cast and Creative Team * Deleted Scenes
* Bates Motel :
After Hours – Season 2 Premiere
* Bates Motel :
After Hours – Season 2 Finale * Origins of a Psycho :
Inside Bates Motel * Deleted Scenes * A Broken Psyche : Creating Norma - n
* Deleted Scenes *
Gag Reel
* Bates Motel : Closed for Business
* Bates Motel : The Checkout * Paley Center Panel Discussion with the Cast and Creative Team * Bates Motel :
After Hours – Season 2 Premiere
* Bates Motel :
After Hours – Season 2 Finale * Origins of a Psycho :
Inside Bates Motel * Deleted Scenes * A Broken Psyche : Creating Norma - n
*
Gag Reel
* Bates Motel : Closed for Business
* Bates Motel : The Checkout }
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast .
In Canada , the series airs only on the U.S. network A&E , which is available through most Canadian cable and satellite companies .
In Australia , the series premiered on Fox8 on May 26 , 2013 .
In the UK and Ireland , it premiered on Universal Channel on April 2 , 2014 .
In Jamaica , it premiered on CVM TV on August 11 , 2014 .
In the Middle East , it premiered on OSN First HD in mid-2014 .
The second season premiered on January 5 , 2015 .
In the Philippines , Bates Motel began airing on Jack TV on August 12 , 2013 .
In South Africa , the series premiered on MNet on June 21 , 2013 .
The series premiered in India on Colors Infinity on November 6 , 2015 .
MERCHANDISING Section::::Merchandising .
NBCUniversal partnered with Hot Topic , the American retailer of pop culture merchandise , to introduce a collection of clothing and accessories inspired by Bates Motel .
The merchandise , including items such as bathrobes and bloody shower curtains , became available at Hot Topic 's website and select stores on March 18 , 2014 .
As of 2018 , the merchandise is no longer available through Hot Topic .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS