LIGHTNING ( CONNECTOR )
Lightning is a proprietary computer bus and power connector created by
Apple Inc. Introduced on , to replace its predecessor ,
the 30-pin dock connector , the Lightning connector is used to connect Apple mobile devices like iPhones , iPads , and iPods to host computers , external monitors , cameras , USB battery chargers , and other peripherals .
Using 8 pins instead of 30 , Lightning is significantly more compact than the 30-pin dock connector and can be inserted with either side facing up .
However , unless used with an adapter , it is incompatible with cables and peripherals designed for its predecessor .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Lightning connector was introduced on , as a replacement for the 30-pin dock connector , to be used for all new hardware that was announced at the same event .
The first compatible devices were the iPhone 5 , the iPod Touch ( 5th generation ) , and the iPod Nano ( 7th generation ) .
The iPad ( 4th generation ) and the iPad Mini ( 1st generation ) were added as Lightning devices in October 2012 .
On November 25 , 2012 , Apple acquired the " Lightning " trademark in Europe from Harley - Davidson .
Apple was given a partial transfer of the Lightning trademark , suggesting that Harley - Davidson likely retained the rights to use the name for motorcycle - related products .
Apple is the sole proprietor of the trademark and copyrights for the designs and specifications of the Lightning connector .
The iPad Pro , released in 2015 , features the first Lightning connector supporting USB 3.0 .
However , the included cable only supports USB 2.0 as it lacks the necessary extra pins , so any USB 3.0-supporting Lightning devices would be bought separately .
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
Lightning is an 8-pin connector which carries a digital signal .
Unlike the Apple 30 pin connector it replaces ( and USB Type A or B connectors ) , the Lightning connector can be inserted either face up or face down .
Apple offers various adapters which allow the Lightning connector to be used with other interfaces , such as 30-pin , USB , HDMI , VGA , and SD cards .
The Lightning to 30-pin adapter supports only a limited subset of the available 30-pin signals : USB data , USB charging , and analog audio output ( via the DAC inside of the adapter ) .
Official Lightning connectors contain an authentication chip that was intended to make it difficult for third - party manufacturers to produce compatible accessories without being approved by Apple ; however , the chip has been cracked .
The pin out is detailed in the info box .
However , each pin on the reverse side of the connector is connected to its directly opposite twin on the other side .
Part of the processor 's job is to route the power and data signals correctly whichever way up the connector is inserted .
The plug measures 6.7 mm by 1.5 mm .
COMPARISONS WITH MICROUSB Section::::Comparisons with microUSB .
Apple has not publicly discussed microUSB , but various tech news websites state that Lightning might have been used instead of microUSB because of its compatibility with docks and speaker systems ; the ability to insert the cable in either direction for user convenience ; Apple wishing to maintain control over the ethics of the supply chain of accessories and the ability to charge a licensing fee ; the mechanical weakness of USB connectors ; and the ability to either charge a device , or allow a device to power accessories .
The optional supplemental standard USB On - The - Go allows USB devices to do this .
On April 10 , 2015 , Apple announced a new line of MacBooks that featured USB - C , which has similarities with Lightning , and advantages over microUSB .
USB - C , like Lightning , but unlike its predecessor microUSB , can be plugged in either direction .
USB - C and Lightning are not interchangeable ; as they are entirely different pin - outs , protocols and connectors , and until the launch of the new MacBooks required adapters to work with each other .
On October 30 2018 , Apple announced that their new range of iPads will replace Lightning with USB - C. DEVICES USING LIGHTNING CONNECTORS Section::::Devices using Lightning connectors .
The following Apple - made devices use Lightning connectors : IPHONE * iPhone 5 *
iPhone 5C * iPhone 5S * iPhone
6/6
Plus * iPhone 6S/6S
Plus
* iPhone SE
* iPhone 7/7 Plus
* iPhone 8/8
Plus
* iPhone X * iPhone XS / XS Max * iPhone XR
IPAD
*
iPad ( 4th generation )
*
iPad Air
* iPad Air 2 * iPad ( 2017 )
* iPad ( 2018 )
* iPad Mini ( 1st generation )
* iPad Mini 2 * iPad Mini 3
*
iPad Mini 4
* iPad Pro ( 9.7-inch , 10.5 inch and 12.9-inch models , except third generation models , which uses USB - C. ) IPOD * iPod Nano ( 7th generation ) * iPod Touch ( 5th generation )
* iPod Touch ( 6th generation )
ADAPTERS
*
Lightning to 30-pin Adapter
* Lightning to 30-pin Adapter ( 0.2 m )
* Lightning to Micro USB Adapter
* Lightning to USB Camera Adapter
* Lightning to USB 3 Camera Adapter
* Lightning to SD Card Camera Reader
* Lightning to VGA Adapter * Lightning Digital AV Adapter
* Lightning to HDMI
* Lightning to 3.5 mm
Headphone Jack Adapter
* Lightning to USB Type C ( Power Delivery )
ACCESSORIES * Apple Pencil ( 1st Generation )
* Magic Keyboard * Magic Mouse 2 , Magic Trackpad 2 * Siri Remote for Apple TV ( 4th & 5th generation )
* Airpods Charging Case *
EarPods with Lightning connector * BeatsX Earphones *
Beats Pill+ Speaker * iPhone Lightning Dock SEE ALSO
* Dock connector * Smart Connector * Thunderbolt ( interface ) REFERENCES FURTHER READING