THE FLUME ( ALTON TOWERS )
The Flume was a Log Flume at Alton Towers in Staffordshire .
It opened in 1981 and was rethemed in 2004 coinciding with its sponsorship by Imperial Leather .
The ride was a bath time themed log flume with three drops .
It was the longest log flume attraction in the world at the time of opening .
The attraction closed in 2015 and was removed a year later for the area 's redevelopment into the Wicker Man rollercoaster .
RIDE EXPERIENCE Section::::Ride Experience .
The ride was approximately six minutes long and began with the loading of passengers into the boats , which had a maximum capacity of five .
The boarding took place in a moving , circular station .
Once the boat dispatched from the station , it took several turns through woodland and then travelled up to the first lift hill .
The boat was then dropped down a small drop to gain some height , turning around the woodland until it came to the second lift hill , which was enclosed in a darkened hut , followed by a ' blind ' drop .
Following the Imperial Leather sponsorship , a shower sprinkler and riders were met with a giant rubber duck statue .
The ride then traveled through more woodland before embarking up a 86 ft lift hill , then swiftly dropping riders
85 ft where riders were usually soaked with water .
The boats then travelled through two shower sprinklers before returning to the station .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1980 , Alton Towers opened the ride Corkscrew along with a few other amusement attractions .
Alton Towers gained popularity so for the 1981 season they decided to open a log flume .
Construction started in late 1980 to open the ride for the 1981 season .
the park 's first major scale engineering project including purpose built reservoir sunk into a former field .
The 5.5-acre site was bordered on two sides by the Park Railway .
initially access to the new ride was via a railway bridge over the tracks , by 1982 the Railway had been shortened to allow easier access for the popular new ride .
In 1981 the ' White Water Flume ' opened to the public as the world 's longest log flume with its 2600-foot waterway themed around the Canadian Falls ; by 1983 the ride had acquired its traditional and more popular name of ' The Log Flume ' and for the next 23 years operated as such .
Between 1984 and 1995 it also featured props from ' Dinosaur Land ' which had been closed the previous season to make way for The Black Hole , including a prehistoric family inside the tunnel section of the flume .
In 2004 the ride was re - themed to ' The Flume ' with a bath theme , as sponsored by a soap manufacturer ; new ' bath ' boats replacing the logs , new lining , maintenance , a refurbished station , a yellow duck , shower and other bath - time theming .
In 2008 , the area in which the ride operated was re - themed to Mutiny Bay , however the ride retained its bath time theme .
Weeks before the beginning of the 2016 season , Alton Towers announced that the ride was to be closed permanently .
On March 16 , 2016 , the park posted a photo through their Towers Loving Care
Twitter page of a sign on the perimeter of the former area of the attraction that reads " SW8 .
Ground breaking new ride development " , marking the construction site for the resort 's next large investment SW8 .
After the ride 's closure and during the construction of SW8 , the resort held charity auctions with lots containing a variety of items from The Flume .
This included various queue line and warning signage , as well as the ride boats .
MEDIA GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* http://old.towerstimes.co.uk/attractions/mb/flume.htm at the Towers Times website * Clips of old Log Flume ride * Youtube clip of the Log Flume ( retheme as bath tubs )