KINGDOM HEARTS HD 1.5 REMIX
Kingdom Hearts HD
1.5 Remix includes both Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and in high - definition and with trophy support .
Additionally , the collection features a cinematic remake of Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days , including high - definition cutscenes from the original game plus new scenes ; the 358/2 Days cinematic also has trophy support .
Ideas for a remastered collection of Kingdom Hearts games were first revealed in August 2011 , with the collection formally announced in September 2012 .
Kingdom Hearts Final Mix , in addition to being created from the ground up due to lost assets from the original game , had the most adjustments made to its gameplay , including adding Reaction Commands first introduced in Kingdom Hearts II and allowing the camera to be moved with the right thumb stick .
The collection was met to generally favorable reviews .
A second collection , Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 Remix , was released in 2014 while a third collection , Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue , was released in 2017 .
1.5 Remix was released in a single , combined collection with 2.5 Remix on the PlayStation 4 in March 2017 .
GAMES KINGDOM HEARTS FINAL MIX Section::::Games .
Section::::Kingdom Hearts Final Mix .
Kingdom Hearts follows the adventures of Sora , a cheerful teenager who fights against the forces of darkness .
He is joined by Donald Duck , Goofy and other Disney characters who help him on his quest .
In the original and Final Mix versions of Kingdom Hearts , the command menu had four commands : Attack , Magic , Items , and a fourth context - sensitive slot that varied depending on what the player had targeted , where they were , etc .
The command menu has been updated to include " Attack " , " Magic " , " Items " , and " Summons " in the fourth slot , which was originally located as a sub - category beneath the " Magic " menu .
The original fourth command has been replaced by the introduction of Reaction Commands from Kingdom Hearts II and are triggered by pressing the Triangle Button .
The camera works more similarly to that of Kingdom Hearts II , utilizing the right thumb stick to move the camera and allowing the player to click the R3 button to reset the camera behind Sora , as opposed to the original game which made use of the shoulder triggers L2 and R2 to position the camera .
Overall , the gameplay of Kingdom Hearts Final Mix was modified so it would play more similarly to Kingdom Hearts II and Re : Chain of Memories , to create a more consistent play style throughout the series .
It was released in North America , Europe and Australia for the first time as part of the collection .
KINGDOM HEARTS RE : CHAIN OF MEMORIES
Section::::Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories .
Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories is a direct sequel to Kingdom Hearts , and its ending is set about a year before Kingdom Hearts II .
The game follows Sora and friends , exploring a mysterious castle .
There , Riku explores the basement levels and fights the darkness .
This version of Chain of Memories was released in Europe and Australia for the first time as part of the collection , as it was previously released in North America in December 2008 .
KINGDOM HEARTS 358/2
DAYS
Section::::Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days .
The story takes place near the end of Kingdom Hearts , continuing parallel to .
The story is told from the perspective of Roxas , following his daily life within Organization XIII and his relationship with fellow Organization member Axel ; it also introduces a fourteenth member , Xion , who becomes friends with the former two .
358/2 Days does not appear in playable form , and instead features the Nintendo DS game adapted into 2 hours and 50 minutes worth of cinematic retelling , and features trophy support .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
In August 2011 , Nomura expressed desire to release a high definition re - release of the game though he had yet to confirm such plans .
The idea for a high definition re - release preceded plans for Final Fantasy X re - release , and was a focus for two Square Enix programmers for over a year .
In September 2012 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 Remix for release in Japan on the PlayStation 3 .
The collection would include both Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and in high definition and trophy support , as well as non - playable HD event scenes from Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days as a way for players to understand the story .
The development team experimented with using some character models from for HD 1.5 Remix .
The cutscenes from Kingdom Hearts Final Mix , which were either unvoiced or used English voice acting , now use the original Japanese voice acting in the Japanese release ; the voice acting remains unchanged in the English - language releases .
358/2 Days was originally planned to receive a full remake for the compilation similar to Re : Chain of Memories , but due to the lengthy development time it would require , it was instead presented as an extended HD cinematic retelling the game 's events .
Every cutscene from Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days , whether it was originally a pre - rendered scene or used in - game graphics , was re - animated for the cinematic .
In January 2013 , Jesse McCartney , the voice of Roxas , posted a picture on Instagram of himself in a recording booth , with Roxas seen on a screen in the background , along with the caption , " For all you ' Kingdom Hearts ' Fans .
Recording the next chapter !
# KingdomHearts # Roxas # Gamers .
" The image was later deleted by McCartney .
In February , Square Enix confirmed the game would release in North America and Europe , later revealing September 2013 releases for North America , Australia , and Europe .
It was revealed in March 2013 in a Famitsu interview , that 66 tracks spanning across all three games ( with a majority of them concentrated in Kingdom Hearts Final Mix ) were re - recorded with live instrumentation , as opposed to the original games ' use of the PlayStation 2 's built - in tone generator for their background music .
In June 2013 , Nomura stated that the original game assets for Kingdom Hearts had been lost some time ago .
He explained , " [ The game data ] was lost , so we had to research , and we had to dig out from the actual game what was available and recreate everything for HD .
We had to recreate all the graphics and it was actually not that easy . "
In July 2017 , Nomura spoke on bringing the collection to the Xbox One , saying he did not believe there was much demand for it outside of North America , but felt it could be a possibility after Square Enix completed development on Kingdom Hearts III .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 Remix was released in Japan on March 14 , 2013 , in North America on September 10 , 2013 , in Australia on September 12 , 2013 , and in Europe on September 13 , 2013 .
Preorders for the game in North America , Australia , and Europe included a book of the game 's concept artwork and a dynamic PlayStation 3 theme .
Square Enix also released the collection in a bundle in Japan with Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 Remix titled , Kingdom Hearts Collector 's Pack : HD 1.5 + 2.5 Remix .
The Collector 's pack will feature both collections , a code to get an Anniversary Set for Kingdom Hearts χ [ chi ] , music , and a booklet with art from the series .
In October 2016 , Square Enix announced a single - disc compilation release of Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 Remix and Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 Remix for the PlayStation 4 .
It was released on March 9 , 2017 , in Japan , and was released on March 28 , 2017 , in North America , and March 31 , 2017 , in Europe .
A set of free downloadable content for the PS4 version released in June 2017 added a Theater mode for Kingdom Hearts Final Mix and an additional cutscene for 358/2 Days .
An additional bundle , Kingdom Hearts :
The Story So Far , includes the Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 + 2.5 Remix PlayStation 4 collection and Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue and will be released in North America on October 30 , 2018 for the PlayStation 4 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Kingdom Hearts HD
1.5 Remix has been met to generally positive critical reception .
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the game a 77/100 .
Kotaku gave the release a generally positive rating , praising the redone visuals , tweaked gameplay and expanded content , but also noting the game 's age is still palpable .
Game Informer gave the collection an 8.25 out of 10 , stating " The core of this collection is the excellent original game , and that 's where your attention should be .
The other two lowly offerings are inessential bonus features .
"
Joystiq gave a positive , unscored review , saying the collection " captures that early era of the franchise at its purest simplicity .
It 's a trip down memory lane for long - term fans , while the visual overhaul and back - to - beginnings story should make it a welcoming entry point for newcomers .
"
GameSpot gave the HD remake a 7 out of 10 , saying , " Kingdom Hearts HD
1.5 Remix presents a couple of the earliest games in the beloved series in their best light and makes a revealing cinematic experience out of a third one .
The three experiences complement one another with unique elements and welcome context that is a treat for longtime fans and newcomers alike . "
Giving the game a 7.5 out of 10 , GameTrailers felt that , " While Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 ReMIX certainly lives up to the HD part of its name , the collection is not without its shortcomings .
The original game 's inclusion with all the new revisions and the addition of Final Mix content is a worthy investment on its own , and the inclusion of Chain of Memories is a nice gesture .
The card - based battle system might be off - putting , but it 's a unique experiment that deviates from the norm of the series .
However , despite the overhauled visuals and new voice work , it 's hard to excuse the reduction of 358/2 Days to a lengthy film rather than an actual game .
" IGN felt that the collection was " an excellent way to replay the series ' first two games in crisp , high - definition splendor " but was disappointed that the box art did not properly distinguish 358/2 Days as a non - playable game .
They awarded the collection an 8.5 out of 10 .
Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the collection an 8 out of 10 , stating the collection " brings a PS2 classic to the modern age with a noticeably impressive visual update , improved camera controls , and , for added fun , secondary and tertiary Kingdom Hearts content all contained on one disc . " ADDITIONAL COLLECTIONS HD 2.5 REMIX Section::::Additional collections .
Section::::HD 2.5 Remix .
In October 2012 , game director Tetsuya Nomura suggested that an HD - version of Kingdom Hearts II was likely to be created for another collection , saying that " it 'd be unusual if there was n't " another one .
In the credits of HD 1.5 Remix , clips of Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix , Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix and were shown , hinting at a second collection .
On October 14 , 2013 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 Remix , with the collection including the previously mentioned games in high definition .
However , Re : coded appears as HD cinematics , similar to 358/2 Days in HD 1.5 Remix .
The collection was released exclusively for the PlayStation 3 in Japan on October 2 , 2014 , in North America on December 2 , 2014 , in Australia on December 4 , 2014 , and in Europe on December 5 , 2014 .
HD
2.8 FINAL CHAPTER PROLOGUE Section::::HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue .
In the credits of HD 2.5 Remix , clips of were shown as well as the inclusion of a secret ending related to the game , hinting at a possible additional collection .
In September 2015 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue .
The collection features an HD remaster of Dream Drop Distance as well as Kingdom Hearts χ Back Cover , a cinematic retelling of Kingdom Hearts χ that reveals new parts of the series ' history in HD cinematics , and Kingdom Hearts 0.2 :
Birth by Sleep – A Fragmentary Passage , a new game taking place after the events of the original Birth by Sleep , told from the perspective of Aqua .
It was released on January 12 , 2017 in Japan and January 24 , 2017 for other countries .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 Remix Japan official website