REVENGE OF THE MUMMY Revenge of the Mummy , officially named Revenge of the Mummy : The Ride , is an enclosed roller coaster based on the Mummy film franchise , located at Universal Studios Florida , Universal Studios Hollywood , and Universal Studios Singapore , using linear induction motors ( LIMs ) to launch riders from a complete standstill to a top speed of between in a matter of seconds .
All Revenge of the Mummy roller coasters have a minimum passenger height requirement of .
Two versions of the attraction have the same track layout but different storylines , however the attraction at Universal Studios Hollywood has an original layout and storyline .
All three attractions are manufactured by Premier Rides , feature track switches by Dynamic Structures , and are themed by Universal Creative and ITEC Entertainment Corporation .
Some of the alternate features of the Singapore version were designed by Adirondack Studios .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 2002 , Universal Parks & Resorts set about designing a dark ride based on the popular Mummy movie franchise .
As part of this process , Universal Studios Florida closed Kongfrontation on September 8 , 2002 , and Universal Studios Hollywood closed E.T. Adventure on March 14 , 2003 .
On May 21 , 2004 , Revenge of the Mummy opened at Universal Studios Florida .
This was followed by the opening of the ride at Universal Studios Hollywood on June 25 , 2004 .
In December 2008 , Resorts World Sentosa , which now encompasses Universal Studios Singapore , announced a Revenge of the Mummy ride would be built at the park , due to open in 2010 .
Unlike the previous two installations , the one at Universal Studios Singapore was reported to cost only US$ 20 million instead of US$ 40 million .
On March 18 , 2010 , the ride officially opened to the public .
Revenge of the Mummy was also destined for the new Universal Studios Dubailand theme park where it would exist in the proposed Legendary Heroes section of the park .
UNIVERSAL STUDIOS FLORIDA Section::::Universal Studios Florida .
Revenge of the Mummy opened on May 21 , 2004 .
This Revenge of the Mummy roller coaster uses three LIM launches to propel riders from a complete standstill .
The roller coaster lasts nearly three minutes and features a top speed of .
The track is long featuring no inversions , 80 degree banked turns , and a 50 degree angle of descent .
At the end of the ride there is an area where guests may purchase a photo of themselves on the ride from a Mummy themed gift shop titled " Sahara Traders , " which replaced Kongfrontation 's " Safari Outfitters " gift shop .
The six story , 62,000 square foot building housing
the roller coaster was previously home to one of Universal 's landmark attractions , Kongfrontation .
Homages to the Kong attraction can be found in several areas within Revenge of the Mummy , including a golden statue of King Kong in the second scene of the ride .
The slabs used to construct the building were the largest of its kind ever used .
Track pieces from Kongfrontation were built into the building during construction and parts of the track still remain within the building .
In order to compensate for space , part of the building was excavated several feet deep for the ride 's climactic drop .
QUEUE AND PRE - SHOW Section::::Queue and pre - show .
Guests enter the ride by entering the massive Museum of Antiquities facade , browsing through the film setup of a fictional sequel titled " Revenge of the Mummy " .
The film 's props , molds , and concept drawings are on display inside .
TVs around the studio play a video explaining how the original Mummy film was made , and most importantly how the film 's fictional curse seemingly was proven to be real while filming , with various accidents and plagues striking the cast and crew .
Brendan Fraser is skeptical , though , and refuses to wear the medjai symbol that the crew and locals are convinced will protect them from the curse .
Brendan steals crew member Reggie 's medjai necklace and demands a coffee ( which craft services would not serve him before since he was not wearing the medjai symbol ) .
Reggie injures himself in a freak accident later in the video , and then is seen being trapped inside a sarcophagus prop in the background near the end of the video .
The inside queue morphs into a 1940s archaeological dig inside an Egyptian tomb , where guests climb to the second floor to board mine carts utilizing individual lap bars .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
As the ride begins , the mine carts move into another room inside Imhotep 's tomb , where Reggie ( a " Revenge of the Mummy " crew member who was missing on the set ) is seen partly mummified and warns the riders : " Are you insane ? !
Get out of here !
The curse is real ; this whole place is a trap !
He is after your souls ! "
Before Reggie can finish , Imhotep then comes out of a sarcophagus , prompting Reggie to desperately instruct the riders , " Look for the medjai symbol .
It 's your only hope ! " , but Imhotep cuts him off , shouting , " Silence ! " , and sucking out Reggie 's soul , and then reminds the riders , " With your souls , I shall rule for all eternity ! "
The cars next move into a second room where there is treasure on the left and right sides of the car .
Imhotep appears from the sand in front of a tomb mural and tempts riders , " Serve me and savor riches beyond measure " .
Light appears across the room , revealing treasure around the room .
Imhotep also sternly states , " or refuse , and savor a more bitter treasure .
" Soldier mummies appear in front of the treasure as he utters an Egyptian curse : " Akudei makrraken ra ! ! " .
The cart then quickly moves into another room where the mine cart " hits " a wall and scarab beetles come " pouring out " of a wall in front of the riders .
The cart then drops backwards into another room where it stops .
Imhotep appears again on a screen above the riders , moving across the screen to the back of the room , while the ride vehicle turns 180 degrees to follow him .
Imhotep warns " Not even the medjai can save you now .
There is no escape .
Your end shall be my beginning .
Behold your fate .
Will this be your destiny ? "
Then the ride catapults guests to 40 mph while Imhotep shouts : " YOUR SOULS ARE MINE ! ! !
"
The mine cart passes through Imhotep 's skull ( a fog display ) and drops through various turns , while speeding past projections of mummies and fire .
The cart comes to a stop after this , and a female ride attendant appears behind a glassed control booth and thanks them for riding , but Imhotep sucks out her soul , breaks the glass , and sets the ceiling on fire while shouting " Prepare to forfeit your souls !
Death is only the beginning ! "
The cart then drops down 39 ft ( the highest drop in the ride ) and goes down a winding drop until a medjai symbol appears while Imhotep shouts " NOOOOO ! "
as the vehicle passes through the medjai symbol .
Then passengers travel through a tunnel of flickering lights with a screen in front of them .
Rick O'Connell ( as portrayed by Brendan Fraser ) appears and tells the riders , " Hey , welcome back !
Hope you enjoyed yourself .
I would have enjoyed this interview a lot more if I HAD GOTTEN MY CUP OF COFFEE ! ! ! "
Suddenly , a cape passes over the screen and Imhotep 's arm offers Fraser a cup of coffee .
As Fraser screams and falls back in his chair , the screen fades to black , while riders hear Imhotep roaring over Fraser 's screams .
Riders are then directed to exit through an actual unload station .
At the exit of the ride , riders see a missing persons
poster with a picture of Reggie on it .
INCIDENT
Section::::Incident .
On September 21 , 2004 , a 39-year - old man fell four feet from the ride 's loading platform onto the tracks below while boarding the front row .
He died the following morning during an operation to remove his spleen .
The death was ruled accidental by the local Medical Examiner 's Office .
UNIVERSAL STUDIOS HOLLYWOOD Section::::Universal Studios Hollywood .
The ride opened on June 25 , 2004 .
The roller coaster has a height restriction of 48 inches .
Revenge of the Mummy uses linear induction motors ( LIM ) , a technology used to launch riders .
The roller coaster lasts approximately 2 minutes and is housed in the building of the former attraction , the E.T. Adventure .
The ride features warrior mummies , treasures and tombs , a sudden launch , a scarab beetle attack , forwards and backwards motion and surround sound speakers inside the vehicles .
Hollywood 's coaster was built in the former E.T. Adventure building .
Some support beams for the coaster were built by digging downward to accommodate space .
The warrior mummies and treasures are replicated film props from The Mummy film series while some are actual props .
QUEUE AND PRE - SHOW Section::::Queue and pre - show .
Set in 1944 , the queue provides riders with a brief backstory of Imhotep and the ride in general .
Once guests enter the building 's corridor in to the ride , they first see a hole which air will blast out of every 10 to 15 seconds ( there are further traps along the corridor . )
When guest move further in , the Book of the Dead is seen .
A peep hole is also seen , fenced up by wires , containing a mummified man in his sarcophagus and other mummified remains of people whom Imhotep may have sucked their souls out earlier .
The man 's mummy is surrounded by carnivorous scarab beetles .
When guests move deeper into the building ( now appearing to be a tomb ) , they find an abandoned archaeological dig which is actually Imhotep 's burial chamber .
Looking up ahead in a giant mirror is a pictogram of Imhotep grinning at the guest followed by another pictogram of the guest being chased by Imhotep 's army of mummy soldiers .
Further in , riders find an archaeological dig set in a backdrop of 1944 .
The queue ends in an Ancient Egyptian themed loading platform , complete with hieroglyphs and a large statue of a scarab beetle , in which the riders board mine cart - type coasters .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
As the ride begins , riders enter a dark tomb lit with dark green and red fluorescent lights , with a mummy coming to life to the left and hissing at riders .
From above , Warden Gad Hassan , the prison archaeologist and Omid Djalili 's character from The Mummy film ( who was thought to have met his fate in the first film ) , warns guests " Run for your lives !
The curse is real !
Imhotep lives ! "
He screams as scarab beetles engulf him .
The mine car continues through to a dark chamber , as drops of water fall on guests , and mummies stretch their arms out from each side of the cart while mummified arms appear from the ceiling , trying to grab riders .
The mine car slowly continues into the treasure room , filled with large amounts of golden yellow light , Egyptian hieroglyphs covering the walls , and two gigantic statues of Anubis stationed next to a projector screen , where Imhotep appears from sand in a mural and tells guests , " Serve me and savor the riches of eternal life . "
The mine car makes a sharp turn as the yellow room quickly turns a dark shade of green , Imhotep continues his monologue ... " And join us in eternal death . "
The mine car moves into the grand gallery as an animatronic Imhotep continues to speak a curse in Egyptian language " Akum ra , akum de , " before exclaiming " Now your souls belong to me ... FOREVER ! "
At the same time , the grand gallery starts to collapse after Imohtep used the powerful curse from the Scroll of Osiris .
A wall behind him collapses , forming an eclipse as four more mummy warriors drop down from each side of the track , holding cutlasses in their hands .
The car is then launched at a high speed into darkness as the ride photo is taken .
The surround sound speakers in the mine cart provide riders with an added dimension of entertainment , as the sound score begins .
The ride continues for 56 seconds in darkness , going around high banked turns and small drops .
Various images of mummy warriors and Imhotep are illuminated with ultraviolet lighting as the car twists and turns .
The mine car makes a sharp uphill movement and veers left , where the track viciously brakes in a corner .
Scarab beetles appear on the walls with help of projectors , as the added special effects of air jets at riders ' feet and a spray of water from above create the illusion of the vehicle being overrun by the bugs .
The car moves backwards into the underworld as Imhotep 's evil laugh roars on the soundtrack .
The vehicle makes a few more twists and turns , while more images of Imhotep and the mummy warriors are lit up as it continues backwards and Imhotep reminds riders
" There 's no place to hide !
Your souls are MINE ! "
The car slows suddenly under the last illuminated painting of Imhotep 's outstretched grasp and moves slowly into another room .
A turntable moves the car into a forward - facing position as fog machines and strobe lighting fill the blackened room .
As the car faces forward once again , Imhotep appears as a projected image and screams " NOOOOO ! "
hauntingly at riders before vanishing .
There is a second of uncertain silence before a floodlight hits riders , and as a wall lifts up into the ceiling to allow the car to pass through , a second strobe light blinds guests .
Imhotep 's curse is broken as the ride enters the loading platform .
MODIFICATIONS Section::::Modifications .
Originally , the ride featured faux - fire and projection effects during the final encounter with Imhotep , engulfing the ride vehicle in pressurized steam and specialized lighting .
The ride now uses strobe effects , with a brief pause before the false wall rises on the loading platform .
UNIVERSAL STUDIOS SINGAPORE Section::::Universal Studios Singapore .
Revenge of the Mummy was opened on 18 March 2010 with the soft opening of the park .
This Revenge of the Mummy roller coaster is nearly identical to the version at Universal Studios Florida .
However , the Singapore version includes new sounds and effects , as well as a new ending featuring Imhotep being sealed inside his tomb .
The ride 's new theming was designed by Adirondack Studios , ITEC Entertainment Corp. and Universal Creative .
QUEUE AND PRE - SHOW Section::::Queue and pre - show .
Unlike the Orlando version of the ride , guests enter an Egyptian tomb directly .
Props from the Mummy film franchise and wall paintings of Imhotep 's life as a high priest are featured in the inner queue areas similar to the Orlando version of the ride .
At the loading station , guests board mine cars utilizing individual lap bars . RIDE Section::::Ride .
As the ride begins with mine cars move deeper into the tomb .
The words " Find the Book " are scrawled over the walls .
As the mine car turns , riders see Evelyn 's supervisor trapped on a table .
Standing next to him , while holding the Book of the Dead , is Imhotep , who allows the supervisor to say his final words before he can suck his soul .
For his final words , the supervisor instructs the riders , " Find the Book of the Living and kill Imhotep !
It 's your only hope ! " .
With that done , Imhotep sucks his soul , and turns to the riders , warning them " You will never find the book -- your souls will be mine for all eternity .
"
Outlines of the Book of the Living , on the walls at the left , glow in red .
Almost identical to the Orlando version , the vehicle next move into a room with treasure all over .
Imhotep appears from the sand in a tomb mural ahead and tempts riders , " Serve me and savor riches beyond measure " .
Light appears across the room , revealing treasure around the room .
Imhotep also sternly states , " or refuse , and savor a more bitter treasure .
" Soldier mummies appear in front of the treasure as he utters an Egyptian curse : " Akudei makrraken ra ! ! " .
The vehicle then quickly moves into another room and halts into a sudden stop , nearly " crashing " into a wall , causing scarab beetles to " burst out " from the walls in front and at the sides .
Then the vehicle drops backwards and turns in a 180 degree circle and
Imhotep warns the riders : " You will never find the book .
There is no escape .
Your end shall be my beginning .
Behold your fate .
Will this be your destiny ? "
Then the ride catapults guests to 40 mph while Imhotep shouts : " YOUR SOULS ARE MINE ! ! !
"
At this instant , riders are accelerated from 0 to in a matter of seconds .
The vehicle accelerates up a hill as it goes through Imhotep 's skull and drops through various turns past projections of mummies .
The vehicle comes to a stop after this , and riders will find the Book of the Living on a pedestal .
Soon , Imhotep 's voice is heard saying , " Without this book , you will never stop me ! "
and he suddenly appears behind the book saying " Prepare to forfeit your souls ! " .
Soon , the ceiling of the room is engulfed in flames as Imhotep threatens the riders once again , opening the book and causing the mummies to glow red as he activates the curse .
The vehicle moves forward and drops down " into hell " ( the camera is located here ) and goes down a winding drop before the brake run .
Further on , riders " pass through " a wall and will see a sarcophagus hanging from the ceiling with Imhotep trapped inside .
As the eyes of his Sarcophagus glow red , he taunts the riders with a warning , " Death is only the beginning ! " , followed by an evil laugh as the riders move on to the unload platform .
COMPARISON Section::::Comparison . Statistic !
Universal Studios Florida !
Universal Studios Hollywood !
Universal Studios Singapore
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
+
Golden Ticket Awards :
Best Indoor Coaster !
Year !
2004 !
2007 !
2011 !
2013 !
2015 !
2016
1 1 1
SEE ALSO * Flight of Fear , a similar ride at two Cedar Fair parks .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Revenge of the Mummy : The Ride at Universal Studios Florida
* Revenge of the Mummy : The Ride at Universal Studios Hollywood
* Revenge of the Mummy at Universal Studios Singapore
* Revenge of the Mummy Design News , 13 December 2004 * Review at Theme Park Insider * Adirondack Studios official website