EVIL DEAD ( 2013 FILM )
Evil Dead is a 2013 American supernatural horror film directed by Fede Alvarez in his directorial debut , written by Rodo Sayagues and Álvarez and produced by Robert Tapert , Sam Raimi , and Bruce Campbell .
The film was shot in New Zealand outside of Auckland , lasting about a month .
The fourth installment in the Evil Dead franchise , it serves as a soft reboot of the original 1981 film and as a continuation to the original film trilogy .
The film had its world premiere at the South by Southwest festival on March 8 , 2013 and was released in the United States on April 5 , 2013 .
It grossed $ 97 million worldwide .
Evil Dead was announced on July 15 , 2013 , to be adapted into a live experience as the first maze announced for Universal Studios Hollywood 's and the second maze for Universal Orlando Resort 's annual Halloween Horror Nights 2013 event .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
David and his girlfriend Natalie arrive at a cabin in the woods , where the pair meet up with his younger sister Mia and his friends Eric and Olivia .
The group plans to stay in the cabin while Mia overcomes her addiction to heroin .
The group discover the cellar , littered with rotting animal corpses , a shotgun , and a book called the Naturom Demonto .
Eric , despite written warnings , reads aloud an incantation and awakens a malevolent force .
Mia begins seeing a bloody girl in the woods , and begs the group to leave because she is scared .
They refuse , believing that she is simply experiencing the effects of withdrawal .
Mia steals the car keys and drives away from the cabin .
As Mia drives her way out , she then sees a demon girl on the road , startling her , causing her to pull over and crash into a swamp .
Emerging from the mud water , the demon chases Mia through the woods .
Mia stumbles into a circular opening to a thorn bush and becomes entangled by possessed vines .
As Mia struggles to detangle , she then sees an Abomination version of herself .
A thorny vine comes out of its mouth and rapes Mia , crawling its way up Mia 's leg into her vagina , successfully infecting her with the possession .
David and Olivia find Mia and take her back to the cabin .
Later , David finds his murdered dog along with a bloodied hammer , and goes to confront Mia , who is in the shower .
In the bathroom , he sees her scalding herself in a heated shower .
David tries to drive her to a hospital , but heavy rains flood the only road back .
Meanwhile , Eric becomes more and more convinced that the book is the cause of all that .
That night , the possessed Mia comes into the living room with a shotgun and shoots David in the arm as a strong wind blows through the cabin , Mia warns the others that they are all going to die tonight , after which she passes out .
David instructs Olivia to get the gun away from Mia , but before she can , Mia wakes up and overpowers her , then projectile vomits blood all over her face .
Olivia manages to shove Mia off , sending her tumbling down into the cellar where she is locked in by Eric .
Olivia goes to the bathroom to wash the blood off her face and get a sedative for Mia , but is terrified when she sees her own disfigured reflection in the mirror .
Olivia tries to rush back to the others , but becomes frozen and possessed before she could get out of the room .
Hearing a door slam , Eric goes to the room and finds her cutting into her cheek with a mirror shard behind the shower curtain .
Olivia attacks and stabs Eric in the chest , who grabs a broken piece of the sink and bludgeons her to death .
In the shed , David nurses Eric 's wounds , and Eric confides that he believes that when he read the book , it released " something evil " .
Meanwhile , Mia lures Natalie into the cellar , where she bites her hand .
Natalie tries to attack Mia with a box cutter , but Mia takes it from her and uses the blade to split her own tongue in half , before planting a bloodied kiss on Natalie 's mouth .
David opens the trapdoor , interrupting the assault and allowing Natalie to escape .
After the demon tells him that Mia no longer exists , he chains it up and locks the cellar door .
Eric explains to David that , according to the Naturom Demonto , the Taker of Souls must claim five souls in order to unleash the Abomination .
In the kitchen , while cleaning the bite wound , Natalie becomes convinced that her arm is infected and amputates it with an electric knife .
David does his best to patch up her wounded arm , while Eric continues to explain that Mia must be " purified " either by live burial , bodily dismemberment , or burning .
As they debate , the possessed Natalie attacks the pair with a nail gun , but David manages to shoot off her remaining arm with the shotgun , Natalie turns back to normal , but collapses into David 's arms and bleeds to death .
Eric convinces David to kill Mia and David plans to burn down the cabin with Mia in it .
However , as Mia starts singing a song from their childhood , he has a change of mind and decides to bury her instead .
He digs a grave , then enters the cellar to subdue Mia , who attempts to drown him .
Eric intervenes and clubs Mia with a hammer , but not before being fatally stabbed and succumbing to his wounds .
David proceeds to sedate and bury Mia , unearthing and defibrillating her afterwards , which causes the demon to be exorcized and heals her .
The siblings reconcile .
As David enters the cabin to retrieve the car keys , a possessed Eric 's corpse stabs him in the neck with barb wire cutters .
Mia , who escaped her buried hole but is now back to normal from being healed , comes in and sees David with the wound in his neck .
As Mia tries to help David , David tells Mia to go without him , which she refuses .
When Mia is distracted and traumatized by seeing the possessed corpse of Eric , David is able to lock Mia outside to safety himself and shoot a gasoline can inside , destroying Eric 's body and sacrificing himself .
As Mia tearfully watches the cabin burn down with an empty amulet in her hand a drop of blood falls on it and blood begins to rain from the sky .
Since five souls have been claimed , the Abomination arises only to go after Mia .
Mia attempts to flee in a car but the Abomination bursts through the window , stopping her .
Mia rushes into the cabin which has stopped burning due to the rain and grabs a chainsaw to fight back , setting chainsaw oil in it to turn it on .
When the Abomination throws the car at Mia as an attempt to crush her , Mia is able to dodge the car but gets her hand gets stuck and slammed under an open car window .
Mia tears off her hand free and grabs the chainsaw .
Mia then halves the Abomination with a chainsaw .
Its corpse sinks into the ground and the blood - rain stops .
Mia escapes into the woods and wanders off into the distance .
Unknown to her , the Naturom Demonto is still intact .
In a post - credits scene , a silhouetted Ash Williams says " Groovy " and looks at the camera before it cuts to black .
ALTERNATE ENDING
Section::::Alternate ending .
After defeating the Abomination , Mia attempts to walk her way home , but ends up collapsing in exhaustion on the road from all the wounds , stopping a man who drives by .
The man takes her to his truck to drive her to the hospital .
As the camera zooms into Mia in her sleep , she awakes suspiciously .
CAST
* Jane Levy as Mia Allen * Shiloh Fernandez as David Allen * Lou Taylor Pucci as Eric * Jessica Lucas as Olivia
* Elizabeth Blackmore as Natalie
* Jim McLarty as Harold * Phoenix Connolly as Teenager * Sian Davis as Old Woman
* Stephen Butterworth as Toothless Redneck * Karl Willetts as Long Haired Redneck * Randal Wilson as Taker of Souls / Abomination Mia
* Rupert Degas as the Demon ( voice )
In addition , using audio from the original film , Bob Dorian plays Professor Raymond Knowby during the credits and Ellen Sandweiss plays a voice cameo as Cheryl Williams .
Bruce Campbell plays Ash Williams in an uncredited post - credit cameo appearance .
Section::::Cast .
The initial letters of the five main characters ' names ( David , Eric , Mia , Olivia , Natalie ) form an acrostic spelling out DEMON .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Fede Álvarez and Rodo Sayagues co - wrote the script , which was then doctored by Diablo Cody in an effort to Americanize the dialogue since English was not the writers ' first language .
The film was produced by Raimi , Campbell , and Robert G. Tapert , who are the producers of the original trilogy .
Raimi and Campbell had planned a remake for many years , but in 2009 , Campbell stated the proposed remake was " going nowhere " and had " fizzled " due to extremely negative fan reaction .
However , in April 2011 , Bruce Campbell stated in an AskMeAnything interview on Reddit.com , " We are remaking Evil Dead .
The script is awesome ...
The remake 's gon na kick some ass
— you have my word .
" The film was officially announced that July .
Actor Shiloh Fernandez was cast in the lead male role of David .
Initially Lily Collins was scheduled to play the lead female role of Mia , but dropped out in January 2012 .
with Jane Levy replacing her the next month .
Lou Taylor Pucci , Elizabeth Blackmore , and Jessica Lucas later joined the cast .
In January 2013 , Álvarez commented on the ambiguity of the film 's relationship to the original : Álvarez , who also has a background in CGI , also confirmed in an interview that the film does not employ CGI ( except for touch - ups ) :
" We did n't do any CGI in the movie ...
Everything that you will see is real , which was really demanding .
This was a very long shoot , 70 days of shooting at night .
There 's a reason people use CGI ; it 's cheaper and faster , I hate that .
We researched a lot of magic tricks and illusion tricks . "
Sam Raimi 's 1973 Oldsmobile Delta 88 can be seen in an opening scene with David and Mia as they arrive at the cabin .
The 1973 Oldsmobile Delta 88 has appeared in almost all of the movies that Raimi has been involved with over his career .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
TriStar Pictures released the film theatrically on April 5 , 2013 , in the United States , with Sony Pictures handling other markets .
Fede Álvarez tweeted on January 28 , 2013 , that the film first received an NC-17 rating , which prompted cuts in order to obtain the contractually obligated R - rating .
The film has been rated uncut as an 18 by the BBFC for containing strong " bloody violence , gory horror and very strong language " .
StudioCanal handled the release of Evil Dead in the United Kingdom .
Evil Dead premiered at the SXSW Film Festival in Austin , TX on March 8 , 2013 .
The music for Evil Dead , composed by Roque Baños , was released by La - La Land Records in a 40-minute digital form and a 70-minute physical release , on April 9 , 2013 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Evil Dead was released on DVD and Blu - ray , on July 16 , 2013 .
The Blu - ray exclusives include commentary from three of the cast , and screenwriters Fede Álvarez and Rodo Sayagues , behind the scenes and a featurette , while the regular DVD includes three other featurettes .
EXTENDED CUT
Section::::Extended cut .
An extended version , that has yet to be released , featuring an alternative ending and various other deleted clips and dialogue , some of which were featured in the original trailer but subsequently removed from the theatrical version , was aired in the UK , on January 25 , 2015 .
No one has yet confirmed whether this was an intentional debut for the anticipated " extended cut " , which fans of the film have asked about since the theatrical release , or whether StudioCanal UK had inadvertently supplied Channel 4 with the wrong copy of the film .
Álvarez has confirmed on Twitter , that the version aired was not the extended cut .
Channel 4 has subsequently confirmed that the wrong copy of the film was supplied to them and that they have sent it back .
They added that they have no other information on the version which aired and since the " extended / incorrect " version has been returned to StudioCanal UK they would not be airing it again .
However , the extended version still airs on Film4 .
It was aired again on 13 February 2016 , and yet again , on the night of 14 June 2016 .
On 10 October 2018 , Sony Pictures announced the release of the Unrated Cut on Blu Ray Disc in a two - disc combo pack with the theatrical version .
The release date has been set for 23 October 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film grossed $ 25.8 million in its opening weekend , finishing first at the box office .
It went on to gross $ 54.2 million domestically and $ 43.3 million internationally , for a worldwide take of $ 97.5 million , against its $ 17 million budget , making it a box office success .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 61 % based on 187 reviews , and an average rating of 6.1/10 .
The consensus states : " It may lack the absurd humor that underlined the original , but the new - look Evil Dead compensates with brutal terror , gory scares , and gleefully bloody violence . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 57 out of 100 based on 38 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " C+ " on an A+ to F scale .
Evan Dickson from Bloody Disgusting reviewed the film at SXSW and went on to say , " Evil Dead is amazingly gory and fun " and gave the film 4/5 stars .
Chris Tilly of IGN gave Evil Dead 9/10 and called the movie a " terrifying , exhilarating and relentlessly entertaining new chapter in the Evil Dead story " .
John DeFore of The Hollywood Reporter also gave the film a positive review , calling it a " remake that will win the hearts of many of the original 's fans . "
Independent horror review site HorrorTalk gave the film four stars out of five saying it is " the most unrelenting and bloody horror film to come out of a major studio in a very long time " .
Emma Simmonds of The List commented , " Evil Dead has ample cheap shocks and few bloodcurdling frights but it builds to something gorily bravura and , if that 's your bag , you 'll come away satisfied .
It 's a while before anyone picks up a chainsaw , but boy is it worth it when they do . "
Matt Singer called the film " an assault on the senses " and " a success , one that out - Evil Deads the original movie with even more gore , puke , blood , and dismembered limbs .
It may not be wildly inventive , but it is effective , and plenty faithful to the spirit — and tagline — of the first ' Ultimate Experience in Grueling Terror . ' "
Richard Roeper rated the film one star out of four , criticizing the film 's unoriginality , the characters ' lack of intelligence , and the film 's reliance on gore for what he felt were cheap scares .
He concluded his review by saying , " I love horror films that truly shock , scare and provoke .
But after 30 years of this stuff , I 'm bored to death and sick to death of movies that seem to have one goal : How can we gross out the audience by torturing nearly every major character in the movie ? " AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipient !
Result POSSIBLE
SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
At the SXSW premiere , Álvarez announced that a sequel was in the works .
In addition , Sam Raimi confirmed plans to write Evil Dead 4 with his brother ; it was later specified that this film would be Army of Darkness 2 .
At a WonderCon panel in March 2013 , Campbell and Álvarez stated that their ultimate plan was for Álvarez 's Evil Dead 2 and Raimi 's Army of Darkness 2 to be followed by a seventh film which would merge the narratives of Ash and Mia .
On October 30 , 2013 , co - writer Sayagues confirmed to DeadHollywood that he and Álvarez would not return for the sequel .
That same month , Álvarez took to his Twitter that the rumor was not true .
In November 2018 Fede announced that " This is just concepts for the moment .
I have nothing to announce official .
We have a scenario for
Do n't Breathe 2
this is the true difference .
There is no script for Evil Dead 2 , but we have written a for
Do n't Breathe 2 .
"
he also said that " When I tweeted , it was because I was interested in what people preferred to see .
I was in the process of discussing what people wanted to see .
Unfortunately , this is Evil Dead 2 , which won out .
I would have liked this to be
Do n't Breathe 2 , because this is one of my own creations .
Obviously , the Evil Dead has a much wider audience . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS