BLUE LAWS IN THE UNITED STATES Blue laws , also known as Sunday laws , are laws designed to restrict or ban some or all Sunday activities for religious reasons , particularly to promote the observance of a day of worship or rest .
Blue laws may also restrict shopping or ban sale of certain items on specific days , most often on Sundays in the western world .
Blue laws are enforced in parts of the United States and Canada as well as some European countries , particularly in Austria , Germany , Switzerland , and Norway , keeping most stores closed on Sundays .
In the United States , the U.S. Supreme Court has held blue laws as constitutional numerous times , citing secular bases such as securing a day of rest for mail carriers , as well as protecting workers and families , in turn contributing to societal stability and guaranteeing the free exercise of religion .
The origin of the blue laws also partially stems from religion , particularly the prohibition of Sabbath desecration in Christian Churches following the first - day Sabbatarian tradition .
Both labour unions and trade associations have historically supported the legislation of blue laws .
Most blue laws have been repealed in the United States , although Indiana banned the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays until repealed on February 28 , 2018 , and many states ban selling cars on Sundays .
ARIZONA
Section::::Arizona .
Arizona previously limited alcohol sales hours on Sundays ( 2 a.m. to 10 a.m. ; the other six days of the week alcohol could be purchased starting at 6 a.m. ) .
This law was repealed in 2010 .
ARKANSAS Section::::Arkansas .
Arkansas has 75 counties , 39 of which are " dry " , meaning the sale of any alcoholic beverage is prohibited entirely .
( Some exceptions are made for private facilities ) .
Private facilities must have licenses , which can be rigorous .
Sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day is entirely prohibited , even in private facilities .
Alcohol and liquor sales are entirely prohibited on Sunday and Christmas Day .
( Some exceptions for private facilities are made for Sundays ) .
CONNECTICUT DELAWARE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Section::::District of Columbia .
Washington , D.C. allows private retailers ( Class A ) to sell distilled spirits , but the District Council requires Class A retailers to be closed on Sundays ( Class B retailers , such as grocery stores , may sell beer and wine on Sundays ) .
However , in December 2012 , the Council voted to repeal the Sunday restriction .
The repeal took effect May 1 , 2013 .
FLORIDA Section::::Florida .
Several counties prohibit the sale of alcohol and sex toys on Sunday and during certain hours .
GEORGIA
Section::::Georgia .
Sunday retail alcohol sales in stores were prohibited by the Georgia General Assembly up until 2011 .
On April 28 , 2011 , Georgia Governor Nathan Deal signed legislation allowing local communities to vote on whether to allow alcohol sales on Sundays .
Sales are still restricted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m.
On November 8 , 2011 , voters in more than 100 Georgia cities and counties voted on a bill that would allow stores to sell alcohol on Sundays .
It passed in Valdosta , Atlanta , Savannah and many other cities .
Before this , cities and counties of sufficiently large populations such as most of Metro Atlanta already had Sunday alcohol sales at bars and restaurants , with local ordinances to abide by , such as having a certain amount of food sales in order to be opened and serve alcohol .
Exceptions were also made by the drink at festivals and large events .
ILLINOIS Section::::Illinois .
Horse racing is prohibited on Sundays unless authorized by the local municipality .
Car dealerships are closed on Sundays .
INDIANA
Section::::Indiana .
Carry - out alcohol sales were strictly prohibited on Sundays until 2011 , when the state amended its laws to permit qualified breweries to sell local brews for carryout ( generally growlers ) .
In 2018 , the law was changed to allow carry - out purchases on Sundays .
Restaurants and taverns can generally still serve alcoholic beverages .
Alcohol sales are no longer prohibited on New Years Day .
In 2010 , a change in legislation allowed Indiana residents to purchase alcohol on Election Day .
Christmas sales are still prohibited .
In the state of Indiana , as of March 1 , 2018 , Sunday alcohol sales are allowed between noon and 8 pm .
IOWA Section::::Iowa .
Iowa Code 322.3 states that a licensed car dealership can not either directly or through an agent , salesperson , or employee , engage in Iowa , or represent or advertise that the person is engaged or intends to engage in Iowa , in the business of buying or selling at retail new or used motor vehicles , other than mobile homes more than eight feet in width or more than thirty - two feet in length on Sunday .
MAINE Section::::Maine .
Maine was the last New England state to repeal laws that prohibited department stores from opening on Sundays .
The laws against the department stores opening on Sundays were ended by referendum in 1990 .
Recent efforts to overturn the laws restricting automobile dealerships from opening on Sunday have died in committee in the Maine legislature .
Rep. Don Pilon of Saco has led the effort to get rid of the laws that prohibit automobile dealerships from opening for business on Sundays .
Hunting is prohibited on Sundays .
Maine is also one of three states where it is illegal for almost all businesses to open on Thanksgiving , most notably the big department stores .
Alcohol sales remain restricted but allowed between the hours of 1 a.m. and 7 a.m. Monday through Saturday and 1 a.m. and 9 a.m. on Sunday .
MARYLAND Section::::Maryland .
In Maryland , " a new or used car dealer may not sell , barter , deliver , give away , show , or offer for sale a motor vehicle or certificate of title for a motor vehicle on Sunday " , except in Howard County , Montgomery County , and Prince George 's County .
Motorcycles are excepted in Anne Arundel County .
In the City of Baltimore , a used car dealer may choose to operate on Sunday and not Saturday if it notifies the Motor Vehicle Administration in advance of its intention .
Following a public hearing , the Commissioners of Charles County are allowed to authorize sales of motor vehicles on Sunday .
In Maryland , professional sports teams are prohibited from playing games before 1 p.m. on a Sunday unless a local law or a local ordinance allows it .
MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Massachusetts .
Most off - premises alcohol sales were not permitted on Sundays until 2004 .
Exceptions were made in 1990 for municipalities that were within 10 miles of the New Hampshire or Vermont border .
Since 1992 , alcohol sales have been allowed statewide from the Sunday prior to Thanksgiving until New Year 's Day .
In both exceptions sales were not allowed before noon .
Since the law changed in 2004 , off - premises sales are now allowed anywhere in the state , with local approval , after noon .
Retail alcohol sales remain barred on Thanksgiving Day , Christmas Day and Memorial Day .
Massachusetts also has a " Day of Rest " statute that provides that all employees are entitled to one day off from work in seven calendar days .
Retail employees working on Sundays must be paid time - and - a - half .
MICHIGAN Section::::Michigan .
The sale of alcohol is banned from 2 a.m. to 7 a.m. every day .
The only exception to this rule is New Year 's Day , in which case alcohol sales are permitted until 4 a.m. Alcohol sales were likewise banned on Sunday until 12 p.m. , and on Christmas from 12 a.m. until 12 p.m. , until a repeal in late 2010 .
Specific localities may petition for exceptions for either on - site or off - site consumption .
All " blue laws " which had restricted Sunday hunting , in specific Lower Peninsula counties , were repealed in 2003 .
MINNESOTA Section::::Minnesota .
Prior to the law being repealed in 2017 , the sale of alcohol in liquor stores was prohibited statewide on Sundays .
As recently as the 2015 legislative session , proposals to allow Sunday liquor sales were defeated regularly .
However , in 2015 , Sunday growler purchases were made legal .
On March 2 , 2017 , the state legislature passed a law allowing for Sunday Liquor Sales to begin on July 2 , 2017 .
Governor Dayton signed the legislation as soon as it was passed .
Liquor stores are not required to be open on Sundays , but those who choose to do so are restricted to the hours of 11 AM and 6 PM .
MISSISSIPPI Section::::Mississippi .
The sale of alcohol is prohibited in most of Mississippi on Sundays .
Also , liquor sales are prohibited in nearly half of the state 's counties .
MISSOURI Section::::Missouri .
The sale of alcohol is prohibited from 1:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Saturday through Monday .
Alcohol sales on Sunday are allowed from 9:00 a.m. to midnight subject to an additional liquor license fee .
NEW JERSEY Section::::New Jersey .
In 1677 , the General Assembly of East New Jersey banned the " singing of vain songs or tunes " on Sabbath .
One of the last remaining Sunday closing laws in the United States that covers selling electronics , clothing and furniture is found in Bergen County , New Jersey .
Bergen County , part of the New York metropolitan area , has one of the largest concentrations of enclosed retail shopping malls of any county in the nation ; four major malls lie within the county .
Paramus in Bergen County , where three of the four major malls are located , has even more restrictive blue laws than the county itself , banning all type of work on Sundays except in grocery stores , gas stations , pharmacies , hotels , restaurants , and other entertainment venues .
As recently as 2010 , Governor Chris Christie had proposed the repeal of these Blue Laws in his State Budget , but many Bergen County officials vowed to maintain them .
Two days later , Christie predicted that his planned repeal would not succeed .
Car dealerships are not allowed to be open or do business on Sundays anywhere in the state .
In November 2012 , Christie issued an executive order to temporarily suspend the blue law due to the effects of Hurricane Sandy .
The blue law was suspended on November 11 but was back in effect on November 18 .
NEW MEXICO Section::::New Mexico .
On - premise sale is allowed from 7 am .
to 2 am .
and until midnight for off - premise , except on Sundays ; no alcohol is allowed to be sold on or off - premise .
Stores can apply for permits to sell on and off - premise on Sunday if their municipality allows it .
No sales on Christmas Day .
NEW YORK Section::::New York .
Alcohol sales for consumption off - premises are not permitted between 3 a.m. and 8 a.m. on Sundays , while on - premises sales are not permitted between 4 a.m. and 8 a.m. on any day .
Prior to 2006 , off - premises alcohol sales were forbidden until noon on Sundays , and liquor / wine stores were required to be closed the entire day .
Because grocery stores are not permitted to carry wine or liquor , the older law essentially meant that only beer and alcoholic malt beverages could be purchased at all on Sundays .
Relatively few parts of New York actually permit alcohol sales at all times permissible under state law ; most counties have more restrictive blue laws of their own .
The NYS Alcoholic Beverage Control Law prohibits the issuance of a full liquor license for establishments on the same street or avenue and within two hundred feet of a building occupied exclusively as a school , church , synagogue or other place of worship .
Establishments within of a church or school may obtain a beer and wine license .
NORTH CAROLINA Section::::North Carolina .
North Carolina does not allow alcohol sales between 2 a.m. and 7 a.m. Monday through Saturday and between 2 a.m. and either 10:00 a.m. or 12:00 p.m. on Sundays , varying by county .
Gun hunting is prohibited on Sundays between 9:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. NORTH DAKOTA Section::::North Dakota .
North Dakota may have the strictest remaining blue law of the United States .
Many goods and items are restricted from being sold between midnight and noon on Sunday , rendering virtually all retailers closed in those hours , including malls and some large retail chains ( though it is open Sundays before noon only between Thanksgiving & Christmas Eve ) ; however , some businesses that open 24 hours , like grocery stores , are allowed to be open on Sunday .
However , the big retail chain Walmart is closed .
Prior to 1967 , the law was stricter in that all businesses were closed from 12 a.m. Sunday to 12 a.m. Monday .
In 1967 , changes more clearly defined which businesses were exempt such as pharmacies , hospitals and restaurants .
The changes were made after a 1966 blizzard , after which citizens were not able to purchase some needed goods and services due to the blue law .
The law changed once more in 1991 to allow businesses to open at noon on Sunday .
OKLAHOMA Section::::Oklahoma .
It is illegal to sell packaged liquor ( off - premises sales ) on Sundays .
Sales also are prohibited on New Year 's Day , Memorial Day , Independence Day , Labor Day , Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day .
Car dealerships are also closed on Sundays .
PENNSYLVANIA
Section::::Pennsylvania .
Organized sports competition on Sundays was illegal in Pennsylvania until 1931 ; when challenged by the Philadelphia A 's , the laws were changed permitting only baseball to be played on Sundays .
In 1933 , Bert Bell , understanding that prerequisites to an NFL franchise being granted to him were changes in the blue laws , played the primary role of convincing then Governor Gifford Pinchot to issue a bill before the Pennsylvanian legislature to deprecate the Blue Laws .
The legislature passed the bill in April 1933 , paving the way for Philadelphia Eagles to play on Sundays .
The law also directed local communities to hold referenda to determine the status and extent of Blue Laws in their respective jurisdictions .
On November 7 , 1933 , the referendum on the Blue Laws passed in Philadelphia and it became law .
Regarding alcohol , wines and spirits are to be sold only in the state owned Fine Wine and Good Spirits stores , where all prices must remain the same throughout the state
( county sales tax may cause the price to differ slightly ) .
As of April 2015 , 157 of the 603 Fine Wine and Good Spirits stores are open from noon to 5:00 p.m. on Sundays .
Beer may only be purchased from a restaurant , bar , licensed beer store , or distributor .
Six and twelve packs , along with individual bottles such as 40-ounce or 24-ounce beers , may only be purchased at bars , restaurants , and licensed retailers .
For larger quantities one must go to a beverage distributor which sells beer only by the case or keg , or 12-packs , which were added to beer distributors ' inventories by state law in 2015 .
Beverage distributors ( which also sell soft drinks ) may sell beer and malt liquor , but not wine or hard liquor .
In 2016 , a bill was passed to relax the liquor laws .
Updates include allowing grocery stores , convenience stores , hotels , and restaurants to sell take out wine , allowing mail order wine shipments , and allowing 24/7 alcohol sales at casinos .
Special licenses are required for businesses to take advantage of these new opportunities .
Also Sunday restrictions on the hours at the state owned " Fine wines and Good Spirits " stores were eliminated .
Hunting is prohibited on Sundays , with the exception of foxes , crows and coyotes .
Car dealerships are also closed on Sunday .
TENNESSEE
Section::::Tennessee .
In addition to alcohol laws varying widely across Tennessee , bartenders are prohibited from allowing alcohol to be consumed on their premises between 3 AM and 10 AM on Sunday , unless the local government has decided not to allow extended hours for alcohol sales , in which case sale before noon is prohibited .
TEXAS Section::::Texas .
Car dealerships ( both new and used ) must remain closed on either Saturday or Sunday ; the dealer has the option to determine on which day to close .
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES Section::::Alcoholic beverages .
In Texas , alcoholic beverage sales are distinguished ( and thus blue laws vary ) in two different ways :
* The first way is by type of alcohol sold .
The Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code defines " liquor " as any beverage containing more than four percent alcohol by weight , and liquor sales are more restrictive than " beer and wine " sales .
* The second way is by where the alcohol will be consumed .
Separate permits are required , and differing laws apply , based on whether the alcohol is sold for " on - premises consumption " ( i.e. , at a bar or restaurant ) or " off - premises consumption " ( i.e. , in a retail establishment such as a grocery store or " package store " ) .
BEER AND WINE Section::::Beer and wine .
Beer and wine can be sold for " off - premises consumption " by any retailer that can supply and has the proper licenses .
A beer and wine seller may sell other non - alcohol items , and is not required to be closed for business during periods when beer and wine can not be sold .
Beer can be sold between 7 a.m. and midnight Monday – Saturday and on Sunday from midnight to 1 a.m. and again between noon and midnight .
On - premises consumption permit holders may sell beer between 10 a.m. and noon but only with a food order .
In certain large cities as defined within the Code , beer sales are automatically extended to 2 a.m. on any day of the week ; in smaller cities and unincorporated portions of counties such sales can be allowed if authorized by the local governing body .
Wine sales are subject to the same rules as beer sales , except sales are allowed until 2 a.m. on Sunday in all cases .
LIQUOR
Section::::Liquor .
Liquor must be sold at specialized stores only ( referred to as " package stores " in the statute ) and the store must be physically separate from any other business ( such as an adjoining convenience store ) .
A package store can sell other items , but the store must be closed at any time when it can not sell liquor .
Liquor can not be sold at retail stores during any of the following times :
* Any time on Sunday , *
Any time on New Year 's Day , Thanksgiving or Christmas ( if any of those days except Thanksgiving falls on a Sunday , then sales are prohibited at any time on the following Monday ) and * between 9 p.m. and 10 a.m. local time on any other day of the week .
Wholesalers can deliver liquor to retailers at any time except on Sunday or Christmas ; however , local distributors can only deliver liquor to retailers between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. on any day except Sunday , Christmas or any day where the retailer is prohibited from selling liquor .
UTAH VIRGINIA Section::::Virginia .
There are forms of hunting on Sunday
that are illegal , such as deer , turkey , dove and duck , and other forms that are legal .
The forms of Sunday hunting that are legal are hunting on licensed hunting preserves , bear hunting , raccoon hunting and fox hunting .
A recent grass roots effort is attempting to bring an end to the last of the blue laws in Virginia .
The grass roots effort has centered around a Facebook group called " Legalize Virginia Sunday Hunting for All . "
During the most recent effort the Sunday hunting bill overwhelmingly passed the Senate only to be voted down by a 4 to 3 vote in Delegate R. Lee Ware 's ( Committee Chairman Republican Powhatan , Virginia ) Natural Resources Subcommittee .
During the debate on February 1 , 2012 , in the Powhatan Today opinion section , Delegate Ware expressed his concern over the dangers surrounding hunting activities in these quotes .
" Bullets travel without regard to property lines — and so do shotgun pellets or slugs or even arrows from powerful - enough bows .
And always , for an unsuspecting equestrian , there is the peril of encountering a hunter who misconstrues a horse — or a person — for a deer or any other game . "
" Equestrians , hikers , bikers , picnickers , bird - watchers , fishermen , canoeists , kayakers : all of these wish , too , to enjoy Virginia 's great outdoors , often on Sunday — and they wish to do so without the threat inevitably posed by the presence of rifle- or shotgun - toting hunters . "
The sale of alcohol for off - premises consumption is prohibited between the hours of 12 a.m. and 6 a.m. daily .
State - run Alcoholic Beverage Control ( ABC ) stores have limited hours of operation on Sunday .
WASHINGTON Section::::Washington .
Historically , off - premises
Sunday sales of spirits were banned , and all liquor stores were closed .
On November 8 , 1966 , Washington state voters adopted Initiative 229 , repealing the so - called " Blue Law , " which had been enacted in 1909 .
Consumers still had the option of purchasing beer or wine from grocery stores or on - premises spirits from bars and restaurants .
In 2005 , the state began allowing off - premises spirits sales in select stores on Sundays from noon to 5 p.m. On the election of November 8 , 2011 , voters passed Initiative 1183 , which brought several changes to the liquor distribution and retailing system .
The most significant of these changes were the end to the state monopoly on liquor sales and distribution .
On June 1 , 2012 , Washington completed its transition to private liquor sales .
Under 1183 , spirits may only be sold in premises of at least 10,000 sq ft , generally including grocery stores , warehouse clubs , department stores , and some larger specialty shops .
The sale of alcohol for both on and off - premises consumption is prohibited between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. daily .
New rule‐making by the Washington State Liquor Control Board ( WSLCB )
based on alcohol sales hour restrictions is being proposed as the model for state licensed Marijuana sales per initiative I-502 as well .
WEST VIRGINIA
Section::::West Virginia .
Hunting on Sunday is prohibited in all but 14 of 55 counties .
Alcohol sales are prohibited on Sunday in West Virginia until 1:00 p.m. REFERENCES