THE DOCTOR (
ONCE UPON A TIME )
" The Doctor " is the fifth episode of the second season of the American ABC fantasy / drama television series Once Upon a Time , and the show 's 27th episode overall , which aired on October 28 , 2012 .
It was co - written by Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed by Paul Edwards .
PLOT
OPENING SEQUENCE Section::::Plot .
Section::::Opening Sequence .
An electrical storm is featured in a black and white forest .
EVENT CHRONOLOGY Section::::Event Chronology .
The Enchanted Forest events happen after " We Are Both " and before " Quite a Common Fairy " .
The Storybrooke events happen after " Broken ( Once Upon a Time ) " .
IN THE CHARACTERS ' PAST Section::::In
the Characters ' Past .
In the Enchanted Forest , Rumplestiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) is preparing to teach Regina ( Lana Parrilla ) everything she needs to know about magic .
It is not as easy as it seems , especially after she struggles to take the heart out of a unicorn .
She protests over doing this , but he tells Regina , " Nothing is innocent , " before taking the unicorn 's heart out himself .
He also tells her not even magic will bring her fiancé Daniel ( Noah Bean ) back to life .
The Mad Hatter / Jefferson ( Sebastian Stan ) later arrives to overhear the two and shows off a crystal ball that Rumplestiltskin has requested .
Rumplestiltskin , however , had told the Mad Hatter that he actually needs " the slippers " to enter a realm with no magic , since the Mad Hatter 's hat can only travel between realms with magic .
Now that they meet for the first time , Jefferson tells Regina he has heard of a " wizard " who can help her bring back Daniel .
They travel to see this person , who prefers to be called a doctor .
As he examines Daniel 's body , the doctor tells Regina that he is an ideal candidate for his " experimental " procedure , though , he still needs an enchanted heart , as normal ones can not withstand the procedure .
Regina lets him pick one from Cora 's vault of living hearts .
That night , the doctor begins his work on restoring Daniel to life , but announces his failure .
This devastates Regina , who returns to being Rumplestiltskin 's pupil and demonstrates her readiness by ripping the heart out of his new protegée , crushing it to prove her advancement .
It is revealed that Rumplestiltskin was actually in league with the doctor , who exchanged the strong heart for the " monster " he got in Regina , and the Mad Hatter , who allowed him safe passage back to his world , the Land Without Color .
Before departing , Rumplestiltskin and the Mad Hatter scoff at the doctor 's claims that science is more powerful than magic .
Rumplestiltskin bets that the doctor will one day see things his way , much to the doctor 's doubts .
It is later revealed that the doctor took the strong heart Regina gave him back to his laboratory , where he hands over the prized possession to his assistant and places it inside the body of the doctor 's dead brother so he can bring him back to life .
The doctor is revealed to be none other than Victor Frankenstein ( David Anders ) , and that he relies on science , not magic .
IN THE ENCHANTED FOREST Section::::In the Enchanted Forest .
As Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) , Snow White / Mary Margaret ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) , Mulan ( Jamie Chung ) and Aurora ( Sarah Bolger ) return to the island from the castle , the foursome discover that everyone at the camp has been killed and their hearts ripped out by Cora .
However , they discover Captain Hook / Killian Jones ( Colin O'Donoghue ) hiding among the bodies .
Hook claims that he was the only survivor and pretends to act like a traumatized victim in an effort to gain their trust .
However , Emma is suspicious of his claim , and is convinced that he is lying about the attack .
She ties him to a tree and threatens to leave him to the ogres if he does not confess ; Hook finally comes clean and reveals his identity along with Cora 's plans to travel to Storybrooke .
Hook then tells the four women that Cora is searching for an enchanted compass that he will help them find , so they could get back to Storybrooke if they take him back with them .
Emma asks him why , and Hook reveals that it is so he can kill Rumplestiltskin .
While Snow senses that Hook is using this plan to throw them off , Emma is aware of Hook 's deception , knowing that as long as they do n't trust him , they wo n't be surprised if he double - crosses them .
The five individuals then prepare for their quest to search for the compass , which happens to be located at the top of an enormous beanstalk .
IN STORYBROOKE Section::::In Storybrooke .
Dr. Whale / Victor Frankenstein approaches Prince Charming / David Nolan(Josh Dallas ) , who then punches him for sleeping with Snow White / Mary Margaret .
Dr. Whale asks David if there may be a chance that they could find another portal that could lead them to another world , and hopefully find Dr. Whale 's missing brother .
Dr. Whale suspects that Regina may have the answer .
Meanwhile , Regina is visiting Jiminy Cricket / Dr .
Archie Hopper ( Raphael Sbarge ) for a series of sessions to let go of using her magic so she can see Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) again .
Dr. Whale bursts into Archie 's office and confronts Regina during her session to demand that she send him back to his world so he can find his brother .
Regina , however , tells Archie that she only brought along whom she wanted , including the body of her beloved Daniel that she preserved with a spell .
Later that night , while driving home in the rain , Regina sees whom she believes is Daniel roaming the streets , then finds his glass coffin empty , leading her to believe that Dr. Whale is behind this .
As Regina arrives at the hospital to confront the doctor , she sees him on the lab floor with his arm ripped off .
Dr. Whale confesses to Regina that he has brought Daniel back , but he has become a " monster .
"
The following morning , David confronts Regina at the hospital ; she tells him about what Dr. Whale did , and David reveals that he knows what Snow White
/
Mary Margaret did to her that started this immense hatred .
Regina suggests to David that the resurrected Daniel is reliving his last thoughts and probably has gone to the stables .
Unfortunately , Henry is also there , tending to the new horse that David gave him .
At the stables , Daniel finds Henry and begins to strangle him , believing that Henry is Cora trying to pull his heart out .
David and Regina stop him before he can do any harm , allowing Henry to escape .
David locks Daniel in the stable ; he is ready to kill Daniel with his gun , but Regina insists she can talk to him .
She manages to get as far as pulling the " real Daniel "
out long enough for him to urge her to stop the pain , and let go of their feelings for each other .
Just as he loses control and attempts to kill Regina , she tearfully immobilizes him , then vaporizes him .
Later , Regina returns to Archie , confessing that she has used magic .
Dr. Whale shows up at Mr. Gold 's pawn shop to get his arm reattached .
Rumplestiltskin / Mr .
Gold makes him first admit that he needs magic to prove to Whale that magic is superior to science ; after he magically reattaches his arm , Dr. Whale thanks him and leaves .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
" The Doctor " was co - written by executive producers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , while Lost veteran Paul Edwards served as director .
David Anders was persuaded to take the part of Dr. Whale after discovering his counterpart would be Dr. Frankenstein , though it took the series a year to reveal Whale 's fairytale counterpart .
Anders drew inspiration from Gene Wilder and the film Young Frankenstein .
This episode marks the final appearance by actor Sebastian Stan as the Mad Hatter / Jefferson .
He departed the series due to his obligations to the Broadway play Picnic and the Marvel feature film .
CULTURAL REFERENCES
* Victor Frankenstein and his " monster " are the primary characters from Mary Shelley 's novel Frankenstein , which was written in 1818 .
While the story of Victor Frankenstein originates in the novel , the more well known version , ( and the one alluded to in the episode , i.e. black & white )
is the classic 1931 horror film Frankenstein .
Such references include the use of lightning to bring the monster back to life ( a process not detailed in the book ) , a bad heart ( in the movie , brain ) causing the monster to go bad , a lab assistant ( a hunchback in the movies , while in the novel , Victor worked alone in secret ) , and the famous line " it 's alive ! "
Also , Dr. Whale 's arm is ripped out of its socket by Daniel , just like the police inspector in Son of Frankenstein .
Frankenstein 's Storybrooke name of Whale is a reference to James Whale , who directed Frankenstein and its 1935 sequel , Bride of Frankenstein .
*
The Wizard of Oz is briefly alluded to near the start of the episode when Jefferson gives Rumplestiltskin a crystal ball in lieu of the slippers he was sent to find .
Jefferson says the slippers had " been sent to another land " to which Rumplestiltskin replies , " I needed the slippers to ' get ' to that other land . "
*
Among other references to Lost on the series ( Kitsis and Horowitz , the creators of this series were producers on Lost ) , in this episode Rumplestiltskin tells Regina that " Dead is dead " , the title of a Lost episode .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
For the second week in a row ( in spite of fears that Hurricane Sandy would affect the Eastern United States , which would 've caused ABC affiliates to preempt the show if it became serious ) , this outing helped the series post another increase in the ratings , scoring a 3.4/8 among 18 - 49s with 9.7 million viewers tuning in , despite the competition it had from NBC 's Sunday Night Football and Fox 's broadcast of Game 4 of the 2012 World Series .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
The episode was met with mixed to positive reviews from critics .
Entertainment Weekly 's Hilary Busis liked the episode , but somehow questioned the show creators ' sudden inclusion of characters that were written in the 1800s into the storylines : " Maybe it 's best not to anger the all - powerful sorcerers .
Instead , let 's talk about their televised creation : ' The Doctor , ' which revealed that Dr. Whale was once known as Dr. Horrible — I mean , Dr. Victor Frankenstein .
Though I know that not all of Once 's ' fairy land ' characters actually hail from folklore — like Frankenstein , Pinocchio and the Mad Hatter are both inventions of 19th century novelists — I've still got mixed feelings about bringing Mary Shelley 's classic into OUAT 's potent public domain stew .
If any and all stories are fair game , where will the show 's writers draw the line ?
Will future episodes feature
Emma befriending Elizabeth Bennet and Jo March , then trying to reunite Romeo and Juliet ?
It just seems like expanding the show 's world beyond fairy tales and Disney properties — like Captain Hook — has the potential to turn Once into a giant , fanfiction - y mess . "
The Huffington Post 's Laura Prudom also gave it mixed reviews : " This week 's ' Once Upon a Time ' certainly fit in with the rest of ABC 's Halloween fare , with an abundance of lightning and shambling monsters and creepy heart stealing — but the end result left me a little cold . "
The A.V. Club gave the episode a B : "
With Halloween just around the corner , Once Upon A Time tries its hand at a spooky Regina - centric episode that not only features some considerable character development , but also moves the plot forward , " and added that " it 's a solid episode that incorporates much of this series ' rapidly expanding cast , and it poses some interesting questions about the nature of this show 's alternate worlds . "
TV Overmind had reservations about this episode , noting that " this week 's Once Upon a Time finally revealed Dr. Whale 's true identity , but that discovery - and the story that played out in Storybrooke - made for a bit of a strange episode .
While it 's always nice to get insight into the emotions of the characters , the truth is that what happened in Regina 's Storybrooke arc in this episode did n't really move the overall plot forward .
IGN 's Amy Ratcliffe called the episode " great , " giving it an 8.0 out of 10 .
She highly favored the storyline between Regina and Rumplestiltskin .
She also praised David Anders performance as Dr. Frankenstein , calling him " fantastically creepy . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS