THE WHITE QUEEN ( TV SERIES )
The White Queen is a British television drama series in ten parts , based on Philippa Gregory 's historical novel series The Cousins ' War ( The White Queen , The Red Queen , and The Kingmaker 's Daughter ) .
The first episode was premiered on BBC One on 16 June 2013 in the United Kingdom .
It was first broadcast in the United States on Starz on 9 August 2013 .
The series is set against the backdrop of the Wars of the Roses and presents the story of the women involved in the long conflict for the throne of England .
It starts in 1464 ; the nation has been at war for nine years fighting over who is the rightful king as two sides of the same family , the House of York and the House of Lancaster , contest the throne .
The story follows three women , Elizabeth Woodville , Margaret Beaufort and Anne Neville , who manipulate events behind the scenes of history to gain power .
Elizabeth Woodville is the protagonist in the novel The White Queen , and Margaret Beaufort and Anne Neville are the focus of the novels The Red Queen and The Kingmaker 's Daughter ; the three characters appear in the three novels that make up the television series .
The final episode of The White Queen was aired on 18 August 2013 and the series was released on DVD and Blu - ray Disc the following day .
Two days later , it was confirmed that The White Queen would not be returning for a second series .
In a statement to Broadcast , the BBC stated that the show was always planned as a one - season series .
In October 2013 , The Telegraph reported that Starz planned to develop a sequel miniseries called The White Princess , based on Gregory 's 2013 novel of the same name .
Gregory confirmed that the project was underway in August 2015 .
On 7 February 2016 , Gregory announced on Facebook that the sequel was officially confirmed to be in production , with the scripts being written .
On 15 March 2018 , Starz announced that it would create a continuation of The White Queen and The White Princess to be titled The Spanish Princess , which would be based on Gregory 's novels The Constant Princess and The King 's Curse and center on Catherine of Aragon .
The White Queen was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards , four Primetime Emmy Awards and a People 's Choice Award .
CAST HOUSE OF YORK
* Rebecca Ferguson as Elizabeth Woodville , the " White Queen " and consort to
Edward IV * Max Irons as Edward IV of England
* Faye Marsay as Lady Anne Neville , " the Kingmaker 's Daughter " and queen consort to Richard III * Aneurin Barnard as Richard , Duke of Gloucester , later King Richard III ; brother of Edward IV * James Frain as Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , " the Kingmaker " * Janet McTeer as Jacquetta , Lady Rivers , Elizabeth Woodville 's mother
* David Oakes as George , Duke of Clarence , brother of Edward IV * Eleanor Tomlinson as Lady Isabel Neville , Duchess of Clarence , wife of George , Duke of Clarence and elder sister of Lady Anne Neville * Juliet Aubrey as Lady Anne Beauchamp , Countess of Warwick , wife of Warwick and mother to Lady Isabel and Lady Anne * Caroline Goodall as Cecily Neville , Duchess of York , mother of Edward , George , and Richard
* Sonny Ashbourne Serkis as the Prince of Wales ( later King Edward V ) , eldest son and heir to Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville ; later one of the Princes in the Tower
* Freya Mavor as Elizabeth of York , eldest daughter and child to Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville
* Elinor Crawley as Cecily of York , daughter to Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville HOUSE OF LANCASTER
* Amanda Hale as Lady Margaret Beaufort , " the Red Queen " , mother of Henry Tudor , a great - granddaughter of John , Duke of Lancaster * Veerle Baetens as Margaret of Anjou ,
queen consort to Henry VI of England
* Joey Batey as Edward of Lancaster , son of Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou , married to Lady Anne Neville * Michael Marcus as Henry Tudor , later Henry VII of England ; son and heir of Lady Margaret Beaufort by Sir Edmund Tudor * Oscar Kennedy as young Henry Tudor * Tom McKay as Jasper Tudor , half - brother of Henry VI , brother - in - law to Lady Margaret Beaufort and uncle to Henry Tudor ADDITIONAL CAST * Frances Tomelty as Lady Beauchamp , mother of Lady Margaret Beaufort
* Michael Maloney as Sir Henry Stafford , third husband of Lady Margaret Beaufort * Ben Lamb as Anthony Woodville , 2nd Earl Rivers * Hugh Mitchell as Richard Welles , half - brother of Lady Margaret Beaufort * Rupert Young as Sir William Herbert ,
Lord Pembroke * Robert Pugh as Baron Rivers ( later Earl Rivers ) , father of Elizabeth Woodville * Rupert Graves as Lord Stanley , the fourth husband of Lady Margaret Beaufort * Andrew Gower , as Lord Strange , son of Lord Stanley * Shaun Dooley , as Sir Robert Brackenbury * Arthur Darvill , as Henry Stafford , Duke of Buckingham
* Emily Berrington , as Jane Shore , Edward IV 's mistress * Andreas Perschewski as Louis XI of France
The large majority of the cast is British , but since the series is shot in Belgium , several local actors are featured : Veerle Baetens , Jurgen Delnaet , Joren Seldeslachts , Elsa Houben , Ben Forceville and Ben Van den Heuvel all appear in the series .
Rebecca Ferguson who portrays Elizabeth Woodville , the White Queen , is from Sweden ( her mother is originally from England ) .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The budget was £ 25 million and took 120 days to shoot , consisting of 250 sets including : dungeons , palaces , castles , 12 state banquets and at least two coronations .
Two versions were made , one for the BBC and a more sexually explicit version for the U.S.
A companion two - part documentary series , The Real White Queen and Her Rivals , presented by Philippa Gregory , was made to accompany the series .
It was broadcast on BBC Two on 17 and 24 July 2013 .
CREDITS * Executive producers : John Griffin , George Faber , Charles Pattinson for Company Pictures , Eurydice Gysel for Czar Television , Polly Hill for the BBC , Philippa Gregory and Colin Callender .
* Series lead writer : Emma Frost and produced by Company Pictures .
Lisa McGee and Nicole Taylor are also writers .
* James Kent directed the first three episodes .
* Other episodes were directed by Jamie Payne and Colin Teague .
* Cinematographer : Jean Philippe Gossart .
and David Luther .
* Music : John Lunn . LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
The White Queen was filmed on location in Belgium , where several landmarks in Bruges and Ghent represent locations in London and elsewhere :
* The Gothic Hall in Bruges ' Town Hall represents Westminster Hall
* Church of Our Lady in Bruges represents St Stephen 's Chapel in the old Palace of Westminster *
Heilige Geeststraat in Bruges represents a medieval London street
* Basilica of the Holy Blood in Bruges represents Tower of London
*
In Ghent filming took place in the Castle of the Counts ( Gravensteen ) , Saint Peter 's Abbey ( Sint - Pietersabdij ) , Saint Bavo 's Abbey ( Sint - Baafsabdij ) , Cloth hall ( Lakenhalle ) , Castle of Gerald the Devil ( Geeraard de Duivelsteen ) , Saint Bavo Cathedral ( Sint - Baafskathedraal ) , and Agustijnklooster ( Academiestraat ) .
* Additional filming took place at Rumbeke , in Damme , and at Ursel Airfield—23 locations for the first three episodes .
The rest of the set was constructed at a nearby Philips factory .
NOMINATIONS AND RECEPTION Section::::Nominations and reception .
The series received positive reviews , with an average critic rating of 7.6/10 on Rotten Tomatoes and a score of 70 on Metacritic ; the critic consensus that it " sometimes suffers from clunky storytelling " , but " delivers sufficient intrigue , thanks to its gorgeous costumes , splendid cast , and sexy , soapy plots " .
The show currently holds a 79 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 20 reviews , and a score of 7.8/10 on IMDb based on 10,230 user ratings .
The White Queen was nominated for several awards including three Golden Globe Awards , four Primetime Emmy Awards and a People 's Choice Award for Favorite TV Movie / Miniseries .
71st
Golden Globe Awards ( 2014 )
* Best Mini - Series or Motion Picture Made for Television * Best Performance by an Actress in a Mini - Series or a Motion Picture Made for Television - ( Rebecca Ferguson )
* Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series , Mini - Series or Motion Picture Made for Television - ( Janet McTeer )
66th
Primetime Emmy Awards ( 2014 )
* Outstanding Miniseries 66th
Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards ( 2014 )
* Outstanding Music Composition for a Miniseries , Movie or a Special ( Original Dramatic Score ) -
For episode : " The Final Battle " * Outstanding Costumes for a Miniseries , Movie , or Special - For episode : " The Price of Power " * Outstanding Hairstyling for a Miniseries or Movie 40th People 's Choice Awards ( 2014 )
* Favorite TV Movie / Miniseries 2014 Saturn Awards - Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films
* SBest Television Release on DVD / Blu - ray 2014 ASC Award - American Society of Cinematographers
* Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Television Movie / Mini - Series - David Luther for Episode :
" War at First Hand " ( nomination ) OFTA Television Awards 2014 - Online Film & Television Association * Best Miniseries Satellite Awards 2013
* Best Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television RECEPTION IN THE UK Section::::Reception in the UK .
In the UK the critical reception was described as ' mixed at best ' and ' mostly scathing ' .
Sam Wollaston of The Guardian praised the show 's characters , suggesting Janet McTeer ( Jacquetta ) stole the show .
He also praised the show 's romantic elements , commenting " Mmmm , steamy " .
Gerard O'Donovan of The Daily Telegraph praised the casting of the supporting characters and the exciting " lust and vengeance " fueling the drama , but objected to the prettified portrayal of 15th century England .
Deborah Ross of The Daily Mail gave the mixed review of both one and five stars , " because it possesses the sort of one - star awfulness that , if properly embraced , can transport you all the way to five - star joy . "
The Independent 's Tom Sutcliffe found it " less historically plausible than Game of Thrones " , but concluded that " I 'm sure it will give innocent pleasure to many . "
Barbara Ellen in The Observer , compared the show to " a strange Timotei advert , featuring fornication , shouting , horses , armour " , whilst commenting that the sex scenes , toned down in the British version , " were so vanilla , I ended up fancying an ice cream . "
Reviewing the final episode for The Daily Telegraph , Bernadette McNulty stated that the series , " fell between two stools — not serious enough for the scholars nor glitzy enough for the Game of Thrones fans .
" The ratings were however good .
The first episode received 6 million viewers , stabilising at around the 4–4.5 million mark from the second episode , although occasionally it dipped below this on first broadcast figures .
RECEPTION IN THE U.S. Section::::Reception in the U.S ..
The White Queen received generally mixed reviews after airing on the Starz network on 10 August 2013 .
Joanne Ostrow of The Denver Post described the series as " Sexy , empowering and violent " .
Linda Stasi of the New York Post agreed that the series was a hit , saying " The White Queen [ is ] a royal winner " .
It was again unfavourably compared to HBO 's high budget and fast - paced Game of Thrones .
In comparison to Game of Thrones Neil Genzlinger speculated that " even if dragons were allowed , they 'd mostly be lounging around and , between bouts of relatively tame dragon sex , talking about eating people rather than actually eating them " .
The performances of Janet McTeer and James Frain were praised by several American reviewers .
Amanda Hale , despite receiving praise for her performance by British reviewers , was unfavourably reviewed by U.S. critic Matthew Gilbert .
He said " There were moments when I rolled my eyes — Amanda Hale , as the mother of young Henry Tudor , looks as if she is going to explode with ill intent .
Really , her performance could be transposed into a Mel Brooks spoof " .
Louise Mellor of Den of Geek added " Why does Lady Margaret Beaufort constantly look like she is sucking on a Murray Mint ? "
TV Guide writer Matt Roush praised Hale 's performance as " intense " , and favored the series , labeling it as " fun " , and on a one to ten scale , ranking it at seven .
The White Queen was nominated three times at the 71st Golden Globe Awards , with acting nominations for Ferguson and McTeer and an overall nomination for the series in the Best Miniseries or Television Film category .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
Despite initial plans for a second series , on 20 August 2013 the BBC announced they were not commissioning one , possibly due to the lukewarm reception the series received .
However , in October 2013,The Telegraph reported that Starz was planning to develop a sequel miniseries called The White Princess , based on Gregory 's 2013 novel of the same name .
Starz CEO Chris Albrecht announced in January 2014 that the network was working with White Queen screenwriter Emma Frost on the project .
Starz would produce the White Princess miniseries without involvement from the BBC .
Gregory confirmed that the project was underway in August 2015 .
On 7 February 2016 , Gregory announced on Facebook that the sequel was officially confirmed to be in production , with the scripts being written .
Production on the eight episode limited series began in June 2016 .
It aired weekly on Starz from 6 April to 4 June 2017 .
On 15 March 2018 , Starz announced that it would create a continuation of The White Queen and The White Princess to be titled The Spanish Princess , which would be based on Gregory 's novels The Constant Princess and The King 's Curse and center on Catherine of Aragon .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The Starz episode title is shown below the original BBC title if different .
Final UK episode ratings from Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
A number of anachronisms and historical inaccuracies within the series received attention , especially in the costumes and locations used .
Pat Stacey of the Irish Evening Herald newspaper , said that " the historical howlers are piling up like bodies on a battlefield , week after week " , comparing it to the " flaws " spotted by " nitpickers " in Downton Abbey and Foyle 's War .
Deborah Ross , of the Daily Mail newspaper , criticised the cleanliness and " amazing teeth " of the actors involved , whilst also pointing out glimpses of a modern drainpipe and stair - rail .
Bernadette McNulty , of The Daily Telegraph newspaper , commented that in the final episode of the series , the Battle of Bosworth Field appears to take place in a forest rather than a field .
Mary McNamara , of the LA Times newspaper , states that in order to fit thirty years of history into ten episodes , " Years collapse into minutes , intricate policy is condensed into cardboard personalities , and the characters are swiftly categorized as good or evil . "
Others questioned the depiction of the major characters .
Amy Licence , Cecily 's biographer , states that Cecily Neville , Duchess of York , is portrayed in the first episode as " a Cecily straight from the pages of a novel rather than the actual proud aristocrat who asserted her own right to rule " .
Historian Michael Hicks commented , " They 've fiddled with the chronology " but added , " I can see why they decided to restrict the cast of characters , and play up the rivalry between Elizabeth and the Earl of Warwick , " and also said " As with Philippa Gregory 's source novels , they 've done their research " .
In response to criticisms of the series being " ahistorical " , Gregory stated that " What [ BBC One and Starz ] wanted was not a historical series based on the documents from the War of the Roses .
They wanted my take on it , so that 's what they got . "
Aneurin Barnard ( who played Richard ) stated , with regard to inaccuracies , " ...
the truth can be pretty boring .
You have to up the stakes and make something up or twist it to make it a little bit more exciting . "
DVD AND BLU - RAY RELEASES Section::::DVD and Blu - ray releases . !
rowspan="2"DVD title !
rowspan="2"Discs !
rowspan="2"Year !
rowspan="2"Episodes !
colspan="3"DVD release !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Region 1 !
Region 2 !
Region 4
The complete series 4 2013 10 4 February 2014 19 August 2013 n / a BBC version in region 2 ! rowspan="2"Blu - ray title !
rowspan="2"Discs !
rowspan="2"Year !
rowspan="2"Episodes !
colspan="3"Blu - ray Disc release !
rowspan="2"Notes !
Region A !
Region B !
Region C
The complete series 3 2013 10 4 February 2014 19 August 2013 n / a BBC version in region B SEE ALSO
*
The Hollow Crown ( TV series )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The White Queen at Starz