CAPITAL PUNISHMENT IN KANSAS Capital punishment is a legal penalty in the U.S. state of Kansas but it is rarely used .
Kansas is one of only two death - penalty states , along with New Hampshire , where no executions have been carried out since the 1976 reinstatement of capital punishment in the United States .
LEGAL PROCESS Section::::Legal process .
When the prosecution seeks the death penalty , the sentence is decided by the jury and must be unanimous .
In case of a hung jury during the penalty phase of the trial , a life sentence is issued , even if a single juror opposed death .
There is no retrial .
The Governor has alone the clemency power , after receiving a non - binding recommendation from a board .
In 2004 , the Kansas Supreme Court in a 4 to 3 decision ruled state 's death penalty statute to be unconstitutional .
The decision was later reversed by the U.S. Supreme Court in Kansas v. Marsh ( 2005 ) , effectively reinstating the statute .
CAPITAL CRIMES Section::::Capital crimes .
Capital murder is punishable by death if it involves one of the following aggravating factors :
* The defendant was previously convicted of a felony in which the defendant inflicted great bodily harm , disfigurement , dismemberment or death on another .
*
* The defendant knowingly or purposely killed or created a great risk of death to more than one person .
*
* The defendant committed the crime for the defendant 's self or another for the purpose of receiving money or any other thing of monetary value .
*
*
The defendant authorized or employed another person to commit the crime .
*
* The defendant committed the crime in order to avoid or prevent a lawful arrest or prosecution .
*
* The defendant committed the crime in an especially heinous , atrocious or cruel manner , that is : * * prior stalking of or criminal threats to the victim ; * preparation or planning , indicating an intention that the killing was meant to be especially heinous , atrocious or cruel ; * infliction of mental anguish or physical abuse before the victim 's death ; * torture of the victim ; * continuous acts of violence begun before or continuing after the killing ; * desecration of the victim 's body in a manner indicating a particular depravity of mind , either during or following the killing ; or * any other conduct the trier of fact expressly finds is especially heinous .
*
The defendant committed the crime while serving a sentence of imprisonment on conviction of a felony .
*
* The victim was killed while engaging in , or because of the victim 's performance or prospective performance of , the victim 's duties as a witness in a criminal proceeding .
* DEATH SENTENCES AND EXECUTIONS Section::::Death sentences and executions .
Currently , there are 10 people on death row , all males .
Lethal injection is the only permitted method of execution .
Generally , death sentences are rarely passed in Kansas .
There is no " death row " in Kansas , as inmates are housed at the El Dorado Correctional Facility along with other inmates in administrative segregation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
From 1853 to 1965 , 76 executions were carried out under Kansas jurisdiction .
All but one , the first , were by hanging .
These figures do not include executions that took place at the United States Penitentiary , Leavenworth and United States Disciplinary Barracks ; while located within KS borders , these hangings were performed under federal government and U.S. military jurisdiction respectively .
Kansas first abolished the death penalty on January 30 , 1907 , then restored it in 1935 , although no executions took place until 1944 .
From 1954 to 1960 , there were no hangings in Kansas , as Governor George Docking refused to let any execution proceed due to his opposition to capital punishment .
The last execution in Kansas took place on June 22 , 1965 ( double hanging of George York and James Latham ) .
Perhaps the most famous , or infamous , Kansas death penalty case was that of Richard Hickock and Perry Smith , sentenced for the 1959 murder of a farming family .
The crime , trial and 1965 execution were a subject of Truman Capote 's 1966 bestselling documentary novel In Cold Blood .
After the 1976 United States Supreme Court decision in Gregg v. Georgia permitted states to reinstate the death penalty , the Kansas legislature made numerous attempts to do so , but Governor John W. Carlin vetoed such legislation in 1979 , 1980 , 1981 , and 1985 .
The death penalty was eventually reinstated on April 23 , 1994 .
Of states that still allow the death penalty , Kansas was the last to reinstate the death penalty in the modern era .
The law became effective on July 1 , after then - Governor Joan Finney , despite her proclaimed opposition to capital punishment , decided to allow the bill to become law without her signature .
The first degree murder with the aggravating factors is the only crime punishable by death .
Despite reinstatement , no one has been executed since .
SEE ALSO
* List of individuals executed in Kansas * List of death row inmates in Kansas
* Crime in Kansas * Law of Kansas REFERENCES