A PLACE TO CALL HOME ( TV SERIES ) A Place to Call Home is an Australian television drama series created by Bevan Lee for the Seven Network .
It premiered on 28 April 2013 .
Set in rural New South Wales in the period following the Second World War , it follows Sarah Adams ( Marta Dusseldorp ) , who has returned to Australia after twenty years abroad to start a new life and ends up clashing with wealthy matriarch Elizabeth Bligh ( Noni Hazlehurst ) .
The main cast also consists of Brett Climo ( George Bligh ) , Craig Hall ( Dr. Jack Duncan ) , David Berry ( James Bligh ) , Abby Earl ( Anna Poletti ) , Arianwen Parkes - Lockwood ( Olivia Bligh ) , Aldo Mignone ( Gino Poletti ) , Sara Wiseman ( Carolyn Bligh ) , Jenni Baird as ( Regina Standish ) , Tim Draxl ( Henry Fox ) , Dominic Allburn ( Harry Polson ) , and Frankie J. Holden ( Roy Briggs ) .
It has been described as a " compelling melodrama about love and loss set against the social change of the 1950s " .
The show ended after six seasons in 2018 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CURRENT CAST * Marta Dusseldorp as Sarah Adams , who despite a strictly religious Catholic upbringing , had moved to Paris to be with the man she loved and to adopt his Jewish faith .
A new life awaits her , however , when she comes to work for the local hospital near the Bligh family , whom she met while serving as a nurse on the ship taking them all back to Australia from Europe .
Later , she is astonished to hear a report that her husband is still alive following World War II , and her life again spins into troubled times .
* Noni Hazlehurst as Elizabeth Bligh , the headstrong and stubborn matriarch of the Bligh family .
She is at first rude and cruel to Sarah , but she grudgingly mellows over time .
Later in the series , she leaves for Sydney to live with her daughter Carolyn , and to become a better person .
* Brett Climo as Elizabeth 's son , George Bligh , a good - hearted man who takes Sarah under his protection and gradually falls in love with her .
He is Elaine 's widower ; at the beginning of the series , he appears to be father to James and Anna ; eventually it emerges that Anna is actually a secret child of his sister Carolyn and their friend Jack , taken in by George and Elaine to spare Carolyn any scandal .
His worst flaw may be his trust in people who seek to take advantage of him .
* Craig Hall as Jack Duncan , the secret past lover of Carolyn , who now faces many challenges in his work as a doctor in a hospital run by the Bligh family .
He is a genuine person despite his personal problems and would do anything to help others .
* David Berry as James Bligh ( regular : seasons 1–4 , 6 ; recurring : season 5 ) , the only son of George and Elaine , who grows up unaware of his " sister " Anna 's true background .
He marries Olivia , but is tormented by the realisation that he is gay , and tries to commit suicide .
He later feels betrayed when his wife has an affair , but returns to Ash Park to live for his young son .
* Arianwen Parkes - Lockwood as Olivia Bligh , James ' wife , a newlywed from England at the start of the series .
She develops anger toward James for his indifference to her desperate need for affection , but does try to come to terms with his " condition " .
* Abby Earl as Anna Bligh , the secret child of Carolyn and Jack , who was raised believing she was daughter of George and Elaine .
Anna marries a local farmer , Gino , after rebelling against the Bligh family .
The marriage faces difficulties , however , when Gino goes into debt , and his attempts to expand the farm fail .
* Frankie J. Holden as Roy Briggs , a kindly old farmer who lives alone at the series start .
He is very generous toward Sarah from the time she arrives in town , eventually offering her a refuge in his small home .
They develop an easy , informal , mutually - supportive friendship .
* Sara Wiseman as Carolyn Bligh ( regular : season 2–6 ; recurring : season 1 ) .
Much like her secret daughter Anna , Carolyn was the rebel child of her generation .
For a long time , she gave up on her relationship with the Bligh family , and has had little contact for years .
Once her secret is revealed , she is reunited with her long - separated daughter Anna and they develop an even closer relationship than before .
Later on Carolyn works for Sir Richard Bennett , encountering new problems .
* Tim Draxl as Doctor Henry Fox ( regular : season 3–6 ) , the doctor who helps to save George 's life after he is shot .
Henry then goes on to befriend James , and they realize their mutual attraction to each other is stronger than mere friendship .
Henry falls under the devious control of Regina , when she blackmails him into supplying her with morphine for her addiction .
* Deborah Kennedy as Doris Collins ( regular : season 4–6 ; recurring : seasons 1–3 ) , the most widely - known member of the Inverness village , who seems omnipresent on her bicycle .
Although she means well , her gossiping ways can sometimes make her seem rude and intrusive .
Sarah dislikes her at first , but as time goes on , finds her helpful as someone who always knows who has done what in the village .
* Dominic Allburn as Harry Polson ( regular : season 1 ;
recurring : season 4 ; regular : season 6 ) , Amy Polson 's gay brother .
He has a brief romantic involvement with James , but when much of the village learns of Harry 's true nature , he leaves Inverness for a new life elsewhere .
Later , when he returns after having been severely beaten , Sarah helps him to settle back into a more stable life at Inverness .
MAIN DEPARTED CAST * Aldo Mignone as Gino Poletti ( seasons 1–4 ) , the young , handsome Italian farmer who has set Anna 's heart on fire .
He has a real passion for farming and trying to please everybody , but his ambitious business decisions are not very successful .
* Jenni Baird as Regina Standish ( season 1–5 ) , the widowed , wealthy and still money - hungry sister of George 's late wife , Elaine .
Regina is the opposite of who Elaine had been : cold , bitter , and scheming , she despises Jews and openly displays religious intolerance toward Sarah .
Regina has now set her sights on the widower George 's inheritance , and would take extreme actions to achieve her goals regardless of anyone she sees as an obstacle .
After being committed in an asylum for the murder of Millie Davis and a policeman , Regina was let go in 1958 .
She returned to the town and helped Sarah and George fight Sir Richard 's cruel intentions .
She committed suicide at the end of season 5 , overdosing on morphine and making her death appear to be homicide .
* Matt Levett as Andrew Swanson ( guest : season 6 ;
regular : season 2 ; recurring : season 1 ) , a somewhat entitled heir apparent who tries to win the hand of Anna Bligh .
* Ben Winspear as Doctor Rene Nordmann ( regular : season 3 ; recurring : season 2 ) , the long - lost first love and husband of Sarah Adams .
First seen only in flashback , Rene had been arrested by the Nazi occupiers of Paris , and had disappeared without a trace .
Later , when Sarah is amazed to learn that he is still alive , she travels to Paris to rescue him from the deep psychological damage caused by his long ordeal of imprisonment and torture .
Rene has great difficulty adjusting to normal life , and still seems to carry his imprisonment within him .
* Brenna Harding as Rose O'Connell ( regular : season 4 ; recurring : season 3 )
* Robert Coleby as Douglas Goddard , a retiree who ran a club for Australian war veterans .
He married Elizabeth Bligh but died in season 5 .
RECURRING
* Heather Mitchell as Prudence Swanson , the wealthy friend of Elizabeth .
Prudence socializes with Elizabeth whenever she comes to visit Sydney .
As a member of Sydney 's upper class , she is very aristocratic and looks down her nose at Sarah when she arrives for a garden party .
* Judi Farr as Peg Maloney , the aunt of Sarah Adams , who writes to her frequently from her home in Sydney .
She and Sarah have grown very close , and when Sarah later decides to take a difficult action , she asks Peg for help .
* Dina Panozzo as Carla Poletti , the mother of Gino .
She is very critical of the relationship with Anna and her son , saying that it will never work because she is not Catholic .
But when George accedes , she does so as well .
* Krew Boylan and then Amy Mathews as Amy Polson , the maid of the Bligh household .
When Regina suspects that James is gay she manipulates Amy into spying for her , which eventually forces Elizabeth to fire Amy with great sorrow .
* Angelo D'Angelo as Amo Poletti , the father of Gino * Jacinta Acevski as Alma Grey
* Scott Grimley as Norman Parker ( driver ) * Rick Donald as Lloyd Ellis - Parker , a talented portrait artist on temporary assignment , who seems to offer Olivia the romantic affection she desperately craves .
* Michael Sheasby as Bert Ford , a local yobbo who always seems to be looking for a fight .
His suspicion of outsiders and religious intolerance make Sarah a natural target , as are the Italian Poletti family .
Bert disappears under mysterious circumstances , but his unknown fate continues to haunt his former victims .
* Mark Lee as Sir Richard Bennett , a rich and powerful , but unprincipled owner of a major city newspaper .
He is used to taking whatever he wishes to possess , including the people around him .
* Conrad Coleby as Matthew Goddard , Douglas ' son who returns to town after his father 's death .
He starts dating Olivia and later asks her to marry him .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Development for A Place to Call Home began after Bevan Lee completed his " domestic trilogy " ( Always Greener , Packed to the Rafters and Winners & Losers ) .
He took inspiration from film director Douglas Sirk 's 1950s films such as Written on the Wind ( 1956 ) and All That Heaven Allows ( 1955 ) .
Lee told The Age that he wanted to create a romance - driven melodrama based in the 1950s because people 's lives in the present are " relatively bland " .
He said : " At the end of the day , conflict is drama and we live in relatively conflict - free society .
I had to go to a place where there was pain and damage and hurt ; after the war there was .
" The script is co - written by Lee and Trent Atkinson .
Noni Hazlehurst ( Elizabeth Bligh ) was the first cast member to be announced for A Place to Call Home , on 18 June 2012 .
Marta Dusseldorp ( Sarah Adams ) , Brett Climo ( George Bligh ) and Frankie J. Holden ( Roy Briggs ) were announced a month later , with Dusseldorp leading the overall cast .
Newcomers David Berry ( James Bligh ) , Arianwen Parkes - Lockwood ( Olivia Bligh ) , Abby Earl ( Anna Bligh ) and Aldo Mignone ( Gino Poletti ) , made up the rest of the main cast .
A Place to Call Home is set primarily in both the fictional estate " Ash Park " and the nearby fictional country town of " Inverness " in New South Wales .
Inverness was also used as the country setting of Always Greener .
Camden and the Southern Highlands in New South Wales serves as the backdrop for Inverness .
Ash Park is actually Camelot , a heritage - listed property located at Kirkham , on the outskirts of Camden .
Sydney , the capital city of New South Wales , is a third location where major events occur , but most city scenes are filmed indoors , aside from some establishing shots such as historic footage of the Sydney Harbour Bridge .
Filming for the first season began on 9 July 2012 and concluded on 12 December 2012 .
Season one was shot on a Sony F65 camera , the first Australian television production to do so .
In June 2013 , Erin McWhirter of TV Week announced that A Place to Call Home had been renewed for another season .
Abby Earl told McWhirter , " We 're locked in pre - production in August
and then we start filming in September ,
so there 's plenty of time for me to get back in Anna 's shoes .
" The second season started on 11 May 2014 and concluded on 13 July 2014 .
TV Week confirmed that a third season had been commissioned .
In June 2014 , however , the magazine reported that Channel Seven had declined the option to renew the series , and that the cast and crew had been told that they would not be required for a third season .
On 15 October 2014 , it was announced that Foxtel had finalised a deal with Channel Seven that would see a third season written by Bevan Lee , produced by Seven Productions , but aired on Foxtel .
On 25 October 2014 , The Daily Telegraph announced that A Place to Call Home was renewed for another two seasons and would return in late 2015 , airing on Foxtel channel , SoHo .
It was also announced that all the original cast and crew members would return .
On 16 August 2015 it was announced via the official Facebook page that season 3 would premiere on 27 September 2015 on SoHo .
Season 4 premiered on Foxtel 's Showcase channel on 11 September 2016 .
Season 5 was announced by Foxtel on 16 November 2016 .
The timeline of season 5 skips ahead from 1954 to the year 1958 .
Production of A Place to Call Home resumed in February 2017 with principal photography continuing through July 2017 .
Season 5 premiered on Foxtel 's Showcase Channel in Australia starting on 8 October 2017 .
A sixth and final season was announced by Foxtel on 6 December 2017 , which was noted to be the last in March 2018 .
The final season began airing on 19 August 2018 and the final episode aired 21 October 2018 .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
When Seven Network revealed its new television series lineup for 2012 , A Place to Call Home was mentioned alongside other titles .
Seven Network 's Angus Ross said that it would potentially premiere in late 2012 , but would not be rushed to air by a certain date unless " casting and other elements " were right .
The first season of A Place to Call Home consisted of thirteen episodes .
The pilot episode was originally broadcast on 28 April 2013 , in the 8:30 pm time slot ( previously occupied by Downton Abbey ) .
INTERNATIONAL Section::::International .
Shortly after airing in Australia A Place to Call Home started broadcasting on TV One in New Zealand .
Series one and two began airing on BBC2 in the United Kingdom on 17 November 2014 , series three on 25 February 2016 , and series four on 13 February 2017 .
The fifth series was promoted to a BBC1 daytime slot , and began airing daily on 13 March 2018 .
All six seasons are available for streaming in the U.S. on Acorn TV .
The show is also distributed to television stations by American Public Television .
HOME MEDIA DVD release dates !
scope="col " colspan="1 " Blu - rayRegion 1Region
2Region 4Region BA Place to Call Home —
Season 1
* Discs : 4
* Episodes : 13 colspan="2 " * Photo gallery ( region 2 only )
* Interviews with the Cast ( region 4 only ) A Place to Call Home —
Season 2
* Discs : 3
* Episodes : 10 colspan="2 " * Interviews * Young to Old : Sarah 's Transformation * Character Profiles ( region 1 & 2 only )
* Discs : 3
* Episodes : 10 * Interviews * Young to Old :
Sarah 's Transformation * Season 3 Character Profiles
* Season 3 Trailer * Discs : 1
* Episodes : 3 * Interviews * Young to Old :
Sarah 's Transformation * Season 3 Character Profiles
* Season 3
Trailer A Place to Call Home
— Season 3
* Discs : 3
* Episodes : 10 * New season 2 finale
* Picture gallery
* Season 3 episode recaps ( region 4 only ) A Place to Call Home — Season 4 * Discs : 3 * Episodes : 12 Region 1 :
* Cast and crew interviews ( region 1 only )
* Behind - the - scenes featurettes ( region 1 only )
* Photo gallery A Place to Call Home — Season 5 * Discs : 3 * Episodes : 12 * Q and A with Jenni Baird ( region 1 only ) BOX SETS DVDRegion
1Region
2Region 4 !
scope="row " color:#fff ; " A Place to Call Home — Season 1 & 2 * Discs : 7 * Episodes : 23 * Interviews * Young to Old : Sarah 's Transformation * Season 3 Character Profiles * Season 3 Trailer ! scope="row " color:#fff ; " A Place to Call Home — Complete Seasons
One to Three
* Discs : 10
* Episodes : 33 * Interviews * Young to Old :
Sarah 's Transformation * Season 3 Character Profiles
* Season 3 Trailer * New season 2 finale ( region 2 & 4 )
* Picture gallery ( region 2 & 4 )
* Season 3 episode recaps ! scope="row " color:#fff ; " A Place to Call Home — Complete Seasons 1–4 * Discs : 13 * Episodes : 45 * Alternative series two finale ( region 2 ) ! scope="row " color:#fff ; " A Place to Call Home — Complete Seasons 1–5
* Discs : 16
* Episodes : 57 Region 4 :
* Interviews * Young to Old :
Sarah 's Transformation * Season 3 Character Profiles
* Season 3 Trailer * New Season 2 Finale * Season 3 Episode Recaps
* Photo Gallery
NOTES
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A Place to Call Home — Music from Seasons 1–5 was released on 20 October 2017
RECEPTION AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Australian Cinematographers
Society Awards { class="wikitable " width=80 % Section::::Reception .
Section::::Awards and nominations . !
width="3%"Year !
width="37 % "
Category !
width="27 % " Nominee(s ) !
width="20 % "
Work !
width="10 % " Result !
width="3%"Ref Equity Ensemble Awards
{ class="wikitable " width=80 % !
width="3%"Year !
width="37 % "
Category !
width="27 % " Nominee(s ) !
width="20 % "
Work !
width="10 % " Result !
width="3%"Ref Logie Awards
{ class="wikitable " width=80 % !
width="3%"Year !
width="37 % "
Category !
width="27 % "
Nominee ! width="20 % "
Work !
width="10 % " Result !
width="3%"Ref REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS