THE FARM ( THE OFFICE ) " The Farm " is the seventeenth episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the 193rd overall .
It originally aired on NBC on March 14 , 2013 .
The episode guest stars Matt Jones as Dwight 's cousin Zeke , Majandra Delfino as Dwight 's sister Fannie , Blake Garrett Rosenthal as his nephew , and Thomas Middleditch as his brother .
The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company .
The episode revolves around Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) who attend the funeral of Dwight 's Aunt Shirley at Schrute Farms .
Dwight receives his aunt 's property , and he and his siblings decide to run it .
Meanwhile , Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) returns to the office to get back at them for his firing a year prior .
" The Farm " was produced to serve as a backdoor pilot for a proposed spin - off series starring Wilson as Dwight , which NBC ultimately did not pick up .
The episode received mostly negative reviews from television critics , with many criticizing Dwight 's farm storyline and some critics calling it a " Frankenstein episode " .
The episode was viewed by 3.54 million viewers and received a 1.9/5 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 .
The episode ranked fourth in its timeslot , and it was the highest - rated NBC series of the night .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) receives news that his Aunt Shirley has died , and he informs the office .
The only co - worker he invites to the funeral is Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) , who flees when Dwight begins shooting the corpse with a shotgun to ensure it is really dead .
At the funeral , Dwight 's family gathers : his cousins Mose ( Michael Schur ) and Zeke ( Matt Jones ) , his brother Jeb ( Thomas Middleditch ) , his sister Fannie ( Majandra Delfino ) , his nephew Cammy ( Blake Garrett Rosenthal ) , and his uncle Heinrich ( Tom Bower ) .
The family learns that Aunt Shirley has willed the siblings her estate on the condition that they all come back home to run it .
Despite Dwight 's enthusiasm in inheriting it , Fannie and Jeb are unwilling to move back in due to the lack of sophistication farm life offers .
Nevertheless , Dwight convinces them to help him run the farm .
Meanwhile , Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) visits the office and announces that he wants to make amends for his past behavior .
He makes rude remarks masked as apologies and hands out store - bought cupcakes .
Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) argues that they should not eat the cupcakes , to spite Packer .
She remains adamant on this point even after Packer leaves , but once Pam goes home the remaining employees eat the cupcakes .
Packer reveals to the documentary crew that he spiked the cupcakes with drugs , supposedly as revenge for getting him fired ( though none of the employees present save
Nellie had anything to do with his being fired ) .
He then visits Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) at Athlead in Philadelphia , pulling the same trick on them .
In the morning , Pam returns to the office and announces she is going to eat her cupcake , only to find everyone else reeling from the aftereffects of Packer 's deed .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The episode was written and directed by executive producer and former showrunner Paul Lieberstein , marking his thirteenth writing credit , sixth directorial credit and fourth dual credit . "
The Farm " was the fifth episode produced , but was the seventeenth aired , as noted by its production number .
It was originally supposed to act as a backdoor pilot for a spin - off series starring Wilson and focusing on Dwight .
As such , Wilson was initially slated to appear in only 13 episodes of The Offices ninth season before leaving for the spin - off .
Paul Lieberstein , the showrunner for The Office for seasons five through eight , stepped down at the start of season nine in order to focus more energy on the potential spin - off .
However , upon review , the spin - off was not picked up by NBC .
Executive producer Greg Daniels revealed that the episode would have additional material shot so that it fits better into the season , as the original version contained " certain aspects that were appropriate for a pilot of a new show " .
The episode guest stars Majandra Delfino , Blake Garrett Rosenthal , Thomas Middleditch , Matt Jones , and Tom Bower as members of Dwight 's family ; Delfino plays Dwight 's sister Fannie , Rosenthal plays Dwight 's nephew Cammy , Middleditch portrays Dwight 's brother Jeb , Jones portrays Dwight 's cousin Zeke , and Bower appears as Dwight 's great uncle Heinrich , in a deleted scene .
Jones had previously appeared in the ninth season entry , " Junior Salesman " .
BROADCAST AND RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Broadcast and reception .
Section::::Ratings .
" The Farm " originally aired on NBC on March 14 , 2013 , after a four - week hiatus .
In its original American broadcast , the episode was viewed by an estimated 3.54 million viewers and received a 1.9 rating/5 percent share .
This means that it was seen by 1.9 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds , and 5 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds watching television at the time of the broadcast .
This marked a decrease in the ratings from the previous episode , " Moving On " .
The Office ranked fourth in its timeslot , being beaten by an episode of the CBS police procedural Person of Interest which received a 2.9/8 percent rating , an entry of the ABC series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 2.6/7 percent rating , and an installment of the Fox series Glee which received a 2.0/6 percent rating .
Despite this , the episode was the highest - rated NBC series for the night .
1.90 million viewers watched the episode via DVR playback , bringing the total viewership to 5.36 million viewers and a 3.0 18–49 rating .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
" The Farm " received mostly negative reviews from critics , many criticizing Dwight 's farm storyline and some critics calling it a " Frankenstein episode " .
M. Giant of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a C. Alan Sepinwall of HitFix considered NBC 's decision not to pick the spin - off for more episodes the right decision , writing that the characters and scenes were " barely sketches " and featured too much " cartoonishness " .
Sepinwall also criticized the Todd Packer scenes , and only saw Dwight 's interactions with his nephew , Cammy , in a positive light .
TV.com columnist Nick Campbell called the farm storyline " unnatural " compared to the episode and the series , as a whole , and wrote that the tone to the ending " did n't match " .
Despite this , he complimented the storyline for " establishing tone , characters , and direction in literally half the time usually allotted " .
The A.V. Club reviewer
Erik Adams complimented the episode for serving as a " breather " from the season 's long arcs , and gave good background information into Dwight 's personality .
He went on to criticize the pilot 's broad humor , writing that following the scene featuring Dwight shooting a shotgun into his aunt 's casket , " it would be next to impossible for The Farm to heighten from that point " .
Adams graded the episode a B. Damon Houx of Screen Crush called the two storylines " two pieces of that did n't work all that well together " , which all added to a " dull " episode .
Houx complimented Koechner 's performance , calling him a " great improviser " but wrote that the whole plot was lacking .
He also considered the farm plotline to be pointless and aimless , especially due to it airing in the last few episodes of the series .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS *
" The Farm " at NBC.com