HASTERT RULE
The Hastert Rule , also known as the " majority of the majority " rule , is an informal governing principle used in the United States by Republican Speakers of the House of Representatives since the mid-1990s to maintain their speakerships and limit the power of the minority party to bring bills up for a vote on the floor of the House .
Under the doctrine , the Speaker will not allow a floor vote on a bill unless a majority of the majority party supports the bill .
The Hastert Rule is an informal rule and the Speaker is not bound by it ; he or she may break it at his or her discretion .
Speakers have at times broken the Hastert Rule and allowed votes to be scheduled on legislation that lacked majority support within the Speaker 's own party .
Hastert described the rule as being " kind of a misnomer " in that it " never really existed " as a rule .
Under House rules , the Speaker schedules floor votes on pending legislation .
The Hastert Rule says that the Speaker will not schedule a floor vote on any bill that does not have majority support within his or her party — even if the majority of the members of the House would vote to pass it .
The rule keeps the minority party from passing bills with the assistance of a minority of majority party members .
In the House , 218 votes are needed to pass a bill ; if 200 Democrats are the minority and 235 Republicans are the majority , the Hastert Rule would not allow 200 Democrats and 100 Republicans together to pass a bill , because 100 Republican votes is short of a majority of the majority party , so the Speaker would not allow a vote to take place .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
The Hastert Rule 's introduction is credited to former House Speaker Dennis Hastert ; however , Newt Gingrich , who directly preceded Hastert as Speaker ( 1995–1999 ) , followed the same rule .
The notion of the rule arose out of a debate in 2006 over whether Hastert should bring an immigration reform bill to the House floor after it had been passed by the Senate .
" It was pretty obvious at that point that it did n't have the votes to move it out , especially in the Judiciary Committee , " he said later .
" It was pretty well stacked with people who were n't willing to move . "
SPEAKERS ' VIEWS AND USE OF THE POLICY * Tip O'Neill ( Speaker from 1977–1987 )
:
According to John Feehery , a Hastert aide and speechwriter who coined the term " majority of the majority , " O'Neill let the Republicans " run the floor " because he did n't have the votes and because he believed that if he gave President Ronald Reagan " enough rope , he would end up strangling himself . "
* Tom Foley : ( 1989–1995 ) : In 2004 , Foley said , " I think you do n't want to bring bills to the floor that a majority of your party is opposed to routinely but sometimes when a great issue is at stake , I think you need to do that . "
* Newt Gingrich ( 1995–1999 ) :
Although the majority - of - the - majority rule had not been articulated at the time , Gingrich followed it in practice .
* Dennis Hastert ( 1999–2007 ) : In 2003 Hastert said , " On occasion , a particular issue might excite a majority made up mostly of the minority .
Campaign finance is a particularly good example of this phenomenon .
[ But ] the job of speaker is not to expedite legislation that runs counter to the wishes of the majority of his majority . "
During his speakership , he broke the Hastert Rule a dozen times .
In mid-2013 he said , " If you start to rely on the minority to get the majority of your votes , then all of a sudden you 're not running the shop anymore . "
Later that year , Hastert said , " The Hastert Rule never really existed .
It 's a non - entity as far as I 'm concerned .
" Reflecting on his time as speaker , he said , " This was n't a rule .
I was speaking philosophically at the time ...
The Hastert Rule is kind of a misnomer . "
* Nancy Pelosi ( 2007–2011 ) : In 2003 Pelosi , then the Minority Leader under Speaker Hastert , decried the Hastert Rule as a partisan attempt to marginalize elected members of the Democratic Party in Congress .
In May 2007 Pelosi said , " I 'm the Speaker of the House ...
I have to take into consideration something broader than the majority of the majority in the Democratic Caucus .
" She also said at that time , " I would encourage my colleagues not to be proposing resolutions that say ' the majority of the majority does this or that . '
We have to talk it out , see what is possible to get a job done .
And as I say , we do that together .
" Pelosi 's former chief of staff , George Crawford , expanded upon this saying , " On the larger issue of the ' majority of the majority , ' she has talked about that for a quite a while .
She does want the minority party to engage in the legislative process ...
That 's the kind of Speakership she wants .
" She violated the majority - of - the - majority rule seven times during her four - year speakership .
* John Boehner ( 2011–2015 ) :
*
In December 2012 Boehner told his caucus in a conference call , " I 'm not interested in passing something with mostly Democrat votes " and that did not have the support of the majority of the Republican caucus .
Nonetheless , Boehner allowed a vote on January 1 , 2013 on the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 ( also known as the " fiscal cliff bill " ) with only 85 out of 241 Republicans in favor ( a support level of only 35 % ) and the bill passed with the support of 90 % of Democrats ( 172 out of 191 ) .
The bill 's passage marked the first time in more than ten years that a measure passed a Republican - controlled House when opposed by a majority of House Republicans .
In response , former House Speaker Hastert criticized Boehner for not adhering to the " majority of the majority " governing principle by saying , " Maybe you can do it once , maybe you can do it twice , but when you start making deals when you have to get Democrats to pass the legislation , you are not in power anymore . "
* Two weeks later , on January 15 , 2013 , Boehner allowed a vote on aid to victims of Hurricane Sandy to take place without the support of a majority of the Republican caucus .
The vote passed with 241 votes , but only 49 of the votes were from Republicans or a mere 21 % of the majority .
Since then some notable Republicans have publicly questioned whether the " majority of the majority " rule is still viable or have proposed jettisoning it altogether .
*
In spite of all the criticism , on February 28 , 2013 Boehner brought a third bill for a vote on the floor of the house which did not have support of majority of Republicans .
The bill , an extension of the Violence Against Women Act , received the vote of only 38 % of the Republicans in the House of Representatives .
*
On April 9 , 2013 , the " rule " was violated a fourth time , on a bill about federal acquisition of historic sites .
The bill was passed with more than two thirds of the House vote but without a majority of the GOP caucus .
Shortly thereafter , Boehner said , " Listen : It was never a rule to begin with .
And certainly my prerogative – my intention is to always pass bills with strong Republican support . "
*
On October 16 , 2013 , Boehner again violated the rule by allowing a floor vote to reopen the government and raise the debt ceiling .
The House voted 285 to 144 less than three hours after the Senate overwhelmingly passed the Continuing Appropriations Act , 2014 .
The " yea " votes consisted of 198 Democrats and only 87 Republicans , less than 40 % of the conference .
*
On February 11 , 2014 , Boehner broke the rule by allowing a floor vote on a " clean " debt ceiling bill .
The bill passed the house 221 - 201 , with only 28 Republicans voting " yea " along with 193 Democrats .
* Paul Ryan ( 2015 – ) :
Paul Ryan promised his caucus that he would apply the Hastert rule to immigration bills proposed during his tenure as Speaker , although conflicting reports have also interpreted his statements as a more blanket application of the rule .
As of July 2017 , Ryan has not violated the majority - of - the - majority rule .
COMMENTARY Section::::Commentary .
Commentators ' views about the Hastert Rule are generally negative .
The New York Times reported in 2016 that the rule " has come to be seen as a structural barrier to compromise . "
George Crawford , writing in The Hill observes that the rule restricts legislative proposals to those approved by the majority of the Speaker 's caucus .
When combined with a systematic effort to marginalize the influence of the minority power , it can lead to a breakdown of the legislative process , radicalization of the members of the minority party , and legislation that does not reflect the broadest view and area of agreement .
It also all but ensures that the Speaker will keep his or her job .
Norman Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute , an expert on Congress , opposes the rule , arguing that it is a major reason why bills passed on a bipartisan basis in the Senate are often not later introduced in the House .
Ornstein notes that the speaker is the leader of his or her party but is also " a constitutional officer " who is " ratified by the whole House " and as such has a duty to put the House ahead of his or her party at crucial times .
Ezra Klein , while at The Washington Post , wrote that the Hastert Rule is " more of an aspiration " than a rule and that codifying it as a formal rule would be detrimental to House Republicans , as it would prevent them from voting against bills that the Republican caucus wanted passed but that a majority of Republicans wanted to oppose for ideological or political reasons .
Matthew Yglesias , writing in Slate , has contended that the rule , while flawed , is better than the alternatives and that the dynamic prior to its adoption was " a weird kind of super - empowerment of the Rules committee that allowed it to arbitrarily bottle up proposals . "
Senator Angus King of Maine , an independent , as well as commentators such as Rex Huppke of The Chicago Tribune and Eric Black of MinnPost have blamed the Hastert Rule for the government shutdown of October 2013 .
Huppke added facetiously , " Here 's the fun part : the Hastert Rule is n't an official rule , or an official anything .
It 's just a made - up concept , like bipartisanship or polite discourse . "
CNBC 's Ben White has called the Hastert Rule " perhaps the most over - hyped phenomena in politics , " since Republican speakers " have regularly violated the rule when it was in their interest to do so . "
DISCHARGE PETITION
Section::::Discharge petition .
A discharge petition signed by 218 members ( or more ) from any party is the only way to force consideration of a bill that does not have the support of the Speaker .
However , discharge petitions are rarely successful , as a member of the majority party defying his or her party 's leadership by signing a discharge petition can expect retribution from the leadership .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS