EXPUNGEMENT IN TEXAS Expungement in Texas is a legal process through which individuals to seek erasure of an event from their criminal records .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Texas expungement law allows expungement of arrests which did not lead to a finding of guilt , and class C misdemeanors if the defendant received deferred adjudication , and completed a community supervision .
If the defendant was found guilty , pleaded guilty , or pleaded no contest to any offense other than a class " C " misdemeanor , it is not eligible for expungement ; however , it may be eligible for non - disclosure if deferred adjudication was granted .
The Texas Young Lawyers Association and State Bar of Texas provide an informational packet about expungement as a service to the public .
JUVENILE OFFENSES Section::::Juvenile offenses .
Juvenile offenses potentially eligible for expungement include " misdemeanor[s ] punishable by fine committed prior to the age of 17 , [ offenses ] committed by [ minors ] under the Alcoholic Beverage Code and [ convictions ] for Failure to Attend School " under the Education Code .
Disqualifying factors can include multiple convictions and insufficient age .
RELEASE , DISSEMINATION , AND ADMISSIBILITY Section::::Release , dissemination , and admissibility .
The release , dissemination or use of expunged records by any agency is prohibited .
Unless being questioned under oath , the defendant may deny the occurrence of the arrest and expungement order .
If questioned under oath , the witness may only respond the matter was expunged .
LEGISLATION Section::::Legislation .
The 76th Texas Legislature rejected a bill that would have expanded access to expungement .
The 78th Texas Legislature failed to gain consensus for HB-384 , which would have granted automatic expungement in the cases of acquittal , pardoning , or upon dropping of charges .
The 82nd Texas Legislature 's passing of HB-351 and SB-462 reformed the expungement code to include relief for those convicted but later determined to be innocent .
ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES
Section::::Alternative remedies .
Those ineligible for expungement may still seek an Order of Nondisclosure under some circumstances .
TEXAS RECORD SEALING
( ALSO KNOWN
AS ORDERS OF NONDISCLOSURE ) Section::::Texas Record Sealing ( also known as Orders of Nondisclosure ) .
An Order of NonDisclosure acts is an option for those that are not eligible for an expungement / expunction in Texas .
An Order of Non - Disclosure does not completely eradicate your record like that of a criminal expungement , but seals it from public domain .
Your record may be visible to certain government agencies but to the rest of the public , it will not be able to be viewed / found .
Typically , record sealing in Texas is available to those who have successfully completed all terms of deferred adjudication probation .
For a misdemeanor in Texas , you can seal your record immediately after completing your deferred adjudication .
For a felony , you must wait 5 years to seal your record .
The following charges are never eligible for a non - disclosure : * Aggravated and Regular Sexual Assault
* Indecency with a Child * Prohibited Sexual Conduct * Aggravated Kidnapping * Burglary of Habitation with intent to commit the above - listed offenses * Compelling Prostitution * Sexual Performance of a Child * Child Pornography charges * Unlawful Restraint , Kidnapping , or Aggravated Kidnapping of a person younger than 17 years old * Attempt , conspiracy , or solicitation to commit any of the above - listed offenses * Capital Murder or Murder * Injury to a Child , Elderly or Disabled person
* Abandoning or Endangering a Child * Violation of a Protective Order
* Stalking * Family Violence
SEE ALSO
* Criminal records in the United States
* Expungement in the United States * Law of Texas REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Juveniles .
Texas Municipal Courts Education Center .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Expunctions in Texas
* How Do I Expunge My Record ?
from the office of Texas State Senator Royce West
* Index of related topics at the Papillon Foundation