GOD OF WAR VIDEO GAME COLLECTIONS God of War is an action - adventure video game series , the first era of which was loosely based on Greek mythology .
Debuting in 2005 , the series has become a flagship title for the PlayStation brand and the character Kratos is one of its most popular characters .
The series consists of eight games across multiple platforms ; the first seven make up the Greek era of the series .
Five of the Greek era games have been re - released through three separate compilations for the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) platform : God of War Collection ( 2009 ) , God of War : Origins Collection ( 2011 ) , and God of War Saga ( 2012 ) .
With the exception of God of War III in the God of War Saga , each collection features remastered ports of the games that were not originally released on the PS3 .
God of War III was later remastered as God of War III Remastered and released on PlayStation 4 ( PS4 ) in July 2015 .
, , and God of War ( 2018 ) are the only installments that have not been remastered for a newer platform or included in a collection .
Each collection was praised for how the games were remastered , as well as their price .
IGN claimed that the God of War Collection was the " definitive way to play the game[s ] " .
God of War Collection prompted Sony to make a new line of remastered games for the PlayStation 3 ( which expanded to the PlayStation Vita and the PlayStation 4 ) .
Although the Origins Collection was criticized for its lack of new bonus content , IGN said that " Sony succeeded at making good games better . "
For the Saga , Digital Trends claimed it is " perhaps the best value buy for any console available . "
GOD OF WAR COLLECTION Section::::God of War Collection .
God of War Collection is a remastered port of God of War and God of War II for the PlayStation 3 on a single Blu - ray Disc that was released in North America on November 17 , 2009 .
It is the first game under Sony 's line of " Classics HD .
" The collection was included in the God of War III Ultimate Trilogy Edition , released on March 18 , 2010 , in Australia and New Zealand , and on March 19 in Europe .
It was released in Japan as a stand - alone on March 18 , where it was distributed by Capcom , and was later released as part of the God of War III Trilogy Edition , which included God of War III and God of War Collection , on March 25 .
It was released as a stand - alone in Australia on April 29 and in Europe on April 30 .
At the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) , a PlayStation Vita version of God of War Collection was announced , and it was released on May 6 , 2014 , in North America , May 9 in Europe , May 14 in Australia , and May 15 in Japan .
God of War and God of War II were ported by Bluepoint Games and feature high - definition 720p anti - aliased graphics at 60 frames per second and Trophies .
The bonus materials of the original two - disc PlayStation 2 version of God of War II are included with the Blu - ray version of the collection .
The port was produced as a result of feedback from fans of the series and was viewed as a means of introducing new players to the series before God of War III was released .
The God of War III game demo from E3 2009 was included with early copies of the collection .
Sanzaru Games was responsible for porting the collection to the Vita .
Sony 's Santa Monica Studio — the games ' original developer — ran a sweepstakes in November 2009 for the release of God of War Collection .
The grand prize was an autographed " Gold " disc , exclusive artwork created and signed by a God of War team member , a Limited Edition Kratos T - shirt , and a limited edition figurine of Kratos .
First place prize was a copy of God of War Collection signed by the development team .
Winners were announced in December 2009 .
On November 2 , 2010 , God of War Collection was released as a digital download on the PlayStation Store .
PlayStation Plus subscribers can download a one - hour trial of each game .
For a limited time , Plus subscribers received a God of War III skin with the purchase of each game : " Phantom of Chaos " ( God of War ) and " Forgotten Warrior " ( God of War II ) respectively .
The bonus materials for God of War II were not included with the digital download version .
Patch update version 1.01 , released on September 5 , 2012 , allows the PlayStation 3 version of God of War Collection to be played on the PlayStation Vita via the Remote Play function .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
God of War Collection received critical acclaim from critics .
Aggregating review websites
GameRankings and Metacritic gave the PlayStation 3 version 90.78 % based on 43 reviews and 91/100 based on 50 reviews and the PlayStation Vita version 75.00 % based on 15 reviews and 73/100 based on 28 reviews .
The PlayStation 3 version received critical acclaim .
IGN gave the game an " Editor 's Choice " Award , praised the enhanced resolutions , lower price point , and smoother frame rates , and stated it was the " definitive way to play the game " .
1up.com noted the tremendous increase in visuals but said the in - engine cut - scenes appeared blurry .
GamePro stated the collection is " two fantastic games on one disc for a low price ; puts you in the right mindset for God of War 3 . "
PlayStation LifeStyle ( 5/5 ) said " Those ... familiar with Kratos will enjoy the extra polish the Collection brings to two of the best games from the PS2 era .
" Due to the success of God of War Collection , Sony announced that further titles would receive similar treatment for release under its new " Classics HD " brand .
By June 2012 , God of War Collection had sold more than 2.4 million copies worldwide , making it the eighteenth best - selling PlayStation 3 game of all time .
GOD OF WAR :
ORIGINS COLLECTION Section::::God of War :
Origins Collection .
God of War :
Origins Collection ( God of War Collection – Volume II in Europe and Australia ) is a remastered port of the two PlayStation Portable installments in the series — and — for the PlayStation 3 on a single Blu - ray Disc .
It was announced at the Sony press conference at E3 2011 and was ported by Ready at Dawn , the developer of the PlayStation Portable games .
The collection was released on September 13 , 2011 , in North America , September 16 in Europe , September 29 in Australia , and October 6 in Japan .
God of War :
Origins Collection was also released in North America as a digital download on the PlayStation Store on September 13 .
God of War :
Origins Collection features native 1080p high - definition video , anti - aliased graphics at 60 frames per second , DualShock 3 rumble features , Trophies , and is the only God of War release to feature Stereoscopic 3D.
The God of War – Game Directors
Live documentary , Kratos Legionnaire bonus skin , and Forest of the Forgotten combat arena ( originally pre - order bonuses for Ghost of Sparta ) are also included with the Origins Collection .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
God of War :
Origins Collection received positive reviews from critics .
It received a score of 86.62 % based on 41 reviews on GameRankings and 84/100 based on 58 reviews on Metacritic .
IGN stated , " Sony succeeded at making good games better " and that it " acts as a time lapse experiment for players to get a really good look at how a developer evolves from one game to another . "
GamePro noted the lack of new bonus content , and said , " 3D does n't necessarily radically redefine the experience .
It does , however , make things like boss fights and magical effects much more mesmerizing " , but added that , " all of the in - game cinematics are not in 3D , which is ... unfortunate considering how cutscenes are such an integral part of the storytelling in any God of War game " .
By June 2012 , God of War : Origins Collection had sold 711,737 copies worldwide .
GOD OF WAR SAGA Section::::God of War Saga .
God of War Saga is a collection of five of the God of War games for the PlayStation 3 released as part of Sony 's PlayStation Collections line on August 28 , 2012 , in North America .
The collection includes God of War , God of War II , God of War III , Chains of Olympus , and Ghost of Sparta .
It features two Blu - ray Discs — God of War I and II on the first and III on the second — and a voucher to download Chains of Olympus and Ghost of Sparta .
The games retain the same features as their first PS3 releases .
The collection also includes exclusive bonus content and a voucher for a one - month trial of PlayStation Plus .
The games , with the exception of God of War III , are also available to download from the PlayStation Store .
From September 27 until October 5 , 2012 , to celebrate the release of God of War Saga , PlayStation .
Blog ran a weekly countdown of the top five God of War epic moments as voted by the God of War Facebook community .
" The Death of Ares " from the original God of War was voted as the " # 1 most epic God of War moment of All Time . "
In Latin America , an exclusive version of God of War Saga , titled God of War : Omega Collection , was released in November 2012 .
The Omega Collection features three Blu - ray discs , as opposed to two , with Chains of Olympus and Ghost of Sparta included on the third disc .
It also includes a SteelBook game case with exclusive artwork and a limited edition bronze statue of Kratos , created by an Argentine artist .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Ryan Fleming of Digital Trends wrote that the collection " is perhaps the best value buy for any console available " , and that for fans of the series , " this collection is not for you " as all games ( with the exception of God of War III ) are available for download , and it will " likely be redundant . "
However , new or inexperienced players should buy it .
Fleming added that it was odd that the PSP games were included as downloads , and would like to have seen content migrate over to the PlayStation Vita .
Jeffrey L. Wilson of PC Magazine gave the collection a 4 out of 5 and called it " an excellent purchase for anyone looking for cinematic , blood - drenched action – especially newcomers who get five titles for the price of one " , but added that long time fans may not find much value in the collection .
REFERENCES