LIST OF SCHOOL SHOOTINGS IN THE UNITED STATES
This article lists in chronology and provides additional details of incidents in which a firearm was discharged at a school infrastructure or campus in the United States , including incidents of shootings on a school bus .
This list contains school shooting incidents that occurred on the campuses of K-12 public schools and private schools as well as colleges and universities .
It excludes incidents that occurred during wars or police actions , as well as murder - suicides by rejected suitors or estranged spouses , and suicides or suicide attempts involving only one person .
Mass shootings by school staff , where victims are only other employees , are covered at workplace killings .
This list does not include bombings such as the Bath School disaster .
19TH CENTURY 1840S University of Virginia , was fatally shot by student Joseph Semmes , and died 3 days later .
1850S
Sabbath School gathering .
The perpetrator escaped , but several arrests were made .
1860S
1870S
Philo McGiffin . 0 1
Chris Foote shot the school mistress for whipping his son .
1 0
After being ejected from school for disobedience , 20-year - old Thomas Squires , fatally shot Prof. Hayes three times in the abdomen .
1 0
John R. Breckinridge , son of the late Robert Jefferson Breckinridge , attending classes in law at Cumberland University in Lebanon , Tennessee , was killed by John L. Anderson , the Mayor 's son .
The latter was reportedly " crazed with liquor . " 0 1
A 12-year - old boy , Luckert , accidentally shot and wounded Allie McDonald , another boy at the Neill school .
The youth was expected to recover .
His mother Mrs. McDonald went to the police station , but did not file a formal complaint .
0 1
Telegraph operator Frank Shugart , shot and severely injured Mr. Carr , superintendent of the stables at a girls ' school .
1880S Sam Houston Normal School , shot and wounded another student , M.J. Jordan .
They were arguing over a comic valentine .
0 3
As some children were playing and throwing snowballs outside the Ponca Creek schoolhouse , Lem Harbaugh and the Shipley brothers , three young men , pulled up in a wagon and engaged the children in a snowball fight .
One of the Shipley brothers had a .45 caliber needle gun .
As the children kept throwing snowballs , Harbaugh aimed the gun at them .
The lock was faulty and the gun went off ; he wounded Mamie Shipley , Joy Price , and Marquis Price .
Harbaugh later surrendered himself to the authorities .
0 0
A bunch of drunken cowboys stopped at several schoolhouses , forcing two teachers to drink whiskey , and firing numerous shots at three schoolhouses . 0 2
As Allen Wamack , a 15-year - old boy , drove by a Negro schoolhouse , he called out " school butter " ( an insult meaning a cobbing , or a whipping ) .
The students came out and fired several shots at him ; he shot back , hitting two students . 0 0 As news of outlaw Jesse James reached the East Coast , young boys started to imitate him .
For instance , boys shot at police investigating their activities at the Concord Street schoolhouse . 0 0 In the middle of the day , a group of very drunk Jackson County farmers were shooting their revolvers as they headed down the street , driving people into their homes .
As they approached the female academy , the girls fled from the yard into the school .
The farmers followed , firing several rounds into the school door , but no one was hurt .
1 0
Will Guess shot and killed teacher Miss Irene Fann , for whipping his little sister the day before . 0 0 Charles Crawford , upset over an argument with a school trustee , went up to the window and fired a pistol into a crowded schoolroom .
The bullet lodged in the wall just above the teacher 's head .
1890S
Kable 's Military Academy , 15-year - old A.H. Hathaway of Denison , Texas , was accidentally shot and killed by his 17-year - old classmate James Whitworth of Sulphur Springs , Texas , while they were playing with an old pistol .
0
14
During a school exhibition and concert at the Parson Hill schoolhouse , an unknown gunman fired a double - barreled shotgun into the mixed audience , made up of black and white students , parents and teachers .
Fourteen people were wounded , some seriously . 0 data - sort - value="0 " ? 70-year - old James Foster fired a shotgun at a group of students in the playground of St. Mary 's Parochial School , causing minor injuries to several of the students .
4 1
During an evening school dance at Plain Dealing High School , a fight broke out .
Two students were shot and killed immediately , two more were fatally wounded , and the high school 's Professor Johnson was wounded in the arm .
6 data - sort - value="1"1
+
During the school exhibition , a group of young men tried to break up a student performance .
When teacher Mr. Fisher tried to throw them out , they turned on him .
Audience members joined the fray .
Harry Flasher was shot and instantly killed , Henry Carney was fatally shot in the back
, Ralph Jones and two others were also fatally shot , and George Gibson was shot in the hand ; Haz Harding had his skull crushed , and several others received minor wounds .
20TH CENTURY 1900S depression ) .
0 1
During a school performance of The Grand Central , John Moake , portraying the villain , was shot in the forehead and dangerously wounded by the hero , Roy Slater .
The cartridge was thought to have been blank .
1 0 Walter Harris , 11-year - old student , accidentally shot his teacher , B.C. Briggs , in the head while on a school field trip , killing him .
0 0
After hunting doves , a group of six young men deliberately shot out the glass at the Fruitvale School .
They also shot at the nearby residence of A.J. Hunter , narrowly missing several children in the rear yard .
1 0 John Butram , a student at the Bear Hollow School , told his fellow students that school was cancelled .
The teacher A.T. Kelly said it was not .
When Butram drew a knife on his teacher , Kelly shot and killed him .
1910S
Preston School of Industry , students Albert Brown and Eugene Griffin tried to escape , stealing a revolver from the school 's bakery shop .
They shot at Captain William H. White when he pursued them .
No one was hurt , but the boys were transferred to the adult penitentiary .
1 data - sort - value="0 " ?
A general fight broke out during school board elections .
Lewis Napier was shot and killed , and several other persons were hurt .
Several men were arrested .
1 0 During a school play rehearsal , a boy loaded his revolver , unknown to others .
Pearl Reedy , an 18-year - old girl who was to use the gun in the play , said she was afraid to handle it .
The teacher said she did n't need to fear it and pointed it at Reedy , squeezing the trigger .
Reedy was fatally wounded .
1 0
During a stone throwing confrontation near the Oriental School on Clay Street , a group of white boys became trapped between two groups of Chinese boys .
Jose Aguilar fired a BB shot air rifle twice to frighten the Chinese .
10-year - old Wong She had a gun and fired back .
One bullet passed through Aguilar 's coat sleeve and fatally struck 14-year - old James Kane in the school 's rear yard .
1 0 14-year - old May McQuade was killed by classmate Raymond B. Carroll .
Carroll said the shooting was accidental as he did not think the gun was loaded .
1 0 While walking to school , 14-year - old Charles Listman killed 15-year - old Andrew Milton over rivalry for classmate 13-year - old Minnie London .
0 1
During a parent - teachers ' meeting , 15-year - old student Murlan Decker was accidentally shot by his younger brother , Luther .
1 1 20-year - old Will Yates , teacher of Clear Pond school in Hamilton County , Florida , was shot and killed in a fight with Claude Holtzendorff and his two sons .
The Holtzendorffs objected to one of the boys being whipped at school .
When they showed up , Yates had armed himself .
He shot the father through the mouth , and was fatally shot through the body , dying an hour later . 0 1 Olga Dahl , the 19-year - old teacher at the Round Lake District School , was found tied to a tree near the school , assaulted , and shot twice in the face .
She had been working late after school , when a man with a revolver entered the school house and ordered her to obey him .
He raped and shot her ; she was expected to live .
A group of men in Itasca County joined in hunting the assailant . 1 data - sort - value="0 " ?
During the Christmas tree celebration at the Harris Creek School , a fight broke out in the room packed with children and visitors .
William Benedict , Sr . was instantly killed , William Benedict , Jr. was shot in the ankle , Bourdon Galloway was shot in the right arm , and Mike Gaddis was shot in the leg .
Many others were injured .
Thomas Thornton had been drinking and objected to Benedict telling him to calm down .
Thornton 's brother George left the room and returned with a revolver . 0 1 16-year - old freshman Earl Wolf was accidentally shot in the leg with a revolver about noon , in the company of classmates at Central High School .
1 0 Brothers 16-year - old William and 15-year - old Ralph Carter broke into the May public school , robbing the phone boxes and teachers ' desks .
When they were discovered by janitor Howard Parks and policeman Thomas Conway , the latter shot at them .
William was critically wounded and not expected to live ; Ralph Carter was taken to jail .
0 1
At the Perkins school 's Thanksgiving night pie supper , 21-year - old teacher Joe Todd , was mysteriously shot .
He was expected to recover .
1 0
At the Lincoln Institute , State Negro Normal School , 31-year - old Professor Romeo West , was killed in the dormitory by superintendent of school Theodore Martin .
They were arguing about dishes to use at a social .
Martin said he shot in self - defense , fatally hitting West with three of five shots .
1 0
During the afternoon recess , a boy was looking over a 22-caliber rifle ; it discharged , striking the head of the Coyne boy in the seat to the front , killing him instantly . 0 0
While school was in session , Hugh Claggett shot through the school house 's front door , while on his way home from work .
No one was hurt , and he was fined $ 20 . 0 1 During a high school assembly , six boys shot off their guns .
Permission had been given in the belief the guns were loaded with blanks , but they had live shot .
Teacher Verna Davidson was shot in the foot .
0 2 Roger Sprague , an assistant in the department of chemistry at the University of California , despondent over his inability to obtain a position , shot and wounded 59-year - old Professor Edmond O'Neill , head of department , and 37-year - old Dr. Joel Henry Hildebrand , professor of chemistry , in the offices of Gilman Hall .
He went to California Hall and shot at 57-year - old May L. Cheney , appointment secretary , but hit only one of her hair combs before he was subdued .
1920S
Naylor , Georgia ) .
1 0
Bryant Hignight and four other students were at the outhouse of the Mount Zion school .
Hignight fired two shots .
One instantly killed Raymond Guinn .
When questioned , the other three boys said it was an accident .
0
1 12-year - old Frederick Heilman was shot through the right instep when Gettysburg College janitor , Joseph Carver , fired toward a group of boys trying to force their way into the college gymnasium .
Carver had shot into the ground , and did not realize a bullet had ricocheted .
Heilman 's father did not press charges .
1930S
Lehigh University English instructor , C. Wesley Phy for giving him a failing grade .
Clow committed suicide after shooting Phy . 1 0 16-year - old Robert Douthitt , was accidentally killed backstage during high school play practice .
The revolver was to have been loaded with blanks , but it held live ammunition .
0 2 ( including the perpetrator )
12-year - old Robert Snyder wounded his principal , June Mapes , in her office at Arlington Public School when she declined his request to call a classmate .
He fled the grounds , and wounded himself .
1 0
17-year - old Edward Marley was accidentally killed by a fellow actor with a loaded gun while rehearsing for a play at Blencoe High School .
1940S
Ohio State University freshman James Heer grabbed a .45 caliber handgun from the room of a Delta Tau Delta fraternity brother , and killed 21-year - old Jack McKeown , a senior and fraternity brother .
Heer was sentenced to life in prison for the crime .
1950S
Western Military Academy , was killed in the cadet store on campus .
2 0 Professor W.E. Sweatt , superintendent and teacher at the Alexander School , was killed by 16-year - old Billy Ray Powell and 19-year - old Hugh Justice , students whom he had reprimanded .
The boys fled and also shot Wade Johnson , 15 , for reporting their rule infraction to Sweatt .
1 0 15-year - old student , David Brooks , was fatally shot in front of other pupils .
Two former students were sought by police .
1 0 A 15-year - old boarding school student shot a dean rather than give up his pin - up pictures of girls in bathing suits .
1 0 Bayard Peakes shot and killed secretary Eileen Fahey at the American Physical Society ( APS ) at Columbia University , where he was reportedly upset that the APS had rejected a paper of his .
Peakes was deemed insane by a judge ; he was held at an asylum for the criminally insane until his death in 2000 .
1 0
14-year - old Bernice Turner killed 14-year - old Pasquale Coletta inside the science classroom at Kelly High School .
The shooting was later ruled to be accidental .
1 0
14-year - old John Frankenberger was accidentally killed in a classroom at Day Junior High School when a pistol held by a classmate discharged .
1
2 Putnam Davis Jr. was killed during a fraternity house carnival at the Phi Delta Theta house at the University of North Carolina .
William Joyner and Allen Long were wounded during the exchange of gunfire in their room .
The incident followed an all - night beer party .
Long told police that , while the three were drinking beer at 7 a.m. , Davis pulled out a gun and started shooting .
1
0
After some of his dormmates urinated on his mattress during hazing , Robert B. Bechtel , a 22-year - old student proctor at Swarthmore College , returned to his Wharton Hall dorm with a shotgun and killed fellow student , 19-year - old Francis Holmes Strozier .
Betchtel was acquitted of murder by reason of insanity and spent five years in a psychiatric hospital .
1 2 15-year - old student , Billy Ray Prevatte , fatally shot 32-year - old teacher , Frazer Cameron , and injured 25-year - old athletic coach , Francis Daniel Wagner , and 31-year - old teacher , Robert Hicks , at Maryland Park Junior High School .
He left after waiting outside the principal 's office for a reprimand due to failing to turn in a written physical education assignment ; he returned with a rifle , shooting the three staff members .
Prevatte was sentenced to thirty years in prison and was released in 1988 .
0 1 A Booker T. Washington Junior High School student was shot and wounded in the forearm by another student armed with a home - made weapon .
0 1
A 16-year - old student was shot in the leg by a 15-year - old classmate at a city high school .
0 1
A 17-year - old student shot a boy in the Manual Training High School .
1 0 A 15-year - old Massapequa High School freshman was killed by a classmate in a washroom .
1 0 Twenty - seven men and boys and an arsenal were seized in the Bronx as the police headed off a gang war resulting from the fatal shooting of a teenager at Morris High School .
1960S
Jefferson High School , was in the locker room after swimming class and was shot twice in the back and once in the hip with a .22 caliber revolver by student , 16-year - old Randy Schultz .
Schultz ran home and told his parents to call the police .
The boys had been playing water polo , and Holmquist had reportedly dunked Shultz .
When Schultz objected , Holmquist hit him .
Schultz retaliated with a gun .
1 0
A 48-year - old teacher , John S. Lane , was fatally wounded when he tried to stop 16-year - old student James Arthur Frampton , who was armed with a shotgun and seeking boys he had argued with earlier that day .
Lane died about six weeks later .
Frampton was sentenced to thirty years in prison for the murder .
18 ( including the perpetrator )
31 University of Texas tower shooting :
25-year - old engineering student , Charles Whitman , shot and killed 15 people and wounded 31 during a 96-minute shooting rampage from the observation deck of the university .
He was shot and killed by police .
He had earlier murdered his wife and mother at their homes .
It was the deadliest shooting on a U.S. college campus until the Virginia Tech shooting in 2007 .
1 1 Grand Rapids High School student , 15-year - old David Black , killed school administrator Forrest Willey and seriously wounded fellow student , 14-year - old Kevin Roth .
5 2 18-year - old Bob Smith , took seven people hostage at Rose - Mar College of Beauty , and ordered them to lie down in a circle .
He shot each in the head .
Four women and a 3-year - old girl died ; another woman and a baby were injured but survived .
Police arrested Smith , who reportedly admired Richard Speck and Charles Whitman .
Smith was sentenced to death in Arizona 's gas chamber , but his sentence was commuted to life when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the death penalty unconstitutional in 1972 .
1 1 18-year - old dropout , Michael Pisarski killed his former girlfriend , 17-year - old Christine Mitchell inside West Leyden High School .
The school 's athletic director was wounded .
Pisarski was sentenced to a maximum of 60 years in prison .
1 0
16-year - old Blanche Ward killed fellow student , 16-year - old Linda Lipscomb , at Miami Jackson High School .
According to Ward , she was threatened with a razor by Lipscomb during an argument over a fountain pen , and in the ensuing struggle , her gun went off .
1 0
15-year - old David Lee Walker , was killed just outside Central High School , by 15-year - old Gerald Locklear .
0 2 Ernest Lee Grissom , a 15-year - old student at Drew Junior High School , seriously wounded a teacher and a 13-year - old student after he had been reprimanded for behavior .
2 0 Alprentice Carter and John Huggins , two student members of the Black Panther Party , were fatally shot during a student meeting inside Campbell Hall at the University of California , Los Angeles .
Reportedly there was disagreement over who would control the school 's African American Studies Center .
The shooter , Claude Hubert , was never found ; three other men were later arrested in connection with the shooting .
1 0 Herman Clifford , 45-year - old Cardozo Senior High School assistant principal , was killed in the school 's hallway by 18-year - old Ronald Joyner , while trying to stop him and two other youths who had robbed the school 's bank .
1 0
13-year - old Ernest Napoleon Carter Jr. was accidentally killed by a 13-year - old classmate at Hanes Junior High School who was armed with a pistol .
The shooter was charged with involuntary manslaughter .
Carter 's mother filed a lawsuit against the Winston - Salem / Forsyth County Board of Education for $ 50,000 in damages .
1 0
46-year - old Martin Mogensen , principal of Tomah Junior High School , was killed in his office by a 14-year - old boy .
1970S University of Pennsylvania professors , 40-year - old Walter Koppelman , and 45-year - old Oscar Goldman , were shot by 33-year - old disgruntled graduate student , Robert Cantor , during a seminar .
Cantor then took his own life .
Koppelman died March 5 from his injuries , but Goldman recovered . 4 9 Kent State shootings : During protests against the bombings in Cambodia during the Vietnam War , members of the Ohio National Guard shot and killed 4 unarmed college students and injured a further 9 .
The shootings led to protests and strikes on colleges all across the United States .
2 12 Jackson State shootings : Shortly after midnight , a group of students were confronted by city and state police .
The police opened fire , killing two students and injuring twelve .
The event happened only 11 days after the Kent State shootings , in which National Guardsmen killed four students at Kent State University in Ohio , which had first captured national attention .
0 2 Two students were shot while standing in a second floor hallway of Harlan High School .
15-year - old Kenneth House , was shot in the lower left abdomen , his condition was described as serious .
14-year - old Portia Walls , suffered a superficial wound on her lower back .
The incident was thought to have involved gang recruiting in the school .
1 0 56-year - old teacher , Samson L. Freedman , was killed as he left Morris E. Leeds School , by 14-year - old student , Kevin Simmons .
Freedman had suspended Simmons earlier in the day for cursing in the hallway .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 4 21-year - old former MIT student
, Larry J. Harmon , armed with a rifle , killed 68-year - old caretaker , Hilary Kunzon , who came upon him wrecking St. Aloysius Roman Catholic Church , then fled onto the campus of Gonzaga University , where he wounded four more people before he was shot and killed by police .
Harmon was described by his father as a religious fanatic claiming to have visions .
1 0 17-year - old Wayne Phillips , was killed when he was caught between two youths who were fighting in the hallway of Armstrong High School .
1 1
School superintendent Marcus Foster , was killed and his assistant Robert Blackburn , was wounded when members of the Symbionese Liberation Army opened fire on them as they exited a school board meeting .
Two members of the SLA were later arrested and convicted of the crime .
Both were sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole .
The SLA had reportedly believed that Foster supported a measure to install police on school grounds and make students carry identification cards .
In reality , Foster opposed both measures .
1 0 52-year - old elementary school principal , Rudolph Jezek Jr. , was killed in his office by 14-year - old Steven Guy , a former student said to be angry about being transferred to a social adjustment center .
1 0
48-year - old James T. Blevins , athletic director at Brownstown Central High School , was fatally shot in the school parking lot by a 17-year - old student waiting for him .
He gave the police no motive . 0 1 19-year - old McKeesport student , Ray D. Gilmore , was wounded in a scuffle with two men in his third floor campus dormitory room .
26-year - old Benjamin F. Goodman and 22-year - old Carl Bell , who were not students , had their .32 caliber pistols taken and were wrestled to the floor by other students .
3 11 Olean High School shooting : During a two - and - a - half - hour siege , 18-year - old honor student , Anthony Barbaro , the best on his rifle team , killed three adults , one being pregnant , in and around his high school and wounded eleven other persons .
He shot from the windows out at the street and neighborhood .
The school was closed for the Christmas holiday .
Barbaro committed suicide in prison before he could stand trial .
1 1
24-year - old David Gary killed the 33-year - old Reverend Thomas Quinlan , inside a classroom at St. James School .
Quinlan was the school 's principal .
A teacher was also wounded .
Gary was sentenced to life in prison for the crime .
1 0
16-year - old Stephen Goods , a bystander , was killed during a fight between other teens .
Three youths were convicted for the homicide .
1 5 Student James Briggs killed fellow student Randy Truitt at Grant High School , wounding several others .
0 5 Intruders entered Murray - Wright High School , shooting and wounding five students after an apparent dispute over a girlfriend of one of the intruders .
7 2 California State University , Fullerton massacre :
The gunman , 37-year - old Edward Charles Allaway , was a custodian at the California State University , Fullerton library .
Allaway killed seven people and wounded two others in the library 's first - floor lobby and at the building 's Instructional Media Center ( IMC ) , located in the basement .
Allaway was convicted of murder , but a judge ruled him insane and ordered him to be confined to a mental institution .
1 0 High School principal , M. O. Tripp , was killed on the front steps of the school by 17-year - old student , Ricardo Lopez , for unknown reasons .
Lopez was convicted of murder and subsequently sentenced to life in prison .
0 2
" As about 50 horrified students scattered for safety , a young man wearing a hood and surgical mask yesterday shot and seriously injured the business manager of St. John 's College High School in northwest Washington during a robbery attempt in the school cafeteria , District police said .
" 0 1 At 8:10 a.m. , 13-year - old student , Andre Davis , was wounded while watching a fight between two students in the front lobby of Christian County Middle School , one of whom had a gun .
A 16-year - old was charged with the assault .
1 0 14-year - old Hayes Junior High School student , Stuart Wayne Perrock , killed 14-year - old schoolmate , Arthur Clinton Smith .
1 1
After being taunted for his beliefs , 15-year - old Roger Needham , a self - proclaimed neo - Nazi , killed one student and wounded a second with a pistol at Everett High School .
1 0
38-year - old Woodrow Porter , a janitor at Paul Dunbar Elementary School , was killed by the 56-year - old grandmother of an 8-year - old who was allegedly spanked by Porter earlier .
1 0
13-year - old John Daniel Christian , son of Lyndon B. Johnson 's former press secretary George Christian , killed his English teacher , 29-year - old Wilbur Grayson , with his father 's rifle in front of approximately thirty classmates at Murchison Junior High School .
Christian was arrested and charged but not prosecuted ; he was committed to a mental hospital where he was treated for a period and released . 0 4 18-year - old Larry Ward and two companions were escorted from the halls of University City High School following a fight with 18-year - old student , Carl Triplett .
Ward ran back into the building with a gun and fired shots into a group , critically injuring Triplett in the chest and hip , and wounding 17-year - old Angela Darden and 16-year - old Jennifer Pride .
Ward sustained a head injury as he was tackled by assistant principal , Franklin McCallie .
His companions grabbed the gun and fled .
0 1 13-year - old Robin Robinson , was paddled by Lanett Junior High School principal , Lewis Hoggs , after having a disagreement with another student .
Robinson left the school , and returned with a .22-caliber handgun and shot Hoggs , grazing the top of his head .
Robinson was arrested two hours later about two blocks from the school , and later charged in juvenile court .
2 9 Cleveland Elementary School shooting :
16-year - old Brenda Spencer opened fire on Grover Cleveland Elementary School from her home across the street , killing two adults and wounding nine people .
Spencer was sentenced to life without parole and remains in prison .
0 1
17-year - old Timothy Stahle was critically wounded in the leg and upper thigh , with shot gun pellets , as he threw rocks at the windows of Wisconsin Lutheran High School .
28-year - old school janitor , Kenneth B. Stein , was arrested .
0
1 15-year - old sophomore , Darryl Williams , was shot in the neck by a sniper during the half - time interval , while standing with teammates and coach in the end zone of the Charlestown High School football field .
The player for the predominantly black Jamaica Plain High School team was left paralysed .
A racial motivation was determined by Mayor Kevin White .
17-year - old white youths , Joseph Nardone and Stephen McGonagle , were charged with the shooting and received ten year sentences .
1980S
Ferris State College ; Kakonis had failed an exam in his class .
Kakonis is the son of an associate dean at the college .
1 ( the perpetrator ) 1 17-year - old Rudy Farmer , pulled out a .22 caliber pistol and wounded a fellow student in the art room of Hueytown High School , he then turned his gun on himself .
1 ( the perpetrator )
1 19-year - old former freshman , James Howard Taylor , brought a 12-gauge single - shot shotgun into the Delta Delta Delta sorority house on the University of Arkansas campus .
He entered the house at 5:45 p.m. and terrorized an initiation dinner .
After attempting to negotiate a surrender , he was shot by police when he aimed his shot gun into the dining room .
2 0 As students fled their rooms , after a homemade firebomb set a minor blaze on the sixth floor hallway of Bursley Hall dormitory , 22-year - old psychology student , Leo E. Kelly Jr. , fired a sawn - off 12-gauge shotgun at his University of Michigan schoolmates at point - blank range .
19-year - old pre - medical student , Edward Siwik , and 21-year - old resident advisor , Douglas C. McGreaham , died at hospitals a few hours later .
Kelly had been dismissed from UM once and was on the verge of another dismissal because of falling grades .
In 1982 , he was convicted on two counts of first - degree murder and sentenced to life .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 Shortly before noon in Engineering Hall on the school 's campus in north Portland , 34-year - old University of Portland night janitor , John C. Holbrook , killed 37-year - old engineering teacher , Brian D. Massey , before taking his own life .
1 2 17-year - old Valley High School student , Patrick Lizotte , killed his teacher Clarence Pigott and wounded two students .
Lizotte was sentenced to life in prison , but was paroled in 2017 .
1 0 13-year - old Deer Creek Junior High School student , Scott Darwin Michael , was killed by 14-year - old classmate , Jason Price Rocha .
Rocha was tried as an adult and sentenced to twelve years , plus one year of parole .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
18-year - old school dropout , James Hartzog , killed his girlfriend , 17-year - old Faye Williams in her algebra class at Wingfield High School .
Hartzog then took his own life .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 1 Eighth grade
Parkway South Middle School 14-year - old student David F. Lawler sitting in study hall classroom of 28 students opened fire , killing Randall Koger , and injuring Greg Saffo .
Lawler then took his own life .
1 0 Billy Conn Gardner , a friend of a food service worker 's husband , robbed the Lake Highlands High School cafeteria manager at gun point as she was counting day 's revenue in the office .
Gardner shot her and took $ 1,600 .
Gardner was subsequently sentenced to death for the crime and was executed by lethal injection in 1995 .
3 ( including the perpetrator )
12 Tyrone Mitchell killed two people and wounded twelve others when shooting at students leaving 49th Street Elementary School .
He then committed suicide .
1 0
13-year - old Kelly Crittendon , was accidentally killed by two classmates in a classroom at the Precious Blood School .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 17-year - old student , Todd Dunahoo , killed 16-year - old Valerie Rockafellow in the hallway at Southeast Polk High School , then turned the gun on himself .
0 1 1981 alumnus Barry Wayne Shaw returned to his alma mater Richland High School carrying a 9 mm Uzi submachine gun , an AR-15 strapped across his neck and a .45-caliber pistol in a shoulder harness looking for Ms. Ball , his English teacher .
Ms. Ball 's classroom had recently moved across the campus , something Barry did n't know at the time .
He ran across the roof and jumped down into the courtyard before entering the building and starting his search .
After some time , he finally gave up the hunt , yelled out "
Homecoming , homecoming , " and sprayed the school 's foyer with 30 rounds of ammunition .
His bullets struck windows and the ceiling , but none of the dozen or so students who were also in the foyer at the time .
However , a male student was injured by flying debris .
Principal Ray Williams arrived after Barry had fired his last shot to confront him .
Barry threw both rifles at Ray , saying " I did it . "
Ray had Barry sit down and wait for the police while he inspected his students for injuries .
Barry offered no resistance .
He was wearing a white T - shirt under a khaki - colored vest with flap pockets , blue jeans and cowboy boots when he was arrested .
Over the weekend , it was discovered that Barry had killed Dallas karate instructor Jimmy Glen Wilson and wounded Rudy Smedley earlier in the week with the submachine gun .
He was charged with two counts of intent to commit murder , one count of retaliation and one count of murder .
1 0
45-year - old Shirley Shindeldecker , killed school bus driver 54-year - old Gene Green , as he stopped to pick up the son of Shindeldecker 's estranged husband .
After serving nineteen months of her sentence , Shindeldecker was found not guilty by reason of insanity , and released .
1 3 Armed with a rifle and a handgun , 14-year - old James Alan Kearbey , killed principal , James McGee , and wounded two teachers and a student at Goddard Junior High School .
Kearbey was paroled in 2003 .
0 6
Murray - Wright High School shooting :
During half - time of the homecoming football game between Northwestern and Murray - Wright high schools , a youth opened fire with a shotgun , injuring six students with whom he had fought earlier in the day .
3 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 14-year - old Heather Smith , killed 15-year - old Gordon Pickett , who was her ex - boyfriend , and 14-year - old Christopher Ricco , in the gymnasium at Spanaway Junior High School .
She later took her own life .
1 ( the perpetrator ) 0
At Concord High School , Louis Cartier , a 16-year - old dropout , entered the school with a shotgun and took students hostage , 18-year - old Patrick Lena Lena and 16-year - old Scott Hayes .
Responding police officers fatally shot him after he aimed at football coach , Don LeBrun .
1 2
After being suspended for refusing to take off his hat while at school , 13-year - old student Floyd Warmsley pulled out a firearm at Portland Junior High School , shooting and wounding the 53-year - old school secretary Lynn Haddad , and killing 36-year - old janitor David Bangston . 0 1 At about 9:40 a.m. , as 52-year - old math teacher Norma Cooper 's third - period algebra class was beginning in a second - floor classroom in the C Building at Thornridge High School , she was shot in the shoulder by a freshman student , with a large - caliber handgun , registered to the youth 's father , a security guard .
He is charged with attempted murder , unlawful use of a weapon and aggravated battery .
The freshman , a resident of Harvey , was enrolled in the class and apparently had recently received poor grades .
1 0
A new student , 16-year - old Ritchie Overman , killed studious 15-year - old Leslie Lynn Wyatt , using a 20-gauge shotgun , in front of twenty - six " totally horrified " science class students and teacher Sheila Adams , at Senath - Hornersville High School .
0 3 A 17-year - old student shot three classmates at Pine Forest High School with a .25-caliber handgun wounding them .
One student was critically injured and treated for a neck wound .
2 ( both perpetrators )
74
( one by gunfire )
Cokeville Elementary School hostage crisis : 43-year - old former town marshal David Young , and his 47-year - old wife , Doris Young , took 136 children and eighteen adults hostage at Cokeville Elementary School .
Doris Young accidentally detonated a bomb she was carrying during the standoff , injuring herself and 73 others .
David Young then shot and killed Doris , shot and wounded a teacher , and then committed suicide .
1
3 14-year - old Kristofer Hans intended to shoot his French teacher at Fergus High School , for a failing grade .
Instead , Henrietta Smith , who was substituting for LaVonne Simonfy , was shot in the face and died .
Hans fired several other shots as he fled , wounding vice principal John Moffatt , and two students .
He then ran about a mile to his home , where he was arrested after the police surrounded his house .
A classmate said Hans had repeatedly threatened to kill Ms. Simonfy , saying , " I 'm going to blow Simonfy 's head off . "
He was charged as an adult , convicted and sentenced to 206 years in prison .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 35-year - old associate professor of Computer Science Djamshid ( Amir ) Asgari was confronted in the Engineering Building of California State University , Northridge by 25-year - old graduate student Fawwaz Abdin .
Abdin was angry about
a low grade Asgari had given him a year earlier , which caused him to be put on academic probation .
After Asgari refused to change his grade , Abdin shot him twice , then himself .
Asgari later died at the Northridge Hospital .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
After constant teasing about his weight , 12-year - old honors student Nathan Ferris killed a 13-year - old classmate , Timothy Perrin , then turned the gun on himself .
1 2 Murray - Wright High School second shooting :
A ninth - grade student at Murray - Wright High School killed 17-year - old Chester Jackson , a student athlete , and wounded 17-year - old Damon Matthews , and 18-year - old Tomeka Turner .
0 1
After being kicked off the soccer team for smoking on school grounds , 16-year - old student Blake Docter , of Illiana Christian High School wounded 44-year - old John Hoogewerf in the chest , the teacher who had reported him for smoking .
1 2 Pinellas Park_High shooting : 15-year - old students , Jason Harless and Jason McCoy , took stolen .38-caliber revolvers to Pinellas Park High School .
Harless shot two assistant principals and a student - teacher inside the school 's cafeteria .
53-year - old Richard Allen died from his injuries , Nancy Blackwelder and intern Joseph Bloznalis were wounded .
1 5 30-year - old Laurie Dann , killed 8-year - old Nick Corwin , inside Hubbard Woods School .
Five additional students were wounded .
Dann later committed suicide after taking hostages in a nearby home . 0 1 25-year - old Robin Jenkins , was shot in the elbow after a basketball game turned violent about 7:45 p.m.at Siefert Elementary School .
A 28-year - old man was taken into custody the following day .
5 ( including the perpetrator )
2 After killing two people at a nearby auto parts store , 40-year - old Clem " Clemmie " Henderson entered Moses Montefiore Academy , where he shot and killed the school custodian .
Henderson then shot and killed police officer Irma Ruiz and wounded her partner , Greg Jaglowski , as they confronted him .
Despite being shot in both legs , Officer Jaglowski managed to return fire , killing Henderson .
2 9 Oakland Elementary School shooting :
19-year - old James William Wilson entered Oakland Elementary School and started firing shots in the cafeteria .
Two students were wounded and a first - grade teacher .
After reloading his gun in a girls ' restroom , he was confronted by physical education teacher , Kat Finkbeiner , who tried to stop him ; she was wounded twice .
He then entered a third - grade classroom and shot toward the students , killing 8-year - olds Shequila Tawoon Bradley and Tequila Maria Thomas , and wounding five others .
Wilson was ultimately convicted of murder and sentenced to death .
0
1 16-year - old student Mason Staggs shot Cooper High School teacher , Rick Maloney in the face with a pistol , severely injuring the teacher .
Staggs left the school and went fishing .
1
1
At Atlantic Shores Christian School , 16-year - old student Nicholas Elliott shot two teachers with a Mac-10 9-millimeter machine pistol , killing 41-year - old Karen Farley , and critically wounding 37-year - old Sam Marino , then began firing on a classroom full of students before the gun jammed and any students were hit .
6 ( including the perpetrator )
32 Stockton schoolyard shooting :
24-year - old Patrick Edward Purdy fatally shot five children and wounded 32 others at the Cleveland Elementary School , before taking his own life .
The victims were children of refugees from Southeast Asia .
Purdy had a history of violence , alcoholism and drug addiction , and criminality . 0 0
At Thomas Jefferson Junior High School , a 12-year - old boy fired a handgun at a vice principal , William Crumbaugh .
No one was injured .
1 ( the perpetrator )
1
While riding the school bus , 16-year - old Serra Catholic High School student , Robert Butler , shot 16-year - old schoolmate , Adam Ference , in the back of the head before fatally shooting himself .
Ference was in critical condition but survived .
1990S Bensonhurst area of Brooklyn .
The 14-year - old was then shot and slightly wounded , because he had acted as peacemaker when the same boys had clashed with another black teen the month before . 0
3 3 students were wounded when gunfire broke out at Sam Houston High School .
The incident took place at 11:55 a.m. and was gang related .
17-year - old John Campbell was wounded in the right foot , 18-year - old Larry Johnson was wounded in the right thigh and calf , and a 16-year - old received a chest wound .
18-year - old Kenneth Wolford , and two other male students were arrested and charged .
1 0
A teenager aimed and fired a handgun at a security guard who had chased him and three friends off the grounds of Ralph J. Bunche Middle School .
He instead killed 11-year - old Alejandro Vargas , a bystander and student at the school .
1 0
17-year - old Arthur Jermel Jack , was killed by 15-year - old LaKeeta Cadoree , in the cafeteria at Crosby High School .
6 ( including the perpetrator )
1 University of Iowa shooting : 28-year - old former graduate student , Gang Lu , killed four members of University of Iowa 's faculty and a research student , and seriously wounded another student .
47-year - old professor of physics and astronomy , Christoph K. Goertz , 45-year - old associate professor of physics and astronomy , Robert Alan Smith , 44-year - old chairman of the physics and astronomy department , Dwight R. Nicholson , 56-year - old associate vice president for academic affairs , Dr. Theresa Anne Cleary , shot in the head and died the following day , and 27-year - old research investigator in physics and astronomy , Dr. Shan Linhua .
23-year - old Miya Rodolfo - Sioson , Dr. Cleary 's temporary student receptionist in the grievance office , survived but was left paralyzed from the neck down .
Lu then shot himself in the head , he died shortly after police arrived .
1 0 Thomas Jefferson High School shooting :
During an argument between two teens , a stray bullet killed a third , uninvolved 16-year - old student .
In 1992 , 14-year - old shooter Jason Bentley , was sentenced to three to nine years in prison .
0
1 26-year - old graduate student , Sarah Smith , was wounded in the chest as she was waiting for her husband to pick her up at Kent State University .
3 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
Indiana University graduate student , Susan Clements , was shot to death in her dorm by a former boyfriend before he committed suicide .
A friend that attempted to intervene , Steven Molen , was also shot and critically injured ; he died several days later .
Indiana University .
2 0 Thomas Jefferson High School second shooting : 15-year - old Kahlil Sumpter , killed fellow students , 16-year - old Tyrone Sinkler and 17-year - old Ian Moore , on the school 's second - floor hallway .
In 1993 , he was sentenced to between 6⅔ and twenty years in prison .
He was released on parole in 1998 .
March 5 , 1992 Obetz
, Ohio 0 1 Hamilton Middle School : Gordon W. Dye Jr. shot his bully Gregg Johnson in the head with a .22-caliber pistol in the school cafeteria .
Gregg was rushed to Children 's Hospital in Columbus where doctors found the bullet and traced it 's path .
It had entered between Gregg 's eyes and traveled the nasal sinuses where it shattered bones .
Its trajectory was parallel to the bottom of the skull and was deflected by part of the skull base .
This deflection sent the bullet on a downward path , to the adenoids .
4 10 Lindhurst High School shooting :
Former student , 20-year - old Eric Houston , killed three students and one teacher , and wounded nine other students and teacher before surrendering to police .
Houston was later sentenced to death and remains on California 's death row .
0 7
Following a pep rally , in a hallway near the activity center of Palo Duro High School , for the evening football match - up against Hereford High , 17 year old Randy Earl Matthews shot and wounded 7 students with a .22 caliber pistol .
Matthews had attended the school for 9 days when the incident occurred and was believed to have been bullied at his previous school in Memphis Texas .
Matthews was charged with one count attempted murder , five counts aggravated assault , and one count of unlawfully carrying a weapon onto school grounds .
He served eight years .
0
3 Two 14-year - old girls and a 16-year - old boy were shot at outside a Bronx high school .
0 11
11 students were hit by gunfire during a four - hour period in three separate school incidents , five were hospitalized .
Six students at Finney High School were grazed by buckshot after three ski - masked gunmen opened fire in a crowded hallway .
A 14-year - old was in custody for shooting three Foch Middle School students as they passed by the Marcus Garvey Academy .
In the third incident , 16-year - old DeWayne Boyd was hit in the chest , when shots were fired at two Mumford High School students .
December 14 , 1992 Great Barrington , Massachusetts 2 4 Wayne Lo , a Taiwanese - born American , opened fire at Simon 's Rock College of Bard .
He killed one student and a professor , and wounded four people .
Lo was sentenced to life in prison without parole for the murders .
January 6 , 1993
Brentwood , New York 0 1 Brentwood High School .
Former student , Matthew Hunter , was shot by two gunmen during a basketball game between Brentwood High School and Sachem High School .
The assault was over a dispute about the theft of a gold chain .
2 0 East Carter High School shooting :
17-year - old Scott Pennington , a student at East Carter High School , fatally shot his 48-year - old English teacher , Deanna McDavid , and 52-year - old head custodian , Marvin Hicks .
Pennington was sentenced to life in prison without parole for 25 years .
1 0 15-year - old Robert Heard , fatally shot 17-year - old Michael Shean Ensley in the corridor of the Reseda High School 's science building .
1 0 44-year - old David Taber entered Ford Middle School and took three hostages .
During the hostage crisis , Taber killed school nurse Carol Day .
Taber was found not guilty of the murder by reason of insanity .
1 0
17-year - old Max Alexander Martinez , killed 17-year - old Jose Balderas , with a .38 caliber revolver in a hallway in Nimitz High School during a dispute over girls .
1 0
15-year - old student Jason Smith killed another student who had bullied him at Upper Perkiomen High School .
He was charged as an adult and sentenced to between twelve and twenty - five years in prison .
1 ( the perpetrator ) 4 29-year - old Kevin Newman , wounded four students before killing himself at Central Junior High School .
1 0
18-year - old Miguel DeJesus , was gunned down on the steps of New Britain High School .
Rival gang members , 24-year - old Maurice Flanagan and 23-year - old Thomas Mejia , were charged .
1 0
Wauwatosa West High School shooting :
21-year - old former student , Leonard D. McDowell , shot 46-year - old associate principal , Dale Breitlow , three times with a revolver in a second - floor hallway of Wauwatosa West High School .
McDowell was found guilty of the murder and sane at the time of the shooting , he was sentenced to life in prison .
His sentence was upheld by the state Court of Appeals in April 1997 .
1 0
18-year - old Floyd Eugene Brown , shot fellow Eau Claire High School student , 17-year - old Earnest Dunlap , following an argument the week before .
Brown was arrested shortly after at his home .
A 16-year - old boy was also arrested for kicking Dunlap after the shooting .
A jury later acquitted Brown of murder .
1 0
24-year - old Darrell Cloud , a former student at Whitman Middle School in North Seattle , killed 45-year - old Neal Summers , who had sexually abused Cloud since he was thirteen .
Cloud served nine years in prison .
He later received a $ 250,000 settlement in a civil suit against Seattle Schools , charging that Summers had not been adequately supervised . 0 1 At around 10 p.m. , 24-year - old Roosevelt Johnson was shot in the leg , after a basketball game at Spartanburg High School .
2 0
33-year - old Dante D. Hayes , a hunter and ex - convict , killed 58-year - old Richard Vancena , a cafeteria manager , and 33-year - old Robin Michelle Coleman , a cook , in the mess hall of Kemper Military School and College .
He was drunk and looking for his wife Anna Hayes with whom he had a fight the night before .
No students were harmed .
Hayes was layer convicted of two counts of murder and sentenced to life without parole .
1 0
10-year - old Jason Osmanson , teased because his parents have AIDS , killed an 11-year - old student on the playground of Margaret Leary Elementary School .
Osmanson was sent to a private residential treatment center .
1 0
14-year - old Jeremy Bryant , killed 13-year - old Terrence Murray , in music class at J.T. Moore Middle School .
1
( the perpetrator )
1
After being suspended for smoking , 16-year - old Nicholas Atkinson , returned to Grimsley High School with a 9 mm pistol .
After wounding assistant principal , Bill Whites , Atkinson took his own life .
0 1 A 16-year - old female student was shot in the thigh outside Hubbard High School when a teenage boy rode past on a bicycle and fired into a crowd .
It is believed the shooting was meant for rival gang members , but the girl was hit instead .
The boy lived in the neighborhood .
1 5 ( including the perpetrator )
Wickliffe Middle School shooting : 37-year - old former student , Keith A. Ledeger , killed 41-year - old custodian , Pete Christopher , at Wickliffe Middle School , and wounded 47-year - old assistant principal , Jim Anderson , 47-year - old police officer , Thomas Schmidt , and 50-year - old teacher , Lowell Grimm , before being injured and taken into custody .
Ledeger was sentenced to 57 years in prison , and died in prison in 2011 .
December 14 , 1994
Albany , New York 0 1 Ralph J. Tortorici , 26 , a military veteran and psychology major at the State University of New York at Albany held hostage a large lecture hall from 9:10 a.m. until 11:30 a.m. Tortorici , armed with a .270-caliber rifle with more than two dozen rounds of ammunition and a hunting knife , walked into the ancient history class of Hans Pohlsander , saying , " Do n't worry .
Nobody move .
You guys are getting held hostage .
"
The standoff ended when Tortorici had his gun taken away by Jason McEnaney , a 19-year - old student .
McEnaney was shot in the leg , groin , and abdomen in the exchange .
Tortorici suffered from a well - document history of mental illness , argued during the hostage crisis that the government had implanted a control chip in his head during a procedure at Albany Medical Center , and ultimately committed suicide in 1999 in prison while serving a 15 1/2 year sentence .
0 2 A 15-year - old student at Garfield High School left school during the day and returned with his grandfather 's handgun .
He wounded two students .
1 0 14-year - old student Keith E. Johnson , killed 13-year - old Joey Summerall , at Tavares Middle School with a handgun that he had stolen from his neighbor 's home .
He was convicted and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 1 Blackville - Hilda High School shooting :
Suspended student , 16-year - old Toby R. Sincino , killed 56-year - old math teacher , Phyllis Senn , and wounded 38-year - old math teacher , Johhnny Thompson , before committing suicide at Blackville - Hilda High School .
2 1 Richland High School shooting :
17-year - old James Rouse , killed a student and teacher at Richland High School and seriously wounded another teacher with a rifle .
Rouse was later sentenced to life in prison without parole .
1 0 Two masked gunmen killed 14-year - old Damion Blocker in a stairwell at Winston Education Center .
One shooter , 16-year - old Darrick Evans , was sentenced to 41 years to life in prison .
3 1 Frontier Middle School shooting :
14-year - old Barry Loukaitis , killed a teacher and two students and wounded another student when he opened fire on his algebra class .
Loukaitis was sentenced to life in prison .
2 1 30-year - old Mark Boyd , hired 23-year - old Malik Nettles , to kill 15-year - old Kyunia Taylor , as she rode on a school bus bound for Beaumont High School .
Taylor was pregnant with a child fathered by Boyd ; a baby girl was delivered by emergency caesarean section , but died 23 days later .
The bus driver was also shot , he survived .
Both Boyd and Nettles were convicted of murder .
Boyd was sentenced to 26 years while Nettles was sentenced to life without parole .
3 0 San Diego State University shooting :
At San Diego State University , 36-year - old graduate student , Frederick Martin Davidson , killed three professors , 32-year - old Chen Liang , 44-year - old D. Preston Lowrey III , and 36-year - old Costas Lyrintzis , that he believed were involved in a conspiracy against him .
Davidson was sentenced to serve three life terms without parole .
1 2 19-year - old Jillian Robbins , killed one student and injured two outside Pennsylvania State University 's HUB – Robeson Center .
Robbins was sentenced to between 30 and 60 years in prison .
1 2 16-year - old David Dubose Jr. , killed English teacher , Horace Morgan , on the steps of Dekalb Alternative School .
Dubose was found not guilty by reason of insanity and was committed indefinitely to a state mental hospital .
1 0
14-year - old Willis Ward Johnson , killed 20-year - old James Earl Routt , as they rode a school bus .
1 0 14-year - old Conniston Middle School student , Tronneal Mangum , fatally shot 14-year - old classmate , John Pierre Kamel , just minutes before school started , over a $ 40 debt .
2 2 Bethel Regional High School shooting :
16-year - old student , Evan Ramsey , killed Bethel Regional High School principal , Ron Edwards , and 15-year - old student , Joshua Palacios , and wounded two other students .
3 7 Pearl High School shooting : 16-year - old Luke Woodham , murdered his 50-year - old mother , Mary , at home before killing his ex - girlfriend , 16-year - old student , Christina Menefee , and 17-year - old student , Lydia Kaye Dew , then wounding seven others at Pearl High School .
Woodham was sentenced to life in prison .
0
1
After an argument between them the day before , 13-year - old Brandon Hartsoe took a .38 revolver from his mother 's dresser drawer and shot 13-year - old Lincoln Middle School classmate , Trent Murray , in the back causing serious injury , then continued to fire three more shots in the general area of other students .
Hartsoe was sentenced in 1998 to serve until his 18th birthday .
His probation was set to end in October 2009 .
3 5 Heath High School shooting : Three students were killed and five wounded by 14-year - old Michael Carneal , as they participated in a prayer circle .
Carneal was sentenced to life in prison .
0 2 Concealed in a wooded area on school grounds
, 14-year - old Joseph " Colt " Todd , wounded two students as they were entering Stamps High School .
1 3
At around 4:15 p.m. , gunfire broke out as a crowd streamed from the Palestra after a high school championship basketball game near the University of Pennsylvania .
A 22-year - old man was shot in the back and killed , and a student working at the fine arts building was shot in the leg .
5 10 Westside Middle School shootings : 13-year - old Mitchell Johnson , and 11-year - old Andrew Golden , killed a teacher and four students , and wounded ten others , as Westside Middle School emptied during a fire alarm intentionally set off by Golden .
Both shooters were sentenced to confinement until their 21st birthdays .
1 3 Parker Middle School dance shooting :
14-year - old student , Andrew Wurst , fatally shot 48-year - old teacher , John Gillette , and wounded two students and another teacher at an 8th grade graduation dance .
He is serving a thirty to sixty - year sentence in a prison for young offenders .
1 0
18-year - old Jacob Lee Davis , shot 18-year - old Robert Creson , at Lincoln County High School in a dispute over a girl .
Davis received a life sentence on July 29 , 1999 .
4 25 Thurston High School shooting : After killing his parents at home , 15-year - old Kip Kinkel , drove to Thurston High School , where he killed two students and wounded 25 others .
After pleading guilty , he was sentenced to 111 years of prison .
0
2 14-year - old student , Quinshawn Brooker , wounded 45-year - old basketball coach and history teacher , Gregory Carter , and 74-year - old Head Start volunteer , Eloise Wilson , in the hallway of Armstrong High School .
1 0
52-year - old Professor Andrzej Olbrot , was killed by 48-year - old graduate doctoral student , Wlodzimierz Dedecjusat , at Wayne State University .
2
( both perpetrators ) 0 15-year - old Andrea Garrett was found dead and 17-year - old Jeff Miller seriously wounded in the girls ' restroom at Central Carrollton County High School , after a suspected suicide pact .
Miller died the next day . 0 0 15-year - old Shawn Cooper , fired two shots from a shotgun near the front desk at
Notus Jr. Sr .
High School .
There were no serious injuries , but some students were close enough to the blast to be grazed by shrapnel from the tile floor .
Cooper had been undergoing treatment for bipolar disorder .
15 ( including both perpetrators )
21 Columbine High School massacre : 18-year - old Eric Harris and 17-year - old Dylan Klebold , students at Columbine High School , killed twelve students and one teacher .
They injured 21 additional people , and three more were injured while attempting to escape the school .
The pair committed suicide in the library after a brief gunfight with police at the end of the massacre .
Eric and Dylan used a 9 mm Hi Point Carbine rifle , a Savage 67H pump - action shotgun ( sawed off ) , multiple pipe bombs , propane tanks , gasoline bombs , etc .
Klebold used a Intratec TEC - DC9 semi - automatic pistol , a stevens 311d double barreled sawed - off shotgun multiple pipe bombs , Molotov cocktails , and propane tanks . 0 6 15-year - old student Thomas " T.J. " Solomon Jr. , wounded six students at Heritage High School .
A 15-year - old girl was hospitalized in critical condition , and the other victims suffered from non - life - threatening injuries .
Solomon initially faced up to 351 years of prison if convicted of aggravated assault and other charges .
In 2000 he was found guilty but mentally ill and was sentenced to forty years in prison and sixty - five years of probation .
1 0
13-year - old Victor Cordova Jr. , fatally shot 13-year - old Deming Middle School schoolmate , Araceli Tena .
Cordova said he had intended to commit suicide but was jostled by others and his gun moved . 0 6 Before his middle school opened , 13-year - old Seth Trickey opened fire in the courtyard .
While there were no fatalities , several students felt sparks from the bullets hitting the building walls .
Five were injured , including a girl who was shot in the face .
Trickey brought the gun from home .
21ST CENTURY 2000S Shooting of Kayla Rolland :
At Buell Elementary School , 6-year - old Dedrick Owens fatally shot 6-year - old classmate Kayla Rolland .
To date , Owens is the youngest documented school shooter .
1 0 13-year - old honor student , Nathaniel Brazill , was sent home for throwing water balloons , but returned to his Lake Worth Middle School with a family pistol .
He fatally shot teacher Barry Grunow , a popular teacher , he was Brazill 's favorite .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 58-year - old Director of the Division of Pathology of the University of Washington Medical Center , Rodger C. Haggitt , M. D. , was shot dead by 42-year - old Chinese ( Taiwan ) emigrant and
then U. S. citizen , Jian Chen , M. D. , who had just completed his second year of forensic pathology residency training and had been notified of his contract non - renewal ( which Dr. Chen wrote would dishonor his family ) .
Chen then committed suicide .
Dr. Haggitt would later be honored with his name upon the History of the Rodger C. Haggitt Gastrointestinal Pathology Society .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
36-year - old James Easton Kelly , a PhD candidate in Comparative Literature at University of Arkansas , killed 67-year - old Dr. John R. Locke , the English professor overseeing his coursework .
Kelly had been dismissed from this PhD program for lack of progress toward his degree .
Kelly shot Dr. Locke three times before committing suicide in the director 's office , which had been isolated by campus police .
0 2 13 year - olds Darrel Johnson , and Alfred Anderson were initially charged with attempted first - degree murder in the shooting of 15 year - old William Pennington .
Pennington , after being shot , managed to gain control of the gun and shoot Johnson in the back .
Charges were later reduced to Aggravated Battery .
0 1
( the perpetrator )
A 15-year - old Junipero Serra High School student who showed off a handgun on campus and threatened to shoot a classmate , ended up accidentally shooting himself , causing minor injuries .
2 13 Santana High School shooting :
15-year - old student , Charles Andrew Williams , killed two students , 14-year - old Bryan Zuckor , and 15-year - old Randy Gordon , at Santana High School and wounded thirteen others .
He was arrested and convicted of murder and attempted murder .
He was sentenced to life with the chance of parole after serving fifty years .
0
1 14-year - old student , Elizabeth Catherine Bush , wounded fellow student Kimberly Marchese in the cafeteria of Bishop Neumann High School .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 40-year - old music instructor and organist James D. Holloway was shot multiple times with a .22-caliber handgun at Pacific Lutheran University by a 55-year - old man from Tacoma .
The shooter was not a student or employee of the university and also killed himself .
The victim was apparently chosen at random as the shooter had a personal dispute with a different staff member who was not on campus that day .
0
5 18-year - old former student , Jason Hoffman , opened fire at Granite Hills High School , injuring five people .
He was convicted of assault and sentenced to prison , where he committed suicide in 2002 .
1 0
17-year - old Donald Ray Burt Jr. , fatally shot Neal Boyd , IV with one bullet to the head in a parking lot outside Lew Wallace High School .
Burt was sentenced to 57 years in prison .
0 2 17-year - old Vincent Rodriguez , wounded two students at Martin Luther King , Jr. High School in Manhattan , with a semi - automatic pistol .
He was retaliating for the victims having harassed his girlfriend .
In February 2003 , Rodriguez was sentenced to ten years in prison on charges of assault and attempted assault .
3 3 Appalachian School of Law shooting :
Recently dismissed graduate student , 42-year - old Peter Odighizuwa , killed three at the Appalachian School of Law .
42-year - old dean Anthony Sutin , and 41-year - old professor Thomas Blackwell were killed along with 33-year - old student , Angela Dales .
Three other students were also wounded .
In 2005 Odighizuwa received three life sentences and an additional 28 years without the possibility of parole .
1 0 16-year - old Washington High School student , Joseph Johnson Jr. , was killed by Phillip D. Jackson Jr. , when violence erupts between rival fans in the parking lot , after a basketball game between Vincent High School .
0 1
In the Beltway sniper attacks , one victim of several was 13-year - old Iran Brown , who was wounded as he arrived at Benjamin Tasker Middle School in Bowie , Maryland .
His aunt , a nurse who had just dropped him off , rushed him to a hospital emergency room .
Despite serious injuries , Brown survived the attack .
The shooters , Lee Boyd Malvo and John Allen Muhammad , were later convicted of numerous unrelated murders committed during their killing spree .
Muhammad was executed in 2009 , while Malvo was sentenced to life in prison .
4 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
Failing nursing college student and Gulf War veteran , 40-year - old Robert Stewart Flores Jr. , killed three assistant professors of nursing at the University of Arizona , 50-year - old Robin Rogers , 44-year - old Cheryl McGaffic , and 45-year - old Barbara Monroe , before turning the gun on himself .
0 1 A 15-year - old student was shot in the abdomen and wounded inside a basement of Lincoln High School , during an argument with another student .
Another 15-year - old student was arrested and charged with attempted murder .
1 3 John McDonogh High School shooting .
18-year - old Steven Williams , and 17-year - old James Tate opened fire with an AK-47 and a handgun in the gymnasium of John McDonogh High School , killing a 15-year - old student and wounding three female students .
Williams was sentenced to life imprisonment , and Tate was sentenced to fifteen years .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
14-year - old student James Sheets , entered Red Lion Area Junior High School armed with his stepfather 's pistols .
He killed the school 's principal , Eugene Segro , before killing himself .
1 2
On May 9 , 2003 , Biswanath Halder , a 62-year - old business school alumnus of Case Western Reserve University , killed a graduate student and wounded a professor and another student using a semi - automatic rifle .
He held the building and its nearly 100 occupants hostage for seven hours before being apprehended by a SWAT team .
He was sentenced to life in prison .
2 0 Rocori High School shooting :
15-year - old John Jason McLaughlin , shot 15-year - old freshman Seth Bartell and 17-year - old senior Aaron Rollins at Rocori High School .
Rollins was killed immediately , and Bartell died from his wounds sixteen days later .
McLaughlin was sentenced to life in prison with the chance of parole in 2038 .
1 0 Thomas J. Boykin was acquitted of the murder of 17-year - old James Richardson , a football player at Ballou High School in Southeast Washington .
0 1
Jon W. Romano in East Greenbush , New York fired two rounds from a shotgun , wounding one teacher .
He was tackled by the assistant principal and charged with one count of attempted murder .
0 4 Two students were charged with a school shooting that arose from a dispute after a basketball game at Randallstown High School .
Four persons were injured , two seriously .
One student was paralyzed from the waist down . 0 1 An 18-year - old student at Bowen High School was shot in the leg as she left the school around 2:30 p.m. 1 0 14-year - old Jason Clinard , killed his bus driver , 47-year - old Joyce Gregory , as she stopped to pick him up .
Gregory had earlier reported Clinard for using snuff on the school bus .
Clinard was given a life sentence .
10 ( including the perpetrator )
7 Red Lake shootings : 16-year - old student Jeffrey Weise , killed his grandfather and grandfather 's companion at their home , where he had been living , at the Red Lake Indian Reservation .
He drove to Red Lake Senior High School .
Armed with his grandfather 's police weapons , Weise killed five students , one teacher , and one security guard , wounding seven others , before committing suicide following a gunfight with police officers .
0 1
At Harlan Community Academy High School , a fight broke out between two 15-year - old boys in the gymnasium .
Christopher Huff took out a pistol , shooting the other youth in the leg .
A police officer on duty at the school arrested the gunman .
The suspected shooter was charged as an adult with aggravated battery with a firearm .
1 2 Campbell County High School shooting :
Inside the Campbell County High School office , 15-year - old Kenneth Bartley , shot the school principal , Gary Seale .
He shot assistant principals Ken Bruce and Jim Pierce .
Bruce later died from his wound .
Bartley was sentenced to forty - five years in prison with chance of parole after twenty - nine years .
0 1 14-year - old freshman
Vincent Wayne Leodoro , shot student 16-year - old Joseph Monti , four times in the back with a handgun at Roseburg High School .
Leodoro walked away from the school campus , and was confronted near a restaurant by six police officers .
He threatened suicide but was persuaded to surrender .
He was found guilty of attempted murder and assault in July 2006 , and will be held in prison until he turns twenty five years old .
0 2
Pine Middle School shooting : In the hallway of Pine Middle School , 14-year - old James Scott Newman , injured two 14-year - old classmates , Alexander Rueda and Kenzie McKeon , with a revolver belonging to his parents .
Two students received minor wounds .
Newman was subdued by a physical education teacher .
The youth was arrested and charged as an adult for attempted murder , use of a deadly weapon and use of a firearm by a minor .
He later pleaded guilty to charges of two counts of battery with a deadly weapon , and was sentenced as a juvenile .
Newman was sentenced to house arrest until he completed two - hundred hours of community service .
August 24 ,
2006 Essex Junction , Vermont 2 3 ( including the perpetrator ) Christopher Williams , 26 , shot his girlfriend 's mother , Linda Lambesis , 57 at her home and from there he went to Essex Elementary School where Andrea , his girlfriend , worked .
After he arrived at the elementary school , which was not in session at the time , he shot and killed Mary Alicia Shanks , 56 , and shot Mary Snedeker , 52 , nonfatally .
He left the school and allegedly shot Chad Johansen , 26 nonfatally .
He then turned the gun on himself , but did not die as a result .
Williams was sentenced to life in prison without parole in 2008 .
1 2
After shooting and killing his father , teenager Alvaro Castillo went to his high school , where he wounded two students .
He was reportedly obsessed with the Columbine shootings and had written an email to the current Columbine high school principal before committing his own crime .
3 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
49-year - old Douglas W. Pennington , killed himself and his two sons , 26-year - old Logan P. Pennington , 24-year - old Benjamin M. Pennington , during a visit to the campus of Shepherd University .
0 5 Five Duquesne basketball players were shot early Sunday morning during an apparent act of random violence on campus , leaving three hospitalized — two of them in critical condition .
2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 Platte Canyon High School hostage crisis : 53-year - old drifter , Duane Roger Morrison , walked into Platte Canyon High School and took six girls hostage .
During the ensuing siege , Morrison sexually assaulted all of the girls .
When a SWAT team stormed the classroom , Morrison killed 16-year - old Emily Keyes , then took his own life after being shot and wounded by police .
1 0 Weston High School shooting :
At around 8 a.m. , 15-year - old freshman , Eric Hainstock , entered Weston High School .
He aimed a 20-gauge shotgun at social studies teacher , Chuck Keller , before it was wrestled from him by school custodian , Dave Thompson .
Hainstock then shot 49-year - old high school principal , John Alfred Klang , with a .22 caliber revolver .
Klang died later that afternoon .
Hainstock was charged and convicted of murder , and is serving a life sentence .
He will be eligible for parole in 2037 .
6 ( including the perpetrator )
5 West Nickel Mines School shooting :
32-year - old milk truck driver , Charles Carl Roberts IV , killed five Amish girls and wounded five others before killing himself in an Amish school in the hamlet of Nickel Mines , in Bart Township , Lancaster County .
0 0
13-year - old student Thomas White fired one shot from a Mac-90 rifle at a hallway ceiling at Memorial Middle School .
The gunshot struck a water pipe , and nobody was injured .
He also tried repeatedly to shoot principal Stephen Gilbreth at near - point - blank range as Gilbreth ushered him out of the school .
Joplin police say the attempt was foiled by an improperly seated ammunition clip in the rifle .
The principal was not injured .
White was tried as an adult on charges of assault and firearms possession , and in 2009 he was sentenced to ten years of prison .
1 0
18-year - old student Douglas S. Chanthabouly , killed 17-year - old Samnang Kok , in the hallways of Henry Foss High School following a personal disagreement .
In 2009 , Chanthabouly was sentenced to 23 years in prison on a charge of second - degree murder .
0 1
During an argument with several non - students and students , a student was shot in the elbow and wounded in the eating area at Centennial High School .
The shooting occurred an hour after classes were dismissed , and students in after - school activities were sent home .
33 ( including the perpetrator )
23 Virginia Tech shooting :
23-year - old student , Seung - Hui Cho , armed with 2 pistols , a Glock 19 and a Walther P22 , killed thirty - two students and faculty members at Virginia Tech , and wounded another seventeen students and faculty members in two separate attacks before committing suicide .
The first attack was on the second floor of Norris Hall where he shot a young girl and another student that came to help .
He then changed his clothes , and made multiple videos stating that he " had to do it for his brothers and sisters . "
He then made several pictures of him with hammers , large knifes , and guns .
He then chained the doors shut and shot and killed 30 more students and staff .
He also shot 17 more students and staff wounding them .
6 more students were also wounded from non gunshot injuries .
He was described as extremely quiet and lonely .
During the rampage he wore a black T - shirt , a russet vest , a backwards baseball cap , black military cargo pants , black boots , and grip gloves .
The incident is the 3rd deadliest shooting by a lone gunman in modern U.S. history and the deadliest school shooting in modern U.S. history .
September 21,2007
Dover , Delaware 1 1 Two 17-year - old Delaware State University freshmen were shot on campus .
One died 32 days later on October 23 , from critical injuries sustained in the attack .
A suspected perpetrator , Loyer D. Braden , a freshman from East Orange , New Jersey , was arrested and charged with attempted murder ; the charges were dismissed in May 2009 .
0 1
At Hamilton High School , a student shot a 16-year - old student in the leg during a classroom argument over rap music .
The victim 's injury was not life - threatening .
3 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
Latina Williams , a 23-year - old nursing student at Louisiana Technical College killed two classmates and herself in a second floor classroom .
0
1 43-year - old 11th grade algebra teacher , Sergio Miranda , was shot by 19-year - old Patrick Lively , outside Miami Carol City Senior High School during a robbery but was expected to survive .
In 2011 , Lively received a life sentence .
0 1
Following a feud that started off campus earlier in the week , a 19-year - old senior was shot by a 17-year - old sophomore during a gym class held in the cafeteria with about 75 other students at Mitchell High School , before handing the gun to a coach making no attempt to flee .
The victim suffered at least two gunshot wounds and was in critical condition , the suspected shooter was in custody . "
He walked up to him , shot him , and made a statement to the coach that ' It 's over now , ' " , said principal , Daniel Ware . 1 0 Murder of Larry King : 14-year - old Brandon McInerney , shot 15-year - old Lawrence " Larry " King , twice in the head in the computer laboratory of E.O. Green Junior High School .
McInerney was apprehended in a nearby neighborhood .
King , who was openly homosexual , died two days later .
McInerney was initially charged with a hate crime , but that charge was dropped .
McInerney pleaded guilty to second - degree murder and was sentenced to 21 years in prison .
6 ( including the perpetrator )
21 Northern Illinois University shooting :
27-year - old Steven Kazmierczak , shot multiple people with a shotgun in a classroom of Northern Illinois University , killing five and injuring 21 , before taking his own life .
Kazmierczak was not enrolled at the university , but had attended in the years prior to the attack .
1 0 26-year - old Omero Mendez was waiting at the Lakota Middle School campus to pick up his girlfriend 's son .
He was confronted by 16-year - old Luis F. Cosgaya - Alvarez and two of his friends , driving in an SUV .
Cosgaya - Alvarez flashed gang signs at Mendez , and shot him once in the head .
Mendez later died of his injuries .
Cosgaya - Alvarez was arrested a few days later in Seattle and was charged with murder .
Cosgaya - Alvarez pleaded guilty to murder and weapon enhancements , and was sentenced to eighteen years in prison .
1 0
At Central High School , 15-year - old Jamar Siler killed 15-year - old Ryan McDonald .
In 2011 , Siler was sentenced to thirty years in prison after pleading guilty to murder in a plea agreement .
September 2 , 2008
Willoughby , Ohio 0 0 A 15-year - old student brought a handgun into South High School , and shot two rounds , one into the ceiling and one shattering a trophy case .
The student then put the gun to his head .
Then Assistant Principal Jeff Lyons talked the student out of doing any harm .
1 3 16-year - old Christopher Walker , was killed , and three other teenagers were seriously wounded during a drive - by shooting near Henry Ford High School , soon after classes let out .
Three teenagers were arrested and charged in connection with the shooting .
The shooter , 15-year - old William Morton , was sentenced to life without parole , and Devon Bell was sentenced to forty - two years of prison .
2 1 University of Central Arkansas shootings : Four young men fatally shot two students , 18-year - old Ryan Henderson , and 19-year - old Chavares Block , and wounded a 19-year - old campus visitor in the leg , outside the Arkansas Hall dormitory of University of Central Arkansas .
1 0
15-year - old Amanda Collette , was killed in the hallway at Dillard High School .
The shooter , 15-year - old Teah Wimberly , was sentenced to twenty - five years to life on a first - degree murder charge .
0
5
After attendees were leaving a basketball game at Dunbar High School , a truck pulled over and someone inside fired shots at the crowd , wounding five people , three critically .
18-year - old Georgio Dukes , was arrested and charged a week later with five counts of felony aggravated battery with a firearm .
Police believe that the attack was gang - related . 0 3 18-year - old Odane Greg Maye , a former student of Hampton University , followed a 43-year - old pizza delivery man into his former dormitory .
Armed with three guns , Maye wounded the delivery man , then the dorm monitor .
Lastly , Maye shot himself in a suicide attempt .
He survived and was convicted of two charges of malicious wounding , two counts of using a gun in a felony ; burglary ; and shooting in an occupied building .
He was sentenced to fourteen years of prison in November 2009 , and was ordered by a judge to pay more than $ 62,000 in restitution to his victims for lost wages .
1 0 20-year - old Jabrai Copney , 23-year - old Jason Aquino , and 19-year - old Blayn Jiggetts , of New York City , invited 21-year - old Justin Cosby , of Cambridge , into a Harvard College dormitory .
After trying to rob him of a pound of marijuana , they shot him .
The victim , Cosby , was pronounced dead early the next day .
Copney turned himself in three days later , and was convicted of murder .
His partners pleaded guilty to armed robbery and manslaughter .
His girlfriend , 21-year - old Brittany Smith , pleaded guilty to accessory after the fact , firearm possession , and misleading a grand jury .
1
( the perpetrator ) 0
15-year - old Larose - Cut Off Middle School student , Justin Doucet , carried his backpack to a restroom , where he put on camouflage clothes and took out a semi - automatic handgun before storming into a nearby classroom .
He attempted to shoot a teacher , Jessica Plaisance , but the gun did not fire .
He returned to the restroom and shot himself in the head , dying a week later of his wounds .
0
3
After students were being let out of International Studies Academy on the first day of summer school classes , a man left a car and opened fire , wounding three people , including a 17-year - old female student .
An 18-year - old man was arrested for being an accessory in the crime .
0 1
A 20-year - old student was wounded in the parking lot of Skyline College after an argument between him and other men .
The college campus was placed on lockdown .
Three San Francisco residents , 18-year - old Germaine B. Benjamin , 20-year - old Dimaryea J. McGhee , and 18-year - old Jacori W. Bender , were each arrested and charged with felony firearm offenses .
2010–2014 Pakistan .
February 12 , 2010 3 3 University of Alabama in Huntsville
shooting : 44-year - old biology professor , Amy Bishop , killed the chairman of the biology department , 52-year - old Gopi K. Podila , and biology professors , 50-year - old , Maria Ragland Davis and 52-year - old Adriel D. Johnson .
She also wounded biology professors , Luis Rogelio Cruz - Vera and Joseph G. Leahy , and staff assistant , Stephanie Monticciolo .
Bishop was sentenced to life without parole .
February 19 , 2010 0 1
Less than a week after Northern Illinois University solemnly marked the second anniversary of a mass shooting on campus that claimed the lives of five students , the DeKalb school was the scene of further gun violence .
24-year - old NIU student , Brian Mulder , refused entry to 22-year - old Zachary R. Isaacman , when he had tried to follow a female resident into the Stevenson Residence Hall North , where they were living , because he was not a resident .
Moments later , while outside the dorm smoking with a friend , Mulder was shot by Isaacman , with a handgun in the leg above the knee .
Isaacman tried to flee , but was caught by police within minutes .
February 23 , 2010 0 2
At Deer Creek Middle School , 32-year - old Bruco Strong Eagle Eastwood opened fire from a rifle in a parking lot , and wounded two eighth - graders Reagan Webber and Matt Thieu , before being restrained by 57-year - old Math teacher , David Benke , and held until his arrest .
The boy 's wounds were critical for the four days following the shooting .
In October 2011 , Eastwood was found not guilty by reason of insanity .
March 9 , 2010 2 ( including the perpetrator )
1 51-year - old Ohio State University custodian , Nathaniel Brown , killed a co - worker and wounded another before committing suicide .
May 11 , 2010 0 1
A West Bladen High School student was shot on campus as students were leaving school for the day .
Investigators said the incident started when a fight broke out between two groups of students near the high school 's entrance .
September 8 , 2010 0 2 Two students were wounded in front of Mumford High School by 17-year - old Steven Jamal Hare .
He was tried as an adult and charged with assault with intent to kill .
In 2012 , Hare was sentenced to 27 years in prison .
September 28 , 2010 1
( the perpetrator ) 1
A 19-year - old sophomore student Colton Tooley , wielding an AK-47 and wearing a ski mask , opened fire and then killed himself in a University of Texas library October 1 , 2010 1 0 15-year - old student Jose Daniel Cisneros was killed after being shot several times on an athletic field at Alisal High School while walking to school .
Police said that the shooting was gang - related . October 8 , 2010 0 2
41-year - old Brendan O'Rourke climbed over a fence and opened fire with a handgun in a playground of Kelly Elementary School , which had 230 students ; two second - grade female students were grazed in the arms before O'Rourke was subdued by a construction worker .
He was found guilty of seven counts of attempted murder and was sentenced to 189 years to life in prison .
November 29 , 2010 1 ( the perpetrator ) 0
15-year - old Samuel Hengel , took 23 students and a teacher hostage inside a classroom of Marinette High School for five hours .
He had stormed into the class , firing with a handgun at a movie projector .
Police persuaded Hengel to release the hostages .
After officers entered the building , Hengel shot himself in the head .
He died the next day . December 6 , 2010 0 1 In a gang - related attack outside Aurora Central High School , a 17-year - old girl was paralyzed .
She was one of a group of students outside the school .
20-year - old Luis Enrique Guzman - Rincon , had fired shots from a car trying to hit gang rivals .
Guzman - Ricon was sentenced to thirty - five years in prison .
January 5 , 2011 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 2
At Millard South High School , 18-year - old student , Robert Butler Jr. , killed assistant principal Dr. Vicki Kaspar and wounded principal Curtis Case before opening fire at police in the front office area , causing the school nurse to be wounded by gunshot debris .
Butler then drove to a parking lot and shot himself as police cornered him .
March 25 , 2011 0 1
Michael Phelps , a 15-year - old suspended student , returned to Martinsville West Middle School with a handgun .
In the entrance of the school , Phelps shot 15-year - old Chance Jackson twice in the abdomen , critically wounding him .
Phelps fled the school and dropped the handgun ; he was arrested shortly after .
Jackson had to undergo surgery three times to save his life ; he suffers from post - traumatic stress disorder .
Phelps was convicted of attempted murder in August 2011 , and was sentenced to thirty years in prison and five years of probation .
March 31 , 2011 1 5
Multiple gunmen opened fire during a powder puff football game at Worthing High School .
One man , an 18-year - old former student named Tremaine De Ante ' Paul , died .
Five other people were injured .
May 23 , 2011 0 1
A 14-year - old male student was accused of firing a handgun on the campus of Highlands Intermediate School , wounding one student .
The gunman was arrested on suspicion of attempted murder .
Two other suspects were arrested in connection with the shooting .
August 19 , 2011
Albany , Georgia 0 1 An Albany State University student was shot on campus .
October 24 , 2011 0 1
Cape Fear High School shooting : 15-year - old Catilyn Abercrombie , was shot in the neck with a rifle by fellow student , 15-year - old Charles Underwood , at Cape Fear High School .
She was hospitalized for two months in a serious condition .
Underwood was arrested and charged with attempted murder .
He was convicted of attempted first - degree murder and sentenced to fifteen years in prison .
December 8 , 2011 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 22-year - old , Ross Truett Ashley , part - time business student at Radford University , killed a police officer engaged in an unrelated traffic stop on the campus of Virginia Tech , he then committed suicide in a nearby parking lot .
December 9 , 2011 0 2
Two students were shot after school at Harwell Middle School in Edinburg , Texas while trying out for their school 's basketball team .
The shooting allegedly was done by an adult off campus , who was shooting at a target range .
January 10 , 2012 0 1
A student opened fire with a handgun at North Forest High School , wounding another student .
The shooter said that he had been confronted by three students who had been bullying him and he shot in self - defense .
He hit a 16-year - old bystander in the leg .
The 18-year - old suspect was charged with aggravated assault with a deadly weapon .
February 27 , 2012
3 3 Chardon High School shooting : 17-year - old Thomas " T. J. " Lane , took a semi - automatic handgun and a knife to Chardon High School , where he fired ten shots at a group of students sitting in the cafeteria .
He killed three boys and wounded three other students .
One 16-year - old died immediately , two others died the following day .
Lane was arrested early the next morning while standing near his car .
He was charged as an adult with murder , attempted murder , and firearms offenses .
In March 2013 , he was convicted and sentenced to three life sentences without the possibility of parole .
March 6 , 2012 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
A murder - suicide resulted in two deaths on the campus of the Episcopal School of Jacksonville .
Shane Schumerth , a Spanish teacher who had been fired that morning returned to the campus in the early afternoon via a pedestrian entrance , armed with an AK-47 which he concealed in a guitar case .
He entered the office of the Head of School , Dale Regan , and fired multiple shots , fatally wounding her .
Schumerth then killed himself , in the office .
April 2 , 2012 7 3 Oikos University
shooting :
43-year - old One L. Goh , was accused of shooting dead seven students with a handgun and wounding three others at Oikos University , a Christian college .
He fled the scene , stealing a victim 's car , and was apprehended hours later nearby .
Goh was charged with seven counts of murder .
In January 2013 , Goh was determined to be mentally unfit for trial and committed for treatment .
August 16 , 2012 0 2
Two Hamilton High School students were wounded in the parking lot of the school .
The attack was believed to be gang - related . August 27 , 2012 0 1
15-year - old Robert Gladden , fired two shots with a shotgun inside the cafeteria at Perry Hall School .
He hit a 17-year - old senior in the lower back , causing critical wounds .
The youth has Down syndrome .
Gladden was subdued by two school faculty members , and arrested .
In February 2013 , he was sentenced to thirty - five years in prison on attempted murder charges .
September 7 , 2012 0 0
A 14-year - old student fired multiple gunshots in a classroom ceiling at Normal Community High School , and was tackled by a teacher .
Nobody was injured .
The student was arrested and charged with sixteen felony counts .
October 19 , 2012 1 0
18-year - old Banner Academy South student , Terrance Wright , was killed during an attempted robbery .
Wright was approached by five would - be robbers as he left the school about 3:40 p.m ..
He was shot in the chest as he fought back when one assailant was going through his pockets .
Wright had been picked on at his previous high school because he was gay , which led him to transfer to Banner .
October 31 , 2012 0 4 At a Halloween party on the University of Southern California campus , an argument escalated and 20-year - old Brandon Spencer , used a handgun to shoot rival gang member , Geno Hall , seven times , critically wounding him .
Spencer wounded three other people , none were students at USC , they were hospitalized with less serious injuries .
Spencer was arrested just minutes after the shooting , which took place outside USC 's Grand Ballroom at around 11:30 p.m.
In April 2014 , he was convicted of attempted murder and sentenced to forty years to life in prison .
December 14 , 2012 28 ( including the perpetrator ) 2 Sandy Hook Elementary School
shooting :
20-year - old Adam Lanza , killed twenty - six people and himself .
He first killed his mother at their shared home before taking her guns and driving to the school .
Lanza brought four guns with him .
He killed twenty first - grade children aged six and seven during the attack at school , along with six adults , including four teachers , the principal , and the school psychologist .
Two other persons were injured .
Lanza then killed himself as police arrived at the school .
January 10 , 2013 0 2 16-year - old student , Bryan Oliver , entered a science classroom of Taft Union High School with a shotgun and opened fire , critically wounding 16-year - old student Bowe Cleveland .
He shot at but missed another student .
The classroom teacher Ryan Heber convinced Oliver , to drop his weapon .
He was later arrested .
On January 14 , he was charged with two counts of attempted murder and assault with a firearm .
He was convicted and accepted a plea deal with a sentence of 27 years and 4 months .
According to the attorney for the Cleveland family , they were not satisfied with the sentence .
January 12 , 2013 0 1 A 16-year - old Osborn High School student was shot and wounded after a basketball game .
January 15 , 2013 0 2
A 34-year - old gunman wounded an administrator in his office on the fourth floor of Stevens Institute of Business and Arts .
The suspected gunman , Sean Johnson , a part - time student , wounded himself in a stairwell .
Both the administrator and Johnson were hospitalized in stable conditions .
Johnson was charged with three felony charges , including assault .
January 15 , 2013
3 0 Two people were killed and a third person was wounded at the parking lot of Hazard Community and Technical College .
The third victim , 12-year - old Taylor Cornett , died from her wounds the next day .
21-year - old Dalton Lee Stidham , was arrested and charged with three counts of murder .
He was sentenced to life in prison in 2014 .
January 16 , 2013 1 0
A 17-year - old boy , Tyrone Lawson , was killed in a parking lot of Chicago State University .
The shooting happened after high school basketball games held on the campus , where Lawson had been a spectator .
Police arrested two brothers , Michael McNabb , 33 , and Brian Hewlett ( under the alias Stephen Gilbert ) , 30 after the shooting and recovered a weapon .
January 22 , 2013 0 3 Lone Star College –
North Harris shooting :
Outside Lone Star College – North Harris , two men got into an argument .
One wounded the other .
He also wounded a maintenance man , and accidentally shot himself in the leg .
The shooter fled into the woods and was arrested hours later .
The charges against the initial suspect were dropped and another man was arrested .
January 31 , 2013 0 0
An argument between two rival gangs escalated to what police described as a " gun battle " at Cesar Chavez High School .
Approximately fifteen shots were fired in the vicinity of people waiting to get into a scheduled boys ' basketball game .
No one was injured .
January 31 , 2013 0 2 A 14-year - old male student was wounded at Price Middle School .
The gunman , a 15-year - old student , was believed to be arguing with the other student before using a handgun to shoot him .
A teacher was also wounded .
Afterward , the gunman was disarmed by a school resource officer and arrested ; police charged him with aggravated assault .
March 18 , 2013 1
( the perpetrator ) 0 At the University of Central Florida , 30-year - old student James Oliver Seevakumaran pulled a fire alarm at the Tower One dormitory , to attract a crowd .
He pointed a handgun at his roommate and threatened to shoot him in their room ; he released the roommate , who ran out and called 9 - 1 - 1 .
Seevakumaran then fatally shot himself in the head .
Authorities found an assault weapon , a couple hundred rounds of ammunition and four homemade bombs inside his backpack .
April 12 , 2013 0 2 New River Community College
shooting incident : Two women were wounded during a shooting at the campus of New River Community College .
18-year - old Neil Allen MacInnis , was taken into custody .
In June 2014 , he was sentenced to 38 years in prison .
April 16 ,
2013 0 3 Three students were injured on the campus of Grambling State University .
April 18 , 2013 1 0
Three days after committing the Boston Marathon bombings , while still at large , the brothers Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and Tamerlan Tsarnaev shot and killed Massachusetts Institute of Technology campus police officer Sean Collier in his patrol car near MIT 's Ray and Maria Stata Center .
About three hours after the MIT shooting and after carjacking a vehicle , Tamerlan died in a gunfight with police in Watertown , Massachusetts .
Another officer was seriously wounded .
Shot in the neck and hiding in a boat parked nearby , Dzhokhar was arrested 18 hours later , and hospitalized in critical condition .
He was sentenced to death in 2015 .
May 14 , 2013 0 0 Allegedly responding to a student fight , a mother of a student fired a weapon on the campus of Ossie Ware Mitchell Middle School .
No one was injured .
June 7 , 2013 6 ( including the perpetrator ) 4 2013
Santa Monica shooting :
23-year - old John Zawahri , began a killing spree at his home .
After killing his 55-year - old father , Samir " Sam " Zawahri , and 25-year - old brother , Chris Zawahri , he set the house ablaze .
Dressed all in black with body armor and wielding an AR-15-type semi - automatic rifle , Zawahri carjacked 41-year - old Laura Siska , shooting 50-year - old Debra Fine , as she attempted to intervene , before forcing Siska to drive to Santa Monica College .
Upon arriving on the college campus , Zawahri began shooting at passing vehicles , including a police car and a city bus , leaving three people with minor injuries .
Zawahri next targeted a Ford Explorer , killing the driver , 68-year - old campus groundskeeper , Carlos Navarro Franco , and fatally wounding the passenger , his 26-year - old daughter Marcela Diaz - Franco , a student at the college , who died two days later .
68-year - old Margarita Gomez , who was collecting cans outside the library , died after being shot in the abdomen and chest .
Zawahri opened fire on students who were trying to run away .
It ended at the college library where he opened fire on students studying for finals , before being fatally wounded in an exchange of gunfire with responding police officers .
August 20 , 2013 0 0 Armed with an AK-47 and other weapons , 20-year - old Michael Brandon Hill fired six shots inside the front office of Ronald E. McNair Discovery Learning Academy .
He barricaded himself in the office , where police returned fire .
Nobody was injured .
Children were evacuated .
After talking with school bookkeeper , Antoinette Tuff in the front office , he was persuaded to surrender before anyone was hurt .
Hill was arrested and charged .
August 23 , 2013 1 2 15-year - old student , Roderick Bobo , was killed during a football game at North Panola High School in what was termed a gang - related shooting .
Two others were injured in the shooting .
Three men were charged as being responsible for the crime .
August 30 , 2013 0 1
A 15-year - old male student was shot at Carver High School , at 2:30 p.m ..
He was hospitalized with minor injuries .
An 18-year - old male student was apprehended without further incident .
The suspected gunman is charged with assault with a deadly weapon inflicting serious injury , carrying a concealed gun , possessing and discharging a firearm , and carrying a firearm onto educational property .
The shooting was believed related to a dispute between the suspect and the victim .
October 4 , 2013 0 2
A 16-year - old student was shot in the hip outside Agape Christian Academy after a fight broke out at 2 p.m ..
An innocent bystander was hit by a stray bullet or shrapnel .
The two victims were treated for minor injuries .
The suspected shooter reportedly fled in a car with several other males , and was not caught .
October 21 , 2013 2 ( including the perpetrator )
2 12-year - old seventh - grade student Jose Reyes opened fire with a handgun at the basketball courts of Sparks Middle School , injuring one student in the shoulder .
Michael Landsberry , a teacher and veteran , tried to intervene and was killed by Reyes .
Reyes also wounded a student trying to help the teacher .
Reyes then committed suicide by shooting himself in the head .
The shooting happened before classes , and the school was evacuated and was closed for the week .
November 2 , 2013 0 1 A 21-year - old student was wounded at North Carolina A&T State University .
The victim was hospitalized for serious but non - life - threatening injuries .
The university was temporarily locked down that night .
No suspects are in custody .
November 3 , 2013 0 2
A Stephenson High School student and a janitor were shot in an apparent confrontation between football team members and a group of teens who were not attending the school .
Both were innocent bystanders .
November 13 , 2013 0
3
After classes ended , at least one gunman came out of the woods and opened fire on three students as they were walking to their cars at Brashear High School .
One student was grazed in the head , another was struck in the neck and shoulder , and a third was hit in the leg and foot .
Six people were taken into custody .
The shooting is believed to be drug - related .
December 4 , 2013 0 1
A 15-year - old student was wounded by a 17-year - old student near a soccer field on the campus of West Orange High School .
The shooting occurred after a fight broke out between the two students .
The 17-year - old suspected shooter was taken into custody several miles away from the school , and is charged with attempted murder , aggravated battery with a firearm , possession of a firearm by a minor and possession of a firearm on school grounds .
In October 2014 , the shooter was sentenced to twenty - five years in prison .
December 13 , 2013 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
18-year - old Karl Pierson , shot 17-year - old student Claire Davis in the head , fatally injuring her , in a hallway in Arapahoe High School .
Pierson then took his own life .
Pierson was armed with a shotgun , three Molotov cocktails , and a machete .
His intention was to shoot the librarian who had disciplined him .
Claire Davis died from her injuries on December 21 , 2013 . December 19 , 2013 0 1 Four teens ( 16 , 16 , 16 and 17 years old ) entered Edison High School in what was believed as a gang - initiation process .
After accosting a 62-year - old woman about a mile away from school grounds , they found an athletic trainer who taught at Edison High and shot him several times in the leg and stomach .
January 9 , 2014 0 1 A 16-year - old student was charged with bringing a gun to school at Liberty Technology Magnet High School and shooting a classmate in the thigh .
The incident occurred outside the front of the school .
January 13 , 2014 0 1 A 14-year - old boy was shot outside of a basketball game at the Hillhouse High School athletic facility , suffering wounds in his hand and leg.[cite ] January 14 , 2014 0 3 Two people were wounded inside the gymnasium of Berrendo Middle School , at about 8:10 a.m .. An 11-year - old boy and a 13-year - old girl were airlifted to a hospital in Lubbock , Texas in critical condition .
The 12-year - old suspected shooter , Mason Campbell , a seventh grade student , was apprehended at the scene after he was talked down by a staff member and dropped the shotgun .
A staff member received minor injuries .
Campbell was charged with three counts of aggravated battery with a deadly weapon .
He was sentenced to a maximum sentence of confinement in a juvenile detention facility until he is twenty one years old .
January 17 , 2014 0 2
A student allegedly shot two other students in the gymnasium at Delaware Valley Charter School .
Both victims , a male and a female , were shot in the arm .
They were taken to a nearby hospital and are in stable condition , police say .
Police Commissioner Charles Ramsey said at a news conference that the shooter ran out of the school after the shooting but was taken into custody near his home .
17-year - old Raisheem Rochwell was arrested and charged as an adult for aggravated assault , recklessly endangering another person and firearms offenses .
Rochwell was sentenced to two years of juvenile detention .
January 20 , 2014 0 1
One person was critically injured at Widener University .
The incident occurred around 10 p.m. outside the university sport 's complex and led to an 8-hour university lock - down .
The suspect was not immediately found .
January 21 , 2014 1 0 A 21-year - old student , Andrew Boldt , was killed in a classroom building on the campus of Purdue University .
24-year - old student Cody Cousins was found guilty of the murder and was sentenced to sixty - five years of prison .
In October 2014 , Cousins committed suicide in his cell .
January 24 , 2014 1 0 A 20-year - old student was killed at South Carolina State University .
A 19-year - old was arrested and charged with murder .
January 25 , 2014 1 0
A man was killed at Los Angeles Valley College .
Two suspects were arrested in the fatal shooting .
January 27 , 2014 0 1
A group of students at Rebound High School got in an argument in the school 's parking lot .
One student pulled out a gun and shot another student in the ensuing altercation .
An 18-year - old suspect is facing charges of attempted murder .
January 28 , 2014 0 1
One student was shot in the leg in an apparent altercation over a gambling debt at Tennessee State University .
January 30 , 2014 0 1 Three students were fighting in a parking lot of Eastern Florida State College and one pulled out a gun and shot another of the students .
All three students claimed self - defense .
January 31 , 2014 0 1 After a basketball game at North High School , there was gunfire in a parking lot of the school .
Six males in a black jeep had come moments before the shooting and returned at the time it happened .
A 15-year - old girl was injured by a ricocheting bullet .
While officers were gaining control of the area , teachers on the scene led students into the school building for safety .
February 10 , 2014 0 1
A 16-year - old student was shot in the stomach on the campus of Salisbury High School during a dispute in the school gym .
17-year - old suspect was charged with assault with a deadly weapon with intent to kill inflicting serious injury , possession of a firearm on school property and discharging a weapon on school property .
February 10 , 2014 0 0
Five shots were fired in the parking lot of Charles F. Brush High School , including one which hit an unoccupied police car .
No one was reported to be injured , though a school basketball game was going on at the time .
February 12 , 2014 0 1
A male victim was shot in the back in a possible gang - related drive - by shooting near the University of Southern California .
The suspect fled into the University Campus .
The victim was last reported in stable condition before being transported to a local hospital .
February 22 , 2014 0 1
A shooting involving a campus police officer occurred at a Georgia Regents University dormitory complex .
A male suspect entered a vehicle and nearly struck an officer , who opened fire .
The suspect was taken to Georgia Regents Medical Center with injuries that were not believed to be critical .
March 25 , 2014 0 0
An argument between students led to shots being fired in a Benjamin Banneker High School parking lot during the afternoon .
Investigators believe multiple people were present when shots were fired , but it was not known how many could face charges for the incident .
No one was injured in the shooting .
April 11 , 2014 1 0
After a Friday evening student awards ceremony called " Grammy Night " , four men who were affiliated with a gang fired into a crowd in the parking lot of East English Village Preparatory Academy .
One 19-year - old , Darryl Smith , was fatally shot in the head .
Smith was not a student at the academy .
May 4 , 2014 0 1
Two men fired shots inside a dormitory at Paine College on Sunday , injuring one student in the head .
Neither of the suspects were students at the college .
May 5 , 2014 0 1
An active shooter situation was reported at Paine College on Monday with one person reported to be shot .
The suspect was apparently apprehended and in custody .
It was the second shooting incident to occur at the college campus in two days .
May 8 , 2014 0 1
A person was shot on a student parking lot roof at Georgia Gwinnett College , receiving an injury .
The specific cause has not been identified .
May 14 , 2014 0 1
A 14-year - old student was injured during a drive - by shooting in front of John F. Kennedy High School at 8:30
a.m ..
He was shot as he was running towards the school campus after a fight took place .
The student suffered a serious but stable injury to his leg .
Police are searching for a suspect .
June 5 , 2014 1 3 19-year - old students , Paul Lee and Sarah Williams , and 24-year - old student , Thomas Fowler , were shot inside a hallway of Otto Miller Hall at Seattle Pacific University .
Freshman Lee was rushed to Harborview Medical Center but later died .
The shooter was subdued with pepper spray and tackled to the ground by student building monitor , Jon Meis , as he paused to reload his shotgun .
26-year - old Aaron Rey Ybarra was arrested at the scene and has been charged with premeditated and attempted murder .
June 10 , 2014 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 1
At around 8:30 a.m. shots were fired at Reynolds High School .
14-year - old freshman Emilio Hoffman was killed , a physical education teacher was injured , and the gunman , 15-year - old Jared Padgett , exchanged gunfire with police officers and then committed suicide in a restroom stall .
September 9 , 2014 0 1
Towards the end of the school day , one alternative school student in Miami was shot as a small group of students tussled .
The injury was minor , requiring hospitalization , and five young adults were later questioned .
September 11 , 2014 0 1
An elementary school teacher with a concealed weapon permit had her gun fire accidentally in a faculty bathroom .
The bullet shattered a toilet , and fragments of both the bullet and the porcelain injured her leg .
September 27 , 2014 0 1
A 20-year - old Indiana State University student was shot by another student on Saturday inside a residence hall .
The injuries were not fatal , and a full recovery was expected .
The shooter was arrested on the following day .
September 30 , 2014 0 1 Two students got in an argument at Albemarle High School around 7:30 a.m. on Tuesday , and one of the students shot the other twice including once in the leg .
The student who committed the shooting was allegedly involved in a stabbing of a football player last year at West Montgomery High School , which is only away in Mount Gilead , North Carolina .
The school had held an active shooter training over the summer , which prepared the school for this incident .
September 30 , 2014 0 1
One student was injured at Fern Creek Traditional High School .
The incident occurred around 1 p.m. , reportedly after student became enraged in a hallway and pulled out a gun .
The student was arrested later that day .
October 3 , 2014 1 0
After a homecoming football game , a fatal shooting of 17-year - old Kristofer Hunter , occurred in the Langston Hughes High School parking lot .
The assailant , 18-year - old Eric Dana Johnson Jr. , turned himself in a week later .
October 24 , 2014 5 ( including the perpetrator ) 1
Marysville Pilchuck High School shooting .
15-year - old freshman , Jaylen Fryberg , shot five students in the school cafeteria of Marysville Pilchuck High School , fatally wounding four , before committing suicide .
November 20 , 2014 1 ( the perpetrator ) 3
At around 12:40 a.m. EST , a gunman opened fired in or near the Strozier Library at Florida State University .
Three people suffered gunshot injuries and were taken to a local area hospital .
One was in critical condition , another was in good condition , and the third was shortly released after treatment .
The gunman , later identified as Myron May , an alumnus from the school , started firing towards responding police officers and was fatally shot by them on the steps of the library .
November 20 , 2014 1 1
Two teens were shot during a fight at Miami Carol City High School .
One of the boys died .
December 12 , 2014 0 4 Rosemary Anderson High School shooting : A gunman shot three students and a man outside Rosemary Anderson High School in north Portland .
A 16-year - old girl was in critical condition , while the others suffered minor injuries .
Two men , aged eighteen and twenty - two , were arrested in connection with the shooting .
2015
TO PRESENT Wisconsin Lutheran High School .
The student had unspecified injuries that were treated .
The father was shot in the knee and the teacher was grazed in the toe .
A 36-year - old man was charged in the shooting .
January 16 , 2015 0 2 Two were injured in gunfire that occurred after a Friday night basketball game .
One was injured directly by a bullet , the other by ricocheting glass .
February 4 , 2015 0 2 Two students were shot near the gymnasium of Frederick High School during a junior varsity ( JV ) boys ' basketball game .
Approximately two hundred students , staff , and faculty were placed on lockdown for several hours after the shooting while police searched for the suspects .
No suspects have been apprehended , although witnesses report seeing four black males dressed all in black who are considered by police to be suspects in this shooting .
February 14 , 2015 1 0
A teenager was found dead in the parking lot of Tenaya Middle School .
The shooting was reported to have occurred after school hours .
February 23 , 2015 0 3
Two students argued outside the music building at Bethune - Cookman University when one pulled out a gun .
Both had guns and it is not disclosed who did the shooting , injuring three students .
A reward was offered to help solve this case .
March 30 , 2015 0 1
Police said one person has been arrested for a shooting at Pershing Elementary School .
The shooting occurred in the parking lot , with a 34-year - old - man being shot in the buttocks .
April 13 , 2015 1 0
A faculty member was killed with a rifle in the school library of Wayne Community College .
The suspected 20-year - old gunman , Kenneth Stancil , was arrested in Florida the next day .
As of January 2017 , Stancil , an admitted Neo - Nazi is being investigated for a hate crime .
Stancil was later sentenced to life without parole for the murder .
April 16 , 2015 0 1
A police officer was shot outside a school in a school zone while he was directing school buses into J.B. Martin Middle School , and the suspect was apprehended at the scene .
April 27 , 2015 0 0
A 15-year - old student at North Thurston High School walked into the commons area and fired two shots into the ceiling from a .357 magnum pistol .
Brady Olson , a teacher at the school , was able to tackle the student before they could turn the gun on other students .
No one was injured or killed .
The student is facing charges of firing and possessing a gun on school property .
May 12 , 2015 0 2 Police report that a 16-year - old shot five bullets into a school bus and injured two students .
Apparently , there was an argument that touched on previous events .
May 24 , 2015 0 7
In the early morning hours of Memorial Day weekend , a group of people were at Southwestern Classical Academy in the parking lot .
Shots rang out and seven were injured , with two men being apprehended and charged .
August 27 , 2015 1 0
22-year - old student Christopher Starks was fatally shot in a student union building at Savannah State University .
The shooter has not been identified .
September 3 , 2015 1 2
A man was arguing with at least one other person escalated into a physical fight on the parking lot of Sacramento City College .
A man opened fire , killing a 25-year - old student and wounding two others .
The shooting suspect has not been arrested .
September 14 , 2015 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 A geography professor at Delta State University fatally shot a fellow history professor .
The geography professor was chased by police and eventually died of a self - inflicted gunshot wound .
September 30 , 2015 0 1
A principal was shot in the arm and wounded at Harrisburg High School after an argument with a student .
The suspect , a 16-year - old student at the school , was taken into custody and is charged with first - degree attempted murder .
October 1 , 2015 10 ( including the perpetrator ) 9 Umpqua Community College
shooting :
At around 10:40 a.m. PDT , a gunman , later identified as 26-year - old student Christopher Harper - Mercer , opened fire in a hall on the Umpqua Community College campus , killing eight students and one teacher , and injuring nine others .
The gunman later committed suicide after engaging responding police officers in a brief gunfight .
October 9 , 2015 1 3
One student died and three others were wounded in a shooting at Northern Arizona University .
It is unclear what sparked the shooting , which took place near Mountain View Hall , a dormitory that houses most of the campus ' students involved in Greek organizations .
An 18-year - old student was arrested and charged with murder and aggravated assault .
October 9 , 2015 1 1
One person died and another person was injured after someone opened fire outside a Texas Southern University dorm .
October 22 , 2015 1 3
One person was killed and three others were wounded in a shooting at an outdoor courtyard at Tennessee State University .
The shooting may have stemmed from an argument over a dice game .
A suspect has not been identified or arrested .
November 1 , 2015 1 1
One person died and another person was injured after someone opened fire on the campus of Winston - Salem State University .
A 21-year - old non - student suspect is sought .
November 20 , 2015 1 0
A 16-year - old student was fatally shot during a fight after school hours that involved multiple people on the campus of Mojave High School .
January 22 , 2016 0 1 A 15-year - old male was shot in the leg and injured during a night - time basketball game at Lawrence Central High School .
January 29 , 2016 0 0
A gunshot was fired during a fight in a stairwell at Franklin High School , and no injuries were reported .
Three people were detained .
February 9 , 2016 0 4
Four people , including two students , were injured during a basketball game event in the parking lot of Muskegon Heights High School .
February 12 , 2016 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 Two 15-year - old girls died in an apparent Murder - Suicide at Independence High School .
February 29 , 2016 0 4 15-year - old Cameron Smith , and 14-year - old Cooper Caffrey , were shot
when 14-year - old James Austin Hancock , opened fire in the Madison High School cafeteria with a .380 caliber handgun .
15-year - old Brant Murray , and 14-year - old Katherine Douchette , also suffered shrapnel injuries .
Hancock was apprehended in a nearby wooded field .
April 23 , 2016 1
( the perpetrator ) 2
Two students at a prom at Antigo High School were shot and injured by 18-year - old former student Jakob Wagner .
Wagner later exchanged fire with a school resource officer in the school 's parking lot , and was captured after being shot and wounded by police .
He died hours later in a hospital .
June 1 , 2016 3 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 2016
UCLA shooting .
Mainak Sarkar , age 38 , a Ph.D. student , killed his former professor , William S. Klug , age 39 , a professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering , in an engineering building at UCLA .
Sarkar then killed himself .
Sarkar , who lived in Minnesota , also killed his ex - wife , Ashley Hasti , age 31 , in her Brooklyn Park , Minnesota home .
June 8 , 2016 Dorchester , Massachusetts 1 3 One student was killed and three other individuals were injured when gunfire erupted outside of the Jeremiah Burke High School following a fire - alarm causing an evacuation of the school .
Two suspects have been arrested .
September 9 , 2016 1 2
A 14-year - old female student shot a 16-year - old girl in an Alpine High School restroom before committing suicide .
A police officer accidentally shot another officer during the incident .
September 28 , 2016
2 2 Townville Elementary School shooting :
Two students and one teacher were wounded after a teen opened fire at Townville Elementary School .
The suspect 's father was found dead at his home soon after the shooting .
One of the victims , six - year - old Jacob Hall , died 3 days after the shooting .
October 11 , 2016 0 1
A student was shot in the abdomen and wounded at Vigor High School .
The suspect , a 16-year - old boy , turned himself in and was charged with assault .
October 13 , 2016 0 2
Two students were shot and wounded on the front lawn of Linden McKinley STEM Academy .
One was shot in the shoulder and the other shot in the chest ; both were hospitalized in stable condition .
October 18 , 2016 0 4
Four students were shot outside June Jordan High School for Equity , a San Francisco public high school .
One female victim was in critical condition , while three male victims suffered minor injuries .
Two people were arrested in the shooting .
October 25 , 2016 Sandy , Utah 0 1 Police say the two teens ages 14 and 16 were involved in a confrontation on the far north end of Union Middle School .
The boys got into an argument .
The argument lead to a shooting .
The 14 year old shot the 16 year old twice .
He was sent to the hospital in critical but stable condition .
December 1 , 2016
Bountiful , Utah 0 0 At Mueller Park Junior High School , a 15-year - old student fired one shot into the ceiling and then pointed the weapon at his own neck .
The student was confronted verbally by a teacher and another student and later arrested in possession of a shotgun , a handgun , and ammunition for each .
January 20 , 2017
West Liberty , Ohio 0 1
A 17-year - old student was charged with attempted murder and other crimes after bringing a gun to West Liberty - Salem High School and firing two shots at a 17-year - old student in a bathroom with a shotgun .
The victim was injured .
The student " also is accused of discharging the weapon in the school 's hallway before returning to the bathroom , where he was eventually taken into custody . " January 20 , 2017
Seattle , Washington 0 1 A 34-year - old man was shot in Red Square at University of Washington while protesting the visit of controversial journalist Milo Yiannopoulos .
The shooter turned himself in to the university police and was later questioned and released without being charged with a crime .
January 27 , 2017
Naperville ,
Illinois 1 0
A 37-year - old Oswego man , named Matthew Lange , was shot at Scullen Middle School , which is a part of Indian Prairie School District 204 at about 7:30 PM .
The school is located at 2815 Mistflower Lane , Naperville , Illinois .
At the time of the shooting , there were two non - district organizations renting the building out .
The victim was waiting to pick his son up from a weekly Polish culture class .
He was shot in the head .
He was killed through his car window .
He was brought to Edward Hospital in Naperville .
The City is still seeking answers over a year later .
March 21 , 2017
King City , California 0 1
An 18-year - old King City High School student was shot outside the school 's auditorium .
The gunman ran across the school 's campus and baseball field , and fled the area .
The school was then placed on lockdown .
The victim was hospitalized with life - threatening injuries .
A suspect was arrested in August 2017 .
April 10 , 2017
San Bernardino , California 3 ( including the perpetrator ) 1 North Park Elementary School
shooting :
Cedric Anderson , age 53 , of Riverside , California , died of a self - inflicted gunshot wound after shooting and killing his estranged wife , Karen Elaine Smith , age 53 , in a classroom .
An eight - year - old student was also fatally shot , and a seven - year - old student was injured .
May 4 , 2017
Irving , Texas 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 0 North Lake College :
Adrian Victor Torres killed a 20-year - old student , Janeera Nickol Gonzalez , whom he was stalking .
He fatally shot her three times and the college went into lockdown before discovering that the suspect has died from a self - inflicted gunshot wound .
September 13 , 2017
Rockford ,
Washington 1 3 Freeman High School : Three students were injured and one killed after a shooter opened fire .
The suspect was armed with an AR-15 and a Pistol .
He shot one student with the AR-15 , but the gun jammed so he switched to his pistol .
He killed one student after shooting him twice in the stomach and once in the head .
He was stopped by a janitor .
The suspect , a 15-year - old student , ( Caleb Sharpe ) was taken into police custody .
September 20 , 2017
Mattoon , Illinois 0 1 Mattoon High School : A 14-year - old male student was subdued by a female teacher when he attempted to open fire in the school cafeteria at 11:33 a.m.
Multiple shots were fired in the process , and one student was struck in the chest and was driven to a nearby hospital suffering non - life - threatening wounds .
The student was taken into custody without further incident .
November 13 , 2017 Albany ,
Georgia 0 2 Two people were shot on the Albany State University campus .
November 14 , 2017
Rancho Tehama Reserve , California 6 ( including the perpetrator ) 18
Rancho Tehama Reserve shootings :
Neighbor on a rampage injured one student at Rancho Tehama Elementary School and fatally shot five adults at several locations .
The secretary heard the gunfire near the school and ordered the school to go on lockdown .
After a custodian and the teachers put it into action , 43 year - old Kevin Neal rammed a truck into the gate of the school and fired at the classrooms hitting one student when a bullet pierced the wall .
Neal fatally shot himself after sheriff 's deputies rammed his vehicle during a pursuit . December 7 , 2017 Aztec , New Mexico 3 ( including the perpetrator ) 0
Aztec High School shooting :
William Atchison , 21-year - old former male student snuck into Aztec High School disguised as a student and hid in an unlocked washroom with a Glock 9 mm hidden in his bag .
He retreated from the washroom after being spotted by a school custodian who chased him shouting " active shooter " and " lockdown " .
Atchinson was able to shoot and kill two students who were caught in the hallway before he killed himself .
He had been investigated in 2016 by the FBI when he asked " where to find cheap assault rifles for a mass shooting " on an online forum .
January 10 , 2018
Denison , Texas 0 0
A criminal justice club student picked up a loaded gun , belonging to an advisor , which the student thought was an unloaded training weapon .
She then shot at a wall target , unintentionally firing a bullet , which went through the wall and broke a window .
The advisor was a licensed peace officer permitted to carry a firearm on campus .
January 20 , 2018
Winston - Salem , North Carolina 1 0
A student was fatally shot at a party at 1 a.m. on the campus of Wake Forest University .
January 22 , 2018
Italy , Texas 0 1
A 16-year - old male student fired at a 15-year - old female classmate that he had briefly dated in the cafeteria of Italy High School .
The gunman left the school immediately after opening fire and was arrested . January 22 , 2018 New Orleans , Louisiana 0 1 Shots were fired from a truck in the parking lot of NET Charter High School , targeting a crowd of students during lunch time .
One student was slightly injured , apparently from injuries unrelated to gunfire .
One person was arrested in connection with the shooting .
January 23 , 2018 Marshall County
, Kentucky 2 18 Marshall County High School shooting :
Gabriel Ross Parker , a 15-year - old male student shot 16 people in the lobby at Marshall County High School and caused non - gunshot injuries to four others .
Two 15-year - old students died : one killed at the scene , another died of wounds at Vanderbilt Medical Center .
January 25 , 2018
Mobile , Alabama 0 0
A disagreement between two 16-year - old students escalated when Jonah Neal pulled out a handgun .
School administrators noticed the weapon and tried to calm him ; Neal then fled across campus .
He was pursued by staff until he fired the gun four or five times into the air .
Nobody was injured .
Neal was taken into custody and charged for multiple offenses , including possession of a weapon on school property .
January 31 , 2018
Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 1 0
A fight began in the school parking lot outside a basketball game , and the school went into lockdown after shots were fired .
A 32-year - old male was transported by private vehicle to Nazareth Hospital with two gunshot wounds in his leg .
He was transferred by helicopter to another hospital , but died from his injuries .
Police announced that they are searching for an adult male suspect .
February 1 , 2018 Los Angeles ,
California 0 5 Two 15-year - old students , a boy and a girl , were shot and injured inside a classroom at Sal Castro Middle School , which shares a campus with Belmont High School .
Three other people suffered injuries unrelated to gunfire .
A 12-year - old girl was arrested and charged with negligent discharge of a firearm .
February 5 , 2018 Oxon Hill , Maryland 0 1
A student was taken to the hospital after exiting Oxon Hill High School and going to speak to individuals in a vehicle who then attempted to rob , and subsequently shot and wounded him in the school 's parking lot .
Two other students were arrested and charged with attempted murder and robbery .
February 9 , 2018 Nashville ,
Tennessee 0 1 Pearl - Cohn High School : A student was shot five times in the parking lot .
February 14 , 2018 Parkland ,
Florida 17 17 Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting :
A 19-year - old former student ( Nikolas Cruz ) whose behavior had led to his expulsion began shooting students and staff members with a rifle at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School after activating a fire alarm .
Seventeen people were killed , and 17 others were injured .
The suspect shot the students on the first and third floor of the complex .
The suspected shooter blended in with the crowd of fleeing students and was arrested in a residential area of neighboring Coral Springs after walking away from the school .
He was later charged with murder and attempted murder .
The suspect had sat down at a McDonald 's , then went to a nearby Subway .
February 24 , 2018 Savannah ,
Georgia 1 0 Savannah State University : A non - student was shot on campus and later died .
February 27 , 2018
Itta Bena , Mississippi 0 1 Mississippi Valley State University :
A person was shot in a recreation center .
The injury was not life - threatening . February 27 , 2018 Norfolk ,
Virginia 0 1 Norfolk State University : A student was shot from an adjacent dorm room while doing homework .
He was not seriously injured .
March 2 , 2018
Mount Pleasant , Michigan 2 0 Central Michigan University
shooting : 19-year - old student James Eric Davis Jr. shot and killed his mother and father when they came to campus to take him home for spring break .
After the shooting Davis fled and the campus was placed on lockdown .
Around 15 hours later police arrested him and took him to a local hospital .
The incident disrupted the travel plans of students and campus activities for several days .
Davis was charged with two counts of murder and one count of unlawful possession of a firearm used to commit murder .
March 7 , 2018
Birmingham , Alabama 1 2 Huffman High School :
One student was killed and another injured when shots were fired in the school building , prompting the school to go into lockdown shortly after the bell rang for school dismissal .
Law enforcement originally labeled the shooting as " accidental " .
Subsequently , a 17-year - old male student was charged with manslaughter and will be charged as " being a certain person forbidden to possess a pistol " .
Although the school has metal detectors , they were not being used that day .
School resource officers were onsite at the time of the shooting .
March 7 ,
2018 Jackson ,
Mississippi 0 1 Jackson State University : A student was shot inside a dormitory .
His injuries were not life - threatening .
March 8 , 2018
Mobile , Alabama 0 1 University of South Alabama : One person was hospitalized after a shooting on campus .
March 9 , 2018
Lexington , Kentucky 0 1 ( the perpetrator ) Frederick Douglass High School : A 16-year - old male student unintentionally shot himself with a gun he had smuggled into a classroom , sustaining an injury to his left thumb .
Police announced they were charging him with wanton endangerment and possession of a weapon on school property .
After the shooting , the school superintendent announced that stationary metal detectors would be installed and all students would be required to enter through them .
March 13 , 2018
Seaside , California 0 1 Seaside High School :
A teacher accidentally discharged a firearm while teaching a public safety class , injuring one student . March 14 , 2018
Birmingham , Alabama 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 1 University of Alabama at Birmingham : A disgruntled employee entered the UAB Highlands Hospital on the campus of the University of Alabama at Birmingham and shot two hospital employees , fatally wounding one , on the second floor .
The perpetrator then shot and fatally wounded himself .
March 20 , 2018 Great Mills , Maryland 2 ( including the perpetrator ) 1
Great Mills High School : The school was placed on lockdown after a shooting occurred in the morning .
A 17-year - old male student , armed with a handgun , shot and fatally injured a female student ( with whom he had a prior relationship ) and wounded a male student .
The student shot himself in the head , fatally , while the school resource officer simultaneously shot at him .
April 12 , 2018 Raytown , Missouri 0 1 South Middle School
: A man was shot in the stomach in the parking lot during a track meet .
April 20 , 2018
Ocala , Florida 0 1 Forest High School :
A student shot through the door of the school with a Sawed - off shotgun shortly before a national school walkout for gun control measures .
The student had recently dropped out and had planned a much more serious school shooting .
His injuries were not life - threatening .
The 19-year - old former student was arrested .
May 11 , 2018
Palmdale , California 0 1 Highland High School : A 14-year - old former student allegedly fired a semi - automatic rifle shortly before classes were to begin .
A 15-year - old was struck in the shoulder but went into surgery and was expected to recover fully .
The suspect ditched the gun in a field and was arrested nearby , and faces a charge of attempted murder .
May 16 , 2018
Dixon , Illinois 0 1 ( the perpetrator ) Dixon High School : A 19-year - old student recently kicked off the football team allegedly fired shots prior to graduation rehearsal .
A school resource officer shot the suspect , who suffered non - life - threatening injuries .
May 18 , 2018 Santa Fe , Texas 10 13 ( including the perpetrator )
Santa Fe High School shooting : The school was evacuated when fire alarms were pulled at 7:45 am after students said they had heard gunshots .
The shooter ( Dimitrios Pagourtzis ) started in the art room , then went through the art hallway .
The shooter had a Remington 870 shotgun and a .38 caliber revolver .
Multiple IEDs , pressure cookers , Molotov cocktails , pipe bombs , propane tanks , and other homemade explosives were also found around the school and parking lot .
May 18 , 2018
Jonesboro , Georgia 1 3 Mount Zion High School :
An argument led to a shooting in a parking lot after a high school graduation ceremony for graduates of Perry Learning Center .
Mount Zion High School provided overflow parking for people attending the ceremony .
May 25 , 2018
Noblesville ,
Indiana 0 2 Noblesville West Middle School shooting : Two people were shot and injured in a shooting at Noblesville West Middle School in Noblesville , Indiana .
The shooter is an unnamed middle school student who exited his science classroom and re - entered with a gun .
When he returned , he shot a female student and the science teacher , identified as Jason Seamen .
Seamen was shot in the abdomen , hip , and forearm .
The gun was wrestled away by Seamen after both he and the female student were shot .
August 17 ,
2018 Wellington ,
Florida 0 2 Two people were shot and injured at a football game in Palm Beach Central High School in Wellington , Florida . August 20 , 2018
Atlanta , Georgia 0 0
A shootout erupted on the campus of Georgia State University the night before classes started .
August 30 , 2018 San Francisco , California 0 1 One student was injured when two students were joking around about guns , and one student discharged a firearm at Balboa High School in San Francisco , California .
4 students were arrested in this incident , and 2 were allowed to go back to school .
The school was on lockdown along with three other schools in the area for two hours .
September 5 , 2018 Providence , Rhode Island 1 1 ( the perpetrator ) William Parsons , a 15-year - old student at Central High School , was shot and killed outside Providence Career and Technical Academy in Providence , Rhode Island .
Police said that two young men got into an altercation and shots were fired , hitting the victim , who was uninvolved .
The 16-year - old suspect accidentally shot and injured himself while trying to get away , under a mile from the scene .
September 10 , 2018
Memphis ,
Tennessee 0 1
A teen girl was injured after shots were fired into school bus full of students attending Fairley High School .
September 11 , 2018 Las Vegas , Nevada 1 0 A 18-year - old student was shot at Canyon Springs High School near the baseball field and later died of his injuries at a hospital .
October 29 , 2018 Matthews ,
North Carolina 1 1 A David W. Butler High School freshman , 16 year old Jatwan Craig Cuffie , fatally shot sophomore Bobby McKeithen .
Cuffie is in custody and charged with first - degree murder .
December 13 , 2018
Richmond , Indiana 1 ( the perpetrator ) 0 A 14-year - old male attempted a shooting on Dennis Intermediate School .
Informed of his intentions by his own mother , police arrived just before he was able to begin his attack .
He was cornered in one of the school 's stairwells and died by a self - inflicted gunshot wound .
SEE ALSO
* List of school shootings in the United States by death toll
* List of school - related attacks * Mass shootings in the United States REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS * School Safety Interim Study Committee – Indiana Legislative Services Agency ( September 24 , 2013 )
* Federal Report Looks at Crime and Safety in Schools – Council for American Private Education ( CAPE )
( January 2015 )
* Indicators of School Crime and Safety : 2014 – National Center for Education Statistics ( July 9 , 2015 )
* Indicators of School Crime and Safety : 2014 – Council of State Governments Justice Center ( July 15 , 2015 )
* Selected Findings from the Indicators of School Crime and Safety : 2014
– Center for Evidence - Based Crime Policy
( CEBCP ) Symposium ( August 17 , 2015 )