ILLINOIS
WIRETAPPING LAW
Illinois 's wiretapping law ( 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 / Criminal Code of 2012 .
Article 14 , also called the Illinois eavesdropping law ) was a " two - party consent " law .
Illinois made it a crime to use an " eavesdropping device " to overhear or record a phone call or conversation without the consent of all parties to the conversation .
The law was ruled unconstitutional in 2014 by the Illinois Supreme Court .
The law defined an " eavesdropping device " as " any device capable of being used to hear or record oral conversation or intercept , retain , or transcribe electronic communication whether such conversation or electronic communication is conducted in person , by telephone , or by any other means " .
The law had been repeatedly and controversially used to arrest people who have video - taped police .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 2009 , Christopher Drew was arrested for " selling artwork without a permit " on State Street in the downtown Chicago Loop .
He also had charges brought against him for " felony eavesdropping on a government official . "
In August 2010 , Tiawanda Moore had criminal wiretapping charges brought against her for secretly recording police officers with her BlackBerry when she was filing a complaint for sexual harassment .
In August 2011 , a jury cleared her of the charges brought against her , and in 2012 Moore filed a federal suit against the city , alleging " unreasonable seizure , false arrest and malicious prosecution " .
COURT PROCEEDINGS Section::::Court proceedings .
In 2010 , the American Civil Liberties Union filed the lawsuit ACLU v. Alvarez against the State 's Attorney of Cook County , Anita Alvarez , to block prosecution of ACLU staff for recording police officers performing their duties in public places , one of the group 's long - standing monitoring missions .
On 2 March 2012 , Criminal Courts Judge Stanley Sacks deemed the Illinois wiretapping law unconstitutional , potentially criminalizing " wholly innocent conduct " .
In November 2012 , the Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal of this ruling .
Alvarez and other state 's attorneys , however , continued to pursue prosecutions against members of the general public who openly recorded on - duty police officers in public places .
As a result , on April 8 , 2013 , U.S. District Judge Amy St. Eve signed an order permanently enjoining Alvarez from enforcing the wiretapping law against any person who openly records the audible communications of police .
On March 20 , 2014 , the Illinois Supreme Court declared the Illinois wiretapping law unconstitutional unanimously in People v. Melongo and People v. Clark .
REVISED LAW Section::::Revised law .
Following the Melongo and Clark decisions , the state legislature drafted a bill amending the wiretapping statute to make it constitutionally compliant .
The bill was injected into an unrelated piece of legislation , and was passed as SB1342 late in the legislative session .
On December 30 , 2014 , Governor Pat Quinn signed the bill into law as Public Act 098 - 1142 .
SB1342 makes changes to the original language of the wiretapping law , adding that in order to commit a criminal offense , a person must be recording " in a surreptitious manner " .
The bill 's sponsors , Elaine Nekritz and Kwame Raoul , claim the law upholds the rights of citizens to record in public .
SEE ALSO
* Law of Illinois
* Glik v. Cunniffe REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Illinois Compiled Statutes ( 720 ILCS 5 )