UNITED STATES ECONOMIC CENSUS
The United States Economic Census is the U.S. federal government 's official five - year measure of American business and the economy .
It is conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau , and response is required by law .
Forms go out to nearly 4 million businesses , including large , medium and small companies representing all U.S. locations and industries .
Respondents are asked to provide a range of operational and performance data for their companies .
Trade associations , chambers of commerce , and businesses use information from the economic census for economic development , business decisions , and strategic planning purposes .
The next Economic Census will be conducted for the year ending December 2017 .
The Economic Census , together with the separately conducted censuses of agriculture and governments , covers virtually the entire economy , excepting only for forestry , agricultural support , rail transportation , and employment by private households .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Censuses have measured American economic activities since the first census of manufactures was taken in 1810 .
As the nation 's economy has grown , the scope of what is now called the Economic Census expanded to include retail and wholesale trade , construction industries , mining , and a broad array of services .
Early in the 19th century , Congress responded to an increase in industrial activity and ordered census takers — at that time , federal marshals — to " take an account of the several manufactures within their several districts , territories and divisions " as part of the 1810 United States Census .
As the marshals traveled from house to house counting the population , they asked questions on 25 broad categories of manufactured products and more than 200 kinds of goods .
In successive decades the census came to include certain non - manufacturing businesses as well , such as retail stores , lumber yards and butcher shops .
Then in 1902 , Congress authorized the establishment of a permanent Census Bureau , and at the same time directed that a census of manufactures be taken every five years .
The 1905 manufacturing census marked the first time a census of any kind was taken separately from the regular every 10 years population census .
The first census of business , covering retail and wholesale trade , was conducted in 1930 , and shortly thereafter was broadened to include some service trades .
The periodic economic censuses were suspended during World War II in favor of war - oriented surveys .
They resumed with the 1947 Census of Manufactures and the 1948 Census of Business .
The Economic Census almost took another hiatus when the administration of President Dwight Eisenhower failed to provide funding for the 1953 Economic Census .
Then , in October 1953 , the United States Secretary of Commerce appointed Dr. Ralph J. Watkins , then Director of Research for Dun and Bradstreet , to form an Intensive Review Committee to study the issue .
The Committee made its report , " Appraisal of Census Programs , " in February 1954 .
Its series of testimonials from the business , financial , professional , and governmental groups represented on the Committee led to the reinstatement of the Economic Census for 1954 .
The 1954 Economic Census was the first to fully integrate census taking for the various kinds of business .
The census provided comparable statistics across economic sectors , using consistent time periods , concepts , definitions , classification and reporting units .
For the first time , an electronic computer ( UNIVAC 1 ) was used to process Economic Census data .
The 1954 Economic Census also was the first to be taken by mail , using lists of firms provided from the administrative records of other federal agencies .
Since 1963 , administrative records have been used to provide basic statistics for very small firms , reducing or eliminating the need to send them census questionnaires .
The range of industries covered in the economic census has continued to expand .
The census of construction industries began on a regular basis in 1967 .
The scope of service industries coverage was broadened at various points over the following 25 years .
The census of transportation began in 1963 as a set of surveys covering travel , transportation of commodities , and trucks .
Starting in 1987 , census publications also reported on business establishments engaged in several transportation industries , paralleling the data on establishments in other sectors .
The final major expansion of the Economic Census took place in 1992 , adding more transportation industries , plus finance , insurance , real estate , communications , and utilities , a group accounting for more than 20 percent of U.S. gross domestic product .
The 1997 Economic Census was the first major statistical report based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) .
Developed cooperatively by the U.S. , Canada , and Mexico , NAICS replaced the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) system to provide greater comparability with international statistics .
The first survey of minority - owned businesses covered 1969 , and a parallel program began for women - owned businesses for 1977 .
Now titled the Survey of Business Owners , this program presents statistics according to the federal standard that allows respondents to report more than one race .
The survey also gathers expanded characteristics of businesses and their owners , including age and veteran status of the owners and the identification of home - based business and participation in franchising .
PURPOSES AND USES
*
The economic census is the major source of facts about the structure and functioning of Nation 's economy and provides vital information for government , business , industry and for general public .
*
The economic census provide a vital part of the framework for such composite measures as the GDP , input and output measures , production and price indices , and other statistical series that measure the short term changes in economic conditions .
* Policy making agencies of the Federal Government use data , especially in monitoring economic activity and providing assistance to business .
* State and local governments use the data to access business activities and tax bases within their authorities and to develop programs to attract tourists .
* Trade associations study trends in their own and competing industries and keep their members informed of market changes .
* Individual businesses use data to locate potential markets and to study their own production and sales performance related to industry or area .
TYPES OF ECONOMIC CENSUS
Section::::Types of Economic Census .
Title 13 of the US Code ( sections 131 , 191 , 224 ) manages the Census Bureau to take economic census every five years .
The 1992 Economic Census consists of the following censuses : * Census of Retail Trade * Census of Wholesale Trade * Census of Service Industries * Census of Financial , Insurance and Real Estate Industries * Census of Transportation , Communication and Utilities * Census of Manufactures * Census of Mineral Industries * Census of Construction Industries DATA PROCESSING AND CONFIDENTIALITY Section::::Data processing and confidentiality .
Responses to the Economic Census have been treated as confidential since the 19th century .
Legislation authorizing the 1910 decennial census went even further and required that statistics be published so that no particular establishment or its operations could be identified .
In 1954 , the confidentiality provisions were incorporated into the law ( Title 13 of the United States Code ) that specifies the frequency and scope of the Economic Census .
The law also prescribes penalties for any disclosure by the Census Bureau , or for a respondent 's false reporting or willful refusal where response is mandatory .
In 1962 , the confidentiality rule for census questionnaires was extended by law to also make copies retained in respondents ' files immune from legal process ( ) .
The automation of the Economic Census dates back to the use of tabulating typewriters in 1900 , punch card tabulating equipment in 1920 , and electronic computers in 1954 .
Starting in 1967 , selected large firms were allowed to file their reports on computer tape .
The 2002 Economic Census was the first to allow every firm to file electronically .
DATA DISSEMINATION Section::::Data dissemination .
Since 1972 , most of the same statistics found in printed reports have also been available to data users in electronic media , initially on computer tape .
The 1987 Economic Census was the first to be published on CD - ROM , a practice continued until 2002 , when the medium changed to DVD .
Key 1987 statistics were also published online via CENDATA .
Only a few reports were published in print for 1997 , and none were printed in 2002 .
Portable document format ( pdf ) technology allowed anyone to print out 1992 , 1997 , and 2002 reports from their computers on demand .
Since 1997 , the primary means for data users to access Economic Census statistics is through American FactFinder .
REFERENCES * Economic Census Summary .
U.S Census Bureau
EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S. Census Bureau - Economic Census