ABOUT TIME ( 2013 FILM ) About Time is a 2013 British romantic comedy - drama film about a young man with the special ability to time travel who tries to change his past in order to improve his future .
The film was written and directed by Richard Curtis , and stars Domhnall Gleeson , Rachel McAdams and Bill Nighy .
It was released in the United Kingdom on 4 September 2013 .
The film received mixed critical response and was a moderate box office success grossing $ 87.1 million against a $ 12 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Tim Lake ( Domhnall Gleeson ) is a young man from Cornwall .
He grows up in a house by the sea with his father ( Bill Nighy ) , his mother ( Lindsay Duncan ) , his absent - minded maternal uncle ( Richard Cordery ) , and his free - spirited sister , Katherine ( Lydia Wilson ) , who is known to family and friends as Kit Kat .
At the age of 21 , Tim is told by his father that the men of his family have a special gift : the ability to travel in time .
This supernatural ability is subject to one constraint : they can only travel to places and times they have been before .
After his father discourages Tim from using his gift to acquire money or fame , he decides that he will use it to improve his love life .
The following summer , Kit Kat 's friend Charlotte ( Margot Robbie ) comes to the house in order to spend her holiday with Tim 's family .
Tim is instantly attracted to her and at the end of her stay decides to tell her how he feels .
She tells him that he should not have waited until the last day , that perhaps if he had told her earlier , something could have happened between them .
Tim travels back in time and , the second time around , tells Charlotte in the middle of the holiday how he feels .
In this instance , Charlotte uses the exact opposite excuse , saying that it would be better if they waited until the last day of the holiday , and then something could potentially happen between them .
Heartbroken , Tim realizes that Charlotte is not interested in him and that time travel will not make it possible for him to change her mind .
After the summer , Tim moves to London to pursue a career as a lawyer .
He is put up by his father 's old acquaintance , Harry ( Tom Hollander ) , a misanthropic playwright .
After some months , Tim visits a Dans le Noir restaurant , where he meets Mary ( Rachel McAdams ) , a young American woman who works for a publishing house .
The two flirt in the darkness of the restaurant , and afterward , Mary gives Tim her phone number .
Tim returns home to find a distraught Harry .
It turns out that the same night as he met Mary , the opening night of Harry 's new play had been ruined by one of the actors forgetting his lines at a crucial point .
Tim goes back in time to put things right and the play is a triumph .
Having saved Harry 's opening night , Tim tries to call Mary , but discovers that her number is no longer in his mobile phone .
By going back in time to help Harry , Tim chose a path in which the evening with Mary never happened .
However , he recalls that Mary was obsessed with Kate Moss .
By attending a Kate Moss exhibition in town , he is able to run into Mary again .
He strikes up an acquaintance with her but discovers she now has a boyfriend .
Tim finds out when and where they met , turns up early and persuades her to leave the party before she can meet her future boyfriend .
Their relationship develops and Tim moves in with Mary .
He encounters Charlotte again by accident , and this time she tells him that she would be interested in pursuing a romantic liaison with him .
Tim turns her down , realising that he is truly in love with Mary .
He proposes marriage ; she accepts and is welcomed into his family .
Their first child , Posy , is born .
Kit Kat has not been so lucky and her unhappy relationship , failure to find a career , and drinking lead her to crash her car on the same day as Posy 's first birthday .
Kit Kat is seriously hurt but begins to make a good recovery .
Tim decides to intervene in her life and does so by preventing her from meeting her boyfriend , Jimmy ( Tom Hughes ) .
When he returns to the present , he finds Posy has never been born and that he has a son instead .
His father explains that travelling back to change things before his children were born would mean those children would not be born .
Thus , any events that occurred before Posy 's birth can not be changed , and Tim must accept the consequences as a normal person would .
Tim accepts he can not change Kit Kat 's life by changing her past
but he and Mary help her to change her life in the present .
She settles down with an old friend of Tim 's and has a child of her own .
Tim and Mary have another child , a baby boy .
Tim learns that his father has terminal cancer and that time travel can not change it .
His father has known for quite some time , but kept travelling back in time to effectively extend his life and spend more time with his family .
He tells Tim to live each day twice in order to be truly happy : the first time , live it as normal , and the second time , live every day again almost exactly the same .
The first time with all the tensions and worries that keep us from noticing how sweet the world can be , but the second time noticing .
Tim follows this advice and also travels back into the past to visit his father whenever he misses him .
Mary tells Tim she wants a third child .
He is reluctant at first because he will not be able to visit his father after the baby is born but agrees .
After visiting his father for the following nine months , Tim tells his father that he can not visit any more .
They travel back to when Tim was a small boy , reliving a fond memory of them playing on the beach , and afterwards have a heartfelt , tearful goodbye .
Mary gives birth to another baby girl , and Tim knows he can never see his father again .
After reliving each day , Tim comes to realise that it is better to live each day once , and appreciate everything as if he is living it for the second time .
The film ends with Tim leaving Mary in bed and getting his three children ready for school .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
By Curtis 's own admission
the conception of the idea " was a slow growth " .
The genesis of the idea came when Curtis was eating lunch with a friend and the subject of happiness came up .
Upon admitting he was not truly happy in life , the conversation turned towards him describing an ideal day .
From here Curtis realized that the day of the lunch , for him , constituted such a day , which led to him deciding to write a film about " how you achieve happiness in ordinary life " .
Thinking that the concept was too " simple " he decided to add a time travel element to the film .
Although the production contracted out various effect houses to try to make the time travelling effects feel like more of a spectacle , they found the resulting work " just completely wrong " tonally and instead focused on a more low key approach .
Curtis has opined " that in the end it turns out to be a kind of anti – time travel time travel movie .
It uses all the time travel stuff but without it feeling like it 's a science fiction thing particularly or without it feeling that time travel can actually solve your life . "
Curtis has said the film was likely to be his last film as director , but that he will continue in the film industry .
Zooey Deschanel had been in talks for the role of Mary but ultimately the role went to McAdams .
The film was initially scheduled to be released on 10 May 2013 , release was pushed back to 1 November 2013 .
The film premiered on 8 August 2013 as part of the Film4 Summer Screen outdoor cinema series at London 's historic Somerset House .
It was released in the United Kingdom on 4 September 2013 and in the United States in limited release on 1 November 2013 and in wide release on 8 November 2013 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
About Time received mixed reviews from critics .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 68 % , based on 144 reviews , with an average rating of 6.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Beautifully filmed and unabashedly sincere , About Time finds director Richard Curtis at his most sentimental .
"
Metacritic , which uses a weighted mean , assigned a score of 55 out of 100 , based on reviews from 34 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Catherine Shoard of The Guardian compared the film to Groundhog Day noting it " is about as close to home as a homage can get without calling in the copyright team " and describes Domhnall Gleeson as a " ginger Hugh Grant " , which " at first , is unnerving ; as About Time marches on , Gleeson 's innate charm gleams through and this weird disconnection becomes quite compelling .
"
Shoard gave the film 2 stars out of 5 .
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph praised the comic timing of McAdams and Gleeson , but criticised the film , comparing it to a quilt , calling it " soft , frayed at the edges , and oh so comfortable " and gives it a score of 3 stars out of 5 .
Leslie Felperin of Variety magazine called the film " reassuringly bland " and says there is sense of déjà vu especially for anyone who has seen The Time Traveler 's Wife also co - starring McAdams .
Unlike that film she has no knowledge of his powers , resulting in a " fundamental lack of honesty in their relationship " .
Felperin noted British reverse snobbery would put many off this and other Curtis films , but that this would be less of a problem among American Anglophiles and those willing to suspend disbelief , taking the characters as British " versions of Woody Allen 's Manhattanites ( but with less angst ) " .
Felperin praised the chemistry of the leading couple " that keeps the film aloft " and the supporting cast , while also criticising the stock characters as being too familiar .
The film became a surprise hit in South Korea , where it was watched by more than 3 million people , one of the highest numbers among the foreign romantic comedy movies released in Korea .
It grossed a total of $ 23,434,443 there , higher than in any other country .
PLOT HOLES Section::::Plot holes .
Mark Kermode observed that writer Curtis " sets up his rules of temporal engagement , only to break them willy - nilly whenever the prospect of an extra hug rears its head " .
Megan Gibson , writing in Time magazine , commented " sci - fi fans out there likely wo n't be able to see [ the film 's ] charms through the gaping time - travel plot - holes " , pointing out that the main rules as explained to Tim by his father are violated : * Only male members of the family can travel in time
* * Only travel to the past is possible *
*
It is impossible to travel back to before you were born *
* Travelling back to a time before your child is born may cause a different child to be born and the original child to be lost .
*
The film 's internal logic about time travel was also criticised in other reviews :
*
The Independent says the explanation of time travel is " shockingly inadequate " and that " Curtis keeps leaving questions unanswered – time and time again " * Steve Cummins of the Irish Post refers to Tim travelling backwards and forwards in time when he says the film is " riddled with plot holes "
* Matthew Turner points out the " big problem is the unsightly pile - up of plot holes and logic problems " * Kate Erbland of Film School Rejects states " the rules and limitations of Tim 's gift are n't exactly hard and fast , and the final third of the film is rife with complications that never get quite explained .
Rules that previously applied suddenly do n't apply ...
the time travel rules are n't exactly tight and are occasionally confusing " .
SOUNDTRACK Track
listing SEE
ALSO
* List of films featuring time loops REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS