TEMPLE RUN 2 Temple Run 2 is an endless running video game developed and published by Imangi Studios .
A sequel to Temple Run , the game was produced , designed and programmed by husband and wife team Keith Shepherd and Natalia Luckyanova , with art by Kiril Tchangov .
It was released on the App Store on January 16 , 2013 , on Google Play on January 24 , and on Windows Phone 8 on December 20 .
As of June 2014 , Temple Run 2 and its predecessor have been downloaded over 1 billion times .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
Temple Run 2 features the same controls as its predecessor .
However , the gameplay itself is slightly different insofar as it introduces new obstacles , such as zip - lines , mine tracks , sharper turns , waterfalls , and jets of fire .
The game also features new power - ups , whose use is typically governed by an energy bar that is filled up by collecting coins , and players now have the ability to save the protagonist from death by using green gems that are collected while running , or purchased online .
The game is set in a different location than the first game , and the main character runs faster .
The three monkeys that chased the character in the original game have been eliminated .
Now , a singular enlarged monkey called Cuchanck is the sole antagonist .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Upon the initial release , there were four characters available for play , but that has been increased to twenty - seven as of 2016 :
* Guy Dangerous - default explorer ( shield power - up )
* Scarlett Fox ( boost power - up ) * Barry Bones ( coin bonus power - up ) * Karma Lee ( score power up ) * Francisco Montoya - Spanish conquistador * Maria Selva - Photojournalist character from " Temple Run " National Geographic book * Zack Wonder - American football player * Montana Smith - Explorer , wears a hat like that of Indiana Jones * Usain Bolt - fastest runner in the world ( " Bolt " power - up ; combined magnet and boost ) * Santa Claus -
Only available for purchase at Christmas * Mrs. Claus - Only available for purchase at Christmas
* Bruce Lee - special edition , limited availability * Russell Wilson - NFL player ( Seattle Seahawks ) , limited availability * Colin Kaepernick - NFL player ( San Francisco 49ers ) , limited availability * Calvin Johnson - NFL player ( Detroit Lions ) , limited availability * Tom Brady - NFL player ( New England Patriots ) , limited availability * Peyton Manning - NFL player ( Denver Broncos ) , limited availability * Cam Newton - NFL player ( Carolina Panthers ) , limited availability * DeMarco Murray - NFL player ( Dallas Cowboys ) , limited availability * LeSean McCoy - NFL player ( Buffalo Bills ) , limited availability * Freya Coldheart - queen of the fictional land of Kaldr , said to be a cold desolate place
* Sigur Frostbeard - general from Kaldr , a Viking - like warrior
* Cleopatra - the last active pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt
* Imhotep - Egyptian polymath who served under the Third Dynasty king Djoser * Wolfman - Half wolf ,
half human * Sir Montague - Skeleton warrior * Rahi Raaja - Indian male explorer * Nidhi Nirmal - Indian female explorer
In August 2013 , Usain Bolt was made available for purchase for a limited - time , though this was later made permanent .
In December , Santa Claus was made available for purchase , only for a limited - time .
The December 2013 update also included water slides , an unlockable Santa hat for each of the main characters , collectible artifacts such as masks , and a " Christmas progress " chart .
For December 2015 , a new game environment called " Frozen Shadows " was introduced .
It is depicted as a frigid , snow laden landscape .
The update also introduced alternate winter outfits for Guy Dangerous and Scarlett Fox .
On June 1 , 2016 , another environment called " Blazing Sands " , based on Egyptian temples and craggy canyons was introduced .
On September 10 , 2016 , a new feature called Global Challenges was introduced .
The first Global Challenge was a coin collection challenge .
The subsequent Global Challenge was a meter - distance challenge .
On March 29 , 2017 , a new environment , " Lost Jungle , " which includes large trees , snakes , Venus flytraps and a Hindu temple , made its debut .
Except for Usain Bolt , Bruce Lee , the NFL players , Bunny Guy , Santa Claus , Mrs. Claus , Wolfman and Sir Montague , all characters are unlocked with coins ; Bolt , Lee , and the NFL players must be bought with real money , Sir Montague is unlocked by completing a global challenge , and the others must be unlocked with gems .
Although the characters appear different , their abilities and behavior are identical .
In early versions of the game , Scarlett Fox must be purchased with coins , but this requirement was later dropped in an update on April 20 , 2015 , in support of gender equality , allowing people to play as the character immediately upon downloading the game .
MAPS Section::::Maps .
Imangi introduced new concepts in Temple Run 2 .
Now , with updates Imangi started publishing new maps with different environments and music .
* Frozen Shadows : It was introduced on December 3 , 2015 , It was similarly based on a sub - Arctic frozen land with lots of frosted obstacles and even a frozen river slide .
* Blazing Sands : It was introduced on June 1 , 2016 , and its environment took place at Egyptian desert .
The traditional temple was replaced with a pyramid , Egyptian temple ( Hall of Kings ) .
* Lost Jungle : It was introduced on March 29 , 2017 , and its environment was based on an Indian jungle with snakes , carnivorous plants alike Venus - fly - trap named in - game " demon crocs " , with a Hindu temple replacing the traditional one .
Two Indian explorers Rahi Raaja and Nidhi Nirmal were also introduced in a new update .
* Pirate Cove : It was introduced on August 29 , 2018 and is the fifth map to be introduced ( not including the modified maps I.e. Frozen Festival , Lantern Festival , Spooky Summit and Jungle Fall ) .
Two new players " Jean Benitez(Captain ) " and " Simone Davies(Commodore ) " were introduced along with the Golden Edition of the map , for which players have to purchase with real money .
This map features : ( 1)Two new outfits , " Magnum G.U.Y. " Guy Dangerous and " Castaway " Francisco Montoya , which can be unlocked by collecting 60 tokens of Magnum G.U.Y. and 30 tokens of Castaway respectively .
( 2 )
The new " Pirate Dubloon " coin skin .
( 3 ) Four sets of artifacts containing 8 artifacts in each set .
These maps could be tried for free for a limited time after their release , Later player could buy them using 500 in - game gems .
However , apart from normal maps , some maps were introduced on special events and could be played only for limited time , After then user ca n't buy them using gems .
* Christmas : Released on Christmas of 2015 .
It featured a set of Christmas artifact , with a Santa Hat ; featured a new map known as Frozen Shadows which features more and new obstacles with a frozen scenery .
This event also feature alternative outfits for Guy Dangerous ( Aviator ) and Scarlett Fox ( Mountaineer ) .
* Valentine 's Special : Released on Valentine 's Day of 2016 .
Features a new outfit for Zack Wonder ( Romeo ) ;
a set of Valentine 's artifacts with a Heart Hat .
In the February 2018 update , a coin skin " Valentine 's " was featured in the Coin Skins section , along with Dim Sum coins .
* St. Patrick 's : Released on March 17 , 2016 .
Featured a set of " St . Patrick 's " artifacts with a Leprechaun Hat and the St .
Patricks coin skin ( Shamrocks ) .
* Easter : Released on April 1 , 2016 .
Featured a set of Easter artifacts with a Bunny Ears Hat ; a new outfit for Guy Dangerous ( Bunny Guy ) and a new Easter coin skin .
* 4th of July : Released on July 4 , 2016 .
Featured a set of artifacts with the Uncle Sam Hat .
* Halloween : Released on October 25 , 2016 .
This event featured a new map known as Spooky Summit which is a spooky version of Sky Summit ; new outfits for Guy Dangerous ( Frankenguy ) , Scarlett Fox ( Mountaineer ) , Barry Bones ( Mummy Bones ) and Karma Lee ( Vampire Lee ) ; two new characters Sir Montague and Wolfman and a set of Halloween artifacts with a Halloween Hat .
In the October 2017 update , two new coin skins Halloween Ghosts and Halloween Candy were introduced .
DEVELOPMENT AND RELEASE Section::::Development and release .
Development of Temple Run 2 began in March 2012 .
Imangi stated that the main goal of the game was to make the gameplay similar and familiar in relation to the original , while introducing new elements and creating a " redeveloped experience . "
According to Keith Shepherd , " Our biggest reason for doing the sequel instead of an update is that we just were n't going to be able to make these changes to the original .
Under the hood , the game was completely re - written from scratch and it 's now in much better shape to allow us to continue adding more to it over time .
"
Natalia Luckyanova added " Once it became so popular , there was a ton we wanted to do to Temple Run
but it really was n't built for expansion .
It 's built on top of our in - house 3D engine , which is pretty limited and requires a lot of coding on our end to make any changes .
Plus , we did n't want to change Temple Run too dramatically , since so many people were playing it and loving it .
So we decided to make a brand new version , where we could update the graphics , play around with powers , create new environments , etc . "
Temple Run 2 was announced in a surprise announcement by Imangi on January 16 , 2013 , with the game being released in the App Store in New Zealand immediately , and an international release coming a few hours later .
The Android version was released on January 24 , 2013 .
The Windows Phone 8 version was released on December 20 , 2013 with the inclusion of Xbox Live achievements .
A version for Tizen was released on October 13 , 2016 Within four days of its iOS release , the game had reached twenty million downloads , six million of which were within the first twenty - four hours .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Temple Run 2 has been generally well received .
The iOS version holds an aggregate score of 79 out of 100 on Metacritic , based on 24 reviews .
Edge were impressed , scoring the game 8 out of 10 and writing " Temple Run 2 is a beautiful looking , natural extension of the series that never breaks stride for a second . "
Chris Reed of Slide to Play was equally impressed , scoring the game 4 out of 4 , and arguing that it " improves on just about every aspect of the original . "
Carter Dobson of 148Apps scored the game 4.5 out of 5 , writing " The sequel is largely just full of minor tweaks that mostly improve the experience while leaving the addictive core untampered [ ... ]
Playing Temple Run 2 is a simple reminder of why the original was such a hit , and why it stands above all imitators .
Its mechanics are still pristine .
Its controls are still pretty much immaculate .
The formula has been tweaked , and I think it has come out for the better . "
TouchArcade Jared Nelson also gave a score of 4.5 out of 5 , writing " Temple Run 2 simplicity and intangible " something " is what made its predecessor a game that I always went back to even in the face of a smorgasbord of alternatives , and it 's what will keep this on my device easily within thumb 's reach for a long time to come . "
AppSpy Andrew Nesvadba gave the game 4 out of 5 , the same score he had given the original , writing " The end result is a smoother experience that retains the core of Temple Run without adding too much complexity so as to alienate its base .
"
Gamezebo 's Jim Squires also scored the game 4 out of 5 , writing " There are no big shifts in gameplay .
There are no buzzworthy changes .
At best , you can sum it up as " it 's like Temple Run , but a little bit better " . "
Eurogamer Owen
Faraday was slightly less enthusiastic , scoring the game 7 out of 10 and writing , "
The biggest flaw Temple Run 2 betrays is its conservatism .
The amount of work that has gone into the game is evident , and it 's hard to fault an accessible , thrilling game that offers itself to you for free -
but it 's so similar to its predecessor that it ultimately feels a bit unnecessary . "
Pocket Gamer Harry Slatter also scored the game 7 out of 10 , writing " Endless - runners have n't really moved on since Temple Run first sprinted onto the scene .
And , if anything , Temple Run 2 highlights that more than most .
Where Imangi was blazing a new trail with the first game and setting trends left , right , and right again , Temple Run 2 is just another enjoyable entrant into a crowded genre . "
SEE ALSO
* List of most downloaded Android applications REFERENCES