VISA POLICY OF NEPAL
The visa policy of Nepal is relatively liberal , allowing citizens of almost all nations to obtain a tourist visa on arrival .
In January 2014 Nepal introduced online visa application system .
All tourists are allowed to stay in Nepal for a maximum of 150 days in one calendar year .
Visitors must hold passports that are valid for at least 6 months from the date of arrival .
VISA POLICY MAP FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT Section::::Freedom of movement .
Citizens of do not need a visa to enter Nepal , and can reside permanently as Nepali citizens with no restrictions , because Article 7 the 1950 Indo - Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship allows free movement of people between the two nations on a reciprocal basis .
Indian citizens can use any acceptable documents mentioned below to enter Nepal : * Indian Passport * Voter ID card with photograph * Registration certificate issued by the Indian embassy to the Indian citizen residing in Nepal
* Ad hoc / temporary identity card issued by the Indian embassy to the Indian citizen in the event of emergency VISA ON ARRIVAL Section::::Visa on arrival .
With the exception of nationals of states mentioned below and holders of refugee travel documents , any foreign national can obtain a tourist visa on arrival .
Multiple entry visas can be issued for a duration of stay of 15 , 30 or 90 days .
Holders of temporary passports are not eligible unless they hold a temporary passport issued by a European Union member state .
VISA REQUIRED IN ADVANCE Section::::Visa required in advance .
Citizens of the following states are required to apply for a visa prior to arrival in Nepal : VISA FEE WAIVER Section::::Visa fee waiver .
Nationals of SAARC member countries can receive a tourist visa free of charge for 30 days at no cost .
Those countries are : } Since January 1 2016 , holders of passports issued by the following jurisdictions can have their visa fees waived if they are traveling as tourists .
Those jurisdictions are : NON - ORDINARY PASSPORTS Section::::Non - ordinary passports .
Holders of diplomatic or service passports of following countries do not require a visa .
valign =
top Visa exemption agreement was signed with in October 2018 and it is not yet ratified .
STATISTICS SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Nepalese citizens
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Department of Immigration of Nepal