MOBILE PHONES IN PRISON
In most prisons , inmates are forbidden from possessing mobile phones due to their ability to communicate with the outside world and other security issues .
Mobile phones are one of the most smuggled items into prisons .
They provide inmates the ability to make and receive unauthorized phone calls , send email and text messages , use social media , and follow news pertaining to their case , among other forbidden uses .
REASONS CELL PHONES ARE PROHIBITED Section::::Reasons cell phones are prohibited .
Security concerns are often cited for why cell - phones are forbidden in prisons .
Cellphones in prisons have been used to organize work stoppages for prison labor between prisons .
Forced Penal labor in the United States is a common practice .
Cell phones in prison are used by prisoners to communicate with family and loved ones .
Prisoners can be isolated , prison phone calls can be expensive , and the prisons get profits from the phone calls .
The rates are controversial .
Prisons have a profit motive to ban cell phones .
METHODS OF SMUGGLING Section::::Methods of smuggling .
Most mobile phones are smuggled in by prison staff , who often do not have to go through security as rigorously as visitors .
Security of staff is often less intense because this would be time - consuming on the part of the staff , union prison employees are paid for this time , and it would increase the overall cost of operations .
More rarely , they are smuggled in by visitors , who must undergo tougher security checks , by inmates who are permitted to leave , or by outsiders who establish contact with inmates alongside the prison fence .
Once inside prison walls , the devices end up in the hands of inmates who purchase them with cash , which is also contraband in most prisons .
Black market prices vary by prison , and can be up to $ 1000 USD .
USES BY PRISONERS Section::::Uses by prisoners .
While some prisoners use their mobile devices simply for harmless communication or web browsing , others use them for illegal activity .
These may include gang control , taunting witnesses , planning escapes , or arrangement of other serious crimes .
Prisoners may also use smart phones to gather intelligence on prison staff and to coordinate clandestine activity within the facility .
Not all inmates use mobile phones for harmful purposes .
Many inmates use them to hold innocuous conversations with family and friends .
In South Carolina in September 2012 , an inmate using an illegal mobile phone alerted authorities about an officer being held hostage , leading to that officer 's rescue .
COMBATING MOBILE PHONES IN PRISONS
Section::::Combating mobile phones in prisons .
Laws have been passed in various jurisdictions , placing penalties on inmates who possess mobile devices as well as staff who smuggle them in .
Inmate penalties range from loss of privileges and behavior credits to additional sentencing .
Staff penalties range from disciplinary action from job loss to criminal charges .
Consideration has been given to using cell phone jammers inside of prison walls to render them ineffective .
The practice of jamming cell phone signals is illegal in the United States .
Exceptions to this law have been considered for prisons , though there is concern that a cell phone could be a guard 's lifeline in a crisis , and other rescuers may need to use them for communication .
Some places are using an experimental technology of managed communications that blocks the communications of inmates while continuing to allow that of others .
This Managed Access System ( MAS ) technology was first deployed at Mississippi State Penitentiary in 2010 by Tecore Networks .
Special dogs have been used to sniff for cell phones coming into prison walls .
Mobile phones have a unique scent , and these dogs have been trained to detect it .
One solution would be to enable the correctional facility to automatically detect and locate contraband 2G/3G/4 G and WiFi mobile devices thereby enabling the facility staff to confiscate the phone and neutralize the threat completely .
An automatic 24/7 detect and locate solution such as this bypasses the weaknesses inherent to jamming ( e.g. , phones of facility workers can be jammed ) ;
managed access solutions ( surrounding neighborhoods can be affected by the " bleed " from these systems preventing bystanders from making calls and/or not all makes of phones are subject to call intercept ) ; and phone sniffing dogs ( this solution only works when the dogs are patrolling ) .
New solutions have been introduced to the market that provide such automated 24/7 detect and locate capabilities .
Another solution is the use of ferromagnetic cell phone detectors .
This technology detects the presence of the ferrous metal components ( antenna , vibrator , speaker ) that are in cell phones .
The reliance is then not on the location of signals , but in the recognition of the physical phone itself which can not be masked by internalizing or hiding on the person .
In 2010 , Robert Johnson , a prison guard at Lee Correctional Institution in Bishopville , South Carolina , was shot six times by a gunman hired by an inmate using a contraband cell phone .
In 2013 , the FCC suggested prisons be allowed to manage cell phone network access which would allow only authorized phones to access the network .
However , the movement did not pass .
In February 2014 , the government of Honduras enacted legislation mandating that the cellular providers in Honduras block their own signals at the nine national prisons throughout the country , in order to eliminate the extortion and kidnapping schemes that were being run by inmates within the prisons .
In Ireland , 648 phones were smuggled into jails in 2016 , despite heightened security measures .
In 2017 , it was announced that American company Securus Technologies had developed and invested more than $ 40 million in " Wireless Containment Solutions " , which create a local cellular network inside a prison which require all phones on the network to be screened and approved .
In the UK , 20,000 mobile phones and sim cards were recovered as prison contraband in 2016 .
In 2017 , a prison in Bristol added telephones and computers which were not connected to the internet into the prison cells in an attempt to combat illegal mobile phone usage .
The UK Parliament passed a law which would allow mobile phone operators to jam cell phone signals in prisons later that year .
The legislation also enabled prison officers to use devices which detect mobile phone usage .
In 2017 , jails in Scotland implemented plans to block active phones within prisons through network monitoring .
Between 2013 and 2017 , 1,500 mobile phones or component parts were found in Scottish prisons .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Banks , Gabrielle .
"
Inmates giving cell phone new meaning , use toilets to talk " ( Archive ) .
Pittsburgh Post - Gazette .
June 27 , 2007 .