MARRIED TO MEDICINE Married to Medicine is an American reality television series which premiered on March 24 , 2013 , on Bravo and was created by Mariah Huq .
The series chronicles the lives of seven women in the Atlanta medical community with three of the women being doctors themselves , while the others are doctors ' wives .
It shows the group as they balance their social circles , careers , and families .
Mariah Huq , Quad Webb - Lunceford , Jacqueline Walters , Kari Wells , Toya Bush - Harris , and Simone Whitmore composed the first - season cast .
Lisa Nicole Cloud and Heavenly Kimes joined the series beginning with the second season after the departure of Wells , while Huq departed after the second season .
The network announced a spin - off show entitled , which premiered on November 11 , 2016 .
On April 11 , 2018 , Bravo renewed the show for a sixth season .
With this renewal , another spin - off titled Married to Medicine : Los Angeles would be premiering at a later date .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In November 2012 , Bravo announced the series green - light of Married to Medicine .
The network detailed the series by stating , " Married to Medicine follows a group of successful and educated women , including doctors and wives of doctors , who are connected to the world of medicine in Atlanta . "
By February 2013 , the first - season cast was revealed with Toya Bush - Harris , Mariah Huq , Quad Webb - Lunceford , Jacqueline Walters , Kari Wells , and Simone Whitmore starring in the series .
At the time of its debut , Married to Medicine held the title of highest - rated series premiere since Bethenny Getting Married ?
in 2010 and the most watched non - spinoff series premiere in the network 's history .
The milestone was later surpassed in January 2014 by Blood , Sweat and Heels .
The first season delivered over 1 million viewers in the 18 - 49 viewership demographic and 1.8 million total viewers , making it the network 's highest - rated non - franchise / non - spin - off freshman series since Queer Eye for the Straight Guy .
The production of the second season began the first week of September 2013 .
It premiered on April 6 , 2014 , with Toya Bush - Harris , Mariah Huq , Quad Webb - Lunceford , Jacqueline Walters , and Simone Whitmore reprising their roles while Lisa Nicole Cloud and Heavenly Kimes joined in the second season .
Wells transitioned into a guest starring role for the second and third season .
On January 15 , 2015 , Bravo renewed the show for a third season , which premiered on June 7 , 2015 , and featured Bush - Harris , Lunceford , Walters , Whitmore , Kimes , and Cloud reprising their roles from the second season .
Huq transitioned into a recurring role for the third season , while Jill Connors , who had guest starred in the second season , was featured in a recurring capacity .
On December 26 , 2015 , Heavenly Kimes teased that the show will be returning for a fourth season .
No further sources have surfaced to confirm if this statement is legit or not .
Sources revealed on April 27 , 2016 , that the show had been renewed for a fourth season by Bravo , and the current cast were already six weeks into filming .
The entire cast from the third season returned as series regulars , along with Mariah returning in a recurring capacity .
In regards to a fifth season , Bravo has yet to announce the renewal .
However , the cast have been optimistic that the show will return with all of them reprising their roles , with the exception of Lisa Nicole , as she has stated that she would not return for any upcoming seasons of the show .
On June 19 , 2017 , it was confirmed that majority of the cast would be returning for the upcoming fifth season , with the exception of Lisa Nicole .
It was also announced that another new cast member would join the show , however , that member has yet to be revealed .
Mariah Huq is also expected to return in a recurring role .
On September 19 , 2017 , Bravo announced the premiere date for the fifth season , along with a trailer for the upcoming season and the reveal of the new cast member , Dr. Contessa Metcalfe , who officially joined the main cast from the third episode .
On August 2 , 2018 , the premiere of the sixth season was announced , starting on September 2 , along with the release of the seasons ' trailer .
The cast was also revealed , with all the ladies returning who were prominent in the fifth season , along with Mariah rejoining the main cast , as she was present in a recurring capacity over the last three seasons .
CAST
MAIN RECURRING SERIES
OVERVIEW EPISODES SEASON 1 ( 2013 )
SEASON 2 ( 2014 )
SEASON 3
( 2015 )
SEASON 4
( 2016–17 ) SEASON 5
( 2017–18 ) SEASON 6 ( 2018 ) RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Before the series premiere , a group of students from Howard University College of Medicine created a Change.org petition to prevent the series from airing .
The petition stated that the series " heavily associates Black females in medicine with materialism , cat fights , and unprofessionalism " .
It goes on to detail the rising difficulty in obtaining residency positions as African American women and how the series ' representation of those physicians would only make the task tougher .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS