CECIL HOTEL ( LOS ANGELES ) Stay on Main ( formerly Cecil Hotel , Hotel Cecil and informally The Cecil ) is a budget hotel in Downtown Los Angeles , located at 640 S. Main Street , opened in 1927 .
It has 600 guest rooms .
The hotel has a checkered history , but is currently being renovated and redeveloped into a mix of hotel rooms and residential units .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Cecil was constructed in 1924 by hotelier William Banks Hanner , as a destination for business travelers and tourists .
Designed by Loy Lester Smith in the Beaux Arts style , the hotel cost $ 1 million to complete and boasted an opulent marble lobby with stained - glass windows , potted palms and alabaster statuary .
Hanner had invested confidently in the enterprise , in the knowledge that several similar hotels had been established elsewhere downtown , but within five years of its opening , the United States sank into the Great Depression .
Though the hotel flourished as a fashionable destination through the 1940s , the decades beyond saw the hotel decline , as the nearby area known as Skid Row became increasingly populated with transients .
As many as 10,000 homeless people lived within a four - mile radius .
By the 1950s the hotel had gained a reputation as a residence for transients .
A portion of the hotel was refurbished in 2007 after new owners took over .
In 2011 the Cecil Hotel was rebranded as " Stay on Main , " complete with a new website — its old website , thececilhotel.com , expired at the end of 2013 .
The hotel was sold in 2014 to New York City hotelier Richard Born for $ 30 million , and another New York - based firm , Simon Baron Development , acquired a 99-year ground lease on the property .
Matt Baron , president of Simon Baron , said he was committed to the preservation of architecturally or historically significant components such as the hotel 's grand lobby , but that his company planned to completely redevelop the interior and fix the " hodgepodge " work that had been done in more recent years .
Beyond renovating rooms , the developer also plans a rooftop pool , gym and lounge .
Construction is projected to be complete by 2019 .
In February 2017 the Los Angeles City Council voted to deem the Cecil a historic - cultural monument , because it is representative of an early 20th century American hotel , and because of the historic significance of its architect 's body of work .
REPUTATION FOR VIOLENCE AND SUICIDE Section::::Reputation for violence and suicide .
As the area where the Cecil Hotel is located began to decline , suicides and other violent deaths on the premises became more frequent .
The first documented suicide at the Cecil was reported in 1931 when a guest named W.K. Norton died in his room after taking poison capsules .
Throughout the 1940s and 1950s , more suicides at the Cecil occurred .
By the 1960s , longtime residents had begun to call the Cecil " The Suicide . "
In addition to suicides , the Cecil 's history includes other kinds of violence and salacious happenings .
It also became a notorious rendezvous spot for adulterous couples , drug activity and prostitution .
In 1947 Elizabeth Short , dubbed by the media as the Black Dahlia , was rumored to have been spotted drinking at the Cecil 's bar in the days before her notorious and , to date , unsolved murder .
In 1964 a retired telephone operator named " Pigeon Goldie " Osgood , who had been a well known and well liked long - term resident at the hotel , was found dead in her room .
She had been raped , stabbed and beaten , and her room ransacked .
A man named Jacques B. Ehlinger was charged with Osgood 's murder , but he was later cleared ; her death remains unsolved .
Perhaps most infamously , in the 1980s the hotel was rumored to be the residence of serial killer Richard Ramirez , nicknamed the " Night Stalker .
" Ramirez had been a regular presence on the skid row area of Los Angeles , but , according to a hotel clerk who claims to have spoken to him , is rumored to have stayed at the Cecil for a few weeks .
Ramirez may have engaged in part of his killing spree while staying there .
Another serial killer , Austrian Jack Unterweger , stayed at the Cecil in 1991 , possibly as an homage to Ramirez .
While there , he strangled and killed at least three prostitutes , for which he was convicted in Austria .
He hanged himself shortly after his conviction .
In 2013 the Cecil ( by then re - branded as the " Stay on Main " although still maintaining the original Hotel Cecil signs and painted advertisements on its exterior ) became the focus of renewed attention when surveillance footage of a young Canadian student , Elisa Lam , behaving erratically in the hotel 's elevator went viral .
The video depicts Lam repeatedly pressing the elevator 's buttons , walking in and out of the elevator , and possibly attempting to hide from someone .
It was recorded shortly before her disappearance ; her naked body was subsequently discovered in a water supply cistern on the hotel roof , following complaints from residents of odd - tasting water and low pressure .
Why and how she got into a cistern , which was atop the roof and could only be accessed by taking a stairway to the roof and then climbing a ladder to the tank 's covered top , remain a mystery .
The Los Angeles County Coroner ruled her death accidental due to drowning , with bipolar disorder being a " significant " factor .
CULTURAL REFERENCES Section::::Cultural references .
On March 27 , 1987 , the band U2 performed an impromptu live concert on the rooftop of a one - storey building on the corner of 7th and Main in Downtown Los Angeles , next door to the Cecil Hotel .
The performance , with the hotel featuring as a backdrop , was filmed and commercially released as a music video for the release of the band 's song " Where the Streets Have No Name " .
The hotel is also reputable for the loose inspiration for .
SEE ALSO
* List of deaths and violence at the Cecil Hotel REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS