CHUMLEE Austin Lee Russell ( born September 8 , 1982 ) , better known by his stage name Chumlee , is an American actor , businessman and reality television personality , known as a cast member on the History Channel television show Pawn Stars , which depicts the daily business at the Gold and Silver Pawn Shop in Las Vegas where Russell works as an employee .
Chumlee came to work at the pawn shop five years before filming of the first season , having been a childhood friend of Corey Harrison , whose father , Rick Harrison , and grandfather , Richard Benjamin Harrison , opened the shop in 1989 .
On the show , he is often portrayed as the comic foil , but often appraises items in his areas of expertise including pinball machines , sneakers , and video games .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Russell was given the nickname " Chumlee " when he was about 12 years old , due to his large face and chin .
The father of one of his friends once stated that he looked like Chumley , the walrus character from the animated TV series Tennessee Tuxedo .
As a child he became good friends with Corey " Big Hoss " Harrison , whose father , Rick Harrison , and grandfather , Richard Harrison , opened the Gold & Silver Pawn Shop in 1989 .
Chumlee has stated via Instagram he is of part Scottish descent .
Mexican , Native American & some others were also mentioned but this has n't been verified .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Chumlee began working for the Gold & Silver Pawn Shop at age 21 , having worked there for five years before filming the first season of the reality television series Pawn Stars in July 2009 .
His duties include behind - the - counter work at the shop , such as testing items , loading items , and writing tickets for items purchased by customers .
On the series , he is depicted as the comic foil , often made the butt of the others ' jokes for his perceived lack of intelligence and his incompetence , for which he has been referred to as a " village idiot " .
Chumlee has responded to this by explaining that he is underestimated , and points to his expertise in pinball machines , which he utilizes in the second - season episode " Pinball Wizards " , much to Corey 's surprise , as an example of one of the areas in which he is knowledgeable .
Chumlee emerged as the breakout character , and a fan favorite of the series .
As a result of the show 's success , he formed his own company , which sells novelty items , including T - shirts of his own design , and arranges for his personal appearances .
He sold half of his stake in the company in 2010 to Rick Harrison for $ 155,000 , so that the shop could handle orders of his merchandise more efficiently .
Chumlee 's sales of merchandise have surpassed other stars of the show , due to his popularity .
Chumlee appeared as himself , alongside Rick and Corey Harrison , in the episode " iLost My Head in Vegas " , on the American TV series iCarly .
In May 2017 , Chumlee opened a candy shop , Chumlee 's Candy on the Boulevard , across the street from the Gold and Silver Pawn Shop in Las Vegas .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Chumlee enjoys collecting shoes , as he owns more than 200 pairs .
He also enjoys sports , the Pokémon Trading Card Game , video games and skateboarding .
He is a fan of both punk rock and rap music .
He is a fan of the TV series Boardwalk Empire , Sons of Anarchy and Breaking Bad .
He also enjoys driving his 1986 Buick Regal , which he has customized with hydraulic lifts on the front and back .
He also owns a Rolls - Royce Phantom , a Maserati GranTurismo , a Cadillac Escalade , Range Rover , and a 1964 Impala SS .
By September 2013 , Chumlee had altered his lifestyle habits and lost in a year by exercising at a gym six days a week and improving his diet , including drinking more juice , eating more vegetables and abstaining from red meat , a change that was inspired by his father 's death at age 54 from pancreatic cancer , two weeks before Pawn Stars debuted .
Chumlee 's diet has enabled him to be able to ride a hovercraft he had purchased earlier in the series , but could not ride before due to a maximum weight restriction of .
His girlfriend , Tanya Hyjazi , is a chef for a major Las Vegas casino .
LEGAL TROUBLES Section::::Legal troubles .
On March 9 , 2016 , Chumlee 's home was raided during the course of an investigation into sexual assault allegations .
During the search , police found crystal meth , marijuana and one firearm .
On a later search , police found 11 more legally owned firearms , ranging from handguns to a shotgun , MP5 , and .223-caliber rifles .
Most of the firearms were found in a bedroom vault safe , along with 17 multi - dose ' bars ' of the anti - anxiety drug Xanax and seven capsules containing small amounts of methamphetamine , police said .
Police also found evidence of possible cocaine use on the property .
Subsequently , Chumlee was arrested .
He was released on bond the following day .
His first appearance in court was set for March 11 , 2016 .
On May 23 , 2016 , Chumlee was charged with 20 felony counts , including drug and weapons charges .
David Chesnoff , Russell 's lawyer , confirmed that the reality TV star pled guilty to a felony weapons charge ; unlawful possession of a firearm ; and to a gross misdemeanor of attempted drug possession in a deal which calls for three years probation and counseling .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " About The Series " .
History Channel Online .