DOUBLE MAJORS IN THE UNITED STATES
A double major , sometimes called dual major , is a student who completes two sets of degree requirements .
In the United States , undergraduate programs toward a bachelor 's degree often follow a liberal arts model , and have a set group or type of coursework ( sometimes called distribution or core requirements ) together with a specialization , called a major -- a double major would usually complete one set of the core requirements and two sets of the specialization requirements .
This happens mostly for undergraduate students , but some graduate schools do offer double majors for graduate degrees .
Although they declare two separate majors , most schools only award one bachelor 's degree listing both majors at time of completion .
Increasing numbers of college students in the United States are accumulating more than one degree , with an estimated 25 % of college graduates with more than one major .
Some schools report that 30 % to 40 % of their undergraduates are double majors .
A number of factors are thought to contribute to this increase , including greater numbers of students entering college with AP credits and the belief that a second major gives a student an edge in the job market .
There is sometimes a difference in the time it takes to pursue a double major compared to a single major , such that it may take an additional year or more .
The added benefits of a second major include the opportunity to increase your knowledge and the expectation of increased earnings and competitiveness .
In fact , students cite enjoying the coursework , gaining parental approval , and finding a job after graduation as the three most important reasons for pursuing a second major .
Additionally , the pursuit of a double major can be an " identity project " by which students appear to focus on their " low status " major as their " core identity , " while their high status major is used when discussing their education with parents and potential employers .
TYPES OF DOUBLE MAJORS Section::::Types of double majors .
A 2008 study found that 27 % of double majors had two arts / social science majors , 14 % had two business majors , while 39 % had two majors that crossed disciplinary categories .
Some first majors lend themselves to greater likelihood of acquiring a second .
Business Administration , Social Science and Education majors are the most likely to have pursued a second major .
According to the Teagle Report , the ten most popular concentrations for double majors are : * Foreign Languages * * Economics * * Business * * Engineering * * Political Science * * Biology * * Psychology * * English * * History * * Mathematics *
In addition , the ten most popular double major combinations are : * Two Different Business Majors * * Foreign Language and International Studies * * Foreign Language and Political Science * * Economics and Mathematics * * Economics and Political Science * * Foreign Language and Biology * * Foreign Language and Economics * * Foreign Language and Business * * Economics and Engineering * * Foreign Language and Psychology .
* BREADTH VERSUS DEPTH Section::::Breadth versus depth .
The goal of many colleges and universities is to produce students of a wide breadth of knowledge , an aim that is evident in the implementation of general education courses and other similar curricular requirements .
An additional major suggests a greater likelihood of achieving this and researchers have begun to unpack the relationship between double majors and their knowledge base .
A study , in particular , identify two kinds of double majors – those who " hyper - specialize " and those who " hypo - specialize .
" Hyper - specialists are those who have both majors in similar academic fields ( e.g. , psychology and sociology ) , while hypo - specialists have majors in distinct fields ( e.g. , English and chemistry ) .
Most double majors are hypo - specialists , but close to a third of double majors hyper - specialize .
Double majors who hyper - specialize are predictably more concentrated in their knowledge base as a result of taking courses in areas that overlap whereas hypo - specialists would appear to have more breadth in their courses .
Hyper - specialization , however , has different impacts upon knowledge breadth depending upon field of study .
Humanities double majors , for example , see no difference in breadth exposure regardless of whether their second major is similar or dissimilar .
This provides a stark contrast to social and natural science double majors who see a negative impact to hyper - specialization in terms of acquiring a broad range of knowledge .
EFFECT ON EARNINGS AND OTHER LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
Section::::Effect on earnings and other labor market outcomes .
Post - graduation earnings vary widely for double majors .
Studies have estimated that a double major experiences a benefit of approximately 2.3 % to 3.4 % to their earnings compared to single majors .
A major in the science , technology , engineering or mathematics , either as a single major or part of a double major , fared appreciably better than other double - major combinations .
Students double majoring in engineering and natural sciences earned an average salary of $ 78,342 ; those double majoring in education and a social science earned $ 45,491 .
A double major is directly beneficial for those who only have a bachelor 's degree .
Double majors who go on to complete a graduate degree see no difference in earnings than those with a single major , controlling for field and level of degree .
Having two majors within the same group , such as two arts / social science degrees , produces similar earnings to those with only one major in the same field .
Exceptions to this are business and education where two degrees in each of these fields results in returns of 10 % and 5 % greater than single majors in those fields , respectively .
Contrary to what might be expected , having two math , science or engineering majors does not produce greater earnings than single majors .
There is much inconsistency when it comes to economic returns to a second major .
The greatest gains in earnings come when the two majors are in different fields ( hypo - specialization ) , with the highest returns being among those who opt for technical majors .
An arts / social science or education pairing with a business or math / science has greater earning potential than a single arts / social science or education major – although , adding an arts / social science or education major with a business or math / science degree offers no greater rewards than a single major in either of those fields .
On the contrary , it appears that an education and math / science pairing results in ' ' lower ' ' earnings compared to a single math / science major .
The greatest earnings appear to be for those who opt for an engineering – math / science pairing .
Compared to those with only the math / science major , double majors have returns of up to 30 percentage points .
The most profitable second majors , regardless of the first major , appear to be Business and Administration , Computer Science , and Engineering .
In some cases , gender appears to matter greatly .
Female engineering - math / science double majors , for example , have greater earning returns than males .
On the other hand , Males do not suffer the earnings penalty that female education double majors often do .
Differences in earnings also appear across types of institutions .
Liberal Arts colleges , where close to a third of students have two majors , the return to earnings are small and insignificant .
In contrast , a 3.9 % premium appears for double majors from Research institutions , where less than a quarter of students add a second major .
DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN SINGLE AND
DOUBLE MAJORS Section::::Differences between single and double majors .
In terms of collegiate experiences , studies have found a number of differences between single and double majors .
Compared to their single major peers , double majors appear to be more involved in extracurricular activities , more likely to hold positions in student organizations , and more likely to pursue academic interests ( research projects with faculty or honors thesis ) outside the classroom .
Double majors , on average , have higher GPAs than single majors .
In fact , students with GPAs of 3.5 or higher are more than twice as likely to double major .
27 % of them even have a minor .
Students who expect to go to graduate school are 72 % more likely to pursue a double major , and these students are also twice as likely to say they plan on pursuing a Ph.D. than their single major peers .
This reflects post - baccalaureate pursuits , as 23.4 % of individuals with just bachelor 's degrees were double majors , compared to 24.9 % of those who have graduate degrees .
CLASS AND GENDER Section::::Class and gender .
An estimated 25 % of women are double majors , compared to 22 % of men , although most studies show generally no difference between men and women .
Double majoring can provide an added benefit for women , who often balance differing expectations when it comes to major selection .
On the one hand , traditional gender socialization lends itself to less financially lucrative majors ( those in the humanities , for example ) .
On the other hand , the promise of financial rewards ( as well as parental pressure ) may push many women towards the science , technology , engineering and mathematics majors .
Combinations of double majors differed largely by gender , with men likely to pair business or economics with a second major while women often pair a foreign language or psychology with a second major .
Moreover , women often emphasized that a double major makes them more marketable to prospective employers and to graduate programs , especially if their majors appear to come from two unrelated fields .
The top double major combinations for men are as follows : * Two Different Business Majors * * Economics and Engineering * * Economics and Political Science * * Economics and Foreign Language * * Economics and Mathematics * * Engineering and Mathematics * * Economics and Business * * Political Science and Philosophy * * Engineering and Computer Science * * Foreign Language and International Studies .
*
The most popular double major combinations for women are : * Foreign Language and International Studies
* * Foreign Language and Political Science
* * Foreign Language and Psychology
* * Foreign Language and Human Development * * Foreign Language and Biology
* * Foreign Language and Business * * Two Different Business Majors *
* Art and Psychology * * Foreign Language and English * * Biology and Psychology .
*
Some differences appear between single and double majors in terms of family and educational background , although less than perhaps might be expected .
Double majors are more likely to come from wealthy families , have at least one parent with a bachelor 's degree , and are less likely to work than their single major peers .
Furthermore , double majors are slightly more likely to have graduated from a private high school and have taken more AP classes .
THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONS Section::::The role of institutions .
Institutions vary largely in their percentage of double majors .
Public schools appear to have close to twice the amount of double majors than private schools , in part because they tend to offer a broader array of subjects and classes .
Larger schools , however , see decreases of about 1.25 % in double majors for every additional 1500 students compared to smaller schools .
The greatest increase in the number of double majors appears to be happening at the most selective colleges .
Schools with higher percentages of students with student loans see decreases in the number of double majors compared to more affluent universities .
Campuses that are predominantly white , have mostly traditional - aged students ( 18 - 24 ) , and are more selective ( 25 % of incoming freshmen score at least on the SAT ) have more double majors than other campuses .
Likewise , an estimated $ 6800 increase in tuition is associated with a 1 % increase in double majors .
Different institution types may also vary in the culture surrounding double majors .
In liberal arts institutions , for example , an estimated 30 % of all students pick up a second major compared to research institutions where only 22 % of students double - up .
REFERENCES