THE ORIGINALS ( TV SERIES )
The Originals is an American television series that began airing on The CW on October 3 , 2013 .
Created as a spin - off of The Vampire Diaries , the series follows vampire - werewolf hybrid Klaus Mikaelson as he and his family become embroiled in the supernatural politics of New Orleans .
On May 10 , 2017 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth season .
On July 20 , 2017 , it was announced by series creator Julie Plec ahead of Comic Con that the series ' fifth season would be its last .
The final season debuted on April 18 , 2018 .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
The Originals , a spin - off from The Vampire Diaries , centers around three of the Mikaelson siblings : Klaus ( Joseph Morgan ) , Elijah ( Daniel Gillies ) , and Rebekah ( Claire Holt ) .
The Mikaelson family is called " the Originals " as they are the first vampires to ever exist .
Niklaus " Klaus " Mikaelson is a descendant of a witch and a werewolf , and his quest to unleash his hybrid nature was detailed in The Vampire Diaries .
The backdoor pilot , which aired on April 25 , 2013 , also revealed that the werewolf Hayley ( Phoebe Tonkin ) is pregnant with Klaus 's child .
The series begins with the Original siblings returning to the city of New Orleans for the first time since 1919 , where a pregnant Hayley has also settled .
Having originally built the city , they had been forced to abandon it when fleeing from their vengeful father .
In their absence , Klaus 's protégé , Marcel ( Charles Michael Davis ) , took charge of the city .
Klaus resolves that they must take down Marcel and get back the city that once belonged to them .
While doing that they must also protect their city from a war brewing between vampires , werewolves , and witches .
Over time , new and old friendships are formed , love is in the air , death surrounds them , and the Originals learn more about their own family past .
The first season describes how Klaus 's mystical child is going to be born and speaks of the threats that the Originals together must keep her safe from .
The second season deals with the return of Klaus and his siblings ' parents , and the arrival of an aunt who threatens the baby 's life .
The third season shows the Mikaelsons facing both a prophecy that speaks of their downfall , and the first - sired vampires who have wanted revenge for a millennium .
The fourth season jumps ahead five years , with the Mikaelsons returning to New Orleans and having to face a reawakened ancient menace set on destroying anything in its path .
The fifth and final season of the series takes place seven years after the fourth season , with Hope now being a teenager at a school for supernatural children , the Salvatore Boarding School for the Young and Gifted .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Joseph Morgan as Niklaus " Klaus " Mikaelson : The self - proclaimed King of New Orleans and the Original Hybrid : half - Original Vampire and half - werewolf .
As the son of a witch and a werewolf plus being a vampire by magic , Klaus is one of the most ruthless and feared supernatural beings in history but also has a soft spot for his family .
He is the father of Hayley 's daughter , Hope , and is the adoptive father of Marcel , also his former protégé .
He eventually develops feelings for Cami .
* Daniel Gillies as Elijah Mikaelson : An Original Vampire and Klaus 's older maternal half - brother .
He is shown to be extremely suave , always sporting a suit , and relatively level - headed compared to Klaus 's more heated tendencies .
He harbors romantic affections for Hayley .
* Claire Holt as Rebekah Mikaelson ( main season 1 ; special guest star season 2–5 ) : An Original Vampire and Klaus 's younger maternal half - sister .
She is Klaus 's favorite and the youngest of the Mikaelson siblings after the death of Henrik .
At one time , she was in a romantic relationship with Marcel .
Despite her unwavering love for her family , she desires to find love and start a family of her own , which is complicated by her family name and vampire status .
She eventually leaves New Orleans to pursue a simpler life outside of her family .
Holt departs the main cast near the end of season 1 , but has guest starred sporadically in every season since .
Maisie Richardson - Sellers portrayed Rebekah during the second half of season 2 and one episode of season 3 , when Rebekah possessed witch Eva Sinclair 's body .
* Phoebe Tonkin as Hayley Marshall : Originally a werewolf , later hybrid , who conceived a daughter with Klaus named Hope .
She is revealed to be the long - lost Alpha of her werewolf bloodline .
Later , she rises to become the Alpha of the entire Crescent pack when the Alphas of all the other bloodlines bow down before her .
She is initially reluctant to be involved with the Mikaelsons , but is eventually accepted into the family and accepts them in return .
She reciprocates Elijah 's romantic feelings , but marries Jackson Kenner in order to unite their packs .
* Charles Michael Davis as Marcel Gerard : A vampire , now enhanced Original Vampire , and former slave .
He was turned by Klaus , his adoptive father and former mentor .
He has a romantic past with both Rebekah and Cami .
His relationship with the Mikaelsons is complicated as a result of his history with them as well as philosophical differences .
They are often adversarial as Klaus and Marcel constantly struggle for power over New Orleans .
He rescues Davina from being sacrificed and takes her under his wing as his adoptive daughter .
* Daniella Pineda as Sophie Deveraux ( main season 1 ) : A powerful witch of the French Quarter .
* Leah Pipes as Camille O'Connell ( main seasons 1–3 ; special guest star season 4–5 ) :
A human therapist for Klaus whom he is later affectionate toward , though she was briefly romantically involved with Marcel .
* Danielle Campbell as Davina Claire ( main seasons 1–3 ; special guest star season 4–5 ) :
A powerful young witch and Marcel 's adoptive daughter who becomes Regent of all witch covens in New Orleans .
She does n't much care for the Mikaelsons and seeks to destroy them with Marcel 's help , until she unknowingly falls in love with one .
* Yusuf Gatewood as Vincent Griffith ( guest star season 1 ; main season 2–5 ) :
A witch once possessed by Finn , the eldest brother among the Mikaelson siblings .
He is the ex - husband of Eva Sinclair , the witch Rebekah possessed .
He succeeds Davina as Regent of all witch covens in New Orleans .
* Riley Voelkel as Freya Mikaelson ( recurring season 2 ; main season 3–5 )
: Klaus 's long - lost maternal older half - sister , Freya is an immensely powerful and skilled thousand - year - old witch , former immortal , and the eldest of the Mikaelson siblings .
* Danielle Rose Russell as Hope Mikaelson ( main season 5 ) , the teen - aged daughter of Klaus and Hayley , and who is an extremely powerful supernatural being as she holds the three - fold lineage of vampire , werewolf , and witch .
* Steven Krueger as Joshua " Josh " Rosza ( recurring seasons 1–4 ; main season 5 ) , a visitor to New Orleans who is soon turned into a vampire .
He befriends Davina , and later serves as Marcel 's lieutenant .
EPISODES PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On January 11 , 2013 , it was announced that a backdoor pilot focused on the Originals , starring Joseph Morgan as Klaus and titled The Originals would air sometime in April for a potential series pick - up for the 2013–2014 season .
On April 26 , 2013 , The Originals was confirmed for a full series .
This second spin - off attempt will be overseen by Julie Plec , with no involvement by Kevin Williamson .
The Originals was officially picked up by The CW on April 26 , 2013 , for the 2013–14 season .
Season one of The Originals was set to premiere on Tuesday , October 15 .
However , on July 29 , 2013 , The CW announced that the series premiere would instead air on October 3 , 2013 , following the fifth - season premiere of The Vampire Diaries in order to attract fans of the series .
On October 10 , 2013 , the CW ordered three additional scripts for the series .
On November 11 , 2013 , the CW decided to order a full season for The Originals .
Following her March 11 episode
Claire Holt left the main cast .
Holt confirmed that she will be returning to the show , but she needs to spend time with her family first .
RECEPTION RATINGS AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result ! class="unsortable
"
THE ORIGINALS :
THE AWAKENING Section::::The Originals : The Awakening .
The Originals : The Awakening is a webseries .
The series explores the character Kol Mikaelson and his relationships with his siblings .
Flashing back to 1914 , Kol is on a quest to form an alliance with the witches of the French Quarter .
Awakening gives answers to some questions about Kol 's past , including the origins of his rivalry with his family and the unique backstory he has with the New Orleans witches .
Each webisode is approximately two minutes long .
NOVELS Section::::Novels .
On January 27 , 2015 , the first book in a series of novels based on the show was released .
The Rise , The Loss , and The Resurrection make up the three novels in The Originals series written by Julie Plec .
SPIN - OFF Section::::Spin - off .
In August 2017 , it was announced that a spin - off focusing on Hope Mikaelson , the daughter of Klaus and Hayley , was in development .
Julie Plec , co - creator of The Vampire Diaries and creator of The Originals , wrote the script and is credited with creating the series .
In January 2018 , it was revealed that filming for the pilot would go into production in the second quarter of 2018 .
It was announced in March 2018 that the spin - off was in fact ordered to pilot , but instead of a traditional pilot , Plec would be delivering a fifteen - minute pilot presentation of the series to The CW .
It was also announced that The Vampire Diaries veteran Matt Davis would star in the project along with Aria Shahghasemi , Quincy Fouse , Jenny Boyd , and Kaylee Bryant .
Shahghasemi will debut in the fifth season of The Originals as Hope 's friend Landon .
On May 11 , 2018 , it was announced that the spin - off , titled Legacies , was ordered to series for the 2018–19 season .
The show will center around " a 17-year - old Hope , along with Alaric 's twin daughters , and other young witches , vampires , and werewolves " as they come of age at the Salvatore Boarding School for the Young and Gifted .
SEE ALSO
* Vampire film
* List of vampire television series REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS