HELEN GEORGE Helen George ( born Helen Thomas ; 19 June 1984 ) is an English actress .
She plays Trixie Franklin on the BBC TV drama series Call the Midwife .
In 2015 , she participated in the thirteenth series of BBC One 's Strictly Come Dancing ; she was paired with Aljaž Skorjanec , and finished in sixth place .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
George was born Helen Thomas in Harborne , Birmingham , to political science professor Neil Thomas and social worker Margareth Thomas .
She has a sister , Elizabeth , a veterinarian .
George studied ballet as a child , eventually becoming a junior associate at Birmingham Royal Ballet , and was active in sports , competing in the long jump .
As a child she dreamed of being the first female manager of the Aston Villa football club .
George decided that she wanted to work in musical theatre at the age of 15 , when she was in a production of Les Misérables at her secondary school , Henry Beaufort Winchester .
She is a graduate of the Royal Academy of Music , London and the Birmingham School of Acting .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
George attended the Royal Academy of Music , London , studying musical theatre .
She gained her first role some two weeks after graduation in the play
The Woman in White .
She was a backing singer for Elton John during a tour , in which her sister Victoria Ingle also sang .
She sang at venues including both Wembley Arena and the Royal Albert Hall .
George was cast in the role of Trixie on the BBC One series Call the Midwife , based on the book by Jennifer Worth .
She was daunted by the prospect of working with the likes of Pam Ferris and Jenny Agutter .
As part of the role she was trained in the medical techniques of the 1950s , including how to deliver a baby .
During the first series , she practised this at home with her husband taking the role of a pregnant woman , and her Yorkshire Terrier being the ' baby ' .
In 2012 , she underwent a press tour in the United States to promote the series there .
She also starred in the music video for singer Birdy 's cover of " 1901 " .
In August 2015 , George was announced as one of the celebrities who would compete in the thirteenth series of Strictly Come Dancing .
She was partnered with professional dancer Aljaž Skorjanec .
Despite continuously getting high remarks from the judges , George was eliminated in week 11 , finishing in sixth place .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
George married actor Oliver Boot in December 2012 .
They met when they were both in Hotel Babylon , but started their relationship several years later .
In August 2015 , representatives of George confirmed that she and Boot had split up after three years of marriage .
In April 2016 , she began dating her Call The Midwife co - star Jack Ashton when they went to South Africa to film the show 's Christmas special .
In September 2017 , their daughter , Wren Ivy , was born .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography .
+ Film and television roles !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes 2017 Red Dwarf Aniter M - Corp : Season 12 , Episode 5
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS