CATS IN AUSTRALIA Cats are kept as pets in Australia and are also one of the major invasive species that are causing detrimental effects to indigenous wildlife .
For biosecurity reasons any cats that are imported into Australia must meet conditions set by the Department of Agriculture , Fisheries and Forestry .
There are now an estimated 2.7 million domestic cats and over 18 million feral cats in Australia .
HISTORICAL CONTEXT Section::::Historical context .
Historical records date the introduction of cats to Australia at around 1804 and that cats first became feral around Sydney by 1820 .
In the early 1900s , concern was expressed at the pervasiveness of the cat problem DOMESTICATED CATS Section::::Domesticated cats .
It has been identified that domesticated cats prey on native animals , and surveys of catches have regularly occurred By 2006 , 26 percent of Australian households had a domesticated cat .
FERAL CATS Section::::Feral cats .
Feral cats are one of the major invasive species in Australia and have been linked to the decline and extinction of various native animals .
They have been shown to cause a significant impact on ground nesting birds and small native mammals .
Feral cats have also hampered any attempts to re - introduce threatened species back into areas where they have become extinct as the cats have simply hunted and killed the newly released animals .
Numerous Australian environmentalists claim the feral cat has been an ecological disaster in Australia , inhabiting most ecosystems except dense rainforest , and being implicated in the extinction of several marsupial and placental mammal species .
A field experiment conducted in Heirisson Prong ( Western Australia ) compared small mammal populations in areas cleared of both foxes and cats , of foxes only , and a control plot .
Researchers found the first solid evidence that predation by feral cats can cause a decline in native mammals .
It also indicates that cat predation is especially severe when fox numbers have been reduced .
Cats may play a role in Australia 's altered ecosystems ; with foxes they may be controlling introduced rabbits , particularly in arid areas , which themselves cause ecological damage .
Cats are believed to have been a factor in the extinction of the only mainland bird species to be lost since European settlement , the paradise parrot .
Cats in Australia have no natural predators except dingoes and wedge - tailed eagles , and as a result they are apex predators where neither the dingo nor the eagle exist .
Australian folklore holds that some feral cats in Australia have grown so large as to cause inexperienced observers to claim sightings of other species such as puma etc .
This folklore is being shown to be more fact than fiction , with the recent shooting of an enormous feline , in the Gippsland area of Victoria .
Subsequent DNA test showed it to be a feral cat .
Since 2016 there is a program on Kangaroo Island to eradicate an estimated population between 3,000 and 5,000 cats within the next 15 years .
PHANTOM CATS Section::::Phantom cats .
There have been numerous sightings of phantom cats in Australia including the Gippsland phantom cat and the Blue Mountains panther .
SEE ALSO
* Cougars in Western Australia * Mammals of Australia
* Invasive species in Australia
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Feral Cat Felix catus , Department of Sustainability , Environment , Water , Population and Communities
* Predation by feral cats - Threat abatement plan - Department of Sustainability , Environment , Water , Population and Communities * Management of cats in Australia - Australian Veterinary Association * Australian Companion Animal Council