CORPORATE ANNIVERSARY
In marketing , a Corporate anniversary is a celebration of a firm 's continued existence after a particular number of years .
The celebration is a media event which can help a firm achieve diverse marketing goals , such as promoting its corporate identity , boosting employee morale , building greater investor confidence , and encouraging sales .
As a public relations opportunity , it is a way for a firm to tout past accomplishments while strengthening relationships with employees and customers and investors .
The duration of the celebration itself can vary considerably , from an hour or day to activities happening throughout the year .
Many businesses use an anniversary to express gratitude for past success .
Generally , larger corporations have the means to stage more elaborate celebrations .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
An anniversary can advertise a firm 's staying power and longevity .
A report in the New York Times explained the marketing logic :
Marketers choose variables relating to anniversaries to meet specific promotional objectives .
While the length of time celebrated by an anniversary is often divisible by five , such as the 10th , 15th , 25th , 50th , or 80th anniversary , there are no hard and fast rules .
For example , Google celebrated its 13th anniversary with a special " doodle " for its main search page which showed a colorful image of " cake , presents and balloons . "
Generally , anniversaries are chosen to coincide with marketing initiatives , such that " any coming of age will do , " according to one view .
An anniversary can commemorate not only a firm 's founding year but the introduction of a successful company brand , a merger , a patent , or some other milestone .
There are a wide variety of marketing gimmicks and appeals which can accompany an anniversary celebration :
sweepstakes , contests , thank you letters , special product editions , parties , guest speakers , birthday displays on websites , giveaways , new product introductions , publicity stunts , sponsorships , fireworks , live musical performances , commemorative packaging , anniversary rings , promotions , signs in retail stores , donations , scholarships , temporary price reductions or discounts , reflections on past accomplishments , special ad campaigns , new logos , and so on .
PLANNING
Section::::Planning .
Planning an anniversary can take years .
In some cases , special marketing consultants and event planners have been hired to coordinate the effort .
Large corporations typically work closely with their corporate advertising agency as well as their marketing and sales departments to plan sometimes elaborate campaigns , often with a special theme to mark the occasion .
For example , Starbucks marked their 40th anniversary with a redesigned logo and media campaign .
Guinness Brewery celebrated its 250th anniversary with a global advertising effort .
In 1972 , Time magazine celebrated its 50th anniversary with events throughout the year : Goya Foods , on its 75th anniversary , donated a million pounds of food to help fight hunger and announced scholarship programs as well as held parties in different locations .
There is flexibility in terms of choosing which dates to use when determining an anniversary .
The start date is often the month or year when a firm was founded , but this can vary considerably , and exceptions are the rule ; for example , Lego toys celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2008 – – exactly 50 years after the time when the founder 's son , Godtfred Kirk Christiansen , filed a patent for the iconic plastic bricks in 1958 .
DIFFICULTY IN MEASURING SUCCESS Section::::Difficulty in measuring success .
Measuring the success of any advertising effort , including an anniversary celebration , can be difficult .
Sometimes an anniversary generates negative publicity , such as the tenth anniversary of the merger between AOL and Time Warner , which was largely seen as a colossal business blunder .
A report in The Guardian suggested that corporate anniversaries do not always lead to " happy returns " : SEE
ALSO
*
Advertising
* Corporate identity
* Event management * Event planning * Marketing strategy
* Media event * Public relations REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Anniversary marketing