THE ONE AND ONLY IVAN
The One and
Only Ivan is a children 's novel written by K. A. Applegate and illustrated by Patricia Castelao .
The book is about a silverback gorilla named Ivan who lived in a cage at a mall .
The novel is written in first person from the point of view of Ivan , a gorilla .
In 2013 it was named the winner of the Newbery Medal .
It has won several other awards and is currently nominated to several reading lists .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story is placed at the Exit 8 Big Top Mall by the Video Arcade .
Ivan , the gorilla , has lived in captivity at the Big Top Mall for 9,855 days by his own tally .
He lives in his domain , and is generally content with his life .
He watches television , eats bananas and makes artwork that is sold by the owner .
Along with Ivan , Stella , an elephant and Bob , a stray dog live also at the mall .
Stella is an older elephant who has a chronic injury in one leg and regularly performs in the daily shows .
Unlike Ivan , Stella has a long memory , and can remember living other places , like the circus where she was taught many of her tricks .
However , Stella would like to live at a zoo , because they have much wider spaces for their domains .
Stella believes that zoos are how humans make amends .
When Ruby , a baby elephant is brought to the Big Top Mall to live with Stella and learn new tricks , things begin to change .
Stella 's old injury causes her to get sick .
Just before Stella succumbs to her illness and passes away , she asks Ivan to take care of Ruby and find her a better place .
Ivan promises he will take care of Ruby , even though he does not know how he will manage to do it .
After Stella 's death , Ivan begins to remember his life before the Big Top Mall , and what it was like to have freedom , if only to have stories to tell to Ruby .
While Mack , the owner of the Big Top Mall is trying to train Ruby to do tricks , Ivan witnesses first hand the abuse to which she is subjected and starts to decide how to keep his promise to Stella .
When Julia , the custodian 's daughter gives Ivan some finger paints , he begins to get an idea of how to help Ruby .
He also changes his opinion of the Big Top Mall .
He no longer thinks of his area as his domain , but as a cage .
Ivan uses his art to make a large picture of a zoo .
George and Julia help him by putting it on the billboard outside of the Big Top Mall .
When people see the new signs , they begin to protest the treatment of the animals .
Investigators are sent to the Big Top Mall , and eventually it is closed down , and Ivan , Ruby and the other animals are taken away to a zoo .
Ivan and Ruby are both adopted by the same zoo .
Ivan was tested if he really was a silverback at the new zoo .
The story ends with Ivan and Ruby adapting to their new habitats and the other animals they will live with .
CHARACTERS
* Ivan : An easygoing gorilla who has lived in the Big Top Mall and Video Arcade for 24 years and 3 years living with Mack ; the main character .
Ivan has spent most of his life in captivity , either living in a human home or at the Exit 8 Big Top Mall and Video Arcade .
He remembers little about his life before captivity and has grown content with his life at the mall .
As the story progresses , Ivan determines that his life is not satisfactory and he works to save Ruby by having her removed to a zoo .
* Stella : a senior elephant who used to live in circuses before coming to the mall .
Stella has a long memory , and would much prefer to live in a zoo .
She extracts a promise from Ivan to take care of Ruby if she can not .
* Bob : a stray dog who lives with Ivan in his domain .
Bob is satisfied to be a stray dog and has no desire to be adopted into a human home .
* Mack : the owner of the mall and part - time circus clown ; purchased Ivan from poachers who captured him in his home in Africa .
Mack is not seen often on screen .
He appears to be a generally good man .
However , his business is failing and he can not afford to keep up the mall the way he used to .
His actions regarding Stella and Ruby are what finally spur Ivan to try to have Ruby moved to a zoo .
* George : The mall custodian .
George is a good man who cares for the animals and the mall .
However , he is conflicted about helping them because he is afraid of losing his job .
* Julia : George 's daughter ; inspires Ivan to love drawing .
Julia works to help Ivan in his quest to move Ruby and the other animals to a zoo .
* Ruby : a baby elephant who is new to the mall .
Ruby has only recently lost her mother and has never previously been trained in circus tricks .
Ruby 's treatment at the hands of Mack is what ultimately drives Ivan to try to find a way to save her .
She can also tell if people are lying , apparently .
INSPIRATION
Section::::Inspiration .
Although The One and Only Ivan is an entirely fictional story , it is inspired by the true story of Ivan , who lived in a similar situation for 27 years .
Eventually Ivan was adopted by Zoo Atlanta in 1994 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
According to Kirkus Reviews , " Fittingly , Ivan narrates his tale in short , image - rich sentences and acute , sometimes humorous observations that are all the more heartbreaking for their simple delivery ...
Utterly believable , this bittersweet story ... will inspire a new generation of advocates . "
Jonathan Hunt wrote in The Horn Book Magazine , " The choice to tell this story in the first person and to personify the gorilla with an entire range of human thoughts , feelings , and emotions poses important questions to the reader , not only about what it means to be human but also about what it means to be a living creature , and what kind of kinship we all share . "
Carolyn Phelan wrote in Booklist that " The text , written in first person from Ivan 's point of view , does a good job of vividly conveying his personality , emotions , and intelligence as well as creating a sense of otherness in his point of view .
" Writing for School Library Journal , Elizabeth Bird said , " There 's nothing twee or precious about it .
Just good crisp writing , complex characters , and a story that will make animal rights activists out of the most lethargic of readers .
Applegate has penned a real doozy of a book that speaks to the best and worst in all of us . "
ADAPTATION Section::::Adaptation .
On April 9 , 2014 , it was announced that Disney may adapt the book with Allison Shearmur to produce .
On May 6 , 2016 , it was announced that Mike Newell would direct the film , but on March 1 , 2018 he was replaced by Thea Sharrock .
The script will be written by Mike White .
The cast for the film include Sam Rockwell as Ivan , Angelina Jolie as Stella , Bryan Cranston as Mack , Ariana Greenblatt as Julia , and Ramón Rodríguez as Mack 's assistant , with Brooklynn Prince , Helen Mirren , Danny DeVito , Indira Varma and Eleanor Matsuura in undisclosed roles .
Shearmur , who died on January 19 , 2018 , will still have a producing credit along with Jolie and Brigham Taylor .
The One and Only Ivan entered production on the week of May 1 , 2018 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
The One and Only Ivan at Goodreads
* Obituary of Ivan on npr.org blog