WITCHES OF EAST END ( TV SERIES ) Witches of East End is an American television series based on the book of the same name by Melissa de la Cruz .
The series premiered on Lifetime on October 6 , 2013 .
Set in the fictional seaside town of East End , it follows the lives of a family of witches – Joanna Beauchamp ( Julia Ormond ) and her two grown - up daughters , Freya Beauchamp ( Jenna Dewan Tatum ) and Ingrid Beauchamp ( Rachel Boston ) , as well as her sister Wendy Beauchamp ( Mädchen Amick ) .
On November 22 , 2013 , Lifetime renewed Witches of East End for a second season to consist of 13 episodes , which premiered on July 6 , 2014 .
On November 4 , 2014 , Lifetime cancelled Witches of East End after a decline in ratings during the second season .
The series finale aired on October 5 , 2014 .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The series stars Julia Ormond as lead character Joanna Beauchamp , a witch and mother of Freya Beauchamp ( Jenna Dewan ) and Ingrid Beauchamp ( Rachel Boston ) , who are part of the next generation of witches .
Mädchen Amick co - stars as Joanna 's mischievous witch sister Wendy Beauchamp .
The series is loosely based on the book 's plot , with one change being that Freya and Ingrid are initially unaware of their magical powers .
CAST , PEOPLE , AND CHARACTERS * Julia Ormond as Joanna Beauchamp * Mädchen Amick as Wendy Beauchamp
* Jenna Dewan Tatum as Freya Beauchamp
* Rachel Boston as Ingrid Beauchamp
* Daniel Di Tomasso as Killian Gardiner
* Eric Winter as Dash Gardiner
* Christian Cooke as Frederick Beauchamp ( season 2 )
Section::::Cast , people , and characters .
Notes : a DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
On July 19 , 2012 , it was announced that Lifetime had ordered a pilot for Witches of East End for its 2013 season , and that the show would be executive - produced by both Maggie Friedman and Erwin Stoff , and produced by Fox 21 .
On January 31 , 2013 , it was revealed that Lifetime had picked up Witches of East End with ten episodes and that it was scheduled to premiere later that year .
The executive VP of programming for Lifetime Networks , Rob Sharenow , said " We 've been thrilled about Witches of East End and its powerful premise since the moment we bought the property , and our friends at Fox 21 helped develop it for television .
This is one of the most exciting ensemble casts we 've seen and the whole show is fresh , original and just right for Lifetime . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
On August 30 , 2012 , it was announced that Julia Ormond had landed a main role on the show , as Joanna Beauchamp .
On September 14 , 2012 , the role of Freya Beauchamp was officially given to Jenna Dewan Tatum , who publicly announced on December 17 , 2012 , that she and husband Channing Tatum were expecting their first child .
On September 17 , 2012 , the leading male role of Dash Gardiner was assigned to Patrick Heusinger .
And on September 19 , 2012 , Rachel Boston and model Daniel Di Tomasso were announced to have earned the two remaining main roles , respectively Ingrid Beauchamp and Killian Gardiner .
Finally , as announced on September 25 , 2012 , Nicholas Gonzalez would portray detective Matt Torcoletti .
On October 9 , 2012 , two guest star announcements were made : Mädchen Amick , who then became a part of the permanent main cast , and Glenne Headly - Amick as Wendy ( Joanna 's sister ) and a leading role and Headly as Penelope ( the Gardiner brothers ' mother ) .
Tom Lenk was later given the role of Hudson Rafferty , Ingrid 's best friend , as announced on October 16 , 2012 .
Casting however underwent a few changes .
As revealed by Nicholas Gonzalez himself on his Twitter account , a few days after the pick - up announcement , the actor was dropped from the show , and on June 6 , 2013 , it was announced that Patrick Heusinger 's role as Dash Gardiner would be recast , for creative reasons .
On June 26 , TVLine revealed that Eric Winter would replace Patrick Heusinger as Dash Gardiner .
On July 9 , the recurring role of the detective Adam ( formerly Matt Torcoletti ) was assigned to Jason George .
On July 12 , Virginia Madsen replaced Glenne Headly for a multi - episode arc as Penelope , Dash and Killian 's mother .
On August 12 , Freddie Prinze , Jr. booked a guest role on the show , as Leo Wingate , with a possibility that it could become recurring .
On August 14 , Anthony Lemke was cast as recurring Harrison Welles .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming the pilot episode began on October 16 , 2012 in the port town of Wilmington , North Carolina , where several scenes were shot .
On October 29 , 2012 , the crew moved for a week to Macon , Georgia , where they filmed the wedding scenes for the pilot at the historical Hay House .
When the network Lifetime announced Witches of East End was going to be a series , it was also revealed that filming the rest of the series would happen in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , instead of continuing in Wilmington , NC .
Maggie Friedman announced on Twitter on June 10 that she was scouting locations for the series , trying to " find Fair Haven " .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Critical reaction to Witches of East End has been mixed , with a score of 50 on Metacritic and 70 % for the first season on Rotten Tomatoes with a consensus saying " Although it 's ridiculously soapy , Witches of East End is often campy fun ; it 's a supernatural spectacle that 's entertaining despite its silliness . "
Lori Rackl of Chicago Sun - Times described the show as a " Soapy , silly adaptation of Melissa de la Cruz 's best - seller . "
Matthew Gilbert of Boston Globe reviewed the show saying " [ It ] will remain a missable new supernatural series populated by wooden actors and feeble plotlines .
"
Matt Roush of TV Guide summed up his review saying " Whatever the opposite of spellbinding is , that 's this show . "
Diane Werts of Newsday gave the show a more positive review , saying " What 's utterly clear is that the starter hour picks up steam whenever loose - cannon Amick bops around -- although Ormond does a nice job of grounding its shenanigans in a semblance of reality .
"
She finishes her review giving the pilot a B rating .
Allison Keene from The Hollywood Reporter also praised the premiere , claiming " Witches of East End is up against a number of other supernatural shows , and there becomes a question of saturation .
Fortunately or unfortunately , we are n't at that point , yet .
It seems there 's plenty more room at the table , and there , Witches of East End currently looks like the most fun . "
Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times also gave the show a glowing review , starting off by negatively reviewing the " humorless " witches on shows such as the 2013 debuts of Sleepy Hollow and The Originals , then going on to say Witches of East End is a welcome relief to those series .
He further applauds the casting and characters , saying " thanks to zippy repartee among the stars .
Ms. Amick is hilarious , and Ms. Dewan Tatum and Ms. Boston make a pretty amusing pair of mismatched sisters . "
He ends the review with " there is a lot of heavy fare on television on Sunday nights .
If Witches can retain its wry tone , it will be a satisfying alternative for viewers looking for a lighter way to end the weekend . "
Lily Moayeri of Under the Radar compared the show with Charmed saying " Witch - themed shows work better when both the witches and the target audience are teenagers .
The grown - up witches on Witches of East End are just a little too ridiculous - even more so than the witch sister trio of Charmed . "
The show 's second season currently has a 90 % user rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
Witches of East End premiered on a Sunday night to 1.93 million viewers and a 0.7 18 - 49 rating .
The premiere rated on par to the June 23 premiere of Lifetime 's other new show Devious Maids , however , Witches of East End faced a lot of tough competition and ended the night being the number two scripted drama on cable , behind Boardwalk Empire on HBO .
The following week , Witches of East End pulled a total of 1.93 million viewers and rose to a 0.8 18 - 49 rating , despite the return of The Walking Dead and its talk show Talking Dead breaking records on AMCEST12 BROADCASTS Section::::Broadcasts .
Witches of East End premiered in the United Kingdom on November 5 , 2013 on the second night of the newly formed UK channel , Lifetime UK .
The second season premiered on August 25 , 2014 .
In Australia , Witches of East End premiered on Eleven on August 4 , 2014 .
CANCELLATION AND FAN CAMPAIGN Section::::Cancellation and fan campaign .
On November 4 , 2014 , it was announced that Lifetime had cancelled Witches of East End after a decline in ratings during the second season .
The first season averaged 1.67 million viewers , but dropped in its second season to 1.13 million .
After its cancellation , fans launched an online petition campaign to save the show called " Renew Witches of East End " .
The petition became popular on Twitter , where fans were told to use the hashtag # RenewWitchesofEastEnd and tweet it to Lifetime 's Twitter account .
Fans have also campaigned the online streaming service Netflix to pick up the show .
The campaign received support from celebrities on Twitter who backed the show to be renewed , including Channing Tatum , William Shatner and Snooki as well as stars from cult television series such as Buffy the Vampire Slayers Sarah Michelle Gellar and Charmeds Shannen Doherty and Holly Marie Combs .
As of June 2017 and after 3 years since the finale , the petition has received more than 272,000 signatures .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS