FINDING DORY Finding Dory is a 2016 American 3D computer - animated adventure film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures .
Directed by Andrew Stanton with co - direction by Angus MacLane , the screenplay was written by Stanton and Victoria Strouse .
The film is a sequel / spinoff to 2003 's Finding Nemo and features the returning voices of Ellen DeGeneres and Albert Brooks , with Hayden Rolence ( replacing Alexander Gould ) , Ed O'Neill , Kaitlin Olson , Ty Burrell , Diane Keaton , and Eugene Levy joining the cast .
The film focuses on the amnesiac fish Dory , who journeys to be reunited with her parents .
The film premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 8 , 2016 , and was released in the United States on June 17 , 2016 .
Upon release , the film was well - received by critics and grossed over $ 1billion worldwide , becoming the second Pixar film to cross $ 1 billion after 2010 's Toy Story 3 , the third highest - grossing film of 2016 and the 22nd - highest - grossing of all - time at the time of its theatrical run .
The film set numerous box office records , including the biggest opening for an animated film in North America , and the highest - grossing animated film in North America .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dory , a regal blue tang , gets separated from her parents as a child .
As she grows up , Dory attempts to search for them , but gradually forgets them due to her short - term memory loss .
In the flashback of the previous film , Finding Nemo , she joins Marlin – a clownfish looking for his missing son Nemo – after accidentally swimming into him .
One year later , Dory is living with Marlin and Nemo on their reef .
One day , Dory has a flashback and remembers that she has parents .
She decides to look for them , but her memory problem is an obstacle .
She eventually remembers that they lived at the Jewel of Morro Bay across the ocean in California , thanks to Nemo mentioning its name .
Marlin and Nemo accompany Dory .
With the help of Crush , their sea turtle friend , they ride a water current to California .
Upon arrival , they explore a shipwreck full of destroyed cargo , where Dory accidentally awakens a giant squid , who immediately pursues them and almost devours Nemo .
Marlin berates Dory for endangering them .
Her feelings hurt , Dory travels to the surface to seek help and is captured by staff members from the nearby Marine Life Institute after getting entangled in six pack rings .
Dory is placed in the quarantine section and tagged .
There she meets a grouchy , but well - meaning octopus named Hank .
Dory 's tag shows that she will be sent to an aquarium in Cleveland .
Due to a traumatic ocean life , Hank wants to live in the aquarium instead of being released back into the ocean , so he agrees to help Dory find her parents in exchange for her tag .
In one exhibit , Dory encounters her childhood friend Destiny , a nearsighted whale shark , who used to communicate with Dory through pipes , and Bailey , a beluga whale , who mistakenly believes he has lost his ability to echolocate .
Dory subsequently has flashbacks of life with her parents , and struggles to recall details .
She finally remembers how she was separated from her parents : she overheard her mother crying one night , left to retrieve a shell to cheer her up , and was pulled away by an undertow current .
Marlin and Nemo attempt to rescue Dory .
With the help of two California sea lions named Fluke and Rudder and a disfigured common loon named Becky , they manage to get into the institute and find her in the pipe system .
Other blue tangs tell them that Dory 's parents escaped from the institute a long time ago to search for her and never came back , leaving Dory believing that they have died .
Hank retrieves Dory from the tank , accidentally leaving Marlin and Nemo behind .
He is then apprehended by one of the employees and unintentionally drops Dory into the drain , flushing her out to the ocean .
While wandering aimlessly , she comes across a trail of shells ; remembering that when she was young , her parents had set out a similar trail to help her find her way back home , she follows it .
At the end of the trail , Dory finds an empty brain coral with multiple shell trails leading to it .
As she turns to leave , she sees her parents Jenny and Charlie in the distance .
They tell her they spent years laying down the trails for her to follow in the hopes that she would eventually find them .
Marlin , Nemo , and Hank end up in the truck taking various aquatic creatures to Cleveland .
Destiny and Bailey escape from their exhibit to help Dory rescue them .
Once on board the truck , Dory persuades Hank to return to the sea with her , and together , they hijack the truck and drive it over busy highways , creating havoc , before crashing it into the sea , freeing all the fish .
Dory , along with her parents and new friends , return to the reef with Marlin and Nemo .
In a post - credits scene , the tank gang from the first film , still trapped inside their ( now algae - covered ) plastic bags , reach California one year after floating across the Pacific Ocean .
They are eventually picked up by staff members from the Marine Life Institute .
VOICE CAST
* Ellen DeGeneres as Dory , a regal blue tang , who suffers from short - term memory loss .
* Sloane Murray as young Dory .
Murray is the seven - year - old daughter of producer Lindsey Collins .
* Lucia Geddes as teen Dory .
* Albert Brooks as Marlin , an overprotective ocellaris clownfish , Nemo 's father and Dory 's friend .
* Hayden Rolence as Nemo , a young optimistic clownfish and Marlin 's son .
He was previously voiced by Alexander Gould in the first film .
* Ed O'Neill as Hank , a cranky East Pacific red octopus , who is called a " septopus " due to having lost a tentacle .
* Kaitlin Olson as Destiny , a near - sighted whale shark and Dory 's childhood friend .
* Ty Burrell as Bailey , a beluga whale , who temporarily lost echolocation due to a concussion .
* Diane Keaton as Jenny , Dory 's mother .
* Eugene Levy as Charlie , Dory 's father .
* Idris Elba as Fluke , a California sea lion and Rudder 's friend .
* Dominic West as Rudder , a California sea lion and Fluke 's friend .
* Bob Peterson as Mr. Ray , a spotted eagle ray and Nemo 's schoolteacher .
* Andrew Stanton as Crush , a green sea turtle .
* Sigourney Weaver as herself , the announcer for the recorded messages broadcast over the institute 's public address system .
* Bill Hader as Stan , a kelp bass and husband fish .
* Kate McKinnon as Stan 's wife fish .
* Alexander Gould as Passenger Carl , a delivery truck driver who works for the institute .
Gould previously voiced Nemo in the first film .
* Torbin Xan Bullock as Gerald , a California sea lion , who wishes to lie on the rock occupied by Fluke and Rudder only to be constantly repelled by them , and Becky , a loon who helps Marlin and Nemo .
* Katherine Ringgold as Chickenfish , named Kathy .
* Bennett Dammann as Squirt , Crush 's son .
* John Ratzenberger as Husband Crab ( Bill ) .
* Angus MacLane as Sunfish " Charlie Back - and - Forth . "
* Willem Dafoe as Gill , a Moorish idol , the leader of the " Tank Gang . "
* Brad Garrett as Bloat , a pufferfish .
* Allison Janney as Peach , a pink starfish .
* Austin Pendleton as Gurgle , a royal gramma .
* Stephen Root as Bubbles , a yellow tang .
* Vicki Lewis as Deb ( & Flo ) , a four - striped damselfish .
* Jerome Ranft as Jacques , a cleaner shrimp .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Prior to work on Finding Dory , Disney had planned to make a Finding Nemo sequel without Pixar 's involvement , through Circle 7 Animation , a studio Disney announced in 2005 with the intention to make sequels to Pixar properties .
However , due to the 2006 acquisition of Pixar by Disney , Circle 7 was shut down by Disney without ever having produced a film .
Although it never went into production , a script for the Circle 7 version was uploaded to the official Raindance Film Festival website .
It would involved Nemo 's long lost twin brother named Remy , and Marlin getting captured so Nemo , Remy , and Dory have to save him .
In July 2012 , it was reported that Andrew Stanton was developing a sequel to Finding Nemo , with Victoria Strouse writing the script and a release date scheduled for 2016 .
However , the same day the news of a potential sequel broke , Stanton posted a message on his personal Twitter calling into question the accuracy of these reports .
The message said , " Did n't you all learn from Chicken Little ?
Everyone calm down .
Do n't believe everything you read .
Nothing to see here now .
# skyisnotfalling . "
According to a report by The Hollywood Reporter published in August 2012 , Ellen DeGeneres was in negotiations to reprise her role of Dory .
In September 2012 , it was confirmed by Stanton , saying : " What was immediately on the list was writing a second Carter movie .
When that went away , everything slid up .
I know I 'll be accused by more sarcastic people that it 's a reaction to Carter not doing well , but only in its timing , but not in its conceit .
"
In February 2013 , it was confirmed by the press that Albert Brooks would reprise the role of Marlin in the sequel .
In April 2013 , Disney announced the sequel , Finding Dory , for November 25 , 2015 , confirming that DeGeneres and Brooks would be reprising their roles as Dory and Marlin , respectively .
Following a long campaign for a sequel on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , DeGeneres stated : In a July 2013 interview with Los Angeles Times , Stanton spoke of the sequel 's origin : " There was polite inquiry from Disney [ about a Finding Nemo sequel ] .
I was always ' No sequels , no sequels . '
But I had to get on board from a VP standpoint .
[ Sequels ] are part of the necessity of our staying afloat , but we do n't want to have to go there for those reasons .
We want to go there creatively , so we said [ to Disney ] , ' Can you give us the timeline about when we release them ?
Because we 'd like to release something we actually want to make , and we might not come up with it the year you want it . '
"
In a 2016 interview Stanton stated how the film 's story came to be ; " I do n't watch my films that often after they 're done because I have to watch them so many times before they come out .
So about 2010 when we were getting Finding Nemo ready for the 10-year re - release in 3D , it was interesting to watch again after all that time .
Something kind of got lodged in the back of my brain and started to sort of stew .
I started to think about how easily Dory could get lost and not find Marlin and Nemo again .
She basically was in the same state that she was when Marlin found her .
I did n't know where she was from .
I knew that she had spent most of her youth wandering the ocean alone , and I wanted to know that she could find her new family , if she ever got lost again .
It 's almost like the parental side of me was worried . "
Stanton additionally stated : " I knew if I ever said Finding Dory or mentioned a sequel to Finding Nemo out loud , I 'd be done , [ T]here would be no way I 'd be able to put that horse back in the barn .
So I kept it very quiet until I knew I had a story that I thought would hold , and that was in early 2012 .
So I pitched it to John Lasseter
and he was all into it .
Then I got a writer , and once we had a treatment that we kind of liked , I felt comfortable calling Ellen . "
Stanton selected Victoria Strouse to write the screenplay .
She later said , " It was always collaborative with Andrew , but really the screenwriting was me .
Of course , Andrew would do passes , and he and I would brainstorm a lot together and then we would bring it to the group of story artists .
People would weigh in and share ideas .
"
She pointed to Dory 's forgetfulness as a challenge when writing the script , adding , " You do n't realize until you sit down to write a character who ca n't remember things how integral memory is to absolutely everything we do , and
that 's what creates a narrative that people can follow .
When a main character ca n't self - reflect and ca n't tell a story , that character is very difficult to design because she ca n't really lead .
To get her to be able to lead and to get an audience to be able to trust her was the hardest thing to do . "
The fictional Marine Life Institute depicted extensively in the film is based on the production team 's research trips to the Monterey Bay Aquarium , the Marine Mammal Center and the Vancouver Aquarium .
The film 's ending was revised after Pixar executives viewed Blackfish , a 2013 documentary film which focuses on the dangers of keeping orca whales in captivity .
Initially , some of the characters were to end up in a SeaWorld - like marine park , but the revision gave them an option to leave .
On September 18 , 2013 , it was announced that the film would be pushed back to a June 17 , 2016 , release .
Pixar 's The Good Dinosaur was moved to the November 25 , 2015 , release window to allow more time for production of the film .
Angus MacLane was one of the first people to whom Stanton revealed his idea for the sequel .
Together , with Bob Peterson , they discussed about different ideas for places Dory would visit during her journey — one of those ideas was the touch pool sequence .
Later , during the Brave ( 2012 ) wrap party , Stanton invited Angus to join him in his first co - directing duty .
Stanton described Angus ' role as a " jack of all trades " , particularly utilizing his experience in animation and story , as well as in production , having created a few short films himself .
In August 2015 , at Disney 's D23 Expo , it was announced that Hayden Rolence would voice Nemo , replacing Alexander Gould from the first film , whose voice has deepened since reaching adulthood ( Gould voiced a minor character in the sequel instead ) .
At the D23 expo they also announced that Ed O'Neill would be the voice of Hank .
To make the light more realistic , RenderMan was completely re - engineered , its biggest change in 25 years .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's soundtrack entitled Finding Dory was composed by Thomas Newman and released on June 17 , 2016 .
Louis Armstrong 's version of " What a Wonderful World " is played during the scene in which fish are released into the ocean as the truck Dory and Hank are driving crashes into the water .
On May 20 , 2016 , Sia performed a cover of Nat King Cole 's " Unforgettable " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show following an announcement that it would be featured in the film .
TRACK LISTING
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Finding Dory premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 8 , 2016 , and was theatrically released in the United States on June 17 , 2016 , in 2D , Disney Digital
3-D and RealD 3D.
It was also released to select IMAX 3D theaters .
In April 2016 , it was announced that a new Pixar short , Piper , directed by Alan Barillaro and with music by Adrian Belew , would be shown in front of the film .
It had its UK premiere at the Edinburgh International Film Festival on June 18 , 2016 .
The film was re - released for Labor Day weekend in 2016 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Finding Dory was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu - ray ( 2D and 3D ) and DVD in the United States on November 15 , 2016 , with a digital release on October 25 .
In addition to Piper , the bonus features also included a short film , titled Marine Life Interviews , featuring interviews with the inhabitants of the Marine Life Institute about their encounters with Dory .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Finding Dory grossed $ 486.3 million in the U.S. and Canada and $ 542.3 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 1.029 billion , against a budget of $ 200 million .
It had a worldwide opening of $ 185.7 million , which is the third - biggest of all time for an animated film behind Incredibles 2 ( $ 235.8 million ) and ( $ 218.4 million ) , and an IMAX global opening of $ 6.4 million .
On August 16 , it became the fourth film of 2016 to earn $ 900 million in ticket sales , and on October 9—its seventeenth weekend — it passed the $ 1 billion threshold , becoming the third film of 2016 after and Zootopia to reach that mark , the second Pixar film ( after Toy Story 3 ) , the fifth animated film ( after Toy Story 3 , Frozen , Minions , and Zootopia ) , the twelfth Disney film ( fourth Disney animated film ) , and the twenty - seventh film overall in cinematic history .
Worldwide , it is the third - highest - grossing film of 2016 ( behind Civil War and Rogue One ) , the highest - grossing animated film of 2016 , the third - highest - grossing Pixar film ever ( behind Toy Story 3 and Incredibles 2 ) , the sixth - highest - grossing animated film of all time , and the 31st - highest - grossing film of all time .
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 296.6 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film , making it the fourth - most profitable release of 2016 .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
In the United States and Canada , Finding Dory opened on June 17 , 2016 , alongside Central Intelligence , with projections having the film grossing $ 110–120 million in its opening weekend , with some estimates going as high as $ 130 million .
It received the widest release for a Pixar film ( 4,305 theaters , breaking Braves record ) , of which 3,200 venues were in 3D , along with 425 premium large format locales , approximately 100 IMAX theaters and a handful of Dolby Cinema sites .
It was Fandango 's top pre - selling animated film of all time , outselling the previous record - holder , Minions .
The film grossed $ 9.2 million from Thursday night previews , a record for both Pixar and any animated film , and $ 54.7 million on its opening day , marking both the biggest opening day and single - day for an animated film .
This also marks the first time that an animated film has grossed over $ 50 million in a single day .
It went on to gross $ 135.1 million in its opening weekend , finishing first at the box office and setting the record for the highest opening weekend for both Pixar ( breaking Toy Story 3s record ) and any animated film ( out - grossing Shrek the Thirds record , later out - grossed by Incredibles 2 ) and became the third - biggest adjusted for inflation .
It is also the third - highest opening ( excluding Marvel and Star Wars films ) for Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures behind Beauty and the Beast ( $ 174.8 million ) and ( $ 135.6 million ) , and is the studio 's ninth - biggest debut overall .
It also became the fifth animated film and the fifth film of 2016 to open above $ 100 million .
Moreover , its opening also marked the second - biggest for the month of June , behind only Jurassic World .
Its opening was 93.8 % above Finding Nemos $ 70.3 million debut .
It further broke the record for the biggest PLF and Cinemark XD opening for an animated film with $ 10.4 million and $ 2.6 million , respectively .
In IMAX , it made $ 5 million from 211 theaters , the third - best animated IMAX opening behind Zootopia ( $ 5.2 million ) and Toy Story 3 ( $ 8.4 million ) .
Following its record - breaking openings , it scored the biggest Monday for Pixar by grossing $ 19.6 million ( breaking Toy Story 3s $ 15.6 million ) and the best Monday in June for an animated film .
However , among all animated films , it is ranked second — behind 2004 's Shrek 2 , which made $ 23.4 million on its first Monday , and it is also the biggest Tuesday for an animated film with $ 23.2 million , besting Minions $ 16.8 million .
It jumped 18.5 % over its Monday gross , a rare achievement for a film .
It crossed the $ 200 million mark in its first seven days , becoming the first ( and fastest ) animated film to pass the said milestone in just a week .
It fell only 46 % in its second weekend earning $ 73 million to record the biggest second weekend for an animated film ( breaking Shrek 2s $ 72.2 million previous record ) , the biggest for Disney and 2016 ( surpassing Captain America : Civil Wars $ 72.6 million ) , and the eighth - biggest second weekend gross of all time overall .
This was despite facing stiff competition from newcomer .
It crossed $ 300 million in 12 days — a new record for an animated film , surpassing the previous record held by Shrek 2 and Toy Story 3 ( both of which took 18 days ) , and became the second animated film of 2016 ( after Zootopia ) , the fourth Disney film of 2016 , and the sixth overall film of the year to cross the milestone .
It continued to dominate the box office for the third straight weekend , despite competitions from three new wide releases — The Legend of Tarzan , , and fellow Disney release The BFG — after witnessing a 42 % decline to $ 41.8 million in three days and $ 51.4 million in four days , respectively , during the Independence Day holiday frame .
This made it the second time in two years and just the third time since 1992 , the July 4 holiday box office was topped by a film in its third weekend of release .
It broke another record as it passed the $ 400 million mark in 21 days , which is the fastest for an animated film , the fastest of 2016 , the fastest for the studio , and the fifth - fastest of all time overall .
Morever , it became the second film of 2016 ( after Captain America : Civil War ) , the fifth animated film , the ninth film for the studio , and the twenty - fourth film overall to pass the milestone .
On the following day ( July 8) , it surpassed Civil War to become the biggest film of the year up until Rogue One took that title in January 2017 .
It dropped out of the top ten in its eighth week .
Although the film was finally overtaken by The Secret Life of Pets ( and The Legend of Tarzan in second place ) in its fourth weekend , it nevertheless passed The Lion King to become the highest - grossing Disney animated film of all time in the same weekend , surpassing the latter which held the record for 15 non - consecutive years .
In just 30 days , it overtook Shrek 2 ( $ 441.2 million ) to become the highest - grossing animated film of all time , breaking the latter 's record of 12 years .
Four days later , on July 20 , it became the first - ever animated film in cinematic history to cross the $ 450 million mark .
As with its predecessor Finding Nemo , the studio expanded the theater count for the film during the Labor Day weekend from 345 theaters to 2,075 theaters , an addition of 1,730 theaters .
In 2003 , Nemo was expanded from 838 sites to 1,053 locations .
It became the second - highest - grossing film of 2016 ( behind Rogue One ) , the highest - grossing Pixar film , the second - highest - grossing Walt Disney Pictures release ( behind Beauty and the Beast ) , the highest - grossing Disney animated film , the highest - grossing animated film overall , and the ninth - highest - grossing film of all time .
OUTSIDE NORTH
AMERICA Section::::Outside North America .
Internationally , Finding Dory received a staggered release in a span of four months from June to September , with Germany being the last country .
This was done in order take advantage of key holidays and competitive dates around the world .
It was released across 29 countries — which is 32 % of its entire international release territories — the same weekend as its U.S. premiere .
It made an estimated $ 50.7 million to take the No . 1 spot at the international box office .
In its second weekend , it added $ 38.7 million from 37 markets , falling in third place behind Independence Day :
Resurgence and Now You See Me 2 .
In the same weekend along with its $ 73 million take in North America , the film helped Pixar cross the $ 10 billion mark worldwide since Toy Story ( 1995 ) .
By its fourth weekend , the animated film helped Disney push past the $ 3 billion mark internationally and $ 5 billion globally .
It had the biggest opening for an animated film in Brazil ( $ 7.1 million ) and the Netherlands ( $ 2.1 million ) , and the biggest of all time for a Disney animated or Pixar film in Australia ( $ 7.7 million ) , the Philippines ( $ 2.1 million ) , Singapore ( $ 1.3 million ) , India ( $ 1 million ) , Indonesia , Peru and Central America , and in Russia it opened with $ 3.2 million , and the second - biggest in the United Kingdom and Ireland ( $ 10.7 million ) , Mexico ( $ 9.4 million ) and Argentina ( $ 3.5 million ) , and that 's despite amidst the latter country 's Copa America soccer match , and Colombia ( $ 2.1 million ) , behind Monsters University .
In the UK and Ireland , the film recorded the second - biggest animated opening of the year with £ 8.1 million ( $ 10.7 million ) from 580 theaters , behind only The Secret Life of Pets .
However , if previews are excluded , Finding Dory is ahead .
Moreover , it also posted the second - biggest Disney / Pixar opening , behind only Toy Story 3 ( fourth - biggest if previews are included ) , and the seventh - biggest animated opening of all time overall based on pure Friday - to - Sunday gross alone .
It added an additional 43 theaters in its second weekend , after which it added another £ 3.98 million ( $ 5.1 million ) at the weekend , thereby passing the £ 20 million mark in just 10 days ( among Pixar films , only Toy Story 3 reached £ 20 million faster ) .
It made an impressive £ 8.15 million during weekdays , from Monday to Thursday resulting in a £ 2.03 million daily - average gross .
According to The Guardian , this was because of the school holidays that prevailed on the weekdays .
Otherwise , family films earn the vast majority of their takings on Saturday and Sunday , and showtimes typically reduce on weekdays .
It returned to the top of the box office in its fourth weekend and went on to become the highest - grossing film of the summer that year .
In Brazil , in addition to recording the biggest Disney / Pixar opening ever , almost twice the previous record held by The Good Dinosaur , it also set a new record for an all - time animated opening , on par with Minions in local currency .
In South Korea , it had the biggest opening for a Pixar film with $ 7.1 million , which is also the second - biggest for a Disney animated film , behind Frozen .
In Japan , the film had a two - day weekend opening of $ 7 million on Saturday and Sunday from 511 screens on 571,000 admissions .
For the entire three - day holiday weekend , including Marine Day on Monday July 18 , the film earned $ 11 million on 922,000 admissions .
This made it the top western release of the weekend and the biggest foreign opening - weekend in the country of that year .
It had further number - one openings in Spain ( $ 4.9 million ) , France ( $ 4.7 million ) , Hong Kong ( $ 1.9 million ; $ 2.8 million including previews ) , Taiwan ( $ 1.9 million ) , Sweden , Norway , and Denmark .
It topped the box office in the Netherlands for three and in Spain and Australia for four consecutive weekends .
In Italy , it scored the biggest animated opening of the year with $ 5.8 million .
In China , where Pixar films have been struggling to find broad audiences and accrue lucrative revenues , the film was projected to make around $ 30 million in its opening weekend .
The film ended up grossing $ 17.7 million — the highest Pixar opening in the country 's history — debuting in second place behind Warcraft .
It surpassed Monsters University in just seven days to become the biggest Pixar film there with $ 38.1 million .
It opened in Germany — its last market — on September 29 , where the film delivered a robust opening of $ 8.4 million , the biggest for any film of 2016 in the country .
The film continued to benefit from German Unity Day on October 3 .
It went on to top the box office there for three straight weekends , tying with Inferno in its third weekend .
It is now the highest - grossing Disney animated or Pixar film in Australia ( where it is also the second - highest - grossing animated film of all time behind Shrek 2 ) , Bolivia , Brazil , Central America , Colombia , India , Indonesia , New Zealand , Peru , the Philippines , and Trinidad .
It also became the second - highest - grossing Pixar release of all time in South Korea behind Inside Out .
Elsewhere , the biggest markets in terms of total earnings were Japan ( $ 66 million ) , followed by the UK ( $ 56.3 million ) , China ( $ 38.1 million ) , Australia ( $ 36.3 million ) , and Brazil ( $ 34.5 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , Finding Dory has an approval rating of 94 % based on 308 reviews and an average rating of 7.6/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Funny , poignant , and thought - provoking , Finding Dory delivers a beautifully animated adventure that adds another entertaining chapter to its predecessor 's classic story .
"
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 77 out of 100 , based on 48 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 91 % overall positive score and an 81 % " definite recommend " .
Mike Ryan of Uproxx gave the film a positive review , saying : " I never thought I wanted a sequel to Finding Nemo , but here we are
and I 'm pretty happy it exists .
And , for me , it was a more emotional experience than the first film .
Finding Dory got me — it made me cry . "
A. O. Scott of The New York Times said that while the film lacks " dazzling originality " , he overall wrote , " it more than makes up for in warmth , charm and good humor " .
In his review for Variety , Owen Gleiberman wrote , " It 's a film that spills over with laughs ( most of them good , a few of them shticky ) and tears ( all of them earned ) , supporting characters who are meant to slay us ( and mostly do ) with their irascible sharp tongues , and dizzyingly extended flights of physical comedy . "
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal said that " Finding Dory can be touching , sweet and tender , but it 's compulsively , preposterously and steadfastly funny . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three - and - a - half stars out of four and said that the film " brims with humor , heart and animation miracles " , despite lacking " the fresh surprise of its predecessor " .
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a negative review , writing , " Its heroine may suffer from short - term memory loss , but viewers with any memory at all will realize that Finding Dory falls rather short of its wondrous progenitor .
" Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Turan said that , " As the 13-year gap between " Nemo " and " Dory " indicates , this was not a concept that cried out to be made . "
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROVERSIES AND ISSUES
Section::::Environmental controversies and issues .
Conservationists warned that , very much like Finding Nemo , the film could lead to uninformed customers buying blue tangs for home aquariums .
Blue tangs can not be bred in captivity and have to be caught in the wild .
They are related to surgeonfish and exhibit razor - sharp spines on both sides of the tail that can inflict formidable wounds .
While promoting the film , actress Ellen DeGeneres reminded audiences that Nemo and Dory 's real - life home , the Great Barrier Reef , is under enormous threat , mostly due to coral bleaching , a process induced by climate change , which has killed coral reefs on an enormous scale .
ACCOLADES POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
In June 2016 , director Andrew Stanton talked about the possibility of a sequel , saying that he would never exclude it because of the introduction of new characters , citing the Toy Story films as guides for how to expand a world through sequels .
SEE ALSO
* Exploring the Reef
* Finding Nemo ( franchise ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS