FINALE ( THE OFFICE )
" Finale " is the last episode of the American comedy television series The Office .
It serves as the 24th and 25th episodes of the ninth season , and the 200th and 201st episodes of the series overall .
The episode was written by series developer and executive producer Greg Daniels and directed by Ken Kwapis , who directed the series ' pilot episode .
It originally aired on NBC on May 16 , 2013 , preceded by an hour - long series retrospective .
The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company .
In the episode , which takes place a year after the previous episode " A.A.R.M. " , present and past employees of Dunder Mifflin gather for the wedding of Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , during which Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) returns to serve as Dwight 's best man .
In addition , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) finally decide to pursue Jim 's dream of working in sports marketing .
Finally , everyone comes together for a final round of interviews and goodbyes .
The initial idea for the finale , involving the Q&A , was thought of by Daniels during production of the third season .
The episode features the return of many recurring characters , as well as Carell , whose return was kept secret for many months .
Many members of the show 's crew — such as episode writer Daniels — made cameos in the episode as various background characters .
Jennie Tan , the founder of the largest Office fansite OfficeTally appears in the episode as a fictional version of herself asking the members of the office questions .
The episode was viewed by an estimated 5.69 million viewers and received 3.0 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , making it the highest - rated episode of the series since the eighth season installment , " Pool Party " .
" Finale " received critical acclaim from critics and fans , with many critics complimenting the writers for wrapping up the storylines for most of the characters .
Critics also praised Carell 's cameo , with many arguing that it was perfectly executed .
This episode received three Primetime Emmy Award nominations for the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , and won for Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
One year since the documentary has aired , the crew has returned to gain more footage for the DVD bonus features .
Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) are getting married .
Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , after being humiliated with his talent show audition tape going viral on the internet , has found a job at his alma mater Cornell University in the Admissions Office .
Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) has helped expand Athlead , now named Athleap , opening a branch in Austin , Texas .
Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) is enjoying retirement in Florida and Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) tries to get Stanley 's replacement Malcolm ( Malcolm Barrett ) fat on chocolates to make him look like Stanley .
After being fired by Dwight , Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) bought a bar and Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) started a career as an author in New York City .
Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) has moved to Poland .
Creed Bratton ( Creed Bratton ) had faked his death but was then revealed to be a wanted fugitive , so Dwight replaced him with former employee Devon White ( Devon Abner ) .
Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) is preparing to run for a State Senate seat and is now Phillip 's godfather .
Andy , Darryl , Stanley , Toby , and Nellie return to Scranton for the wedding as well as a panel for the documentary .
Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) has been appointed best man at the wedding and plans a series of " good surprises " ( " Guten Pranken " ) for Dwight during his bachelor party , which consists of most of the current and former male employees .
At the bachelor party , the group has Dwight fire a bazooka and receive a lap dance from Elizabeth the Stripper ( Jackie Debatin ) , though Dwight thinks she is their waitress and remains oblivious .
At the bachelorette party , with the current and former female employees plus Angela 's sister Rachael ( Rachael Harris ) , the group is shocked to see that the stripper hired for entertainment is Meredith Palmer 's ( Kate Flannery ) son Jake ( Spencer Daniels ) .
Angela is kidnapped by Dwight 's cousin Mose ( Michael Schur ) .
After hearing about Angela 's kidnapping , Dwight and the male employees visit the bar that Kevin owns , where Dwight , at Jim 's insistence to bury the hatchet , tells Kevin that his firing was not personal but based solely on his job performance , which cheers him up .
Mose then leads Dwight and Jim out to his car where Angela is stuck in the trunk and finally lets her out .
The following day , a panel is held for the office so that audience members can ask them questions .
Dunder Mifflin CEO David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) states his distaste for the documentary .
Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) is pressed with questions about why she did not allow Jim to follow his dream after he has paid her so many romantic gestures .
Jim attempts to disperse the resulting tension .
Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) finally meets her birth parents ( Ed Begley , Jr. and Joan Cusack ) , who had put her up for adoption .
At the wedding , Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) arrives with her husband Ravi ( Sendhil Ramamurthy ) , where Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) surprises them with a baby , his son Drake , that he had with a former girlfriend who then abandoned them both .
Jim tells Dwight that under Schrute tradition , he is not allowed to be best man as he is younger than him .
Jim surprises him with the arrival of Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) .
The wedding proceeds in Schrute tradition with Michael as Dwight 's new best man .
At the reception , Michael shows Pam pictures of his kids with Holly Flax , and Pam notes that he is paying for two phones just to hold all the images .
Ryan deliberately gives Drake an allergic reaction so that Ravi , a pediatrician , can attend and Ryan can steal Kelly away .
Kevin tells Ravi that Ryan wanted him to keep Drake so that Ryan can have Kelly and the two can start a new life together .
Ravi then gives Kevin the baby to give to Child Services before leaving , but Nellie , who has still been wanting a child , takes Drake instead .
When Jim and Pam briefly return home , Jim is surprised to find Carol Stills ( Nancy Carell ) showing their house to another couple .
Pam comes clean and admits she has been showing the house for two months .
She wants to repay Jim for all his romantic gestures and says she wants him to go to Athleap in Austin , at which point the couple seeing the house make an offer .
Jim and Pam go to an after party at the warehouse where they inform an elated Darryl of their plans , with Jim being able to rejoin the company with no change .
Pam unveils a new painted mural featuring the history of their branch .
A final picture is taken with the employees and the camera crew before the employees go back up to the office for a final toast .
Jim and Pam tell Dwight they are quitting , but Dwight fires them instead so he can give them hefty severance packages , as a last gesture of friendship .
The employees find Creed , who has been living in Ryan 's old closet since faking his death , in the office .
Creed sings a song on the guitar for the office before being arrested .
The employees give one last round of interviews before leaving , with Pam taking her watercolor of the office building that Michael bought from her in the third - season episode " Business School " .
PRODUCTION
WRITING AND FILMING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Writing and filming .
" Finale " was written by series developer and showrunner Greg Daniels , making it his second writing credit for the year , after the season debut " New Guys " , and his 12th writing credit overall .
The episode was directed by Ken Kwapis .
Kwapis had originally directed the series ' pilot episode .
Daniels joked that Kwapis was " the country vet who birthed this puppy " and had come " back to put it down " .
His last directorial credit for the series , prior to " Finale " , however , was the fifth season episode " Company Picnic " .
The initial idea for the finale was thought of by Daniels during production of the third season , described as " a reunion show " , in the fashion of the post - competition cast rehashes familiar from reality shows like Survivor " .
Daniels , at one point , approached Jeff Probst , the host of Survivor , to appear in the finale as a moderator for the fictional reunion , although he declined .
The initial table read for the episode took place on March 4 , 2013 .
Filming commenced on March 6 .
According to Jenna Fischer , the episode took nine days to film , with the cast devoting 12 hours a day to the episode .
The finale was described as " ambitious " , featuring multiple location shoots , including one in an AT&T Office Building , which stood in for the Scranton Cultural Center .
Filming for the episode and series as a whole came to an end on March 16 , 2013 .
Wilson later tweeted a picture of the empty set after all filming had been finished .
Originally , the episode was supposed to be the 23rd and 24th episodes of the season , which would have meant that the series aired exactly 200 episodes .
However , the series ' penultimate episode was elongated into 2 separate episodes , resulting in " Finale " being the 24th and 25th episodes of the season .
This meant that the last part of " Finale " is the series ' 201st episode .
Once filming finished Daniels , in an interview with TVLine , expressed his hope to expand the episode , stating , " I was very excited with the footage we got ...
It 's very big .
I 'm going to beg NBC to super - size it or extend it .
"
Daniels later commented that when the editors cut together the first act , it was 23 minutes long ; this is much longer than a normal first act for an hour long episode of television .
In response , OfficeTally — the largest fan site for the series — started an online petition to supersize the finale , similar to the petition to expand the second - season finale , " Casino Night " .
By May 2 , the petition had received over 20,000 signatures .
On May 7 , it was announced that NBC had extended the episode by 15 minutes , meaning that the episode would air in a 75-minute time slot .
The episode is approximately 52 minutes in length .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The series finale guest stars Rachael Harris , Dakota Johnson , Joan Cusack , Ed Begley , Jr. , and Malcolm Barrett .
The episode features the return of several of the series ' actors and actresses , including former series writers and stars B. J. Novak and Mindy Kaling , as well as Andy Buckley , Robert R. Shafer , Michael Schur , and Matt L. Jones .
Other minor recurring characters also make appearances , such as Nancy Carell as Carol Stills ( who played the recurring role as Michael 's real - estate agent and short - time girlfriend ) , Sendhil Ramamurthy as Ravi ( who first appeared in the eight season episode " Angry Andy " ) ,
Eric Wareheim as Gabor ( who first appeared in the earlier ninth - season episode " Junior Salesman " ) , James Urbaniak as Rolf ( who first appeared in the fifth - season episode " Company Picnic " ) , Jackie Debatin as Elizabeth ( who first appeared in the third - season episode " Ben Franklin " ) , Devon Abner as Devon ( who was a former Dunder Mifflin employee fired in second - season episode " Halloween " ) , and Spencer Daniels as Jake Palmer ( who first played Meredith 's son in the second - season episode " Take Your Daughter to Work Day " ) .
The episode also features Bill Hader and Seth Meyers playing themselves .
Many members of the show 's crew made cameos in the episode .
The documentary crewman 's voice that speaks to Dwight was played by camera operator Matt Sohn .
The " frat boy " who mocks Andy at the restaurant was Greg Daniels ' former assistant , Jonah Platt .
Jay Falk , a script editor for the series , and his wife stood in for the couple buying Jim and Pam 's house .
Jennifer Celotta , a series writer and director , makes an appearance at Dwight 's wedding .
The episode 's call sheet listed her character as " Jen Celotta Schrute " .
Producer and writer Graham Wagner also makes a cameo in both Mose 's group , as well as at the wedding .
Many of the individuals who asked questions were writers on the show : Brent Forrester asked about seeing their lives on TV , Amelie Gillette asked the question regarding Jim giving up Athlead , Steve Burgess asked if the camera changed the characters ' behavior , Steve Hely asked if life has no meaning , Allison Silverman made the statement that Jim is attractive , and Dan Sterling asked what was in the teapot .
Daniels ' wife , Susanne Daniels , was the Q&A moderator .
Daniels himself appeared during the documentary after - party along with executive producer Howard Klein , editors David Rogers and Claire Scanlon , script supervisor Veda Semarne , first assistant director Rusty Mahmood , prop master Phil Shea , and casting director Allison Jones .
The remaining extras in the scene were members of the crew of The Office .
Jennie Tan , the founder of the largest The Office fansite OfficeTally appears in the episode as a fictional version of herself asking the members of the office questions .
She initially emailed Daniels , asking if she could appear in the background in one of the scenes .
He , however , hired her as a day actor and wrote her seven lines .
During the filming , Daniels re - wrote part of Tan 's line to make it more " pointed " .
Tan called the experience " surreal " , because she was " playing [ herself ] but talking to Jim and Pam " , rather than Krasinski and Fischer .
Early during production for the season , Kinsey and Wilson noted in an interview that the cast and crew were hoping for the return of former lead actor Carell .
In mid - December , Krasinski later revealed that he was optimistic about a return ; in an interview with E !
Online Krasinski said that the producers were supposedly " still trying to figure out [ Carell 's ] schedule " and that the finale " just would n't be the same without him " .
However , NBC chairman Robert Greenblatt later admitted during an interview that while he was " hopeful " , he did not think Carell would return ; he noted that Carell was satisfied with his character 's exit and did not want to tarnish it .
On January 16 , Daniels revealed that Carell would not appear in the finale in any capacity , a decision that Carell later reiterated .
Several months later , however , TVLine reported that the producers for The Office mounted " an 11th hour effort " to get Carell to make a cameo in the show 's final episode .
According to the article , " while no one is confirming that the final diplomatic push proved successful , no one is denying it either .
" Carell 's personal representative confirmed that Carell was on the set for the final episode , but that he did not film any scenes .
However , an anonymous source close to the show cryptically said " do n't rule anything out " .
TVLine later reported on May 6 , that Carell would appear in a cameo , although NBC declined to comment and Carell 's representatives continued to deny the reports .
A month after the episode aired , Carell explained in an interview with TVLine that he " lied for months to the press , to almost everyone , really " .
He noted that he " felt terribly for the cast and for [ executive producer ]
Greg Daniels , because they all lied , too . "
Krasinski , on the other hand , explained that " It was so thrilling .
We all just flat - out lied ...
It was just one of those things that we all vowed and had to protect " .
Even at the initial table read for the script , Carell 's appearance was not revealed .
In fact , his first line was not included in the read at all , and his second was scripted to be delivered by Creed Bratton .
DELETED
SCENES
Section::::Deleted scenes .
The Season Nine DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode .
Notable cut scenes include : more scenes from the Q&A panel ;
Pete discussing what he learned working at Dunder Mifflin ; Angela 's sister , Phyllis , and Andy giving toasts at the wedding ; more scenes with Erin and her biological parents in which they reconnect ; further shots of the office members reminiscing about shared memories ; and the office taking one of the potted plants outside and planting it in actual soil .
Erin 's parents explain that they , like Erin , are puppeteers , and when they worked on the movie The Dark Crystal it gave them such gloomy thoughts they did n't think they could handle bringing up a baby .
The episode originally was scripted to begin with a different cold open ; it would have entailed a prank on Dwight by Jim , in which Dwight is led to believe that he is actually living in the Matrix , a computer - simulation from the eponymous 1999 film of the same name .
The scene was either not filmed , or cut from the episode and not included with the other deleted scenes .
A table read of it — along with the rest of the episode — was included as a bonus feature on the ninth season DVD .
CULTURAL REFERENCES Section::::Cultural references .
The episode makes a reference to Creed being a member of the rock band The Grass Roots .
In fact , Creed Bratton , who portrays a fictionalized version of himself on the show , did play with the band from 1967 to 1969 .
The song he performs near the end is titled " All the Faces " , which he wrote himself .
Andy mentions that both the " Double Rainbow Guy " and the " Star Wars Kid " reached out to help him after his viral video mishap .
Both Hader and Meyers appear in a fictional Saturday Night Live Weekend Update sketch involving Andy 's viral fame .
After Pam compares her and Jim 's relationship to a great book that never ends , Tan 's character asks if it is comparable to the Harry Potter series .
Dwight claims that Google Inc. is actually a front for either the United States government or " the government of other countries " .
The episode also features several callback references to previous episodes .
Oscar saying " Whazzup ! "
serves as a reference to a scene from " Pilot " between Michael , Dwight , and Jim .
Jim 's description in his final talking head of his job is a direct quote from his first talking head in " Pilot " .
Dwight hires Devon back after Creed quits , a reference to " Halloween " , when Creed convinced Michael to fire Devon .
Pam sits at reception one final time and answers the phone , saying " Dunder Mifflin , this is Pam .
" This is a reference to Pam 's former role as office receptionist and a common phrase that she said during the early seasons .
Pam 's painting of the office building , introduced in " Business School " , plays a prominent role in the final scene .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
" Finale " originally aired on May 16 , 2013 , on NBC in a 75-minute timeslot , preceded by a one - hour retrospective .
The retrospective was viewed by 4.37 million viewers and received a 2.1/7 % rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 .
The finale itself was viewed by 5.69 million viewers and received a 3.0 rating/8 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 .
This means that it was seen by 3.0 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49-year - olds watching television at the time of the broadcast .
This marked a significant increase , of over one million viewers , in the ratings from the previous episode , " A.A.R.M. " .
It also ranks as the highest - rated episode of the season , as well as the highest - rated episode for the series since the eighth season entry , " Pool Party " , which was viewed by 6.02 million viewers and received a 3.0/7 % share .
The episode ranked second in its timeslot , being beaten by the ABC medical drama series , Grey 's Anatomy .
NBC increased their usual ad price by 200 percent for " Finale " , asking for $ 400,000 per commercial .
This was largely due to the anticipated increase in viewership that the finale would bring .
Via DVR viewing , the episode was watched by an additional 2.38 million viewers with an added 18- to 49-year rating of 1.4 , bringing the total to 8.07 million viewers and an 18- to 49-year rating of 4.4 .
REVIEWS
Section::::Reviews .
" Finale " was met with acclaim from television critics .
Alan Sepinwall of HitFix gave the episode a highly positive review and called it " a tremendously satisfying conclusion to a show that could make us gasp with laughter , but that could also make us cry or smile " .
Sepinwall noted that , despite the inconsistency in the last few seasons , " the world was rich enough to fuel a lovely 75-minute trip through the past , present and future of The Office .
Ultimately , he noted that the " biggest emotional moments " belonged to Jim and Pam , and their final talking heads .
Roth Cornet of IGN awarded the episode a 9 out of 10 , denoting an " amazing " episode .
She was highly pleased with the final fifteen minutes , noting that " in those final moments , this series hit every note we could have wanted , without overplaying any of them . "
She concluded that it " was a strong hour of television [ and ] the finale shone and delivered on all of its promise . "
Hillary Busis of Entertainment Weekly praised the entry , writing that " for anyone who 's stuck with The Office through thick and thin ... last night 's 75-minute - long finale was pretty much perfect . "
She wrote that " the finale had no shortage of sob - inducing moments " , and applauded all of the characters ' various happy endings .
Nick Campbell of TV.com wrote that the episode was " just right " for the series , and that it highlighted the fact that " the ending was more about the fact that you took a journey with these characters . "
He wrote that all of the character 's subplots had emotion , even if they appeared slightly contrived .
Ultimately he concluded that " it felt okay to say goodbye because it was the right atmosphere . "
James Poniewozik of Time wrote that the finale was " touching , sweet , funny , messy , a little manipulative .
And in the end , it worked . "
He found that " The stuff that was like latter - seasons Office " , such as Andy and Dwight 's antics , were " all right " but that " the stuff that recalled the sweep of the whole series was wonderful .
" Poniewozik was slightly critical of Pam and Jim 's story , noting that in the grand scheme of the show it was successful , but that it makes slightly less sense when one examines it closely ; however , he felt that even " if the details do n't add up , the emotions do " .
He concluded that the episode " worked mostly as an epilogue " and allowed the cast of the series to have their final moments .
Brian Lowry of Variety wrote that the finale " ignored " the last few seasons ' missteps and was " awash in warmth and inside gags " .
He concluded that the show " deserved to finish on top " , and that while some of the scenes , such as Dwight 's wedding , seemed " a little bit trite " , the resulting product was successful .
Michael Tedder of Vulture awarded the episode five stars out of five and wrote that the episode was able to provide solid conclusions for all of the characters .
Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " and wrote that " the quality of this series finale is found in the way it functions right now , in the afterglow of a TV show to which many devoted more than 100 hours of their lives .
Some aspects of the episode fall flat , but when it hits , it hits . "
Ultimately , he found that Finale ' is not a great piece of television " but that it was the finale that " The Office needed " because it was " the right point to jump off ...
the circular track " , due to the series idea of thematic reoccurrence .
Tom Gliatto of People magazine , however , gave the episode a negative review , and wrote that " this episode was poorly conceived and clumsily structured .
It really was n't worthy of all the years of affectionate humor that had gone before it . "
Steve Carell 's cameo received glowing reviews from critics .
Campbell noted that he was " glad [ Carell 's ] return was still uncertain [ before the episode aired ] because the reveal was made that much sweeter . "
Sepinwall noted that Carell 's return managed to not " overshadow the stories of the people who remained after he left , but which made sense for the characters , and the end of the series . "
Adams noted that " Carell does n't get a lot to say — he 's already had his chance to say goodbye — but that just makes each of his lines count more " .
Cornet felt that the cameo 's " brevity " was " the perfect amount of Michael for this particular episode " .
Poniewozik described it as " a way that as best as possible walked the line between overplaying and underplaying Steve Carell 's cameo . "
Lowry called it a " perfectly orchestrated cameo " .
Basis wrote that the appearance was " pretty great " and that " the notion of Michael finally getting the family he 's always wanted was enough to melt the heart of even the nit - pickiest fan . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
This episode received three Primetime Emmy Award nominations for the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards .
Greg Daniels was nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series and Ben Patrick , John W. Cook , and Rob Carr were nominated for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half - Hour ) and Animation .
David Rogers and Claire Scanlon won for Outstanding Single - Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series , marking the fifth win for The Office at the Emmys overall and the series ' first win since 2009 .
Rogers and Scanlon also won an ACE Eddie award for Best Edited Half - Hour Series for Television .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Finale " at NBC.com