THE WAY ( ARIANA GRANDE SONG )
" The Way " is a song recorded by American singer Ariana Grande for her debut studio album , Yours Truly ( 2013 ) .
It was written by the song 's producer Harmony Samuels , alongside Amber Streeter , Al Sherrod Lambert , Jordin Sparks , Brenda Russell , and Mac Miller , who is featured in the song .
"
The Way " was released on March 25 , 2013 by Republic Records as the lead single from Yours Truly .
The song 's backing track is based on the piano melody from Russell 's 1979 song " A Little Bit of Love " , and the song has melodic and lyrical similarities to Big Pun 's 1998 song " Still Not a Player " , which also samples " A Little Bit of Love " .
In the United States , " The Way " debuted at No . 10 and peaked at No . 9 on US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Grande and Miller 's first top ten song on the chart .
This also made Grande the first top ten arrival for a lead female artist making her first Hot 100 appearance since Yael Naim , who launched with " New Soul " back in 2008 .
As of April 2018 , " The Way " has sold 2.4 million copies in the United States and has been certified triple platinum .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
On December 12 , 2011 , Grande released her debut single " Put Your Hearts Up , " a bubblegum pop song with a vastly different style of music and target demographic than " The Way .
" Whereas the lyrics in " The Way " deal with the subject of a flirty , romantic relationship , some sections with sexual implications , " Put Your Hearts Up " was a song aimed at young audiences , with lyrics about making the world a better place .
During a radio interview on KIIS - FM on March 25 , 2013 about her debut single , Grande confessed that she had in fact " hated " both the music video for and the song itself , considering it to be " a terrible first impression . "
She added that she had wanted to " pretend it never happened before it already happened " and that she had felt no enthusiasm to promote the song at the time .
In subsequent interviews , Grande implied that in order to feel " passionate " about her music , it needed to relate to her maturing personality .
In an interview with Billboard she said , " When I do Sam & Cat , and when I act as Cat , of course I 'm still going to be there for my younger fans .
But I 'm also growing up – I 'm almost 20 .
I 'm not going to do anything crazy , but I want to do music that I 'm passionate about .
I 'm finally at an age where I can do the music that I grew up loving , which was urban pop , 90s music .
I grew up listening to the divas , so I 'm very happy to finally do urban pop .
I hope that it 's received well , and it has been so far . "
" The Way " can be seen as the reboot of Grande 's singing career , steering her toward an older demographic and a different musical genre than where she originally began .
In January 2013 , she met with producer Harmony Samuels , at which point he presented her with a demo of the song that featured the vocals of co - writer Jordin Sparks , whom the song was originally intended .
The beat he 'd created for the single , samples Brenda Russell 's " A Little Bit of Love " either directly or indirectly , via Big Pun 's " Still Not a Player " .
Grande immediately connected with the sound and asked Mac Miller to feature on the song with her , to which he responded , " Sounds like a hit to me .
"
The song was recorded that same month , and caught the attention of Republic Records VP Charlie Walk when he heard it being played from Republic co - founder Monte Lipman 's office .
" It was 8:00 one night , and I heard a song coming from Monte 's office through my wall .
He called me down and I played a video , a DIY of Ariana Grande .
We heard the song and I immediately made the decision to set it up [ and ] put the song out . "
PROMOTION AND RELEASE Section::::Promotion and release .
Grande created online buzz in the weeks leading up to her single 's release through social media .
She first tweeted about " The Way " on March 5 , 2013 , stating that the song would be released later that month .
On March 13 , she announced the release date .
She posted a teaser trailer for both the song and the music video on her YouTube page on March 16 and then shared a second teaser on March 21 .
In the later half of March , Grande went on a radio tour across the United States , focusing on some of the most popular Top 40 stations in the country .
She visited both Y-100 Miami and 93.3 FM on March 18 for interviews .
The next day she went on Elvis Duran and the Morning Show and attended a release party thrown by Z100 , where she spoke to fans about her music .
On March 25 , she visited KIIS - FM for an interview with JoJo Wright .
She visited 99 - 7 Now on March 29 .
"
The Way " debuted on On Air with Ryan Seacrest on March 25 , 2013 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Digital Spy gave the song a five out of five star rating comparing the song 's sound and Ariana 's vocals to Mariah Carey 's , continuing to say Ariana has a " powerful vocal " whilst the song has " bouncy piano riff " and " throwback R&B beats " .
Sam Lansky of Idolator gave the song a positive review , calling the vocals " sweet , soulful , and grown - up " .
MTV Buzzworthy 's Jenna Hally Rubenstein praised the song , advising readers to " keep one eye on Ariana " as " she may very well be the hottest pop newcomer in the game . "
Rubenstein also commented that the song 's " early ' 00s - influenced R&B vibes " made it sound like an updated version of Jennifer Lopez 's " I 'm Real " featuring Ja Rule .
Nick Catucci of Rolling Stone magazine gave the song a 3 and half stars , saying that Grande is " more flirty than freaky , but her Mariah - esque vocals verge on ecstatic . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Organization !
Award !
Result !
Ref . !
scope="row " 2013 Teen Choice Awards Choice Love Song COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
Following its release , " The Way " sold over 120,000 digital downloads within the first 48 hours .
Having sold over 219,000 copies in its opening week , " The Way " holds the fourth largest first - week sales figure of 2013 , behind Katy Perry 's " Roar " , Justin Timberlake 's " Suit & Tie " and One Direction 's " Best Song Ever " .
" The Way " debuted at number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart on the week ending in April 5 , 2013 , becoming Grande 's and Miller 's first Hot 100 top - ten hit .
This makes Grande the first top ten arrival for a lead female artist making her first Hot 100 appearance since Yael Naim , who launched with " New Soul " back in 2008 .
The song dropped to number 22 during its second week on the chart , and then to number 37 .
As radio stations gave it more attention , the song gradually rebounded , eventually peaking at number 9 for two weeks .
The song reached 500,000 sold units on May 1 , 2013 and received its official Gold certification from the RIAA on May 6 , 2013 .
"
The Way " surpassed one million downloads on June 10 , 2013 and was officially certified Platinum by the RIAA on June 19 , 2013 .
As of September 2013 , the song has thus far sold 2,000,000 copies in the United States .
"
The Way " spent 26 weeks in the Billboard Hot 100 chart , all but two , being within the top 40 .
The Spanglish version of " The Way " reached number 5 on Billboards Latin Pop Songs chart on the week ending August 24 , 2013 .
As of March 2016 , " The Way " has sold over 2.3 million copies in the United States and has been certified triple platinum .
REMIX Section::::Remix .
The official remix features American rapper Fabolous .
It was released online on July 11 , 2013 .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
The music video for " The Way " was filmed on February 10 and 11 , 2013 .
On March 16 , 2013 , the first teaser for the song was released on to her YouTube page .
The second teaser was released on Ryan Seacrest 's website two days later , and later on Grande 's page .
The full video was released on March 28 , 2013 at 12/3 am PST / EST .
Directed by Jones Crow , the video consists of Grande , Miller , and a group of dancers .
Grande poses for pictures taken by Miller on various cameras , while dancing around a room filled with balloons and their images are projected on the wall .
At the end of the video Miller and Grande kiss , and Grande described it as " quite a statement " of growing up .
The video was Vevo - certified on October 2 , 2013 , having reached 100 million views .
As of July 2018 , the music video has over 340 million views on Vevo .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
Grande performed " The Way " at several Top 40 radio concerts , including KIIS - FM 's Wango Tango concert on May 11 , 2013 in Los Angeles , 101.3 KDWB 's Star Party concert on May 17 , 2013 in Minneapolis , Kiss 108 's
Kiss Concert 2013 event in Boston , 103.3 AMP Radio 's Birthday Bash concert on June 30 , 2013 also in Boston , and Mix 93.3 's Red White & Boom concert on July 5 , 2013 in Kansas City .
She was scheduled to perform the song at B96 's Summer Bash concert on June 15 , 2013 in Chicago , but had to cancel due to being sick .
Her first televised performance of the song was aired on May 29 , 2013 on The Ellen DeGeneres Show .
Her second televised performance aired on Late Night With Jimmy Fallon on June 14 , 2013 .
Grande was the opening act for the last three US dates of Justin Bieber 's Believe Tour , during which she performed " The Way " .
The performances took place in Jacksonville , Tampa , and Atlanta on August 7 , August 8 , and August 10 respectively .
Along with her second single , " Baby I " , Grande performed " The Way " at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards Pre - show at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn , New York City on August 25 , 2013 .
She later performed " The Way " with Mac Miller on the Today Show on September 3 , 2013 to celebrate the release of her album , Yours Truly , and to promote it .
She also performed the song at Worldwide Day of Play 2013 , at Jimmy Kimmel Live !
on October 15 .
Grande played the song at every concert from her The Listening Sessions and Jingle Bell Ball 2013 .
The song was performed for the last time in 2013 at New Years Rockin ' Eve , where Mac Miller joined Grande on stage .
In 2014 , Grande performed the song in a medley with " Problem " at the 2014 iHeartRadio Music Awards .
She performed the song on May 5 at the 2014 Wango Tango .
Grande also performed " The Way " along with some songs at the 2014 Easter Egg Roll at the White House .
She also performed the track in a few showcases in Tokyo , Japan , to promote the release of " Yours Truly " in the country .
The song was performed in June at the 2014 iHeartRadio Ultimate Pool Party and again in July at the Macy 's 4 July Fireworks Spectacular .
On September 19 , 2014 , she performed " The Way " along with other songs at the 2014 iHeartRadio Music Festival .
It was also added to the setlist for her 2015 world tour , The Honeymoon Tour .
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT
LAWSUIT Section::::Copyright infringement lawsuit .
On December 11 , 2013 , Minder Music filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Grande , Sony / ATV , UMG Recording and other parties .
It claimed that the line " What we got ta do right here is go back , back into time " , which is spoken in the introduction to " The Way " , infringes its copyright in the 1972 single " Troglodyte " by The Jimmy Castor Bunch , which contains the spoken lyric , " What we 're gon na do right here is go back , way back , back into time " .
The suit argued that the songs ' similarities include " nearly identical lyrics ; similar enunciation speed with a fast and consistent pace for ' What we got ta do right ' and a slightly slower pace for ' here is go back , ' and substantially similar placement " at the beginning of both songs .
Minder Music sought a permanent injunction , statutory damages of $ 150,000 per infringement , and legal fees .
The case was settled outside of court in 2015 .
TRACK LISTINGS * Digital download * " The Way " – 3:46
*
* Digital download * " The Way " –
3:46 * * CD single
* " The Way " – 3:48
* * " The Way " – 3:10 * CREDITS
* Composed by – Harmony Samuels
* Engineer – Carlos King , Jose Cardoza
* Engineer [ Vocals ] – Chris " Tek " O'Ryan
* Featuring – Mac Miller
* Mixed by – Jaycen Joshua
* Mixed by [ Assistant ] –
Trehy Harris
* Producer – Harmony Samuels * Producer [ Vocals ] – Ariana Grande , Sauce * Written by –
Al Sherrod Lambert , Amber Streeter , Brenda Russell , Harmony Samuels , Jordin Sparks , Malcolm McCormick
CHARTS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts .
Section::::Weekly charts .
!
scope="col " Chart ( 2013–14 ) ! scope="col " Peakposition !
scope="row
" ! scope="row " !
scope="row " !
scope="row
" ! scope="row " ! scope="row " Japan ( Japan Hot 100 ) ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " South Korea International Chart ( GAON ) !
scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " ! scope="row " J Balvin remix !
Chart ( 2013 ) !
Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 2013 ) !
scope="col"Position !
scope =
rowUS
Billboard Digital Songs !
scope =
rowUS
Billboard Hot 100 !
scope =
rowUS
Billboard On - Demand Songs !
scope =
rowUS
Billboard Radio Songs !
scope =
rowUS
Billboard Streaming Songs CERTIFICATIONS
RELEASE HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col " Country ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Version ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Label ! scope="row " Canada ! scope="row " United States !
scope="row
" France !
scope="row " Russia ! scope="row " Germany ! scope="row " Japan ! scope="row " United Kingdom !
scope="row
" Russia ! scope="row " United States ! scope="row " Germany !
scope="row " Spain ! scope="row " United States REFERENCES