THE BLACKLIST ( TV SERIES )
The Blacklist is an American crime thriller television series that premiered on NBC on September 23 , 2013 .
Raymond " Red " Reddington ( James Spader ) , a former U.S. Navy officer turned high - profile criminal , voluntarily surrenders to the FBI after eluding capture for decades .
He tells the FBI that he has a list of the most dangerous criminals in the world that he has compiled over the years and is willing to inform on their operations in exchange for immunity from prosecution .
However , he insists on working exclusively with a rookie FBI profiler by the name of Elizabeth Keen ( Megan Boone ) .
The series also stars Diego Klattenhoff , Ryan Eggold , and Harry Lennix .
The pilot episode was written by Jon Bokenkamp and directed by Joe Carnahan .
Executive producers for the series include Bokenkamp , John Eisendrath , and John Davis for Sony Pictures Television , Universal Television , and Davis Entertainment .
On May 12 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a sixth season , which is set to premiere on January 3 , 2019 .
The series has received positive reviews , with many critics praising Spader 's performance in particular .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Raymond " Red " Reddington , a former US Naval Intelligence officer who had disappeared twenty years earlier to become one of the FBI 's Ten Most Wanted Fugitives , surrenders himself to FBI Assistant Director Harold Cooper at the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington , D.C ..
Taken to an FBI " black site " , Reddington claims he wishes to help the FBI track down and apprehend the criminals and terrorists he spent the last twenty years associating with ; individuals that are so dangerous and devious that the United States government is unaware of their very existence .
He offers Cooper his knowledge and assistance on two conditions : immunity from prosecution , and that he wants to work exclusively with Elizabeth Keen , a rookie profiler newly assigned to Cooper .
Keen and Cooper are suspicious of Reddington 's interest in her , but he will only say that she is " very special " .
After Cooper tests Reddington 's offer in locating and killing a terrorist in the first episode , Reddington reveals that this man was only the first on his " blacklist " of global criminals , which he has compiled over his criminal career , and states that he and the FBI have a mutual interest in eliminating them .
The mysteries of Reddington 's and Liz 's lives , and his interest in her , are gradually revealed as the series progresses .
Each episode features one of the global criminals , and Reddington assisting the team tracking and apprehending them .
The rank and name or alias of the featured criminal on the list is displayed at the start of every episode .
Three episodes in the series , " Cape May " , " Requiem " and " Ruin " , do not follow this format .
CAST AND CHARACTERS * James Spader
as Raymond " Red " Reddington :
A master criminal turned confidential informant for the FBI , later revealed to be Elizabeth Keen 's biological father .
However , in the end of season 5 Keen asserts he is an impostor who had the real Reddington killed and kept his bones in a suitcase .
* Megan Boone as
Elizabeth " Liz " Keen :
Born Masha Rostova , Keen is a special agent with the FBI on Harold Cooper 's team , and Tom Keen 's wife .
* Diego Klattenhoff as Donald Ressler : A special agent with the FBI on Cooper 's team , who also became the Acting Assistant Director of the FBI Counterterrorism Division .
* Ryan Eggold as Tom Keen :
Born Christopher Hargrave , later taking the adoptive name Jacob Phelps , Keen works as a covert operative and is Liz 's husband .
( seasons 1–5 ) * Parminder Nagra as Meera Malik : A field agent with the CIA who worked with Cooper 's FBI team ( season 1 ) .
* Harry Lennix as Harold Cooper : The Assistant Director of the FBI Counterterrorism Division who uses Reddington to stop people on his Blacklist .
* Amir Arison as Aram Mojtabai :
A computer specialist with the FBI on Cooper 's team ( main , season 2–present ; recurring , season 1 ) .
* Mozhan Marnò as Samar Navabi : A Mossad agent who works with Cooper 's FBI team ( season 2–present ) .
* Hisham Tawfiq as Dembe Zuma :
Reddington 's bodyguard and confidante ( main , season 3–present ; recurring , seasons 1–2 ) .
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
On October 4 , 2013 , NBC ordered nine additional episodes , filling out the series ' first season .
On December 3 , 2013 , NBC renewed the series for a 22-episode second season .
On May 11 , 2014 , owing to the series ' breakout success , NBC decided to air an episode in the coveted post – Super Bowl timeslot in 2015 .
On December 5 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a fourth season , which premiered on September 22 , 2016 .
A spin - off series , , premiered on February 23 , 2017 .
On May 11 , 2017 , the series was renewed for a fifth season , while the spin - off was canceled the following day .
The fifth season premiered on September 27 , 2017 .
CONCEPTION Section::::Conception .
After showing a screening of the pilot at Comic - Con , producers revealed that their inspiration for The Blacklist came from the capture of Whitey Bulger .
Recalling the experience in an interview with Collider , executive producer John Eisendrath stated : NBC bought the rights to The Blacklist from Sony Pictures Television in August 2012 and greenlighted the show in January 2013 .
During an NBC upfront presentation in May 2013 , it was announced that The Blacklist was NBC 's highest - testing drama in 10 years .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Eisendrath said the casting process was difficult .
In February 2013 , NBC offered Kiefer Sutherland the lead role of Raymond Reddington .
After considering other actors for the role , Eisendrath and Bokenkamp called James Spader to see if he would be interested in it .
Feeling confident in Spader 's understanding of the character , they cast him three days before filming began .
Megan Boone took a week to prepare for her audition as FBI profiler Elizabeth Keen .
Feeling like her initial audition was one of the better auditions of her career , Boone later was called back for multiple auditions .
In March 2013 , Deadline Hollywood reported that Boone accepted the role as the female lead in the series .
FILMING LOCATIONS AND TECHNIQUE
Section::::Filming locations and technique .
Despite being set in Washington , D.C. , the series is mainly filmed in the same Manhattan studio where Law & Order was filmed for 20 years .
Producer Richard Heus said they chose to film specific Washington , D.C. locations for the series , including the Lincoln Memorial , the Washington Monument , and the National Mall , because they were " iconic American locations " .
The series is filmed in 4 K using Sony PMW - F55 cameras that are adapted to use Panavision lenses .
It is edited using Avid Media Composer , and editor Christopher Brookshire says the show has " a very distinctive look and pace " .
An average of three cameras are used at one time , but as many as six cameras are sometimes rolling .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series is broadcast simultaneously on Global in Canada .
In New Zealand , the show premiered on TV3 on February 2 , 2014 .
The second season premiered on September 23 .
In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the show premiered on Sky Living on October 4 , 2013 .
The second season premiered on October 3 , 2014 .
Netflix has streaming rights to seasons 1–5 in the United States , Canada , Australia , Latin America , Finland , Switzerland , Germany , Sweden , The Netherlands , New Zealand .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The first season of The Blacklist received strong reviews from television critics .
On Metacritic , the first season has a score of 74 out of 100 , based on 31 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports an 85 % approval rating , based on 52 reviews , with an average score of 7.18/10 .
The consensus reads , " James Spader is riveting as a criminal - turned - informant , and his presence goes a long way toward making this twisty but occasionally implausible crime procedural compelling " .
The second season received a rating of 80 % , based on 15 reviews , with an average score of 7.77/10 .
The consensus reads , " Though The Blacklist flirts with narrative overload , it 's held together by James Spader 's scenery - eating performance and wildly entertaining action . "
The third season received a rating of 93 % , based on 14 reviews , with an average score of 7.41/10 .
The consensus reads , " The Blacklist is back in top form with fresh dangers that put Red on the ropes while giving James Spader room to shine . "
The fourth season received a rating of 88 % , based on eight reviews , with an average score of 7/10 .
The fifth season received a rating of 100 % , based on five reviews , with an average score of 8.5/10 .
David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle said about the pilot , " You think you know this situation and how it will turn out , but there are surprising , yet entirely credible , twists throughout Monday 's episode " .
Robert Bianco of USA Today said , " The Blacklist is a solid weekly crime show built around a genuine TV star .
That 's the kind of series the networks have to be able to pull off to survive .
And with Spader in command , odds are NBC will " .
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter praised both Spader 's performance and the procedural elements of the show , writing " there 's an overarching element to the premise as well
that makes it intriguing without making it overly complicated . "
RATINGS ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades . !
Year !
Association !
Category !
Nominee !
Result
Note :
*
The stunt cast included Airon Armstrong , Kevin Ball , Chris Barnes , Nitasha Bhambree , Michael C. Brennan , Bryce Burke , Jared Burke , Kachina Dechert , Neimah Djourabchi , Paul Drechsler - Martell , Stefanie Flores , Edward Gabree , Christopher Jon Gombos , Tony Guida , Gene Harrison , Greg Harvey , Chad Hessler , Cort Hessler , Donald John Hewitt , Scott Kelly , Pete Klein , Drew Leary , Luke Lesko , Roberto Lopez , Terence Lorino , Stephen Mann , Michael Matera , Chazz Menendez , Luis Moco , Declan Mulvey , James Newman , Josiah Nolan , Christopher Parker , Ashley Pynn , Jodi Michelle Pynn , Bob Roseman , Akos Schenek , Hannah Scott , Derrick Simmons , Brian Smyj , Matt Triplett , Thad Turner , and Aaron Vexler .
* OTHER MEDIA COMICS
Section::::Other media .
Section::::Comics .
Titan Books released an official comic book series based on the series , written by Nicole Phillips and drawn by Beni Lobel .
The series ' crew is working in the project as well .
Editor David Leach told The Hollywood Reporter that the comic is " a true extension of the television series " giving " new dimensions of the characters that have captured the audiences worldwide " .
The series will open with a six - issue story arc , which will be " a journey deep into the dark world of international espionage , conspiracies and intrigue on a global scale " .
Issue # 1 was launched July 22 , 2015 , in both comic book and digital stores .
GAMES Section::::Games .
A mobile game by Gameloft based on the series , The Blacklist : Conspiracy , was released on June 23 , 2016 , for Android , iOS and Windows devices .
The game consists of the player as a member of the task force .
Players can interact with Reddington and Cooper , other members of the task force , as well as interrogate potential suspects and witnesses .
The game mainly consists of searching for missing items in different environments , as well as mini games to further the investigations .
Players can also make decisions that alter the route of the story .
SPIN - OFF Section::::Spin - off .
In March 2016 , NBC began developing a spin - off series created by Bokenkamp and Eisendrath , who would also serve as executive producers with Davis and Fox .
The project was set to star Famke Janssen as Susan " Scottie " Hargrave ( formerly Halsted ) and Eggold , in his role as Tom Keen , as well as Edi Gathegi reprising his role as Matias Solomon .
Tawny Cypress was cast as Nez Rowan , a character already recurring during the third season .
Hargrave first appeared on The Blacklist episode " Susan Hargrave " , with " Alexander Kirk " serving as a backdoor pilot for the potential series .
That episode was written by Bokenkamp and Eisendrath and directed by Michael Dinner .
On May 14 , 2016 , a pilot for the series , The Blacklist : Redemption , was ordered .
The series was canceled after one season .
Eggold continued his role on The Blacklist until his character was murdered in the season 5 midseason finale .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS