LIMITATION PERIODS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
In the United Kingdom , there are time limits after which court actions can not be taken in certain types of cases .
These differ across the three legal systems in the United Kingdom .
The United Kingdom is almost unique in the world in that it has no statute of limitations for any criminal offence tried above magistrate level .
CIVIL CLAIMS
Section::::Civil claims .
The key legislation relating to civil claims in England and Wales is the Limitation Act 1980 , which lists the time to various types of cases .
DEBTS
Section::::Debts .
If a lender allows six years to pass without receiving any payment , an action for recovery may become statute - barred .
INJURY LITIGATION
Section::::Injury litigation .
The general time limit for injury litigation is three years , with multiple exceptions and special cases .
The statute of limitations for injuries to children only starts at the eighteenth birthday .
The statute of limitations for brain damage begins only when the victim has been medically acknowledged as regaining cognitive ability .
The Montreal Convention ( 1999 ) and the Athens Convention ( 1974 ) govern the statute of limitations for compensation for injuries on an airplane or while at sea , respectively .
LIBEL Section::::Libel .
The limitation period for libel , slander , slander of title , slander of goods or other malicious falsehood is one year .
CRIMINAL MATTERS MAGISTRATES '
COURTS Section::::Criminal matters .
Section::::Magistrates ' courts .
In relation to criminal matters , Section 127 of the Magistrates Court Act 1980 states that normally : HIGHER COURTS Section::::Higher courts .
Unlike other European countries , the United Kingdom has no statute of limitations for any criminal offence .
Following a number of acquittals and wrongful convictions of people charged with serious sexual crimes alleged to have been committed several decades prior , there has been some debate as to whether there should be a statute of limitations for historical rape and sexual assault cases , as prosecutions rely solely on personal testimonies and have no physical or scientific evidence due to the passage of time .
ROAD TRAFFIC OFFENDERS ACT Section::::Road Traffic Offenders Act .
Section 1 of the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 requires a Notice of Intended Prosecution ( NIP ) to be served within 14 days of applicable offences being committed ; if that does not occur , it may follow that any further action may be prevented .
However , there are exceptions to the 14 day rule : if the alleged offence was committed in a company car or the car was not being driven by the registered keeper of the vehicle are all examples of exception to that day to allow the police to make appropriate investigations .
The date of the offence is excluded .
The onus is on the body issuing the Notice of Intended Prosecution ( NIP ) to ensure the Notice is served within 14 days .
The definition of " served " has changed .
Prior to 1994 , NIPs were served by registered or recorded post , but in 1994 , the Road Traffic Offenders Act 1988 was amended to allow for standard postal delivery .
Several successful defences to a NIP have been conducted on the production of the envelope that contained the NIP in which the postmark on the envelope indicated to a court that the NIP could not have been received ( served ) within the 14 day limit .
REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT Section::::Representation of the People Act .
Section 176 of the Representation of the People Act 1986 , requires that proceedings for any offence within the act begin within one year of the offence being committed .
REFERENCES