MATERNITY LEAVE IN THE UNITED STATES
Maternity leave in the United States is regulated by US labor law .
There is a right to a temporary and unpaid period of absence from employment granted to expectant or new mothers during the months immediately before and after childbirth .
These policies are generally aimed at supporting the mother 's full recovery from childbirth and facilitating a stronger mother - child bond .
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 ( FMLA ) requires 12 weeks of unpaid leave annually for most mothers of newborn or newly adopted children .
This is one of the lowest levels of leave in the industrialized world .
In comparison to other countries , the United States is one of the only countries in the world , and the only OECD member , that has not passed laws requiring business and corporations to offer paid maternity leave to their employees .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Between 1961 and 1965 , only 14 % of mothers participated in the workforce within 6 months of their child 's birth .
Prior to the enactment of FMLA legislation in 1993 , maternity leave coverage was governed by state law , collective bargaining agreements and employer policies .
The first set of maternity leave related policies emerged in the late 1960s .
By 1969 , five states had enacted Temporary Disability Insurance laws protecting employees from income loss in the occurrence of a temporary medical disability .
Under this legislation , new mothers were granted leaves corresponding to the benefits that other employees received for temporary illness or disability .
This state - level trend of maternity leave legislation continued into the 1970s and 1980s where multiple other states passed more explicit recognitions of new mothers ' rights to a temporary leave of absence .
Ultimately , 12 states and the District of Columbia had implemented measures requiring at least some private sector employers to offer maternity leave packages to its employees .
Even in the absence of this formal legislation , employees in other states often obtained maternity leave through collective bargaining .
Employees frequently held enough bargaining power to influence employer policies and negotiate for the inclusion of maternity leave protection .
Despite some localized employees ' access to maternity leave , there was growing pressure for national maternity leave legislation in the early 1990s .
Many new mothers continued to be excluded from such maternity leave provisions despite growing national demand .
Women now enjoyed greater employment opportunities and changing gender norms that encouraged increased labor involvement .
This increased female employment extended to mothers as well who now were now more likely to engage in the workforce even if they had a young child .
The labor participation rate of mothers with children under the age of 1 rose from 31 % in 1976 to 54 % in 1992 .
In spite of a high labor force participation rate , only an estimated 40 % of working women had access to explicit maternity leave protection .
This inadequate national coverage provoked intense protest and growing national consensus on the value of maternity leave .
Ultimately , the increased salience and galvanized national support prompted the 1993 enactment of the Family and Medical Leave Act mandating maternity leave .
CURRENT LEGISLATION FEDERAL LEGISLATION Section::::Current legislation .
Section::::Federal legislation .
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 ( or FMLA ) , signed into law during President Bill Clinton 's first term , mandates a minimum of 12 weeks unpaid leave to mothers for the purpose of attending to a newborn or newly adopted child .
However , the act does not attain universal coverage as it includes several limiting stipulations .
In order to receive maternity leave , employees must work in a firm of 50 or more employees , maintain employment with the same business for 12 months and have accumulated at least 1,250 working hours over those 12 months .
As of 2012 , 59 % of American employees were eligible under the FMLA .
The FMLA is the only law that addresses family leave .
Two other Federal laws , the Pregnancy Discrimination Act and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 's amendment of the Fair Labor Standards Act , provide some additional protection for parents on the birth of a child .
STATE LEGISLATION Section::::State legislation .
Many states have supplemented these federal regulations and provided more extensive maternity leave benefits , including expanding paid or flexible sick time , expanding access for workers in smaller companies or with less time on the job , right to pump that expands on federal law , and pregnancy accommodations .
As of 2016 , 12 states have enacted no additional laws or programs to support family leave before or after birth .
Fourteen states , along with the District of Columbia , have addressed eligibility requirements by lowering the firm - size threshold from 50 or more employees down to as low as 10 employees .
Seven other states , in addition to the District of Columbia , have adopted more generous maternity leave lengths that allow longer absences for the purpose of child rearing .
Moreover , some states have enacted legislation enhancing the benefits of leave programs .
California , New Jersey , and Rhode Island for instance , operate programs that require private - sector employers to pay their employees who utilize maternity leave at partial replacement rates .
New York passed paid family leave legislation , which includes maternity leave , in 2016 — starting off at 8 weeks and 50 % of pay in 2018 , and reaching 12 weeks and 67 % of pay in 2021 .
Washington state passed a paid family leave bill in 2007 , but it lacked a funding mechanism and has not yet gone into effect .
Hawaii , Puerto Rico , and the District of Columbia designate childbirth as a temporary disability thus guaranteeing mothers paid maternity leave through Disability Insurance ( TDI ) provisions .
OTHER FEDERAL POLICIES
Section::::Other federal policies .
The Department of Defense has regulated the amount of maternity leave a military member can take .
Before February 5 , 2016 the leave was six weeks long for active duty members or reservists who had previously done twelve months of active duty time .
On January 28 , 2016 , the Defense Secretary , Ashton Carter , increased the paid maternity leave to twelve weeks for all branches .
Traditional reservists , however , are given an eighty - four - day excusal , not leave .
In the United States Air Force AFI36 - 3003 , it states that the maternity leave starts after being released from the hospital from giving birth , as also defined for other branches .
" Shared benefits " can be created if both parents are active Air Force members .
Therefore , a sum of up to twelve weeks can be taken by one parent or distributed amongst the two parents .
However , two married active duty members can not create " shared benefits " in the Army , according to the Army Directive 2016 - 09 ( Maternity Leave Policy ) .
There was a stance by the previous Secretary of the Navy , Ray Mabus , to increase the maternity leave from six to eighteen weeks for the Navy and Marine Corps beginning on July 2 , 2015 .
It was implemented until January 28 , 2016 , however , it remained eighteen weeks for those who were pregnant previous to and on March 3 , 2016 .
It was a significant leap to go from six to twelve weeks of maternity leave .
Other benefits have also been increased to improve the lives of those with newborn or newly adopted children .
These benefits include an increase of child care hours to fourteen hours a day , and allowing active duty members more ability to family plan by paying for the sperm and egg freezing .
These decisions were made by the previous Defense Secretary " in an effort to support military families , improve retention and strengthen the force of the future . "
IMPACTS OF UNITED STATES MATERNITY
LEAVE
HEALTH CHILD HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Impacts of United States maternity leave .
Section::::Health .
Section::::Child health and development .
Studies assert that an additional week of maternity leave among industrialized countries reduces infant mortality rates by 0.5 deaths per 1,000 live births .
There is also a positive correlation between maternal leave and the duration of breast - feeding .
Mothers who are not engaged in employment may be more able to participate in consistent breast - feeding ; babies who are breastfed may be less likely to get a variety of infections and are also at a lower risk for asthma , obesity , and infant death syndrome .
Research suggests that breast - feeding has the ability to yield substantial health improvements in disease prevention and immune system build - up .
Moreover , further evidence indicates that maternal care is especially crucial during the first couple of months following child birth , or the time in which American maternity leave is in effect .
MATERNAL HEALTH
Section::::Maternal health .
The medical definition of postpartum is the time frame between childbirth and the return of the mother 's reproductive organs to their non pregnant state .
For women that return to work during this postpartum period , the stress of maintaining a balance between their professional and parenting responsibilities has been shown to weaken their immune systems and interact poorly with their psychological state .
IMPACT OF DEPRESSION Section::::Impact of depression .
Depression is a condition with both mental and physical side effects and can be very debilitating depending on the severity .
The risk factors vary from person to person and women are typically diagnosed with depression more than men .
Other than trauma , physical illness , certain personality traits , and previous family history , pregnancy can be a cause of depression in women .
Symptoms of this disease include , loss of interest in activities , difficulty focusing , thinking , making decisions , and remembering things , anxiety , irritation , slowed speaking , physical pains , and feelings of sadness and worthlessness .
Any combination of these symptoms makes simple tasks seem daunting and almost impossible .
Women who just gave birth are already managing recovering from the severe physical symptoms while taking care of a newborn child and adding symptoms of depression to this mixture can be a huge burden on them .
When these new mothers go back to work they have the added stress of worrying about their child and balancing their family and work roles .
Mothers who return to work soon after a birth of a child are likely to get depressed than other mothers ; therefore , longer paid maternity leave has the potential to help new mothers .
Women will have more time to recover from giving birth both mentally and physically , which can help prevent the onset of depression .
ECONOMIC ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY Section::::Economic .
Section::::Economic efficiency .
Four states currently offer paid family leave :
California , Massachusetts , New Jersey , and Rhode Island .
In New Jersey , women who took paid leave in the year after giving birth were 40 % less likely to receive public aid or food stamps .
According to a California - based study , 87 % of employers reported that the paid leave requirement did not increase costs ; 9 % note that it saved money due to decreased turnover and other costs .
Though the overall labor force participation has declined since the year 2000 , some economists argue that paid maternity leave in California has increased labor force participation among mothers .
Mothers who receive paid maternity leave may be more likely to return to employment later , and then work more hours and earn higher wages .
Less favorable maternity leave policies may inhibit a woman 's career trajectory and promotion prospects .
The extended period of absence of such policies often reduce a women 's economic status and opportunities .
During this hiatus , their job skills and experiences may deteriorate thus limiting their potential advancement .
MOTHERHOOD PENALTY Section::::Motherhood penalty .
Available maternity leave options may also help lower the impact of children on career advancement , or the motherhood penalty .
There currently exists a " family gap " between the pay of mothers and nonmothers .
In the United States prior to the passage of the FMLA , mothers typically earned 70 % of men 's wages while nonmothers earned 90 % .
These earning disparities partially stemmed from insecure employment return prospects .
Women without maternity leave protection were often forced to start over with a new employer following their absence .
This interrupted their career progression and burdened them with the additional task of seeking new employment .
Such factors ultimately impeded equitable access to income and career opportunities .
Women as a group notably experience increasing income inequality as they age illustrating the impact of motherhood on their wage prospects .
However , the implementation of FMLA addressed some of these impediments through the introduction of mandatory maternity leave .
Mothers now are more likely to return to their previous employer due to this increased legal protection .
The policy minimizes some of the negative externalities of motherhood by maintaining women 's employment options even following maternity leave .
Many policy experts though suspect that the remaining gender imbalance is largely attributable to the dearth of paid leave options .
Women who worked for companies that provided paid maternity leave before they gave birth are more likely to take such leave for up to 12 weeks , and more likely to return to work more quickly thereafter .
SOCIAL
ACCESS EQUALITY Section::::Social .
Section::::Access equality .
American family policy perpetuates inequalities as many low - income women lack access to maternity leave .
Under the current FMLA system , approximately 40 % of United States workers are ineligible for benefits due to the brevity of their tenure or the smallness of their firm .
These excluded populations are often low - waged and minority women thus furthering their already present disadvantage .
Moreover , the unpaid aspect of the current policy limits access to those who are economically well off .
The United States Department of Labor reported that over a 22-month period in 1999 and 2000 , 3.5 million people needed leave but were unable to take it due to affordability concerns .
The lack of monetary compensation may hinder the ability of women who are not as financially secure as others to balance employment with their family life .
PATERNITY LEAVE Section::::Paternity leave .
California is the first state to offer paid paternity leave weeks ( six weeks , partial payment ) .
New Jersey , Rhode Island , and New York since passed laws for paid family leave .
In the rest of the US , paternity pay weeks are not offered ( therefore neither paternity paid leave weeks ) , but fathers have access to unpaid paternity leave to care for their newborns ( without new income ) .
Often , fathers will take sick days or vacation time when they have newborns .
There is also a growing number of fathers that go unpaid .
Some employers are required by law to allow 12 weeks of unpaid family leave after the birth or adoption of a child .
This law is under FMLA or Family Medical Leave Act .
Fathers who have access to paid paternity leave give mothers the opportunity to engage in paid work , with a positive effect on female labor force participation and wages .
The United States military branches also show a minimal paternity leave .
Although some branches give more time after the birth to take the leave , all branches give ten days .
This type of leave is applicable to those who are married .
Longer paternity leave increases the father 's engagement with a child , which leads to the child 's improved cognitive and mental health outcomes and fewer behavior problems .
FOREIGN COMPARISON Section::::Foreign comparison .
The United States maternity leave policy is distinct for its relative scarcity of benefits in comparison to other industrialized countries .
Thus , the legislation imposes relatively few restrictions on American firms and instead underscores employer discretion in the shaping of maternity leave policy .
These firms are thus free to offer maternity leave policies on terms that are more aligned with corporate interests .
This United States policy differs greatly from most other western countries in terms of maternity leave provision .
These stark maternity leave differentials are demonstrated in both the policy 's length and compensation .
In terms of the length of protected maternity leave , the United States currently ranks 20th out of the 21 highest - income countries .
The United States is one of three countries , along with Oman and Papua New Guinea , that do not offer paid maternity leave .
Countries that offer paid maternity leave include Mexico ( 12 weeks ) , United Kingdom ( 40 weeks ) , India ( 26 weeks ) , Chile ( 6 weeks before birth , 12 weeks after)http://www.dt.gob.cl / consultas/1613 / w3-article-60107.html , Canada ( 1 year ) , and China ( 14 weeks ) .
Although the United States does not guarantee paid maternity leave , employers may provide paid leave if they choose .
There are three states in the United States that do provide paid maternity leave and they are California , New Jersey , and Rhode Island .
Mothers usually share baby care with their husbands .
Fathers can have paid week leaves if they live in California ( partial paid leave ) .
In Slovenia fathers have 12 weeks of 100 % paid paternity leave .
In Sweden 480 days of 80 % paid paternity leave weeks .
In Norway 49 weeks of 100 % paid paternity leave weeks or 59 weeks of 80 % paid paternity leave .
Finnish fathers have 11 partial paid leave weeks .
SEE ALSO
*
Parental leave * Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
* Paid family leave *
Motherhood penalty
* Working mothers
* Work - life balance
* Maternity * US labor law REFERENCES