ALL I WANNA DO ( 1998 FILM )
All
I Wanna Do ( originally titled The Hairy Bird ) is a 1998 comedy film written and directed by Sarah Kernochan .
It stars Kirsten Dunst , Gaby Hoffman , Monica Keena , Heather Matarazzo and Rachael Leigh Cook in an ensemble cast as students of the fictional Miss Godard 's Preparatory School for Girls , and Lynn Redgrave as the school 's headmistress .
The film takes place in 1963 and focuses on several students ' plotting and sabotage of a proposed merger for the school to go coed .
Originally titled The Hairy Bird , the film 's screenplay , set in 1963 , is based loosely on Kernochan 's experiences at Rosemary Hall around that time .
Filming was done in Toronto , Ontario , Canada at the Trafalgar Castle School in Whitby .
The song " The Hairy Bird " plays during the film 's end credits ; it was written by Kernochan and sung by a group which includes Kernochan and five of her Rosemary Hall classmates , including Glenn Close .
The film was released in September 1998 in the United States under the title
All
I
Wanna Do , as its American distributor , Miramax Films , found the original title too offensive .
In Canada , it was released under the title Strike ! .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the fall of 1963 in New England , Odette " Odie " Sinclair is forcibly transferred by her parents to Miss Godard 's Preparatory School for Girls after her parents find out that she has planned to have sex with her boyfriend , Dennis .
Upon arrival to the school , which is run by the stern but kind headmistress Miss McVane , Odette is introduced to her roommates , the intelligent and charismatic Verena von Stefan and the promiscuous Tinka Parker .
Verena and Tinka are the school 's primary troublemakers ; both mock an uptight hall monitor named Abigail " Abby " Sawyer , who has a penchant for tattletaling , and Verena regularly buys cigarettes from a lunch cook and is constantly late for classes .
After a brief hazing period , Odie is welcomed into the D.A.R. ( Daughters of the American Ravioli ) , a club of several girls at the school who have greater aspirations than those of their peers ; the members congregate in the school 's attic , where they have access to canned ravioli stored above the cafeteria .
The club is led by Verena , and consists of several other girls , including Theresa " Tweety " Goldberg , a bulimic who self - induces vomiting by drinking ipecac syrup and plans to be a child psychologist ; and Maureen " Momo " Haines , a well - spoken science nerd and aspiring biologist .
Verena has plans to start a fashion magazine like Vogue , while Tinka plans to be an " actress - folk singer - slut " .
Odette declares her interest in politics , but pines to finish what she started with Dennis and lose her virginity .
The D.A.R. begins planning a rendezvous for Odie and Dennis , but when it is discovered that Miss Godard 's is considering going co - ed with the nearby St. Ambrose boys ' academy , the girls become divided on the matter and ultimately the club breaks up , leaving Verena and Momo to plan a sabotage for an upcoming dance with the St. Ambrose boys .
Meanwhile , the board of trustees for the school , which include Abby 's parents , deliberates on the matter .
Miss McVane detests the merger , but can do little about it because of the school 's financial problems .
As the St. Ambrose dance arrives , Verena and Momo concoct a plan to cast the boys ' academy in a bad light , by spiking the fruit punch with alcohol from the chemistry lab and feeding them Tweety 's ipecac to induce vomiting during their choir performance ; Verena then plants empty liquor bottles in their school bus .
The same night , Dennis arrives at the academy dressed in a St. Ambrose uniform and meets Odette for their rendezvous in the attic of the school .
Tweety and Tinka have a change of heart on the co - ed integration after Tweety is humiliated by some St. Ambrose students .
With the help of a group of teenage male townies called " The Flat Critters " , led by Snake who has a crush on Tinka , they end up sending the intoxicated St. Ambrose boys home with a poor reputation .
Miss McVane recognizes Verena as the mastermind behind the sabotage .
Despite Miss McVane 's appreciation for Verena 's efforts , she is forced to expel Verena for having been caught fraternizing in her undergarments with a St. Ambrose boy .
The following week at the end of the year ceremony , the announcement of the merger is made by Mrs. Sawyer , much to the disapproval of the girls , including Abby .
The students , led by Odie , hole up inside the school dormitories and demand a student body vote count as a single vote on the board of trustees .
Meanwhile , a media circus surrounds the school , and the board of trustees agree to a student vote .
Ultimately , the votes against the integration
outnumber those for it , and the students donate their personal savings to help with the school 's debt .
In a humorous epilogue prior to the credits , the following is revealed : Verena goes on to publish Moi , one of the most - read women 's publications in the world ; Odette becomes a congresswoman and declares war on the tobacco industry ; Momo is a scientist developing the first male oral contraceptive ; Tinka , a famous actress , comes out to Barbara Walters in a 1997 interview ; Tweety became a psychologist and wrote a best - seller about bulimia ; Abby , a radical political activist , is serving a prison sentence for a 1970 bank holdup ; and Miss Godard 's is still a girls school .
CAST
* Kirsten Dunst as Verena von Stefan
* Gaby Hoffmann as Odette Sinclair
* Lynn Redgrave as Miss McVane * Rachael Leigh Cook as Abigail
" Abby " Sawyer
* Tom Guiry as Bradley " Frosty " Frost * Vincent Kartheiser as Snake ( Flat Critter )
* Monica Keena as Tinka Parker * Matthew Lawrence as Dennis * Heather Matarazzo as Theresa " Tweety " Goldberg
* Merritt Wever as Maureen " Momo " Haines * Robert Bockstael as Mr. Frank Dewey
* Brenda Devine as Miss Phipps * Rosemary Dunsmore as Page Sawyer
* Nigel Bennett as Harvey Sawyer * Jenny Parsons as Mrs. Dewey * Dorothy Gordon as Mrs. O'Boyle * Michael Reynolds as Mr. Armstrong * Caterina Scorsone as Susie
* Michael Barry as Possum ( Flat Critter ) * Zachary Bennett as Skunk ( Flat Critter ) * Aaron Poole as Beagle ( Flat Critter ) * Danny Smith as Groundhog ( Flat Critter )
* Noah Shebib as Conrad Bateman * Robin Dunne as Todd Winslow * Paul Nolan as Charles Schumacher * Hayden Christensen as Tinka 's date * Christopher Redmond as Danforth * Shawn Ashmore as St. Ambrose photographer
* Jack Duffy as School Guard
* Richard McMillan as Bert Chubb ( St. Ambrose Boy Housemaster )
* Les Porter as Graham John ( St. Ambrose Boy Choirmaster )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
All
I Wanna Do was filmed in 1997 in Toronto , primarily at the Trafalgar Castle School also at Loretto Abbey CSS ( especially the chapel scenes ) , and was financed through Alliance Atlantis studios , a Canadian distribution company .
RELEASE THEATRICAL DISTRIBUTION
Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical distribution .
The film was picked up by Miramax Films and was given a limited release in the United States on September 4 , 1998 under the alternate title
All
I
Wanna Do , as Miramax found the film 's original working title
, The Hairy Bird ( which alluded to male genitalia ) , to be too offensive .
The film was released in Canada and the United Kingdom under the title Strike ! .
The only country to release the film under its original title was Australia .
In March 2000 , the film was re - released in New York City at the United Artists Union Square Theater where it grossed $ 5,383 in its single week of screenings .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
A.O. Scott of The New York Times noted that the film " mixes such prim old - fashioned naughtiness with more consequential misbehavior ...
All
I Wanna Do lurches between girl - power melodrama and bratty farce , but the ungainliness is part of the film 's charm . "
He also noted that the film is " surprisingly pleasant , thanks to smart , unstereotyped performances -- especially by Ms. Hoffmann and Ms. Dunst -- and the filmmaker 's evident respect and affection for her characters . "
Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club favorably reviewed the film , noting that in its final act it " gains focus and momentum , becoming less a nostalgic celebration of female bonding than a boldly feminist teen sex comedy that is n't above the occasional group - vomiting scene .
It improves steadily as it goes along , right up through an enormously satisfying ending that combines rousing rhetoric about the price of gender inequity and the power of group solidarity — and throws in a rowdy snobs vs. slobs setpiece worthy of Animal House . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Script for the film , in PDF format , from the director 's website * Lyrics and MP3 for the title song , also from the director 's website