ALCOHOL LAWS OF TEXAS
A person must be at least be 21 years of age to publicly drink an alcoholic beverage in Texas , with some exceptions Texas is one of ten states ( California , Colorado , Maryland , Montana , New York , Texas , West Virginia , Washington , Wisconsin , and Wyoming ) that allow consumption by minors in the presence of consenting and supervising family members .
In the state of Texas , parents accept responsibility for the safety of minors under 18 when the minor is on their property or on property leased by them and under their care , custody , and control ; an adult may provide alcohol to a minor if he /
she is the minor 's adult parent , guardian , or spouse , and is visibly present when the minor possesses or consumes the alcoholic beverage .
It is against the law to make alcohol available to a non - family person younger than 21 even in your own residence , even with the parent 's permission .
Texas holds parents / adults civilly liable for damages caused by the intoxication of a minor younger than 18 if they knowingly provided alcohol or allowed alcohol to be served on property owned or leased by them and the minor : * is injured or dies as a result of drinking on the property , * gets into a fight , falls and hurts him / herself , or is sexually assaulted ,
* damages someone else 's property , or * leaves and is involved in a motor vehicle accident and causes injury to themselves or others .
An operator of a motor vehicle is considered automatically under the influence of alcohol if a chemical screening shows a blood - alcohol content ( BAC ) of 0.08 percent or greater .
If under the age of 21 , a driver in Texas is not able to test positive for any blood - alcohol content ( BAC ) under penalty of DUI charges .
WET AND DRY COUNTIES Section::::Wet and dry counties .
Several counties are completely " dry " counties , where no sales of alcoholic beverages are legal anywhere in the county :
Many counties are completely " wet " counties , where all alcoholic beverage sales are legal everywhere in the county : All others are " moist " counties , which are a combination of wet and dry areas .
SALES OF ALCOHOL Section::::Sales of alcohol .
Beer sales are permitted between 7 AM and midnight on all days except Sunday ; Sunday sales are permitted between midnight and 1AM and between noon and midnight ( excepting certain sales of beer with food ) .
Wine sales are generally permitted at the same time as beer sales .
Any retailer with a proper permit may sell beer and wine .
Liquor sales are more stringently regulated .
Liquor sales are prohibited 1 ) on Sundays , 2 ) on Thanksgiving Day , Christmas Day , and New Year 's Day ( and when Christmas and New Year 's fall on a Sunday , the prohibition is carried over to the following Monday ) , and 3 ) before 10AM and after 9PM on any other day .
Furthermore , liquor can only be sold in " package stores " , which must be closed whenever liquor sales are prohibited ( even for sales of otherwise allowable products ) , and which further must be physically separated from any other business .
Moreover , no owner can own more than five package stores , and no publicly - traded company can own such a store .
LEGITIMATE AGE Section::::Legitimate age .
People must be at least 21 years of age to legally consume alcoholic beverages in Texas with certain exceptions , as in any other state in the United States .
However , employment at a company serving alcoholic beverages can be entered into at age 18 provided they get certified by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission .
No specific training is required to serve alcohol ; however , the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code states that the actions of an employee ( such as serving alcohol to a clearly intoxicated patron ) will not be imputed to the employer if 1 ) the employer requires the employee to complete training approved by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission , 2 )
the employee actually completes the training , and 3 ) the employer has not directly encouraged the employee to violate the law .
OPEN CONTAINER LAWS Section::::Open container laws .
All previously opened containers of alcoholic beverages must be stored and transported in a vehicle 's trunk ( or behind the last row of seats in the case a vehicle does not have a partitioned trunk ) or other storage to which the driver and or any passengers do not have access .
BLOOD ALCOHOL CONTENT LIMITS Section::::Blood alcohol content limits .
An operator of a motor vehicle is considered under the influence of alcohol if a chemical screening test shows a blood - alcohol content of 0.08 percent or higher .
No other evidence ( such as Field Sobriety tests ) need be presented to the court to obtain a DUI ( driving under the influence ) conviction .
A driver testing 0.15 percent or more over the legal limit of 0.08 percent faces more severe penalties for enhanced BAC .
When under the age of 21 , a driver in Texas must not test positive for any blood - alcohol content ( BAC ) and may be charged with DUI even if the amount tested is under 0.08 percent .
SEE ALSO
* Law of Texas REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* alcohollaws.org
* tabc.state.tx.us