AUTOMATIC AND CONTROLLED PROCESSES
Automatic and controlled processes ( ACP ) are the two categories of cognitive processing .
All cognitive processes fall into one or both of those two categories .
The amounts of " processing power " , attention , and effort a process requires is the primary factor used to determine whether it 's a controlled or an automatic process .
An automatic process is capable of occurring without the need for attention , and the awareness of the initiation or operation of the process , and without drawing upon general processing resources or interfering with other concurrent thought processes .
Put simply , an automatic process is unintentional , involuntary , effortless ( not consumptive of limited processing capacity ) , and occurring outside awareness .
Controlled processes are defined as a process that is under the flexible , intentional control of the individual , that he or she is consciously aware of , and that are effortful and constrained by the amount of attentional resources available at the moment .
CHARACTERISTICS AUTOMATIC PROCESSES Section::::Characteristics .
Section::::Automatic processes .
When examining the label " automatic " in social psychology , we find that some processes are intended , and others require recent conscious and intentional processing of related information .
That being said automatic effects fall into three classes : Those that occur prior to conscious awareness ( preconscious ) ; those that require some form of conscious processing but that produce an unintended outcome ( postconscious ) ; and those that require a specific type of intentional , goal directed processing ( goal - dependent ) .
Preconscious automaticity requires only the triggering proximal stimulus event , and occur prior to or in the absence of any conscious awareness of that event .
Because they occur without our conscious awareness they are unnoticeable , uncontrollable , and nearly effortless .
Many previous studies suggest that the mere perception of the physical behaviors of others , as well as abstract categories ( race , gender , role - related ) that occurs passively in person perception results in increased tendencies to behave in the same way oneself .
So basically a stimulus may that be person , object , or an action will unconsciously affect one 's response and or behavior without one 's knowledge .
In a study they subliminally exposed one of the participants with an African American face or a Caucasian face before the participants engaged in a verbal game .
The study concluded that when participants were subliminally exposed to the African American faces they were significantly more aggressive in the verbal game than those exposed to the Caucasian face .
In a study related to this the participants were required to play a video game that depicted a real - life situation that involved deciding to shoot a man with a gun .
Participants were shown pictures of both Caucasian and African American men with or without a gun or another object in hand .
The participants had to respond " Shoot " or " Not Shoot " within milliseconds .
The results were that participants significantly decided to shoot faster when African Americans had a gun versus Caucasians .
Postconscious automaticity depends on recent conscious experience for its occurrence .
This postconscious influence on processing can be defined as the non - conscious consequences of conscious thought .
The conscious experience may be intentional , or it may be unintentional , what is important is that the material be in awareness .
Most things we are aware of are driven by the environment , and one does not intend or control the flood of these perceptual experiences , yet they still result in postconscious effects .
In other words , we need to consciously engage in something and depending on the experience we will unconsciously think , and or behave a certain way .
In the classic Bobo doll experiment a child watches a video of an adult acting aggressive towards a Bobo doll .
Later when the child is put in the room with that same doll , the child was more likely to also engage in that act , versus children who did n't watch the video .
In a study participants were primed with the stereotype of professors by being told to imagine a typical professor for 5 min and to list ( a conscious act )
the behaviors , lifestyle , and appearance attributes of this typical professor .
After they were primed they had to perform a general knowledge task .
The results were that the participants in the professor condition outperformed those in the control conditions ( those not primed at all ) .
Goal - dependent automaticity concerns skill and thought processes that require a goal to engage in them .
This process is much similar to postconscious in that it requires conscious awareness to be initiated , but after that it can be guided outside of awareness by the unconscious mind .
A good example would be driving a car : in order to drive a car , one needs to consciously have a goal to drive somewhere .
When engaged in driving ( only with enough practice ) one can almost operate the car almost entirely without conscious awareness .
However , more attentional control and decision making are needed when introduced to novel ( reference ) situations like driving through an unfamiliar town .
The process needs to be learned enough that it can be automatic , requiring little conscious thought as to how to do it .
CONTROLLED PROCESSES
Section::::Controlled processes .
One definition of a controlled process is an intentionally - initiated sequence of cognitive activities .
In other words , when attention is required for a task , we are consciously aware and in control .
Controlled processes require us to think about situations , evaluate and make decisions .
An example would be reading this article .
We are required to read and understand the concepts of these processes and it takes effort to think conceptually .
Controlled processes are thought to be slower , since by definition they require effortful control ; therefore , they generally can not be conducted simultaneously with other controlled processes without task - switching or impaired performance .
So the drawback of controlled processes is that humans are thought to have a limited capacity for overtly controlling behavior .
Being tightly capacity - limited , controlled processing imposes considerable limitations on speed and the ability to multitask .
In a study , participants were randomly assigned into two conditions , one requiring one task ( small cognitive load ) and one requiring two tasks ( heavy cognitive load ) .
In the one - task condition , participants were told that they would hear an anti- or pro - abortion speech and would have to diagnose the speaker 's attitude toward abortion .
The two - task condition had the same first assignment , but they were required to switch spots with the speaker and take their place after that .
Even after being specifically told that they would be given further instructions at the next step , their cognitive load was affected in this study .
Participants in the two - task condition performed more poorly than the one - task condition simply because they had the next task on their mind ( they had extra cognitive load ) .
Basically , the more tasks someone tries to manage at the same time , the more their performance will suffer .
PROCESSES
WITH AMBIGUOUS CATEGORIZATION Section::::Processes with ambiguous categorization .
Some cognitive processes are difficult to categorize as distinctly automatic or controlled , either because they contain components of both types of process or because the phenomena are difficult to define or observe .
An example of the former is driving a car .
An example of the latter is flow .
FLOW Section::::Flow .
Flow has been described as involving highly focused attention on the task at hand , loss of self - consciousness , and distorted time perception , among other cognitive characteristics .
Some people report that during flow states they are less aware of autonomic responses such as hunger , fatigue , and discomfort .
Some researchers hypothesize that because of this , some challenging tasks can counterintuitively require less effort to perform .
Flow has been difficult to study , however , because it is difficult to produce in a controlled laboratory setting .
Most experiments have relied heavily on correlating the presence of flow with various attributes of the task and the subjects ' reported experiences .
Of those correlations , subjects experiencing flow generally report that they perceive a good match between the task requirements and their skills ( e.g. a professional basketball player in a professional basketball game . )
Task structure and the clarity of the goal of the task are also thought to be related to when flow occurs .
All of these aspects of flow imply that there must be an opportunity to suppress other controlled processes , as well as inhibit certain types of automatic processes .
A study involving video game performance showed that flow in participants ( determined based on a self - report survey of flow characteristics ) strongly correlated with performance in the game .
A related study attempted to inhibit and induce flow by biasing the moods of participants .
The experimenters found that flow could be inhibited by a negative mood , but could not be induced by a positive mood .
" A person does not need to be told to pay attention to a stimulus that captures attention quickly and effortlessly .
In many cases , explicitly directing one 's own or another 's attention is necessary due to the presence of another stimulus that more easily captures attention .
In the case of flow , however , an action that would normally grab one 's attention is ignored , and many automatic processes are either suppressed ( such as stimulus - driven attention changes ) or ignored ( such as discomfort . )
On the other hand , situations in which autonomy is encroached upon ( for example , if the individual must always control his / her actions to abide by rules imposed by the task ) are thought to inhibit flow .
This implies that another requirement of flow is to be free from constraints that force controlled processes to be used .
Additionally , several areas of research indicate that during a state of flow an otherwise - controlled process becomes automatic allowing it to behave dominant over all other automatic processes .
SEE ALSO
* Conscious mind
* Dual process theory
* Modularity of mind REFERENCES