WAITING
ALL NIGHT
" Waiting All Night " is a song by English drum and bass band Rudimental .
It features the vocals from English singer Ella Eyre .
The song was released in the United Kingdom on 14 April 2013 as the fourth single from their debut studio album , Home ( 2013 ) .
The song reached number one in the UK Singles Chart and has also charted in Australia and Belgium .
The group , along with Eyre , performed a live version of the song for BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge , which features on the Live Lounge 2013 compilation album .
A mashup of the song with Bastille 's " Pompeii " was performed live by Rudimental , Eyre and Bastille at the 2014 BRIT Awards .
The mashup entered the UK Singles Chart at number 21 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the song a positive review stating :
" I 've been waiting all night for you to tell me what you want , " singer Ella Eyre 's warm and tender vocal declares over steadily rising drum - step and synthesised organ , before the chorus bursts open with soul - flying brass .
It may echo much of their previous hits – if not with a slightly darker edge – but nevertheless their sound is one they can officially claim to dominate . .
MUSIC VIDEO Section::::Music video .
A music video to accompany the release of " Waiting All Night " was first released onto YouTube on 4 April 2013 at a total length of five minutes and fourteen seconds .
The music video is the inspirational true life - story of San Francisco - born BMX champion and actor Kurt Yaeger , who became an amputee after an accident in 2006 .
All the characters in the clip are professional BMX'ers and the real friends of Yaeger .
Director Nez Khammal approached him after he found his information on his website and told Yaeger that the band was interested in his story .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
At the 2014 Brit Awards , the song won the British Single of the Year .
USAGE IN MEDIA Section::::Usage in media .
" Waiting All Night " was featured in the promo of MTV Latin America Music in on .
An instrumental version of the song is used in BBC 's Match of the Day 2 as background music to Goal of the Month , and is also used by Sky Sports during touchdown round - ups in their NFL coverage .
The song is also featured in Lexus International 's video " The Lexus Hoverboard : It 's here " , which unveils their new hoverboard .
TRACK LISTING
CHARTS AND CERTIFICATIONS WEEKLY CHARTS Section::::Charts and certifications .
Section::::Weekly charts . !
Chart ( 2013 ) !
Peakposition YEAR - END CHARTS Section::::Year - end charts . !
scope="col"Chart ( 2013 ) !
scope="col"Position !
scope="row"Hungarian Airplay Chart
align="center"42 !
scope="row
" New Zealand ( Recorded Music NZ )
align="center"49 CERTIFICATIONS RELEASE
HISTORY Section::::Release history .
!
scope="col " Region ! scope="col " Date ! scope="col " Format ! scope="col " Label REFERENCES