FRANKLIN LEONARD Franklin Leonard is an American film executive best known for founding The Black List , a yearly publication featuring Hollywood 's most popular unproduced screenplays .
After working as a development executive for Overbrook Entertainment and Universal Pictures , Leonard is currently an adviser to BoomGen Studios and Plympton .
Leonard serves on the board of directors for Young Storytellers .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
After graduating magna cum laude from Harvard University in 2000 in Social Studies , Leonard began his career as the Communications Director for John Cranley 's campaign for the United States House of Representatives in Ohio 's first district .
He went on to work as a columnist for the Trinidad Guardian , an analyst for McKinsey & Company , and an assistant for Creative Artists Agency .
Beginning in 2004 , Leonard worked as a development executive for John Goldwyn Productions , Appian Way Productions , and Mirage Entertainment .
While working at Appian Way in 2005 , he came up with the concept behind " The Black List , " forwarding a spreadsheet to seventy five fellow producers to collect the names of well - known but unproduced screenplays .
After becoming an instant success , The Black List was adapted into a website and has provided over two hundred screenplays which later became feature films .
The vast majority of The Black List scripts however were already purchased or commissioned by large studios , prior to being placed on The Black List .
Leonard went on to become one of the youngest executives at Universal Pictures , serving as Director of Development and Production .
Two years later , he was Vice President of Creative Affairs at Will Smith 's production company , Overbrook Entertainment .
Leonard shared the title with Smith 's brother - in - law Caleeb Pinkett , and later left the company after two years .
Besides his full - time work on The Black List , Leonard is currently an adviser to Plympton , a literary studio that specializes in serialized fiction , and BoomGen Studios , where he assisted in developing the transmedia graphic novel 1001 .
He is also a Judge on the Afrinolly Short Film Competition ; Africa 's most prestigious Short Film Competition with a $ 25,000 first place cash prize to winners .
He currently serves on the board of directors for Young Storytellers , an arts education nonprofit organization .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Franklin Leonard interview with Scripts & Scribes .
REFERENCES