RESTRICTIONS ON CELL PHONE USE WHILE DRIVING IN THE UNITED STATES Various laws in the United States regulate the use of mobile phones and other electronics by motorists .
Different states take different approaches .
Some laws affect only novice drivers or commercial drivers , while some laws affect all drivers .
Some laws target handheld devices only , while other laws affect both handheld and handsfree devices .
REGULATORY LAWS Section::::Regulatory laws .
The laws regulating driving ( or distracted driving ) may be subject to primary enforcement or secondary enforcement by state , county or local authorities .
All State - level cell phone use laws in the United States are of the primary enforcement type — meaning an officer may cite a driver for using a hand - held cell phone without any other traffic offense having taken place — except in some cases involving newer ( or " novice " ) , drivers .
In the case of secondary enforcement , a police officer may only stop or cite a driver for a cell phone use violation if the driver has committed another primary violation ( such as speeding , failure to stop , etc . )
at the same time .
A federal transportation funding law passed in July 2012 , known as the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act ( MAP-21 ) , provided $ 17.5 million in grants during fiscal year 2013 for states with primary enforcement laws against distracted driving , including laws prohibiting cell phone use while driving .
States with secondary enforcement laws or no laws at all are ineligible to receive this grant funding .
LAWS BY STATE Section::::Laws by state .
No state bans all cell phone use for all drivers .
However , California , Connecticut , Delaware , Georgia , Hawaii , Illinois , Maryland , Nevada , New Hampshire , New Jersey , New Mexico , New York , Oregon , Vermont , Washington , West Virginia ( plus Washington , D.C. , Puerto Rico , Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands ) prohibit all drivers from using hand - held cell phones while driving .
Thirty - six states and Washington , D.C. ban all cell phone use by newer drivers , while 19 states and Washington , D.C. prohibit any cell phone use by school bus drivers if children are present .
+ Cell Phone Restrictions While Driving in the US and Territories !
State !
Total handheld device ban applied to : !
Any cell phone use by driver prohibited if : !
Bus driver use restriction(s ) !
Texting & Internet Access !
class =
unsortableComment July 1 , 2017 updated the texting law to be enforced as a primary reason an officer can stop you .
" Texting " is defined as : texting , internet browsing , playing games , and reading social media applications .
If proven you were " texting " during a traffic fatality , it is deemed a Class C felony , and you can be put into prison for up to 10 years .
* ( 2nd Offense )
$ 250 Fine .
*
* ( 3rd Offense )
$ 500 Fine , + a 2-year suspension of drivers license .
* New Jersey all ( primary violation ) on permit or provisional license ( primary violation ) .
totally prohibited PREEMPTION LAWS Section::::Preemption Laws .
Often , local authorities pass their own distracted driving bans — most include the use of cell phones while driving .
Several states ( Florida , Kentucky , Louisiana , Mississippi , Nevada , Pennsylvania , and Oklahoma ) have prohibited localities from enacting their own laws regarding cell phone use .
COST OF DISTRACTED DRIVING Section::::Cost of distracted driving .
A 2014 report from the National Safety Council , which compiles data on injuries and fatalities from 2013 and earlier , concluded that use of mobile phones caused 26 % of U.S. car accidents .
Just 5 % of mobile phone - related accidents in the U.S. involved texting : " The majority of the accidents involve drivers distracted while talking on handheld or hands - free cellphones . "
The U.S. Department of Transportation has established an official website to combat distracted driving , Distraction.gov .
In 2010 , the State Farm insurance company stated that mobile phone use annually resulted in : 636,000 crashes , 330,000 personal injuries , 12,000 major injuries , 2,700 deaths , and $ 43 billion in damages .
SEE ALSO
* Texting while driving REFERENCES FURTHER READING