CEDAR COVE ( TV SERIES ) Cedar Cove is an American - Canadian drama television series on the Hallmark Channel that aired for three seasons from July 20 , 2013 , to September 26 , 2015 .
Based on author Debbie Macomber 's book series of the same name , Cedar Cove focused on Municipal Court Judge Olivia Lockhart 's professional and personal life and the townsfolk surrounding her .
It was the network 's first - ever original scripted series .
On December 1 , 2015 , it was announced that the series was cancelled and would not be renewed for a fourth season .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Cedar Cove is a quaint , picturesque town on an island in Puget Sound in Washington state .
Its residents are old fashioned in their values , neighbors on the most part trying to help neighbors , and people not locking their doors in their trust of their neighbors .
The moral center and compass of the town is Olivia Lockhart , the bicycle riding , scarf wearing municipal court judge who grew up in the town .
Regardless of her being the focus for many in town , Olivia 's life has not been issue - free , she long ago having gone through a divorce from her physician ex - husband , the dissolution of their marriage largely due to the accidental drowning death of their son , Jordan , when he was thirteen , that incident from which they as a couple could not recover .
Also affected was Jordan 's twin sister , Justine , now a young woman , who has been struggling to find her place in life ever since .
Much like the town is being pulled in different directions , such as by cutthroat developer Warren Saget , Olivia is often pulled in different directions , personally and professionally , which one day may take her away from Cedar Cove .
In the former category is her search for love .
Through it all , she acts as supporter to her friends and family , including librarian Grace Sherman , her best friend since they were children .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN CAST
* Andie MacDowell as Olivia Lockhart , Cedar Cove Municipal Court judge
* Dylan Neal as Jack Griffith , editor of the local newspaper , the Cedar Cove Chronicle , an admitted recovering alcoholic , and Olivia 's love interest * Teryl Rothery as Grace Sherman , Olivia 's librarian best friend * Sarah Smyth as Justine Lockhart , Olivia 's artistic daughter who is an insecure person , largely because of the death of her twin brother Jordan when they were thirteen and the resulting dissolution of her parents ' marriage * Brennan Elliott as Warren Saget , a cutthroat Cedar Cove land developer
* Bruce Boxleitner and Barbara Niven as Bob and Peggy Beldon , a married couple and owners of the local bed & breakfast , ' Thyme and Tide ' , * Timothy Webber as Moon , the aged hippie proprietor of Moon 's , a cafe / knick - knack store * Corey Sevier as Seth Gunderson , Justine 's high school boyfriend who , now a commercial fisher , returns to town in hopes of renewing their relationship together .
Was portrayed by Greyston Holt in the pilot episode .
( seasons 1 & 2 )
* Paula Shaw as Charlotte Jeffers , Olivia 's headstrong mother ( season 1 )
* Delilah ( voiceover only ) , a nationally syndicated radio host who provides quotes and inspirational passages as the host of her radio show in - universe in a fictional sense .
These set up some of the plot devices which occur throughout each episode .
( season 1 ) * Elyse Levesque as Maryellen Sherman , Grace 's daughter ( seasons 1 & 3 , recurring season 2 )
* Sebastian Spence as Cliff Harting , a rancher .
He was estranged from his father ,
once famous country singer Tom Harting , at the time of Tom 's death .
( seasons 2 & 3 , recurring season 1 )
* Tom Stevens as Eric Griffith , Jack 's irresponsible son who blames much of that irresponsibility on the fact that he had no male role model growing up ( season 2 , recurring seasons 1 & 3 ) * Jesse Hutch as Luke Bailey , an ex - Navy SEAL suffering from PTSD ( seasons 2 & 3 ) * Emily Tennant as Cecilia Rendall , a high school friend of Justine 's ( season 2 , recurring season 3 ) .
Portrayed by Katharine Isabelle in the series ' pilot .
* Cameron Bancroft as Will Jeffers , Olivia 's philandering brother ( season 3 , recurring seasons 1 & 2 )
* Cindy Busby as Rebecca Jennings , the young , ambitious assistant district attorney ( season 3 , recurring season 2 )
* Rebecca Marshall as Alex Baldwin , a ranch hand , ex - stockbroker and recovering alcoholic ( season 3 , recurring season 2 )
* Colin Ferguson as Paul Watson , the new DA ( season 3 )
* Tom Butler as Buck Saget , Warren 's wealthy businessman father ( season 3 ) RECURRING CAST
* Charlie Carrick as John Bowman , an artist and chef , who served jail time for a crime committed by his brother , and who ends up as Maryellen 's love interest .
Portrayed by Giles Panton beginning in season 3 .
* Hayley Sales as Shelly , Eric 's folk singing girlfriend
* Mike Dopud as Roy Mcafee , a private investigator * Jesse Moss as Ian Rendall , Cecilia 's military husband * Garry Chalk as Cedar Cove Sheriff Troy Davis ( seasons 1 & 2 )
* Matreya Fedor as Allison Weston , a high school student who volunteers at the library ( seasons 1 & 2 ) * Andrew Airlie as Stan Lockhart , Olivia 's ex - husband and Justine 's father , who left the family following the death of their son Jordan , Justine 's twin brother .
He is a Seattle - based physician , and is remarried .
( season 1 ) * Julia Benson as Jeri Drake , a journalist and one of Jack 's ex - wives ( seasons 2 & 3 ) * Chris William Martin as Anthony , the district attorney ( season 2 & 3 )
* Sarah - Jane Redmond as Corrie Mcafee , Roy 's wife ( season 3 )
* Anna Van Hooft as Linnette Mcafee , Roy & Corrie 's daughter , a Physician Assistant ( season 3 )
* Andrew Francis as Derek , Seth 's fisher friend ( season 3 )
* Tara Wilson as Gloria Ashton , the daughter Roy and Corrie gave up for adoption ( season 3 )
* Laura Mennell as Kelly , Warren 's estranged wife ( season 3 ) * Bruce Dawson as David , the hands - on owner of the Seattle Chronicle ( season 3 ) PRODUCTION SETTING AND FILMING
Section::::Production . Section::::Setting and filming .
Although filmed in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , the setting for the series ( both book and television ) is based on Port Orchard , Washington , producer / writer Debbie Macomber 's summer residence .
" Cedar Cove " is the community of Deep Cove in North Vancouver , BC .
Macomber stated that she tried to get the series filmed in Washington .
" We did get tax incentives [ for filmmakers ] back
but the problem is we do n't have the infrastructure Canada does , " she said .
With the announcement of the July 19 , 2014 , premiere date for the second season , Hallmark also announced that Sue Tenney , executive producer and writer for 7th Heaven , would take over as series showrunner .
BOOK TO TELEVISION DEVIATION Section::::Book to television deviation .
In the book series , Grace 's husband is disturbed by his actions in the Vietnam War and commits suicide , but , for the television series , Macomber revealed that the network considered that " too heavy " of a storyline .
Instead , Grace arrives home from vacation to announce her husband is divorcing her .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Cedar Cove was given " generally favorable " reviews at the Metacritic website , based on the aggregate score of 62 out of 100 from ten critics .
The Wall Street Journals Nancy DeWolf Smith called the series " relaxing , " adding that it is " as burden - free as a day on the beach with an umbrella , a book and a breeze .
"
Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times commented , " Despite a certain built - in B&B preciousness , Cedar Cove evokes certain splendid shows of another time and place , including the late - great Family and the longtime Irish hit Ballykissangel . ' "
The New York Timess Neil Genzlinger commented that the " able " cast " makes it stand out from the stream of interchangeable Hallmark movies that aim for the same tone and audience . "
Ellen Gray of the Philadelphia Daily News commented on the difference between Hallmark 's standard fare and Cedar Cove , " While [ Hallmark ] movies are often forced to rush headlong toward their happy endings , a series can take more time .
And in [ the ] four subsequent episodes I 've seen , the stories and characters get to breathe a bit . "
The New York Posts Linda Stasi stated , " It ai n't brain surgery and nobody 's going to win any Emmys , but that 's not why fans watch Hallmark .
"
David Hinckley of New York 's Daily News stated , " From the early evidence ...
there 's every indication a Hallmark series will be the same sort of television comfort food as a Hallmark movie . "
The Pittsburgh Post - Gazettes Rob Owen called the series " comfortable , uncomplicated , unchallenging entertainment , " adding , " which makes it ideal for Hallmark 's brand .
Fans of Hallmark 's movies will enjoy it ; viewers who want to be more engaged and absorbed by a program may be bored . "
Brian Lowry of Variety
stated,"There 's still a distinction to be drawn between ' light ' and ' weightless , ' which is roughly where this new show registers — in part because the Olivia - Jack relationship is the only aspect with any resonance . "
Ratings for Cedar Cove made Hallmark the top cable channel for its time slot on Saturdays .
EPISODES
INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTION
Section::::International distribution .
The show began airing in the United Kingdom on 5 USA from February 9 , 2014 .
The second season aired in the UK from May through June 2015 in a series of feature - length episodes , each consisting of two standard episodes .
The show began airing in Turkey on Dizimax Drama on 5 March 2014 .
The show began airing in Greece on NovaCinema 1 , NovaCinemaHD on June 4 , 2014 .
The show began airing in Germany on Sat.1 Emotions on March 18 , 2014 , and aired Tuesdays at 8 p.m. The free - TV premiere took place on January 6 , 2015 on the German Disney Channel .
The show began airing in Italy on Rai1 on July 1 , 2015 , and airs Wednesdays at 9 p.m. Series 2 was shown immediately afterwards , starting on 18 August 2015 airing on Tuesday and Wednesday nights in blocks of three episodes , finishing on 26 August 2015 .
In Brazil , it began to appear in the Brazilian cable channel Mais Globosat on January 23 , 2018 .
HOME MEDIA RELEASE Section::::Home media release .
On July 15 , 2014 , Cinedigm ( under license from Hallmark ) released the first season of Cedar Cove in a three - disc DVD set .
On July 14 , 2015 , the second season was also released in a three - disc DVD set .
A three - disc DVD set of the third and final season was released on March 15 , 2016 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS