THE SECRET LIFE OF WALTER MITTY ( 2013 FILM )
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty is a 2013 American adventure comedy - drama film directed , co - produced by and starring Ben Stiller and written by Steve Conrad .
The film also stars Kristen Wiig , Shirley MacLaine , Adam Scott , Kathryn Hahn , and Sean Penn .
This is the second film adaptation of James Thurber 's 1939 short story The Secret Life of Walter Mitty .
The film premiered at the New York Film Festival on October 5 , 2013 .
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty was theatrically released by 20th Century Fox , Samuel Goldwyn Films and New Line Cinema on December 25 , 2013 in North America to generally mixed reception , but was a moderate box office success .
The film was chosen by the National Board of Review as one of the top ten films of 2013 .
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty was released on DVD and Blu - ray on April 15 , 2014 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Walter Mitty is a negative assets manager at Life magazine who daydreams of adventures and has a crush on a coworker named Cheryl .
Mitty works with photojournalist Sean O'Connell , whose images are highly regarded .
O'Connell has sent Mitty his latest negatives and a wallet as a gift in appreciation of Mitty 's work .
O'Connell believes negative # 25 captures the " quintessence of life " and that it should be used for the cover of the magazine 's final print issue as it converts to online status .
The negative is missing , forcing Walter to stall for time with corporate transition manager Ted Hendricks , who is handling the downsizing .
While he views the other negatives , Cheryl suggests that Mitty think of the negatives as clues to Sean 's location .
They look at three of them , including one of a person 's thumb with a unique ring on it , and another of a curved piece of wood .
A third picture of a boat leads Mitty to ascertain that O'Connell is in Greenland .
Mitty flies there to find him .
A bartender in Nuuk explains that O'Connell left on a ship .
To find him , Mitty would need to go on the postal helicopter , and the pilot is drunk .
Mitty recognizes the pilot 's thumb with the unique ring .
After he imagines Cheryl singing " Space Oddity " , Mitty gains a new confidence and boards the helicopter despite misgivings .
Mitty learns the helicopter can not land upon the ship .
Misunderstanding the pilot , Mitty falls into the ocean rather than jumping into a dinghy boat .
He splashes down into ice - cold , shark - infested waters , losing a box of ship - to - shore radio components before being brought aboard .
Mitty learns that O'Connell departed the ship earlier .
The crew offers him clementine cake O'Connell left behind ;
Mitty discovers O'Connell 's destinations in the wrapping paper .
The itinerary directs Mitty to Iceland , where O'Connell is photographing the volcano Eyjafjallajökull .
He arrives at the village of Skógar near the volcano using a longboard , and notices O'Connell on a plane flying near the volcano .
An eruption forces Mitty to flee , and he obeys a text message recalling him to New York .
For failing to recover the negative , Mitty is fired .
He learns that Cheryl , who was let go earlier , seems to have reconciled with her estranged husband .
Mitty returns home discouraged and visits his mother , throwing away the wallet he received from O'Connell .
To his surprise , Mitty recognizes the curve of the piano in his mother 's house while looking at the last photograph .
When asked , she mentions having met O'Connell .
She told Mitty earlier , but he was daydreaming and failed to hear her .
Mitty discovers O'Connell is in the Himalayas , and finds him photographing a rare snow leopard .
When asked about the negative , O'Connell explains that the message on the gift wrapping to " look inside " was literal ; the negative was in the wallet .
When pressed to reveal the image on the negative , O'Connell dismisses the question and joins in a high - altitude football ( soccer ) game with some locals .
Mitty flies to Los Angeles but is detained by airport security during a misunderstanding .
Mitty calls the only person he knows in Los Angeles :
Todd Maher , a representative at eHarmony who has kept in contact during Mitty 's adventures .
While helping his mother sell her piano , Mitty recounts his story but mentions he discarded the wallet .
His mother gives him the wallet , which she retrieved from the trash .
Finding the negative , an emboldened Mitty delivers it to Life magazine , telling management that it was the photograph O'Connell wanted for the final issue , and berates Hendricks for disrespecting the staff that made the magazine so honored before walking away from the office .
Mitty reunites with Cheryl , telling her that he has been thinking about and inspired by her , and learns that Cheryl 's ex - husband was only at her house to repair the refrigerator .
Mitty tells Cheryl of his adventures and admits that he does not know what negative # 25 shows .
Mitty and Cheryl see the final issue of Life at a newsstand , with its cover dedicated to the staff .
It is accompanied by the photograph from negative # 25 , showing Mitty sitting outside of the Life building , examining a contact sheet .
Mitty and Cheryl continue their walk down the street holding hands .
CAST
* Ben Stiller as Walter Mitty , a negative asset manager at Life
* Kristen Wiig as Cheryl Melhoff , Walter 's love interest and co - worker * Shirley MacLaine as Edna Mitty , Walter 's mother * Adam Scott as Ted Hendricks , Walter 's boss * Kathryn Hahn as Odessa Mitty , Walter 's sister * Patton Oswalt as Todd Maher , an eHarmony customer service representative * Adrian Martinez as Hernando , Walter 's understudy and co - worker * Ólafur Darri Ólafsson as a Greenlandic helicopter pilot
* Sean Penn as Sean O'Connell , a photojournalist
* Jon Daly as Tim Naughton , one of Walter 's co - workers * Terence Bernie Hines as Gary Mannheim , one of Walter 's co - workers * Marcus Antturi as Rich Melhoff , Cheryl 's son * Kai Lennox as Phil Melhoff , Cheryl 's ex - husband * Conan O'Brien as himself
* Andy Richter as himself
* Joey Slotnick as a retirement home administrator
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Producer Samuel Goldwyn , Jr. , whose father produced the 1947 film adaptation , conceived the idea of doing a remake in 1994 with Jim Carrey in mind for the title role .
Walt Disney Pictures was enthusiastic to purchase the remake rights , but Goldwyn instead chose New Line Cinema , which held a positive working relationship with Carrey on Dumb and Dumber and The Mask ( both 1994 ) .
The studio bought the rights in 1995 with the understanding that The Samuel Goldwyn Company would be involved in creative decisions .
Babaloo Mandel and Lowell Ganz turned in the first draft of the screenplay in July 1997 .
Ron Howard entered negotiations to direct the same month , and to cover producing duties with Brian Grazer and Imagine Entertainment .
Howard and Imagine Entertainment eventually left the project in favor of EDtv , and The Secret Life of Walter Mitty languished in development hell over the challenges of using a contemporary storyline .
In May 1999 , New Line hired The Mask director Chuck Russell to rewrite the script and serve as Howard 's replacement .
Filming was set to begin in early 2000 , but was pushed back .
Around this time , Peter Tolan worked on rewrites .
In May 2001 , Goldwyn filed a lawsuit against New Line for breach of contract .
Goldwyn claimed that the studio extended their 1995 deal until May 2001 , but then announced that it wanted to transfer the rights for the remake to another company and have Goldwyn surrender his creative input .
In November 2002 , New Line was forced to revert the film rights back to Goldwyn , who won his lawsuit and took the property to Paramount Pictures .
During pre - production discussions between Paramount and DreamWorks on Lemony Snicket 's A Series of Unfortunate Events ( which starred Carrey ) , Steven Spielberg , head of DreamWorks , rekindled interest in working with Carrey ; the duo previously considered Meet the Parents , but the outing fell apart .
In May 2003 , Spielberg agreed to direct , and brought in DreamWorks to co - finance The Secret Life of Walter Mitty with Paramount ( which would acquire DreamWorks in 2006 ) .
By November , Zach Helm was rewriting the script , but Spielberg and DreamWorks vacated the film in April 2004 in favor of War of the Worlds and Munich .
" The goal is to go back to the short story and capture not only the content but the original spirit , " producer John Goldwyn ( son of Samuel ) told The Hollywood Reporter .
Screenwriter Richard LaGravenese entered discussion to write a new script following Spielberg 's departure .
Sam Goldwyn commented that LaGravenese 's script had a momentous and unique approach compared to others .
" I 'd always felt that unless we got a great script , the movie disintegrates into a series of wonderful gags , " Goldwyn explained .
" Writers always fixated on that .
[ Richard ] worked for 10 months on umpteen drafts , and he solved it .
"
In March 2005 , Paramount hired Mark Waters to direct LaGravenese 's script for Walter Mitty , but Carrey had to drop out due to scheduling conflicts .
He was soon replaced by Owen Wilson .
Despite not having a final budget , Paramount scheduled a December 12 , 2005 start date because their option on the remake rights was to end one week later ; they would lose the rights if they did not start filming before December 20 .
Wilson dropped out in October 2005 over creative differences .
The Hollywood Reporter also speculated that Walter Mitty began to falter after Paramount failed to cast a female lead to star opposite Wilson .
Scarlett Johansson had reportedly emerged as the front - runner after screen testing with Wilson earlier in October , but a deal was never signed with the actress .
Paramount executives Brad Grey and Gail Berman decided to put Walter Mitty in turnaround in November 2005 .
Goldwyn found favor at 20th Century Fox and , in May 2007 , it was announced that Mike Myers was attached to star in the title role .
Jay Kogen was hired to write a new script that would be specifically tailored for Myers .
In April 2010 , Sacha Baron Cohen was offered and accepted the lead role .
Later that month , The Pursuit of Happyness writer Steven Conrad was hired to pen the screenplay , with Gore Verbinski announced as director in June 2010 .
In April 2011 , it was announced that Ben Stiller had been cast in the lead role , though no director was attached .
The following July , it was announced that Stiller was also due to direct the film .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
In January 2012 , it was announced that Kristen Wiig would play the female lead , with Shirley MacLaine attached to play the mother of Ben Stiller 's character .
This was followed by reports in February that Patton Oswalt and Adam Scott joined the film .
In April 2012 , Kathryn Hahn was cast as Odessa , Walter 's sister , and Josh Charles was cast as the ex - husband of Kristen Wiig 's character , though he was replaced by Kai Lennox .
Later that month , Sean Penn was cast in what was described as a " small but pivotal supporting role " as photojournalist Sean O'Connell .
The portions of the film set in Nuuk , Greenland , were in fact shot in Stykkishólmur , a village on the Snæfellsnes peninsula in Iceland , and Höfn , a village in southeast Iceland .
Later sequences set in Stykkishólmur were actually filmed in Seyðisfjörður .
The sequences where Walter Mitty follows Sean to Afghanistan were also filmed in Iceland , at the Skogafoss waterfall and in Vatnajökull National Park .
During the skateboarding scene in Central Park , skateboarding legend Rodney Mullen served as Ben Stiller 's stunt double .
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
When Ben Stiller 's character lands at Nuuk in Greenland , he asks the man in the airport booth : " Do you have any cars available ? "
" Yeah , we have a blue one and a red one " , the man replies .
" I 'll take the red one " , says Walter .
" The choice between the red and blue car at the rental car lot is worthy of mention , if only because it almost candidly pulls the idea from the red pill of The Matrix .
Two jelly bean , or pill , shaped cars , red and blue ; the only thing missing is Lawrence Fishburne working the counter " .
" The passage connecting reality to illusion is often visualised using tangible things and physical environments [ as ] Neo took the red pill in The Matrix . " RELEASE Section::::Release .
In April 2013 , nearly 20 minutes of footage was presented by Fox at CinemaCon in Las Vegas followed by a theatrical trailer release in July , both of which began to spark awards speculation .
The film made its world premiere as the Centerpiece Gala presentation at the New York Film Festival on October 5 , 2013 .
It was also selected to serve as the Centerpiece Gala presentation at the 2013 AFI Film Festival .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
20th Century Fox hired filmmaker Casey Neistat to make a promotional video based on the theme of " live your dreams " but Neistat suggested instead to spend the budget on bringing disaster relief to the Philippines in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan .
Fox agreed and gave him a budget of $ 25,000 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty was released on DVD and Blu - ray on April 15 , 2014 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film received polarized reviews from critics .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 51 % based on reviews from 182 critics , with an average rating of 6/10 .
The site 's consensus reads : " It does n't lack for ambition , but The Secret Life of Walter Mitty fails to back up its grand designs with enough substance to anchor the spectacle . "
Metacritic gives the film a normalized score of 54/100 based on reviews from 39 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a B+ rating .
Peter Debruge of Variety magazine criticized the film for lacking the satirical tone of the original story , comparing the film to " a feature - length ' Just Do It ' ad " for the middle - aged audience the film is targeting .
Debruge notes that the script downplays the comedy , and that a scene inspired by The Curious Case of Benjamin Button shows the film could have been made funnier , but that the more serious emotional dimension ultimately makes the film feel more substantial .
The film had its share of admirers , however .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film a positive review , saying " In his uniquely funny and unexpectedly tender movie , Stiller takes us on a personal journey of lingering resonance . "
Joe Neumaier of New York Daily awarded the film five out of five stars , saying " The story Stiller tells manages to float in a most peculiar , satisfying way .
"
Political radio show host and film critic Michael Medved was also positive concerning the film , calling it " one of the feel - good movies of the year .
" The film was criticized for the product placement of several brands which featured prominently in the storyline , including Papa Johns , eHarmony , Time - Life and Cinnabon .
In 2016 , Rolling Stone magazine asked readers to choose their top 10 Ben Stiller movies .
The Secret Life of Walter Mitty came in at number 3 as his third best film ever .
ACCOLADES SOUNDTRACK
* Maneater - Performed by Grace Mitchell *
Escape ( The Piña Colada Song )
- Written by Rupert Holmes *
Wake Up - Performed by Arcade Fire
* Do n't You Want Me - Written by Phil Oakey , Philip Adrian Wright ( as Philip Wright ) , and Jo Callis
* Far Away - Performed by José González
* Far Away - Performed by Junip * Space Oddity - Performed by David Bowie and Kristen Wiig ( uncredited )
* Lake Michigan - Performed by Rogue Wave
* Dirty Paws - Performed by Of Monsters and Men * The Wolves and the Ravens
- Performed by Rogue Valley ( Chris Koza )
* Stay Alive - Performed by José González
*
Step Out - Performed by José González
* Do n't Let It Pass - Performed by Junip *
Escape ( The Piña Colada Song ) - Performed by Jack Johnson
* Dream - Performed by José González " SPACE ODDITY " Section::::Soundtrack . Section::::"Space Oddity " .
The song " Space Oddity " by David Bowie plays a significant role throughout the film .
Walter Mitty is referred to mockingly as " Major Tom " by his new boss , Hendricks , in reference to the astronaut Major Tom in " Space Oddity " , due to his frequent daydreaming : the boss interprets the line " ground control to Major Tom " as akin to " Earth to Walter ; come in Walter " .
Cheryl later tells Walter that Hendricks misunderstands the song , as " it 's about courage and venturing into the unknown " .
The song is featured in a crucial scene in which Mitty decides to leap onto a helicopter after imagining Cheryl singing the song .
Director Ben Stiller has talked about the importance of " Space Oddity " in that scene during an interview in which he said that , " I felt like the way it fits into the story , we got to this point and this scene which was sort of how the fantasy and reality come together for Walter , and that was what that came out of .
That song , and what he mentioned in his head , and what he imagines and what he does , it all just seemed to come together over that song . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS