HARRY POTTER AND THE ESCAPE FROM GRINGOTTS Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts is an indoor steel roller coaster at Universal Studios Florida , a theme park located within the Universal Orlando Resort .
Similar to dark rides , the roller coaster utilizes special effects in a controlled - lighting environment and also employs motion - based 3-D projection of both animation and live - action sequences to enhance the experience .
The ride , which is themed to the Gringotts Wizarding Bank , became the flagship attraction for the expanded Wizarding World of Harry Potter when it opened on July 8 , 2014 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Universal Parks & Resorts , in partnership with Warner Bros. , officially announced the addition of The Wizarding World of Harry Potter to Islands of Adventure on May 31 , 2007 .
The area officially opened in the Islands of Adventure theme park on June 18 , 2010 .
The Harry Potter - themed area saw attendance at Islands of Adventure rise by as much as 36 % in 2010 .
According to Jason Garcia of the Orlando Sentinel , this led to resort executives pondering " when to expand Wizarding World and how to keep business balanced between Islands and Universal Studios Florida " .
In April 2011 , Brady MacDonald of the Los Angeles Times speculated that an area expansion would include the addition of Diagon Alley and a Gringotts - themed dark ride in place of the Lost Continent themed area in the park .
On December 6 , 2011 , Universal park officials confirmed that an expansion would take place and described it as " significant " .
The announcement was made four days after the park confirmed the removal of Jaws , a ride scheduled to close permanently on January 2 , 2012 .
Demolition of the Jaws ride and the surrounding Amity area began soon after its closure .
After the site was levelled , work began on land reclamation as well as the construction of a series of buildings , including a large show building for the Gringotts ride .
Further details about the expansion were announced on May 8 , 2013 , confirming new feature attractions themed after Diagon Alley and London .
On January 23 , 2014 , the name of the area 's flagship attraction was revealed to be Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts .
It was later described as a " virtual reality roller coaster " by Entertainment Weekly as additional details were released in May 2014 .
The new ride opened on July 8 , 2014 , alongside other attractions in the new Diagon Alley section of the park .
The building housing the attraction features a dragon statue perched over the entrance that utilizes special effects to simulate the breathing of fire .
RIDE EXPERIENCE Section::::Ride experience .
Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts is an indoor steel roller coaster with a track length of approximately .
The ride encompasses motion - based vehicles , detailed sets , physical effects , and 3D projection screens similar to those found on and The Amazing Adventures of Spider - Man .
The ride 's storyline is set during the events portrayed in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , when Harry , Ron and Hermione are attempting to infiltrate Gringotts Bank in order to retrieve a Horcrux as part of their mission to defeat Lord Voldemort .
QUEUE Section::::Queue .
The queue begins through the lobby of Gringotts Wizarding Bank , where Bogrod , one of the bank 's tellers , awaits Muggles who are visiting the bank to open an account .
After he clears the Muggles to visit the vaults , they walk toward a security check to have their ID picture taken .
After getting clearance , Muggles pass tables laid out with issues of the Daily Prophet newspaper that display prominent headlines from the film series , then continue down a corridor lined with offices used by the bank 's goblin employees .
In one of these offices , silhouettes of Harry Potter , Ron Weasley , Hermione Granger ( disguised by Polyjuice Potion as Bellatrix Lestrange ) , and Griphook can be seen and heard as they plot to infiltrate the vaults to retrieve an unmentioned item .
Continuing through the queue , Muggles enter Bill Weasley 's office , where they are welcomed by the goblin Blordak and eventually joined by Bill .
Blordak directs the Muggles toward the vaults ; after exiting the office , they wait at the door of an elevator that will take them there as a moving portrait of a goblin explains the safety precautions of the ride .
Upon taking the elevator down to the vaults , Muggles pick up cart goggles and ascend a flight of stairs to the cart loading station .
RIDE Section::::Ride .
After guests board their cart , the vehicle races along the tracks , just before security alarms go off as a security breach is detected and the bank goes on lockdown .
Bellatrix Lestrange appears , after receiving word of an impostor infiltration , and decides to torture the guests by cutting off the track and tilting it .
This sends the cart speeding toward the vaults as stalagmites can be seen to give an impression of being deep underground .
Bill Weasley casts Arresto Momentum to stop the cart and apologizes just before Harry , Ron , Hermione and Griphook , emerge from the Thieve 's Downfall , which has washed away the Polyjuice Potion 's effect off Hermione .
Their cart drops from a high altitude as security trolls climb up , pushing Bill and Blordak off the cart .
A security troll pushes the guests ' cart further , past the Thief 's Downfall and stops in front of more security trolls .
One of them is hit by a mace but hangs on to the guests ' cart and sends them falling .
Bill casts Arresto Momentum again to stop the cart from falling , followed by Wingardium Leviosa , sending guests ' through the vaults .
Meanwhile , Harry , Ron and Hermione are attempting to escape the vaults on the Ukrainian Ironbelly .
Blordak urges guests to seek shelters inside one of the vaults .
After entering the vault , the walls come crashing down and Nagini appears in an attempt to attack guests .
Bellatrix reappears , this time alongside Lord Voldemort , who confronts guests , questioning them on their knowledge of Harry Potter 's whereabouts .
He blames Bellatrix for the vault infiltration , who again decides to torture guests sending them to a lava - filled chamber deep in the vaults .
To further torture guests into revealing Harry Potter 's whereabouts , Voldemort decides to administer " a little dose of pain to help you remember " and conjures a ball of fire .
The Ukrainian Ironbelly crashes in from the opposite side , and Harry casts a counterspell , while the dragon spits fire towards Voldemort , who shields himself and Bellatrix and later furiously retreat .
Hermione casts a spell to hook the cart to the dragon in order to get guests safely out of the vaults and Ron casts Confringo to create an escape route .
In the final scene , Harry asks Bill to take care of the guests as he acknowledges the retrieval of the unnamed item ( mentioned earlier in the queue ) , and Bill bids the guests farewell .
CAST Section::::Cast .
Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts features many of the main characters of the film series , which were reprised by their respective actors , except for Daniel Radcliffe and Emma Watson who were both busy doing other film projects :
* Domhnall Gleeson as Bill Weasley * Helena Bonham Carter as Bellatrix Lestrange
* Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter * Rupert Grint as Ron Weasley * Emma Watson as Hermione Granger * Ralph Fiennes as Lord Voldemort
* Warwick Davis as Griphook
* Jon Key as Bogrod AWARDS Section::::Awards .
In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket AwardsGolden Ticket Awards GALLERY REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS