HUGHIE FURY Hughie Lewis Fury ( born 18 September 1994 ) is a British professional boxer .
He has held the British heavyweight title since May 2018 , and has challenged once for the WBO heavyweight title in 2017 .
As an amateur he represented England at the 2012 Youth World Championships , winning a gold medal in the super - heavyweight division and becoming the first British boxer to do so .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Hughie Lewis Fury was born on 18 September 1994 in Stockport , Greater Manchester , England , to a family of Irish Traveller heritage .
He is the cousin of Tyson Fury , both of whom have stated that they are aiming to become " the new Klitschkos " and dominate the heavyweight division .
Hughie is trained by his father , Peter Fury .
Peter was jailed twice during Hughie 's childhood .
AMATEUR
CAREER
Section::::Amateur career .
In 2012 , Fury represented England at the Youth World Amateur Boxing Championships in Yerevan .
Fury won a gold medal at super - heavyweight and became the first British fighter to win one at that weight class in that event .
PROFESSIONAL CAREER
EARLY CAREER Section::::Professional career .
Section::::Early career .
Fury turned professional at the age of 18 , the year following his gold medal win at the Youth World Amateur Championships .
He fought at the Bell Centre in Montreal on the undercard of Stevenson - Boon II on 22 March 2013 , against 34 year old David Whittom in a scheduled four round fight .
Fury won via second - round knockout .
His second professional bout took place a month later at the Madison Square Garden Theater in New York City on the undercard of his cousin , Tyson Fury 's fight against Steve Cunningham .
He defeated American Alex Rozman via first round stoppage .
Fury fought in the UK for the first time in May at City Hall in Belfast in a points decision win against Ugandan Moses Matovu .
Referee John Lowey scored it 40–36 in favour of Fury .
Ten days following the points win , Fury travelled to Romania to fight at the Sala Olympia in Timişoara on an unsanctioned show against defeating Janos Finfera .
Fury fought twice in June beating Ladislav Kovarik via technical knockout , then beating Tomas Mrazek via a shutout points decision 60–54 .
Fury fought twice again in July , beating 39 year old Ivica Perkovic , then picking up a points win against Moses Matovu for the second time .
On 14 September , Fury was scheduled in his first 8-round bout at the Magna Centre in Rotherham against 27 year old Shane McPhilbin .
The fight ended after round one .
McPhilbin claimed to have injured his left shoulder .
Fury kept his unbeaten record intact with a 6-round unanimous decision win over Dorian Darch at the York Hall in London .
The referee scored it 60–54 for Fury .
Fury was next scheduled to fight little known Croatian fighter Hrvoje Kisicek ( 4 - 5 , 1 KOs ) in a scheduled 6 round bout at the Hermitage Leisure Centre in Whitwick .
Fury won every round as he cruised to a comfortable points win 60–54 .
Fury was to return on 8 November in a scheduled 6th round bout at the City Academy Sports Centre in Bristol , against 32-year - old David Gegeshidze ( 10 - 4 - 1 , 2 KO 's ) .
Fury picked up his 7th stoppage of his career with a hard fought 4th - round TKO win over Gegeshidze .
Fury next fought 36-year - old Matthew Greer and defeated him in the 2nd round of a scheduled 6 round fight at the Copper Box Arena in London .
Fury knocked Greer down three times in the 2nd round to get the stoppage .
Fury went the 8 round distance for the first time in his career , winning seven rounds , against Danny Hughes .
The referee scored it 79–74 .
In February 2015 , Fury faced off against his toughest opponent to date on paper , Andriy Rudenko ( 24 - 1 , 16 KOs ) .
Rudenko 's only loss came before this fight against Australian contender Lucas Browne via decision .
Fury defeated Rudenko in his first ever 10 round fight via unanimous decision on the Golovkin - Murray fight card at the Salle des Étoiles in Monte Carlo , Monaco .
The final judges ' scores were 98–92 , 98–91 , and 97–92 all in favour of Fury .
Fury took five months off before returning in July at the Derby Arena in Derby against 41 year old veteran and former Brazilian heavyweight champion George Arias , who had won 56 of 68 pro fights since 1996 .
Fury remained unbeaten with a points decision win over former world cruiserweight title challenger Arias .
The referee scored the fight 100–90 , in what was called a dreadful mismatch .
In November , Fury fought Argentine Emilio Ezequiel Zarate ( 18 - 14 - 3 , 9 KOs ) at the City Academy Sports Centre in Bristol .
Fury picked up his 9th knockout of his career in stopping journeyman Zarate in the 2nd round of the scheduled eight round bout .
Fury hit Zarate with a right hand to the left side of his head , causing him to fall down face first on the canvas .
Fury fought 37 year old Larry Olubamiwo in an 8-round fight , defeating him via first round stoppage under 2 minutes in round one .
There was rumours after the fight claiming Fury turned down a chance to fight WBC champion Deontay Wilder worth big money on 16 January .
However , Peter Fury stated that Hughie would be in a big fight next year before a shot at the WBC title .
Fury fought in March 2016 outpointing 40 year old American boxer Dominick Guinn in a 10-round decision at the Wembley Arena in London .
Referee Terry O'Connor scored it 100–90 for Fury .
It was announced on 13 April 2016 that Billy Joe Saunders had sustained an injury and would not take part on the card on 30 April , thus moving Fury 's fight with journeyman Fred Kassi ( 18 - 4 - 1 , 10 KO ) as the headliner at the Copper Box Arena .
In his first title bout , Fury claimed the vacant WBO Inter - Continental heavyweight title by outpointing Kassi via technical decision .
The bout went to the scorecards after seven rounds following an accidental clash of heads which left Fury with a gash over his left eye .
Fury was heavily booed throughout the fight .
Fury was ahead on all judges scorecards by a comfortable margin 69–66 , 70–64 , and 69–65 .
Fury extended his unbeaten run to 20 wins and no losses since turning pro in 2013 .
HEALTH CONDITIONS
Section::::Health conditions .
In May 2016 , Peter Fury claimed that Hughie was operating only at 30 or 40 percent because of an ongoing skin condition causing fatigue and affecting the immune system .
The British Boxing Board of Control ordered Fury to face Dillian Whyte for the British title .
Fury had been fighting these health issues since January 2015 .
After a few months of treatment , Peter stated he was keen to get Hughie in the ring with IBF champion Anthony Joshua by November 2016 .
In January 2017 , Fury spoke about the acne and health issues he had over the years and how he battled to overcome them : CAREER FROM 2017–2018 FURY VS .
PARKER Section::::Career from 2017–2018 .
Section::::Fury vs. Parker .
In December 2016 , following Joseph Parker 's WBO heavyweight title victory , Fury , ranked number 2 by the WBO , was in contention to fight him next .
David Haye , ranked number 1 by the WBO , decided to take up a pay - per - view grudge fight with fellow Brit Tony Bellew , pushing Fury to the spot of mandatory challenger .
Fury wanted the fight to take place in the UK whilst Parker preferred it to be in New Zealand .
On 25 January 2017 , the WBO ordered a purse bid to take place on 1 February , with a minimum bid of $ 1 million .
Parker would receive the higher amount of the 60/40 split .
A deal was close to being reached before the WBO ordered the purse bid .
One day before the scheduled purse bids , the WBO pushed it back by two days , to take place on 3 February instead .
Duco Events , representing Parker made a winning bid of $ 3,011,000 to secure promotional rights of the fight .
This would ensure both fighters to receive their career high purses with Parker earning $ 1,806,600 and Fury earning $ 1,204,400 .
Frank Warren , representing Fury , made a bid of $ 2,800,000 , wanted the fight to take place in the UK .
Duco announced a date was set for 1 April 2017 in Auckland , New Zealand .
Due to no deal being signed , on 22 February , WBO president Paco Valcarcel made team Fury aware that they had until 23 February to agree the terms of the fight .
If they do n't comply , they would then order Parker to follow through and make a voluntary defence .
On 8 March , Dave Higgins from Duco Events confirmed the bout would take place at the Vector Arena in New Zealand on 6 May 2017 .
The reason behind the location was due to Parker enjoying fighting in front of his Kiwi fans .
On 22 March 2017 , Peter Fury was denied a VISA entry into New Zealand .
This was due to his criminal past , dating back to the 1990s when he was incarcerated for 10 years for drug related offences .
Two days later , Peter was granted a special VISA running from 28 March to 10 May 2017 meaning he would have over a month to prepare Hughie for the title challenge .
On 22 April 2017 , WBO president Paco Valcarcel announced that the fight was off and would not be taking place .
In the released statement , it was revealed that the cancellation came from team Fury although nothing was confirmed .
Parker 's camp were said to be disappointed but not surprised by this .
The WBO told Duco Events that they can schedule another fight with an opponent within top 15 WBO rankings .
Team Fury issued a statement , Peter Fury later stated that he wanted to reschedule the fight as soon as possible .
Team Fury later released a statement revealing Parker 's promoters had been trying to switch the location of the fight to England because of money issues .
They also were adamant Hughie was injured and wanted the world championship fight with Parker rescheduled .
Peter Fury said his injury was a recurrence of an injury he suffered a year prior and had flared up again during an intense sparring session .
On 9 June 2017 , Peter Fury confirmed that the fight would now take place at the Manchester Arena in Manchester on 23 September .
He also said that Fury would have a tune - up fight at the Copper Box Arena on 8 July and then a week later on 15 July at the Winter Gardens in Blackpool .
The WBO blocked Fury from taking part in a warm - up fight at the Copper Box because as per WBO rules , once a mandatory challenger agrees to fight the world champion , he can not participate in a professional fight before then .
Warren said Fury would still fight , but in an exhibition , which would not count on his professional record .
Fury took part and won a six - round exhibition against UK - based Polish boxer Kamil Sokolowski ( 4 - 10 - 2 , 1 KO ) at the Copper Box on 8 July .
With five days out from the fight , The British Boxing Board of Control had appointed British referee Terry O'Connor , the same official in charge of Fury 's last two bouts .
It saw Peter Fury exchanging a foul - mouthed argument with David Higgins at the final press conference in London .
It started off with Higgins approaching Fury , unhappy with the appointment of British referee O'Connor for the fight .
Higgins was then ejected from the press conference by security officials .
Overall Higgins outburst caused a referee change after it began to create noise and headlines .
As of 21 September , only 5,000 tickets had been sold since the start of the week .
Hennessy was hoping to have a crowd of at least 8,000 at the arena , which has a capacity of 21,000 .
Fury failed to capture his first world title after he was outworked by Parker .
The fight went the 12 round distance , with two judges scoring the fight 118–110 in favour of Parker and the third judge had it 114–114 , giving Parker the win via majority decision .
Parker showed Fury respect throughout the fight , having to get through Fury 's jab in order to land anything .
The opening six rounds saw Fury flicking his jab in to thin air , which caused Parker to think twice before going on the attack .
Parker started finding his shots in the latter half .
Parker finished strong in the last two rounds as Fury started showing signs of fatigue .
In the post fight , Parker said , " I felt the aggression was good on my side .
He was really awkward and his movement was good , but I caught him with the harder punches I felt .
" Fury was paid £ 750,000 while Parker took home £ 1.1 million .
Promoter Mick Hennessy , as with the rest of the Fury camp , was disgusted with the wide scorecards , " This is corruption at its highest level in boxing .
I thought it was an absolute masterclass , shades of Ali .
Parker was n't even in the fight .
One of the worst decisions I 've ever seen . "
He said he would be appealing the decision .
WBO vice - president John Duggan backed the decision to have Parker as the winner .
He made it clear that the result would not be investigated or overturned .
FURY VS .
SEXTON Section::::Fury vs. Sexton .
On 14 February 2018 , Hennessy Sports along with Infinitum announced that Fury would challenge Sam Sexton for his British heavyweight title at Macron Stadium 's Premier Suite in Bolton on 12 May , live and exclusive on Channel 5 .
The bout would mark the first time in nearly seven years that the British title would be contested for on terrestrial TV .
Speaking of the fight , Mick Hennessy said , " I 'm delighted to bring the historic British Heavyweight Championship back to mainstream , free - to - air , television on Channel 5 where it will be seen by the biggest viewing audience possible due to their considerable reach and exposure .
I ca n't believe that it will be nearly seven years since the British Heavyweight title was last seen on free - to - air in the UK on Channel 5 .
" Sexton would make his first defence of the title , which he won defeating Gary Cornish in October 2017 .
The title was vacant at the time .
Fury won the British title defeating Sexton via TKO in round 5 .
Fury knocked Sexton down twice in the fight in dropping him in rounds 4 and 5 .
Referee Terry O'Connor stopped the fight after Fury knocked Sexton down with a right hand in round 5 .
Sexton got back to his feet , but the referee stopped it anyway .
Fury started the fight moving around the ring throwing jabs and right hands .
The movement looked to frustrate Sexton in round 3 .
After the bout it was said that Fury was expected to vacate the title and move forward to get into a mandatory position for a world title .
The fight peaked at 2.9 million viewers .
FURY VS .
PULEV Section::::Fury vs. Pulev .
In March 2018 , the IBF ordered Kubrat Pulev vs. Dominic Breazeale for a final eliminator , however Breazeale refused to take part .
In April , the IBF ordered Pulev to fight British boxer Dillian Whyte ( 23 - 1 , 17 KOs ) .
A purse bid was set for 10 May.
The IBF gave them until 24 May. New York based promotional company , Epic Sports & Entertainment made a purse bid of $ 1,500,111 , winning the rights of the fight .
IBF ruling states for a final eliminator , the higher ranked boxer , in this case was Pulev , would get 75 % ( $ 1,125,083.25 ) and Whyte would earn $ 375,027.75 for the fight .
On 7 June , Whyte pulled out of the fight and instead Matchroom announced he would be fighting former WBO champion Joseph Parker in London on 28 July .
On 16 June , the IBF then ordered Pulev against their # 3 ranked American boxer Jarrell Miller 21 - 0 , 18 KO ) .
On 25 June , at the purse bid , Epic Sports & Entertainment made the winning bid of $ 2,111,111 , much higher than the $ 1,000,010 , which was placed by Team Sauerland .
The bid meant Miller would be earning his highest purse at $ 527,777.75 US dollars .
According to Epic Sports , the contracts were sent within two days of the purse bid .
By 2 July , there was no deal made .
It was said that Miller 's camp were stalling , likely due to the fight taking place in Bulgaria .
Miller 's promoter Dmitry Salita confirmed negotiations were still ongoing however the biggest hurdle was the venue .
According to IBF public relations director Jeanette Salazar , Miller had 15 days from when he received the contract to agree or the IBF would go back to the rankings .
At the time , the next highest challenger was Fury , who was inserted at # 5 by the IBF in June .
Negotiations between Pulev and Miller broke down on July 10 .
The IBF ordered a purse bid between the teams of Fury and Pulev to take place on 9 August .
On the morning , the IBF pushed the date of the bid to 16 August .
However on that same date , the fight was agreed from both parties and was announced to take place in Sofia , Bulgaria on 27 October 2018 .
Pulev defeated Fury via a 12 round unanimous decision to become the mandatory challenger for IBF heavyweight title .
The scores were 117–111 , 118–110 , and 115–113 .
After a good start by Fury , he could not overcome a cut that opened up in round 2 , which altered his mindset and game plan .
Fury had suffered the cut over his left eye during training camp and Pulev took advantage by opening it up again .
With the cut bleeding bad , it forced Hughie to fight more aggressively but cautiously .
After the fight , Peter Fury said , " Hughie came into the fight with a cut above the eye .
He was stitched up two weeks ago but they [ the doctors ] said it would heal in time for the fight
and obviously it did n't .
"
He praised Fury for his efforts after the cut was open .
Pulev used his jab often , until round 4 , he started unloading on more power shots .
Fury spent the majority of the second half of the fight trying to counter Pulev , however was unable to land any meaningful shot .
As the fight went on , Pulev 's jab became much stronger and accurate , although Pulev was caught with a right hand in round 8 .
Pulev clinched after being wobbled and took back control in round 9 .
By round 11 , Fury seemed tired and spent most of the final two rounds boxing with his back against the ropes .
Fury believed the cut was what ultimately lost him the fight .
PROFESSIONAL BOXING RECORD Kubrat PulevSam SextonJoseph Parker 12 23
Sep 2017Dominick
GuinnGeorge AriasAndriy
RudenkoShane McPhilbin
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * 2012 Youth World Amateur Boxing Championships results ( archived )