THE 33 ( FILM )
The 33 ( ) is a 2015 English - language American - Chilean biographical disaster - survival drama film directed by Patricia Riggen and written by Mikko Alanne , Craig Borten and José Rivera .
The film is based on the real events of the 2010 mining disaster , in which a group of thirty - three miners were trapped inside the San José Mine in Chile for more than two months .
The film stars Antonio Banderas as trapped miner Mario Sepúlveda .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dozens of people from Copiapó , Chile , work in the San José mine .
The owner ignores the warnings of the failing stability of the mine , which collapses a short time later .
The only path inside the mine is completely blocked , and the thirty - three miners manage to get to the rescue chamber .
They discover that the radio is useless , the medical kit is empty , the ventilation shafts lack the required ladders , and there is very little stored food .
Mario Sepúlveda becomes the leader of the miners , dividing the foods rations and stopping the outbursts of violence and despair .
The mine company does not attempt any rescue , and the relatives of the miners gather around the gates .
The government of Chile decides on active intervention , and orders the use of drills to reach the chamber .
The first exploratory boreholes move off - target , but a later one reaches the required destination .
The miners attach a note to the drill bit to announce their survival .
They receive new food and clothing , and television communication with the surface .
A second , bigger , drill system is prepared to retrieve the miners one by one .
There is drama and tension during the weeks before the successful rescue of all 33 miners , over two months after they became trapped .
The story is derived from the August 2010 mine collapse and subsequent rescues in Copiapó , Chile .
CAST * Antonio Banderas as " Super " Mario Sepúlveda , public face for the group of miners , who made daily video logs to assure the public that they were all right .
* Rodrigo Santoro as Laurence Golborne , the Minister of Mining of Chile .
* Juliette Binoche as María Segovia , Darío 's sister .
* James Brolin as Jeff Hart , a driller who supervises the drilling operation to save the miners .
* Lou Diamond Phillips as Luis " Don Lucho " Urzúa , the shift foreman , who took a leading role while the miners were trapped and helped make more accurate maps of the cave for the rescue crews .
* Mario Casas as Álex Vega , a miner who suffered from kidney problems and hypertension .
* Gabriel Byrne as André Sougarret , the mining engineer who masterminded the escape operation .
* Bob Gunton as Sebastián Piñera , President of Chile .
* Paulina García as Isabel Pereira , assistant to president Piñera .
* Adriana Barraza as Marta Salinas .
* Kate del Castillo as Katy Valdivia de Sepúlveda .
* Cote de Pablo as Jessica Vega , the wife of Álex Vega .
* Juan Pablo Raba as Darío Segovia , drill operator and son of a miner .
* Jacob Vargas as Edison " Elvis " Peña , the miners ' song leader , who requested that Elvis Presley songs be sent down the mine .
* Naomi Scott as Escarlette Sepúlveda Valdivia , Mario and Katy 's daughter .
* Marco Treviño as José Henríquez , the miners ' pastor , who led daily prayers within the shelter .
* Oscar Nunez as Yonni Barrios .
* Alejandro Goic as Franklin Lobos .
* Tim Willcox as himself .
* Federico Luppi * Tenoch Huerta * Pedro Calvo * Mario Kreutzberger ( Don Francisco ) as himself .
* as Mario Gómez .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
The film is based on the events of the 2010 Copiapó mining accident , also known as the " Chilean mining accident " .
It is directed by Patricia Riggen and written by Mikko Alanne and José Rivera .
Producer Mike Medavoy , who also produced Apocalypse Now , worked with the miners , their families , and those involved to put the film together .
On 13 August 2014 , it was announced that The 33 would be the first film to receive the Colombian Film Commission 's incentive , which includes 40 % for film services and 20 % for film logistics services of the amount spent in the country .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Antonio Banderas , who portrays " Super " Mario Sepúlveda , is the public face for the miners who sent videos to the rescuers to update them on the miners ' condition .
The actual Sepúlveda expressed his enthusiasm and approval towards having Banderas in the role .
Brazilian actor Rodrigo Santoro plays Laurence Golborne , Minister of Mining .
On 17 June 2013 , it was announced that Jennifer Lopez had joined to lead the cast of the film , but later left due to scheduling conflicts with American Idol .
She was replaced by Juliette Binoche .
On 10 January 2014 , Cote de Pablo joined the cast of the film ; she plays the wife of one of the trapped miners .
On 27 January 2014 , Gabriel Byrne joined the cast of the film , to play the role of Andre Sougarret , the engineering genius who masterminded the miraculous rescue of the 33 trapped miners .
Next day on 28 January , Bob Gunton joined the cast of the Chilean miner filming , then shooting in Colombia ; he plays the role of Chilean President Sebastián Piñera .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography began in December 2013 in Colombia .
Before shooting began , Riggen interviewed each of the miners and their families .
After the shooting wrapped up in Nemocón , Colombia in January , crews started filming again in Copiapó , Chile on 5 February 2014 , which was the actual place of the incident .
On 18 February 2014 , news told that more than half of the filming was done in the salt mine of Nemocón , Colombia , and rescue scenes were being filmed in Tierra Amarilla , Chile .
Filming wrapped up on 20 February 2014 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In October 2014 , James Horner was hired to compose the music for the film .
It was the second of two scores he had completed in 2015 , before his death on June 22 of that year .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The 33 was released across Latin America through 20th Century Fox starting from 6 August 2015 in Chile .
It debuted in Colombia on 20 August 2015 , along with the rest of Central America .
Brazil was the last , where the film was released on 29 October 2015 .
Its United States and Canada theatrical releases were handled by Warner Bros. on 13 November 2015 .
The premiere in Santiago was attended by most of the leading cast , in addition to several of the miners , former President Sebastián Piñera and former minister Laurence Golborne .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
On 28 April 2015 , Alcon Entertainment acquired North American and the majority of international distribution rights to The 33 , with Warner Bros. to distribute it .
On the same day , Warner Bros , where Alcon has its output deal , set the film 's release date for 13 November 2015 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The 33 grossed $ 12.2 million in North America and $ 12.7 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 24.9 million , against its production budget of $ 26 million .
In North America , The 33 opened alongside Love the Coopers and My All American on 13 November 2015 with a very poor performance .
In its opening weekend , the film was projected to gross $ 7–8 million from 2,452 theaters .
The film grossed $ 1.8 million on its opening day and $ 5.8 million in its opening weekend , finishing below studio projections .
In Chile , the film grossed $ 1.6 million on its opening weekend , 6 August 2015 , showing on 140 screens .
This is the second biggest opening for a Chilean film ( 5 % behind Stefan v / s Kramer ) , despite coinciding with a severe storm that caused flooding in Santiago and other parts of the country and also marked the sixth - highest opening for Fox International Productions .
It topped the box office there for five consecutive weekends and became the second highest - grossing Chilean film .
The film grossed a total of $ 4.9 million in Chile .
In Mexico it opened at No . 3 with $ 1.3 million , but ended up grossing only a total of $ 3 million there after three weeks in release .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 43 % based on 124 reviews , with an average rating of 5.5/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The 33 offers an appropriately inspirational account of real - life heroism , but its stirring story and solid performances are undermined by a flawed focus and an overreliance on formula .
"
On Metacritic , the film has received a weighted average score of 55 out of 100 , based on 31 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
On CinemaScore , audiences gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
Scott Tobias of Variety said , " The 33 aims for a comprehensive survey of efforts above ground and below , but winds up looking less like a sober docudrama than a ginned - up Irwin Allen disaster movie . "
Chilean critics had mixed reviews .
Ana Josefa Silva gave a mildly positive review , saying that the movie " excites and entertains " , but that the good rhythm of the first half becomes stalled .
She praised the acting , but criticized the use of many clichés , like the heroic young character ( Golborne ) , the " inhumane " politician ( Piñera ) or the brave , " badass " Latina woman ( Segovia ) .
Las Últimas Noticias stated that " while the epic of the rescue is observed thanks to the effective recreation , the agony of the rescued remains in debt in the staging " , and also noted the " young and handsome " hero stereotype .
La Segunda described it as " a catastrophe film with a life message and sentimental vocation that is not willing to give up to truisms associated with the image that Hollywood has of Hispanic America " .
El Mercurio gave a negative review , criticizing the absence of people responsible for the precarious working conditions of the miners , although praising the recreation of the mine and the catastrophe .
ACCURACY Section::::Accuracy .
Among the differences between the film and the real life story , Alex Vega was not the first man to be rescued , but Florencio Ávalos .
Also , Vega 's wife was not pregnant at the time .
In the film , the Fénix capsule arrives empty at the rescue chamber , but actually there was a rescuer inside of it .
The movie also incorrectly shows that Yonni Barrios 's wife and his mistress knew each other before the incident .
The capsule did not get stuck with a miner inside ; André Sougarret did not order the end of the rescue works before the contact with the miners ; and María Segovia never slapped Laurence Golborne in the face .
SEE ALSO
* Survival film REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS