THE PEANUTS MOVIE
The Peanuts Movie ( known in some countries as Snoopy and Charlie Brown : A Peanuts Movie ) is a 2015 American 3D computer - animated comedy film based on Charles M. Schulz 's comic strip Peanuts , produced by Blue Sky Studios and distributed by 20th Century Fox .
It is the fifth full - length Peanuts film , and the first feature film in 35 years .
The film is directed by Steve Martino from a screenplay by Craig and Bryan Schulz
( Schulz 's son and grandson , respectively ) , and Cornelius Uliano , and
stars the voices of Noah Schnapp as Charlie Brown and , via archival recordings , Bill Melendez as Snoopy and Woodstock .
The film sees Charlie Brown trying to improve his odds with the Little Red - Haired Girl , while Snoopy writes a book about the World War I Flying Ace as he imagines himself as a legend trying to save his love interest and fellow pilot Fifi from the Red Baron and his army .
The Peanuts Movie was released on November 6 , 2015 , commemorating the 65th anniversary of the original comic strip and the 50th anniversary of the TV special A Charlie Brown Christmas .
It grossed $ 246 million worldwide against a $ 99 million budget .
The critical consensus on Rotten Tomatoes calls it " sweetly nostalgic " though unambitious .
It received nominations for the Annie Award for Best Animated Feature , the Critics ' Choice Movie Award for Best Animated Feature , and was the first Blue Sky Studios film to be nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
When the Little Red - Haired Girl moves into his neighborhood , Charlie Brown becomes infatuated with her , though worries his long - running streak of failures will prevent her from noticing him .
After Lucy tells him he should try being more confident , Charlie Brown decides to embark upon a series of new activities in hope of finding one that will get the Little Red - Haired Girl to notice him .
His first attempt is to participate in the school 's talent show with a magic act , helped by Snoopy and Woodstock .
However , when Sally 's act goes wrong , Charlie Brown sacrifices his time for her , rescues his sister from being humiliated , and is humiliated himself in return .
Attempting to impress the Little Red - Haired Girl with his dance skills , Charlie Brown signs up for the school dance and gets Snoopy to teach him all his best moves .
At the dance , Charlie Brown attracts praise for his skills but slips and sets off the sprinkler system , causing the dance to be cut short and all the other students to look down upon him once more .
Charlie Brown is partnered with the Little Red - Haired Girl to write a book report .
At first , he is excited to have a chance to be with her , but she is called away for a week to deal with a family illness , leaving Charlie Brown to write the report all by himself .
Hoping to impress both the Little Red - Haired Girl and his teacher , Charlie Brown writes his report on the collegiate - level novel War and Peace .
At the same time , Charlie Brown finds he is the only student to get a perfect score on a standardized test .
His friends and the other students congratulate him , and his popularity begins to climb .
When he goes to accept a medal at a school assembly , however , he learns the test papers are accidentally mixed up and the perfect score actually belongs to Peppermint Patty ; Charlie Brown declines the medal , losing all his new - found popularity .
His book report is destroyed by a Red Baron model plane , and he admits to the Little Red - Haired Girl he has caused them to both fail the assignment .
Before leaving school for the summer , Charlie Brown is surprised when the Little Red - Haired Girl chooses him for a pen pal .
Linus convinces Charlie Brown he needs to tell the Little Red - Haired Girl how he feels about her before she leaves for the summer .
Racing to her house , he discovers she is about to leave on a bus for summer camp .
He tries to chase the bus but is prevented from reaching it .
Just as he is about to give up , thinking the whole world is against him , Charlie Brown sees a kite fall from the Kite - Eating Tree .
The string becomes entangled around his waist and sails away with him .
Amazed to see Charlie Brown flying a kite , his friends follow .
Upon reaching the bus , Charlie Brown finally asks the Little Red - Haired Girl why she has chosen him in spite of his failures .
The Little Red - Haired Girl explains she admires his selflessness and his determination and praises him as an honest , caring , and compassionate person .
The two promise to write to one another ; the other children congratulate him as a true friend and carry him off .
In a subplot , after finding a typewriter in the school dumpster , Snoopy writes a novel about the World War I Flying Ace , trying to save Fifi from the Red Baron with Woodstock and his friends ' help , using the key events and situations surrounding Charlie Brown as inspiration to develop his story .
He acts out his adventure physically , coming across Charlie Brown and the gang several times along the way .
Snoopy defeats the Red Baron and rescues Fifi from an airplane .
When Lucy finishes reading , she calls it the dumbest story she has ever read , so Snoopy throws the typewriter at her in retaliation and kisses her nose causing her to run away in disgust yelling that she has " dog germs " .
CAST
* Noah Schnapp as Charlie Brown * Alex Garfin as Linus
* Noah Johnston as Schroeder * Bill Melendez as Snoopy and Woodstock ( from archival recordings ) .
Woodstock and his bird friends are part of Snoopy 's Beagle Scouts , who serve as the World War
I
Flying Ace 's ( Snoopy 's ) repair crew .
* Hadley Belle Miller as Lucy * Micah Revelli as Little Kid
* Venus Omega Schultheis as Peppermint Patty
* Mariel Sheets as Sally * Madisyn Shipman as Violet * AJ Teece as Pig - Pen * Marelik " Mar Mar " Walker as Franklin
* William " Alex " Wunsch as Shermy
* Troy " Trombone Shorty " Andrews as Miss Othmar and the Little Red - Haired Girl 's mother .
Andrews ' trombone provided their " wah - wah " voices , along with the voices for other adult characters in the film .
* Rebecca Bloom as Marcie
* Anastasia Bredikhina as Patty * Francesca Angelucci Capaldi as the Little Red - Haired Girl and Frieda .
Describing the Little Red - Haired Girl , Capaldi says : " She 's very nice and kind and has a great heart .
She really does like Charlie Brown , but he has no idea , because he 's shy and awkward . "
* Kristin Chenoweth as Fifi , Snoopy 's love interest .
Chenoweth created " a series of conversational - like sounds " to create Fifi 's language , using Melendez 's Snoopy recordings as a guide , and making his sounds more feminine .
Snoopy 's siblings also appear during the end credits .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2006 , six years after the release of the last original Peanuts strip , as well as the death of creator Charles M. Schulz , his son Craig Schulz came up with an idea for a new Peanuts film , which he showed to his screenwriter son Bryan Schulz .
" I was happy to show my son , " Craig said .
" He showed me how to make it bigger — how to blow it up more — and he helped me put in structure .
" When presenting their film to studios , Craig stipulated that the film remain under Schulz control , saying , " We need[ed ] to have absolute quality control and keep it under Dad 's legacy ...
You ca n't bring people in from the outside and expect them to understand Peanuts .
"
On October 9 , 2012 , it was announced that 20th Century Fox and Blue Sky Studios were developing a 3D computer - animated feature film based on the strip , with Steve Martino directing from the screenplay by Craig Schulz , Bryan Schulz , and Cornelius Uliano .
Craig , Bryan , and Uliano also produced .
Craig , stating there is no one " more protective of the comic strip than myself , " chose Martino as director because he showed faithfulness to literature in his adaptation of Dr. Seuss ' Horton Hears
a Who ! .
On the film 's plot , Martino said : " Here 's where I lean thematically .
I want to go through this journey ...
Charlie Brown is that guy who , in the face of repeated failure , picks himself back up and tries again .
That 's no small task .
I have kids who aspire to be something big and great ... a star football player or on Broadway .
I think what Charlie Brown is — what I hope to show in this film — is the everyday qualities of perseverance ... to pick yourself back up with a positive attitude — that 's every bit as heroic ...
as having a star on the Walk of Fame or being a star on Broadway .
That 's the [ story 's ] core .
This is a feature film story that has a strong dramatic drive , and takes its core ideas from the strip . "
Martino and his animators spent over a year looking at Charles M. Schulz 's original drawing style to help translate the " hand - drawn warmth ... into the cool pixel - precision of CGI " without the fear of something getting lost in translation , such as " how the dot of an eye [ conveyed ] joy or sorrow so efficiently " .
In addition to receiving the rights to use Bill Melendez 's voice for Snoopy and Woodstock , Martino was also able to get the rights to archive music from previous Peanuts specials .
Classic locations are featured , such as Charlie Brown 's skating pond , his house , " the wall " and Lucy 's psychiatrist booth , each retaining their " eternal look of the strip . "
Additionally , despite being outdated technology , rotary phones and typewriters are seen , as well as Lucy 's psychiatrist booth still costing a nickel .
Adult characters " wah - wah " voices are represented by a trombone with a plunger mute , as in previous Peanuts media , courtesy of New Orleans jazz musician Trombone Shorty .
Because of the robust number of existing Peanuts characters , the film does not introduce any new characters .
On January 8 , 2013 , Leigh Anne Brodsky became the managing director of Peanuts Worldwide , and was set to control all the global deals for the film .
In April 2013 , Fox announced that the film would be released in 3D. In October 2013 , it was announced that Paul Feig would also produce .
By April 2015 , 75 % of the animation was complete , with some footage scheduled to debut at CinemaCon in Las Vegas .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In October 2014 , it was announced that Christophe Beck would score the film .
Beck stated , " With the Peanuts movies , I grew up on those specials from the ' 60s and ' 70s , that , of course , rerun to this day .
I 'm very fond of all that Vince Guaraldi music , so what we did was try to find spots in the film where we could sort of touch down and remind people who were watching the film that it 's still a Peanuts movie , and there 's still a place for that music in the film .
There 's a bunch of spots where we quote the Guaraldi music , or we actually re - record his pieces quite faithfully . "
He also added that the score would be more orchestral than Guaraldi 's previous scores , which were mainly a small jazz combo .
Jazz pianist David Benoit contributed to Beck 's score .
On July 28 , 2015 , it was announced that Meghan Trainor would write and perform a song for the film , entitled " Better When I 'm Dancin ' " .
Epic Records released the soundtrack album on October 23 , 2015 .
The 20-track album features Trainor 's "
Better When I 'm Dancin "
, Flo Rida 's " That 's What I Like " featuring Fitz , " Linus and Lucy " , " Skating " and " Christmas Time Is Here " by Vince Guaraldi , from the A Charlie Brown Christmas album , and 15 tracks of Beck 's original score for the film .
An exclusive edition of the soundtrack released at Target features a second Trainor track , " Good to Be Alive " .
The Japanese edition of the soundtrack includes " Good to Be Alive " and three more tracks from Beck 's score .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Peanuts Movie held its premiere in New York City on November 1 , 2015 , and was released on November 6 , 2015 in the United States on 3,897 screens .
The release commemorates the 65th anniversary of the comic strip and the 50th anniversary of the TV special A Charlie Brown Christmas .
The film was originally scheduled for November 25 , 2015 , and in November 2012 was rescheduled to November 6 , 2015 .
The film was released as Snoopy and Charlie Brown :
A Peanuts Movie in the United Kingdom and Australia in late December 2015 .
The Australian release date was postponed to January 1 , 2016 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Peanuts Movie was released on digital platforms on February 12 , 2016 before being released on DVD , Blu - ray , Blu - ray 3D , and 4 K Ultra HD a month later on March 8 , 2016 .
The film debuted at the top of the home media sales chart for the week ending on March 13 , 2016 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Peanuts Movie grossed $ 130.2 million in North America and $ 116 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 246.2 million .
In the United States and Canada , the film grossed $ 12.1 million on its opening day , earning a total of $ 44 million for the weekend ( with 27 % of the gross coming from 3D screenings ) , finishing second at the box office behind Spectre ( $ 70.4 million ) .
Outside North America , the film opened in the same week as the US and grossed $ 4.56 million from 12 markets .
China ( $ 2.76 million ) and Italy ( $ 1.16 million ) delivered the biggest openings .
After three weekends , it opened to a total of 49 markets where it had the second biggest opening of 2015 in Mexico ( $ 3.1 million ) and debuted in the U.K. , Ireland and Malta at No . 2 with $ 5.5 million ( including previews ) behind .
One of the final markets was Australia where the film opened on New Year 's Day 2016 , earning $ 2.6 million in its first week .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 87 % approval rating and an average rating of 7/10 based on 182 reviews , making it the highest - rated film to date produced by Blue Sky Studios .
The site 's consensus states : "
The Peanuts Movie offers a colorful gateway into the world of its classic characters and a sweetly nostalgic – if relatively unambitious – treat for the adults who grew up with them " .
On Metacritic , the film has received a weighted average score of 67 out of 100 based on 31 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
On CinemaScore , audiences gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
The Hollywood Reporters Michael Rechtshaffen found the film to be especially praiseworthy , feeling that Charles Schulz would have been proud of the film , though criticized the use of Trainor 's song in an otherwise good use of Guaraldi 's themes with Beck 's score .
Peter Debruge of Variety gave similar sentiments , especially praising the animation of the film .
Alonso Duralde of TheWrap felt the film made a nice transition to 3D , saying , while the film might not reach " the melancholy of earlier films ...
it nonetheless respects the importance of failure and disappointment that Schulz always included in his storytelling " .
He did , however , feel that Peanuts purists would take issue with a few things in the film , such as seeing and hearing so much of the Little Red - Haired Girl , who was always off panel in the comic strips , and Peppermint Patty acknowledging that Snoopy is a dog and not a child with a big nose ( even though , unbeknownst to him , Marcie told her that Snoopy was a beagle in the latter years of the strip ) .
Pete Hammond from Deadline Hollywood admitted his trepidation about translating the characters from 2D to 3D , but enjoyed the film overall , only criticizing the amount of fantasy sequences involving Snoopy .
Brian Truitt of USA Today gave the film three out of four stars , proclaiming the film " is all about simplicity , and what the plot lacks in nuance and complexity is made up for with relatable characters whom people have spent a lifetime watching .
The movie is a testament to Charlie Brown 's place in pop culture and a showcase for a new generation bound to fall in love with its perennially insecure star " .
Neil Genzlinger from The New York Times named the film an NYT Critics ' Pick , calling it " the most charming and the most daring experiment in human genetics ever conducted " .
However , he also showed concern for the modern children 's audiences who may or may not only know the Peanuts gang from the holiday specials .
Scott Mendelson from Forbes was more critical of the film , saying there was " nothing objectively wrong with The Peanuts Movie " , but as he personally was not a fan of the Peanuts comic strip , that made him " anti - Charlie Brown " , loathing each time Charlie Brown failed in the film .
Joe McGovern from Entertainment Weekly was also not as receptive , giving the film a grade of C+ , and criticizing the animation , stating , " Even if you assume that Schulz always wanted his frozen pond reflecting lustrous light and Snoopy frolicking in a lavish Hayao Miyazaki world , the animation steroids injected into the aesthetic here nonetheless shrivel the great melancholy that 's so key to the comic 's endurance " .
AWARDS
Village Voice Film Poll rowspan="2 " January 7 , 2016
Best
Animated Film rowspan="2 " The Peanuts Movie rowspan="2 " Best Film VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A video game based on the film , titled , was released on November 3 , 2015 for Xbox 360 , Nintendo 3DS , Wii U , Xbox One , and PlayStation 4 , and published by Activision .
POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
Although The Peanuts Movie has been described as a success and Fox was reportedly interested in making a sequel and turning The Peanuts Movie into a franchise , Fox only had the rights to make one Peanuts film .
Schulz 's widow , Jean , has indicated that a sequel is not imminent , stating , " This one took eight years , so maybe we 'll talk again then . " SEE ALSO * Peanuts filmography REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS