THE MAN FROM U.N.C.L.E. ( FILM )
The Man from U.N.C.L.E. is a 2015 American action spy film directed by Guy Ritchie and written by Ritchie and Lionel Wigram .
It is based on the 1964 MGM television series of the same name , which was created by Norman Felton and Sam Rolfe .
The film stars Henry Cavill , Armie Hammer , Alicia Vikander , Elizabeth Debicki , Jared Harris , and Hugh Grant .
The film was produced by RatPac - Dune Entertainment and Davis Entertainment .
In 1993 , John Davis obtained the rights for a film adaptation based on the original series .
However , the film fell into development limbo due to multiple script rewrites .
Over the years , Matthew Vaughn , David Dobkin , and Steven Soderbergh were optioned for directing until Ritchie signed on in March 2013 .
The film premiered at Barcelona on August 2 , 2015 and was released on August 14 , 2015 , by Warner Bros. , receiving mixed reviews from critics .
Grossing just $ 109 million worldwide on a $ 75–84 million budget , the film was a box office bomb , losing Warner Bros. an estimated $ 80 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1963 , at the height of the Cold War , professional thief - turned CIA agent Napoleon Solo extracts Gaby Teller , daughter of Dr. Udo Teller , an alleged Nazi scientist - turned United States collaborator at the end of World War II , from East Berlin , evading KGB operative Illya Kuryakin .
He later reports to his superior , Sanders , who reveals that Gaby 's maternal uncle Rudi works in a shipping company owned by Alexander and Victoria Vinciguerra , a wealthy Nazi sympathizer couple who intend to use Teller to build their own private nuclear weapon and give it to lingering Nazi elements .
Due to the potentially world - ending nature of this crisis , the CIA and KGB have reluctantly teamed up , and Solo and Kuryakin are ordered to stop the Vinciguerras from succeeding , with both men secretly assigned to steal Udo Teller 's research for their respective governments .
The trio travels to Rome , where Gaby and Kuryakin reluctantly pose as an engaged couple , and Solo pretends to be an antiquities dealer .
Solo deduces they are being monitored and instructs Kuryakin not to defend himself from muggers so as to preserve this cover .
Despite their hostilities towards each other , Kuryakin heeds his advice and does not react when his father 's prized watch is stolen .
Later , at an auto racing event promoted by the Vinciguerras , Solo and Gaby flirt with Victoria and Alexander to obtain information about Teller .
Meanwhile , Kuryakin acquires evidence the Vinciguerras were recently exposed to radiation , indicating that their weapon is near completion .
Solo and Kuryakin begrudgingly join forces to break into a Vinciguerra shipping yard , in which they find traces of uranium .
After accidentally setting off the alarm , they escape into the water but find their way blocked .
During a scuffle with the guards , Kuryakin nearly drowns .
Solo escapes but surprises himself by returning to save Kuryakin .
Although a suspicious Victoria pursues them with her henchmen , Solo and Kuryakin manage to slip past into their own rooms undetected .
Victoria and Solo spend the night together .
The following day , Gaby meets with Rudi and Alexander to discuss a job , but unexpectedly betrays Kuryakin and Solo to them .
Kuryakin escapes but Victoria drugs and captures Solo and takes him to a nearby warehouse .
There , Rudi , who is revealed as an infamous Nazi war criminal , tortures Solo in an electric chair .
Solo is rescued by Kuryakin , who tortures Rudi .
Rudi reveals that the weapon is hidden in an island fortress where Gaby has been reunited with her father .
The chair malfunctions and Rudi is killed .
Solo and Kuryakin travel to the fortress .
To protect Gaby , Dr. Teller pretends to resume work on the weapon but intends to sabotage it .
Victoria quickly sees through this deception , and has Alexander imprison Gaby as an incentive .
Victoria kills him as soon as he has finished the weapon .
Meanwhile , Solo and Kuryakin are approached by Alexander Waverly , a high - ranking MI6 operative who reveals that Gaby is an undercover agent under his employment .
He and members of the Special Boat Service help Solo and Kuryakin infiltrate the Vinciguerras 's compound .
While they search the compound , Solo finds Kuryakin 's stolen watch on a guard .
Vinciguerra then attempts to escape with Gaby and the warhead , but is intercepted and killed .
Solo retrieves the disc with Teller 's research , but the warhead Vinciguerra was taking with him
was a non - nuclear secondary missile .
Victoria has left undetected on another boat with the real warhead .
Solo is able to contact Victoria via radio and keep her on the line long enough for Waverly to locate her and launch a homing missile , destroying the nuclear weapon and the boat , taking Victoria with them .
Kuryakin confronts Solo in his hotel room , intending to kill him and steal the disc for the Soviet Union , but changes his mind when Solo produces Kuryakin 's father 's stolen watch .
They instead share a drink on the terrace and burn the contents of the disk , so as to not give either of their countries the upper hand in the arms race .
Reuniting with Gaby and Waverly , they are told that the trio has been reassigned to a new international organization under Waverly 's command .
Waverly gives them a new mission in Istanbul under a new codename : U.N.C.L.E. CAST * Henry Cavill as Napoleon Solo * Armie Hammer as Ilya Kuryakin * Alicia Vikander as Gaby Teller * Elizabeth Debicki as Victoria Vinciguerra
* Jared Harris as Adrian Sanders
* Hugh Grant as Alexander Waverly * Luca Calvani as Alexander Vinciguerra * Sylvester Groth as Uncle Rudi * David Menkin as Jones * Simona Caparrini as Contessa * Misha Kuznetsov as Oleg
* Christian Berkel as Udo Teller * David Beckham as Projectionist PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Producer John Davis optioned the film rights to the 1960s TV series in 1993 , setting up a development deal for an adaptation with Warner Bros. and series producer Norman Felton .
Davis has estimated that he commissioned 12 or 14 different scripts over the course of 20 years , with writers Jim and John Thomas , John Requa , Glenn Ficarra , and Scott Z. Burns .
Quentin Tarantino was briefly attached following the success of Pulp Fiction , but opted to make Jackie Brown instead .
The Man from U.N.C.L.E. continued to labor in development hell with directors Matthew Vaughn and David Dobkin .
Steven Soderbergh was attached to direct Scott Z. Burns ' screenplay , with production slated to begin in March 2012 .
Executives from Warner Bros. wanted the budget to stay below $ 60 million , but Soderbergh felt that amount would not be adequate to fund the 1960s - era sets , props , and international settings required for the film .
Emily Blunt was nearly cast as the female lead , but she left the project shortly after Soderbergh departed in November 2011 .
Guy Ritchie signed on in March 2013 .
On July 31 , 2013 , it was announced that Ritchie 's adaptation would start filming in September 2013 in London and Italy .
The final production budget was approximately $ 75 million US .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In November 2010 , George Clooney showed interest in the film , and was in talks for the lead role of Napoleon Solo , but he left in September 2011 due to a recurring back injury .
After Clooney 's departure , actors including Joseph Gordon - Levitt , Ryan Gosling , Channing Tatum , Alexander Skarsgård , Ewan McGregor , Robert Pattinson , Matt Damon , Christian Bale , Michael Fassbender , Bradley Cooper , Leonardo DiCaprio , Joel Kinnaman , Russell Crowe , Chris Pine , Ryan Reynolds , and Jon Hamm were considered for the lead role .
On March 18 , 2013 , Tom Cruise was in early talks to take the lead in the film .
Armie Hammer was cast in the second lead role as Illya Kuryakin on April 24 , 2013 , with Cruise set as Solo .
Swedish actress Alicia Vikander joined the film on May 8 , 2013 , as the female lead .
On May 23 , 2013 , Cruise dropped out of the film , due to his commitment to .
British actor Henry Cavill replaced Cruise .
Elizabeth Debicki was cast in a femme fatale role on July 31 , 2013 ;
Rose Byrne and Charlize Theron were earlier considered for the same part .
On August 8 , 2013 , Hugh Grant joined the cast as Alexander Waverly , the head of United Network Command for Law and Enforcement ( U.N.C.L.E ) .
Jared Harris was cast as Sanders on September 4 , 2013 , and Luca Calvani was cast as a villain , Alexander .
Simona Caparrini was also cast to play Contessa .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography on the film commenced on September 9 , 2013 .
In October 2013 , filming was being under way at the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich , Royal Victoria Docks , London and Goodwood Motor Racing Circuit in West Sussex , UK .
Filming took place in various locations throughout Italy , including the Gulf of Naples , and Baiae Castle .
Kuryakin and Teller 's first outings as an assumed couple were shot at just below the Spanish Steps ; the Grand Hotel Plaza , in Via del Corso ; and in the gardens of ancient Theater of Marcellus .
Two locations stood in place for Berlin sites on either side of the wall : the public toilet fight between Solo and Kuryakin was shot in Regent 's Park in London , while the car chase during the movie 's first act was shot in Chatham Historic Dockyard , Kent UK .
Director Guy Ritchie finalized the script throughout production : " He 's quite intuitive and tends to constantly rewrite stuff , which he does even when they 're shooting .
He 'll rewrite things in the morning if they 're shooting that day , working with the actors if something does n't feel right . "
says long term collaborator David Allcock .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score for The Man from U.N.C.L.E. was composed by Daniel Pemberton .
A soundtrack album was released by WaterTower Music on August 7 , 2015 who also released a behind the scenes video showcasing the many different elements of the process .
The musical score received many glowing references in reviews of the film with the LA Times noting " it is composer Daniel Pemberton who in some ways seems to understand the idea of the movie even better than Ritchie , his score featuring breathy flutes , twangy guitar , spooky harpsichord and pounding drums and organ capturing the mixture of pastiche , homage and a twist of the new in a way the rest of the film rarely matches . "
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was originally set for a January 16 , 2015 release , but on August 12 , 2014 , Warner Bros moved the film 's release date from January 16 , 2015 to August 14 , 2015 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Man from U.N.C.L.E. was released on DVD and Blu - ray on November 17 , 2015 by Warner Home Video .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The Man from U.N.C.L.E. grossed $ 45.4 million in North America and $ 64.4 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 109.8 million , against a production budget of $ 75 million .
The Hollywood Reporter estimated the film lost the studio at least $ 80 million before international release , when factoring together all expenses and revenues .
The film grossed $ 900,000 from its early Thursday screenings and $ 4.8 million on its opening day .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 13.4 million , which was about $ 5 million below expectations , finishing 3rd at the box office .
It opened in Russia with $ 3.1 million .
In the United Kingdom , it opened alongside Sony Pictures ' Pixels , earning $ 2.3 million , debuting at number 4 for Friday - to - Sunday , while Pixels was at No . 1 with $ 4.2 million , including previews during the week .
Warner Bros did not preview The Man from U.N.C.L.E.
Across Asia , it generated $ 2.7 million from six countries and $ 1.7 million in Australia .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 66 % based on 247 reviews , with an average rating of 6.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Man from U.N.C.L.E. tries to distract from an unremarkable story with charismatic stars and fizzy set pieces , adding up to an uneven action thriller with just enough style to overcome its lack of substance . "
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 55 out of 100 , based on 40 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
On CinemaScore , audiences gave the film an average grade of " B " on an A+ to F scale .
ACCOLADES SOUNDTRACK *
" Compared to What " – performed by Roberta Flack * " " – performed by Suzanne Doucet * " " – performed by Rita Pavone *
" Cry to Me " – performed by Solomon Burke *
" Five Months , Two Weeks , Two Days " – performed by Louis Prima * " " – written and conducted by Stelvio Cipriani * " Banana Freak
Out "
– written and performed by George Guzman *
" Man From U.N.C.L.E. " – Theme ( Instrumental ) – performed by Hugo Montenegro & His Orchestra * " " – performed by Peppino Gagliardi * " " – written by Ennio Morricone
* " Torture in D minor " – performed by Sergio Pizzorno * " " – performed by Tom Zé * " " – written and performed by Luigi Tenco *
" Take Care of Business " – performed by Nina Simone POSSIBLE SEQUEL Section::::Possible sequel .
In April 2017 , it was reported that Wigram was working on the script for a sequel , at the suggestion of Hammer ; Cavill stated that he would be excited to return for the sequel .
ANDROID GAME VERSION Section::::Android game version .
It is gamed as " Mission Berlin " on Android .
It is an open world style , there are two heroes , and you can choose freely .
As of December 2018,download is impossible .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS