CAROL ( FILM )
Carol is a 2015 drama film directed by Todd Haynes .
The screenplay , written by Phyllis Nagy , is based on the 1952 romance novel The Price of Salt by Patricia Highsmith ( republished as Carol in 1990 ) .
The film stars Cate Blanchett , Rooney Mara , Sarah Paulson , Jake Lacy , and Kyle Chandler .
Set in New York City during the early 1950s , Carol tells the story of a forbidden affair between an aspiring female photographer and an older woman going through a difficult divorce .
Carol had been in development since 1997 , when Nagy wrote the first draft of the screenplay .
British company Film4 Productions and its then - chief executive Tessa Ross financed development .
The film had a troubled development period , facing problems with financing , rights , scheduling conflicts , and accessibility .
Number 9 Films came on board as a producer in 2011 , when Elizabeth Karlsen secured the rights to the novel .
The film is co - produced by New York - based Killer Films , which joined the project in 2013 after Haynes 's collaborator Christine Vachon approached him to direct .
Principal photography on the British - American production began in March 2014 , in Cincinnati , Ohio , and lasted 34 days .
Cinematographer Edward Lachman shot Carol on Super 16 mm film .
Carol competed for the Palme d'Or at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival , where Mara tied for the Best Actress award .
The film received many accolades , including five Golden Globe Award nominations , six Academy Award nominations , and nine BAFTA Award nominations ; as well as five Dorian Awards and awards from the New York Film Critics Circle , Los Angeles Film Critics Association , and National Society of Film Critics .
It became the best reviewed film of 2015 , as calculated by Metacritic .
The film premiered in the United Kingdom on October 14 , 2015 , followed by theatrical release on November 27 , 2015 .
It opened in limited release in the United States on November 20 , 2015 , and wide release on January 15 , 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
During the Christmas season of 1952 , aspiring photographer Therese Belivet is working in Frankenberg 's department store in Manhattan .
She meets a glamorous woman , Carol Aird , who is searching for a doll for her daughter Rindy .
At Therese 's recommendation , Carol purchases a model train set .
When Carol departs she leaves her gloves on the counter .
Therese mails them to her using Frankenberg 's sales slip with Carol 's name and address .
Therese 's boyfriend , Richard , wants her to go to France with him , hoping they will marry , but she is ambivalent about their relationship .
A mutual friend , Dannie , invites Therese to his workplace , The New York Times , and offers to introduce her to a photo editor friend .
Meanwhile , Carol is going through a difficult divorce from her neglectful husband , Harge .
Carol calls Frankenberg 's to thank the clerk who returned the gloves , and invites Therese to lunch .
Therese visits Dannie and he kisses her , but she becomes uncomfortable and leaves .
Carol invites Therese to her home in New Jersey .
She stops to purchase a Christmas tree , and Therese takes candid photographs of her .
Harge arrives unexpectedly to take Rindy to Florida for Christmas ; he becomes suspicious of Therese as Carol had an affair years before with her friend Abby .
Therese witnesses their argument .
After Rindy leaves , a distressed Carol takes Therese to the train station so she can return home .
Carol calls to apologize and they meet at Therese 's apartment , where Carol surprises her with a suitcase containing a gift of a Canon camera and film .
Carol has learned that Harge is petitioning the judge to consider a " morality clause " against her , threatening to expose her homosexuality and give him full custody of Rindy .
She decides to take a road trip to escape the stress of the divorce proceedings and invites Therese to join her .
Richard accuses Therese of being infatuated with Carol , and predicts Carol will soon tire of her .
The two argue and their relationship comes to an end .
On the second night of the trip , Therese meets a traveling salesman , Tommy Tucker .
On New Year 's Eve , Carol and Therese kiss for the first time and have sex .
The next morning , they discover that Tucker is actually a private investigator hired by Harge to obtain evidence against Carol .
Carol confronts Tucker , threatening him at gunpoint , but he claims to have already sent the tape recordings to Harge .
Carol and Therese turn back .
The following day , in Chicago , Therese learns that Carol has flown home to fight for custody of her daughter , having asked Abby to drive Therese home .
Abby gives her a letter from Carol .
Back at home , Therese telephones Carol , but knowing that she risks losing custody of Rindy if she continues her relationship with Therese , Carol hangs up .
Therese creates a portfolio of her photographs and gets a job at The New York Times .
In the meantime , Carol has been seeing a psychotherapist as a condition of the divorce settlement .
During a confrontational meeting in mid - April with divorce lawyers , Carol suddenly admits to the truth of what the tapes contain , and refuses to deny her sexuality .
She tells Harge that he can have custody , but demands regular visitation even if it has to be supervised .
Carol writes to Therese , and they meet in the lounge of the Ritz Tower Hotel .
Carol reveals she is going to work for a furniture house , and has taken an apartment on Madison Avenue .
Therese declines Carol 's invitation to live with her .
Carol tells Therese that she is meeting associates in the Oak Room , and that if she changes her mind they can have dinner .
Therese remains still and Carol whispers
" I love you .
" They are interrupted by Jack , a colleague who has not seen Therese in months , and Carol departs .
Therese accepts Jack 's ride to a party , but finds that she can not connect with anyone .
Therese heads to the Oak Room .
She scans the diners and sees Carol at a table .
Therese hesitates , before walking towards Carol .
Their eyes meet .
Carol gazes at Therese with a smile that slowly grows .
CAST PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Carol is based on Patricia Highsmith 's 1952 semi - autobiographical romantic novel The Price of Salt .
The book was originally published under the pseudonym " Claire Morgan " by Coward - McCann after Highsmith 's publisher Harper & Brothers rejected it .
In 1990 , Highsmith agreed to republish with Bloomsbury Publishing under her own name , and retitled it Carol .
It had been inspired by an encounter in 1948 between Highsmith and a blonde woman wearing a mink coat ,
Mrs. E.R. Senn ( Kathleen Wiggins Senn ) , whilst she was working as a Christmas season salesgirl at the toy department of Bloomingdale 's in New York .
That evening she wrote an eight - page outline , which she developed some weeks later and had completed by 1951 .
The character of Therese Belivet was based on Highsmith herself .
Senn inspired the character of Carol Aird , but its template was inspired by her relationships with two former lovers , Philadelphia socialite Virginia Kent Catherwood and psychoanalyst Kathryn Hamill Cohen .
Virginia Catherwood lost custody of her daughter in a high - profile divorce that involved secret tape recordings of her and her female lover .
London - born , New York - based producer Dorothy Berwin was initially attached to the project in 1996 , owning the rights to the novel .
She enlisted then - playwright Phyllis Nagy to write the screenplay on the recommendation of her London agent .
Nagy , who was a friend of Highsmith , wrote the first draft of the script in 1997 .
Highsmith had suggested to Nagy that she adapt one of her novels .
According to Nagy , Highsmith was not confident that the novel could be made into a " satisfying " film because of its " intense , subjective point of view " .
Nagy decided to adapt the script to ensure its fidelity to the source material , remarking , " I felt a strange responsibility to take it , and to make sure that it was n't screwed up in some fundamental way , because she so disliked many of the screen adaptations of her work . " While searching for investors , Nagy and Berwin learned that the homosexuality of the characters was not as much of an obstacle as was that they were women . "
Having two women leads was the issue " , Nagy noted .
In 2015 , Berwin said that , in those days , it was a risky idea to play the role of Carol . "
As a project it came together with Cate Blanchett .
You needed to always start with her role " .
Film4 Productions and Tessa Ross financed the development of the film and kept it alive through the years , as it " underwent a decade - plus of revision under various directors and investors " − including Hettie MacDonald , Kenneth Branagh , Kimberly Peirce , John Maybury , and Stephen Frears − until the project completely stalled .
The long delay was a result of struggles with funding , rights , and trepidations about a film with a gay theme and two female leads .
" During its development , there was a very different kind of lesbian or gay movie that got financed " , Nagy said .
" They were very agenda or issue driven , and this was not .
In fact it insists on not being that in order to make the point .
I would talk about that with financiers , and I could see them glaze over . "
Nagy said it was important that the screenplay be authentic to the early 1950s .
" There was a different protocol then , a different etiquette , a different way people related to each other physically " , she said .
" It does you no service to spoon - feed a contemporary audience their own emotional codes and value systems .
" While various directors and investors had input to the script throughout its long gestation period , Nagy rejected suggestions that Carol or Therese " should feel guilty about being gay and suffer some kind of breakdown scene about it . "
" What I knew going in to the adaptation " , Nagy said , " was that Pat 's lack of psychologizing about Carol and Therese 's sexual attraction and ultimately their love , had to be maintained .
It could not be corrupted by an impulse to indulge in any number of dramatic narrative cliches about guilt concerning one 's sexuality or the like . "
Nagy set the adaptation several years later than when the novel is set , so that " the dawn of the Eisenhower administration and the rise of HUAC could be front and center " .
One of the challenges was translating the subjective and limited third - person viewpoint , where the narrator " sits on the shoulder of Therese and makes regular advances into ( and retreats from )
her head " ; Carol is thus largely seen through Therese 's fanatical prism .
Nagy was initially apprehensive about the narrative structure , considering " there 's no character of Carol .
She 's a ghost appropriately , as she should be , in the novel " , adding that she was " overwhelmed by the task of trying to come up with the visual equivalent for it structurally .
"
She decided to split the point of view and shift perspectives from Therese to Carol , as " the point of view is always with the more vulnerable party " .
She made Therese a photographer instead of a set designer , allowing her " to be seen moving from objects to people " , which she likened to Highsmith as Therese is a " clear stand - in " for the author .
Nagy drew from her personal knowledge of Highsmith for Therese , describing one of Therese 's lines , " I started taking pictures of people because my friend says I have to be more interested in humans " , as the epitome of Highsmith : " that ability to step outside of life and comment on it before participating in it " .
For the character of Carol , she took inspiration from Grace Kelly 's character in Rear Window ( 1954 ) .
Nagy had freedom in " inventing a life for [ Carol ] , for whom , basically , we knew the outline of what was going on .
" Once she was able to understand the inner life of Carol , and her motivations , the character became easy to write .
Nagy aimed to " focus on the nature of what it 's like to fall in love from two points of view " , and show the characters " just behaving ... not inhabiting positions . "
Nagy realized she would " pass time in a different way " to the novel , eliminating elements that were unnecessary and slowed down the story .
She had " great freedom " developing the screenplay in England , while no studio or director was attached .
Over the years , five " proper " drafts materialized .
Nagy said that after all the previous collaborations , " working for Todd was easy and quick .
We both have an interest in restraint .
" Haynes and Nagy collaborated on honing the screenplay .
When Haynes came on board they had discussions about " what became the framing device " ; the story reminded Haynes of the 1945 classic film Brief Encounter , and he proposed using a similar technique , which Nagy " then ran with in a certain way " .
" He was interested in the same things , tonally , that the script was interested in " , she noted .
" We were able to keep that restraint going " .
Nagy made the story more enigmatic , pruning some of the backstory in light of a significant early line that Carol says to Therese : " What a strange girl you are , flung out of space . "
Nagy and Haynes were determined not to make " an agenda film " or a " look how far we 've come " film .
At the London Film Festival , Nagy said she had titled the film Carol , and not The Price of Salt , because Highsmith herself had changed the title to Carol when the novel was republished , and she also " liked the sort of strange , obsessive nature of calling it by someone 's name . "
Haynes said that the film is called Carol because the novel " is locked into the subjectivity of the younger woman " and Carol is " really the object of desire in the story . "
" There 's an element of , something aloof ...
something unsettled about [ her ] , that puts Therese and these new feelings ... on edge throughout much of the film " On the universal theme of the story , Haynes said " the real determining question is not whether society will accept [ Therese 's ] feelings or not ; it 's , will this person return her love or not ? ...
That is what transcends the class of love , or the period in which it 's occurring , and makes it something that just humbles us all and levels us all . "
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
British producer Elizabeth Karlsen of Number 9 Films came across Nagy 's script in around 2004 , when she was co - producing Mrs. Harris with Christine Vachon of New York - based Killer Films .
Berwin 's rights to The Price of Salt expired in 2010 , and Karlsen thereafter acquired the script .
Berwin remained an executive producer on the film .
Karlsen managed to convince Highsmith 's estate to sign over the rights , closing the deal with Tessa Ross in late 2011 .
She then persuaded a disillusioned and reluctant Nagy to come back on board .
The producers hired a UK director , who then dropped out because of scheduling conflicts .
They later recruited Irish director John Crowley , who was announced in May 2012 along with the lead cast , Cate Blanchett and Mia Wasikowska , and the involved producers , Karlsen and Stephen Woolley of Number 9 Films and Tessa Ross of Film4 , who received executive producer credit .
Carol was scheduled to commence filming in early 2013 , until Crowley withdrew due to a scheduling conflict .
Karlsen called Vachon to discuss their losing another director , and Vachon told her that Haynes 's new film was not going to happen because its star had also backed out .
They then decided to approach Haynes .
Vachon , Haynes 's frequent collaborator , asked if he would be interested , and he received a copy of the screenplay .
Two days later he committed to direct , and Vachon joined as a producer .
Haynes was announced as director on May 22 , 2013 .
Three days later , The Weinstein Company acquired U.S. distribution rights at the Cannes Film Festival from HanWay Films .
Haynes had first heard about the film in 2012 from costume designer Sandy Powell , who informed him that Blanchett was attached and that Karlsen was producing .
Blanchett , who served as an executive producer through her company Dirty Films , had been involved with the project for " a long time " .
Haynes learned that they were looking for a director when Vachon approached him in 2013 .
He regarded the story , its historical and social context , and collaborating again with Blanchett , as motivations to get involved .
" What was so interesting to me when I first read this script " , he said , " is how it basically links that hothouse mentality of the desiring subject ... to that of the criminal subject , in that both are these over - productive minds that are conjuring narratives constantly ...
this crazy state of this furtive hyperactivity in the mind .
" Haynes collaborated with Blanchett on a dramaturgical level .
Another complication emerged when Wasikowska had to drop out because of a scheduling conflict .
Haynes then approached Rooney Mara , who had been offered the role of Therese after completing the 2011 film The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo .
She said that although she loved the script and wanted to work with Blanchett , she had turned it down as she felt exhausted and unconfident .
By the time Haynes came on board she was " in a much different head space " and signing on was then " a no brainer " .
In August 2013 , it was reported that Mara had replaced Wasikowska .
Sarah Paulson was cast as Abby and Kyle Chandler as Harge in January 2014 .
The following month , Cory Michael Smith was cast as Tommy , and Jake Lacy as Richard .
In April 2014 , John Magaro was cast as Dannie .
Carrie Brownstein then joined the cast in the role of Genevieve Cantrell .
Carter Burwell was hired to compose the music , and Edward Lachman , who had previously collaborated with Haynes , served as the director of photography .
In rehearsal , Haynes , Blanchett and Mara realized that certain lines should be cut , which Haynes deemed the " stylistic practice that we all took throughout the creative departments .
I feel there was an understanding with them that words and dialogue were never carrying the weight of the story . "
Costume Designer Sandy Powell said of working with Haynes , " Todd is super visual , super prepared and he provides his own visuals at the beginning of the film .
He starts with a look book of images that he 's compiled over the months and months .
He 's almost OCD about it .
In a good way .
" The look of the film was influenced by the post - war color photography of Ruth Orkin , Esther Bubley , Helen Levitt , and Vivian Maier , as well as the abstract photography of Saul Leiter .
Haynes used their works as a visual reference for depicting a " dirty and sagging " New York .
In preparing for filming , the producers found that the cost of production in the New York City area would be prohibitive , and it was also going to be difficult to find locations there that resembled the early 1950s .
Part of the financing plan hinged upon a co - production deal with Canada , with filming taking place in Montreal , but Haynes joining the production led to a rethink .
Karlsen recalled making a film 27 years earlier in Cincinnati , Ohio , that was set in 1950s New York .
After researching the city , she found that it had not changed much in decades , with Ohio also having one of the best film tax incentives in the U.S.
The city of Cincinnati was very accommodating to the production , which employed many locals as crew .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
In December 2013 , it was announced that Carol would be filmed in Cincinnati , Ohio , and that production offices would open in early January 2014 with filming expected between mid - March and May.
In February 2014 , the Greater Cincinnati & Northern Kentucky Film Commission released the solicitation from producers for extras and vintage vehicles .
Principal photography began on March 12 , 2014 , at Eden Park in Cincinnati .
Various locations around Cincinnati were used during production , including Downtown Cincinnati , Hyde Park , Over - the - Rhine , Wyoming , Cheviot , and Hamilton , as well as Alexandria , Kentucky .
Except for the Waterloo , Iowa , motel room , which was a private set built for filming the love scene , locations were used for interior and exterior settings .
The second floor of a now - defunct department store served as the setting for the toy department of the fictional Frankenberg 's .
Filming was completed after 34 days on May 2 , 2014 .
Edward Lachman shot Carol on Super 16 mm film using 35 mm format lenses .
POST - PRODUCTION Section::::Post - production .
Post - production in New York took seven months to complete .
Haynes was involved in the editing process alongside editor Affonso Gonçalves .
Visual effects ( VFX ) were used to remove modern components from backgrounds , with six " key shots " needing extensive VFX .
Moving shots were particularly complicated when they were filtered through windows , rain , dust , and other elements , said Haynes , and the CGI details " had to fit exactly into the vernacular itself , with the grain element and level of distress .
" The digital intermediate process was used to achieve a " very specific , slightly spoiled palette " .
Haynes spent five and a half weeks making detailed notes on Gonçalves 's assembly edit , and produced his director 's cut within four weeks .
The producers gave notes on the director 's cut , and held some test screenings with friends and acquaintances .
They decided to show the cut to Harvey Weinstein , who was impressed and endorsed it .
Haynes confirmed the completion of deliverables on December 15 , 2014 .
Carrie Brownstein stated that the first cut was extensive and most of her scenes were left out .
In November 2015 , Sarah Paulson said that a key scene between Abby and Therese , and some conversation in a scene with Carol , had been cut .
In January 2016 , Rooney Mara said that an intimate scene between Therese and Richard had also been deleted .
Gonçalves said that the initial cut was at two and a half hours , and the final cut ended at 118 minutes .
Haynes explained in an October 2015 interview : " We cut a lot of scenes ; it was too long , and they were all well - performed and nicely shot —
we never , in my opinion , cut things because they were poorly executed .
It was just a paring - down process , which all movies do . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was released in both digital download and CD album format by Varèse Sarabande on November 20 , 2015 , followed by a double album vinyl release on June 24 , 2016 .
It includes the original score by Carter Burwell and additional music by The Clovers , Billie Holiday , Georgia Gibbs , Les Paul and Mary Ford , and Jo Stafford .
Songs not featured on the CD include " Willow Weep for Me " performed by Vince Giordano & the Nighthawks Orchestra , " Perdido " by Woody Herman , and
" That 's the Chance
You Take " by Eddie Fisher . "
A Garden in the Rain " by The Four Aces , " Slow Poke " by Pee Wee King , and " Why Do n't You Believe Me " by Patti Page are also not included , but appear in the vinyl version .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The first official image from Carol , released by Film4 , appeared in the London Evening Standard in May 2014 .
Despite being completed in late 2014 , producers withheld the film until 2015 to benefit from a film festival launch .
In October 2014 , Haynes and Vachon announced that it would premiere in the spring of 2015 , and be released in the fall .
Carol had its world premiere at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival .
It made its North American debut at the Telluride Film Festival on September 4 , and screened at the New York Film Festival on October 9 , 2015 .
The film premiered in the United Kingdom at the BFI London Film Festival 's Gala event on October 14 , 2015 .
Originally scheduled for a December 18 release in the United States , Carol opened in limited release on November 20 , 2015 .
It received a platform release in the country , expanding from four to sixteen locations on December 11 , and then to 180 theaters on December 25 , reaching over 520 locations by the weekend of January 8 , 2016 .
The film went into wide release on January 15 , 2016 .
Carol was released nationwide in the UK on November 27 , 2015 .
In December 2015 , The Hollywood Reporter said that Russian distributor Arthouse had acquired rights to release the film in Russia in March 2016 .
Its CEO stated that it was " a huge challenge because of the federal ' gay propaganda ' law that victimizes the Russian LGBT community " , that " will prevent Carol [ being ] sold to major TV channels or even being advertised on federal networks " .
He noted that " some cinemas will refuse to book the film " , but " the controversy ... will help us market Carol to the right audience " , adding that he believed it would " appeal to the public way beyond the LGBT community .
" It was released in Russia on March 10 , 2016 .
In March 2016 , a 35 mm film screening was held at the .
The Metrograph independent cinema in New York hosted a special 35 mm screening event , followed by a Q&A with Haynes , Vachon and Lachman .
The event was sold out , and a second and third screening were added .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Carol was made available for digital download on March 4 , 2016 .
The film was released on DVD , Blu - ray and video on demand on March 15 , 2016 in the United States by Anchor Bay Entertainment , and on March 21 , 2016 in the United Kingdom by StudioCanal .
Disc format bonus features include a behind the scenes gallery , a Q&A interview with the cast and filmmakers , and ( for the UK version ) limited edition art cards . , both the DVD and Blu - ray were Number Seven in pre - order sales in the United States ; followed by ranking Number 18 in retail sales the week of commercial release .
In the United Kingdom , the DVD debut charted at Number 7 and the Blu - ray at Number 12 of " Top 100 " sales for both formats .
, sales of the DVD and Blu - ray in the U.S. and Canada totaled $ 1.2 million and $ 726,657 respectively , for a combined total of $ 1.9 million .
In the United States , Carol premiered on premium cable channel Showtime on October 8 , 2016 , and on Showtime on Demand service and Showtime
Anytime streaming app on October 9 , 2016 .
The film became available for streaming on Netflix on September 20 , 2017 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Carol received a ten - minute standing ovation at its Cannes Film Festival international press screening and premiere .
Critics praised Haynes 's direction , Blanchett and Mara 's performances , cinematography , costumes and musical score , and deemed it a strong contender for a Cannes award .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a 95 % rating based on reviews from 283 critics , and an average rating of 8.6/10 .
The website 's critical consensus states : " Shaped by Todd Haynes ' deft direction and powered by a strong cast led by Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara , Carol lives up to its groundbreaking source material .
"
Carol was named the best - reviewed romance film of 2015 in Rotten Tomatoes ' annual Golden Tomato Awards .
On Metacritic , the film received a score of 95 ( out of 100 ) based on 44 reviews from mainstream critics , indicating " universal acclaim " , and is its best reviewed film of 2015 .
Kate Stables wrote in Sight & Sound : " Elegant restraint is the film 's watchword ...
In this enjoyably deliberate film , each shot and scene is carefully composed to pay homage to 50s cinema , yet infused with an emotional ambiguity which feels decidedly contemporary . "
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said it was " a serious melodrama about the geometry of desire , a dreamy example of heightened reality that fully engages emotions despite the exact calculations with which it 's been made ... '
Carol 's ' lush but controlled visual look is completely intoxicating .
This is filmmaking done by masters , an experience to savor . "
A.O. Scott wrote in The New York Times : " At once ardent and analytical , cerebral and swooning , ' Carol ' is a study in human magnetism , in the physics and optics of eros .
With sparse dialogue and restrained drama , the film is a symphony of angles and glances , of colors and shadows . "
Amy Taubin from Film Comment said : " The narrative , precisely chiseled by Phyllis Nagy from the ungainly novel , is deceptively simple ...
What 's remarkable about Carol is that it seems to exist entirely in the present moment — to be precise , in that electric , elastic , heart - stopping / heart - racing present of romantic desire .
It is a film composed of gestures and glances , its delicacy a veiled promise of abandon .
And it could not exist without the extraordinary performances of Blanchett and Mara . "
David Stratton of The Australian wrote : " The meeting of these two women is an electrifying scene ; their eyes make contact , and nothing of significance is said , apart from the usual interaction between shopper and shop assistant , but Haynes and his wonderful actors make it very clear that something momentous has occurred — love at first sight . "
Geoffrey Macnab of The Independent said : " Todd Haynes 's latest feature is a subtle , moving and deceptive story of two women ( brilliantly played in very contrasting styles by Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara ) who refuse to live against ' their own grain ' ...
Phyllis Nagy 's screenplay emphasises their steeliness and self - reliance .
In sly and subversive fashion , Haynes is laying bare the tensions in a society that refuses to acknowledge ' difference ' of any sort . "
Andrew O'Hehir of Salon wrote : " From its opening shots of the autumnal , rain - swept streets of New York sometime in the middle of the last century , director Todd Haynes ' magnificent new film " Carol " establishes a mood of mournful romance , half nostalgic and half ominous , that never lets go . "
Peter Howell of the Toronto Star said : " Everything clicks into place for this gorgeous achievement .
Cinematographer Ed Lachman shot on Super 16 mm film to achieve era - specific muted colours and softer textures .
Precise production design and a palette steeped in shades of green and red ( appropriate to the Yuletide setting ) make watching it seem like stepping inside an Edward Hopper painting . "
Mark Kermode wrote in The Guardian : " This superb adaptation of Patricia Highsmith 's 1952 novel
The Price of Salt does n't put a foot wrong .
From Phyllis Nagy 's alluringly uncluttered script to Cate Blanchett 's sturdily tremulous performance as a society woman with everything to lose , this brilliantly captures the thrills , tears and fears of forbidden love . "
Writing for Variety , Justin Chang said : " despite their obvious differences in class and background , Therese and Carol seem to ease themselves ( and the audience ) so quickly and naturally into a bond that they have no interest in defining , or even really discussing — a choice that works not only for an era when their love dared not speak its name , but also for Haynes ' faith in the power of the medium to achieve an eloquence beyond words . "
Francine Prose in The New York Review of Books commented on " the delicacy , the patience , and the sheer amount of screen time that it lavishes on the experience of falling in love : the hesitations and doubts , the seemingly casual exchanges freighted with meaning and suppressed emotion , the simple happiness of being together . "
Anita Katz from The San Francisco Examiner said : " Haynes triumphs in his quest to make a sweeping romantic melodrama with social substance at the core .
As a period piece , the movie immerses us in 1950s styles and attitudes .
As a sensory experience , it dazzles with everything from rain - streaked windows to Therese 's plaid tam - o - shanter ...
Haynes powerfully addresses the consequences of ignorance and intolerance .
Impressively textured , the drama is filled with secret glances and other subtle aspects of forbidden love . "
Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote : " Carol " is a performance of a performance , whereby codes and signals convey the most essential stuff of life , while the kabuki of being " normal " plays out with the carefully cultivated — and patently false — perfection of the toy train village Carol buys from Therese at their first meeting .
Working from a carefully crafted script by Phyllis Nagy , Haynes portrays two people thirstily drinking each other in , while on the outside , they sip tea and cocktails with prim decorum .
" Naming it " one of the year 's very best films " , Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said : " Camera virtuoso Edward Lachman finds visual poetry in the hothouse eroticism that envelops Carol and Therese , an amateur photographer who keeps framing Carol in her lens .
Blanchett , a dream walking in Sandy Powell 's frocks , delivers a master class in acting .
And Mara is flawless ...
[ it 's ] a romantic spellbinder that cuts deep . "
Stephen Whitty in the New York Daily News praised Carol as a " lesbian romance where nobody says the word ' lesbian ' ...
because this is n't just a lesbian story .
It 's a human one . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office . , Carol had grossed $ 12.7 million in the U.S. and Canada , and , $ 30.2 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 43 million against a budget of $ 11.8 million .
In the United Kingdom , the film earned £ 540,632 ( $ 812,000 ) in its opening weekend from 206 screens , ranking Number seven of the top ten films for the weekend .
Carol had grossed $ 4.0 million in the UK .
In the United States , the film began its limited run on November 20 at four theaters − The Paris and Angelika Theater in New York and the ArcLight Hollywood and Landmark Theater in Los Angeles − and was projected to earn around $ 50,000 per theater .
It grossed $ 253,510 in its opening weekend at the four locations , the best opening of Haynes 's films .
Its per - theater average of $ 63,378 was the third largest of 2015 .
In its second weekend , the film grossed $ 203,076 , with a " robust " average of $ 50,769 per location , the best of the week , bringing its nine - day cumulative to $ 588,355 .
In its third weekend at the four locations , Carol earned $ 147,241 , averaging $ 36,810 , the highest for the third week in a row .
The film expanded from four to sixteen theaters in its fourth week , and was projected to average an estimated $ 10,000 over the weekend .
In its fourth weekend , it grossed $ 338,000 , averaging $ 21,105 per screen , and bringing its U.S. cumulative total to $ 1.2 million .
The film was projected to earn an estimated $ 218,000 from 16 theaters in its fifth weekend .
It grossed $ 231,137 , averaging $ 14,446 per theater .
Carol then expanded to 180 theaters .
In it sixth weekend , the film made $ 1.1 million , with a $ 6,075 average across 180 locations ; its U.S. gross was $ 2.9 million , with $ 7.8 million worldwide from seven other countries .
Carol reached $ 5 million in the United States in its seventh weekend .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Carol has received over 270 industry and critic nominations , and over 85 awards and honours .
The film was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival , where it won the Queer Palm and Mara tied for the Best Actress award .
It won the Audience Award at the Whistler Film Festival , and the Chicago International Film Festival 's Gold Q Hugo Award for exhibiting " new artistic perspectives on sexuality and identity " .
Carol was the " overall favorite " on IndieWire critics ' poll of the best films and performances from the New York Film Festival , topping the Best Narrative Feature , Best Director , Best Lead Performance ( Blanchett and Mara ) , Best Screenplay , and Best Cinematography categories .
Lachman was awarded the grand prize for Best Cinematography by the Camerimage International Film Festival .
The jury stated : In September 2015 , The Weinstein Company confirmed that it would campaign for Cate Blanchett as Lead Actress and Rooney Mara as Supporting Actress for the 88th Academy Awards .
The film received six Oscar nominations , including Best Actress , and garnered five Golden Globe Award nominations , including Best Motion Picture – Drama .
It received nine BAFTA Award nominations , including Best Film .
The film was nominated for six Independent Spirit Awards and won for Best Cinematography .
It also received nine Critics ' Choice Movie Award nominations , including Best Film .
Blanchett and Mara received Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role and Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role , respectively .
The New York Film Critics Circle awarded Carol Best Film , Best Director , Best Cinematography , and Best Screenplay .
The film won Best Music from the Los Angeles Film Critics Association and was runner - up for Best Director , Best Cinematography , and Best Production Design .
The National Society of Film Critics awarded Haynes Best Director and Lachman Best Cinematography .
Haynes and Lachman also received the Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director and Best Cinematography .
Lachman won the London Film Critics ' Circle Technical Achievement Award .
Carol won five Dorian Awards , including Film of the Year , Director of the Year , Performance of the Year – Actress ( Blanchett ) , LGBTQ Film of the Year and Screenplay of the Year .
It was awarded the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Film – Wide Release .
The Frankfurt Book Fair named Carol the Best International Literary Adaptation .
The American Film Institute selected Carol as one of its ten Movies of the Year .
The AFI Awards jury rationale read :
In March 2016 , the British Film Institute named Carol the best LGBT film of all time , according to over one hundred film experts in a poll encompassing over eighty years of cinema .
In a 2016 BBC poll of 177 critics from 36 countries , Carol was voted the 69th best film of the 21st century .
POPULARITY Section::::Popularity .
The admiration of Carol resulted in a fandom community that has been referred to as the " Cult of Carol " .
In June 2017 , the tribute comedy short film Carol Support Group premiered at the San Francisco International LGBTQ Film Festival .
Directed by Allison Tate , the film tells the story of mayhem in " a support group for people addicted to the movie Carol .
" The tagline of the film 's poster , " Some people are addicts forever " , is a parody of the " Some people change your life forever " tagline of the original Carol film poster by StudioCanal .
CONTROVERSY ACADEMY AWARDS OMISSIONS
Section::::Controversy .
Section::::Academy Awards omissions .
The omission of Carol from Best Picture and Best Director categories prompted speculation from journalists about the perceived indifference of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences toward female- and LGBT - centred films .
Nate Scott of USA Today called it " the standout snub " of the ceremony , " one made all the more ridiculous because of the bloated Best Picture field " .
Nico Lang of The A.V. Club said that despite the film having been considered a " lock " for a Best Picture nomination , the omission " should n't have been a major shock " given the controversy over Brokeback Mountain loss a decade earlier .
Jason Bailey of Flavorwire said that most Best Picture nominees that include gay themes " put them firmly in the realm of subplots " .
" Carol most transgressive quality " , he declared , " is its refusal to engage in such shenanigans ; this is a film about full - blooded gay lives , not tragic gay deaths . "
At HitFix , Louis Virtel suggested that Academy members ' reception of the film was hurt by its focus on self - determined women .
Matthew Jacobs of The Huffington Post expressed similar sentiments and felt that the Academy 's artistic tastes were " too conventional to recognize its brilliance " .
Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair said that although its " themes of passion and heartache may be universal " the film may be " too gay " , speaking " in a vernacular that , I 'd guess , only queer people are fully fluent in . "
He added that the lack of " gushing melodrama " put the film at a disadvantage .
Dorothy Snarker of IndieWire attributed the omissions to the Academy 's demographics .
Snarker agreed that Carol may be too gay and too female " for the largely old white male voting base " to connect with .
She also considered that the successes of the LGBT rights movement in the U.S. may have partly been responsible for the lack of " political urgency " around the film .
At The Advocate , Rebekah Allen argued that " there are those who simply do not want to see a lesbian love story on screen . "
Trish Bendix of AfterEllen said that the Best Picture snub was a " reminder of the patriarchal society we continue to live in , where films that create a space for women to live happily without men and without punishment will not be rewarded . "
Marcie Bianco of Quartz described the film as " centered around women 's desire " and structured in a way that " elevates the power of women 's gaze " .
The omission from Best Picture , she concluded , illustrates " yet again how sexism operates in the world , and in the Academy specifically , as the refusal to see women as protagonists and agents of desire . "
In Paper magazine , Carey O'Donnell observed that gay romances are only " Oscar surefires " when they use the tragedy - desolation - demise " equation " , and that " a depiction of two strong women in love with each other ... seems to still be troubling to many " .
David Ehrlich of Rolling Stone wrote that the film 's " patience and precision " did not conform to Academy tastes , but its legacy " will doubtlessly survive this year 's most egregious snub " .
Todd Haynes said that he thought having two female leads was " a factor " in the omission .
OSCAR
CATEGORY
Section::::Oscar category .
Despite winning Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival ( shared with Emmanuelle Bercot ) and receiving a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama alongside Blanchett , Mara was nominated for the Academy Award as Best Supporting Actress .
The Weinstein Company decided on the category placement to avoid the co - leads competing in the same category .
In an interview with The New York Times , Mara seemed displeased by the decision .
CUTS AND CENSORSHIP Section::::Cuts and censorship .
In January 2016 , ABC rejected a prime time commercial featuring a snippet of the nude scene between Carol and Therese , which caused The Weinstein Company to re - edit the television trailer .
In August 2016 , Delta Air Lines was criticised on social media for airing an in - flight entertainment version of Carol in which the love scenes had been deleted .
Phyllis Nagy replied on Twitter that , in contrast to Delta , American and United Airlines had provided the full theatrical release .
SEE ALSO * Desert Hearts ( a film with similar themes set in 1959 )
* List of lesbian , gay , bisexual or transgender - related films of 2015
* List of LGBT - related films by storyline
* New Queer Cinema
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Academy Conversations : Carol .
Oscars ( Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences ) , YouTube , November 16 , 2015
* Carol : A Rare Movie That Escapes the Male Gaze .
Judy Berman , New York , November 18 , 2015
*
The True Love Story Behind the Making of ' Carol ' .
Mike Powell , Rolling Stone , November 20 , 2015
* The Brilliant Subversiveness of ' Carol 's ' Conventional Ending .
Moze Halperin , Flavorwire , November 23 , 2015
* Phyllis Nagy : Carol and me .
Mark Reynolds , Bookanista , November 24 , 2015
* " Carol " Offers A Rare Ending For A Lesbian Romance .
Kate Aurthur , BuzzFeed , November 25 , 2015
* " Carol " Up Close .
Richard Brody , The New Yorker , November 30 , 2015
* Carol – Q&A with Cate Blanchett , Rooney Mara , Phyllis Nagy , and Todd Haynes .
National Board of Review , November 30 , 2015
* The Object of Desire : Todd Haynes discusses Carol and the satisfactions of telling women 's stories .
Nick Davis , Film Comment , November
/ December 2015
* Edward Lachman Shares His Secrets For Shooting Todd Haynes ' ' Carol ' .
Edward Lachman , IndieWire , December 3 , 2015
* Carol and What It Was Really Like to Be a Lesbian in the 1950s .
George Cotkin , TIME .
December 10 , 2015 .
* 5 Minutes With Carol Costume Designer Sandy Powell .
Jennifer Berry , Flare , December 11 , 2015
* A Lesbian " Carol " for Christmas .
Patricia White , Public Books , December 24 , 2015
* Contender – Production Designer Judy Becker , Carol .
Mary Ann Skweres , Below The Line , December 29 , 2015
* Sketchy Lesbians : " Carol " as History and Fantasy .
Patricia White , Film & Media Studies , Swarthmore College , Winter 2015
* Contender – Editor Affonso Gonçalves , Carol .
Mary Ann Skweres , Below The Line , January 6 , 2016
* The Lesbian Gaze Of ' Carol ' .
Natalie Wilson , The Establishment , January 7 , 2016
* The nearness of you – Carol and the cine - poetics of love .
Joanna Di Mattia , In A Lonely Place , January 21 , 2016
*
Sandy Powell 's costumes tell what words ca n't .
Sam Woolf , The Seventh Row , February 23 , 2016
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website ( Number 9 Films )
* ( The Weinstein Company )
* Official website ( StudioCanal ) * CAROL Production Notes ( 2015 Festival de Cannes Press Kit ) .
Number 9 Films ( Carol ) Ltd. , ( 37 pp ) , May 17 , 2015
* CAROL Production Notes .
The Weinstein Company , ( 51 pp ) , November 10 , 2015
* Carol – Films For Consideration resource by The Weinstein Company * Carol at BBFC
* Carol at British Council Film * Carol at LUMIERE
* Carol at Movie Maps ( Filming Locations )
* Carol at SearchWorks Catalog , Stanford University Libraries
* The Price of Salt , or Carol by Patricia Highsmith ( W. W. Norton , 2004 )