PSYCH :
THE MUSICAL " Psych : The Musical " is an episode of the seventh season of Psych , and the 110th episode in the series overall .
Formatted as a musical , it aired as a two - hour event , using up episodes 15 and 16 of the season order .
The episode aired on December 15 , 2013 .
Steve Franks wrote and directed the episode , including creating the lyrics for original songs .
The episode was many years in the making , promised to fans early on and delayed .
It was finally produced in October 2012 .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Steve Franks was attached to write and direct Psych 's musical episode from many years prior to its completion .
Franks made slow progress on writing and struggled to get the episode to production .
Originally slated to air in the show 's sixth season , the episode was pushed to the seventh .
It was later announced that the episode would air as a two - hour special with original songs written by Steve Franks .
Steve Franks and composer Adam Cohen wrote the original songs featured in the special .
Franks wrote the script and directed the episode .
Filling the order of two episodes , it went into production for 14 days in October 2012 , given no more production time than normal episodes .
There was a special screening in San Diego , CA , on July 17 , 2013 , for fans preceding Psych 's Comic - Con panel the following day .
Announced as " Psych : The Musical , " the episode aired December 15 , 2013 .
Later , it was announced that Ally Sheedy would reprise her role as Mr. Yang .
The episode features fourteen original songs .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The plot deals with a criminally insane playwright named Zachary Zander , who goes by his pen name Z ( Anthony Rapp ) .
The episode takes the format of a normal episode of Psych , intermittent with original songs . "
Psych : The Musical " takes place before the events of the Psych episode " Deez Nups " , putting the episode out of chronological order from the rest of the seventh season .
As a result , there are several continuity errors throughout the episode .
ACT
I Section::::Act I.
The episode begins with a whimsical storybook opening , followed by the opening number .
Six years before the events of the episode , Z 's play about Jack the Ripper is abruptly cancelled and he is sent to a mental institution .
Before the premiere of his play , Z had allegedly set the theater on fire and locked a critic in a back room .
After six years , a similar play is in production at a different Santa Barbara theater by its womanizing owner Armitage ( Barry Bostwick ) .
Z escapes his mental institution and presumably murdered another man .
Psychic Shawn Spencer , his partner Gus , and the Santa Barbara Police Department 's Juliet and Lassiter go to the mental institution and elicit the help of serial killer Mr. Yang ( Ally Sheedy ) .
While Shawn and Gus are investigating Armitage 's new production , the producer falls from the catwalk and dies .
At the coroner 's office , Woody labels the death a suicide .
Shawn suspects that Z 's next target is likely Elisa ( Brooke Lyons ) , his muse and a cast member of his original play .
Buzz McNab ( Sage Brocklebank ) is put on guard at Elisa 's house , and he notifies Lassiter when he sees a man running through the woods of her property .
Lassiter , Juliet , Shawn , Gus , Yang , and her guard rush to the house , where Lassiter and Juliet chase the mysterious man .
The man is revealed to be the same man that was thought to have been killed by Z upon his escape from the mental institution .
Shawn and Gus see Z inside Elisa 's house and break inside .
Shawn chases Z out of the house , and upon seeing him face - to - face becomes convinced that Z is innocent .
Upon returning to the car , Mr. Yang has escaped as well .
ACT II Section::::Act II .
The second act begins with another whimsical storybook opening .
During a briefing at the SBPD station , Shawn exits to accept a Skype video call from Mr. Yang .
She reveals that he should look again in the mental institution .
Shawn and Gus find numerous letters from Z to Elisa hidden inside a bed .
Shawn and Gus meet up with Lassiter and Juliet , who are at the scene of Elisa 's dead body .
When they catch Armitage kissing a cast member at his theater , they chase him until he is hit by an oncoming car .
It is revealed that he has had several extramarital affairs , including one with Elisa .
After another Skype call with Mr. Yang , Shawn and Gus identify her location as the burnt theater of Z 's original production .
When they arrive , they find Mr. Yang , who informs them that they have been followed there .
A disguised person hangs Shawn by the neck with a rope and stabs Yang with her own knife .
When Shawn gets down , he and Gus rush to her side as she dies .
She is seen in an afterlife setting with
criminal expert Mary Lightly ( Jimmi Simpson ) .
Shawn and Gus go to the premiere of Armitage 's play to confront a cast member , whom they suspect is the killer .
After the cast member is knocked out in the altercation , Shawn dresses in his costume and performs his part in the play .
During the performance , he solves the case and trades places with Gus .
Shawn chases down Z , who is attempting to kill the true culprit .
Lassiter and Juliet arrive at an opportune moment and Z surrenders .
Afterwards , the episode has a final storybook sequence that is revealed to be read by Shawn .
In the end , Shawn and Gus are shown to be pitching an idea for a play to Z , who is institutionalized .
MUSICAL NUMBERS
* Santa Barbara Skies - Shawn , Gus and Dancers
*
* Z 's Lament - Z
*
* I 've Heard It Both Ways - Shawn , Lassiter and Juliet *
* Sleigh Bells and Songs - Mr. Yang
*
*
( When You 're ) Making up a Song - Shawn , Juliet , Gus , Mr. Yang and Lassiter
*
* Often It 's the Opposite Part One - Woody , Lassiter and Juliet *
* Often It 's the Opposite Part Two - Woody
* * I Hurt No One - Z and Shawn
*
* I 've Heard It Both Ways Reprise One - Lassiter * * Santa Barbara Skies Reprise - Juliet , Lassiter and Karen
*
* I 've Heard It Both Ways
Reprise Two - Shawn , Lassiter and Juliet
* * Promised Land - Mary and Mr. Yang
*
* The Breakdown - Shawn and Z * * Gus in the Spotlight - Gus
*
* The Surrender - Z * * Jamaican Inspector - Gus * RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
" Psych : The Musical " was viewed by 2.23 million Americans during its original airing .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The special received mixed reviews .
TV Fanatic 's Chandel Charles gave the episode a five stars out of five rating , saying , " This songfest , however , was beyond all expectations . "
Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club said that it " feels like only half of an adventure , even after two hours and plenty of references to musical titles " and gave the episode a C rating .
HOME MEDIA RELEASE DVD Section::::Home media release .
Section::::DVD .
The episode was released on DVD separately from the seventh season on December 17 , 2013 , just two days after airing .
The set features an extended scene , as well as three other Psych episodes with musical themes : " American Duos , " " High Top Fade - Out , " and " Feet Do n't Kill Me Now . "
Also included is a CD of six original songs .
The special is also included as a bonus feature on the DVD set of Psych :
The Complete Eighth Season , along with the extended scene and a new behind - the - scenes feature .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A digital soundtrack album
Psych :
The Musical ( Original Songs and Score ) was released on December 16 , 2013 on iTunes and other digital music services .
The seventeen tracks are as follows : * Santa Barbara Skies ( 5:12 ) * * Z 's Lament ( 1:13 )
*
* I 've Heard It
Both Ways ( 3:13 ) * * Sleigh Bells and Songs ( 1:12 )
* * ( When You 're ) Making up a Song ( 2:02 )
* * Often It 's the Opposite ( 1:42 )
*
* Into the Woods / I Hurt No One ( 2:32 )
* * Act II
Storybook Open ( 1:07 ) * * I 've Heard It Both Ways Reprise One ( 1:06 )
* * Under Santa Barbara Skies Reprise ( 2:10 )
* * I 've Heard It
Both Ways
Reprise Two ( 0:55 )
*
*
It 's Her ( 2:12 ) * * Promised Land ( 2:20 )
* * Shawn Hears the Theme /
The Breakdown ( 3:41 ) * * Gus in the Spotlight
( 1:04 )
*
* The Surrender ( 1:45 ) * * Jamaican Inspector ( 1:47 ) * REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS