THE 100 ( TV SERIES )
The 100 ( pronounced The Hundred ) is an American post - apocalyptic science fiction drama television series that premiered on March 19 , 2014 , on The CW .
The series , developed by Jason Rothenberg , is loosely based on the novel series of the same name by Kass Morgan .
The series follows a group of post - apocalyptic survivors , chiefly a group of adolescents , including Clarke Griffin ( Eliza Taylor ) , Bellamy Blake ( Bob Morley ) , Octavia Blake ( Marie Avgeropoulos ) , Jasper Jordan ( Devon Bostick ) , Monty Green ( Christopher Larkin ) , Raven Reyes ( Lindsey Morgan ) , Finn Collins ( Thomas McDonell ) , John Murphy ( Richard Harmon ) , and Wells Jaha ( Eli Goree ) .
They are among the first people from a space habitat , " the Ark " , to return to Earth after a devastating nuclear apocalypse .
Other lead characters include Dr. Abby Griffin ( Paige Turco ) , Clarke 's mother ; Marcus Kane ( Henry Ian Cusick ) , a council member on the Ark ; and Thelonious Jaha ( Isaiah Washington ) , the Chancellor of the Ark and Wells 's father .
In March 2017 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth season , which premiered on April 24 , 2018 .
In May 2018 , the series was renewed for a sixth season .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
The setting is 97 years after a devastating nuclear apocalypse wipes out almost all life on Earth .
Thousands of people live in a space station orbiting Earth , which they call the Ark , constructed of connecting space stations and spacecraft .
Three generations have been born in space , bringing the population of the Ark beyond carrying capacity .
The future is jeopardized by over - population .
100 juvenile detainees are sent to the surface in a last attempt to determine whether Earth is habitable .
They discover that some survived the apocalypse : the Grounders , who live in clans locked in a power struggle ; the Reapers , another group of Grounders who have become cannibals ; and the Mountain Men , who live in Mount Weather , descended from those who locked themselves away before the apocalypse .
Under the leadership of Bellamy and Clarke , the 100 attempt to survive the harsh surface conditions , battle hostile Grounders and establish communication with the Ark.
In the second season , most of the remaining 48 of the 100 are captured and taken to Mount Weather by the Mountain Men .
It is eventually revealed that the Mountain Men are transfusing blood from imprisoned Grounders as an anti - radiation treatment .
Medical tests of the 100 show an even more potent anti - radiation efficacy : their bone marrow will allow the Mountain Men to survive outside containment .
The inhabitants of the Ark have crash - landed various stations on Earth and begun an alliance with the Grounders to save groups of people , naming the main settlement at Alpha Station " Camp Jaha " .
In the third season , Alpha Station , renamed Arkadia , comes under new management when Pike , a former teacher and mentor , is elected as chancellor and begins a war with the Grounders .
An artificial intelligence named A.L.I.E. who was commanded to make life better for mankind is revealed to have responded by solving the problem of human overpopulation by launching the nuclear apocalypse that devastated Earth .
The AI takes over the minds of nearly everyone in Arkadia and Polis , the capital city of the Grounders .
In the season three finale , Clarke manages to destroy
A.L.I.E.
In the fourth season , hundreds of nuclear reactors around the world are melting down due to decades of neglect that will result in 96 per cent of the planet becoming uninhabitable .
Clarke and the others search for ways to survive the coming wave of radiation .
When it is discovered that Nightbloods , descendants of first , original Nightbloods , including Becca – the creator of A.L.I.E. and the first Grounder commander – can metabolize radiation , Clarke and the others attempt to recreate the formula but fail .
An old bunker is discovered that can protect 1,200 people for over 5 years ; each of the twelve clans select a hundred people to stay in the bunker .
A small group decides to return to space and attempt to survive in the remnants of the Ark.
In the fifth season , six years after the meltdown of the nuclear reactors , a prisoner transport ship arrives in the only green spot left on Earth , where Clarke and Madi , a Nightblood Grounder who also survived the wave of radiation that swept the planet after the meltdown , have been living .
Those who survived in space and in the bunker have returned safely on the ground .
A struggle for the Shallow Valley between the prisoners and a new , united clan , known as Wonkru , begins .
Later , the heroes must find a way to prevent another disaster .
In the fifth - season finale the valley is destroyed and the humans were sent to a new planet to begin their lives .
CAST AND CHARACTERS * Eliza Taylor as Clarke Griffin * Paige Turco as Dr. Abigail " Abby " Griffin * Thomas McDonell as Finn Collins ( seasons 1–2 )
* Eli Goree as Wells Jaha ( season 1 ; guest season 2 )
* Marie Avgeropoulos as Octavia Blake * Bob Morley as Bellamy Blake * Kelly Hu as Callie " Cece " Cartwig ( season 1 )
* Christopher Larkin as Monty Green ( seasons 1–5 ) * Devon Bostick as Jasper Jordan ( seasons 1–4 )
* Isaiah Washington as Thelonious Jaha ( seasons 1–5 )
* Henry Ian Cusick as Marcus Kane
* Lindsey Morgan as Raven Reyes ( season 2–present ; recurring season 1 ) * Ricky Whittle as Lincoln ( seasons 2–3 ; recurring season 1 ) * Richard Harmon as John Murphy ( season 3–present ; recurring seasons 1–2 ) * Zach McGowan as Roan ( season 4 ; recurring season 3 ) * Tasya Teles as Echo ( season 5–present ; recurring season 4 ; guest seasons 2–3 ) NOTES EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
The 100 premiered on March 19 , 2014 .
On May 8 , 2014 , The CW renewed The 100 for a second season , which premiered on October 22 , 2014 .
On January 11 , 2015 , The CW renewed the series for a third season , which premiered on January 21 , 2016 .
On March 12 , 2016 , The 100 was renewed for a fourth season of 13 episodes , which premiered on February 1 , 2017 .
On March 10 , 2017 , The CW renewed the series for a fifth season , which premiered on April 24 , 2018 .
On May 8 , 2018 , the series was renewed for a sixth season .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Post production , including ADR recording for the series , was done at the recording studio Cherry Beach Sound .
David J. Peterson , who created Dothraki for Game of Thrones , developed the Trigedasleng language for The Grounders .
Jason Rothenberg said it was similar to Creole English .
The language is called " Trig " on the show .
After his constructed language work on Star - Crossed , Peterson was contacted by the producers of The 100 to create a language for the Grounders , an evolution of English .
In the setting , 97 years have passed since the apocalypse , which is a very short time for significant language change .
Because of this , Peterson posited an accelerated evolution in which the early Grounders used a ca nt specifically to obfuscate their speech and to differentiate between friend or foe .
Trigedasleng derives from that ca nt and evolved over several short generations of survivors of the apocalypse .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming for the series takes place in and around Vancouver , British Columbia .
Production on the pilot occurred during the second quarter of 2013 .
After the show was picked up to series , filming occurred for the first season between August 2013 and January 2014 .
Filming for the second season commenced on July 7 , 2014 , and concluded on January 23 , 2015 .
The third season was filmed between July 15 , 2015 , and February 2 , 2016 .
Filming for the fourth season commenced on August 2 , 2016 , and concluded on January 18 , 2017 .
Filming for the fifth season commenced on August 14 , 2017 , and wrapped up on January 27 , 2018 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In late February 2013 , Bob Morley and Eli Goree were cast as Bellamy Blake and Wells Jaha , respectively , followed a day later by the casting of Henry Ian Cusick as Marcus Kane .
Less than a week later , Eliza Taylor and Marie Avgeropoulos were cast in co - starring roles as Clarke Griffin and Octavia Blake , respectively .
Throughout March , the rest of the cast was filled out , with Paige Turco cast as Abigail Walters ( now Abigail Griffin ) , Isaiah Washington as Chancellor Jaha , Thomas McDonnell as Finn Collins , Kelly Hu as Callie Cartwig , and Christopher Larkin as Monty Green .
For the second season , Adina Porter and Raymond J. Barry were cast in recurring roles as Indra and Dante Wallace , respectively , along with Alycia Debnam - Carey as Lexa .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
In Canada , Season 1 of The 100 was licensed exclusively to Netflix .
The series premiered on March 20 , 2014 , the day after the mid - season premiere of Season 1 on the CW .
In New Zealand , the series premiered on TVNZ 's on - demand video streaming service on March 21 , 2014 .
In the UK and Ireland , The 100 premiered on E4 on July 7 , 2014 .
The first episode was viewed by an average audience of 1.39 million , making it the channel 's biggest ever program launch .
Season 2 premiered on January 6 , 2015 , and averaged 1,118,000 viewers .
Season 3 premiered on February 17 , 2016 .
In Australia , The 100 was originally scheduled to premiere on Go !
but instead premiered on Fox8 on September 4 , 2014 .
Season 2 premiered on January 8 , 2015 .
HOME MEDIA
* Creating the World of The 100
* Commentary on " We Are Grounders , Part 2 " ! scope="row " 2
* The 100 : Unlocking the Mountain * The 100 Pre - Viz Stunts featurette !
scope="row " 3 * A Short Lived Victory : Unlocking the Season 3 Finale * Arkadia : From Wreckage to Salvation
* Ice Nation : Brutal and Fierce *
Wanheda :
Clarke 's Journey
* Polis : Capital of the Grounders
* The 100 Pre - Viz Stunts Season 3 !
scope="row
" 4 * Deleted Scenes , From Outcasts to Leaders , Creating a Post - Apocalyptic World
*
The 100 :
Jasper 's Journey * Battle Tested : The 100 Season 4 Stunts , Gag Reel
*
The 100 : 2016
Comic - Con Panel RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the show 's first season was certified " fresh " , with 72 % of professional reviewers reviewing it positively and the consensus : " Although flooded with stereotypes , the suspenseful atmosphere helps make The 100 a rare high - concept guilty pleasure " .
On Metacritic , the first season scores 63 out of 100 points , based on 26 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
The second season was met with more favorable reviews , holding a rating of 100 % on Rotten Tomatoes and an average rating of 8.1/10 .
On Metacritic , the season is assigned a score of 81 out of 100 , based on 2 critics .
In a review of the season 2 finale , Kyle Fowle of The A.V. Club said , " Very few shows manage to really push the boundaries of moral compromise in a way that feels legitimately difficult .
Breaking Bad did it .
The Sopranos did it .
Game of Thrones has done it .
Those shows never back down from the philosophical murkiness of their worlds , refusing to provide a tidy , happy ending if it does n't feel right .
With ' Blood Must Have Blood , Part Two , ' The 100 has done the same , presenting a finale that does n't shy away from the morally complex stakes it 's spent a whole season building up " .
Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post , in another positive review , wrote : " I can say with some assurance that I 've rarely seen a program demonstrate the kind of consistency and thematic dedication that The 100 has shown in its first two seasons .
This is a show about moral choices and the consequences of those choices , and it 's been laudably committed to those ideas from Day 1 " .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the third season received an overall rating of 89 % with an average rating of 7.9/10 .
On Metacritic , the season is assigned a score of 77 out of 100 , based on 3 critics , indicating generally positive reviews .
Maureen Ryan of Variety wrote in an early review of the third season : " When looking at the epic feel and varied array of stories on display in season three , which overtly and covertly recalls " The Lord of the Rings " saga in a number of ways , it 's almost hard to recall how limited the scope and the ambitions of " The 100 " were two years ago , when a rag - tag band of survivors first crash - landed on Earth .
In season three ( which the cast and showrunner previewed here ) , the show is more politically complicated than ever , and the world - building that accompanies the depiction of various factions , alliances and conflicts is generally admirable " .
In a review of the season 3 finale " Perverse Instantiation : Part Two " , Mariya Karimjee of Vulture.com wrote : " Every moment of this finale is pitch - perfect : the choreography of the fight scenes , the plotting and pacing , and the stunning way in which the episode finally reaches it apex . "
Perverse Instantiation : Part Two " elevates the season 's themes and pulls together its disparate story lines , setting us up nicely for season four " .
In another review of the season 3 finale and the season overall , Kyle Fowle of The A.V. Club wrote : " Before we even get to tonight 's action - packed finale of The 100 , it needs to be said that this has been a rocky season .
The first half of it was defined by shoddy character motivations and oversized villains .
The second half of this season has done some work to bring the show back from the brink , focusing on the City of Light and issues of freewill and difficult moral choices , bringing some much needed depth to the third season .
That work pays off with " Perverse Instantiation :
Part Two , " a thrilling , forward - thinking finale that provides some necessary closure to this season " .
He gave the finale itself an " A- " rating .
The fourth season is generally considered to be an improvement over the third season , receiving a 92 % score on Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 7.3/10 based on 12 reviews .
On Metacritic , the season is assigned a score of 80 out of 100 , based on 1 critic , indicating generally positive reviews .
The second portion of the fourth season has received better reception than the first portion , with the episodes Die All , Die Merrily and Praimfaya often cited as the two best episodes of the season .
Die All , Die Merrily has a 9.5/10 rating from IGN , a perfect 5/5 rating from Vulture and a perfect A rating from The AV Club .
Praimfaya has a 9.0/10 from IGN and an A rating from The AV Club .
The fifth season currently has a 100 % score on Rotten Tomatoes with an average of 8.8/10 .
This is the highest rating any season of the show has received to date .
On Metacritic , the season is assigned a score of 80 out of 100 , based on 1 critic , indicating generally positive reviews .
All episodes of the season received highly positive reviews , but the third episode Sleeping Giants has received particular high acclaim .
In a 4.5/5 review from Den of Geek , the episode is described as being a " good ol' fashioned episode of The 100 " , praising its balance of action , humour , and rich relationships .
The episode also gained a 4.5/5 rating from TVOverMind , praising the " pulse - pounding action " and approach to problem solving .
Brian Lowry of The Boston Globe said : " Our attraction to Apocalypse TV runs deep , as our culture plays out different futuristic possibilities .
That 's still no reason to clone material , nor is it a reason to deliver characters who are little more than stereotypes " .
Allison Keene of The Hollywood Reporter wrote a negative review , stating : " The sci - fi drama presents The CW 's ultimate vision for humanity : an Earth populated only by attractive teenagers , whose parents are left out in space " .
Kelly West of Cinema Blend gave it a more positive review while noting : " CW 's Thrilling New Sci - fi Drama Is A Keeper .
CW 's The 100 seeks to explore that concept and more with a series that 's about equal parts young adult drama , sci - fi adventure and thriller .
It takes a little while for the series to warm up , but when The 100 begins to hit its stride , a unique and compelling drama begins to emerge " .
IGN 's editor Eric Goldman also gave the show a more positive review , writing : " Overcoming most of its early growing pains pretty quickly , The 100 was a very strong show by the end of its first season .
But Season 2 elevated the series into the upper echelon , as the show become one of the coolest and most daring series on TV these days " .
Maureen Ryan of Variety named the show one of the best of 2015 .
In 2016 , the year Rolling Stone ranked the show # 36 on its list of the " 40 Best Science Fiction TV Shows of All Time " , the episode " Thirteen " attracted criticism when Lexa , one of the series ' LGBT characters , was killed off .
Critics and fans considered the death a continuation of a persistent trope in television in which LGBT characters are killed off far more often than others – implicitly portraying them as disposable , as existing only to serve the stories of straight characters , or to attract viewers .
A widespread debate among writers and fans about the trope ensued , with Lexa 's death cited as a prime example of the trope , and why it should end .
Showrunner Jason Rothenberg eventually wrote in response that " I ( ... ) write and produce television for the real world where negative and hurtful tropes exist .
And I am very sorry for not recognizing this as fully as I should have " .
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
An estimated 2.7 million American viewers watched the series premiere , which received an 18–49 rating of 0.9 , making it the most - watched show in its time slot on The CW since 2010 , with the series Life Unexpected .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
! scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Nominee(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS