INCREDIBLES 2 Incredibles 2 is a 2018 American computer - animated superhero film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Pictures .
Written and directed by Brad Bird , it is the sequel to The Incredibles ( 2004 ) and the second full - length installment of the franchise .
The story follows the Parr family as they try to restore public 's trust in superheroes while balancing their family life , only to combat a new foe who seeks to turn the populace against all superheroes .
Craig T. Nelson , Holly Hunter , Sarah Vowell and Samuel L. Jackson reprise their roles from the first film ; newcomers to the cast include Huckleberry Milner , Bob Odenkirk , Catherine Keener and Jonathan Banks .
Michael Giacchino returned to compose the score .
Following the success of The Incredibles , Bird postponed development on a sequel to work on other films .
He attempted to distinguish the script from superhero films and superhero television series released since the first film , focusing on the family dynamic rather than the superhero genre .
Incredibles 2 premiered in Los Angeles on June 5 , 2018 , and was theatrically released in the United States on June 15 , 2018 in Disney Digital 3-D , Dolby Cinema , IMAX and IMAX 3D.
The film received largely positive reviews and praise for its animation , voice acting , humor , action sequences , and musical score , although it received some criticism for being derivative of the original film .
The film made $ 182.7 million in its opening weekend , setting the record for best debut for an animated film , and has grossed over $ 1.2 billion worldwide , making it the fourth highest - grossing film of 2018 , the second highest - grossing animated film and the 15th highest - grossing film of all - time .
Incredibles 2 was named by the National Board of Review as the Best Animated Film of 2018 .
The film was nominated for Best Animated Feature Film at the 76th Golden Globe Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The Incredibles , a family of superheroes , pursue the Underminer .
Although he escapes with stolen bank money , they stop his drill tank from destroying Metroville 's City Hall with help from Lucius Best .
The government , concerned by the collateral damage , shuts down the Superhero Relocation Program , leaving the Parrs without financial assistance from agent Rick Dicker .
After Violet 's date Tony Rydinger discovers her superhero identity , Dicker erases her from Tony 's memory .
Lucius informs Bob and Helen of an offer from Winston Deavor , the owner of DevTech , a telecommunications corporation .
Winston and his sister Evelyn propose a publicity stunt to regain public trust in superheroes .
Winston chooses Helen to spearhead the stunt under her old identity , Elastigirl , as she causes less property damage than Bob , and provides the Parr family with a new home .
While Helen is away , Bob struggles with his new role as a stay - at - home parent :
Dash has trouble with math , Violet becomes withdrawn after Tony unintentionally stands her up due to his memory wipe , and Jack - Jack wreaks havoc with his burgeoning superpowers .
Bob brings Jack - Jack to Edna Mode , who develops a suit that controls his abilities .
Meanwhile , Elastigirl captures the Screenslaver , a supervillain who projects hypnotic images using television screens .
She unmasks him as a deliveryman with no recollection of his actions .
At a party celebrating the Screenslaver 's arrest , Winston announces a summit of world leaders to legalize superheroes , hosted aboard his luxury ship .
Unsettled by the ease with which she captured the Screenslaver , Elastigirl realizes that he was controlled by a pair of mind - control goggles .
Evelyn forces the goggles onto Elastigirl , revealing herself as the mastermind behind the Screenslaver .
Evelyn explains that she has hated superheroes since Gazerbeam and Fironic failed to rescue her father from being killed by burglars when she was a child .
She plans to sabotage her brother 's summit and cause a catastrophe that will tarnish the reputation of superheroes , ensuring they remain outlawed forever .
Using a hypnotized Elastigirl , she lures Mr. Incredible into a trap , then sends other hypnotized superheroes to subdue the Parr children .
Frozone tries to protect them , but is overwhelmed and placed under Evelyn 's control .
Violet , Dash , and Jack - Jack escape with the help of the Incredibile , a high - tech car once owned by Bob during his time as Mr. Incredible , and reach Winston 's ship .
On board , the hypnotized Mr. Incredible , Elastigirl , and Frozone recite a vindictive manifesto on air to paint superheroes as a threat .
They subdue the ship crew , aim the ship at Municiberg , and destroy the controls .
Jack - Jack removes Elastigirl 's goggles , and she frees Mr. Incredible and Frozone .
The Parrs and Frozone release the other mind - controlled superheroes by destroying their goggles .
With Mr. Incredible swimming underwater to turn the rudder and Frozone creating layers of ice , they slow the ship and prevent it crashing into the city .
Evelyn escapes in a jet , but is captured by Elastigirl .
Superheroes around the world regain legal status .
Later , Tony accompanies Violet and her family to a movie .
Outside the theater , the Parrs spot a high - speed pursuit between police and gunmen .
Violet leaves Tony at the theater and promises to return in time for the film , before the Parrs give chase in a refurbished Incredibile .
VOICE CAST
* Craig T. Nelson as Bob Parr / Mr. Incredible , who possesses super strength and limited invulnerability .
* Holly Hunter as Helen Parr / Elastigirl , who has the ability to stretch her body into many shapes and forms .
* Sarah Vowell as Violet Parr , the family 's daughter and first child , who can become invisible and project force fields for limited lengths of time .
* Huckleberry Milner as Dashiell " Dash " Parr , the family 's troublemaker first son , who has superhuman speed .
He was previously voiced by Spencer Fox in the first film .
* Eli Fucile as Jack - Jack Parr , the infant son of Bob and Helen who has a large assortment of powers .
* Nick Bird provides the vocal effects of Jack - Jack 's monster form .
* Samuel L. Jackson as Lucius Best / Frozone , Bob 's best friend , who has the ability to form ice from humidity .
* Bob Odenkirk as Winston Deavor , a superhero fan who leads a telecommunications company with his sister Evelyn , and wants to bring back superheroes by revamping the public 's perception of them .
* Catherine Keener as Evelyn Deavor , Winston 's younger sister , the mastermind behind the " Screenslaver " , and a technological genius who has never encountered a problem she could not solve .
* Bill Wise as a pizza delivery man converted into a villain by the real " Screenslaver " , who hijacks screens to project hypnotic images in order to hypnotize civilians .
* Brad Bird as Edna Mode , a fashion designer for superheroes and a close friend of the Parrs .
* Jonathan Banks as Rick Dicker , a government agent responsible for helping the Parrs stay undercover and unremarkable .
When his department is shut down , the Parrs are left to their own devices .
He was previously voiced by Bud Luckey in the first film ; Luckey died in 2018 , and the film is dedicated to his memory .
* Michael Bird as Tony Rydinger , Violet 's love interest .
* Sophia Bush as Karen / Voyd , a young Elastigirl fan who aspires to be a true superhero , with the power to create wormholes .
* Phil LaMarr as Krushauer and He - Lectrix , two superheroes who , alongside Voyd , aspire to be true superheroes .
Krushauer has the power of telekinesis , which he uses to crush objects together , although he can not un - crush them , while He - Lectrix has the power of controlling and projecting electrical currents .
* Paul Eiding as Gus Burns / Reflux , an elderly Super who aspires to be a true superhero , with the power of vomiting hot lava .
* Isabella Rossellini as The Ambassador , a dignified foreign official committed to the support and legalization of superheroes .
* John Ratzenberger as The Underminer , a mole - like supervillain who seeks to bring war and destruction to the world .
* Barry Bostwick as Mayor * Jere Burns as Detective No . 1 * Adam Rodriguez as Detective No . 2 * Kimberly Adair Clark as Honey Best , Frozone 's wife .
* Usher as Lucius Best 's valet PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
Following The Incredibles , Brad Bird directed his next film for Pixar , Ratatouille , which was released in June 2007 .
Near its premiere , Bird said he was open to an idea of a sequel to The Incredibles , but only if it could be better than the original .
He stated , " I have pieces that I think are good , but I do n't have them all together . "
In a May 2013 interview , Bird reiterated his interest in a sequel : " I have been thinking about it .
People think that I have not been , but I have — because I love those characters , and love that world ...
I have many , many elements that I think would work really well in another Incredibles film , and if I can get 'em to click all together , I would probably wanna do that . "
While publicizing the first film , Bird had already conceptualized the eventual approach where Bob and Helen would switch roles , and Jack - Jack would develop multiple powers unknown to the family .
At the Disney shareholder meeting in March 2014 , Disney CEO and chairman Bob Iger confirmed that Pixar was working on an Incredibles sequel , and that Bird would return as writer .
Bird started the script around April 2015 , and said that the Incredibles sequel would be his next film after Tomorrowland .
One challenge in writing Incredibles 2 was how to deal with the large number of superhero films and television series that had been released since the first film , such as the Marvel Cinematic Universe .
To try to differentiate the sequel , Bird wanted to avoid tropes related to the superhero genre : " I do n't think that kind of idea stays interesting for very long .
For me , the interesting thing was never the superhero part of it .
It was more the family dynamic , and how do superhero things play into that . "
He said he wanted to include some unused ideas from the first film , and that the new story would focus on Helen Parr / Elastigirl .
Though the sequel was released fourteen years after the first , Bird did not want to use a narrative element like a timeskip or to come up with new characters , and instead continued from where the first film left off .
This allowed him to keep characters with the same superpowers and not have to develop new ones , nor did he need to figure out how to deal with Violet and Dash being adults .
This also allowed him to keep Jack - Jack as an infant with an array of powers , which Bird likened to how infants are able to understand numerous languages .
While the plot of the 2005 follow - up video game to The Incredibles , , begins at that same point of time , the film discards the game 's continuity .
The film was produced with a production budget of $ 200 million .
One advantage that Pixar had with Incredibles 2 was the advancement of technology the company had seen since the original film and a team of much more experienced animators .
Producer John Walker said , " I think that one of the things that excited Brad and Ralph Eggleston , the production designer , was the fact that the technology existed now to finally realize the designs in the way that they had hoped to realize them in 2004 .
There were no notions of , ' Well , we do n't know how to do long hair , we do n't know how to do humans , we do n't know how to do muscles . '
Everybody knows how to do it .
It 's just now about doing it quickly . "
Because Pixar no longer used the same systems from the first movie , all the characters had to be created from scratch on the computer again .
The studio also used physically - based human eye models for the characters for the first time , even if the eyes are larger and more stylized than in real humans .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Pixar announced in November 2016 that both Holly Hunter and Samuel L. Jackson would return to reprise their roles , and at the July 2017 D23 Expo that both Craig T. Nelson and Sarah Vowell would also return with them .
Spencer Fox , the original voice of Dashiell " Dash " Parr , was replaced in the sequel by younger newcomer Huckleberry Milner .
Also that July , Brad Bird and John Ratzenberger were confirmed as reprising their characters from the first film .
In November 2017 , Pixar announced that Bob Odenkirk and Catherine Keener had been signed to the cast , In January 2018 , it was announced that Sophia Bush and Isabella Rossellini would voice new characters Voyd and The Ambassador , while Jonathan Banks would voice Rick Dicker after the character 's original voice actor Bud Luckey retired in 2014 ; after his death in 2018 , the film was dedicated to Luckey 's memory .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
In 2015 , Bird confirmed that Michael Giacchino would return to compose the score .
Giacchino began work around May 2017 .
The soundtrack album was released on June 15 , 2018 .
In addition to the film 's score , it includes the vocalized theme songs for Mr. Incredible , Frozone , and Elastigirl heard in the credits , as well as bonus versions of the songs sung by Disney 's a cappella group , DCappella , and the latter 's version of the track " The Glory Days " from the first film .
TRACK LISTING
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The official premiere of Incredibles 2 took place in Los Angeles on June 5 , 2018 .
It was theatrically released in the United States on June 15 , 2018 , including an IMAX release as part of Disney 's new distribution deal with IMAX , but only in 2D.
It is accompanied by Pixar 's short film Bao .
The film 's release was originally scheduled for June 21 , 2019 , but the date was moved forward after Pixar handed the 2019 release date over to Toy Story 4 , after its production fell behind schedule .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
A 53-second teaser trailer premiered on November 18 , 2017 during ESPN 's broadcast of College GameDay .
It received 113 million views in its first 24 hours , becoming the most viewed trailer for an animated film , and the 7th most - viewed trailer overall .
A new sneak peek premiered during the 2018 Winter Olympics on February 14 .
On April 13 , a new trailer was released .
MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
An Incredibles 2 graphic novel and comic miniseries was published by Dark Horse Comics in 2018 .
The graphic novel , titled Incredibles 2 : Heroes at Home , was written by Liz Marsham and illustrated by Nicoletta Baldari .
A comic miniseries , titled Incredibles 2 : Crisis in Mid - Life ! & Other Stories , was written by Christos Gage and Landry Walker , and illustrated by Gurihiru , J. Bone , Andrea Greppi and Roberta Zanotta .
In May 2018 , a prose novel was released entitled Incredibles 2 : A Real Stretch : An Elastigirl Prequel Story , which focuses on the life of the character Elastigirl before the events of the first film .
A Lego video game adaptation of both films was released on the same day as Incredibles 2 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Incredibles 2 was released on digital copy on October 23 , 2018 , and on 4 K UHD Blu - ray , Blu - ray , and DVD on November 6 , 2018 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Incredibles 2 has grossed $ 608.6 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 633.3 million in other territories , for a total worldwide gross of $ 1.242 billion .
On July 1 , 2018 , the film passed $ 648 million at the worldwide box office , surpassing the $ 633 million the original film made in its entire theatrical run .
It is currently the ninth highest - grossing film of all - time domestically and the highest - grossing animated film domestically .
The film crossed the $ 1 billion mark on July 30 , 2018 , becoming the seventh animated film and the 36th film of all - time to reach the milestone .
It was also the fifth animated Disney film , the third Pixar film , and Disney 's 18th film overall to gross $ 1 billion worldwide , as well as the fastest animated film to gross $ 1 billion , doing so in 46 days , surpassing Minions ( 49 days ) .
On August 12 , the film surpassed Toy Story 3 ( $ 1.067 billion ) to become the highest - grossing Pixar film worldwide .
UNITED STATES AND CANADA Section::::United States and Canada .
In April 2018 , early box office projections had Incredibles 2 grossing $ 110 million in its opening weekend in the United States and Canada .
In May 2018 , a month before the film 's release , tracking revised to an opening weekend of $ 140 million or more .
A week prior to the film 's opening , Fandango reported that pre - sale of tickets for the film had exceeded that of previous mid - year blockbusters Finding Dory , Wonder Woman , and Suicide Squad at the same point in their release cycles .
By the week of its release , opening weekend projections had reached upwards of $ 150 million .
A day before release , it became Fandango 's top pre - selling animated film of all - time , outselling the previous record - holder , Finding Dory .
The film grossed $ 18.5 million from Thursday night previews , increasing weekend projections to as high as $ 174 million .
The previews set the record for an animated film , doubling Finding Dorys $ 9.2 million , and were higher than the likes of fellow superhero films Spider - Man :
Homecoming , and Justice League .
It made $ 71.6 million on its first day , including previews , the best - ever for an animated film ( besting Dorys $ 54.7 million by 31 % ) and 14th highest all - time .
It went on to debut to $ 182.7 million , the eighth best opening of all - time , far ahead of Finding Dorys animated record of $ 135.1
million and more than the entire lifetime gross of Pixar 's A Bug 's Life ( $ 162.8 million ) , Cars 3 ( $ 152.9 million ) and The Good Dinosaur ( $ 123.1 million ) .
The film set animated records for its Monday and Tuesday grosses , making $ 23.9 million ( beating the $ 23.4 million made by Shrek 2 in May 2004 ) and $ 27.1 million ( beating Finding Dorys $ 23.1 million ) , respectively .
Its Tuesday gross also set a June record , topping Jurassic World ( $ 24.3 million in 2015 ) .
By Thursday , its seventh day of release , the film had grossed $ 269.4 million , topping the entire lifetime domestic gross of the original , not accounting for inflation ( $ 261.4 million ) .
In its second weekend the film dropped 56 % to $ 80.9 million , finishing second behind newcomer ( $ 148 million ) , marking the first time two films opened to over $ 100 million in back - to - back weekends .
It remained in second place in its third and fourth weekends , grossing $ 45.5 million and $ 29 million , respectively .
On July 7 , its 23rd day of release , the film crossed $ 495 million , passing Finding Dory to become the highest - grossing animated film and Pixar 's highest - grossing film of all - time domestically , and the following day became the first animated film to gross over $ 500 million domestically .
On September 2 , its 80th day of release , it became the first animated film to gross over $ 600 million domestically .
INTERNATIONALLY Section::::Internationally .
Outside North America , the film made $ 51.5 million from 25 countries in its opening weekend , for a global debut of $ 231.5 million .
Mexico was the largest debut with $ 12.3 million , followed by Australia ( $ 7.7 million ) and Russia ( $ 5.4 million ) .
In its second weekend of release the film made $ 58.6 million from 28 countries , bringing its two - week total to $ 134.7 million .
Its largest market was China where it made $ 21.2 million , the best ever opening for a Pixar film in the country .
It was also released in India where it made $ 3.3 million .
In the United Kingdom , the film grossed $ 12.6 million in its opening weekend , the second biggest opening for Pixar after Toy Story 3 . , The biggest markets in terms of total earnings are the United Kingdom ( $ 73.1 million ) , followed by China ( $ 51.5 million ) , Japan ( $ 43.9 million ) , France ( $ 41.7 million ) , and Brazil ( $ 37.6 million ) .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 94 % based on 322 reviews , with an average rating of 7.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Incredibles 2 reunites Pixar 's family crimefighting team for a long - awaited follow - up that may not quite live up to the original , but comes close enough to earn its name . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score of 80 out of 100 , based on 51 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare grade of " A+ " on an A+ to F scale , the same score as the first film , while PostTrak reported filmgoers gave it a 93 % overall positive score and an 83 % " definite recommend " .
Robert Abele of TheWrap praised the film , saying : " Whatever the opposite of phoning in a sequel is , that 's Brad Bird 's progressive - minded , thunderously fun mix of super saves , throwback aesthetics and family comedy . "
A.A. Dowd , writing for The A.V. Club , felt it was " A sparkling contraption of an animated comedy , funny and often wondrous in its midcentury - modern vision of an alternate America frozen in the amber of a bygone idealism . "
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a " B+ " , saying : " When the Parrs are pushed out of their comfort zone , Bird settles into his ...
[ after ] inciting a Spielberg - level monorail chase that reaffirms Bird 's lucid gift for kinetic and character - driven action filmmaking , the movie blasts off and never looks back . "
Stephanie Zacharek from Time considered it " bold [ and ] rapturously entertaining , " while David Sims at The Atlantic dubbed it " dazzling , thought - provoking , and sometimes overwhelming in terms of plotting . "
Varietys Owen Gleiberman called the film " fun but far from incredible " and wrote " It 's true that the Toy Story films , all three of which are fantastic , did variations on the same theme of a toy 's obsolescence , but as movies they kept the emotions close to the surface .
In Incredibles 2 , we never get that rush of feeling . "
Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars and said , " Incredibles 2 is content to punch the clock and stick to straight , bombastic action mode .
In that mode , composer Giacchino 's music is the most successful element , running nimble , beautifully orchestrated variations on themes that feel familiar in the best ways while retaining their spark .
The animation is bright and visually dynamic .
The script , well ... if the title were Satisfactories 2 , it 'd be about right . "
Ty Burr for The Boston Globe called it a " clattery , unfocused affair that at times is more irritating than fun . "
ACCOLADES Annie Awards !
scope="row " British Academy Children 's Awards !
scope="row " Chicago Film Critics Association Awards !
scope="row
" Critics ' Choice Movie Awards January 11 , 2019 !
scope="row " Detroit Film Critics Society align = center !
scope="row
" Golden Globe Awards January 6 , 2019 !
scope="row " Hollywood Music in Media Awards ! scope="row
" Humanitas Prize ! scope="row " Los Angeles Film Critics Association Incredibles 2 ! scope="row " National Board of Review ! scope="row
" New York Film Critics Circle Awards !
scope="row " New York Film Critics
Online ! scope="row
" Phoenix Critics Circle December 15 , 2018 ! scope="row " San Diego Film Critics Society ! scope="row " San Francisco Film Critics Circle !
scope="row
" Seattle Film Critics Society !
scope="row " St. Louis Film Critics Association !
scope="row " rowspan="2 " People 's Choice Awards ! scope="row " Satellite Awards ! scope="row " Teen Choice Awards !
scope="row " rowspan=2 Washington D.C. Area Film Critics
Association Awards EPILEPSY ISSUES Section::::Epilepsy issues .
Many disability advocates , including the Epilepsy Foundation , have raised concerns that scenes with flashing lights , particularly the scene of Elastigirl 's fight with the Screenslaver , can trigger seizures in viewers affected by photosensitive epilepsy .
As a result , several theaters posted warnings for audiences .
Disney issued a statement to USA Today stating that they appreciated the efforts the theaters had already made in making signs warning people seeing the movie .
They then asked theaters to warn audiences about the scene in a memo that read , " Incredibles 2 contains a sequence of flashing lights , which may affect customers who are susceptible to photosensitive epilepsy or other photosensitivities . "
In response to this , the UK released a re - edited version of the film with all affected sequences altered so that any flashing lights and strobe effects now pass the Harding test .
FUTURE Section::::Future .
Following the release of Incredibles 2 , director Brad Bird acknowledged that the film 's truncated production schedule resulted in many plotlines and ideas he had for the film being cut from the final version .
He cited Pixar 's decision in October 2016 to swap the release dates of Toy Story 4 and Incredibles 2 , which meant that Bird 's film lost a full year of production .
Bird stated that the lingering plotlines could lead to a third installment , just as they did with the second .
" There were a lot of ideas that we had on this film that could be [ used ] ... whether it 's another Incredibles film , or something else . "
Cast members including Samuel L. Jackson and Sophia Bush have expressed interest in reprising their roles .
Producer John Walker would not " rule [ a third film ] out " .
SEE ALSO
* The Incredibles ( franchise ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS