ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT ( SEASON 5 )
The fifth season of the television comedy series Arrested Development premiered on Netflix on May 29 , 2018 .
The season will consist of 16 episodes , split into two eight - episode parts ; with the second half premiering later in 2018 .
This is the second revival season after the series was canceled by Fox in 2006 ; the fourth season premiered in 2013 .
The show 's storyline centers on the Bluth family , a formerly wealthy , habitually dysfunctional family , and the show incorporates hand - held camera work , narration , archival photos , and historical footage .
One central storyline of season five is a " whodunit " regarding the mysterious disappearance of Lucille Austero in the very midst of her congressional campaign .
The season also features the cast together more frequently , as season four primarily had the cast separated due to scheduling difficulties .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
On July 12 , 2013 , Netflix was in discussions for a fifth season .
In August 2014 , Netflix chief content officer Ted Sarandos stated in an interview with USA Today that there is a strong possibility of a fifth season .
" It 's just a matter of when . "
In April 2015 , executive producer Brian Grazer confirmed that a fifth season was in development and would consist of 17 episodes .
Jason Bateman contradicted this in February 2016 , however , and said regarding a fifth season , " There is no plan .
I have n't heard of anything solid going forward . "
However , in January 2017 , Grazer again confirmed a fifth season plan , stating that all of the original series actors are on board for a new season , with an official deal expected to be made " within a couple of weeks " .
Netflix confirmed on May 17 , 2017 , that a fifth season , featuring the full cast from the show , had been ordered and would be expected to be released on their service in 2018 .
Production began in August 2017 , with 17 episodes planned for the fifth season .
Filming wrapped in November 2017 .
Tambor had been subject of sexual misconduct allegations in November 2017 which led to him being taken off Transparent ; however , the allegations did not impact his inclusion within season 5 , and the show 's team has stood in support of Tambor since then .
On May 7 , 2018 , it was announced that the fifth season would premiere on May 29 , 2018 , and the season 's trailer was released .
To promote the fifth season , two versions of the Bluth Real Estate Stair car , featuring the hashtag # AD5 and the website voteBLUTH.com , were driven around New York City and Los Angeles .
Portia de Rossi , who has retired from acting , only appears in five episodes from the fifth season .
CAST MAIN * Jason Bateman as Michael Bluth * Portia de Rossi as Lindsay Bluth Fünke
* Will Arnett as Gob Bluth
* Michael Cera as George - Michael Bluth
* Alia Shawkat as Maeby Fünke * Tony Hale as Buster Bluth * David Cross as Tobias Fünke * Jeffrey Tambor as George Bluth ,
Sr./Oscar Bluth * Jessica Walter as Lucille Bluth
RECURRING
* Ron Howard as Narrator / himself
* Justin Grant Wade as Steve Holt
* Ben Stiller as Tony Wonder * Christine Taylor as Sally Sitwell * Isla Fisher as Rebel Alley * Maria Bamford as DeBrie Bardeaux * Martin Mull as Gene Parmesan
* Judy Greer as Kitty Sanchez * Henry Winkler as Barry Zuckerkorn
* Ed Begley Jr. as Stan Sitwell
* James Lipton as Warden Gentles * John Beard as John Beard * Rebecca Drysdale as Lieutenant Toddler
* Kyle Mooney as Murphy - Brown * Lauren Weedman as Joni Beard GUEST STARS * Frances Conroy as Lottie Dottie * Dermot Mulroney as Dusty
* Gilbert Gottfried as infomercial narrator
* Cheryl Howard as herself
* Bryce Dallas Howard as herself
* Paige Howard as herself
* Rance Howard as himself EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Many critics said the season was more in line with the original Fox episodes and that having the ensemble back together after previously separating them benefited the season .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it holds an approval rating of 65 % with an average score of 5.34/10 , based on 40 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Arrested Development finds itself back in familiar form , recapturing much of the cast 's chemistry and comedic brilliance — though it still does n't quite live up to its own past . "
On Metacritic , the season has a weighted average score of 67 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Ben Travers of IndieWire gave it a positive review with a " B " grade , calling it a big improvement over season four .
He wrote , " With the cast reunited and a better understanding of what made the characters lovable lunkheads to begin with , the new season can be effortlessly enjoyable ; a pleasure to watch instead of something you have to dig through to find the parts you love . "
Sonya Saraiya of Vanity Fair praised it for returning to " the show you remember , " claiming it to be far superior to the fourth season .
She singles out Arnett 's performance in particular , praising him as " magnificent . "
Caroline Framke of Variety also praised the new season for acknowledging and correcting some of the mistakes of the fourth season instead of ignoring them , while also highlighting the ability of the show to engage in character development after 15 years with regards to Cera and Shawkat 's characters .
She too praised Arnett as the standout of the cast .
Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter argued that the second Netflix season was " much , much better , " than the first , believing that once the show " hits its stride , it evokes its glory days , " overall being a " welcome return to form " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS