STAR - CROSSED ( TV SERIES )
Star - Crossed is an American science fiction romantic teen drama television series created by Meredith Averill .
Star - Crossed premiered on The CW on February 17 , 2014 .
On May 8 , 2014 , The CW cancelled Star - Crossed after one season .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis .
Set in the near - future in 2024 , the series follows a romance between a human girl named Emery and an alien boy named Roman when he and six others of his kind are integrated into a suburban high school .
It is filmed and takes place in Louisiana in the fictional town of Edendale .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Aimee Teegarden as Emery Whitehill :
* Matt Lanter as Roman : * Grey Damon as Grayson Montrose : * Malese Jow as Julia Yeung :
* as Lukas Parnell : * Natalie Hall as Taylor Beecham : * as Teri : * Greg Finley as Drake :
* Brina Palencia as Sophia : RECURRING AND GUEST
* Jonathan Billions as Gloria 's Son
* Dora Madison Burge as Zoe * Jesse Luken as Eric
* Tahmoh Penikett as SEU Officer Jack Beaumont
* Jay Huguley as Ray Whitehill * Andrea Frankle as Michelle Whitehill * Susan Walters as Maia
* Jason Douglas as Nox * Deena Dill as Margaret Montrose
* Tom Hillmann as Mr. Montrose * Victoria Platt as Gloria Garcia
* Merle Dandridge as Vega
* Louise Lombard as Saroya * Johnathon Schaech as Castor * Stephanie Jacobsen as Eva Benton
* Alec Rayme as Sketchy Atrian EPISODES Section::::Episodes .
All the episode titles after the pilot are taken from William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
The project was originally titled Oxygen while in development at Isla Producciones ( in collaboration with Olé ) .
It was then adapted for the American market by Powwow before being acquired by The CW .
Star - Crossed premiered on The CW on Monday , February 17 , 2014 , at 8:00 pm Eastern/7:00 pm Central .
The series was picked up for a thirteen - episode season .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In 2013 , it was announced that Natalie Hall and Aimee Teegarden landed roles .
On February 25 , 2013 , Grey Damon was cast as Grayson .
In February , it was announced that Malese Jow would be joining , playing Julia , a girl who has an illness which may be cured by aliens .
On March 5 , 2013 , Matt Lanter was cast as a co - star opposite Aimee Teegarden .
It was announced Tahmoh Penikett will appear as SEU Officer Jack Beaumont Deena Dill was cast as Margaret Montrose along with Johnathon Schaech , who was cast as Castor .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The pilot episode debuted on The CW on , drawing an audience of 1.28 million viewers .
The second episode "
These Violent Delights Have Violent Ends " debuted on , drawing an audience of 1.14 million viewers .
The pilot episode is the most watched episode , drawing an audience of 1.28 million viewers , and the least watched episode , " Some Consequence
Yet Hanging in the Stars " aired on , drawing an audience of 0.76 million viewers .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
David Hinckley of the New York Daily News gave the series 4 out of 5 stars , saying " add forbidden love , which can never escape the shadow of potential doom , and Star - Crossed could become both provocative and entertaining . "
Diana Werts of Newsday gave the series 3 out of 4 stars , saying " Plenty of potential , if Star - Crossed stops talking down to us " .
Carrie Raisler of The A.V. Club gave the series a positive review .
Jeanne Jakle of the San Antonio Express - News gave a positive review , particularly of Aimee Teegarden 's performance , saying " Just as she was so heartbreakingly natural as young Julie Taylor , she also comes across refreshingly unpretentious in Star - Crossed — which , actually , may be the best reason of all to watch the CW drama . "
Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post - Dispatch gave the series 2 of 4 stars signaling mixed reviews , saying " Star - Crossed does n't aim as high as those , Lanter does get a few witty lines ( " One of my hearts stopped beating for a few minutes .
Luckily I had a backup ) " but the tone is mostly dreary and the plot with few exceptions goes precisely where you expect .
Only if the romance proves genuinely heart - stopping to young fans ( maybe , the same ones who have embraced Reign ) will this one be a hit . "
Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times gave the series an mixed review , saying " It 's the usual dance of insiders and outsiders , mean kids and weirdos , of Sharks and Jets , Montagues and Capulets biting their thumbs at one another in the school corridor while one special guy and girl fall in love .
There are the good ones and the bad ones , and the bad good ones , and the good bad ones .
Adults , as always in these things , are no help at all . "
David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle gave it a negative review , writing : "
The title is Star - Crossed because it 's about an alien boy who falls in love with a human girl , a repurposed ' Romeo and Juliet ' , without the poetry .
Or drama .
Or credibility . "
Robert Bianco , of USA Today , saying " As vapid as it is unoriginal , Star - Crossed is sadly typical of a network that continually underestimates its audience .
Teenagers may not be smarter than they were when the WB was at its peak , but it 's unlikely they 're dumber .
So why does CW treat them as if they are ? "
Matt Roush of TV Guide gave a negative review , saying " Star - Crossed lacks humor , suspense or even heat . "
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Awards and accolades . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result
Best TV Actor : Comedy , Drama or Musical
Matt Lanter
Best TV Actress : Comedy , Drama or Musical Aimee Teegarden Outstanding Comedy Series , Drama or Musical Star - Crossed
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
The series aired in Australia , eight and a half hours behind the East Coast of the United States on Fox8 from Tuesday , February 18 , 2014 , at 8:30 p.m.
In the United Kingdom , the show aired on Sky 1 on Friday , April 4 , 2014 at 8 p.m. REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS