WILLIE ROBERTSON
Willie Jess Robertson ( born April 22 , 1972 ) is an American TV personality , businessman , outdoorsman , hunter , author , and actor .
He is best known for his appearances on the reality TV series Duck Dynasty on A&E , and is the current CEO of the company Duck Commander .
Robertson lives in West Monroe , Louisiana with his wife Korie and his children :
John Luke , Sadie , Will , Rowdy , Bella , and Rebecca .
CHILDHOOD Section::::Childhood .
Robertson was born at Tri - Ward General Hospital in Bernice , Louisiana , in Union Parish , to Phil and Marsha Kay Robertson .
He was born 2 days before his father 's 26th birthday .
He has two older brothers , Alan and Jase , and one younger brother , Jep .
Willie grew up around hunting and the outdoors , and spent considerable time around Duck Commander , a small business run by his father .
Willie handled various tasks at the company , including building duck calls and handling business calls .
BUSINESS Section::::Business .
Ever since childhood , Robertson and his brothers have been interested in the duck call business started by their father , Phil .
Willie attended Harding University and graduated from NE Louisiana University .
In 2014 , Harding declared Willie and Korie Howard Robertson jointly as Outstanding Young Alumni .
His business degree helped take Duck Commander from a family business to a multimillion - dollar empire .
Duck Commander is the company that generated a great portion of the wealth that he has acquired and also generated the interest to start the TV show Duck Dynasty .
In 2006 , Robertson started another pursuit , the company Buck Commander .
This company has also created the Buckmen series of DVDs and the television show Buck Commander Protected by Under Armour on the Outdoor Channel .
Along with Si , he appeared on an episode of Last Man Standing , and made a cameo in the Christian film , God 's Not Dead , with his wife .
Willie Robertson was the guest of United States Representative Vance McAllister at the 2014 State of the Union Address by President Barack Obama .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Robertson is known for his Christian faith and often preaches about his faith to others .
He is a member of the Churches of Christ .
He is also almost always seen wearing a bandana in the pattern of the American flag on his head , and he often wears a white suit jacket to look more professional , though the jacket has drawn comparisons to The Dukes of Hazzard character Boss Hogg ( Willie 's Twitter handle is " williebosshog " ) .
Robertson , like many of his family members featured on Duck Dynasty , is known for his ZZ Top - style beard .
FILMOGRAPHY
*
Billy the Exterminator ( 2010 ) * Duck Dynasty ( 2012–2017 ) *
Last Man Standing ( 2013 )
* God 's Not Dead ( 2014 )
- Cameo appearance *
Whose Line Is It
Anyway ?
( 2015 ) AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal presented Willie Robertson with the inaugural Governor 's Award for Entrepreneurial Excellence in February 2014 , at the Duck Commander warehouse in West Monroe .
REFERENCES