GREY 'S ANATOMY ( SEASON 10 )
The tenth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy premiered on September 26 , 2013 , with a two - hour special episode in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , and it concluded with a Farewell to Cristina
finale episode Fear ( of the Unknown ) on May 15 , 2014 .
The season was produced by ABC Studios , in association with Shondaland Production Company and The Mark Gordon Company ; the showrunner being Shonda Rhimes .
The season was officially released on DVD as a six - disc boxset under the title of Grey 's Anatomy : The Complete Tenth Season – Live For The Moments on September 2 , 2014 by Buena Vista Home Entertainment .
The season mainly focuses on the relationship between the show 's protagonist Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) and " her person " Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) as both follow different paths relating their careers straining their relationship .
Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez )
having separated from her wife Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) teamed up with the White House to work on a brain mapping project .
Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) was on a project mapping out the human genome .
Yang and Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) gradually take their relationship from complicated and painful to a place of real friendship .
April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) and Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams )
elope during Kepner and paramedic Matthew 's ( Justin Bruening )
wedding .
Yang takes off to Switzerland for a job offer to take over Preston Burke 's ( Isaiah Washington ) hospital because he wants to step down and move his family .
She bids her farewell to her colleagues of the last seven years , including Hunt and dances it out with Meredith one last time to an old favorite song .
The season , garnered 12.12 million viewers average viewers and was ranked 15th overall in total viewers which is eleven spots higher than ninth season .
In the 18 - 49 key demographic , it ranked 5th and for the 2013 - 2014 primetime TV schedule , Grey 's was the no . 1 drama in the 18 - 49 key demographic .
James Pickens , Jr. and Chandra Wilson were nominated for Outstanding Actor and Outstanding Actress respectively at the 45th NAACP Image Awards .
The show also garnered five nominations at the 40th People 's Choice Awards .
It was announced on May 8 , 2014 , by ABC that Grey 's Anatomy would return in the fall of 2014 for Season 11 .
PLOTS Section::::Plots .
The season follows the story of surgical interns , residents , fellows , and attendings as they experience the difficulties of the competitive careers they have chosen .
It is set in the surgical wing of the fictional Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital , located in Seattle , Washington .
After the superstorm passes , Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital finds itself trying to save some of their own .
Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr. ) is electrocuted and is found by an intern , Dr. Heather Brooks ( Tina Majorino ) .
However , before realizing the danger , she too steps into the water and is electrocuted .
Luckily , the surgical staff are able to save Dr. Webber but Heather is not as fortunate , as Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) and Dr. Shane Ross ( Gaius Charles ) fails to resuscitate her .
Subsequently , Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) reconnects with his father , Jimmy ( James Remar ) , when Jimmy finds his way into the ER .
Dr. Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) , Alex 's new love interest , supports Alex during this reunion .
Jimmy reveals to Alex that he has family in Florida , but much to Alex 's dismay , it is not his family .
Unfortunately , before Alex and Jimmy are able to reconcile their differences , Jimmy dies due to a botched surgery .
Sticking with the interns who become residents this season , Dr. Ross teams up with Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) to work on her research , heart conduits .
Cristina receives a Harper - Avery Nomination , but as the majority of Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital is owned by the Harper Avery Foundation , Cristina does not win .
Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , with the help from Dr. Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ) , is also busy at work with her research , a continuation of the research her mother , Dr. Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) , conducted while she was still living .
To do her research , she orders a 3-D printer , which not only aids Meredith 's research , but also helps Cristina and Shane with their conduits .
Derek and Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) teams up with the White House to work on a brain mapping project , a project that will identify which parts of the brain are responsible for different functions .
Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) is also at the helm of a project mapping out the human genome , a project that helps her save her bubble - boy patient , Braden .
Alex accepts a job offer from Dr. Oliver Lebackes , a.k.a .
Dr. " Butthole , " to work at his private practice .
While separated , Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) continues to sleep around , this time with Dr. Leah Murphy ( Tessa Ferrer ) .
After some heated fights , Callie and Arizona reconcile their differences and move back in together .
They eventually decide that they would like to have another baby , and Arizona tells Callie that she would like for her to carry it .
Cristina and Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) gradually take their relationship from complicated and painful to a place of real friendship where they both know they love each other but have accepted the fact that they can not have a life together as much as they want to .
Dr. April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) and Dr. Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) surprise everyone when they elope during April and paramedic Matthew 's ( Justin Bruening ) wedding .
Issues arise when April realizes that her faith , and Jackson 's lack of faith , is going to be a huge problem when raising their children .
Jackson , after some time apart from April and finding out that she 's pregnant , tells her that he wants to go to church with her and his family .
After losing the Harper Avery Award , Cristina receives offers from many institutions asking her to speak about her research .
One of those offers comes from a hospital in Zürich , Switzerland .
Despite Dr. Webber 's pleading Cristina to fight against the Harper Avery Foundation for not honoring her work , Cristina takes off to Switzerland where she unexpectedly reconnects with Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , the owner of the hospital .
Initially , Cristina believes that this is all a ploy to get her back in his life , but it 's really only a job offer to take over Burke 's hospital because he wants to step down and move his family closer to his wife 's parents in Milan .
After realizing that neither she nor any other doctor at Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital will ever win a Harper Avery Award because of the Foundation 's ownership , she accepts a job offer from Dr. Burke .
Owen supports her decision as he realizes no good could come from him asking her to stay , but requests her not to leave him until she has to leave him for good , following which , they both spend two weeks leading to her permanent departure together .
While saying her farewell to her colleagues of the last seven years , there is a possible act of terrorism in Seattle , which later turns out to be just a gas main explosion .
Cristina has a quick but emotional goodbye hug with Derek , Bailey , and Webber , leaves her shares of the hospital to Alex , and dances it out with Meredith one last time to an old favorite song .
Owen , however , is busy saving a patient in the O.R. , so they share a silent goodbye through the gallery 's glass without exchanging a word with their eyes and imperceptible nods saying everything that was left unsaid .
Meredith starts fighting with Derek when she adamantly states that she 's not going to Washington , D.C. because Cristina makes her realize her life is in Seattle and she is just as important in the relationship as Derek is .
The new head of cardio , Dr. Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) tells Dr. Webber that her birth mother is Dr. Ellis Grey , and asks if he knows her .
CAST
MAIN
CAST
* Ellen Pompeo as Dr. Meredith Grey *
Sandra Oh as Dr. Cristina Yang * Justin Chambers as Dr. Alex Karev * Chandra Wilson as Dr. Miranda Bailey
* James Pickens Jr. as Dr. Richard Webber
* Sara Ramirez as Dr. Callie Torres
* Kevin McKidd as Dr. Owen Hunt
* Jessica Capshaw as Dr. Arizona Robbins
* Sarah Drew as Dr. April Kepner
* Jesse Williams as Dr. Jackson Avery
* Camilla Luddington as Dr. Jo Wilson * Gaius Charles as Dr. Shane Ross * Jerrika Hinton as Dr. Stephanie Edwards * Tessa Ferrer as Dr. Leah Murphy * Patrick Dempsey as Dr. Derek Shepherd RECURRING CAST
* Caterina Scorsone as Dr. Amelia Shepherd
* Jason George as Dr. Ben Warren
* Debbie Allen as Dr. Catherine Avery * Tina Majorino as Dr. Heather Brooks
* James Remar as Jimmy Evans
* Justin Bruening as Paramedic Matthew Taylor * Marguerite Moreau as Dr. Emma Marling * Nicole Cummins as Paramedic Nicole * Rebecca Field as Sabine McNeil * Thomas Barbusca as Link McNeil * Armani Jackson as Braden Morris * Jadin Gould as Ivy McNeil * Harley Graham as
Francesca " Frankie " McNeil * Billy Malone as Jon McNeil
* Kelly McCreary as Dr. Maggie Pierce * Elizabeth Bond as Kimmie Kepner * Emily Happe as Libby Kepner * Grace Bannon as Alice Kepner GUEST STARS
* Bobby Campo as Brian * Heather Hemmens as Sasha * Héctor Elizondo as Carlos Torres * Patrick Fabian as Dr. Oliver Lebackes
* Gordon Clapp as Victor Kaufman
* Paul James as Eric
* Valerie Mahaffey as Donna Kaufman
* Keke Palmer as Cheryl Jeffries * Annie Potts as Joyce Bosco
* Isaiah Washington as Dr. Preston Burke CASTING Section::::Cast .
Section::::Casting .
In May 2012 , it was announced that six original castmates , Ellen Pompeo , Patrick Dempsey , Sandra Oh , Chandra Wilson , Justin Chambers , and James Pickens , Jr. had renewed their contracts through Season 10 , as Meredith Grey , Derek Shepherd , Cristina Yang , Miranda Bailey , Alex Karev , and Richard Webber respectively .
It was revealed in June 2013 , that four out of the five interns from Season 9 would be returning as series regulars , including Camilla Luddington , Gaius Charles , Jerrika Hinton and Tessa Ferrer .
It was announced in July 2013 that Bobby Campo and Heather Hemmens were slated to guest star in the two - part season premiere .
In August 2013 , TV Guide reported that Dexter alum James Remar is set for a " mysterious " story arc .
It was later revealed that Remar would be playing Alex Karev 's drug addict father , whom he has n't seen in more than twenty years .
In October 2013 , it was announced that Hector Elizondo would be returning to the show , as Callie Torres ' father , for a ' Callie - centric ' episode that would air mid - November .
Other guest stars in November were Valerie Mahaffey and Gordon Clapp .
It was announced in January 2014 that Nickelodeon star Keke Palmer would guest star in an upcoming episode slated to air in March 2014 .
It was also announced that Greek alum Paul James had been cast in a potentially recurring role .
It was also announced in January that the role of Zola ( Meredith and Derek 's daughter ) was recast and would now be played by Heaven White , who is significantly older than Jela K. Moore , the actress who previously played Zola .
On March 6 , 2014 , it was revealed that Isaiah Washington would reprise his role as Preston Burke for one episode in May 2014 .
It is believed that his reappearance will have ties with Cristina Yang 's ( Sandra Oh ) departure from the show after ten years .
Dr. Burke was Cristina Yang 's love interest for much of his three years on the show .
Washington was fired seven years ago after he made a homophobic slur against castmate , T.R. Knight .
On March 18 , 2014 , it was announced that another Grey 's Anatomy alum would return in May and stay until the end of the season .
Caterina Scorsone will return to play Amelia Shepherd , one of Derek 's four sisters .
Scorsone was a regular on the Grey 's Anatomy spin - off , Private Practice , where she also portrayed Amelia Shepherd .
In April , news broke that Kelly McCreary would guest star in the Season 10 finale .
It was n't known until the season finale aired that her character , Dr. Pierce , was hired by Dr. Yang to be the new head of cardio .
It was also discovered at the end of the episode that Dr. Ellis Grey was her birth mother .
On August 13 , 2013 , Sandra Oh revealed that after the tenth season she would be leaving Grey 's Anatomy .
It was announced on March 25 , 2014 , that Gaius Charles and Tessa Ferrer were not having their options picked up for Season 11 , meaning that Season 10 would be their last season as regulars on the show .
On January 23 , 2014 , it was announced that Ellen Pompeo and Patrick Dempsey had renewed their contracts for another two seasons , as Meredith Grey and Derek Shepherd respectively , meaning their characters will be staying on the medical drama for seasons 11 and 12 .
On May 2 , 2014 , it was announced that the rest of the six original castmates , Justin Chambers , Chandra Wilson , and James Pickens Jr. , excluding Sandra Oh , had renewed their contracts for another two seasons ( 11 and 12 ) .
Sara Ramirez also renewed her contract for another two seasons .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Grey 's Anatomy was renewed for a tenth season on May 10 , 2013 .
This season is to include the 200th episode of the series , the fourth episode to air , " Puttin ' on the Ritz " .
This season was also split into two batches of episodes , each batch consisting of 12 uninterrupted episodes ( excluding holidays ) .
The mid - season premiere aired on February 27 , 2014 .
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
Grey 's Anatomy 's tenth season opened up to 9.27 million viewers with a 3.4/9 Nielsen rating / share in the 18–49 demographic .
" Everybody 's Crying Mercy " served as the season 's most viewed episode . " Man on the Moon " was the season 's least viewed episode , with 7.02 million viewers and a 2.3/6 Neilsen rating / share in the 18 - 49 demographic .
At the time , the season finale was the series lowest watched season finale with 8.92 million viewers and 2.6/8 in the 18 - 49 rating demo .
Grey 's Anatomy , in its tenth season , ranked 15th overall in total viewers ( 12.12 million ) .
This is eleven spots higher than Season 9 , which was ranked 26th .
In the 18 - 49 key demographic , Grey 's Anatomy ranked 5th .
The last time a season of Grey 's Anatomy was ranked 5th in the 18 - 49 key demographic was Season 1 .
The highest ranking for the 18 - 49 key demographic was 3rd for Seasons 3 , 4 , and 5 .
Last season , Grey 's Anatomy was ranked 10th .
For the 2013 - 2014 primetime TV schedule , Grey 's Anatomy was the # 1 drama in the 18 - 49 key demographic .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The tenth season of the medical - drama received positive reviews from the critics with many referring to the season as a return to form for the long - running show .
The season holds a 100 % positive score on Rotten Tomatoes and a " Fresh " rating .
Annie Barett of Entertainment Weekly gave a positive review to the season and wrote , " There 's true sorrow here along with the passion , which keeps their dynamic so intriguing to me . "
The A.V. Club also praised the tenth season of the show stating , " At its best , Grey 's Anatomy is about everyday bravery , sacrifice , and courage .
At its worst , it 's a melodramatic , moralizing soap opera .
Both sides are on display as the show heads confidently into its 10th season . "
The Loop also acknowledged the return to form giving a positive review , " After a shaky start to its tenth season ...
Grey 's Anatomy has picked up the pace over the past two episodes and is once again showing a great deal of promise that it can revive itself after nearly a decade on the air . "
Many sources , including Rachel Simon of Bustle and Nicole Pomarico of Wetpaint , claimed that Sandra Oh 's performance during her tenth and final season on Grey 's Anatomy is worthy of an Emmy nomination .
Simon stated " She made us care about Grey 's in a way we had n't in years , bringing us into Cristina 's life and mind fully and ferociously .
The show has been good for several seasons now ; because of Oh 's performance this year , it once again became great . "
On Oh 's exit Entertainment Weekly wrote , " Cristina and Meredith is the friendship to end all friendships —
some would even argue it 's what the show is about .
Cristina is Meredith 's person .
How could she possibly function without Cristina in her life ?
More than that , Cristina on her own was a great character .
She did n't want kids , she did n't need a man , and she 'd rather receive compliments on her brain instead of her beauty .
She was everything we needed in a character — and more .
Seeing her go was devastating . "
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
The number in the " No . overall " column refers to the episode 's number within the overall series , whereas the number in the " No . in season " column refers to the episode 's number within this particular season . "
U.S. viewers in millions " refers to the number of Americans in millions who watched the episodes live .
RATINGS LIVE + SD RATINGS
Section::::Ratings .
Section::::Live + SD ratings . !
No . inseries !
No .
inseason !
Episode !
Air date !
Time slot ( EST ) !
Rating / Share LIVE +
7 DAY ( DVR ) RATINGS DVD RELEASE *
24 Episodes ( 1 extended )
* 6-Disc Set * English ( Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround ) * Audio Commentaries *
Extended Episode-"Do
You Know ?
"
* An Immeasurable Gift : Sandra
Oh
* Medical , Medical : A Tutorial on Medical Procedures for TV * Deleted Scenes *
In Stitches : Season Ten Outtakes REFERENCES