ANNA ( FROZEN ) Princess Anna of Arendelle is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 53rd animated film Frozen .
She is voiced by Kristen Bell as an adult .
At the beginning of the film , Livvy Stubenrauch and Katie Lopez provided her speaking and singing voice as a young child , respectively .
Agatha Lee Monn portrayed her as a nine - year - old ( singing ) .
Created by co - directors Jennifer Lee and Chris Buck , Anna is loosely based on Gerda , a character from the Danish fairytale " The Snow Queen " by Hans Christian Andersen .
In the Disney film adaptation , Anna is depicted as the princess of Arendelle , a fictional Scandinavian kingdom and the younger sister of Princess Elsa ( Idina Menzel ) , who is the heiress to the throne and possesses the elemental ability to create and control ice and snow .
When Elsa exiles herself from the kingdom after inadvertently sending Arendelle into an eternal winter on the evening of her coronation , fearless and faithful Anna is determined to set out on a dangerous adventure to bring her sister back and save both her kingdom and her family .
The original fairytale in general and the character of the Snow Queen in particular posed long - term problems to adapt into a feature - length production .
Several film executives , including Walt Disney , made their attempts towards the story and numerous adaptations were shelved as the filmmakers could not work out the characters .
Finally , directors Buck and Lee solved the issue by portraying Anna and Elsa as sisters , establishing a dynamic relationship between the characters .
Anna has received widespread acclaim from film critics , who praised the determination and enthusiasm in her personality .
Bell was also extolled by various reviewers for her performance in the film .
DEVELOPMENT ORIGINS AND CONCEPTION Section::::Development .
Section::::Origins and conception .
Attempts to produce an adaption of " The Snow Queen " in the Disney studio dated back to 1943 , when Walt Disney considered collaborating with Samuel Goldwyn to produce a biography film of Hans Christian Andersen .
However , the story and particularly the Snow Queen character proved to be too problematic to Disney and his animators .
Namely one of the troubles they encountered was that the original story lacked necessary interaction between the main protagonist , Gerda ( who later served as an inspiration for Anna ) , and the Snow Queen .
Most obviously , Andersen 's version did not feature any confrontation between them : when brave little Gerda enters the Snow Queen 's ice castle and sheds her tears on Kay , the Snow Queen is nowhere to be seen .
There just was not enough character conflict to form a full - length feature .
Later on , Glen Keane , Paul and Gaëtan Brizzi , Harvey Fierstein , Dick Zondag and Dave Goetz were among other Disney executives to make efforts towards translating this potential material to the big screen , but none of them made their way .
Around 2008 , Chris Buck pitched Disney his version of The Snow Queen .
At the time , the project was planned to be traditionally animated under the name of Anna and the Snow Queen .
However , by early 2010 , the project encountered the same problem and was stuck again .
Jennifer Lee , Frozens co - director , later recalled , " The issue with the original for us in a lot of ways is it 's a very symbolic story .
It 's very hard to translate symbolism into concrete things .
Film is concrete , so you translate it . "
After the success of Tangled ( 2010 ) , on December 22 , 2011 , Disney announced a release date , November 27 , 2013 , for the film , together with a new title , Frozen , and Peter Del Vecho and John Lasseter took up as the project 's producers .
Now , when the film was revived again , one of the main challenges that Buck and his team had to face with was the character .
The storyboards were presented to John Lasseter , who would tell the assembled production team " You have n't dug deep enough . "
Lasseter commended that Chris Buck 's latest version was fun and very light - hearted , but the characters were not multifaceted , and thus did not resonate for the producer .
The original character of Gerda , known as Anna , was one of the three major characters in the script at this time , along with the Snow Queen , Elsa and Kristoff , loosely based on Kay .
The characters were not considered to be well - rounded or relatable , but an interpersonal , family dynamic was created once Anna and Elsa were established as sisters , an idea suggested by someone on the writing team that no one remembered who .
This changed the story dramatically , shifting from the conflict between the good and the evil to the conflict between love and fear .
Buck stated that their script still retained basic parts of the story and the character of Gerda , citing the similarities between the original story and his version , " [ Gerda ] wo n't give up on finding her friend Kai .
The only thing she really has in her , she 's not a superhero or anything , but she has love .
And it 's love that conquers fear in the end . "
VOICE Section::::Voice .
On March 5 , 2012 , Kristen Bell was cast to voice the adult Anna .
Livvy Stubenrauch was chosen to portray Anna as a young child , while Katie Lopez , daughter of the husband - and - wife songwriting team of the film , Kristen Anderson - Lopez and Robert Lopez , provided the singing voice for young Anna in " Do You Want to Build a Snowman ?
" musical sequence .
Additionally , Agatha Lee Monn , daughter of the film 's director Jennifer Lee , portrayed teenage Anna in this song .
Lee explained about these casting decisions , " We really wanted to use the first two verses of this song to show you Anna 's personality .
And we wanted the singing to be done by real - sounding kids , not necessarily Broadway kids . "
Kristen Bell and Idina Menzel ( who voiced Elsa in the film ) had both auditioned for Rapunzel in Tangled and had already known each other , but they did not get the part .
Talking about her feelings when she got the part , Bell expressed , " Since I was 4 years old , I dreamed of being in a Disney animated film , " she said .
" It was the first goal I ever set for myself .
It seemed like it would be a very unrealistic one . "
She described Disney movies as " the ones [ she ] watched over and over again when [ she ] was a kid , " and continued , " I knew every line from The Little Mermaid .
I love Aladdin .
When asked about her favorite Disney character , Bell said , " Ariel from The Little Mermaid .
Because I think it was a shift that Disney had , where a female lead — the " princess , " I guess — didn't just want to find her mate .
She was singing "
I want to be where the people are .
I want to see the world .
I want to venture outside my comfort zone . "
" Bell described her initial reaction when she first found that she was cast as " I was in glee " .
Lee admitted Bell 's casting selection was influenced after the filmmakers listened a couple of vocal tracks from The Little Mermaid , including " Part of Your World " that the actress recorded when she was young , stating that without these recordings , it would 've been very difficult to the find the right one to play Anna .
The two directors , Buck and Lee , were also impressed by how Kristen and Idina related . "
During one of our early read - throughs , Kristen and Idina sang a ballad to each other which had so much emotion that everyone in the room was in tears , " Buck said .
" It not only showed how great their voices were together , but showed the power the music would have in the story . "
However , Bell was not all confidence when recording with Menzel , described the experiences working with her co - star as " nerve - racking " .
The duo had rehearsed at Idina 's house a song called " Wind Beneath My Wings " , in which Bell greatly commended Idina 's powerful voice .
Regarding the songs that she performed in the film , Kristen said , " We 're singing the lovely songs of Kristen and Bobby Lopez , who wrote ' Book of Mormon . '
So it 's really , really funny music .
It 's really good music .
They 're amazing to work for . "
Director Jennifer Lee strongly believed that there could not be any other Anna but Kristen Bell , saying , " It was definitely a wonderful surprise hearing her voice [ during auditions ] , not knowing that she had been classically trained .
Also , she had such a warm , sweet voice .
She was everything that we could 've hoped for Anna . "
Co - director Chris Buck shared Lee 's ideas , commenting , " Kristen Bell for Anna was the very first person that we saw .
We did a lot of casting to find Anna , but she just hit it out of the park .
From the beginning we loved her , and she just kind of became Anna and Anna became her .
I do n't know which one is which . "
Idina Menzel was also surprised by her co - star 's singing ability , stating that , " I did n't know how great a singer
she was .
I quickly found out and need to constantly tell her because she does n't tell anybody else !
She 's always playing it down . "
Songwriter Kristen Anderson - Lopez later commended Bell 's quick comprehension of her ideas , saying that she would collaborate with the actress for " the rest of [ her ] life " if she could .
Anna 's animator Becky Bresee commented that Bell 's voice " lends itself well , so you are taking bits and pieces . "
During production , Bell and Menzel had to do a lot of recordings and re - recordings , and were required to be together in the same room when on the key emotional scenes between Anna and Elsa .
" We even got Kristen and Idina together for a song .
That really helped elevate the song because they have a duet in the movie and it definitely helped drive that , " said producer Peter Del Vecho .
Chris Buck later commented that getting the actresses in together as much as they could helped add the real , amazing chemistry between them and made them really interact .
Bell 's recording sessions were completed while she was pregnant , and later she had to re - record some of the lines after giving birth , as her voice had deepened .
After watching the completed film , Bell described her performance as " cool and weird and surreal and jarring " , saying that she was really proud that Anna " came out like she did
that [ the directors ] let [ Bell ] do her like this . "
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION Kristen Bell on her approach to the character of Anna .
In order to have one person fully understand and develop their own character , as well as later be able to impart that to the crew , the film 's directors and producers decided to have character leads and supervising animators on specific characters .
First - time character lead Becky Bresee serves as the supervising animator for Anna .
She described her job as " making the character more believable " .
To achieve this , she had to act out part of a sequence in the movie between Anna and Kristoff for a number of times , each of them emphasizing the character 's gestures differently .
" Anna 's a little bit nervous and uncomfortable , and I had to find a way to put that into the animation , " explained Bresee .
Bell said that at first Anna was written plainer and more general .
"
In the first draft of the script she was written more , in my opinion , prissy .
She was kind of specific and very girly , " which Bell did not find appealing .
She admitted that she had always wanted to be part of Disney animated feature , but she " wanted to be a very specific type of princess " , who " was way more awkward than the normal princesses " , not someone with too good postures or too well - spoken .
As she was offered the role of Anna , she came up with a lot of suggestions for the directors .
They were responsive and allowed the actress to mould the character the way she wanted , since they wanted the film to be truthful .
Bell significantly made specific changes to Anna , including the infusion and incorporation of the actress ' own personality to the character , embodying a relatable heroine , which received full support from the directors .
She called the scene where Anna first meets HansKristen Bell on Anna 's influence to her in the future .
When asked about Anna 's biggest charm , Bell said that " her charm is caught somewhere between her sincerity and optimism .
Anna is genuine , sincere and compounded with optimism , and eternally optimistic people are the most charismatic people , much more attractive than those with a bad mood . "
She also expressed why the character seemed to loveable to her , " To have Anna in a situation where she starts the movie without any friends , because her lifestyle has n't allowed her to have a full kingdom .
She runs around , because she wants friends .
"
Bell called the film 's story is " another turning point " for Disney animation because the love depicted in this story is the love between siblings , a non - romantic love .
Anna wants the world and she wants to explore , but she also wants to nurture the relationships around her , particularly the family relationship .
" It 's very non - traditional for a Disney movie , " she added .
Regarding Bell 's influence on Anna , director Chris Buck said her personality was just so fun and energetic .
" We had an Anna character but Kristen really came in and pushed it and made it even funnier and even sweeter
I think , and more believable as a three - dimensional character , " he said .
He also admitted that he " fell in love with [ Bell ] 's voice and [ Bell ] 's spirit " .
Director Jennifer Lee said that she loved Bell because the actress shared a similarity with her , that girls could be funny . "
So she was a fantastic collaborator , " Lee added .
Songwriting duo Kristen - Anderson Lopez and Robert Lopez later commented that they had written a lot of first songs for Kristen , for Anna but , " The more we were working with Kristen Bell , the more , the more she influenced .
" They quickly understand who Anna was because Anna 's Kristen Bell .
Anna 's costumes in the film were informed by the research of Norwegian clothing styles .
Based on these findings , art director Brittney Lee and her team later found out what materials should be used for the costumes .
Co - director Jennifer Lee created a cheerful wardrobe featuring " playful " floral patterns and saturated colors in order to accurately reflect Anna 's personality .
The animators also took into account the climate that Anna is living in , costuming her in heavy wools and velvets , reflecting traditional winter clothing of the Scandinavian area .
The animators added structures to the costumes in a way , such as pleated dresses , that allows movements , giving the character a free range of " twirl[ing ] all she wants " throughout the film .
In order to deepen the cultural context of the film , rosemaling , a traditional form of Norwegian decorative folk art , was added to almost every character 's costumes .
Anna and her sister , Elsa , also enjoyed a large number of types of costumes and the layers of costuming that have never been done before .
As these characters are running around in the snow , they have to have petticoats , undergarments , capes , " and they have all these layers and layers of things that are all meticulously designed , " Brittney explained .
CHARACTER MODEL
Section::::Character model .
Anna has distinguishable facial features of a typical Disney heroine , including big eyes , thin lips and a small nose .
Her physical appearance has drawn much comparison between her and Rapunzel from Tangled , however there are considerable differences between them .
Anna 's eyes are slightly more upturned , her cheeks are a bit fuller , her face and chin are generally rounder , and her eyebrows and eyelashes are thicker than Rapunzel 's .
She also has more freckles than Rapunzel and even has them on her shoulders .
Anna 's eyebrows wrinkle when they move , and she has prevalent neck muscles that appear when she speaks .
Anna 's travel outfit generally consists of magenta , black , dark and light blue , with flowery designs on the bottom of her dress .
APPEARANCES FROZEN
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Frozen .
Anna is the younger child in the royal family of Arendelle , whose older sister , Elsa is born with the power to create and control ice and snow .
As children , they enjoy the life of princesses using Elsa 's abilities to create a winter wonderland for their enjoyment .
After they create a snowman named Olaf in the throne room , Elsa accidentally strikes Anna unconscious with her magic .
The king and queen hurriedly take Anna to the mountain trolls for help .
The troll king , Pabbie , erases Anna 's memory of her sister 's magic , nulling Elsa 's power , only leaving memory of the fun the sisters shared .
Pabbie warns Elsa to control her powers — a strike to Anna 's heart would have been fatal .
In an effort to protect Anna , the king and queen lock the castle gates and generally restrict Elsa to her new separate bedroom .
Confused by the sudden loss of contact by Elsa , Anna makes repeated failed attempts to draw her out of her room .
Elsa cares too much for her sister , traumatized by the near - death experience and she resists reconnecting with Anna .
Eventually , the younger sister ceases trying to rekindle their bond .
The sisters become even more isolated from each other after their parents , the King and Queen of Arendelle , die in a shipwreck .
Devastated by the news , Anna tries to reunite with her sister , looking for love and comfort in the tragedy .
Elsa remains in her room , not attending her parents ' funeral .
Three years later , when Elsa becomes a young adult , she is set to be crowned queen .
The people of Arendelle are joyously preparing for her coronation day .
Anna is flushed with excitement as the castle gates are opened for the first time since the sisters ' childhood .
The young princess expresses how cheerful she is when she leaves her lonely life and meets people , as well as her hopes to find romance and a love interest .
While exploring the town , Anna bumps into a horse owned by Prince Hans of the Southern Isles .
Despite the awkward meeting at first , the pair quickly get acquainted and develop a mutual attraction for each other .
Though Elsa fears of her secret being revealed to the public , her coronation goes on without incident .
At the reception party , Anna is offered a waltz from Hans and the two have a date around the kingdom .
They later find out that they have much in common , and Anna agrees to Hans ' marriage proposal .
Anna asks for Elsa 's blessing to marry Hans , but she refuses and criticizes her for engaging with someone she has just met .
This raises an argument between the two with Anna losing her temper , culminating in Elsa getting angry and accidentally exposing her abilities .
Upon the guests ' ( including Anna ) horrified reactions , Elsa flees the castle in panic and goes into hiding in the icy mountains .
During her retreat , she inadvertently unleashes an eternal winter throughout Arendelle .
Far from there , Elsa decides to let go her powers and build an enormous ice palace .
Anna , believing it 's her fault , determines to find her sister and bring her back , leaving Hans in charge of Arendelle .
At a trading post on her journey , Anna meets a mountain man named Kristoff , an ice harvester who agrees to lead her to the North Mountain , where he knows that a magical phenomenon has occurred and helps her escape a pack of wolves , resulting in his sled being destroyed after falling down into a large hole and catching on fire .
The duo and Kristoff 's reindeer Sven , where being chased by wolves on the way and encounter the sister 's snowman , Olaf , who was unknowingly brought to life by Elsa and later leads them to her palace .
The sisters reunite , but Elsa is reluctant to help Anna by ending the eternal winter .
Upset , she loses control of her powers , striking Anna in her heart .
Desperate to get her sister to leave , Elsa creates a giant snow creature , and it throws Anna and her friends away from the palace .
Upon noticing Anna 's hair is turning white , Kristoff takes her back to his adoptive family of trolls .
Pabbie tells Anna that her heart has been frozen by her sister 's magic and only an act of true love can save her from freezing completely .
Kristoff , believing that a romantic kiss from Hans will heal her , takes Anna back to the kingdom .
Meanwhile , Hans has led a group of soldiers to the ice palace .
Elsa 's defenses are not enough
and she is taken back to Arendelle 's dungeon unconscious .
At the castle , Anna 's request for a kiss is denied by Hans , who reveals their engagement was merely a ploy to seize the throne of Arendelle .
He locks Anna in her room without a fire , leaving her to die .
Hans falsely claims that Anna is already dead and that they spoke their marriage vows before she died , making him the ruler of Arendelle .
Olaf aids Anna while revealing to her Kristoff 's love for her .
Elsa also escapes into the fjord , her fears triggering a massive blizzard , but breaks down in shock when Hans tells her that she killed Anna and the blizzard stops .
While the end of the storm allows Anna to reunite with Kristoff , she sees Hans ready to kill Elsa , and with her final breath , she stops him from killing her sister and inadvertently knocks him unconscious just as she freezes solid — a result of the earlier accident .
As Elsa grieves for her sister , Anna begins to thaw , since her choice to sacrifice herself to save her elder sister rather than herself constitutes " an act of true love " .
Realizing love is the key to controlling her powers , Elsa is able to thaw the kingdom and use her magic safely in public .
Anna confronts Hans and punches him in the face , making him fall off the ship into the water .
She then buys Kristoff a previously - promised new sled and they share a kiss , starting their new relationship .
Anna and Elsa 's sisterly bond is rekindled , with Elsa promising never to shut the castle gates again , much to Anna 's joy .
FROZEN FEVER Section::::Frozen Fever .
Nearly a year after the events of the movie , Elsa throws a birthday for Anna .
However Anna discovers , through Elsa 's continuous sneezing that Elsa has caught a cold .
Despite trying to make the party perfect for her sister , Elsa 's sneezes create tiny snowmen which try to take the cake for themselves , and she nearly falls off the clocktower due to her condition .
Afterwards Anna takes Elsa to rest and feeds her soup , while Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf help transport the snowmen to Elsa 's ice palace in the mountains .
OLAF 'S FROZEN ADVENTURE Section::::Olaf 's Frozen Adventure .
Anna appears in a 21-minute Frozen holiday film along with Elsa , Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf , which debuted in theaters for a limited time engagement with Disney·Pixar 's Coco on November 22 , 2017 .
It made its television debut on ABC on December 14 , 2017 .
RALPH BREAKS THE INTERNET Section::::Ralph Breaks the Internet .
Anna and Elsa together , alongside the Disney Princesses and Moana , appear in the film , as was announced at the 2017 D23 Expo .
MISCELLANEOUS
MERCHANDISE Section::::Miscellaneous .
Section::::Merchandise .
On November 6 , 2013 , Disney Consumer Products began releasing a line of merchandise featuring Anna in Disney Store and other retailers .
Various versions of Anna dolls include the fashion doll set , the mini - doll set , plush doll , Anna - as - a - toddler doll , and a special version called Musical Magic Elsa and Anna Dolls , which lights up and plays their signature songs that appear in the film when users hold their hands or they hold each other 's hands .
Anna 's merchandise also covers a wide range of other products , such as rolling luggage , boots , clothes , nightgowns , bowls , plates , coffee mugs , and home décors .
In addition , the film was adapted as simplified storybooks for children , with diverse versions featuring sound effects , original character voices , and mini projectors that project movie images on the wall .
One of those books , called A Sister More Like Me , includes illustrations by Brittney Lee , the film 's visual development artist .
Both Anna and Elsa appear as playable characters in Disney Infinity through the use of their corresponding figurines .
THEME PARKS Section::::Theme parks .
In November 2013 , prior to the release of Frozen , Anna and Elsa began daily meet - and - greet sessions at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts in Florida and California , US .
In Walt Disney World , the sisters had their debut on October 22 , 2013 , in a temporary attraction at Disney 's Hollywood Studios while their main attractions in Epcot were being built , then officially made appearances in the Norway Pavilion of Epcot on November 2 , 2013 , alongside a gallery of Norwegian culture which the film 's setting and design drew inspirations from .
A cottage called the " Royal Reception " was set up in the Fantasyland section of Disneyland , featuring the pair and an audio - animatronic Olaf speaking on the cottage roof .
In February 2014 , these meet - and - greet sessions were extended indefinitely , with wait time to meet the princesses frequently exceeding two hours , which is longer than any previous Disney characters .
, it was reported that this wait time had reached four or five hours .
Additionally , Elsa , Anna , and Olaf were given a Frozen - themed float for Disneyland Paris ' Disney Magic on Parade .
On March 9 , 2014 , the three made appearances again on their own Frozen parade float in Festival of Fantasy Parade at Magic Kingdom theme park , Walt Disney World , with Anna showing up in her coronation dress for the first time in a Disney park .
On April 20 , 2014 , Anna and Elsa moved from Epcot to the Princess Fairytale Hall at Magic Kingdom , with wait time to see the characters amounted to three hours , comparing to Cinderella and Rapunzel 's 15 minutes .
Anna made a few appearances in Disney California Adventure 's Winter Dreams , a 30-minute , winter - themed new show of the nighttime spectacle World of Color with Olaf , the show 's host , and Elsa .
Disneyland Paris 's nighttime spectacular Disney Dreams !
featured Anna as the French co - narrator of the show , alongside the English - speaking Olaf .
Scenes from the original film , featuring Anna and other characters like Olaf and Kristoff , appear on the castle while Elsa is singing "
Let It Go " , during the Frozen segment in the Magic Kingdom nighttime projection show , Celebrate the Magic .
Coinciding with the film 's release , Anna began making meet - and - greet sessions aboard the Disney Cruise Line 's Disney Dream cruise ship .
On May 16 , 2014 , it was announced that Disneyland would debut a Frozen pre - parade featuring Anna , Elsa , and Olaf .
It premiered June 13 , 2014 , and preceded performances of Mickey 's Soundsational Parade .
From July 5 to September 1 , 2014 , as part of Frozen Summer Fun show at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , Anna and Elsa will appear in a horse - drawn sleigh making their way down Hollywood Boulevard , alongside Kristoff and skaters , skiers and ice cutters in the Anna and Elsa 's Royal Welcome section .
The sisters also made appearances in , where they were joined by royal historians to retell the history of Arendelle ; and " Frozen " Fireworks Spectacular alongside Kristoff and Olaf , a fireworks display set to the music of Frozen .
Other characters from the film will also appear in their respective offerings :
Olaf in Olaf on Summer Vacation , the Oaken 's family in Wandering Oaken 's Trading Post & Frozen Funland , and " Coolest Summer Ever " Dance Party featuring a DJ and live band .
In response to strong demand , Disney Parks subsequently announced on August 7 that Frozen Summer Fun would be extended to September 28 .
On August 19 , 2014 , it was initially announced that Elsa & Anna 's Boutique ( replacing Studio Disney 365 ) would open mid - September in Downtown Disney at the Disneyland Resort .
The opening date was later changed to October 6 , 2014 , and the store name was changed to " Anna & Elsa 's Boutique " .
The location includes products inspired by Anna , Elsa , and Olaf .
While there had not been any official announcements from Disney regarding a coronation for Anna and Elsa , it had been announced in late August 2014 that a special character meal would be held by a group of travel agents in the morning of September 24 , 2014 .
While not officially organized by Disney , the event , called My Royal Coronation , would feature the official Anna and Elsa characters owned by Disney with assistance from the company .
On September 12 , 2014 , Walt Disney World announced that a Frozen attraction was scheduled to open in early 2016 at Epcot 's World Showcase in the Norway pavilion , replacing the park 's Maelstrom ride .
The attraction features the kingdom of Arendelle with music and scenes from the film , as well as meet - and - greets with Anna and Elsa .
Anna , Elsa , Kristoff , and Olaf will make appearances in Mickey 's Once Upon a Christmastime Parade , offered during Mickey 's Very Merry Christmas Party at Magic Kingdom in November and December 2014 ( from November 7 to December 31 ) .
On November 13 , 2014 , prior to " A Sparkling Christmas " Evert , Anna and Elsa began meet - and - greet sessions at Hong Kong Disneyland .
Beginning December 20 , 2014 , the Anna and Elsa meet and greet at Disneyland Resort was moved from Disneyland park to a new location in the Disney Animation Building called " Anna and Elsa 's Royal Welcome " in Disney California Adventure .
In addition , the Storybook Land Canal Boats at Disneyland were updated to include the village of Arendelle from the film , including Anna and Elsa 's castle .
Officially starting January 7 , 2015 , Anna began making appearances alongside Elsa and Kristoff at Disney California Adventure in " For the First Time in Forever — A Frozen Sing - Along Celebration " in Hollywood Land as part of the park 's " Frozen Fun " event .
Also starting January 7 , Anna and Elsa are making appearances in a Frozen play at the Royal Theatre in Disneyland park .
Beginning May 22 , 2015 , Disneyland debuted a new nighttime parade called " Paint the Night " , which includes a Frozen float featuring Anna , Elsa , and Olaf , as part of the park 's 60th anniversary celebration .
BROADWAY MUSICAL Section::::Broadway musical .
Patti Murin originated the role of Anna in the Broadway musical , which opened in March 2018 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL REVIEWS Christian Post described her and Elsa as the " most lovable and charismatic characters yet " , while Tony Hicks of San Jose Mercury News wrote that both Anna and Elsa were depicted as devoted from the start , and " [ Anna 's ] confusion and Elsa 's anguish as she shuts herself away from the world — and her sister — is palatable . "
Deepanjana Pal from First Post commented that Anna " is very much a child who needs to grow up and she does in the course of the film .
"
The Wall Street Journal suggested that the character become more endearing for being " exactly the free spirit she seems to be " .
Noah Lee of The Coast News was impressed by the heroine duo Anna and Elsa , and said , " I never lost interest in the drastic measures Anna took or the tribulations Elsa faced . "
Travis Bean , a reviewer of Community Newspaper Group put emphasis on the lessons that kids could perceive from the film , saying , " Children can also root for Anna to race through the forest and break through Elsa 's icy walls and prove that love conquers all fears .
" Linda Barnard , Toronto Star film critic , described the sisters as " engaging female characters " , particularly praised Anna for her funny and iron - willed characteristics .
Sabina Ibarra from Geek Exchange commended that the directors had crafted two very real girls " who come into their own and also come together in this amazing tale . "
Kristen Bell was lauded for her performance as Anna in the film .
Michelle I m , writing for the Eye of the Tiger referred to the character as " bubbly and spirited " , and commented , "
Not only was [ Bell ] able to nail those vibratos and belting notes in her songs , it was actually her singing them . "
The Coast News review of the film wrote that Bell " earns top marks " for instilling a spirited sensibility in the clumsy but well - meaning Anna .
Cinenerd , a film critic for Blogcritics , commended the actress ' singing ability , stating that she and Menzel " sing their hearts out , with two showstoppers in Let it Go and For the First Time in Forever " .
Colin Covert of Colorado Springs ' The Gazette considered Bell 's performance as a " flawless delivery " .
Matt Goldberg extolled the relationship between Anna and her elder sister Elsa , writing , " There 's so much to love about Frozen , but at the top of the list is the emphasis on [ Anna ] and Elsa 's relationship .
Anna still has an infatuation with the charming Hans and romantic chemistry with the flustered Kristoff , but her greatest love is for her sister .
[ Elsa ] is mostly scared and guilt - ridden .
She 's an incredibly sympathetic character , and it 's a fresh spin on depicting estrangement between siblings .
Anna has so much life and enthusiasm , and we want to see her share it with Elsa . "
Magdalena Lachowicz of The Heights referred to this sisterly bond as " what truly makes the film and the moral that comes with it " , commenting , " the plot is set up to lead the viewer into thinking that it needs to be true love 's kiss — something which Anna then goes to seek .
This journey sends her on a difficult adventure in which she learns about both sacrifice and love . "
Debbie Lynn Elias of Culver City Observer commented , " Female driven with confidence and positivity , Elsa and Anna are like two sides of a coin , both strong , albeit one through power and confidence and the other through clumsy sticktuitiveness and love , " while Stephen Holden from The New York Times appreciated that instead of a romantic attachment , it was a sisterly love and devotion that drove the story , which departed greatly from traditional Disney formula .
Noah Lee described Anna and Elsa 's relationship as " genuine " , saying , " watching those themes of family and love versus isolation and fear touched my heart in more ways than one . "
However , the character was not without criticisms .
Michelle
I m from the Eye of the Tiger
referred to
Anna 's falling immediately in love with a prince as the only personal development in her character , and found it " disappointing " in comparison with Elsa 's emotionally evolving personality .
Anna Smith of The Guardian disliked that both Anna and Elsa were drawn with slender figures and large eyes as is typical of Disney princesses .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Both Anna and Elsa were nominated for Best Animated Female by the Alliance of Women Film Journalists , with only Anna winning the award .
Frozen also won Women Film Critics Circle award in the same category .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official character page