VICTORIAPLUM.COM
VictoriaPlum.com , a trading name of Victoria Plum Ltd , is an online bathroom retailer .
The company traded under the name Victoria Plumb up until 21 July 2015 , when it was rebranded as VictoriaPlum.com , in order to emphasise the exclusively online nature of the business .
Founded in 1999 , it has no physical shops or showrooms , as its business is concentrated on online and telephone sales .
The company 's distribution centre is based in Kingston upon Hull , and its headquarters are located in Hessle , East Riding of Yorkshire , just outside the city .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The company was founded in 1999 , as part of the Walker Group , which also owns other popular homeware and furniture stores such as MFI Group .
The brand began trading in 2001 , and has since seen consistent growth in sales and investment .
In November 2013 , it was announced that the company was seeking the advice of KPMG , on a proposed sale estimated at £ 150 million .
Victoria Plum won the Retailer of the Year award in the home products section at the Venda ECMOD Direct Commerce Awards in London in May 2013 .
The company is listed at number six in the SME rankings for Yorkshire .
In April 2014 , private equity firm TPG Capital had invested £ 200 million in Victoria Plum after buying a majority stake .
Due to expansion , the company moved its headquarters to Hessle , East Riding of Yorkshire in October 2014 .
On 12 April 2015 , Victoria Plum appeared at number # 81 in The Sunday Times Profit Track 100 , which ranks the Top 100 private companies in the United Kingdom with the fastest growth in their profits over a three year period .
On 21 July 2015 , the company changed its main trading name from Victoria Plumb to VictoriaPlum.com , to emphasise the exclusively online nature of the business .
A new logo and strapline – " Your home " – was also introduced , as the brand announced it would be moving into other areas of the home , starting with bedrooms .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
VictoriaPlum.com designs , makes and supplies a range of bathroom products from its headquarters in the East Riding of Yorkshire .
In September 2013 , the company launched a revamped version of its website optimised for mobile browsing , aimed at enabling customers browsing in physical stores to compare products and prices online .
A survey by the retailer also found that builders working on site found the website useful for finding products for custom bathrooms .
In December 2013 , the brand announced an expansion in its range for the following year , following consultations with its customers .
On 2 June 2014 , Victoria Plum expanded their range by introducing bathroom tiles to their collection .
ADVERTISING Section::::Advertising .
Towards the end of 2012 , the company launched its first ever television advertising campaign .
It employed the help of Leeds based ad agency Principles in creating the advert , with Carat in Manchester recruited to handle media planning and buying .
In the end of 2013 , the company reported a significant rise in sales , from £ 19.1 million to £ 26.2 million .
Buoyed by the relative success of the first run of adverts , the company launched a second campaign in 2013 , this time working with CheethamBellJWT , with the tagline " Quality bathrooms , not costly showrooms " , – the advert won campaign of the week in trade magazine Retail Week .
In September 2014 , Victoria Plum signed up to sponsor the remakes of popular shows Celebrity Squares hosted by Warwick Davis and Sunday Night at the Palladium , to be hosted by a different comedian every week .
CHARITY PARTNER Section::::Charity partner .
In November 2014 , Victoria Plum ran a poll to choose which charity would become its official charity partner for 2015 .
WellChild – the national charity for sick children – received the most votes and became the official charity partner .
The company has since donated £ 1 to this charity for every customer review it receives on Trustpilot , and its staff have taken part in fundraising events , including running the London Marathon and completing the National Three Peaks Challenge , to raise money .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS