THE RED ROAD ( TV SERIES )
The Red Road is an American drama television series that aired on SundanceTV from February 27 , 2014 to May 7 , 2015 .
This was SundanceTV 's second fully owned scripted original series ; the first was Rectify .
The Red Road was canceled after its second season , as confirmed by Jason Momoa , who played Phillip Kopus in the series .
The show 's plot is based on the plight of the Ramapough Mountain Indians at the Ringwood Mines landfill site in New Jersey , where toxic wastes from the nearby Mahwah Ford plant were dumped .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Police Officer Harold Jensen is the main protagonist .
He is trying to keep his family together after a cover - up involving his mentally unstable wife , a recovering alcoholic who self - medicates her undiagnosed schizophrenia with alcohol .
Jensen comes into conflict with Phillip Kopus , a member of the Ramapough Mountain people .
His state - recognized tribe lives in the Ramapo Mountains in a border area of New York and New Jersey in the fictitious small town of Walpole , New Jersey , across the Hudson River from New York City .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The working title for the series was originally The Descendants .
Production for both seasons were in Atlanta , Georgia , in 2013 and 2014 .
CAST MAIN CAST
* Martin Henderson as Harold Jensen * Jason Momoa as Phillip Kopus * Julianne Nicholson as Jean Jensen * Allie Gonino as Rachel Jensen
* Tamara Tunie as Marie Van Der Veen * Kiowa Gordon as Junior Van Der
Veen
* Annalise Basso as Kate Jensen
* Tom Sizemore as Jack Kopus RECURRING
CAST EPISODES Season premiereSeason
finale SEASON 1 ( 2014 )
*
* Denotes the primetime average of SundanceTV .
SEASON 2 ( 2015 )
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Red Road has received mostly favorable reviews .
Review aggregator site Metacritic has given the season a " generally favorable " score of 66 out of 100 , based on 25 critics .
On another review aggregator site , Rotten Tomatoes , it holds a 65 % rating with an average rating of 6.9 out of 10 , based on 26 reviews .
The consensus reads , " The Red Road suffers from uneven writing , but its talented cast and creepy story hint at undeveloped promise . "
GRAPHIC NOVEL
Section::::Graphic novel .
In 2015 , Sundance released The Red Road 1990 : A Graphic Novel to be read online .
SEE ALSO
* The red road ( definition )
* Out of the Furnace REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS