LIST OF CURRENCIES IN EUROPE
There are 28 currencies currently used in the 50 countries of Europe , all of which are members of the United Nations , except Vatican City , which is an observer .
All de facto present currencies in Europe , and an incomplete list of the preceding currency , are listed here .
A currency is a medium of exchange , such as money , banknotes , and coins .
In Europe , the most commonly used currency is the euro ( used by 25 countries ) ; any country entering the European Union ( EU ) is expected to join the eurozone when they meet the five convergence criteria .
Denmark is the only EU member which has been granted an exemption from using the euro , Sweden has also not adopted the Euro , although unlike Denmark , it has not formally opted out , instead , fails to meet the ERM II ( Exchange Rate Mechanism ) which results in the non - use of the Euro .
For countries which hope to join the eurozone , there are five guidelines that need to be followed , grouped in the Maastricht criteria .
The pound sterling , used by the United Kingdom , is rated at fourth on Investopedia 's list of the top 8 most tradable currencies , saying that it is a " little bit more volatile than the euro " .
It was ranked just ahead of the Swiss franc , ranked fifth , which is used in Switzerland and Liechtenstein , saying that the set up of the Swiss banking " emphasizes the economic and financial stability policies dictated by the governing board of the SNB " .
Both are in the top 8 major currencies on Bloomberg .
Several countries use currencies which translate as " crown " : the Czech koruna , the Norwegian krone , the Danish krone , the Icelandic króna , and the Swedish krona .
At present , the euro is legal tender in 19 out of 28 European Union member states , in addition to 5 countries not part of the EU ( Monaco , San Marino , Vatican City , Andorra and Montenegro ) .
Kosovo also uses the euro , but is only partially recognised as an independent state .
EUROPEAN CURRENCIES Section::::European currencies .
+ List of all European currencies !
scope="col " Country ! scope="col " Present currency ! scope="col " class="unsortable
" Currency sign ! scope="col " ISO 4217 code ! scope="col " Fractional unit ! scope="col " Previous currency
Portuguese escudo SEE ALSO
* Currencies of the European Union * List of circulating currencies
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * International Organisation for Standardisation ( ISO )