THE GREEN INFERNO ( FILM )
The Green Inferno is a 2013 American cannibal horror film directed by Eli Roth .
The film was inspired by and is a homage to Italian cannibal films of the late 1970s and early ' 80s " cannibal boom " , including Cannibal Holocaust ( 1980 ) , which features a film - within - a - film titled The Green Inferno .
The film follows a group of activists who are forced to fight for survival when they are captured by a cannibalistic tribe .
The film was released on September 25 , 2015 , by Blumhouse Tilt and High Top Releasing .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Justine , a college freshman , becomes interested in a social activism group led by Alejandro and his girlfriend Kara .
The group plans a trip to the Amazon rainforest to stop a company from logging and obliterating ancient native tribes there ; the goal is to film the logging crews with cell phones and stream footage to raise awareness .
Justine suggests she could bring attention to the issue through her father , an attorney for the United Nations .
The operation is funded by a drug dealer named Carlos , who takes the group of students to Peru via plane .
They arrive in the Amazon and head to a logging site where they begin their protest , chaining themselves to bulldozers while filming the loggers cutting down trees .
A private militia arrives , and the protest receives viral attention on the internet when Justine is nearly killed by one of the militia officers .
The group is arrested , but Carlos pays the police to let them go .
As the plane leaves , it crashes into the forest , killing Carlos .
Justine , Alejandro , Kara , and protest members Jonah , Lars , Amy , Samantha , and Daniel survive and search for a GPS phone to call for help .
Suddenly , numerous young men painted in red come out of the bushes and kill Kara .
The rest of the group are tranquilized and taken to a small village where they are imprisoned in a bamboo cage .
The female elder of the cannibal tribe ritualistically dismembers and decapitates Jonah .
Samantha attempts to escape , but she is tranquilized and the group finds out that they are being watched .
Alejandro reveals – to everyone else 's dismay – that he had cynically staged the protest to benefit a rival company , and the eventual deforestation of the area is inevitable .
The next morning , the tribe 's male leader in black and yellow paint orders Justine , Samantha , and Amy out of the cage .
One by one , the girls are tested with a sharpened instrument .
As soon as Justine 's turn is finished , she is revealed to be a virgin .
They take her away , preparing for a genital mutilation ceremony .
When Samantha and Amy are brought back to the cage , they distract the watchman with a ringing cell phone and Samantha escapes .
The next day , Justine is returned with paint marks on her , and the tribe brings the prisoners meat .
Amy , who is vegan , reluctantly agrees to eat it to regain energy and escape : however , upon reaching the bottom of her bowl , she notices a piece of skin with one of Samantha 's tattoos on it .
Realizing they had been fed Samantha , who failed to escape and was recaptured and dismembered , Amy shatters her bowl and uses a shard to cut her own throat .
Lars then stuffs marijuana down Amy 's throat , hoping to get the tribe high when they cook her .
His plan works , and Justine and Daniel escape , but Alejandro tranquilizes Lars and both are left behind .
Lars is caught by two tribe members .
He tries to calm them with his humor but the two tribe members bite his arms .
He escapes but is surrounded by several more members of the tribe and they eat him alive .
Justine and Daniel return to the site of the plane crash and find a phone in Kara 's pocket , but are recaptured by the tribe shortly after .
Justine is prepared for her ceremony where she is put in tribal attire and painted white , a wooden tiara on her head , and red across her eyes .
Daniel is tied to a pole , his limbs broken , and is fed to ants .
Logging machinery attracts the cannibals to the jungle .
The distraction allows Justine to escape with the help of a child sympathizer .
Daniel begs for Justine to kill him and the child sympathizer blows a white powder into Daniel 's face , knocking him out before slitting his throat .
Alejandro is abandoned by Justine in the cage .
Two tribe members chase her down , but lose her when she crosses a river with a black jaguar on the other side of it .
However , the big cat does n't harm her and she runs into the jungle .
Justine encounters the same private militia that had captured her earlier as they slaughter the native warriors and the male tribal leader is killed .
Justine uses Kara 's phone to prove that she is not one of the tribe people , stopping the militia from firing on the remaining native warriors .
Justine is taken home to safety .
In New York , Justine lies to her father , telling him that she was the only survivor of the crash and that the tribe was friendly to her .
In a mid - credits scene , Alejandro 's sister Lucia tells Justine during a phone call that she has found him on a satellite GPS image , showing a surviving Alejandro painted black like the Natives .
CAST
* Lorenza Izzo as Justine
* Ariel Levy as Alejandro * Nicolás Martínez as Daniel * Daryl Sabara as Lars * Kirby Bliss Blanton as Amy * Magda Apanowicz as Samantha
* Aaron Burns as Jonah * Ignacia Allamand as Kara * Sky Ferreira as Kaycee * as The Bald Headhunter * Richard Burgi as Charles * Matías López as Carlos Lincones * Antonieta Pari as The Elder * Paz Bascuñán as Lucia ( voice )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
On May 17 , 2012 , at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival , Eli Roth announced that he was planning to direct a horror thriller , The Green Inferno , with Worldview Entertainment stating that it would finance and produce the film .
Roth wrote the script with Guillermo Amoedo .
Production began in Autumn 2012 in Peru and Chile .
In October 2012 , it was announced that filming was set to begin in November in Peru .
On October 25 , Roth announced the full cast for the film .
Principal photography began in October 2012 in New York City , and shooting in Peru and in some locations in Chile began on November 5 , 2012 .
Roth said in an interview in February 2013 that he wanted the film to look like a Werner Herzog or Terrence Malick film .
He has also said that he was inspired by such Italian cannibal films as Cannibal Holocaust and Cannibal Ferox .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
On July 30 , 2013 , it was announced that The Green Inferno would premiere at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival .
The film was intended to be released theatrically on September 5 , 2014 , by Open Road Films .
However , financial difficulties with the production company Worldview Entertainment caused Open Road to pull it from its original release .
The film had a secret screening on April 25 , 2014 , at the Stanley Film Festival .
The Green Inferno was eventually theatrically released in the United States on September 25 , 2015 , by Blumhouse Productions ' multi - platform arm BH Tilt , Universal Pictures , and High Top Releasing .
It was released in Filipino theaters on September 23 , 2015 by Solar Pictures .
Two versions of the film were presented there , depending on the cinema chain : an R-13 " sanitized " version with some gory details removed , resulting in five minutes of footage edited out , and the uncut R-18 version .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film opened to 1,540 venues , earning $ 3.5 million in its opening weekend , ranking ninth place in the domestic box office .
At the end of its run , six weeks later on November 5 , the film grossed $ 7.2 million in the United States and Canada , and $ 5.7 million overseas for a worldwide total of $ 12.9 million .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The Green Inferno received generally negative reviews from critics ; however , some praised the film 's throwback vibe to earlier Italian cannibal horror films of the 1970s and its social commentary .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 36 % , based on 87 reviews , with an average rating of 4.5/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " The Green Inferno may not win writer - director Eli Roth many new converts , but fans of his flair for gory spectacle should find it a suitably gruesome diversion . "
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 38 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " .
CinemaScore audiences gave the film an average grade of " C- " on an A+ to F scale .
The film received a glowing response from horror novelist Stephen King , who tweeted that the film is " like a glorious throwback to the drive - in movies of my youth : bloody , gripping , hard to watch , but you ca n't look away . "
Todd Gilchrist of The Wrap gave the film a negative review , stating " Unfortunately , Roth 's abundant gore fails to either offend or exhilarate .
" Birth .
Movies .
Death.s Meredith Borders , reporting from Fantasia Fest , gave the film a more positive notice : " The Green Inferno never lets up :
it barrels ahead , exuberant and relentless in its brutality , never giving the audience a second to unclench .
It 's a feast for gorehounds , one with an unsubtle message about the way that uninformed activism harms more than it helps .
And it 's a total blast . "
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The film was criticized by Survival International , which campaigns for indigenous peoples and indigenous peoples living in voluntary isolation , as reinforcing colonialism and respectively neocolonialism , as well as their stigmas against indigenous peoples , portraying them as savage .
Roth dismissed this argument as unimportant for stopping exploitation : " The idea that a fictional movie about a fictional tribe could somehow hurt indigenous people when gas companies are tearing these villages apart on a daily basis is simply absurd .
These companies do n't need an excuse — they have one — the natural resources in the ground .
They can window dress things however they like , but nobody will destroy a village because they did n't like a character in a movie , they 'll do it because they want to get rich by draining what 's under the village .
The fear that somehow a movie would give them ammunition to destroy a tribe all sounds like misdirected anger and frustration that the corporations are the ones controlling the fates of these uncontacted tribes . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Green Inferno was released on DVD and Blu - ray on January 5 , 2016 , by Universal Home Entertainment .
The release features a director 's cut and an audio commentary by Roth , López , Izzo , Burns , Blanton and Sabara .
POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
On September 7 , 2013 , it was announced that a sequel would be produced , titled Beyond the Green Inferno and directed by Nicolás López .
As of May 2016 , there have been no further updates , other than articles referencing the original 2013 announcement and a single unsubstantiated comment , with no production details , that a sequel is still under consideration .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS