FARGO ( TV SERIES )
Fargo is an American black comedy – crime drama anthology television series created and primarily written by Noah Hawley .
The show is inspired by the eponymous 1996 film written and directed by the Coen brothers , who serve as executive producers on the series alongside Hawley .
The series premiered on April 15 , 2014 , on FX , and follows an anthology format , with each season set in a different era , and with a different story and mostly new characters and cast , although there is minor overlap .
Each season shares a common chronology with the original film .
The first season , set in 2006 and starring Billy Bob Thornton , Allison Tolman , Colin Hanks , and Martin Freeman , received positive reviews from critics .
It won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Miniseries , Outstanding Directing , and Outstanding Casting , and received 15 additional nominations including Outstanding Writing , another Outstanding Directing nomination , and acting nominations for all four leads .
It also won the Golden Globe Awards for Best Miniseries or Television Film and Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film for Thornton .
The second season , set in 1979 and starring Kirsten Dunst , Patrick Wilson , Jesse Plemons , Jean Smart , and Ted Danson , also received positive reviews from critics .
It received three Golden Globe nominations , along with several Emmy nominations including Outstanding Miniseries , and acting nominations for Dunst , Plemons , Smart , and Bokeem Woodbine .
The third season , set in 2010 and starring Ewan McGregor , Carrie Coon , Mary Elizabeth Winstead , Goran Bogdan , and David Thewlis , premiered on April 19 , 2017 .
It was met with positive reviews from critics , and received Emmy nominations including Outstanding Miniseries , and acting nominations for McGregor , Coon , and Thewlis .
It received three Golden Globe nominations , for Outstanding Limited Series , and McGregor and Thewlis for acting , with McGregor winning in his category .
A fourth season is currently in development , to start filming in fall 2019 with Chris Rock to star .
It will be set in 1950 in Kansas City , Missouri .
SERIES
OVERVIEW SEASON 1 ( 2014 )
Section::::Series overview .
Section::::Season 1 ( 2014 ) .
In 2006 , Lorne Malvo ( Billy Bob Thornton ) passes through Bemidji , Minnesota , and influences the community – including put - upon insurance salesman Lester Nygaard ( Martin Freeman ) – with his malice , violence , and deception .
Meanwhile , Deputy Molly Solverson ( Allison Tolman ) and Duluth police officer Gus Grimly ( Colin Hanks ) team up to solve a series of murders they believe may be linked to Malvo and Nygaard .
SEASON 2
( 2015 )
Section::::Season 2 ( 2015 ) .
In 1979 , beautician Peggy Blumquist ( Kirsten Dunst ) and her husband , butcher Ed Blumquist ( Jesse Plemons ) of Luverne , Minnesota , cover up her hit - and - run and murder of Rye Gerhardt ( Kieran Culkin ) , son of Floyd Gerhardt ( Jean Smart ) , matriarch of the Gerhardt crime family in Fargo , North Dakota .
Meanwhile , State Trooper Lou Solverson ( Patrick Wilson ) and his father - in - law , Sheriff Hank Larsson ( Ted Danson ) , investigate a triple homicide at a local diner connected to Rye .
SEASON 3
( 2017 )
Section::::Season 3 ( 2017 ) .
In 2010 , St. Cloud probation officer Ray Stussy ( Ewan McGregor ) and his parolee girlfriend Nikki Swango ( Mary Elizabeth Winstead ) dream of a better , wealthier life .
To achieve this , they attempt to steal a valuable vintage stamp from Ray 's more successful older brother , Emmit ( also played by McGregor ) , the self - proclaimed " Parking Lot King of Minnesota " .
However , their plans backfire , and the couple soon has to hide their involvement in two deaths , including the stepfather of former Eden Valley police chief Gloria Burgle ( Carrie Coon ) .
Meanwhile , Emmit wishes to pay back a shady company he borrowed money from two years ago , but the mysterious company and its employees , led by V. M. Varga ( David Thewlis ) and Yuri Gurka ( Goran Bogdan ) , have other plans .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
The fourth season will star Chris Rock , who will play the head of a crime syndicate made up of black migrants fleeing the Jim Crow South who have a contentious relationship with the Kansas City mafia .
It will be set in 1950s Kansas City , Missouri .
Production is scheduled to begin in late 2019 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS SEASON 1
*
Billy Bob Thornton as Lorne Malvo
* Allison Tolman as Deputy Molly Solverson
* Colin Hanks as Officer Gus Grimly
* Martin Freeman as Lester Nygaard SEASON 2
* Kirsten Dunst as Peggy Blumquist * Patrick Wilson as State Trooper Lou Solverson * Jesse Plemons as Ed Blumquist * Jean Smart as Floyd Gerhardt
* Ted Danson as Sheriff Hank Larsson SEASON 3 * Ewan McGregor as Emmit and Ray Stussy
* Carrie Coon as Gloria Burgle
*
Mary Elizabeth Winstead as Nikki Swango * Goran Bogdan as Yuri Gurka
* David Thewlis as V. M. Varga PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2012 , it was announced that FX , with the Coen brothers as executive producers , was developing a new television series based on the 1996 Academy Award - winning film Fargo .
It was later announced that adaptation would be a 10-episode limited series .
On August 2 , 2013 , it was announced that Billy Bob Thornton had signed on to star in the series .
On September 27 , 2013 , Martin Freeman also signed on to star .
On October 3 , 2013 , it was announced that Colin Hanks was cast in the role of Duluth police officer Gus Grimly .
Production began in late 2013 with filming taking place in and around Calgary , Alberta .
The series is set in the same fictional universe as the film , in which events took place in 1987 between Minneapolis and Brainerd , Minnesota .
The first season features the buried ransom money from the film in a minor subplot .
Additionally , a number of references are made connecting the series to the film .
Following the series renewal in July 2014 , creator Noah Hawley revealed that the second season would take place in 1979 and focus on Sioux Falls , South Dakota , as referenced by Lou Solverson and others in the first season .
The ten episodes are set in Luverne , Minnesota , Fargo , North Dakota , and Sioux Falls .
Hawley agreed that this takes place before the events of the film , but he believes all the stories connect : " I like the idea that somewhere out there is a big , leather - bound book that 's the history of true crime in the Midwest , and the movie was Chapter 4 , Season 1 was Chapter 9 and this is Chapter 2 , " he said .
" You can turn the pages of this book , and you just find this collection of stories . ...
But I like the idea that these things are connected somehow , whether it 's linearly or literally or thematically .
That 's what we play around with .
" This book was realized in season 2 , episode 9 , " The Castle " .
Production on the second season began in Calgary on January 19 , 2015 , and completed on May 20 , 2015 .
The first teaser for the second season was released on June 17 , 2015 .
Production on season 3 began in January 2017 in Calgary , Alberta .
" THIS IS A TRUE STORY "
Section::::"This is a true story " .
As with the original film , each episode begins with the superimposed text :
As with the film , this claim is untrue .
Showrunner Noah Hawley continued to use the Coens ' device , saying it allowed him to " tell a story in a new way .
" Hawley has played with the realism of the story further ; responding to queries about Charlie Gerhardt , a character from season 2 , he stated " If he 's out there , I 'd like to get a letter from him someday , telling me how he turned out . "
At the 2017 ATX Television Festival in Austin , Texas , Hawley further discussed the " true story " series tag : " So what does that even mean — the words ' true story ' ? " he said .
" I really wanted to deconstruct that this year . "
He recalled one of the lines spoken by Sy Feltz , Michael Stuhlbarg 's character : " ' The world is wrong — it looks like my world but everything is different . '
That 's what we 're exploring this year . "
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE SEASON 1
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Section::::Season 1 .
The first season received acclaim from television critics , and received a Metacritic score of 85 out of 100 based on 40 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim . "
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 97 % " certified fresh " critics rating with an average rating of 8.44 out of 10 based on 49 reviews .
The website consensus reads : " Based on the film of the same name in atmosphere , style , and location only , Fargo presents more quirky characters and a new storyline that is expertly executed with dark humor and odd twists .
"
IGN reviewer Roth Cornet gave the first season a 9.7 out of 10 score , praising the casting , its thematic ties to the movie , and the writing .
The A.V. Club named it the sixth best TV series of 2014 .
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2 .
The second season has been met with overwhelming acclaim from television critics .
It received a Metacritic score of 96 based on 33 reviews , which indicates " universal acclaim " .
Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100 % " certified fresh " rating with an average rating of 9.19 out of 10 based on 53 reviews , with the site 's consensus , " Season two of Fargo retains all the elements that made the series an award - winning hit , successfully delivering another stellar saga powered by fascinating characters , cheeky cynicism , and just a touch of the absurd . "
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3 .
The third season has received acclaim similar to the first two seasons from critics .
On Metacritic , it has a score of 89 out of 100 based on 32 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
On Rotten Tomatoes , it has a 93 % rating with an average score of 8.56 out of 10 based on 50 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads : "
Thanks in part to a memorable dual performance from Ewan McGregor , Fargo mostly maintains the sly wit and off - kilter sensibility it displayed in its first two seasons . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Fargo has won 51 of its 226 award nominations .
The first season garnered 8 Primetime Emmy Award nominations , with the show itself winning the Outstanding Miniseries and director Colin Bucksey winning the Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries , Movie or a Dramatic Special .
It received an additional 10 Creative Arts Emmy Award nominations , winning for Outstanding Casting for a Miniseries , Movie , or Special .
It has received eight Golden Globe Award nominations , with the show winning for Best Miniseries or Television Film , and Billy Bob Thornton winning for Best Actor in a Miniseries or Television Film .
The series has also received one Screen Actors Guild Award nomination to Billy Bob Thornton for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie .
Additional accolades include : the American Film Institute Award for Top Ten Television Program in 2014 and 2015 , the Artios Award for Excellence in Casting , a Peabody Award , seven Critics ' Choice Television Awards in which the show won twice for Best Miniseries and five times in acting for Billy Bob Thornton , Allison Tolman , Kirsten Dunst , Jesse Plemons and Jean Smart , the Dorian Awards for TV Drama of the Year , the Golden Reel Award for Best Music Score , two Producers Guild of America Award for Outstanding Producer of Long - Form Television and a Writers Guild of America Awards for .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
On April 15 , 2014 , the series made its debut on FX and FXX in Canada ; the remaining episodes were shown on FXX .
The next day , it premiered in the UK on Channel 4 .
On May 1 , 2014 , it premiered on SBS One in Australia , and on SoHo in New Zealand .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Fargo at Rotten Tomatoes