CRUSTACEAN
Crustaceans ( Crustacea ) form a large , diverse arthropod taxon which includes such familiar animals as crabs , lobsters , crayfish , shrimp , krill , woodlice , and barnacles .
The crustacean group is usually treated as a subphylum , and because of recent molecular studies it is now well accepted that the crustacean group is paraphyletic , and comprises all animals in the Pancrustacea clade other than hexapods .
Some crustaceans are more closely related to insects and other hexapods than they are to certain other crustaceans .
The 67,000 described species range in size from Stygotantulus stocki at , to the Japanese spider crab with a leg span of up to and a mass of .
Like other arthropods , crustaceans have an exoskeleton , which they moult to grow .
They are distinguished from other groups of arthropods , such as insects , myriapods and chelicerates , by the possession of biramous ( two - parted ) limbs , and by their larval forms , such as the nauplius stage of branchiopods and copepods .
Most crustaceans are free - living aquatic animals , but some are terrestrial ( e.g. woodlice ) , some are parasitic ( e.g. Rhizocephala , fish lice , tongue worms ) and some are sessile ( e.g. barnacles ) .
The group has an extensive fossil record , reaching back to the Cambrian , and includes living fossils such as Triops cancriformis , which has existed apparently unchanged since the Triassic period .
More than 10 million tons of crustaceans are produced by fishery or farming for human consumption , the majority of it being shrimp and prawns .
Krill and copepods are not as widely fished , but may be the animals with the greatest biomass on the planet , and form a vital part of the food chain .
The scientific study of crustaceans is known as carcinology ( alternatively , malacostracology , crustaceology or crustalogy ) , and a scientist who works in carcinology is a carcinologist .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The body of a crustacean is composed of segments , which are grouped into three regions : the cephalon or head , the pereon or thorax , and the pleon or abdomen .
The head and thorax may be fused together to form a cephalothorax , which may be covered by a single large carapace .
The crustacean body is protected by the hard exoskeleton , which must be moulted for the animal to grow .
The shell around each somite can be divided into a dorsal tergum , ventral sternum and a lateral pleuron .
Various parts of the exoskeleton may be fused together .
Each somite , or body segment can bear a pair of appendages :
on the segments of the head , these include two pairs of antennae , the mandibles and maxillae ; the thoracic segments bear legs , which may be specialised as pereiopods ( walking legs ) and maxillipeds ( feeding legs ) .
The abdomen bears pleopods , and ends in a telson , which bears the anus , and is often flanked by uropods to form a tail fan .
The number and variety of appendages in different crustaceans may be partly responsible for the group 's success .
Crustacean appendages are typically biramous , meaning they are divided into two parts ; this includes the second pair of antennae , but not the first , which is usually uniramous , the exception being in the Class Malacostraca where the antennules may be generally biramous or even triramous .
It is unclear whether the biramous condition is a derived state which evolved in crustaceans , or whether the second branch of the limb has been lost in all other groups .
Trilobites , for instance , also possessed biramous appendages .
The main body cavity is an open circulatory system , where blood is pumped into the haemocoel by a heart located near the dorsum .
Malacostraca have haemocyanin as the oxygen - carrying pigment , while copepods , ostracods , barnacles and branchiopods have haemoglobins .
The alimentary canal consists of a straight tube that often has a gizzard - like " gastric mill " for grinding food and a pair of digestive glands that absorb food ; this structure goes in a spiral format .
Structures that function as kidneys are located near the antennae .
A brain exists in the form of ganglia close to the antennae , and a collection of major ganglia is found below the gut .
In many decapods , the first ( and sometimes the second ) pair of pleopods are specialised in the male for sperm transfer .
Many terrestrial crustaceans ( such as the Christmas Island red crab ) mate seasonally and return to the sea to release the eggs .
Others , such as woodlice , lay their eggs on land , albeit in damp conditions .
In most decapods , the females retain the eggs until they hatch into free - swimming larvae .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
The majority of crustaceans are aquatic , living in either marine or freshwater environments , but a few groups have adapted to life on land , such as terrestrial crabs , terrestrial hermit crabs , and woodlice .
Marine crustaceans are as ubiquitous in the oceans as insects are on land .
The majority of crustaceans are also motile , moving about independently , although a few taxonomic units are parasitic and live attached to their hosts ( including sea lice , fish lice , whale lice , tongue worms , and Cymothoa exigua , all of which may be referred to as " crustacean lice " ) , and adult barnacles live a sessile life – they are attached headfirst to the substrate and can not move independently .
Some branchiurans are able to withstand rapid changes of salinity and will also switch hosts from marine to non - marine species .
Krill are the bottom layer and the most important part of the food chain in Antarctic animal communities .
Some crustaceans are significant invasive species , such as the Chinese mitten crab , Eriocheir sinensis , and the Asian shore crab , Hemigrapsus sanguineus .
LIFE CYCLE
MATING
SYSTEM Section::::Life cycle .
Section::::Mating system .
The majority of crustaceans have separate sexes , and reproduce sexually .
A small number are hermaphrodites , including barnacles , remipedes , and Cephalocarida .
Some may even change sex during the course of their life .
Parthenogenesis is also widespread among crustaceans , where viable eggs are produced by a female without needing fertilisation by a male .
This occurs in many branchiopods , some ostracods , some isopods , and certain " higher " crustaceans , such as the Marmorkrebs crayfish .
EGGS Section::::Eggs .
In many groups of crustaceans , the fertilised eggs are simply released into the water column , while others have developed a number of mechanisms for holding on to the eggs until they are ready to hatch .
Most decapods carry the eggs attached to the pleopods , while peracarids , notostracans , anostracans , and many isopods form a brood pouch from the carapace and thoracic limbs .
Female Branchiura do not carry eggs in external ovisacs but attach them in rows to rocks and other objects .
Most leptostracans and krill carry the eggs between their thoracic limbs ; some copepods carry their eggs in special thin - walled sacs , while others have them attached together in long , tangled strings .
LARVAE Section::::Larvae .
Crustaceans exhibit a number of larval forms , of which the earliest and most characteristic is the nauplius .
This has three pairs of appendages , all emerging from the young animal 's head , and a single naupliar eye .
In most groups , there are further larval stages , including the zoea ( pl .
zoeæ or zoeas ) .
This name was given to it when naturalists believed it to be a separate species .
It follows the nauplius stage and precedes the post - larva .
Zoea larvae swim with their thoracic appendages , as opposed to nauplii , which use cephalic appendages , and megalopa , which use abdominal appendages for swimming .
It often has spikes on its carapace , which may assist these small organisms in maintaining directional swimming .
In many decapods , due to their accelerated development , the zoea is the first larval stage .
In some cases , the zoea stage is followed by the mysis stage , and in others , by the megalopa stage , depending on the crustacean group involved .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
The name " crustacean " dates from the earliest works to describe the animals , including those of Pierre Belon and Guillaume Rondelet , but the name was not used by some later authors , including Carl Linnaeus , who included crustaceans among the " Aptera " in his ' .
The earliest nomenclaturally valid work to use the name " Crustacea " was
Morten Thrane Brünnich 's ' in 1772 , although he also included chelicerates in the group .
The subphylum Crustacea comprises almost 67,000 described species , which is thought to be just to of the total number as the majority of species remain as yet undiscovered .
Although most crustaceans are small , their morphology varies greatly and includes both the largest arthropod in the world – the Japanese spider crab with a leg span of – and the smallest , the 100-micrometre - long ( 0.00004 in ) Stygotantulus stocki .
Despite their diversity of form , crustaceans are united by the special larval form known as the nauplius .
The exact relationships of the Crustacea to other taxa are not completely settled .
Studies based on morphology led to the Pancrustacea hypothesis , in which Crustacea and Hexapoda ( insects and allies ) are sister groups .
More recent studies using DNA sequences suggest that Crustacea is paraphyletic , with the hexapods nested within a larger Pancrustacea clade .
Although the classification of crustaceans has been quite variable , the system used by Martin and Davis largely supersedes earlier works .
Mystacocarida and Branchiura , here treated as part of Maxillopoda , are sometimes treated as their own classes .
Six classes are usually recognised : !
Class ! !
Members ! !
Orders ! !
Photo FOSSIL RECORD Section::::Fossil record .
Crustaceans have a rich and extensive fossil record , which begins with animals such as Canadaspis and Perspicaris from the Middle Cambrian age Burgess Shale .
Most of the major groups of crustaceans appear in the fossil record before the end of the Cambrian , namely the Branchiopoda , Maxillopoda ( including barnacles and tongue worms ) and Malacostraca ; there is some debate as to whether or not Cambrian animals assigned to Ostracoda are truly ostracods , which would otherwise start in the Ordovician .
The only classes to appear later are the Cephalocarida , which have no fossil record , and the Remipedia , which were first described from the fossil Tesnusocaris goldichi , but do not appear until the Carboniferous .
Most of the early crustaceans are rare , but fossil crustaceans become abundant from the Carboniferous period onwards .
Within the Malacostraca , no fossils are known for krill , while both Hoplocarida and Phyllopoda contain important groups that are now extinct as well as extant members ( Hoplocarida : mantis shrimp are extant , while Aeschronectida are extinct ; Phyllopoda : Canadaspidida are extinct , while Leptostraca are extant ) .
Cumacea and Isopoda are both known from the Carboniferous , as are the first true mantis shrimp .
In the Decapoda , prawns and polychelids appear in the Triassic , and shrimp and crabs appear in the Jurassic ; however , the great radiation of crustaceans occurred in the Cretaceous , particularly in crabs , and may have been driven by the adaptive radiation of their main predators , bony fish .
The first true lobsters also appear in the Cretaceous .
CONSUMPTION BY HUMANS Section::::Consumption by humans .
Many crustaceans are consumed by humans , and nearly 10,700,000 tons were produced in 2007 ; the vast majority of this output is of decapod crustaceans : crabs , lobsters , shrimp , crawfish , and prawns .
Over 60 % by weight of all crustaceans caught for consumption are shrimp and prawns , and nearly 80 % is produced in Asia , with China alone producing nearly half the world 's total .
Non - decapod crustaceans are not widely consumed , with only 118,000 tons of krill being caught , despite krill having one of the greatest biomasses on the planet .
SEE ALSO
* Pain in crustaceans REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Crustacea.net , an online resource on the biology of crustaceans
* Crustacea : Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County
* Crustacea : Tree of Life Web Project *
The Crustacean Society * Natural History Collections : Crustacea : University of Edinburgh * Crustaceans ( Crustacea ) on the shore of Singapore
* Crustacea(crabs , lobsters , shrimps , prawns , barnacles ) : Biodiversity Explorer