THE MOTHER ( HOW I MET YOUR MOTHER ) Tracy McConnell ( colloquial : " The Mother " ) is the title character from the CBS television sitcom
How I Met Your Mother .
The show , narrated by Future Ted ( Bob Saget ) , tells the story of how Ted Mosby ( Josh Radnor ) met The Mother .
Tracy McConnell appears in eight episodes , from " Lucky Penny " to " The Time Travelers " , as an unseen character ; she was first seen fully in " Something New " and was promoted to a main character in season 9 .
The Mother is played by Cristin Milioti .
The story of how Ted met The Mother is the framing device behind the series ; many facts about her are revealed throughout the series , including the fact that Ted once unwittingly owned her umbrella before accidentally leaving it behind in her apartment .
Ted and The Mother meet at the Farhampton train station following Barney Stinson ( Neil Patrick Harris ) and Robin Scherbatsky 's ( Cobie Smulders ) wedding ; this scene is shown in " Last Forever " , the series finale .
The Mother 's death from an unspecified terminal illness in 2024 , also revealed in the series finale , received a mixed reaction from fans .
An alternate ending was released in the ninth season DVD .
In the alternate ending , Tracy Mosby is still living when Ted is telling the story in 2030 .
In the video , Future Ted is heard saying , " ...
When I think how lucky I am to wake up next to your mom every morning , I ca n't help but be amazed how easy it all really was ... " , indirectly stating that The Mother is alive .
The video ends right after the train passes at Farhampton station and credits start rolling , implying that Ted never went back to Robin and went on to have a long , happy marriage with Tracy .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
During its first eight seasons , How I Met Your Mother often hinted at the unseen character of The Mother .
Carter Bays and Craig Thomas wanted to cast a lesser known actress in the role to avoid audiences associating the Mother with the actresses ' previous roles , similar to how Cobie Smulders being cast as Robin Scherbatsky had " kept the show alive " when it began .
Bays and Thomas also did not want a large casting call .
They chose Cristin Milioti after seeing her on 30 Rock and Once ; her musical ability was also helpful , as The Mother had been described as a band member .
Milioti filmed her first scene for the last episode of season 8 having never watched How I Met Your Mother before .
She only learned of the character 's importance after binge watching the show during the summer .
CHARACTER HISTORY Section::::Character history .
The Mother was born on September 19 , 1984 .
The Mother , joined by her roommate Kelly ( Ahna O'Reilly ) , awaits the arrival of her boyfriend Max , only to receive a call informing her of his death .
After the funeral service , she returns to the apartment to open Max 's last gift to her — a ukulele .
The Mother spends the next few years grieving the passing of the man she believes was her one true love .
In " Wait for It " , it is revealed that the short story of how they met involved her yellow umbrella .
In " No Tomorrow " , Ted finds the umbrella at a club and takes it home after attending a St. Patrick 's Day party which she also attended , as it had been two and a half years since Max 's death .
She is still grieving , but Kelly encourages her to go out and date again , bringing her to the same bar where Barney Stinson ( Neil Patrick Harris ) and Ted are celebrating .
The two women run into Mitch ( Adam Paul ) , her old orchestra instructor ; The Mother offers to give Mitch her cello for his work at a school
and they head to her apartment .
Mitch tries to seduce her with a move called " The Naked Man " , but she turns him down .
Whilst Mitch is still naked , prompting the Mother to crack some jokes at him , they sit on her couch and start talking .
That is when Mitch encourages her to pursue her dreams .
The Mother expresses her desire to end poverty by taking up economics in college .
On his first day of teaching as Professor Mosby , as seen in the season 4 finale " The Leap " , he is seen in front of the classroom of students , one of which Future Ted says is the titular mother .
But in the first episode of season 5 , " Definitions " , it is revealed that he was actually in the wrong classroom — Economics instead of Architecture .
At the same time in " How Your Mother Met Me " , the Mother sits her first session in Economics 305 and meets another graduate student named Cindy ( Rachel Bilson ) , whom she offers to move in with her as her roommate .
They see Ted enter the room , but when he announces the subject , The Mother thinks she is in the wrong room and runs off .
She heads back to the room after seeing Ted scramble to his actual classroom .
Later , in " Girls Versus Suits " , Ted dates Cindy , not knowing that her roommate is his future wife .
Throughout the episode , Ted notes that Cindy had spent most of their first date talking jealously about her roommate .
When in Cindy and the mother 's apartment he picks up many of The Mother 's belongings , attempting to show how compatible he and Cindy are ( thinking the items are Cindy 's ) and glimpses the mother 's foot as she disappears into her room after taking a shower .
Ted finds out at this time that she plays bass guitar in a band .
Ted forgets to take the yellow umbrella with him when he goes out and Future Ted mentions , " this is how your mother got her yellow umbrella back . "
In " How Your Mother Met Me " , it is revealed that , after Ted left the apartment , the Mother had discovered the umbrella and , upon going to question Cindy , finds her in a state .
As she tried to console her , Cindy said that she was a much better match for Ted , and began to lovingly list all of the reasons that Ted would find the mother attractive , before spontaneously kissing her , revealing that her jealousy towards her roommate was actually a crush .
While this incident made Cindy realise that she is a lesbian , it also made the Mother decide to go back into dating , as the kiss was her first in a long time .
Some time after this , a man named Darren ( Andrew Rannells ) approaches The Mother and is welcomed into her band named Superfreakonomics .
Darren gradually takes over the band .
In the season 6 opener " Big Days " it is revealed Ted meets his future wife " the day of " the wedding at which he is the best man .
In the episode " False Positive " Robin asks Ted to be her future best man , should she ever get married .
In the episode " Challenge Accepted " , it is revealed that Ted meets the mother of his children the day of Barney 's wedding .
In the last episode of season 7 , " The Magician 's Code " it is shown that Barney will marry Robin , and Ted will meet the mother " the day of " their wedding .
On the premiere of season 8 , Ted 's wife appears after Barney and Robin 's wedding , outside at the " Farhampton " station while holding a yellow umbrella and her bass guitar .
In the season 8 episode " Band or DJ ? , " Ted runs into Cindy and her partner on the subway and tells them that the band Barney and Robin hired to play at their wedding cancelled at the last minute .
The end result of the encounter is that Cindy 's ( now ex- )
roommate 's band plays at Barney and Robin 's wedding .
The Mother is first shown meeting Louis ( Louis Ferrigno Jr. ) in " How Your Mother Met Me " as she is left to carry the band equipment while the now - lead band member Darren talks to his fans .
Later at MacLaren 's Pub , she tells him she 's not yet ready to date .
Louis asks her to give him a call if she changes her mind , and they begin dating not long after .
They live together for the next two years , but she knows deep down that she does n't love him .
The Mother meets all of Ted 's best friends - Barney , Robin , Lily Aldrin ( Alyson Hannigan ) , and Marshall Eriksen ( Jason Segel ) - before she meets him .
The Mother is responsible for convincing Barney to pursue Robin , as revealed through a flashback in " Platonish " .
In " The Locket " , Tracy meets Lily on a train journey .
In " Bass Player Wanted " , the Mother picks up a hitchhiking Marshall , carrying his infant son Marvin , on her way to Farhampton Inn .
On their way , it is revealed that the Mother is a bass player in the band that is scheduled to play at the wedding reception , but Darren forced her to quit .
The Mother ultimately decides to confront Darren and retake the band .
Before she can , however , Darren walks up to her , furious the groom 's best man punched him for " no reason " , and quits the band .
In " How Your Mother Met Me " , it is shown that after this incident , the Mother returns to Louis ' summer cottage not far from the Farhampton Inn where she has been staying for the duration of the wedding weekend .
As she walks in the door , Louis proposes to her , but she goes outside to think about it for a few minutes .
She looks skyward and asks Max for permission to let him go and move on ; she takes a sudden gust of wind as a " yes " , says goodbye , and declines Louis ' proposal when she goes back inside .
She leaves his cottage and checks in at Farhampton Inn .
On her room 's balcony , she plays the ukulele and sings " La Vie en Rose " .
Ted hears her singing from his room next door .
In " Gary Blauman " , Ted and the Mother are on their first date .
Ted picks her up at her New York City apartment and they proceed to walk to a Scottish - Mexican fusion restaurant for dinner .
On the way there , Ted is telling her a story when they nearly have a run - in with Louis .
She says that she is in the " weirdest place on earth " right now and that it is too soon for her to be dating .
Ted walks her back to her apartment .
They say goodnight and Ted begins to walk away .
The Mother then stops him and asks him to finish the story he was telling her .
When the story is over , they say goodnight again .
The Mother takes a step towards Ted and they kiss for the first time , before deciding to carry on their date .
In a flashforward in " The Lighthouse " , Ted proposes to the Mother at the top of the lighthouse near Farhampton Inn .
She immediately accepts .
In another flashfoward in " Unpause " , the Mother is revealed to be pregnant with their second child , Luke , in the year 2017 .
She goes into labor while she and Ted are staying at Farhampton .
NAME Section::::Name .
The Mother 's real name is not revealed until the series finale , " Last Forever " .
When Ted meets her at the Farhampton train station , she reveals that her name is Tracy McConnell .
In the season 1 episode " Belly Full of Turkey " , Ted meets a stripper named Tracy and says " ... that , kids , is the true story of how I met your mother " .
The children are horrified , but then he says he is joking , which led some fans to correctly guess that The Mother 's name is Tracy .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
In the series finale , it is revealed that six years prior to Ted telling the story to his children , Tracy died in 2024 from an undisclosed illness .
In the finale the characters do not directly state that the mother is dead .
Ted says that she " became sick " and his children said that she has been " gone " for six years .
Many fans expressed considerable disappointment with The Mother 's death .
Milioti cried when she learned her character was supposed to die , but came to accept the ending was what the writers had planned from the beginning .
Bill Kuchman from Popculturology said that The Mother was " an amazing character " and that " over the course of this final season HIMYM made us care about Tracy .
Kuchman said that " asking fans to drop all of that with a simple line about The Mother getting sick and passing away was a very difficult request " , that the finale " advanced too quickly " and that " HIMYM was a victim of its own success on this issue " .
A petition was started , aiming to rewrite and reshoot the finale .
The petition has over 20,000 signatures and considerable online news coverage .
On April 5 , 2014 , Carter Bays announced on Twitter that an alternate ending would be included on the Season 9 DVD .
No new material was shot for this scene .
In the alternate ending , The Mother is still living when Ted is telling the story in 2030 .
NOTES REFERENCES