BHARATIYA MAHILA BANK
Bharatiya Mahila Bank ( BMB ) was an Indian financial services banking company based in Mumbai , India .
Former Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh inaugurated the system on 19 November 2013 on the occasion of the 96th birth anniversary of former Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi .
Although initially reported as a bank exclusively for women , the bank allows deposits to flow from everyone , but lending will be predominantly for women .
India is the third country in the world to have a bank especially for women , after Pakistan and Tanzania .
As part of the Modi government 's banking reforms and to ensure greater banking outreach to women , the bank merged with State Bank of India on 1 April 2017 .
The merger would mean 103 branches and business of Rs .
1,600 crores added to SBI .
BANKING FOR WOMEN
Section::::Banking for women .
In India , only 26 % of women have an account with a formal financial institution , compared with 46 % of men .
( This has changed after the initiation of Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana - accounts of women jumped radically to 60 % )
That means an account in either a bank , a credit union , a co - operative , post office or a microfinance institution , according to a study by the World Bank .
Also , for women , per capita credit is 80 per cent lower than males .
Furthermore , the results of a study using a global dataset covering 350 Microfinance Institutions ( MFIs ) in 70 countries indicates that more women clients is associated with lower portfolio - at - risk , lower write - offs , and lower credit - loss provisions , ceteris paribus .
provision OBJECTIVE Section::::Objective .
The bank placed an emphasis on funding for skills developments to help in economic activity .
Moreover , the products were designed in a manner to give a slight concession on loan rates to women .
The bank also aimed to inspire people with entrepreneurial skills and , in conjunction with NGOs , planned to locally mobilise women to train them in vocations like toy - making or driving tractors or mobile repairs , according to Usha Ananthasubramanian ( CMD ) .
One of the other objectives of the bank was to promote asset ownership amongst women customers .
Studies have shown that asset ownership amongst women reduces their risk of suffering from domestic violence .
CAPITAL Section::::Capital .
The Bank 's initial capital consisted of Rs 1,000 crores .
The government planned to have 25 branches of the said bank by the end of March 2014 and 500 branches by 4th year of operation ( 2017 ) .
As on date of merger it had 103 Branches .
US - based FIS Global , in partnership with Wipro was providing IT systems at the country 's first women - focussed bank .
BRANCHES Section::::Branches .
The Bank had 103 branches and was planning to open more than 700 branches within next 2 years .
Bharatiya Mahila Bank 's branches were located at the following places- Mumbai - Nariman Point , Central Mumbai - Ghatkopar , Thane , Pune , Patna , Noida , Chandigarh , Bhubaneshwar , Panchkula , Kochi , Vadodara , Ahmedabad , Indore , Bhopal , New Delhi - Nehru Palace , New Delhi - Model Town , Chandigarh , Gurgaon , Patna , Ranchi , Raipur , Guwahati , Shimla , Shillong , Gangtok , Thiruvananthapuram , Chennai , Coimbatore , Madurai , Bengaluru , Mangalore , Hyderabad , Visakhapatnam , Jaipur , Alwar , Dholpur , Komargiri , Kakinada , Goa - Panji , Agartala , Agra , Haridwar , Kanpur , Lucknow , Dehradun , Doddapalya , Kutiyatu , Murshidabad and Lalithadripura .
KEY MANAGEMENT Section::::Key management .
Bharatiya Mahila Bank was wholly owned by Government of India .
Initially the bank had a board of directors consisting of eight women .
Mrs. Usha Ananthasubramanian was the chairman and managing director of the Bank and SM Swathi was executive director of Bank .
The board consisted of a business graduate sarpanch from Rajasthan , Chhavi Rajawat , Dalit entrepreneur Kalpana Saroj , who turned around a tubes business , retired public banker Nupur Mitra , academic Pakiza Samad , private equity professional Renuka Ramnath , Godrej Group executive Director Tanya Dubash and a government nominee .
Details can be seen on bank 's website www.bmb.co.in One of the key objective of the Bank was focus on the banking needs of women and promote economic empowerment through women 's growth and developments .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The bank has been criticised as adopting a segregationist approach to gender equality .
Uma Shashikant of The Hindu writes : REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS