YOUR LIE IN APRIL
Your Lie in April , known in Japan as or just simply Kimiuso , is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Naoshi Arakawa .
The series was serialized in Kodansha 's Monthly Shōnen Magazine from April 2011 to May 2015 .
An anime television series adaptation by A-1 Pictures aired from October 2014 to March 2015 on Fuji TV 's Noitamina block .
A live - action film adaptation of the same name was released in September 2016 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Piano prodigy Kōsei Arima dominates various music competitions and becomes famous among child musicians , but also controversial .
When his mother Saki dies suddenly , he has a mental breakdown while performing at a piano recital which resulted in him no longer being able to hear the sound of his piano even though his hearing was perfectly fine .
Four years later , Kōsei has not touched the piano and views the world in monochrome , without any flair or color , resigning himself to living out his life with his good friends , Tsubaki Sawabe and Ryōta Watari , until , one day , a girl changes everything .
Kaori Miyazono , an audacious , free - spirited , fourteen - year - old violinist whose playing style reflects her manic personality , helps Kōsei return to the music world and shows that it should be free and mold - breaking unlike the structured and rigid style Kōsei was used to , and as she continues to uplift him , he quickly realizes that he loves her , though she already likes Watari .
However , while performing together ( Kōsei having been dragged into it by Kaori ) , Kaori suddenly collapses after a moving performance and is hospitalised .
At first Kaori says that she is anaemic and just needs some routine testing , but this is revealed to be a lie when flashes of her past reveal her collapsing and bleeding many times before .
Finally Kaori is discharged and back to her happy , crazy - self , inviting Kōsei to play at a Gala with her .
However , Kaori fails to show up on the day of the Gala , and as her health deteriorates , she begins to give up on life .
This time , Kōsei is the one who inspires her after playing a duet with Nagi Aiza , the pianist sister of a fellow rival of his named Takeshi Aiza .
After shedding tears and listening to it , Kaori opts for a risky surgery that may kill her if it fails , just so that she can play with him one more time .
While playing in the finals of the Eastern Japan Piano Competition , Kosei sees Kaori 's spirit accompanying him and eventually realizes that she has died during the surgery .
After Kaori 's death , her parents give her letter to Kōsei at her funeral .
The letter reveals that she was in love with Kōsei the whole time , and that her supposed feelings towards Watari were fabricated in order to get closer to Kōsei without emotionally injuring Tsubaki , who also has limerent feelings towards Kōsei .
After finding this out , Tsubaki confronts Kosei and tells him that she will be by his side for the rest of her life .
CHARACTERS
MEDIA
MANGA Section::::Media .
Section::::Manga .
The Your Lie in April manga series is written and illustrated by Naoshi Arakawa , and began serialization on April 6 , 2011 , in Kodansha 's Monthly Shōnen Magazine .
The first tankōbon was published by Kodansha on September 16 , 2011 , and the final volume was released in two editions , a regular edition and a limited edition , with the limited edition bundled with an OVA , and was released on May 15 , 2015 .
The series is licensed in English in North America by Kodansha Comics , and the first volume was published on April 21 , 2015 .
A spin - off manga titled Shigatsu wa Kimi
no Uso
: Coda was bundled with the release of the Blu - ray release of the anime series .
It was later published in tankōbon format on August 17 , 2016 .
VOLUME LIST ANIME Section::::Anime .
A-1 Pictures has aired the anime production of Your Lie in April .
It premiered on October 10 , 2014 , in Japan and ended on March 20 , 2015 .
The first opening theme song is by Goose house and the first ending theme song is by wacci .
The second opening song is by Coalamode and the second ending theme is by 7 ! !
( Seven Oops ) .
The original soundtracks are composed by Masaru Yokoyama .
In North America , Aniplex of America licensed the series within the region , who simulcasted the series on Crunchyroll , Aniplex Channel , Hulu and Viewster .
In Australia and New Zealand , the series is licensed by Madman Entertainment , who streamed the series on AnimeLab .
The series is licensed in the United Kingdom and Ireland by Anime Limited .
The series was later made available on Netflix with the English dub , as well as English subtitles .
LIVE - ACTION FILM Section::::Live - action film .
On August 24 , 2015 , the domain ' kimiuso-movie.jp ' was registered under Toho , a Japanese film production and distribution company , which made fans believe that a movie adaptation was in the works .
Speculations were confirmed in September 2015 when the main cast was announced for the live - action adaptation of the series : Kento Yamazaki as Kōsei Arima , Suzu Hirose as Kaori Miyazono , E - girls ' Anna Ishii as Tsubaki Sawabe , and Taishi Nakagawa as Ryōta Watari .
While the original story depicts the characters in their junior high year , it is announced that they will be in their second - year of high school in the film .
The adaptation , slated to be released in Japan in September 2016 , will be written by Strawberry Night 's live - action scriptwriter Yukari Tatsui , and directed by Paradise Kiss 's live - action director Takehiko Shinjō .
STAGE PLAY
Section::::Stage play .
In the May issue of Monthly Shōnen Magazine , it was announced that a stage play
adaptation of the manga was green - lit , and set to run on August the same year .
The stage play was announced to be held at the AiiA 2.5 Theater Tokyo from August 24 , 2017 , to September 3 , 2017 , and at the Umeda Arts Theater in Osaka from September 7 , 2017 , to September 10 , 2017 .
The stage play is directed by Naohiro Ise , and written by Kaori Miura .
It was also revealed that the play would have live musical performances , with Yuta Matsumura performing the piano , and Shuko Kobayashi performing the violin .
The main cast was announced , and stars : Shintarō Anzai as Kōsei Arima , Arisa Matsunaga as Kaori Miyazono , Misato Kawauchi as Tsubaki Sawabe , Masanari Wada as Ryōta Watari , Haruka Yamashita as Emi Igawa , and Shōjirō Yokoi as Takeshi Aiza .
Additional cast was later announced , with : Takako Nakamura as Yuriko Ochiai , Shun Mikami as Akira Takayanagi , Haruka Igarashi as Nao Kashiwagi , Kuniko Kodama as Hiroko Seto , and Ryōko Tanaka as Saki Arima .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The manga won the award for Best Shōnen Manga at the 37th Kodansha Manga Awards .
It was nominated for the 5th Manga Taishō .
The anime adaptation was the winner of the Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper 's 2016 Sugoi Japan Awards .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Your Lie in April at Kodansha