VISA POLICY OF OMAN
Visitors to Oman must obtain a visa prior to travel unless they come from one of the visa exempt countries , or if they 're citizens of a country allowing them to get a visa on arrival .
Citizens of member nations of the Gulf Cooperation Council may travel to Oman without visa limits .
Nationals of 71 other countries and territories can apply for visas online which are valid for a period of 30 days .
All visitors must hold a passport valid for 6 months .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA EXEMPTION Section::::Visa exemption .
Citizens of the following countries do not require a visa to visit Oman : } EVISA
Section::::eVisa .
Citizens of the following 71 countries and territories , may obtain a single or multiple entry eVisa valid for 30 days online .
*
All European Union citizens valign =
top
On 21st March 2018 it became possible to apply online for an Oman eVisa in addition to being able to obtain an Oman visit visa at Oman 's border posts .
It is planned that persons arriving to Oman without eVisa will be able to apply for one in a designated area of the arrivals terminal before the passport control .
There is concern this could discourage tourists from visiting Oman .
VISA ON ARRIVAL Section::::Visa on arrival .
Citizens of the following countries or territories may receive visa on arrival in Oman .
Visa on arrival service is being phased out in favor of eVisa .
*
All European Union citizens * ( visa free )
valign =
top * ( no fee )
* ( no fee )
CONDITIONAL EVISA Section::::Conditional eVisa .
Citizens of the following 25 countries , including their spouses and children of another nationality , can obtain an online eVisa , if they hold a valid Schengen Visa , a valid visa from Australia , Canada , Japan , the United Kingdom , or the United States , or a residence permit from one of these countries .
One can apply for a single - entry visa ( 5 OMR for 10 days or 20 OMR 30 days ) , or 1-year - valid multiple - entry visa ( for 50 OMR ) .
The allowed duration of stay is 10 days for 10 days visa and 30 days for other visas ( or 30 days per visit on the multiple - entry visa ) .
valign =
top COMMON VISA DUBAI
Section::::Common visa .
Section::::Dubai .
Holders of a visa or entrance stamp of the Emirate of Dubai that is valid for at least 21 days are visa exempt .
Eligible nationalities are : valign =
top QATAR Section::::Qatar .
Holders of a visa for Qatar that is valid for travel to Oman and valid for at least one month are visa exempt when arriving directly from Qatar .
Eligible nationalities are : valign =
top ADMISSION REFUSAL Section::::Admission refusal .
Citizens of Israel are refused admission to Oman .
TRANSIT WITHOUT VISA Section::::Transit Without Visa .
Visitors from any country who hold onward tickets may transit through Oman without a visa for up to 6 hours if proceeding by the same flight .
This is not applicable to nationals of .
PASSENGER SHIPS Section::::Passenger ships .
Oman grants visas without cost or at a nominal charge to passengers and crew of visiting ships based on the ship provided manifest .
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Omani citizens
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sultanate of Oman - Royal Oman Police - eVisa * eVisa Oman Twitter