VISA POLICY OF EAST TIMOR Visa policy of East Timor differentiates between several different groups of passengers and arrival points .
In accordance with the law , citizens of all countries except Cape Verde and the Schengen Area must obtain a visa upon arrival or prior to arrival .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA EXEMPTION
Timor - Leste signed a mutual visa - waiver agreement with Cape Verde on 21 July 2014 and entered into force on 14 April 2015 .
This agreement allows citizens of the respective countries to stay up to 30 days without a visa .
Timor - Leste signed a mutual visa - waiver agreement with the on 28 May 2015 which was applied on a provisional basis as from the date of signature and ratified on 15 December 2015 .
This agreement allows all citizens of states that are contracting parties to the Schengen Agreement to stay without a visa for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period .
Section::::Visa exemption .
There is also a visa exemption for holders of diplomatic or service passports of China .
LAND BORDER ARRIVALS Section::::Land border arrivals .
All visitors who need a visa ( except for citizens of who can apply on arrival at any border post ) arriving at a land border post must apply in advance for a Visa Application Authorization which is then presented to an immigration official at the border .
If other conditions are met a single or multiple entry visa valid for up to 90 days is granted for a fee of US$ 30 .
Visitors which are exempt from a visa ( such as citizens from a Schengen country ) do not need a visa ( and hence no Visa Application Authorization ) at any land border crossing .
VISA ON ARRIVAL Section::::Visa on arrival .
Visitors may apply for visa on arrival at the Presidente Nicolau Lobato International Airport or at the Dili Sea Port .
If other conditions are met a single entry visa valid for up to 30 days is granted for a fee of US$ 30 .
Transit visas are available for stays less than 3 days for a fee of US$ 20 .
There is no transit without a visa option in East Timor .
PRIOR APPLICATION Section::::Prior application .
Visa application may also be submitted online or at one of the East Timor diplomatic missions prior to arrival .
REQUIREMENTS ON ARRIVAL Section::::Requirements on arrival .
Aside from holding a passport valid for not less than 6 months from the date of entry all travellers also must meet strict conditions to be allowed entry to East Timor :
* Intention of a genuine visit ( as tourist or business trip ) .
* Accommodation arrangements and a return or onward ticket .
* US$ 150 per day expected to remain in the country ( for tourist or business visas ) .
* US$ 100 plus US$ 50 per day ( for transit visas ) .
VISA EXTENSION Section::::Visa extension .
All nationals with a visa may extend their stay to a total cumulative stay of 90 days by submitting their application to the Immigration Department .
The fees are US$ 35 for a 30-day extension , or US$ 75 for an extension between 30 and 60 days .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
Most visitors arriving to East Timor by air were from the following countries of nationality : !
Rank Country 2014 2013 2012 2011 ! Total 59,811 77,135 57,517 50,590 SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for East Timorese citizens REFERENCES