THE IRREGULAR
AT MAGIC HIGH SCHOOL
The story takes place in an alternate history where magic exists and is polished through modern technology .
It follows Tatsuya and Miyuki Shiba , siblings who enroll into First High magic high school .
While keeping their connections to the infamous Yotsuba clan secret , they attempt to live their daily life in peace where Tatsuya is shunned for his apparent ineptness and Miyuki is validated for her magical abilities .
The series has been well received .
The light novels appeared on Sugoi Japan 's 2015 polls and since 2011 , is one of the top selling series in Japan with 7.7 million copies sold as of 2017 .
In addition , its manga and anime adaptations also appeared on top selling charts .
English reviewers had mixed to negative reception towards the anime adaptation .
The complex technicality of magic within the series was received warmly but the exposition was criticized for being heavy , unclear , and poorly executed .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The series is set in a world with an alternate history , where magic exists and has been polished through modern technology .
However , the ability to use magic is determined by genetics , limiting the number of magicians in existence .
Following the Third World War , the world 's superpowers shifted to these four nations :
The United States of North America ( USNA ) , New Soviet Union , the Great Asian Alliance , and Japan .
In Japan , the magic community is informally governed by the ten master clans in lieu of the government .
Due to the limited number of magicians , they are treated as a commodity and are forced to enter magic related schools and professions .
Nine magic high schools exist in Japan ; they each specialize in different aspects of magic and are simply referred to by their numbers .
The story follows Tatsuya Shiba , a bodyguard to his sister Miyuki Shiba who is also a candidate to succeed the leadership of the Yotsuba clan , one of the Ten Master Clans that govern Japan 's magicians .
They enroll into First High School which segregates its students based on their magical abilities .
Miyuki is enrolled as a first course student and is viewed as one of the best students , while Tatsuya is in the second course and considered to be magically inept .
However , Tatsuya 's technical knowledge , combat abilities , and unique magic techniques cause people to view him as an irregular to the school 's standardized rankings .
CHARACTERS MAIN CHARACTERS and Tatsuya and Miyuki are siblings of the same school year and children to Tatsurou Shiba and the late Miya Yotsuba ; their parents had a loveless forced marriage , and when their mother died , their father married his mistress , Sayuri Furuha , leaving the siblings to live by themselves .
Maya Yotsuba , their aunt and the current leader of the Yotsuba Clan , was the reason Tatsuya was born with the unique magic to decompose , reconstruct , and detonate matter .
Out of fear of his powers , the Yotsuba Clan leadership of that time argued for Tatsuya 's death , forcing Miya and Maya to take measures to ensure his survival : the first was Miyuki 's creation who would act as a seal to Tatsuya 's power ; the second was to magically dull Tatsuya 's emotions except for his familial love towards Miyuki ; and the third was to assign Tatsuya to be Miyuki 's bodyguard in order to develop his sense of loyalty towards her .
During a family vacation in Okinawa , Tatsuya warded off an invasion by the Great Asian Alliance and joined the 101 Independent Magic - Equipped Battalion which is headed by Major Kazama Harunobu .
At some point during his life Tatsuya developed an interest in engineering magical technology and commercialized revolutionary technology through his family 's company , Four Leaves Technology , under the pseudonymous identity Taurus Silver .
He is voiced by Yuichi Nakamura .
Section::::Characters .
Section::::Main characters .
Miyuki is considered one of the strongest magicians in the world and is a candidate to succeed her Aunt Maya as the leader of the Yotsuba Clan .
Her specialty is freezing magic , and her unique magic allows her to freeze a person 's consciousness .
In addition , half of her magic casting ability is used to seal Tatsuya 's powers .
Before the family vacation in Okinawa , Miyuki treated Tatsuya coldly akin to how the other Yotsuba Clan members did .
She began to warm up to him and when Tatsuya saved her life , she devoted her entire existence to him .
It evolved to the point where she disdains the touch of other males and expresses jealousy towards females around Tatsuya .
Genetically different from Tatsuya despite being born from the same parents , Miyuki professes her love to him following their engagement under Maya 's orders .
She is voiced by Saori Hayami .
In the polls by Kono Light Novel ga Sugoi ! , both Tatsuya and Miyuki ranked as one of the most popular light novel characters .
Outside of the franchise , Tatsuya and Miyuki also appear in .
SUPPORTING CHARACTERS TATSUYA 'S GROUP Section::::Supporting characters .
Section::::Tatsuya 's group .
Tatsuya 's group consists of seven classmates whom he spends time with in his daily school life .
They often assist Tatsuya during investigations and dangerous situations .
* is the daughter of the Chiba clan 's leader and his mistress , which creates a strained relationship with her family .
She has a tomboyish and optimistic personality , and is considered one of the best swordsmen in the clan .
Her magic is used to enhance her sword and combat techniques .
She considers Mizuki to be her best friend and has a crush on Tatsuya .
She is voiced by Yumi Uchiyama .
* , commonly referred to as Leo , is the grandson of a Fortress Series modified magician .
His grandfather was one of the few survivors of the Fortress Series ' instabilities , which causes early death or psychosis .
Leo inherited his grandfather 's physical augmentations and fears he may also have inherited the Fortress Series ' faults .
During combat , Leo uses magic to fortify objects or his own body to augment his combat abilities .
He is voiced by Takuma Terashima .
* is a girl with the disposition called crystal eyes which allows her to see the components of magic invisible to most people .
Her ability mentally strains her , requiring her to wear glasses to control her vision .
She has a timid , calm , and feminine personality , and is voiced by Satomi Sato .
* is a prodigy from the Yoshida clan which specializes in magic dealing with spirits .
Years prior to the series
Mikihiko failed a summoning ritual which created a psychological block and prevented him from using magic effectively .
His involvement with Tatsuya restores his confidence , allowing him to regain his magical talents .
He is voiced by Atsushi Tamaru .
* is a descendant of a group of extinct magicians referred to as the Elements .
The Elements specialize in one of the six elements of magic and had loyalty genetically embedded into their genes .
Honoka uses light magic , and her genetic loyalty is directed towards Tatsuya .
She is voiced by Sora Amamiya .
* is Honoka 's best friend and daughter to an extremely wealthy man .
Shizuku is a mature and tactful girl who rarely shows emotion .
She inherited her mother 's talent for oscillation magic .
She is voiced by Yuiko Tatsumi .
* is the niece of Hoonami Sakurai , Miya Yotsuba 's guardian .
Both Minami and Hoonami were artificially created by the Yotsuba to serve the clan as bodyguards , and they specialize in barrier type magic .
Minami is Miyuki 's junior and serves as her maid and second bodyguard .
STUDENT COUNCIL AND DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE Section::::Student Council and Disciplinary Committee .
The student council is a group of students which provides a liaison between the teachers and students .
Meanwhile , the Disciplinary Committee consists of students who are essentially rule enforcers .
A third committee is the Extracurricular Activities Federation who ensures that school clubs do n't come into conflict with each other .
The three committees are closely related and work together to preserve the peace on campus .
Two people worked alongside Mayumi during the year .
The first was who was the leader of the Disciplinary Committee .
Mari has a tomboyish personality but becomes completely feminine in front of her boyfriend , Chiba Naotsugu , who is also Erika 's half brother .
For combat , she uses a whip like blade and uses magic to manipulate chemicals .
Second is , the leader of the Extracurricular Activities Federation .
Katsuto is the next head of the Jumonji clan and inherited the clans barrier magic , Phalanx : an impenetrable and perpetual barrier used for defensive and offensive purposes .
Both the Saegusa and Jumonji are members of the Ten Master Clans , forcing Mayumi and Katsuto to be politically involved with the magic community outside of school .
Watanabe is voiced by Marina Inoue while Jumonji is voiced by Junichi Suwabe .
During the Shiba siblings ' second year , Mayumi is succeeded as student council president by , a timid and youthful looking girl .
Azusa has an interest in magic engineering and suspects Tatsuya is secretly Taurus Silver .
She is able to use a unique magic named after her , Azusa Dream , to forcefully pacify people .
Mari is succeeded as chairman of the Disciplinary Committee by , an impulsive and good - natured girl .
She is engaged to , an androgynous and timid boy , and loves him dearly .
Azusa Nakajou is voiced by Saki Ogasawara , Kanon Chiyoda is voiced by Saori Onishi , and Kei Isori is voiced by Sōma Saitō .
OTHER CHARACTERS * is a first - year student from Third High School and the successor to the head of the Ichijo clan , another of the Ten Master Clans .
His combat magic includes manipulating air , water molecules , and his unique magic allows him to evaporate water within an organism causing it to explode .
He is often accompanied by his best friend , , who is credited as discovering one of the sixteen codes fundamental to magic .
Shinkuro feels indebted to the Ichijo family for adopting him after his parents ' death and promises to serve them forever .
After losing the nine school competition , they both seek to improve themselves to overcome Tatsuya .
Masaki is voiced by Yoshitsugu Matsuoka while Shinkuro by Ayumu Murase .
* is an undercover agent for the Ministry of Public Safety who infiltrates the school as a counselor .
She takes both of her duties seriously and frequently assists Tatsuya in gathering information .
In addition , Haruka 's disposition enhances her innate concealment magic ; she trains under Yakumo Kokonoe to further enhance her hiding abilities .
She is voiced by Sakura Tange .
* is a master of ninjutsu , a minority and an older form of magic .
He chooses to isolate himself from magician politics and spends most of his time gathering information and training his disciples .
He is voiced by Ryōtarō Okiayu
* is a Home Automation Robot , an android designed to serve humans .
She was created and owned by First High 's robotics club .
During the Visitor Arc , she is used as a physical vessel by one of a group of ethereal supernatural sentient entities referred to as parasites .
The parasite began identifying itself as Pixy , and due to Honoka 's presence , has developed feelings of love towards Tatsuya .
Tatsuya buys her to prevent the magic community from militarizing the parasite inside her .
She is voiced by Nao Tōyama .
* is a middle - man who orchestrated all major conflicts in the series .
He is part of an unknown organization led by who wishes to destroy the Yotsuba .
Zhou is voiced by Kōji Yusa .
* is the leader of the USNA 's magician army force known as Stars .
Her military identity is Angie Sirius , and she is one of the thirteen publicly declared strategic magicians .
She is voiced by Yōko Hikasa .
PUBLICATION AND CONCEPTION Section::::Publication and conception .
The story was conceived around a protagonist whose abilities can not be properly measured through standardized evaluation ; as such , he is mistakenly categorized as a poor performing student or an irregular .
This premise served as a basis for the character , Tatsuya Shiba .
Satō has two processes for scripting the story arcs : the first is to create scenarios to have characters behave and interact in certain ways ; the second is to plan a scene , then script the story so it leads to that scene .
Satō professed that he does not feel his characters are alive or have a will of their own when scripting them .
Tsutomu Satō published his work on the online web novel website , Shōsetsuka ni Narō , between October 12 , 2008 and March 21 , 2011 .
At some point during his publication on Syosetu , Satō sent an original work to Dengeki Bunko under a pseudonym .
The original work 's setting shared similarities to The Irregular at Magic High School causing an editor to deduce his identity and offer him a publication deal .
On March 11 , 2011 , the author announced his work is going to be published as a light novel under the Dengeki Bunko imprint .
The author expressed some regret turning free content into paid commodity and cited his financial needs as the reason .
The illustrations accompanying the light novels were done by Kana Ishida .
The first light novel volume was unable to accommodate the first story arc ; deciding against cutting content from the web novel , it was split into two volumes and released a month later .
On March 9 , 2015 , Yen Press announced its licensing of the light novels for English localization through Twitter .
Yen Press ' first volume was released in April 2016 .
VOLUME LIST Tatsuya and Miyuki ShibaMari WatanabeLeonhard Saijo , and Mikihiko YoshidaShizuku Kitayama 's private resort ; Masaki Ichijo and Shinkuro Kichijoji reflect on their defeat by Tatsuya ; and Tatsuya recalls shopping with Miyuki at the mall .
Afterwards , First High clubs begin planning their officer successions and Tatsuya is asked to convince Azusa NakajouOOPartstrategicMaya YotsubaAngelina Kudo ShieldsPixyMinami SakuraiZhou Gongjintraditionalist magicians .
Tatsuya requests aid from the Kudo clan who are knowledgeable about the traditionalist .
Led by Minoru Kudo , Tatsuya 's group confronts the traditionalists in Nara but are unable to find Zhou , leaving Kyotobunke members of the clan attempt to derail Miyuki 's attendance as her succession will elevate Tatsuya 's status .
Upon their arrival , Miyuki is appointed as the next head , and the origins of Tatsuya and Miyuki 's birth is revealed .
While they are born from the same gametehate crimecold war
MEDIA ADAPTATIONS
MANGA Section::::Media adaptations .
Section::::Manga .
The Irregular at Magic High School had several manga adaptations with various artists and publishers ; each manga adaptation covered a story arc from the original light novel series .
The first adaptation was by Fumino Hayashi and Tsuna Kitaumi and covered the Enrollment Arc of the light novels .
The latest manga adaptation is drawn by Yuzuki N Dash and covers the President Election Arc and is currently ongoing .
Volume list Fumino HayashiTsuna Kitaumi
GFantasy January 2012–October 2013 4 September 2012–December 2013 !
scope="row " Nine Schools Competition Arc Tsuna Kitaumi
GFantasy November 2013 – ? 5 April 2014–July 2016 ! scope="row
" Yokohama Disturbance Arc Gin Amau GFantasy
November 2013–October 2015 5 April 2014–November 2015 !
scope="row "
Recollection Arc Waki Ikawa
Dengeki Daioh April 2014–September 2015 3 June 2014–September 2015 !
scope="row "
Visitor Arc
Gin Amau
GFantasy December 2015–Summer 2019 7 June 2014–September 2015 !
scope="row "
Double Seven Arc Tsuna Kitaumi GFantasy October 2016–Summer 2019 3 ? –
Spring 2019 !
scope="row " President Election Arc Yuzuki N Dash Dengeki Daioh June 2018–Ongoing — THE HONOR STUDENT AT
MAGIC HIGH SCHOOL Section::::The Honor Student at Magic High School .
A spin - off manga titled by Yu Mori premiered in Dengeki Daiohs June 2012 issue .
It is currently ongoing , and was collected into seven tankōbon volumes under the Dengeki Comics
Next imprint .
Yen Press licensed the series ' tankōbon volumes for a North American release ; the first volume is localized in November 2015 .
VOLUME LIST ANIME Section::::Anime .
An anime adaptation of the light novel was announced during the Dengeki Bunko Fall Festival on October 6 , 2013 .
It is directed by Manabu Ono and animated by Madhouse .
It premiered on Tokyo MX , Gunma TV , and Tochigi TV on April 6 , 2014 ; nine other networks and three streaming services broadcast the series afterwards .
The final episode premiered on September 28 .
The individual episodes were later encapsulated into ten DVD and Blu - ray volumes released between July 2014 and April 2015 .
In March 2014 , Aniplex of America announced its acquisition for streaming rights to the anime series ; much later they unveiled their plans to release the series into three Blu - ray volumes which segregate the episodes by story arcs .
Four networks simulcasted the series with English subtitles : these include Aniplex Channel , Crunchyroll , Hulu , and Daisuki .
In June 2014 , the Australasia distributor , Hanabee Entertainment , announced its licensing of the series for streaming and home media release .
Months later , Netflix made the series available on their network .
Animax Asia also began broadcasting the series in July 2015 .
Three related media to the anime were created .
The first is a super deformed short series titled by Aniplex .
These shorts were uploaded on Aniplex 's YouTube channel , and was later English subtitled and uploaded on Aniplex of America 's channel .
An internet radio show titled , premiered on March 23 , 2014 and is hosted by Sora Amamiya and Yuiko Tatsumi , the voice actresses for Honoka Mitsui and Shizuku Kitayama respectively ; the radio show episodes was later made available for purchase on CD .
The third is a radio drama DVD which was released in December 2014 and is based on the light novel 's Recollection Arc .
An anime film called was revealed in the 19th light novel volume which was released in March 2016 .
The film is scripted by the series creator , Tsutomu Satō , and premiered in Japan on June 17 , 2017 .
In the United States , Aniplex of America released the movie in theaters and on home video .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Three video game adaptations have been made for the franchise .
The first is The Irregular at Magic High School : Out of Order by Bandai Namco Entertainment .
It is a 3D fighting game for the PlayStation Vita and was released on December 25 , 2014 .
The second game is The Irregular at Magic High School : , a Japanese role - playing game by Mobage .
It was made available for Android , iOS , and feature phone on June 9 , 2014 .
The third game is The Irregular at Magic High School : Lost Zero , developed by BeXide and published by Square Enix .
It was made available for Android and iOS on September 4 , 2014 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The light novels have been well received .
They were ranked seventh in Sugoi Japan 2015 polls and since 2011 , was one of the top selling light novel series in Japan .
As of 2014 , 5.3 million copies of the light novel have been sold .
In addition , its manga and anime adaptations also appeared on top selling charts .
As of 2017 , the light novel series has sold 7.7 million copies .
Anime News Network had four editors review the first episode of the anime : Carl Kimlinger saw potential in its take on a typical anime premise , praising Tatsuya as the lead protagonist and its handling of mysteries surrounding the plot ; Theron Martin , although hopeful because of its male lead and plot concept , expressed criticism towards the indistinguishable animation and constant exposition for the viewers ; and Rebecca Silverman felt that it was bland and nothing special .
The fourth reviewer , Hope Chapman , expressed immediate dislike towards the series , criticizing it for lacking anything to engage the viewers and for being a lazy adaptation of a light novel , and concluding the review with
" I ca n't even remember the last time I saw something with not a single redeeming factor or thing to recommend about it at all . "
Silverman reviewed the series future episodes .
Plotwise , she praised the Enrollment Arcs underline on standardized testing , criticized the Nine Schools Competition Arc for its execution and weak exposition , and felt the characters were uninteresting .
Silverman felt the series does n't live up to its potential and cited the background music and stilted animations as possible reasons .
Chris Beveridge 's review for Fandom Post was highly positive towards the anime series , calling it a dark horse contender as one of their top new anime series of the year .
Beveridge praised the technical and fundamental aspects of magic in the series for breaking the supernatural approach other works usually take and liked the potential impact it could have on future events .
However , while the reviewer liked the series ' technicality , they noted it will frustrate certain viewers in that aspect .
Richard Eisenbeis , writing for Kotaku , liked the characters , story , the complex and technical magic system , and mysteries .
However , Eisenbeis criticized the exposition , citing it to be poorly timed , heavy , and failing to explain things with better clarity .
He concluded his review by writing how the anime might have been great if a different director or screenwriting was hired .
NOTES AND REFERENCES Works cited * represents the Light Novel of the series in the format of X.Y , where X represents the volume and Y represents the chapter .
Chapter A represents the afterword of the novel .
Japanese References EXTERNAL LINKS