3D PRINTED FIREARMS
In 2012 , the U.S.-based group Defense Distributed disclosed plans to design a working plastic gun that could be downloaded and reproduced by anybody with a 3D printer .
Defense Distributed has also designed a 3D printable AR-15 type rifle lower receiver ( capable of lasting more than 650 rounds ) and a variety of magazines , including for the AK-47 .
In May 2013 , Defense Distributed completed design of the first working blueprint to produce a plastic gun with a 3D printer .
The United States Department of State demanded removal of the instructions from the Defense Distributed website , deeming them a violation of the Arms Export Control Act .
In 2015 , Defense Distributed founder Cody Wilson sued the United States government on free speech grounds and in 2018 the Department of Justice settled , acknowledging Wilson 's right to publish instructions for the production of 3D printed firearms .
In 2013 a Texas company , Solid Concepts , demonstrated a 3D printed version of an M1911 pistol made of metal , using an industrial 3D printer .
EFFECT ON GUN CONTROL Section::::Effect on gun control .
After Defense Distributed released their plans , questions were raised regarding the effects that 3D printing and widespread consumer - level CNC machining may have on gun control effectiveness .
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the Joint Regional Intelligence Center released a memo stating " Significant advances in three - dimensional ( 3D ) printing capabilities , availability of free digital 3D printer files for firearms components , and difficulty regulating file sharing may present public safety risks from unqualified gun seekers who obtain or manufacture 3D printed guns , " and that " proposed legislation to ban 3D printing of weapons may deter , but can not completely prevent their production .
Even if the practice is prohibited by new legislation , online distribution of these digital files will be as difficult to control as any other illegally traded music , movie or software files . "
Internationally , where gun controls are generally tighter than in the United States , some commentators have said the impact may be more strongly felt , as alternative firearms are not as easily obtainable .
European officials have noted that producing a 3D printed gun would be illegal under their gun control laws , and that criminals have access to other sources of weapons , but noted that as the technology improved the risks of an effect would increase .
Downloads of the plans from the UK , Germany , Spain , and Brazil were heavy .
Attempting to restrict the distribution over the Internet of gun plans has been likened to the futility of preventing the widespread distribution of DeCSS which enabled DVD ripping .
After the US government had Defense Distributed take down the plans , they were still widely available via The Pirate Bay and other file sharing sites .
Some US legislators have proposed regulations on 3D printers to prevent their use for printing guns .
3D printing advocates have suggested that such regulations would be futile , could cripple the 3D printing industry , and could infringe on free speech rights .
LEGAL STATUS
AUSTRALIA Section::::Legal status .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , the state law of New South Wales criminalizes the possession of the digital plans and files to 3D print firearms under Section 51F of the Firearms Act 1996 .
In one case in 2015 , a loaded 3D printed firearm was found during a police raid on a meth lab .
In another case in February 2017 , Sicen Sun was arrested on charges related to 3D printable guns .
During trial in December 2017 he pleaded guilty to charges including possessing a digital blueprint for the manufacture of firearms , manufacturing a pistol without a licence permit , and possessing an unauthorised pistol .
In sentence hearing on August 6 , 2018 , he told the court he initially wanted to replicate a gun from the videogame Halo and when he started searching blueprints online
he downloaded plans for other guns which looked " cool .
" Sun had previously posted an advertisement to the internet to sell one of his imitation weapons for " $ 1 million negotiable " on a Facebook buy , swap and sell group , which set off the investigation .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , the Firearms Act 1968 bans the manufacturing of guns and gun parts without government approval .
Hence , 3D printed weapons are de facto banned because the law bans all manufacturing , regardless of method .
However , the Home Office updated its Guide on Firearms Licensing Law to specifically mention the ban on 3D printed weapons .
In 2013 , a police raid on a Manchester gang resulted in seizures in what are believed to be 3D printed gun parts .
The Greater Manchester police believe they found a trigger and a magazine along with a quantity of gunpowder .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Under the Undetectable Firearms Act any firearm that can not be detected by a metal detector is illegal to manufacture , so legal designs for firearms such as the Liberator require a metal plate to be inserted into the printed body .
The act had a sunset provision to expire December 9 , 2013 .
Senator Charles Schumer proposed renewing the law , and expanding the type of guns that would be prohibited .
Proposed renewals and expansions of the current Undetectable Firearms Act ( , ) include provisions to criminalize individual production of firearm receivers and magazines that do not include arbitrary amounts of metal , measures outside the scope of the original UFA and not extended to cover commercial manufacture .
On December 3 , 2013 , the United States House of Representatives passed the bill To extend the Undetectable Firearms Act of 1988 for 10 years ( H.R. 3626 ; 113th Congress ) .
The bill extended the Act , but did not change any of the law 's provisions .
On August 27 , 2018 , a United States federal judge blocked the Defense Distributed and its founder , Cody Wilson , from posting 3D - printed gun blueprints online .
Judge Lasnik first imposed a temporary restraining order on Wilson , but that was due to expire , so he mandated a preliminary injunction that blocks online distribution in the United States while the legal proceedings are ongoing .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In Japan , in May 2014 , Yoshitomo Imura was the first person to be arrested for possessing printed guns .
Imura had five guns , two of which were capable of being fired , but had no ammunition .
Imura had previously posted blueprints and video of his guns to the Internet , which set off the investigation .
SEE ALSO
* 3D printing *
Defense Distributed
* Ghost gun * Gun control
* Gun politics in the United States * Improvised firearm
* List of 3D printed weapons and parts REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official FOSSCAD Library Repository
* How 3-D Printed Guns Evolved Into Serious Weapons in Just One Year , Wired , May 2014 .
* Should We Be Afraid of the 3D Printed Gun ? , Popular Mechanics , May 2014 .