THINK LOVELY THOUGHTS
" Think Lovely Thoughts " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American fantasy drama series Once Upon a Time , and the show 's 52nd episode overall .
In this episode , the group races to Skull Rock in order to save Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) from Peter Pan ( Robbie Kay ) , who plans to harness immortality by taking Henry 's heart .
Meanwhile , a young Rumpelstiltskin ( Wyatt Oleff ) and his scheming father Malcolm ( Stephen Lord ) make their way to Neverland , which soon becomes a life - altering journey for both of them .
The episode was met with positive reviews from critics ; however , the episode saw a significant drop in ratings , with 6.66 million viewers tuning in .
PLOT
OPENING SEQUENCE Section::::Plot .
Section::::Opening Sequence .
Skull Rock is featured .
EVENT CHRONOLOGY Section::::Event Chronology .
The Enchanted Forest events take place years after " The Black Fairy " and years before " Manhattan " .
The Neverland events take place after " Dark Hollow " .
IN THE CHARACTERS ' PAST Section::::In
the characters ' past .
In a local tavern yard , a young boy , who is revealed to be a young Rumplestiltskin , begs a man not to hurt his father Malcolm , who is a 3-card monte cheat .
Later on , Malcolm brings Rumplestiltskin to a cabin and asks the women spinning wool to look after him as he attempts to get a real job .
Before he goes , he gives his son the corn husk doll as a present .
Hours later , the women see that Rumplestiltskin has a huge talent for spinning .
While Rumplestiltskin tells them that he believed that Malcolm will come back , the ladies tell him that he returned to the same tavern .
The women advise him to take the magic bean and go someplace where his father 's bad reputation wo n't follow him .
Rumplestiltskin later return to the same tavern , and just as the ladies told him , sees his father playing games again .
Rumplstiltskin coaxes Malcolm to go away somewhere and make a fresh start .
Malcolm then remembers the phrase " think lovely thoughts , " which he used to comfort himself when he was apprenticed to a blacksmith .
So they use the bean to go to a place called Neverland , holding hands .
As they land in Neverland , Malcolm tells his son to imagine a cake , and it appears .
He then tells him that in Neverland anyone can fly , but as he attempts to take off , he falls to the ground because he is now a grown - up .
Malcolm remembers needing Pixie Dust , but Rumplestiltskin is too scared to climb up the tall trees that have the pixie dust flowers , so Malcolm tells him to wait and he 'll get enough for both .
He climbs up and sprinkles some dust on himself , saying " I want to fly , " but just then the shadow comes and mocks him , telling him he does n't belong .
On the ground , Rumplestiltskin later weeps , thinking his father has met with an accident after one of his shoes falls from the tree , but then his father climbs down to comfort him , telling him that Neverland is only for children .
Unfortunately , as Rumplestiltskin suggests they go somewhere else , Malcolm says he knows he would just go back to his old ways if he did .
The shadow then comes to take Rumplestiltskin , believing it is the only way the father can believe he 's a young man .
As the shadow takes Rumplestiltskin away he witnesses a green spell coming over Malcolm , who suddenly turns into the infamous Peter Pan , a name that Rumplestiltskin had given his lost doll .
After he returned to stay with the women he tells them of what had happen , as the women believe that he would be better off without a father .
Pan and the shadow then arrive at Skull Rock , where the shadow tells Pan that the island was created when Pan decided to stay , and the hourglass shows how much time he has before he stops being young and dies .
In doing so , the shadow tells Pan that he broke the rules by staying because Neverland is a place for children to visit in their dreams .
IN NEVERLAND Section::::In Neverland .
As Emma Swan , Neal , Hook , David , Tinker Bell , and Mary Margaret walk through the forest towards Pan 's camp , Emma confronts Mary Margaret about staying behind with David , which made Emma concerned that she will once again be separated from her family .
As Regina and Gold emerged from another location , the reunion does not goes smoothly as Neal tells everyone involved that Gold was planning to kill Henry because of a prophecy .
They all draw their weapons on him , but Gold proves his legitimacy by handing over Pandora 's Box to earn their trust , and tells Neal he has no idea who he 's up against as Gold explains to Neal that Pan was responsible for his father Malcolm 's demise .
Despite this , Neal made sure that Gold does not use magic and Gold agrees to it .
Meanwhile , Hook and Emma discuss Neal 's fate and the future of David when Gold says he may know a cure , as he remembered the elixir that saved him back at Storybrooke .
As they finally reach Pan 's camp , the party come up with a plan to keep The Lost Boys at bay , so Regina waves her hand and causes a sleeping spell and the Boys doze off .
They then hear Wendy and Emma see her in cage , and Neal breaks her free .
She 's startled to see Neal , who she knew as Baelfire , now grown up .
She explains that she went back to Neverland to save him , because she remembered Neal telling her that his parents were dead , to which a stunned Gold replied " You told them that ? "
But Bae says that it was better than saying his father abandoned him .
At first , Wendy lies to the rescuers about where Pan is , but Gold recognizes she 's lying and she comes clean , and admits that Pan really wants the heart of the truest believer so he can be immortal , which is actually Henry 's heart .
It 's a trade , she says , because once Pan has the heart , Henry will die .
Neal promises he will save her brothers and Regina tells Wendy that John and Michael are safe in Storybrooke .
They make a plan to rescue Henry , and send David to Dead Man 's Peak to get water to make a cure .
Emma then tells everyone involved that they will all return home once they rescue Henry .
So Emma , Regina , Gold , and Neal race off to Skull Rock .
As the individuals prepare their plan of attack , Peter Pan ( Robbie Kay ) and Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) arrives at Skull Rock , where Pan tells Henry ( who is unaware that Pan is actually his great grandfather ) that he can save magic , and Henry believed him .
As they enter the caves , Pan cast a protection spell to keep anyone with a shadow out .
The individuals then reach the island , where Gold eventually penetrated the spell because he has no shadow .
The other members finally believe that he wants to save Henry and Neal gives the box back to him , followed by Regina and Emma casting an eclipse spell so they can enter .
Henry and Pan finally enter a large chamber that contains a large hourglass on top of a pedestal of golden skulls that shows the magic slowly fading , indicating how much time is left for magic in Neverland .
After looking at this , Pan tells Henry it is time to save magic , but he now wants to use Henry 's heart rather than believing in it , then lies to Henry that he 'll live forever in Neverland if he does this .
He then is interrupted by a presence , as Gold shows up to confront his father and to stop him from going through with this and takes out the box .
Pan says they are really alike because both abandoned their sons , but Gold says he regretted leaving his son the moment he let him go and spent the rest of his life trying to get him back .
Pan then responds " Why do you think I call myself Peter Pan ? " and asks Gold to put the box down so they can make a fresh start .
After Gold refuses , he waves his hand over the box but nothing happens , as Gold discovers Pan switched boxes , and Pan waves his hand over the real one and places Gold inside it .
Pan then returns to finish his scheme to take Henry 's heart by giving him magic to allow him to remove it .
As Henry succeeds in doing so , Emma , Regina and Neal arrive to stop Henry from giving it to Pan , but Pan tells Henry that they are lying to him because they are adults even as they tell Henry they believe in him because they love him .
Unfortunately , Henry , believing that he can save magic , gives his heart to Pan , who has now emerged victorious in his plot to become immortal .
Henry dies as a result .
CULTURAL REFERENCES Section::::Cultural references .
When Rumple tells Neal that " Peter Pan destroyed my father " , it is similar to a scene in , in which Obi - Wan Kenobi tells Luke Skywalker the story about a Jedi called Darth Vader who was a pupil of Kenobi before he turned to Evil and killed Luke 's father .
Furthermore , the revelation that Peter Pan is actually Rumple 's father is similar to another scene in The Empire
Strikes Back where Vader reveals that he is Luke 's father .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
This episode features American musician Marilyn Manson as the voice of The Shadow .
On October 21 , British actor Stephen Lord was announced to be playing Rumplestiltskin 's father , Malcolm / Colin .
He featured in this episode , and will also feature on the eleventh episode of the season .
The detail and reveal of Peter Pan 's true identity was kept a secret from cast members , who were banned from finding out until the episode aired .
According to Ginnifer Goodwin , " We were so banned , " she says .
" We had to sign our lives away .
That 's truly the Rumple story , like we own the children .
Some cast members saw it coming and I was shocked , but I guess it makes so much sense because the family is cursed .
Each generation is caught in a cycle of sacrificing family for power and it only makes sense that Rumple would be the product of such a villain . "
RECEPTION RATINGS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The episode saw another decline in the ratings , scoring a 1.9/5 among 18 - 49s with only 6.67 million tuning in , making it the lowest rated episode in the series so far and the only one to post below a 2.0 .
This setback can attributed to the debut of FOX 's science fiction crime drama Almost Human , which had 3.1/8 among 18 - 49s with 9.18 million viewers watching , marking the first time that OUAT was beaten by another scripted program since its 2011 debut .
It can also be attributed to television coverage of the November 17 , 2013 tornado outbreak in several Midwestern states that was shown on ABC rather than Once Upon a Time .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The episode received generally positive reviews from critics .
Amy Ratcliffe of IGN gave the episode the second highest score of the season thus far , after " Ariel , " giving in an 8.9 out of 10 , saying " tonight 's installment of Once was engaging , touching , and action - packed .
The twists were complete surprises , and they did n't feel contrived .
The rescue party was the most together they 've been
and it was fun to watch them jump into action .
I felt more invested in the characters than I have at any other point this season , and I ca n't wait to see what happens next . "
Hillary Busis of Entertainment Weekly commented " Just when you thought Henry 's family tree could n't get any more complicated , Once threw us another genuine curveball .
On second thought , " curveball " does n't seem emphatic enough .
Let 's call it a genuine " oh - my - God , holy - crap , did - they - seriously -
just - say - what - I - think - they - said ?
" ball instead .
" She then added " Okay , I 've made my point .
Sense of history repeating aside , though , " Think Lovely Thoughts " really was full of surprises , thanks particularly to the fairyback that introduced us to a young , adorably big - eyed Rumpelstiltskin — back in the days when he was still being cared for by his ne'er - do - well dad , whose name is either Malcolm or Colin .
"
The latter referring the character name that was a source of confusion in the casting credits before its air date .
Christine Orlando of TV Fanatic also gave the episode a positive review , rating it a 4.5 out of 5 , noting Rumpelstiltskin 's subplot , saying " the revelation that Peter Pan was actually Rumpel 's father totally floored me .
It ranked up there with watching The Empire Strikes Back when I was 9 .
I never saw it coming . "
Andrea Reiher of Zap2it also commented positively on the episode , noting Marilyn Manson 's role , saying he " was awesome as the voice of the Shadow -- super creepy and menacing . "
Gwen Ihnat of The A.V. Club graded the episode a B , mostly directed at Jared S Gilmore 's performance in the episode :
" Almost from the very beginning , Henry has been Once Upon A Time 's sore spot .
Some blame has been aimed at poor Jared S. Gilmore 's acting abilities , but let 's face it , Olivier himself could n't carry what the Henry character has had to endure . "
Liane Bonin Starr of HitFix gave the episode a mixed review , saying " Things are now at their darkest , but somehow this in - between episode was still frustrating .
Rumple was dismissed too quickly , Wendy spat out some exposition and then receded into the background , and Henry 's bad decision did n't feel particularly well - played .
I realize that Henry needed to commit fully to Pan , but I did n't feel Pan 's case was ever entirely convincing -- not for a kid who only recently found his " real " parents .
I guess Henry , being the good kid that he is , just wanted to do the right thing — even as his parents had tiny heart attacks watching him do it .
I bet he 's getting grounded when they all get back to Storybrooke ! "
Gwen Orel of the Wall Street Journal called Rumpelstiltskin 's subplot " by far the most unsettling backstory yet . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS