INDIAN SUPER LEAGUE
The Indian Super League ( ISL ) is a men 's professional football league in India .
For sponsorship reasons , the league is officially known as the Hero Indian Super League .
One of the top football leagues in the country , it currently shares the top spot in the Indian football league system with the I - League .
The league is contested by 10 teams and will run from September to March during the 2018–19 season .
Founded on 21 October 2013 in partnership with IMG , Reliance Industries , and Star Sports , the Indian Super League was launched with the goal of growing the sport of football in India and increase its exposure in the country .
The league 's first season took place in 2014 with eight teams .
During the first three seasons of the Indian Super League , the league operated without official recognition from the Asian Football Confederation , the governing body for the sport in Asia .
The league also operated along the same lines of the Indian Premier League , the country 's premier Twenty20 cricket competition , with the league campaign lasting for 2–3 months and matches held daily .
However , before the 2017–18 season , the league earned recognition from the AFC , expanded to ten teams , and extended its schedule to five months .
Unlike most football leagues around the world , and indeed India 's other top league , the I - League , the Indian Super League does not use promotion and relegation , instead choosing to grow the league through expansion , similar to Major League Soccer in the United States .
During the league 's first four seasons , two teams have been crowned champions , both winning twice each .
ATK won the first title in 2014 before winning their second title in 2016 .
Chennaiyin are the other club to be crowned as champions , having done so in both 2015 and 2017 .
HISTORY ORIGINS Section::::History .
Section::::Origins .
Football in India has existed in many forms since the game first arrived in the country during the 19th century with the first nationwide club competition , the Durand Cup , being founded in 1888 .
Despite India 's early history in the game , the country 's first nationwide football league did not begin until the semi - professional National Football League commenced in 1996 .
Prior to the creation of the National Football League , most clubs played in state leagues or select nationwide tournaments .
Ten years after the formation of the National Football League , the All India Football Federation , the governing body for the sport in India , decided to reformat the league as the I - League in an effort to professionalize the game .
However , during the following seasons , the league would suffer from a lack of popularity due to poor marketing and poor quality of football .
In September 2005 , the AIFF signed a 10–year television and media contract with Zee Sports .
The deal would see Zee broadcast the National Football League and I - League , as well as other tournaments organized by the AIFF and select India international matches .
However , in October 2010 , the deal between the AIFF and Zee Sports was terminated five years early after differences between both parties related to payment and how to grow the game in India .
A couple months later , on 9 December 2010 , it was announced that the AIFF had signed a new 15–year , 700–crore deal with Reliance Industries and the International Management Group .
The deal gave IMG – Reliance exclusive commercial rights to sponsorship , advertising , broadcasting , merchandising , video , franchising , and the right to create a new football league .
As commercial partners for the AIFF , IMG – Reliance were responsible for the marketing and organization of the I - League .
However , in February 2012 , it was revealed that I - League clubs were not happy with the federation 's commercial partners and believed IMG – Reliance had done little to try and promote the country 's then top domestic football league .
However , the AIFF reassured the clubs that the federation , as well as IMG – Reliance , had plans to improve the league prior to the 2012–13 season and maybe even revamp the tournament along the lines of Major League Soccer of the United States .
In June 2013 , word had come out that IMG – Reliance were planning to start their own franchise - based tournament for 2013 and also divide the I - League into two conferences .
This idea was not well received by I - League clubs who decided to refuse to loan any of their players for the IMG – Reliance proposed tournament or sign any players already contracted to the company .
However , by August 2013 , it was revealed that IMG – Reliance had signed the required number of players needed to start their own tournament and that the tournament would have the backing of the AIFF .
FOUNDATIONS Section::::Foundations .
The Indian Super League was officially launched on 21 October 2013 by IMG – Reliance , Star Sports , and the All India Football Federation .
The league was announced to take place from January 2014 to March 2014 .
A few days later however , on 29 October 2013 , it was announced that the ISL would be postponed to September 2014 .
At first , it was announced that bidding for the eight Indian Super League teams would be complete before the end of 2013 and that there was already high interest from big corporations , Indian Premier League teams , Bollywood stars , and other consortiums .
However , due to the rescheduling of the league , the bidding was moved to 3 March 2014 .
It was also revealed around this time that not only would bidders need to comply with a financial requirement but they would also need to promote grassroots development plans for football within their area .
Finally , in early April 2014 , the winning bidders were announced .
The selected cities / state were Bangalore , Delhi , Goa , Guwahati , Kochi , Kolkata , Mumbai , and Pune .
Former India cricket player Sachin Tendulkar , along with PVP Ventures , won the bidding for the Kochi franchise .
Another former Indian cricket player , Sourav Ganguly , along with a group of Indian businessmen and La Liga side Atlético Madrid , won the bid for the Kolkata franchise .
Meanwhile , Bollywood stars John Abraham , Ranbir Kapoor , and Salman Khan won the bid for the Guwahati , Mumbai , and Pune franchises respectively .
Bangalore and Delhi were won by companies while Goa was won by a partnership between Videocon , Dattaraj Salgaocar , and I - League side , Dempo .
The first team to be launched officially was the Kolkata franchise as Atlético de Kolkata on 7 May 2014 .
On 7 July 2014 , the team announced the first head coach in league history , Antonio López Habas .
The next day , Kolkata also announced the first official marquee signing in the Indian Super League , UEFA Champions League winner Luis García .
Eventually , all eight teams were revealed as Atlético de Kolkata , Bangalore Titans , Delhi Dynamos , Goa , Kerala Blasters , Mumbai City , NorthEast United and Pune City .
However , on 21 August 2014 , it was announced that due to Bangalore 's owners dropping out , Chennai would be given a franchise instead .
The team was eventually named Chennaiyin FC .
At the same time , the original marquee players were Luis García , Elano , Alessandro Del Piero , Robert Pirès , David James , Fredrik Ljungberg , Joan Capdevila , and David Trezeguet .
The inaugural season began on 12 October 2014 at the Salt Lake Stadium when Atlético de Kolkata defeated Mumbai City , 3–0 .
The first goal was scored by Fikru Teferra .
The inaugural final was held on 20 December 2014 with Atlético de Kolkata becoming champions after defeating Kerala Blasters 1–0 at the DY Patil Stadium .
RECOGNITION AND EXPANSION Section::::Recognition and expansion .
For the first three seasons of the Indian Super League , the league operated without official recognition from the governing body for football in Asia , the Asian Football Confederation ( AFC ) , and FIFA , the world governing body .
In October 2014 , then FIFA General Secretary Jérôme Valcke stated that the world governing body only recognized the ISL as a tournament , not a league .
The official league for football in India remained the I - League .
With no recognition from the AFC , the league also could n't participate in Asian club competitions , the AFC Champions League or AFC Cup .
During the first three seasons of the Indian Super League , attendances across the league had exceeded expectations of pundits and of the domestic I - League .
Television ratings were also strong for the league as well as social media interaction .
However , despite the general success off the pitch , the league drew criticism in other areas .
Due to the need to accommodate the ISL into the Indian football calendar , the I - League season was shortened and went from having an October to May schedule to January to May schedule .
Indian players would play for both an ISL team and an I - League club while the I - League continued to suffer from lack of visibility compared to the ISL .
India head coach Stephen Constantine had called for both the ISL and I - League to either run together at the same time or merge .
On 18 May 2016 , IMG – Reliance , along with the AIFF and I - League representatives met during a meeting in Mumbai .
During the meeting it was proposed that , starting from the 2017–18 season , the Indian Super League become the top tier football league in India while the I - League be reformed as League One and be relegated to the second division .
The ISL would also expand by two teams and continue to operate without promotion and relegation but run for 5–7 months instead of 2–3 .
The idea was not entertained by the I - League representatives .
In June 2017 , IMG – Reliance , the AIFF , I - League representatives , and the AFC met in Kuala Lumpur in order to find a new way forward for Indian football .
The AFC were against allowing the ISL as the main league in India while I - League clubs East Bengal and Mohun Bagan wanted a complete merger of the ISL and I - League .
A couple weeks later , the AIFF proposed that both the Indian Super League and I - League run simultaneously on a short – term basis with the I - League winner qualifying for the AFC Champions League and the AFC Cup qualification spot going to the ISL champion .
The proposal from the AIFF was officially approved by the AFC on 25 July 2017 , with the ISL replacing the domestic cup competition , the Federation Cup .
It was also stated that the league would now run for five months starting with the 2017–18 season and the league would expand to 10 teams .
A month before , on 11 May 2017 , the ISL organizers started to accept bids for 2–3 new franchises for the 2017–18 season .
The bids would be for ten cities , namely Ahmedabad , Bangalore , Cuttack , Durgapur , Hyderabad , Jamshedpur , Kolkata , Ranchi , Siliguri and Thiruvanathapuram .
It was also clarified that if Kolkata were to win at least one bid that the new Kolkata side would have to play away from the city for only two seasons .
A month later , on 12 June , it was announced that I - League side , Bengaluru , and Tata Steel ( for Jamshedpur ) had won the bidding for the new teams .
On 22 September 2017 , the league announced officially that it would be expanding its season by two months , thus making the league last for five months instead of three .
The league would also go from having matches played daily to being played between Wednesday and Sunday .
The next year , prior to the 2018–19 season , it was reported that Reliance Industries had bought out IMG 's shares in the league .
Thus giving Reliance Industries 65 % ownership of the league while Star Sports retains 35 % .
COMPETITION FORMAT Section::::Competition format .
During the 2018–19 season , the Indian Super League will run from September to March .
All ten teams play each other twice , home and away , for eighteen matches each .
At the end of the season , the top four sides qualify for the playoffs .
During the league 's first three seasons , the competition ran from October to December .
The regular season would begin in October and end by early December while the playoffs would take place within the next two to three weeks .
The regular season would be fourteen matches long .
The top four sides at the end qualify for the playoffs .
The first round of the playoffs sees the first placed team take on the fourth placed team while the second placed team faces the third .
During the playoffs , the first round is played in a two - legged format with both teams playing each other at their home venues .
At the end of the two matches , the team which leads on aggregate would move on to the final .
The final is a single - leg match which takes place in a neutral venue .
If scores were tied on aggregate in the first round or in the final , 30 minutes of extra time would be used to determine the winner and finally , if still tied , penalties .
QUALIFICATION FOR AFC CUP
Section::::Qualification for AFC Cup .
In July 2017 , it was proposed by the All India Football Federation ( AIFF ) that the Indian Super League champion be granted a spot in the AFC Cup , Asia 's second - tier club competition .
On 25 July 2017 , the Asian Football Confederation ( AFC ) approved the AIFF 's proposal .
Thus , from the 2017–18 season , the Indian Super League champions were allowed to participate in the AFC Cup from the qualification stages of the competition .
Meanwhile , India 's spot in the AFC Champions League , Asia 's top club competition , was still kept by the I - League .
During the 2018 AFC Cup , Bengaluru became the first ISL club to participate in Asian club competition .
The club qualified by virtue of being the Federation Cup champions from the previous season .
On 17 March 2018 , Chennaiyin became the first club to qualify for the AFC Cup via becoming the Indian Super League champions after they defeated Bengaluru in the 2018 final .
TEAMS Section::::Teams .
The Indian Super League consists of ten teams from nine different states in India .
Unlike other football leagues , the ISL does not use promotion and relegation but instead uses expansion like Major League Soccer in the United States and the A - League in Australia .
The league features two main derbies which include the Southern derby between Chennaiyin and the Kerala Blasters , and the Maharashtra derby between Mumbai City and Pune City .
In 2017 , the league added two new clubs for the first time when Bengaluru and Jamshedpur were awarded expansion teams .
For the upcoming 2018–19 season ORGANIZATION OWNERSHIP Section::::Organization .
Section::::Ownership .
Just like the Indian Premier League , the Indian Super League has a similar ownership model where the teams are owned by prominent businessmen , as well as celebrity owners from bollywood and cricket .
The Indian Super League owners act as the league 's " League Partners " .
British professional services group , Ernst & Young , were hired to draw up a criteria for the team bidding process and they were required to approve the potential owners .
In April 2014 the owners were announced .
Bollywood stars such as Ranbir Kapoor , John Abraham , and Salman Khan were bid winners , as well as cricket stars Sachin Tendulkar and Sourav Ganguly .
Football clubs such as Atlético Madrid and Shillong Lajong were also bid winners .
Despite careful selection , the Indian Super League has had trouble in the past with team ownership .
In August 2014 , two months before the inaugural season , Sun Group , the owners of the Bangalore franchise , dropped out of the league after the league rejected their potential tie - up with then I - League club Bengaluru FC .
Later that month , it was announced that another Bollywood star , Abhishek Bachchan , would take over the last franchise spot and move the team from Bangalore to Chennai .
The league had its first ownership switch within a team on 1 June 2016 when the Kerala Blasters announced their new ownership structure .
Along with Sachin Tendulkar , the team bought in businessman Nimmagadda Prasad and film stars Allu Aravind , Chiranjeevi , and Akkineni Nagarjuna after PVP Ventures withdrew their stake in the team .
STADIUMS Section::::Stadiums .
Since the league began in 2014 , there have been a variety of stadiums used to host matches .
Two stadiums , the DY Patil Stadium in Navi Mumbai and the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium in Kochi , are mainly used as cricket stadiums .
Three other stadiums are athletic stadiums which are primarily used to host football matches in the I - League : the Fatorda Stadium in Goa , the Salt Lake Stadium in Kolkata , and the Balewadi Stadium in Pune .
Three other venues were used which do n't primarily host top - tier professional football : the Indira Gandhi Athletic Stadium in Assam , the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium in Chennai , and the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium in Delhi .
For the 2016 season , two new stadiums were used in the league , the Mumbai Football Arena in Mumbai and the Rabindra Sarobar Stadium in Kolkata .
The Mumbai Football Arena replaced the DY Patil Stadium for Mumbai City .
ATK moved to the Rabindra Sarobar Stadium after the Salt Lake Stadium was being renovated for the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup .
For the 2017–18 season , ATK returned to the Salt Lake Stadium while the addition of Bengaluru and Jamshedpur added two new stadiums to the league .
Bengaluru would host matches at the Sree Kanteerava Stadium while Jamshedpur would play at the JRD Tata Sports Complex .
SPONSORSHIP AND REVENUES Section::::Sponsorship and revenues .
On 18 July 2014 , it was announced that Hero MotoCorp would be the first title sponsor of the Indian Super League .
The deal is scheduled to last for three - years from 2014 to 2016 .
On 30 September 2014 , a week before the first season , it was announced that German sports manufacture , Puma SE , would be the official ball supplier of the Indian Super League .
The company provides balls for matches and training sessions .
The league relies heavily on a central sponsorship pool .
League stakeholders , Star Sports and IMG – Reliance , manage the central sponsorship pool and market the league to potential investors and sponsors .
Twenty percent of the money gained in the central sponsorship pool goes towards organizing the league while the rest is divided among the teams .
Despite successfully gaining a lot of money through central sponsorship in 2014 , 100 % of the revenues were used by the league to improve infrastructure and facilities , which meant that the teams lost money during the first season .
The next season saw a change , however , with the central sponsorship pool doubling to around 100 crore due to new league – wide sponsorships with corporates such as Flipkart and DHL Express .
Teams were also able to increase their intake in sponsorships in 2015 with shirt sponsorship deals worth double from the previous season and around nine advertisements allowed on team kits .
Teams in the league had also signed shirt manufacturing sponsorship deals with companies such as Adidas and Puma .
For the 2016 season , it was projected that the league would gain more sponsors compared to the previous season , especially since the league would occur during the Indian festive periods .
For kit sponsorships , each team is allowed to have six sponsorships on the kit , with teams like ATK regularly filling those spots .
On 23 July 2017 it was announced that Hero MotoCorp would extend their deal as the title sponsors of the Indian Super League for another three - years .
The company would spend $ 25 million on the league during those three years according to Nita Ambani , the league 's chairperson .
TROPHY
Section::::Trophy .
The Indian Super League trophy was unveiled on 5 October 2014 , by Nita Ambani , the founder and chairperson of Football Sports Development .
At the trophy unveiling occasion , Mrs. Ambani said , " It 's a momentous day for all of us today as I stand along with the world 's footballing legends to unveil the pride of Indian Super League .
As these role models have inspired hundreds of thousands of players worldwide , I am sure the ISL trophy will also stand as a symbol of aspiration for many youngsters in an emergent India " .
Designed by Frazer and Haws , the trophy stands 26 inches tall .
The logo on the top band has the ISL colours assigned to it and the handles are ornately carved and embellished with 24 carats gold gilt to imbue a sense of pride , when held up .
MEDIA COVERAGE Section::::Media coverage .
With Star Sports being one of the organizers of the Indian Super League , they also serve as the official broadcasters of the league in India .
The goal of Star Sports for the league was to " use its superior content creation , packaging and presentation expertise to attract and retain viewer interest . "
In September 2014 it was announced that Star Sports would broadcast the ISL through eight channels in five different languages in an attempt to reach 85 % of the Indian television audience , the first of its kind in Indian sporting history .
The first match of the Indian Super League , between Atlético de Kolkata and Mumbai City on 12 October 2014 , reportedly drew a television audience of 75 million people .
The first week reportedly drew 170 million people in total .
These numbers were 12 times more than what India drew for the 2014 FIFA World Cup and around 20 - 30 times more than what the I - League , India 's other top - tier football league , drew on TEN Action and even the Premier League .
Overall , at the end of the first season , it was reported that the ISL drew a total of 429 million viewers across India , just a bit lower than the Pro Kabaddi League , and two and a half times more than the FIFA World Cup .
It was also reported that 57 % of the viewers were women and children and that the STAR Sports website gained 32 million visits during the tournament .
The league experienced a sharp growth in ratings after the 2016 season with over 216 million viewers on television throughout .
The 2016 final between ATK and the Kerala Blasters reportedly drew 41 million viewers which was a 41 % increase on the number of viewers who saw the 2015 final between Chennaiyin and Goa .
Ratings in rural India meanwhile drew 101 million viewers .
For the 2017–18 season , Star Sports broadcast the league on Star Sports 2 and Star Sports 2HD in English .
The broadcasters also televised the matches in Hindi and Tamil and thru various regional channels in different languages .
The league was also streamed online via Hotstar , Star Sports ' online streaming service .
LEAGUE CHAMPIONSHIPS
FINALS RESULTS 2014
20 December Atlético de Kolkata align = center1–0 Kerala Blasters DY
Patil Stadium align = center36,484
Chennaiyin , Goa align =
center2015 20
December
Chennaiyin align
= center3–2
Goa Fatorda Stadium align =
center18,477
Atlético de Kolkata , Delhi Dynamos
align =
center2016 18 December Atlético de Kolkata align = center1–1 ( 4–3 ) Kerala Blasters Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium
align =
center54,146
Delhi Dynamos , Mumbai City
align =
center2017–18 17
March
Chennaiyin align
= center3–2 Bengaluru
Sree Kanteerava
Stadium align =
center25,753
Goa , Pune City CHAMPIONSHIPS
BY
TEAM
PLAYER RECORDS SEE ALSO
* All India Football Federation
* I - League * National Football League REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS