THE TUNNEL ( TV SERIES )
The Tunnel ( ) is a British - French crime drama television series adapted from the 2011 Danish - Swedish crime series The Bridge ( Broen , Bron ) .
The series began broadcasting on 16 October 2013 on Sky Atlantic in the UK , and on 11 November 2013 on Canal+ in France .
The series stars Stephen Dillane and Clémence Poésy as British and French police detectives Karl Roebuck and Elise Wassermann .
The plot follows the two detectives working together to find a serial killer who left the upper - half of a French politician and the lower - half of a British prostitute in the Channel Tunnel at the midpoint between France and the UK .
The killer is nicknamed the " Truth Terrorist " and is on a moral crusade to highlight many social problems , terrorising both countries in the process .
As the series progresses , the killer 's true intention is revealed .
The Anglo - French adaptation of The Bridge was announced as a joint project between Sky and Canal+ in January 2013 .
Tunnel head writer Ben Richards worked with Hans Rosenfeldt , the creator of the original series .
Due to the setting , the dialogue of the series is bilingual , a first for British and French television .
Filming took place between February and August 2013 with a budget of £ 15 million , and was shot on location in Kent , England and Nord - Pas - de - Calais , France .
It was produced with both British and French crew members .
The premieres on both Sky Atlantic and Canal+ received strong ratings for the respective channels , with an initial consolidated figure of almost 900,000 in the UK and 1.3 million in France .
Critical reception of the series has been generally positive , with Dillane and Poésy 's acting being praised , as well as the plot 's grittiness .
Some reviewers made favourable comparisons with The Bridge , though others criticised The Tunnel for being identical .
The producers admit that the first episode is a copy of the original .
On 16 February 2015 , Canal+ and Sky Atlantic announced that a second series would begin production in March , set to air in early 2016 , entitled The Tunnel : Sabotage , and consisting of eight episodes .
Series 2 would focus on the crash of an airliner into the English Channel , with Dillane and Poésy returning ; it premiered on Canal+ on 7 March 2016 .
The debut on Sky Atlantic was originally set for 5 April 2016 but was put off until a week later in deference to the Brussels terrorist attacks on 22 March 2016 .
It premiered in the UK on 12 April 2016 and was made available via Sky 's On Demand service .
The renewal for a third and final series was announced on 20 January 2017
entitled The Tunnel : Vengeance and consisting of six episodes .
It began filming in March 2017 and premiered on Sky Atlantic on 14 December 2017 , with all episodes released on the same day .
Canal+ did not announce a corresponding date for France at the time of the UK release .
Season 3 premiered on Canal+ on 4 June 2018 .
In the United States , the first season aired on many PBS stations from June through August 2016 .
The second season was broadcast from June through August 2017 .
The third season aired July through August 2018 .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN
* Stephen Dillane as Det .
Chief Inspector Karl Roebuck * Clémence Poésy as Captain ( later Commandant )
Elise Wassermann * Angel Coulby as Laura Roebuck ( Series 1–2 ) * Thibault de Montalembert as Commander Olivier Pujol
* Cédric Vieira as Lieutenant Phillipe Viot
* Thibaut Evrard as Gaël ( Series 1–2 )
* Fanny Leurent as Officer Julie ( Series 1–2 )
* William Ash as Det .
Constable Boleslaw ' BB ' Borowski ( Series 2–3 )
* Juliette Navis as Lieutenant Louise Renard ( Series 2–3 )
* Laura De Boer as Eryka Klein ( Series 2 ) * Marie Dompnier as Madeleine Fournier ( Series 2 ) * Emilia Fox as Vanessa Hamilton ( Series 2 ) * Johan Heldenbergh as Robert Fournier ( Series 2 )
*
Hannah John - Kamen as Rosa Persaud ( Series 2 )
* Stanley Townsend as Chief Superintendent Mike Bowden ( Series 2 )
* Christine Bottomley as Helena Carver ( Series 3 )
* William Gaminara as Wesley Pollinger ( Series 3 ) * as Commander Astor Chaput ( Series 3 ) * Felicity Montagu as Chief Superintendent Winnie Miles ( Series 3 ) * Angeliki Papoulia as Lana Khasanović ( Series 3 )
* Sharon Rooney as Kiki Stokes ( Series 3 ) * Brian Vernel as Anton Stokes ( Series 3 ) RECURRING SERIES 1
* Tobi Bakare as Det .
Constable Chuks
Akinade
* Jeanne Balibar as Charlotte Joubert
* Tom Bateman as Danny Hillier * Sigrid Bouaziz as Cécile Cabrillac * Mathieu Carrière as Alain Joubert * Catalina Denis as Veronica
* Nigel Lindsay as Jonno
* Jack Lowden as Adam Roebuck * Joseph Mawle as Stephen Beaumont
* Keeley Hawes as Suze Beaumont * James Frain as Kieran Ashton
* Anastasia Hille as Det .
Superintendent Andrea Kerrigan
* Jean - Toussaint Bernard as Mathieu SERIES 2 :
SABOTAGE * Nicolas Wanczycki as Thibaut Briand * Mish Boyko as Stefan Cyzrko
* Edyta Budnik as Vladka Horvath
* Clarke Peters as Sonny Persaud * Paul Schneider as Artem Baturin * Con O'Neill as Neil Grey
* Jan Bijvoet as The Chemist SERIES 3 : VENGEANCE * Angela Wynter as Celeste
* India Ria Amarteifio as Maya Roebuck * Wim Willaert as Jacques Moreau * Tony Jayawardena as Lawrence Taylor * Nicholas Burns as Richard Carver
* Phil Zimmerman as Jimmy Jones STEPHEN DILLANE AND CLÉMENCE POÉSY Section::::Cast and characters .
Section::::Recurring .
Section::::Stephen Dillane and Clémence Poésy .
Stephen Dillane plays Detective Chief Inspector Karl Roebuck of Northbourne Police ( a fictional counterpart to the real life Kent Police ) , an ageing British detective used to getting his own way .
Roebuck 's role parallels that of Martin Rohde ( played by Kim Bodnia ) , the Danish detective in The Bridge .
Karl and Martin share some characteristics , but also differ in certain ways ; for instance , Karl is " more educated and a more troubled man " .
Dillane was drawn to the political questions raised in the storyline , as well as the series ' " novelistic telling " .
Clémence Poésy plays Capitaine ( later Commander )
Elise Wassermann of the DCPJ , the French detective and Roebuck 's opposite .
Wasserman 's role parallels that of Saga Norén ( played by Sofia Helin ) , the Swedish detective in The Bridge .
Elise shares some characteristics with Saga , including driving a Porsche ( in Elise 's case , a Porsche 944 ) , picking up men from bars for casual sex , and exhibiting behaviour consistent with Asperger syndrome .
The innate seriousness of the character was a trait that Poésy found " quite annoying " , but the actress came to appreciate Elise 's honesty .
Both Dillane and Poésy opted not to view the original Scandinavian series , with the latter stating that it would allow her more freedom in interpreting the character .
Poésy dubbed her English lines for the French broadcast . GUESTS Section::::Guests .
The series includes several guest stars .
Joseph Mawle plays a social worker named Stephen Beaumont , Tom Bateman appears as journalist Danny Hiller , and Tobi Bakare plays Chuks Akinade .
Thibault de Montalembert plays Olivier Pujol , who is the head of the Calais police service , and Elise 's superior .
Sigrid Bouaziz plays Cécile Cabrillac and Cédric Vieira plays Philippe Viot ; these characters are police officers who work with Elise .
Mathieu Carrière and Jeanne Balibar play banker Alain Joubert , and his wife Charlotte , respectively .
Merlin actress Angel Coulby stars as Laura Roebuck , Karl 's wife , while Jack Lowden plays Adam , his son .
Keeley Hawes guest - starred as Suze Harcourt , a care worker and drug addict , along with Liz Smith , who plays Harriet , an elderly woman under Harcourt 's care .
James Frain plays Kieran Ashton , a former colleague of Karl , who faked his suicide and became the Truth Terrorist , serving as the primary antagonist .
The character is motivated by the loss of his identity and family , as well as betrayal from Karl by his affair with Kieran 's wife before her death .
Frain believed that Kieran is the most disturbing character he has played .
Portraying the character , the actor wanted to make his actions understandable , though not justifiable .
DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION Section::::Development and production .
The Anglo - French adaption of the Danish / Swedish series The Bridge was first announced by Sky in January 2013 .
The ten - part series was to be a co - production between British broadcaster Sky and French broadcaster Canal+ .
Sky Atlantic director Elaine Pyke commissioned the show with the intention of establishing the channel as a home for British dramas following the channel 's release of the drama series Hit & Miss and Falcón .
Due to the setting of the series , it would be bilingual , with dialogue being spoken in English and French .
This made The Tunnel , according to its producers , the first series in British and French television to be bilingual .
Being a " 50–50 co - production " between the British and French , the crew were a mix from both countries , and neither party has " final control " .
The series employed both British and French writers and directors to collaborate on the series , with former Spooks writer Ben Richards leading the writing team .
Multiple versions of the script were used , which were translated for both languages .
Five directors were hired for the series , three of them British and the other two French .
Dominik Moll is considered the head director , with the other directors being Hettie MacDonald , Thomas Vincent , Udayan Prasad and Philip Martin .
The series ' executive producers are Sky 's Anne Mensah ;
Canal+ 's Fabrice De La Patellière ; Kudos ' Jane Featherstone , Karen Wilson , Manda Levin and Ben Richards ; Shine France 's Nora Melhli ; and Filmlance 's Lars Blomgren .
Ruth Kenley - Letts is the series producer .
Jane Featherstone , the chief executive of the production company Kudos , said of the British – French collaboration : " We have had to work very collaboratively to make sure we are appealing to both nations .
I honestly do n't know if we have got that right yet .
The French like things to be slightly slower , we like them pacier . "
In developing the storyline of the series
Featherstone said that " the team took what was wonderful from [ the original ] and then forgot about it , in the nicest possible way , and made their own show . "
While working for the series , Richards worked with Hans Rosenfeldt , the Swedish writer who created The Bridge .
Many aspects of the first episode are virtual copies of the first episode of the Scandinavian series , including : the female lead " stripping unselfconsciously to her underwear in the office " , the male lead 's relationship with his teenage son , and the " sleazy journalist [ being ] held captive in his own car with a ticking bomb " , the last of which was a sequence Richards wanted to repeat in the remake .
However , Richards said that as the series progressed and the drama unfolded the storylines would diverge from the original .
Featherstone also noted there would be plenty of changes , saying that many had " seen both [ The Bridge and The Tunnel ] , who feel that they get satisfaction because the characters go on different journeys and the actors all bring a whole new level of interest in it " .
FILMING AND LOCATIONS Section::::Filming and locations .
The budget of the series is estimated to be £ 15 million .
Filming began in February 2013 and concluded in August 2013 , with location shooting largely taken place in Kent and northern France .
Filming in Kent was based in Discovery Park in Sandwich and was supported by the Kent Film Office .
A former Pfizer facility was used as a number of sets , including the Calais police station and Elise 's apartment .
The series was filmed throughout five districts : Canterbury , Dover , Folkestone and Hythe , Swale and Thanet .
Several prominent locales were featured , including Folkestone Harbour ;
The Turner Contemporary art gallery ; Westwood Cross shopping centre ; and the towns of Dover , Folkestone and Margate .
Production also made use of the Kent Film Office 's legal powers to close certain roads for uninterrupted filming .
An estimated £ 2.5 million of the budget was spent on , among other services , accommodation , locations , parking and catering , providing a boost for the Kent economy .
The filming in France was supported by the Nord - Pas de Calais Film Commission and benefited from the Tax Rebate International .
Shooting took place over 31 days across Boulogne - sur - Mer , Calais , Dunkerque , and Wissant .
Some scenes of The Tunnel were also shot in the Channel Tunnel itself , which makes the series the first television drama production to do so .
The producers spent " months of gentle negotiation " with Eurotunnel , the company that operates the tunnel , for permission to shoot scenes there .
Eurotunnel allowed it .
According to Moll , " The only thing they did n't want was to see train passengers in danger or fires .
" Moll also noted that they did not shoot in the actual midpoint of the tunnel , stating " once you are a few kilometres in , it all looks the same . "
Filming for series two again took place in Kent and France .
The production filmed for 85 days in Kent between April and July 2015 , with a further 50 days in the county for pre- and post - production , spending an estimated £ 1.5 million .
The Kent filming locations included Eurotunnel , Folkestone Harbour , Discovery Park , Deal ( including the pier ) , Folkestone , Dover ( including the port and Dover Castle ) , Westwood Industrial Estate Margate , Ramsgate , The Barn in Upstreet , St Martin 's Hospital , and Knowlton Court .
For series three , filming locations in East Kent included Reculver , Botany Bay , Ramsgate Royal Harbour and Port of Dover .
RELEASE
BROADCAST Section::::Release .
Section::::Broadcast .
The Tunnel had a world premiere on 7 October 2013 in France at the international television trade exhibition MIPCOM in Cannes .
In the United Kingdom , Sky Atlantic premiered the series on 16 October 2013 at 9 pm , and continued weekly until 18 December .
The debut was seen by an average of 362,000 overnight viewers , considered strong ratings for the channel .
With consolidated ratings taken into account , the first episode went up to 803,000 viewers on Sky Atlantic , with an extra 90,000 viewing from its catch - up channel , Sky Atlantic +1 .
However , the second episode dropped a third of its overnight audience , leaving it with 236,000 viewers .
The finale was seen by 267,000 overnight viewers .
In France , the series premiered on Canal+ on 11 November 2013 at 8:55 pm , with two out of ten episodes airing consecutively , and concluded on 9 December 2013 .
The premiere attracted 1.3 million viewers , making it one of the highest rated original series debut for the channel .
The first series had an average audience of 1.04 million viewers per episode .
Series 2 , titled The Tunnel : Sabotage , premiered on Canal+ on 7 March 2016 , and concluded on 28 March 2016 .
The second series debut on Sky Atlantic was originally set for 5 April 2016 but was put off until a week later in deference to the Brussels terrorist attacks on 22 March 2016 .
Series 2 premiered in the UK on 12 April 2016 and was made available via Sky 's On Demand service .
The season finished on 31 May 2016 .
Series 3 , titled The Tunnel : Vengeance , premiered on Sky Atlantic on 14 December 2017 , with all episodes released on the same day .
The season premiered on Canal+ on 4 June 2018 , and the finale aired on 18 June 2018 .
In the United States , The Tunnel was broadcast on many PBS stations .
Season 1 aired from 19 June through 21 August 2016 , Season 2 from 15 June through 3 August 2017 , and Season 3 from 1 July through 5 August 2018 .
The Tunnel is distributed by Endemol Shine International in the U.S. HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
A four - disc DVD box set ( Region 2 ) of Series 1 was released in France by StudioCanal on 20 December 2013 , with special features including a " making of " feature and interviews featuring Clémence Poésy and Dominik Moll .
The DVD and Blu - ray of Series 1 was released in the United Kingdom on 13 January 2014 by Acorn Media UK , and includes three discs , with special features including a making - of feature , cast and crew interviews , and a picture gallery .
The box set of Series 2 was released in France by StudioCanal on 29 March 2016 .
Starting on 1 February 2014 , the first episodes of The Tunnel – along with some other original Sky Television series – were released for free in the UK on YouTube as an attempt to attract more Sky subscribers .
EPISODES RECEPTION
Section::::Reception .
The Tunnel received generally positive reviews from television critics .
Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy stated that while remakes are " often underwhelming " , The Tunnel was " gripping stuff " , and he believed that viewers " should find plenty to enjoy " in the series .
The performances of Dillane and Poésy were also lauded .
Gerard Gilbert of The Independent was positive in his assessment of the series , stating that " as an avid fan of The Bridge , I am happy to report that The Tunnel works well in its own right – it 's intelligently made , well cast and ambitiously cinematic " , adding that it had " succeeded in its high - risk strategy of re - working a near - flawless Scandi - drama in our Anglo - French image " .
Ellen E Jones , also of The Independent , said that Dillane and Poésy 's performances " stuck closely " to the original characterisation of the leads from the Scandinavian version .
Of the execution , Jones stated : " should you bother watching The Tunnel even if you 've already seen the original ?
The early signs are good .
The makers obviously have sense enough to preserve what was effective about the original , and invention enough to distinguish their work too . "
In a review posted early in the first season , Gerard O'Donovan of The Daily Telegraph expressed mixed feelings about the series " so far at least " , saying : " there was no sense that this was doing much different from other mainstream crime thrillers .
Sticking too close to the original script meant a golden opportunity was missed to dig deeper into the attitudes and history that both connect and divide the UK and France " .
However , he also wrote that he would be " happy to be persuaded otherwise if the action develops " .
Harry Venning of The Stage believed that , plotwise , the collaboration between the British and French police forces and style were " all very effectively done , creepily atmospheric and splendidly gruesome " , but also stated that the best thing about the series was " the interplay between Stephen Dillane 's easygoing , laddish , rosbif detective inspector and his po - faced , glacial but – would n't you know it – extremely sexy Gallic counterpart , played by Clémence Poésy .
" Metro reviewer Keith Watson , having rated the series four stars out of five , stated : " the idea is great .
But what 's surprising about The Tunnel ( Sky Atlantic ) is that it 's less a version of , more a faithful remake . "
The Guardian posted a number of reviews on its website .
Julia Raeside deemed the series a " perfectly cast remake of Swedish - Danish crime hit " , and stated that " this confirms Dillane as one of our very finest .
Such control .
Poésy is beautifully chilly , and Joseph Mawle ( another cracker ) leads an asylum - seeker subplot .
It 's also really funny . "
Writing about the finale , Reaside said of Dillane 's performance : " If this were on a terrestrial channel , he 'd be up for all the awards . "
On the Karl – Elise partnership , she stated : " I was n't sure about them as a pairing but was immediately convinced by their uncomfortable chemistry . "
Having not enjoyed The Bridge , Andrew Anthony called The Tunnel an " attractive proposition " , adding that " there 's an engaging confidence to the slow revelation of the story .
All in all , this looks good . "
Sam Wollaston was more critical of the series , stating that , while the tone was " atmospheric , intriguing , gripping " and there were strong performances from the lead cast members , The Tunnel was " exactly the same as the ( recent ) original " .
Wollaston felt that the only " obvious " difference was that , in the original series , there " was a bridge , this is a tunnel .
However magnificent an engineering feat the Channel tunnel is , it ca n't compete as a spectacular location with the Øresund Bridge . " AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS BROADCASTING PRESS
GUILD
AWARDS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Broadcasting Press Guild Awards .
Year
GLOBES DE CRISTAL AWARD Section::::Globes de Cristal Award .
Year GUILD OF BRITISH CAMERA TECHNICIANS Section::::Guild of British Camera Technicians .
Year INTERNATIONAL EMMY
AWARD Section::::International Emmy Award .
Year ROYAL TELEVISION SOCIETY Section::::Royal Television Society .
Year
SEE ALSO
* The Bridge ( Danish / Swedish TV series )
* The Bridge ( US TV series ) NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS * The Tunnel Series 1 at Sky Atlantic ( archive ) * The Tunnel : Sabotage at Sky Atlantic
* The Tunnel at Canal+