SOME ASSEMBLY REQUIRED ( 2014 TV SERIES )
Some Assembly Required is a teen situation comedy series that aired on YTV in Canada and streams on Netflix worldwide .
The series was produced in Burnaby , British Columbia .
The series was created by Dan Signer ( The Suite Life on Deck , A.N.T. Farm , Mr. Young ) & Howard Nemetz , and stars Kolton Stewart , Charlie Storwick , Harrison Houde , Sydney Scotia , Dylan Playfair , Travis Turner , and Ellie Harvie .
The first season consists of 26 episodes , all of which were made available on Netflix on June 19 , 2015 .
The season finale for Season 3 aired June 6 , 2016 .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
Jarvis Raines ( Kolton Stewart ) is an average 14-year - old who becomes a boss overnight after he sues a toy company over a defective chemistry set that blows up his house .
Jarvis ' first act as CEO of Knickknack Toys is to recruit a diverse group of kids from his high school to help him run the company .
Usually something backfires when they are trying to develop a new toy .
Before the end credits there are usually advertisements showing Knickknack Toys ' newest products , which are shown or often invented in said episode .
EPISODES
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Kolton Stewart as Jarvis Raines is a fun - loving teenager who becomes the new owner of Knickknack Toys , after suing the company when a defective chemistry set he got blows up his house on Christmas .
After time discovering that he has a crush on Piper , he became Piper 's boyfriend in Season 3 .
* Charlie Storwick as Piper Gray is a computer - savvy , sardonic ' hacker chick ' who is hired by Jarvis as the Chief Technology Officer and the vice president of the company .
She has had a huge crush on Jarvis even before starting at Knickknack Toys , but if he were to find out about this , she would be very embarrassed .
In Season 3 she became Jarvis 's girlfriend .
* Harrison Houde as Bowie Sherman is Jarvis 's nerdy best friend whom he also hired .
He gets ideas ranging from bad to worse which are idiotic including taking words seriously .
Even so , he is still like everyone 's lovable little brother .
In episode 106 Jarvis puts him in charge of the Joke and Prank Division .
* Sydney Scotia as Geneva Hayes is a beautiful yet dimwitted young girl who " works " as the receptionist and Jarvis 's personal executive assistant .
She is the prettiest girl in school .
Jarvis , like many young boys , has a huge crush on her , until developing feelings for Piper .
She has a few hidden talents like being able to solve a puzzle cube ( like Rubik 's Cube ) faster than a robot .
* Dylan Playfair as Malcolm " Knox " Knoxford III is an amateur extreme sports daredevil who is not very smart .
He is recruited as the product and safety tester and human crash test dummy .
He likes a brand of clothing called " Epic Thunder " and also likes playing with Boxes .
* Travis Turner as Aster Vanderberg is creative , confident and the most fashionable guy in the whole school .
He is the self - proclaimed King of Swag and the company 's Chief Design Officer .
He is also the only one who knows about Piper 's crush on Jarvis , and has promised not to tell anyone , because , as he says " he likes to keep his conversations interesting " .
Aster also has some twisted pleasure in always insulting and mocking Piper and everyone on how they dress , even to the point that when he called in sick , he asked Bowie to fill in for his " job " of making fun of her .
* Ellie Harvie as Candace Wheeler is the previous owner and CEO of Knickknack and the only adult in the main cast of characters .
She refused to give Jarvis a settlement after selling him a defective chemistry set that blew up his house , and the jury awarded the company to Jarvis as compensation instead .
She has high doubts that Jarvis can run a company , but she 's always proved wrong in the end .
* Mrs. Bubkes is actually former Knickknack owner Candace ( Ellie Harvie ) in disguise .
She masquerades as Knickknack 's janitor Mrs. Bubkes , an old woman from Meeskatania , a fictitious country in Eastern Europe , in order to snoop on Jarvis in hopes of regaining control of the company .
She frequently attempts to sabotage Jarvis ' plans in secret , to no avail .
* Russell Roberts as P. Everett Knickknack is the original owner of Knickknack toys since 1943 who pop out of nowhere , everyone thinks he is a fraud trying to steal the company especially Bowie who thinks he 's Candace due to his stupidity , but due to being innocent they claim him as part of the team
, It 's unknown that he 's the real deal or a wacko thinking he is him ,
Throughout he and his cartoon counterpart use a running gag to say words and sentence start with the letter " P " because they randomly say what it stands for .
* Mmmboing is a rubber bouncing ball that was created by Bowie in the pilot and has n't stopped bouncing since .
Mmmboing has become a running gag in the series appearing somewhere in almost every episode .
* Nils Hognestad as Mr. Gournisht is a recurring character in Some Assembly Required that appears in Lobster Trap , Flycycle , and Rocket with a Pocket .
He is a Meesketanian born man who is fluent in both Meesketanian and English .
Mr. Gournisht is deeply in love with Mrs. Bubkes , but has no interest in Candace Wheeler .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The series was created and is executive produced by Dan Signer and Howard Nemetz and produced in Burnaby , British Columbia .
The series was renewed for a second season in June 2014 .
On August 19 , 2015 , the series was renewed for a third season .
On January 7 , 2017 , YTV cancelled their # 1 series , and aired the 13 episode third season on their network .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* – on Netflix * – on YTV