THE BLOOD OF OLYMPUS
The Blood of Olympus is an American fantasy - adventure novel written by Rick Riordan , based on Greek and Roman mythology .
It was released on October 7 , 2014 , is the fifth and final novel in The Heroes of Olympus series .
It is preceded by The House of Hades and followed by The Hidden Oracle of The Trials of Apollo .
The seven demigods of the Prophecy of Seven — Percy Jackson , Annabeth Chase , Jason Grace , Leo Valdez , Piper McLean , Hazel Levesque , and Frank Zhang — go on their final adventure to defeat Gaia / Terra while Nico di Angelo , Reyna Avila Ramírez - Arellano , and Coach Gleeson Hedge attempt to bring the Athena Parthenos to Camp Half - Blood in order to prevent a war between the Roman and Greek demigods .
The novel is narrated in third - person , alternating between the points of view of Jason , Piper , Leo , Reyna , and Nico , making it the first time in the series that someone other than one of the seven demigods of the prophecy is the viewpoint character .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Taking place after the events of the previous novel , Jason , Piper , and Annabeth disguise themselves with Hazel 's Mist to infiltrate Odysseus ' home in Ithaca , where Gaia's / Terra 's resurrected souls are gathering .
They learn that Gaia 's army does not plan to invade Mount Olympus as expected , but the Acropolis in Athens , where most of them have gathered .
Since the Gulf of Corinth is heavily fortified and guarded by the army , the demigods decide they have no choice but to circle the whole Peloponnese to reach Athens .
When Michael Varus , one of the souls , recognizes the demigods ' deception , he forces Jason to confront his mother 's insane spirit , whom Jason rejects , and mortally wounds Jason .
As Jason recuperates , the three demigods use Odysseus ' marriage bed to summon Juno who tells them to seek Nike at Olympia and reach out to Artemis and Apollo , both of whom have been banished by Zeus .
At Olympia , Percy , Leo , Hazel , and Frank are forced to participate in Nike 's deadly Olympic Games , capture and detain her .
Coerced , she reveals that one of them is destined to die , and that he needs the Physician 's Cure to survive , a cure that consists of Pylosian mint , the heartbeat of the chained god , and the curse of Delos .
Frank obtains the first ingredient from his shapeshifter relatives in Pylos .
Piper and Annabeth obtain the second ingredient , the Makhai , from a chained Ares statue by defeating Mimas at the temple of Ares in Sparta .
While sailing through the Aegean Sea , a violent storm hits the Argo II , which Percy and Jason discover to be caused by Kymopoleia , a daughter of Poseidon who is working with Polybotes .
Jason convinces Kymopoleia to switch sides and they together kill Polybotes ; in return , he swears to become a Pontifex Maximus after the war .
After reaching Mykonos , Leo , Frank , and Hazel meet with Artemis and Apollo at Delos where , with Leo 's offering , Apollo gives them the third ingredient , the cursed aster .
He also reveals that his son Asclepius is able to make the cure and is at Epidaurus .
Leo tells Hazel and Frank about his plan to sacrifice himself and defeat Gaia / Terra , to later inject himself with the cure .
Meanwhile , Reyna Avila Ramírez - Arellano , Nico di Angelo , and Coach Hedge shadow - travel to Camp Half - Blood with the Athena Parthenos .
At Évora , they are attacked by Lycaon and his aides , whom they defeat and shadow - travel to San Juan , Reyna 's homeland .
Reyna is captured by the Hunters of Artemis , who are working together with the Amazons , led by Reyna 's sister , Hylla .
The giant , revealed to be Orion , appears and massacres both the Hunters and the Amazons .
Reyna , Nico , and Hedge shadow - travel to South Carolina .
Reyna reveals she killed her father 's insane spirit before Nico and Hedge while secretly being spied upon by Bryce Lawrence , a legacy who was once exiled from New Rome by Reyna before being reinstated by Octavian .
He tries to execute Reyna for patricide but is turned into a ghost by a furious Nico .
Arriving at Camp
Half - Blood with the help of Pegasus and several of his brethren , Nico and Hedge head out to the camp while Reyna , who is confronted by Orion , manages to kill him with the help of her mother Bellona , and Athena .
Reyna reveals the Athena Parthenos , ending the warfare and rivalry .
Meanwhile , the demigods head to the Acropolis and battle the army of giants , whom they kill with the help of the gods , after their split personalities are healed by the return of Athena Parthenos .
However , the Giants are able to injure Percy and Annabeth , whose blood wakes Gaia / Terra .
Gaia / Terra rises and begins to attack the camp .
The seven demigods , transported by Zeus / Jupiter , arrive and battle
Gaia / Terra .
Piper charmspeaks Gaia
/ Terra to sleep , and Leo sacrifices himself with the help of a newly - revived Festus while blasting Gaia / Terra with fire , which , coupled with an onager attack that Octavian launched with him , destroying Gaia / Terra .
The camps celebrate their victory together at Camp Half - Blood .
Nico decides to reside in Camp Half - Blood and also reveals his crush to Percy but decides he has moved on .
Jason , having been made a Pontifex , plans to visit Camp Jupiter occasionally to make offerings .
Percy and Annabeth also plan to move to Camp Jupiter to attend college after they graduate from high school .
Meanwhile , Leo , who was thought to be dead , is revived by the physician 's cure .
He arrives at Ogygia to pick up Calypso .
No longer bound to her curse , Calypso and Leo leave into the unknown .
CHARACTERS
* Jason Grace – Son of Jupiter
* Piper McLean – Daughter of Aphrodite * Leo Valdez – Son of Hephaestus
* Reyna Avila Ramírez - Arellano – Daughter of Bellona , praetor of Camp Jupiter * Nico di Angelo – Son of Hades * Percy Jackson – Son of Poseidon * Annabeth Chase – Daughter of Athena
* Frank Zhang – Son of Mars and descendant of Poseidon , praetor of Camp Jupiter
* Hazel Levesque – Daughter of Pluto
* Gleeson Hedge – Satyr of Camp Half - Blood , chaperone * Gaea – Primordial goddess of the earth
* Nike / Victoria – Goddess of victory
* Octavian – Legacy of Apollo , Augur of Camp Jupiter
* Orion – Giant , bane of Apollo and Artemis RELEASE Section::::Release .
The Blood of Olympus was released on October 7 , 2014 in both hardcover and eBook formats .
Disney announced that in the first printing , there were 3 million copies printed .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The Blood of Olympus received mixed reviews .
While some praised Riordan 's writing , as well as the inclusion of two additional POVs , some doubts were expressed over certain loose ends .
According to Kirkus Reviews , " The satisfyingly cataclysmic showdowns yield to peaceful resolution at last ; here 's hoping it holds this time . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Heroes of Olympus series site from publisher Disney ( readriordan.com )
* Rick Riordan Myth Master at publisher Penguin Books ( UK )