LIST OF STEVEN UNIVERSE EPISODES Steven Universe is an American animated television series created by Rebecca Sugar for Cartoon Network .
The series revolves around Steven Universe ( voiced by Zach Callison ) , who protects his hometown of Beach City alongside Garnet ( voiced by Estelle ) , Amethyst ( voiced by Michaela Dietz ) and Pearl ( voiced by Deedee Magno Hall ) , three magical alien guardians known as the Crystal Gems .
The series was renewed for a fourth and fifth season on March 30 , 2016 .
On July 21 , 2018 , it was announced that a Steven Universe television film , Steven Universe : The Movie , was in production .
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview .
EPISODES PILOT ( 2013 )
SEASON 1
( 2013–15 ) * The first season initially aired weekly on Monday nights .
* Episode premieres switched to Wednesday nights beginning with the episode " Steven the Sword Fighter " .
* Episode premieres switched again to Thursday nights beginning with the episode " Coach Steven " .
*
The 46th through 48th episodes were bumped to air during the second season in order to facilitate the airing of the final " arc " of the first season .
Consequently , some sources treat them as part of the second season , while Cartoon Network 's website lists them as part of the first season , as intended .
SEASON 2
( 2015–16 ) SEASON 3 ( 2016 )
* The episodes " Super Watermelon Island " , " Gem Drill " , " Same Old World " , " Barn Mates " , and " Hit the Diamond " aired as a four - week special event titled In Too Deep .
*
The remaining episodes of the season all aired during another four - week special event titled Summer Adventures .
SEASON 4
( 2016–17 )
* The episodes " Kindergarten Kid " and " Know Your Fusion " were the last two episodes to air during a four - week special event titled Summer Adventures .
* " Steven 's Dream " , " Adventures in Light Distortion " , " Gem Heist " , " The Zoo " , and " That Will Be All " aired as a four - night special event titled Out of This World .
* Episode premieres moved to Fridays beginning with the episode " The New Crystal Gems " .
SEASON 5
( 2017–19 )
*
The episodes " Stuck Together " , " The Trial " , " Off Colors " , and " Lars ' Head " aired together as a one - hour special , under the umbrella title Wanted .
*
The episodes " Lars of the Stars " and " Jungle Moon " aired together as a half - hour special , under the umbrella title Stranded .
* Episode premieres moved to Monday nights beginning with the episode " Your Mother and Mine " .
*
The episodes " Now We 're Only Falling Apart " , "
What 's Your Problem " , " The Question " , " Made of Honor " , and " Reunited " aired as a five - night special event titled Heart of the Crystal Gems .
* " Legs from Here to Homeworld " , " Familiar " , " Together Alone " , " Escapism " , and " Steven Universe : Battle of Heart and Mind " will air as a five - week special event titled Diamond Days .
FILM Section::::Film .
A film based on the series , titled Steven Universe : The Movie , was announced on July 21 , 2018 , at San Diego Comic - Con .
A teaser was shown and was uploaded to the Cartoon Network YouTube channel .
It is to be made available on Cartoon Network at an unknown date .
SHORTS
SEASON 2
Section::::Shorts .
Section::::Season 2 .
All six digital shorts combined make up one full production code of the second season ( 1031 - 058 ) .
SEASON 4 Section::::Season 4 .
All five of these shorts combined make up one full production code of the fourth season ( 1040 - 112 ) .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Depending on the customer 's region , Steven Universe is available through various video on demand services such as Hulu , Google Play , iTunes , Amazon Video , and Microsoft Movies & TV .
Episodes on the Steven Universe DVDs are not always presented in original broadcast order .
In the table below , the episodes are listed in the order they appear on the disc , and are numbered according to episode tables above .
In North America , Warner Home Video has released several single - disc compilation DVDs featuring select episodes , as well as a " complete season " DVD set .
In Australia , Madman Entertainment NOTES REFERENCES Production code columns * Production codes are stamped on numerous model sheets and storyboards that must be searched for , in : http://www.cartoonnetwork.com/shows/steven-universe/pictures/index.html