THE GIRL OF FIRE AND THORNS
The Girl of Fire and Thorns is the debut novel of author Rae Carson , published by Green Willow Books , an imprint of HarperCollins .
It is the first novel of the Fire and Thorns trilogy , followed by The Crown of Embers ( 2012 ) and The Bitter Kingdom ( 2013 ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The Princess of Orovalle , Lucero - Elisa de Riqueza , was born as the chosen one , selected by God to fulfill a prophecy shown by a blue gem in her navel called the Godstone .
She is the younger sister of Alodia , the future queen of her country and a more beautiful and confident person .
She is married off to King Alejandro de Vega of the country Joya d'Arena .
It is a country in turmoil and at war with a country named Invierne .
Her new husband is kind and understanding , a surprise to Elisa .
They leave the day following their wedding to travel to Joya d'Arena along with Elisa 's nurse , Ximena , and lady - in - waiting , Aneaxi .
While traveling their caravan is attacked and many die .
Aneaxi is injured , and later dies on the road , due to infection .
When they arrive at the palace , King Alejandro does not announce Elisa as his wife nor as the bearer of the Godstone , only as a special guest .
While at the palace , she meets Alejandro 's son , Prince Rosario , and his mistress , Condesa Ariña .
She hires Ariña 's maid , Cosmé , as her own to keep her under watch as she suspects Cosmé as a spy for Ariña .
Elisa attends the meetings where she learns about the war .
She also finds out about a book called Homer 's Afflatus from Father Nicandro .
Homer was the first bearer of the Godstone , and his act of service by God was to write a set of prophecies for all the bearers that followed .
It was a book kept secret from her in her home country .
Father Nicandro gives her a bag full of Godstones whose bearers have passed .
Elisa hides the bag of Godstones in a potted palm .
Cosmé finds out that Elisa bears the Godstone one day while dressing her and then kidnaps her in her sleep with the help of her brother , Humberto , and a few other companions .
Elisa awakens finding herself traveling through a desert with her captors , who treat her rather kindly , especially Humberto .
After a month , they reach their destination .
There , Elisa sees the war from the citizens ' perspective .
Most of the people are wounded children .
Elisa meets with the head of the village , Cosmé 's uncle , Father Alentín , who says that they need the Godstone bearer whom they believe can use sorcery to battle the powerful sorcerers of Invierne , the animagi .
Elisa sees that the people of Joya are unprepared for war .
To learn more of the army of Invierne , she , Cosmé , Humberto , and two others go to observe them from a cave hideout .
The Invierno army decides to investigate the cave one day and the group flees , leaving Elisa hidden behind because she will only slow them down .
Elisa is captured , and taken to an Animagi who wears a Godstone around his neck .
She plays dumb and tricks him into sipping a drug to knock him out .
She dons his robes and Godstone pendant and escapes , burning the Animagi in his tent .
Elisa finds Humberto using her Godstone , and he nurses her back to health .
Later , a message states that the Conde Treviño , the father of Condesa Ariña , wishes to discuss an alliance with the Malficio , the group Elisa has created to conquer the Invierne .
They travel to his village only to discover he has allied with the Invierne .
He demands Elisa tell him where the camp is , while everyone else is held captive in his home .
When Elisa refuses to give information , he kills Humberto and throws Elisa in the cell with the rest of her party .
King Alejandro 's men show up and break Elisa and the rest out of the cell .
They escort them back to King Alejandro 's palace , where Elisa is re - introduced to the king as the leader of the Malficio .
The King is shocked to discover it is her , and finally announces that she is queen .
At the palace , Elisa discovers her potted plant with the Godstones is missing from her room .
She asks Prince Rosario to locate them for her .
Days later , the army of Invierne marches in against Joya d'Arena .
Elisa receives a message from Cosmé that five animagi are headed towards the palace escorted by the Invierne army .
The army breaks through the palace 's defenses and kills Condesa Ariña and severely injures the King .
Elisa 's nurses quickly plan to flee with Elisa and the Prince , but the animagi break in .
Elisa steps up as the bearer of the Godstone to save her nurses , and , getting the Godstones from Prince Rosario , which he found in Ariña 's room , places all four plus her own into the pendant she stole from the first animagus she encountered .
This sets off an explosion that destroys all the animagi .
The King dies from his wounds , and Elisa becomes queen of Joya .
She is prepared for the tasks to come that God has set out for her .
CHARACTERS * Lucero - Elisa :
The heroine of the story , known as Elisa .
She is the chosen one , the bearer of the Godstone , set to perform an as - yet unknown act of service and fulfill a prophecy set by God .
She is married off to King Alejandro of Joya d'Arena to help his country at war .
She also fell in love with Humberto just before he was killed .
* King Alejandro : The King of Joya d'Arena .
* Cosmé : Worked in the palace as a maid but is actually a member of a hidden rebel village in the hill country on the other side of the desert .
She captures Elisa to bring the Godstone bearer to her people , who suffer the depredations of the army of Invierne without help from the King or from Conde Treviño .
* Humberto : Cosmé 's brother .
He helps with the kidnapping and is very kind to Elisa .
He reveals that he has feelings for her .
* Ximena : Elisa 's nurse and guardian .
Trained as a scribe , she has raised Elisa as a little girl , and has secret abilities of the art of assassination .
* Condesa Ariña : Alejandro 's mistress .
She is the daughter of Conde Treviño , a traitor who treats secretly with Invierne .
*
Prince Rosario : The young son of King Alejandro and his late wife , Queen Rosaura .
* Lord Hector :
King Alejandro 's personal guard and man - at - arms .
He is the one who finds Elisa in Conde Treviño 's place .
* Father Nicandro : A priest who informs Elisa about Homer 's Afflatus .
He gives her a bag of three Godstones that his monastery watched over .
* Father Alentín : A priest and Cosmé 's uncle .
He asked Cosmé to bring the Godstone bearer to the village to assist in the war .
* Juana - Alodia : Elisa 's older sister , the future queen of Orova lle .
* Aneaxi : Elisa 's lady - in - waiting .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The book generally received positive reviews , with Publishers Weekly calling the characters " stellar " and Booklist saying the book was " thought - provoking " .
It was a finalist in 2012 for the William C. Morris YA Award .
It was also selected as 2012
Top Ten Best Fiction for Young Adults by Young Adult Library Services Association .
It is in the running for the 2011 Andre Norton Award .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rae Carson 's website