MIDDLE - EARTH : SHADOW OF MORDOR Middle - earth : Shadow of Mordor is an open world action role - playing video game developed by Monolith Productions and published by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment .
The game was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One in September 2014 and PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in November 2014 .
An original non - canon story set in the legendarium created by J. R. R. Tolkien , the game takes place between the events of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings .
The player controls Talion , a Ranger who bonds with the wraith of the Elf Lord Celebrimbor , as the two set out to avenge the deaths of their loved ones .
Players can engage in melee combat , and use wraith abilities to fight and manipulate enemies .
The game introduces the Nemesis System , which allows the artificial intelligence of non - playable characters to remember their prior actions against the game 's protagonist and react accordingly .
The game 's development began in 2011 .
In order to create an accurate environment and be consistent with Tolkien 's books , the developers consulted many people from Warner Brothers , as well as Peter Jackson , director of the Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit film trilogies .
They also received assistance from Weta Workshop , who advised on the special effects .
Monolith focused on the development of the PC , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One versions , while the development of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions was outsourced to Behaviour Interactive .
Middle - earth : Shadow of Mordor received critical acclaim upon release .
Most praise was directed at its combat , open - world design , and the Nemesis System .
Some criticism was aimed at the game 's story and boss battles .
Shadow of Mordor marked the biggest launch for a game based upon Tolkien 's universe , and would go on to win several awards from video gaming publications , including Game of the Year in 2015 .
The game was supported by downloadable content upon release .
A sequel , , was released in October 2017 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Middle - earth : Shadow of Mordor is a third - person open world action - adventure video game , where the player controls a ranger by the name of Talion who seeks revenge on the forces of Sauron after his family , consisting of his wife and son , are killed by those that lead them .
Players can travel across locations in the game through parkour , riding monsters , or accessing Forge Towers , which serve as fast travel points .
Though Talion is mortally felled in the game 's introduction , the wraith of the Elven Lord Celebrimbor is able to use his power to keep Talion alive , along with gifting him wraith - like abilities to exact his revenge .
Missions in the game feature main story missions that follow Talion 's quest for revenge , side missions that involve following Gollum to find artifacts that are tied to Celebrimbor 's past , missions to free the human slaves that have been captured by the Uruk armies and forced to work for Sauron , and additional quests to help forge new abilities for Talion 's sword , bow , and dagger .
The player also has the freedom to pursue side quests and roam around Mordor , with special activities to collect specific flora or to hunt certain creatures , or to find old artifacts or Elvish seals .
Completing quests earns the player a number of rewards : experience points that are used to unlock new abilities for the player from both Talion 's ranger and Celebrimbor 's wraith skills , a Power value that allows the player to access more powerful abilities to unlock , and an in - game currency called " Mirian " that the player can use to improve Talion 's health , wraith skill capacity , or forge new slots on his weapons to add additional runes ( as described in the Nemesis System below ) .
In completing missions , the player can have Talion engage in melee , ranged combat , and stealth approaches , with some missions rewarding the player more for completing the mission in a specific manner .
Talion 's ranger abilities are enhanced through Celebrimbor , allowing the player to mix combat with special focus - based attacks ; these latter attacks can be used to slow time down while aiming with the bow , drain focus out of an enemy foe , or , later in the game , brand the foe to become an ally of Talion .
The combat system uses an attack - chain system that enables the player to perform special moves after building the chain to a large enough value , such as instantly draining a foe of focus or performing an area focus attack .
With the combat system , they can also counter and dodge attacks .
Stealth is a critical element in some missions ; several areas are considered Strongholds and should Talion 's presence be discovered , an alarm will sound and more Uruks will arrive to try to kill him .
NEMESIS SYSTEM
Section::::Nemesis system .
A core feature of Shadow of Mordor is the Nemesis system .
The game can track any Uruk ( A " nastier orc , " the general antagonists of the game ) that the player comes into contact with .
While there are " generic " Uruk for the player to fight en masse , and will be as cannon fodder as part of Sauron 's armies , the game will begin tracking Uruk that perform any notable talents within the game , such as killing the player , or surviving an encounter with the player .
These Uruk will be promoted into captains .
Defeating these leaders will help to weaken Sauron 's army , and these leaders will drop a rune which the player can install on Talion 's weapons to provide additional buffs in battle .
Alternatively , being killed by a leader will cause the current mission to be cancelled and the player returned to a safe point to continue exploring , and the leader will gain additional power , making him more difficult to defeat in the next encounter .
If the procedurally generated Orcs survive an encounter with Talion , they will also be promoted .
Further , such deaths are tracked through online servers , and the player 's friends on the various network services will be notified of this death and be offered the chance to accept a Vendetta mission , and exact revenge on the Uruk .
If the mission is successful the game will give rewards to both the original player and the victorious friend .
The leader Uruk will have a range of strengths and weaknesses , the latter that can be exploited in combat to quickly weaken and defeat the leader .
The player can gain knowledge of these through finding intelligence mostly by draining and interrogating marked Uruks for this .
Being able to exploit such weaknesses in defeating the leader will gain a better quality rune and more experience points in this manner .
Once the player gains the ability to brand Uruks , they can brand these leaders and convert portions of Sauron 's army to their side .
At this point , the player can use the Nemesis system to trigger infighting within the Uruk forces which they can then directly participate in , helping to weaken the army further .
Uruks that survive their encounter with Talion will remember this when Talion combats them again ; for example , an Uruk who was thrown into a fire by Talion might want revenge on him for being disfigured .
SYNOPSIS SETTING
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Setting .
The game takes place in the 60-year gap between the events of Tolkien 's The Hobbit and The Lord of The Rings .
The family of Talion ( voiced and motion captured by Troy Baker ) , a ranger of Gondor responsible for guarding the Black Gate of Mordor , is killed by the armies of Sauron , but Talion is revived with " wraith - like abilities " and heads into Mordor to exact his revenge .
Mordor is not yet a barren wasteland in this story .
The player will encounter Gollum ( voiced by Liam O'Brien ) .
Talion discovers that the wraith who revived him is Celebrimbor ( voiced by Alastair Duncan ) , the greatest Elven smith master of the Second Age , who also seeks revenge against Sauron .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Talion , a captain of Gondor , serves within a garrison stationed at the Black Gate of Mordor .
The garrison is attacked by Sauron 's Orc forces led by three Black Númenórean captains : the Hammer of Sauron ( John DiMaggio ) , the Tower of Sauron ( JB Blanc ) , and their leader , the Black Hand of Sauron ( Nolan North ) .
Talion , his wife Ioreth ( Laura Bailey ) , and his adult son , Dirhael ( Jack Quaid ) , are captured and ritually sacrificed by the Black Hand in an attempt to summon into himself the wraith of the Elf Lord Celebrimbor .
However , Celebrimbor ( who suffers from amnesia due to his centuries as a wraith ) instead merges with Talion , preventing him from dying alongside his family .
Talion and Celebrimbor then depart to both uncover Celebrimbor 's identity — increasing his / their power — and avenge the death of Talion 's family .
Over the course of their travels , Talion and Celebrimbor encounter Gollum multiple times , who is wandering Mordor in search of his " Precious " ( The One Ring ) .
Gollum possesses the ability to see and speak with Celebrimbor due to his prior contact with the One Ring , and pledges to serve the " Bright Master " .
Hoping that Celebrimbor might lead him to the One Ring , Gollum leads Celebrimbor to relics of his past , each of which restore parts of his lost memories .
Celebrimbor gradually recalls how Sauron , disguised as Annatar , the Lord of Gifts , deceived him into forging the Rings of Power .
Celebrimbor ultimately assisted Sauron in forging the One Ring , but was able to steal it from him .
Celebrimbor proclaimed himself the Bright Lord of Mordor and raised an army of Orcs against Sauron .
However , the Ring ultimately betrayed Celebrimbor and returned to Sauron .
A victorious Sauron then punished Celebrimbor by executing his wife and daughter ( whom Sauron had taken hostage to force Celebrimbor to aid him ) before finally killing him with his own smithing hammer .
In his search for the Black Hand , Talion allies himself with Hirgon , a ranger deserter who leads a community of Gondorian outcasts choosing to settle in Mordor , and Ratbag the Coward ( Phil LaMarr ) , an Orc who offers to bring Talion closer to the Black Hand in exchange for his assistance in climbing Mordor 's military hierarchy .
Talion helps Ratbag ascend the ranks to the level of warchief by killing each of his immediate superiors , finally becoming Warchief himself .
Talion then goes after the other Warchiefs in Udun , weakening Sauron 's forces in that area .
Soon enough , Hirgon has a plan to draw out the Black Captains .
Using acquired grog and blasting powder , Talion helps the Outcasts destroy a statue dedicated to Sauron .
Instead of the Black Hand answering the " message " , the Hammer of Sauron is sent , punishing Ratbag for not answering his duties to kill the ranger .
Talion and The Hammer then face off , with packs of Uruk joining the fight , but after a savage battle , Talion manages to kill The Hammer .
Talion is then sought out by the warrior Lithariel , the daughter of Queen Marwen ( Claudia Black ) , who claims to be able to assist Celebrimbor with his mission .
Marwen is the ruler of Núrn , a kingdom of sea raiders located in the south of Mordor .
She uses her powers to guide Talion and Celebrimbor to another of Celebrimbor 's relics .
Talion also gets help from a Dwarf hunter named Torvin , teaching Talion the ways of the hunt to dominate Caragors and Graugs ( beasts native to Mordor ) , eventually fighting a massive Graug from Torvin 's past who killed Torvin 's hunting partner , later revealed to be his brother .
Later , Marwen advises them to use Celebrimbor 's powers to take control of an army of orcs and other beasts , using them to lead an assault against Sauron .
Talion eventually realizes that the wizard Saruman is possessing Marwen , and assists Lithariel in freeing her from his control .
Talion , however , still carries out Saruman 's plan , leading an army of mind - controlled orcs in an assault against the Black Hand 's stronghold at Ered Glamhoth .
However , rather than the Black Hand , Talion finds the Tower of Sauron waiting for him .
The Tower mockingly taunts Talion that Celebrimbor chose him as a host and can free him at any time and offers the elf a place at Sauron 's side .
Refusing the offer , the two battle and Talion emerges victorious after viciously stabbing the Tower to death with his son 's sword .
Afterwards , Celebrimbor confesses that the Tower told the truth and promises to let Talion join his family in death if he wishes , once the Black Hand is slain .
Talion then travels to the Black Gate for a final confrontation with the Black Hand .
The Black Hand quickly incapacitates him with a spell that also restores the last of Celebrimbor 's memories .
He then kills himself as part of a ritual that forces Celebrimbor to depart from Talion and merge with himself .
This allows Sauron to possess the Black Hand 's body and incarnate in physical form .
However , Celebrimbor is able to briefly paralyze Sauron from within , allowing Talion to destroy Sauron 's physical form .
With the Black Hand dead , Celebrimbor wishes to depart for Valinor .
Talion instead convinces him to stay and attempt to overthrow Sauron .
Gazing at Mount Doom , Talion declares his intention to forge a new Ring of Power .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Development of Middle - earth : Shadow of Mordor , which took about three years , began in late 2011 .
The game 's lead developer was Monolith Productions , who had experience on a Middle - earth game with Guardians of Middle - earth ( a multiplayer online battle arena game released in 2012 ) .
According to design director Michael de Plater , Shadow of Mordor was developed in parallel with Guardians of Middle - earth but handled by a separate team .
It was published by Warner Bros. , who had published the game series .
The game was designed by de Plater , who had worked with Creative Assembly on and Ubisoft on Tom Clancy 's EndWar and .
Shadow of Mordor was Monolith 's first third - person open world video game for the eighth generation consoles PlayStation 4 and Xbox One , and de Plater considered its development an educational experience for the studio .
In Monolith 's introduction to the genre , many core mechanics were built from scratch and the studio were inspired by successful video games such as the Batman :
Arkham series created by Rocksteady Studios ; those games inspired Shadow of Mordor stealth and free - flow combat mechanics .
The studio considered Rocksteady 's games good examples of how to handle a licensed title .
The game 's signature feature is its Nemesis system .
The Monolith team considered themselves experts in artificial intelligence , and wanted to push its boundaries .
Allowing players to choose their story ( a sandbox - game pillar ) and " leverage the new generation hardware through innovation " , the team wanted to create a system allowing non - playable characters to respond to player actions ; this later became the Nemesis system .
The system 's idea was frameworked three months after development began , and to best present it everyone in the studio was involved .
The developers hoped that with the system , orcs could be memorable for players .
It was made more complex during the game 's early development , incorporating personal relationships among orcs , but was later pared down when the studio considered it too complicated .
The Nemesis system was also inspired by pen - and - paper role - playing games .
Although most orcs are similar , some were designed with distinctive behavior patterns .
These orcs have dialogue written by Dan Abnett , and the team hoped the special orcs would surprise players .
The team also hoped that the system would provide tension and competition , similar to a multiplayer game .
The studio was inspired by sports games , where the narrative continues when players lose a match .
This can prevent immersion and narrative from breaking when players die in the game .
According to Rob Roberts , the system is designed so players can emotionally attach to the protagonist through gameplay drama .
They also hoped that through the system , players can create their own villain , leading to an organic story .
Shadow of Mordor bridges the gap between The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings , with the team wanting to show iconic elements of the universe in an original way .
The team had to draw notes on Tolkien 's notes and appendices to ensure that their vision for the game would not change the franchise 's timeline .
Although the game 's environment is inspired by the books and films , several places ( such as Udûn and the Sea of Nurnen ) were re - imagined .
Art director Phil Straub considered consistency with the lore and presenting " something visually new " and realistic the most important elements of creating the game , and the team did not incorporate many fantasy elements in its world .
To depict volcanic activity , the studio sent a team to Eastern Washington and the Columbia River plateau to photograph a volcano ; to create other parts of the game environment , they studied photos of Iceland and New Zealand and yellow stone found worldwide .
Since Shadow of Mordor is set before The Lord of the Rings , its landscape is less post - apocalyptic ; environments also vary by weather , lighting and atmosphere .
The game has a standalone plot .
Early in development the team consulted Peter Jackson , director of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit film trilogies , who advised them against a film tie - in .
According to de Plater , the story is character - driven to be " authentic " relative to Tolkien 's themes .
The game was written by Christian Cantamessa , who was lead writer and lead designer for Rockstar San Diego 's Red Dead Redemption .
According to Roberts , the story is designed for accessibility by all players ( regardless of their familiarity with the franchise ) by creating natural interactions and believable relationships among the characters .
Its protagonist is Talion , a half - human , half - wraith inspired by Boromir .
Although Torvin was originally proposed as a playable character , the idea was scrapped , as the team wanted the game to have a single protagonist , like The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings .
The wraith is later revealed as Celebrimbor , creator of the Rings of Power .
The development team picked Celebrimbor because they considered his backstory sufficiently interesting to expand the canon 's authenticity , allowing the team to write a story around power ( a major theme of the game ) .
Another important component was Mordor tone .
The team created a dark atmosphere with humor , reflected in dialogue and voice acting .
This was handled by Dan Abnett , who previously worked on books related to Warhammer " dark and gritty " universe .
The team hired David Salo , a linguist who worked on the Tolkien 's languages for the Lord of the Rings film trilogy , to develop the Orcs ' Black Speech .
The game 's narrative was also inspired by BioShock , which according to de Plater , has successfully incorporated systemic stories with players ' choices .
To prevent inaccuracies , Monolith consulted several Tolkien scholars from Warner Bros. and collaborated with Weta Workshop ( Jackson 's design company ) on the game 's special effects and scenery .
To depict well - known characters the company partnered with Middle - earth Enterprises , the franchise - rights holder , to prevent misuse and contradiction between the game 's story and Tolkien 's .
Monolith focused on developing the game 's PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions , with development of the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions outsourced to Behaviour Interactive .
Although the game 's core gameplay mechanics , story and narrative are unchanged in the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 ports , some features ( such as the Nemesis system ) are less complex than the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions .
According to the game 's developer , the Nemesis system was too large for older consoles .
The music for Middle - earth : Shadow of Mordor was composed by Garry Schyman and Nathan Grigg , and a soundtrack album was released digitally by WaterTower Music on September 30 , 2014 .
In designing the game 's music , the team used a number of sonic tools which synchronize with other aspects of the game ( such as player actions and enemy movements ) ; combat music included waterphones and spring drums .
In August 2013 an artist mentioned that Monolith Productions was working on a AAA title separate from Guardians of Middle - earth , and on November 12 its title was announced .
Although the game was originally scheduled for release on October 7 , 2014 , according to Warner Bros. its release was moved up to September 30 in North America and October 3 in the United Kingdom due to " fans ' excitement " .
The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions were released on November 18 in North America and November 21 in Europe .
On December 16 , 2014 , the downloadable content ( DLC )
Lord of the Hunt was released .
Its storyline revolved around Torvin , and it included new runes , skins and bosses .
Lord of the Hunt received mixed reviews from critics .
The final DLC for Shadow of Mordor ( The Bright Lord ) is set 3,000 years before the main campaign and allows players to control Talion 's companion , Celebrimbor .
It adds a chapter to Shadow of Mordor in which players can complete ten more missions and fight Sauron .
The content was released on February 24 , 2015 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One .
A Game of the Year edition with DLC was announced on April 29 , 2015 and released on May 5 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One .
A special edition , with in - game items and a steelbook , was introduced on August 1 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The review aggregator website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version a score of 84 out of 100 ( based on 17 reviews ) , the PlayStation 4 version scored 84 out of 100 ( based on 85 reviews ) , and the Xbox One version scored 87 out of 100 ( based on 12 reviews ) .
The game 's core feature , its Nemesis system , was praised .
According to Lucas Sullivan of GamesRadar , the system elevated Shadow of Mordor to excellence by making its villains memorable and adding personality to its protagonist .
Brad Shoemaker of Giant Bomb agreed , writing that the system created many distinctive characters and its side content extended the game 's longevity .
Joystiq 's Alexander Sliwinski said that the system made each playthrough unique and made the game stand out from other action games .
Chris Carter of Destructoid found the system gimmicky , since it failed to create unique villains ; it added different appearances and weaknesses to villains without adding personality .
Shadow of Mordor combat was considered excellent by most critics .
Shoemaker and Sliwinski compared it to the rhythm - based combat system of the Batman :
Arkham game series ; both found it engaging and fluid .
Shoemaker praised the game 's combat variety ; the combination of the combat and nemesis systems created " a specific kind of chaotic , emergent nonsense " desirable in an open world game .
According to Sliwinski and Shoemaker , even without the Nemesis system the combat system would make the game compelling .
Although Matt Miller of Game Informer found the game 's focus on killing made it repetitive , failing to capture the charm of its inspirations Assassin 's Creed and Batman : Arkham , Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot called Shadow of Mordor combat an improvement of the Assassin 's Creed formula .
Reception of the game 's storyline was mixed .
Although Shoemaker and Sliwinski praised its " dark " tone , Shoemaker found some story elements ( such as Gollum 's introduction ) forced and designed to appeal to a particular audience .
According to Game Informer Matt Miller , Shadow of Mordor fails to successfully tie together all of its various plot threads in the game 's conclusion .
Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot also found the storyline erratic , dragged down by anti - climactic fights and scenes .
Dan Stapleton of IGN wrote that the story introduced memorable characters but would not make sense to fans of the series , and his interest in the game waned towards its end .
Destructoid Chris Carter was disappointed in a plot he considered generic ( " Go here , kill this , draw out this big bad , then kill him for your family " ) ; the game failed to add anything new to the universe , and its side missions were more interesting than the main campaign .
Other aspects of Shadow of Mordor were praised .
Sullivan enjoyed its Lord of the Rings ' lore , and found the number of collectibles in the game " staggering " .
Miller also admired Monolith 's extensive use of lore in the game , and praised its soundtrack and voice - acting ; Stapleton agreed , particularly about the voice acting .
Elements of the game were criticized .
Sullivan found some side missions repetitive , and Sliwinski was disappointed with some of the boss battles .
Miller wrote that some Shadow of Mordor features are too complex and inaccessible for new players or those unwilling to use strategy .
Critics disagreed about the Nemesis system .
Miller wrote that the system fell flat in the game 's final hours ; according to VanOrd , the system was unappealing until the game 's second half .
Carter found the unskippable cutscenes after a player died annoying .
Unlike Shadow of Mordor current - generation versions , the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions received mixed - to - negative reviews and many technical problems were noted .
According to Thomas Morgan of Eurogamer its frame rate was substandard , and Yannick LeJacq of Kotaku cited " many technical hiccups and glitches " .
Morgan believed that the game developers spent little effort on the port , and LeJacq questioned the need to release the game for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 at all .
Shadow of Mordor was well received by BioShock series creator Ken Levine , who called it the first open world game with a non - linear story and narrative and said he would bring some of its elements to his upcoming science - fiction project .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Shadow of Mordor release was the most successful for a Lord of the Rings - based game .
The game debuted at number two in the UK retail software sales chart in its first week ( behind FIFA 15 ) , and was the ninth - bestselling game in the United States in October 2014 .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
When Shadow of Mordor was introduced , Monolith was accused by former Ubisoft employee Charles Randall of using assets ( such as the protagonist - animation code ) from Assassin 's Creed II .
Monolith responded that all their project 's assets were developed from scratch ; they had confidence in their originality , and the game was based upon the Nemesis system .
In October 2014 , after the usual video - game review outlets were unable to obtain early access to Shadow of Mordor , John Bain ( known as TotalBiscuit ) said that YouTube video creators had been offered early access in exchange for agreeing to a contract requiring them to describe it positively .
Jim Sterling of The Escapist obtained a copy of one of the contracts and analyzed it in detail .
The Federal Trade Commission began an investigation and announced in July 2016 that Warner Brothers Home Entertainment had violated the Federal Trade Commission Act , and that the company must declare sponsored advertising in the future .
AWARDS SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
The game 's sequel , Middle - earth : Shadow of War , was announced in February 2017 .
The sequel was developed by Monolith Productions and published by
Warner Bros. It was released Worldwide on October 10 , 2017 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS