THE COLDEST GIRL IN COLDTOWN
The Coldest Girl in Coldtown is a 2013 young adult novel by Holly Black .
The book was first published on September 3 , 2013 through Little , Brown Books for Young Readers and follows Tana , a teenager that believes that she has been infected with vampirism .
The book was written to be a standalone novel and while Black has stated that she is not adverse to writing a sequel , she has no plans to do so at this point in time .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
Vampires were hidden , hunting in secret , when one newly turned vampire , Caspar , decided not to kill his victims .
Vampire bites infect the bitten , and they turn Cold .
Once they turn Cold , a person can become a vampire by drinking human blood .
Caspar 's victims turned around and created legions of new vampires before the governments around the world knew what was happening .
Once the government started policing vampires and people who are Cold , they started sending them to Coldtowns so they could not infect or kill innocent people .
The Coldtowns attracted many people , who were drawn in by the perceived glamor of vampires .
Once in Coldtown , it was nearly impossible to leave a Coldtown .
At the beginning of the story , Tana wakes up in a bathtub after a wild high school party .
When she walks out , she sees all of her classmates have been slaughtered by vampires , with the exception for her ex - boyfriend , Aidan , who has been bitten and tied to a bed .
Next to him is a shackled vampire .
Below them , in the basement , the vampires are awakening to come back up and kill them .
Tana saves both Aidan and Gavriel , the captive vampire , but in her escape , one of the vampires nicks her leg with his fang .
Afraid that she will turn Cold ( into a vampire ) , she takes Gavriel , Aidan , and herself to the nearest Coldtown .
On the way , they pick up Midnight and Winter , twins who are obsessed with going to Coldtown and becoming vampires .
Midnight is more enthused than her twin brother , and she has a popular blog that chronicles her obsession with vampires .
Once in Coldtown , Tana realizes that Gavriel is the Thorn of Istra , and she realizes he is there to kill Lucien .
They share a passionate kiss before he disappears for the morning light .
Midnight and Winter turn on Aidan and Tana .
They want Aidan to turn , and they leave Tana with him to sate his new hunger .
However , Tana escapes , and Aidan kills another girl who set them up .
Tana gets help by Jameson and Valentina , two humans in Coldtown .
She goes to Lucien 's famous party with Valentina to get back her pass to the outside ( which Aidan had stolen ) .
Midnight has turned into a vampire , after killing her twin brother , and she attacks Tana , who officially becomes infected with the Cold .
Gavriel is at the party but appears to make a truce with Lucien , and they decide to kill the head vampire , the Spider .
Valentina is captured and put into the dungeon , and Tana kills a vampire to save her .
She drinks the vampire blood before being caught and put back into her room .
She learns Lucien is going to turn on Gavriel and that her little sister , Pearl , has come to Coldtown to find her .
She helps Valentina escape with Jameson 's mom ( who is one of the vampires who works for Lucien ) .
Jameson , his mom , and Valentina promise to help find Pearl to keep her safe .
Tana goes back into the mansion to kill Lucien and save Gavriel .
She fails in her attempt , but then realizes that Gavriel is the Spider .
He reveals this fact to Lucien , who gets scared .
Then , Tana kills Lucien after he attacks her .
At the end of the story , Aidan saves Pearl , who is given the pass out of Coldtown by Tana .
Jameson finds a place where Tana can hole up to wait out the infection and Gavriel comes down to be with Tana and tells her that he loves her .
The story ends with Gavriel promising to stay with Tana until she gets better , and , if she is no longer human enough to do so , to help her get enough vampire blood to sate her appetite .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critical reception for The Coldest Girl in Coldtown has been predominantly positive and the book has received praise from Commonsensemedia , the Royal Oak Public Library , and Booklist .
Strange Horizons praised the book heavily , writing that it was a " sharp , lavish , engaging book that not only manages to revitalize vampires , but lends itself easily to salient discussions of modern Western culture and American politics .
A timely novel in every sense of the word , and one I 'd very much recommend , both to existing fans of Holly Black and to anyone thinking of giving her a try .
"
Tor.com and io9 also wrote positive reviews
, Tor.com commented that the book would have a great appeal to people who liked " old - school vampires " and were potentially growing tired of vampires as depicted in popular media like Twilight and The Vampire Diaries .
The School Library Journal was somewhat more mixed in their review and the reviewer stated that while they greatly enjoyed the book , it did have flaws such as the pacing and that " Tana 's risky behavior and generally troubled self is something the reader hears about but actually , from moment one she 's thoughtful and has a tendency to basic human decency , so the emotional core is satisfying but not astounding — because it 's actually inevitable given how Tana is written . " AWARDS * School Library Journal Best Book of the Year ( 2013 ) * Texas 's Tayshas Reading List Top Ten ( 2014 )
* YALSA Best Fiction for Young Adults ( 2014 ) * YALSA Amazing Audiobooks for Young Adults ( 2014 ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS