CHARLOTTE 'S WEB ( CANNABIS )
Charlotte 's Web is a high - cannabidiol ( CBD ) , low - tetrahydrocannabinol ( THC ) Cannabis strain marketed as a dietary supplement under federal law of the United States .
It is produced by the Stanley brothers in Colorado .
It does not induce the psychoactive " high " typically associated with recreational marijuana strains that are high in THC .
In September 2014 , the Stanleys announced that they would ensure that the product consistently contained less than 0.3 % THC .
Charlotte 's Web is named after Charlotte Figi , born , whose story has led to her being described as " the girl who is changing medical marijuana laws across America . "
Her parents and physicians say she experienced a reduction of her epileptic seizures brought on by Dravet syndrome after her first dose of medical marijuana at five years of age .
Her usage of Charlotte 's Web was first featured in the 2013 CNN documentary " Weed " .
Media coverage increased demand for Charlotte 's Web and similar products high in CBD , which has been used to treat epilepsy in toddlers and children .
It was originally called " Hippie 's Disappointment " as it was a strain that had high CBD and could not induce a " high " .
While anecdotal reports have sparked interest in treatment with cannabinoids , there is not enough evidence to draw conclusions about their safety or efficacy .
Physicians worry that some parents are willing to try treatments before proper research has been conducted , and that they may be disappointed .
They are " alarmed by parallels to past miracle - cure manias later proved false ... " and " ... wary of the heightened placebo effect in treatments involving children , when reports of progress depend on the view of parents . "
MEDICAL USES EVIDENCE Section::::Medical uses .
Section::::Evidence .
In 2014 , there was little evidence about the safety or efficacy of cannabinoids in the treatment of epilepsy .
A 2014 Cochrane review did not find enough evidence to draw conclusions about its use .
A 2014 review by the American Academy of Neurology similarly concluded that " data are insufficient to support or refute the efficacy of cannabinoids for reducing seizure frequency . "
The Cochrane review suggests cannabinoids be reserved for people with symptoms that are not controllable by other means , who have been evaluated by EEG - video monitoring to confirm diagnosis , and are not eligible for better established treatments such as surgery and neurostimulation .
A second review described four placebo - controlled trials of cannabadiol including 48 people with a disease that was not manageable by other means .
Three out of four trials reported some reduction in seizures , but no comparison with placebo was possible due to the small number of people in the trials .
The drugs were well tolerated .
A third review found that no reliable conclusions about the effect of cannabis on epilepsy could be drawn due to the poor quality of available data , but further research may be warranted because of the good safety profile observed in small clinical trials .
A 2017 study in children with drug - resistant Dravet syndrome , using a comparatively high dose of 20 mg / kg , found cannabidiol reduced convulsive seizures ( but not non - convulsive seizures ) , and resulted in more side effects compared with placebo .
Three phase 3 clinical trials completed in 2017 demonstrated the efficacy of cannabidiol in reducing convulsive seizure activity at doses of 10–20 mg / kg per day in children with treatment - resistant Dravet Syndrome and treatment - resistant Lennox - Gastaut Syndrome .
STATEMENTS Section::::Statements .
Due to the anecdotal nature of the health claims being made medical bodies have published statements of concern .
A position statement by the American Epilepsy Society states :
The recent anecdotal reports of positive effects of the marijuana derivative cannabidiol for some individuals with treatment - resistant epilepsy give reason for hope .
However , we must remember that these are only anecdotal reports , and robust scientific evidence for the use of marijuana is lacking ...
at present , the epilepsy community does not know if marijuana is a safe and effective treatment , nor do they know the long - term effects that marijuana will have on learning , memory and behavior , especially in infants and young children .
Cannabis - derived products are not mentioned in the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence epilepsy treatment guidelines .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Charlotte 's Web was developed in 2011 by the Stanley brothers ( Joel , Jesse , Jon , Jordan , Jared and Josh ) through crossbreeding a strain of marijuana with industrial hemp .
This process created a variety with less tetrahydrocannabinol ( THC ) and more cannabidiol ( CBD ) than typical varieties of marijuana .
The variety shows potential for medical usage , especially for those who do not wish to experience the typical high of recreational marijuana use .
As it is so low in THC , the variety was originally called " Hippie 's Disappointment " , and also has been labeled " boring " .
It is a less profitable plant with " close to no value to traditional marijuana consumers . "
The Stanley brothers grow the plants at their farm and greenhouses .
A CBD rich oil is extracted from the harvested plants and concentrated through rotary evaporation .
To make it easier to perform clinical trials , they are planning to move the Charlotte 's Web part of their operation to Uruguay .
By doing so , they will also be able to import it into any U.S. state as hemp .
The Realm of Caring Foundation ( RoC ) , a 501(c)(3 ) nonprofit organization , was set up by the Stanley brothers to help patients " who ca n't afford the treatment .
" They have also started " Stanley Brothers Social Enterprises , Inc. " , which has registered the trademark " Charlotte 's Web Hemp Products " .
Some products are marketed through CW Hemp ( formerly CW Botanicals ) .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE LEGAL STATUS Section::::Society and culture .
Section::::Legal status .
With the main ingredient being classified as " industrial hemp " , ( Farm Bill )
Charlotte 's Web Oil and other CBD products are legal in all 50 states ; ( as long as the THC content is < 0.3 % ) as they are dietary supplements .
The publicity associated with Charlotte 's Web has inspired a number of legislative bills , some of which are in the planning stages , and others which have been proposed or actually passed .
Children , as " uniquely powerful advocates for medicinal pot across the country , " have inspired " the movement to legalize medicinal marijuana , " a movement which " has a face like Charlotte's – and it 's a young one that 's hard to ignore .
Lawmakers across the country are pushing legislation to legalize marijuana oil as a treatment for children with epilepsy . "
Colorado law permits the use of medical cannabis for eight conditions : cancer , glaucoma , HIV / AIDS , muscle spasms , seizures , severe pain , severe nausea and dramatic weight loss , and muscle atrophy .
The publicity surrounding anecdotal reports of successful treatment of intractable epilepsy with cannabinoids is likely to lead to a surge in interest .
In 2013 , the parents of a two - year - old with Dravet syndrome confronted New Jersey governor Chris Christie , who signed a bill allowing access for sick children to medical marijuana in a controversy dubbed " pot for tots " .
In 2014 , legislative proposals in Utah , Arizona , New York , Washington state , Minnesota , and Florida were considered , where " even some staunch opponents of medical marijuana now are willing to make an exception " to allow the marijuana extract for medical treatment .
In Utah , Rep. Gage Froerer , R - Huntsville , said in October 2013 : " Nothing in federal or state law prohibits the sale or use of hemp products . "
He pledged to consult with the Utah Substance Abuse Authority , saying : " We need to take a strong look at this and make sure that we as a legislature and we as citizens understand really what this is and what it 's not . "
In November 2013 , he said he would address " three components in sponsoring legislation : access , quality control and research .
He said the Utah Department of Health would probably be involved in quality - control efforts ... "
Annette Maughan , President of the Epilepsy Association of Utah , said : " The current Utah law does n't exclude its use but also does n't allow for its use .
We are in limbo until Utah lawmakers decide what to call it . "
On March 21 , 2014 , Gary Herbert , the governor of Utah , signed a bill giving " families access to the marijuana extract for treating epilepsy .
"
The state bill , HB0105 , allows import of Charlotte 's Web extract across state lines from Colorado to Utah , and covers only use for intractable epilepsy with the consent of a neurologist .
Also on March 21 , 2014 , an Arizona court found " that Arizona 's medical marijuana law allows consumption of the plant in extract form . "
On March 20 , 2014 , the Florida House of Representatives Budget Committee passed the " so - called Charlotte 's Web measure ( CS / HB 843 ) " designed to limit prosecutors ' ability to prosecute those in possession of low THC / high CBD marijuana ( " 0.5 percent or less of tetrahydrocannabinol and more than 15 percent of cannabidiol " ) used for treating seizures .
The law took effect July 1 , 2014 .
Since then , Florida legislators have passed a bill with bipartisan support legalizing the use of Charlotte 's Web , and Governor Rick Scott signed the " Compassionate Medical Cannabis Act of 2014 " ( SB 1030 ) into law on June 6 , 2014 .
The law is also referred to as the " Charlotte 's Web " law .
The law specifies the number of distribution centers , which types of nurseries can grow the plants , requires various other controls , and provides funding for research .
* Federal legislation was introduced in 2014
( U.S. 113th Congress 2013 - 2014 )
but was never brought to a vote and died in committee .
* Rep. Perry , Scott ( R - PA-4 ) introduced to the U.S. 114th Congress ( 2015 - 2016 )
H.R.1635 - Charlotte 's Web Medical Access Act of 2015 with 62 bipartisan co - sponsors .
It has not been voted on yet , but it has made progress and been referred to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce , the House Committee on the Judiciary , the Subcommittee on Health and the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime , Terrorism , Homeland Security and Investigations .
*
The Therapeutic Hemp Medical Access Act of 2015 ( Senate 1333 ) was introduced ( not passed yet ) with 11 co - sponsors to amend the Controlled Substances Act to exclude cannabidiol and cannabidiol - rich plants from the definition of marijuana .
It was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary .
On October 31 , 2017 , the FDA sent warning letters to four CBD marketers , including Stanley Brothers Social Enterprises , LLC
( d / b / a CW Hemp ) , the producer of Charlotte 's Web .
They were warned " against making medical claims about cannabidiol ( CBD ) .
The agency also took issue with the businesses marketing CBD products as dietary supplements " .
REACTIONS TO CBD - ONLY LAWS Section::::Reactions to CBD - only laws .
The federal Schedule 1 drug classification blocks broad scientific research on cannabis .
However , in late 2015 , the United States Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) eased some regulatory requirements imposed by the Controlled Substances Act ( CSA ) for those who are conducting FDA - approved clinical trials on cannabidiol ( CBD ) .
These modifications will streamline the research process regarding CBD 's possible medicinal value and help foster ongoing scientific studies .
But the Marijuana Policy Project has expressed frustration over the fact that many legislative efforts inspired by Charlotte 's Web are aimed at only legalizing low or no THC , high CBD medical marijuana products .
They believe that such legislation is too restrictive and ignores claimed benefits of THC , leaving " behind around 98 % of the individuals who can benefit from it . "
Referring to the " Charlotte 's Web Medical Hemp Act of 2014 " , an editorial in Ladybud Magazine expressed concern that the law " leaves thousands of patients out in the cold without safe , legal access to medical cannabis .
It also ignores science that seems to indicate that whole plant medicine is optimal . "
NAME Section::::Name .
Charlotte 's Web is named after an American girl , Charlotte Figi .
She developed Dravet syndrome ( also known as severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy or SMEI ) as a baby .
By age three , Figi was severely disabled and having 300 grand mal seizures a week despite treatment .
Her parents learned about another child with Dravet Syndrome , who had been using a different type of medical marijuana since June 2011 , and decided to try marijuana .
Her parents and physicians said that she improved immediately .
She now follows a regular regimen that uses a solution of the high - CBD marijuana extract in olive oil .
She is given the oil under her tongue or in her food .
Her parents said in 2013 that her epilepsy had improved so that she had only about four seizures per month , and she was able to engage in normal childhood activities .
The type now named after Figi was not the first type her parents tried .
As their original supply , a type called R4 that is also high in CBD and low in THC , was running out , they contacted the Stanley brothers .
From the Stanleys ' stock , they chose the high - CBD variety that has since been renamed to Charlotte 's Web .
Charlotte 's story has been featured on two CNN documentaries , The Doctors TV show , 60 Minutes Australia , and Dateline NBC , among many other sources .
An article in the National Journal detailing the role of several children as " uniquely powerful advocates for medicinal pot across the country " described Charlotte as the " first poster child for the issue ...
" Her story has led to her being described as " the girl who is changing medical marijuana laws across America , " as well as the " most famous example of medicinal hemp use " .
PUBLICITY AND DEMAND Section::::Publicity and demand .
When Charlotte was five years old , her story was featured in the August 11 , 2013 CNN documentary " Weed " , hosted by Sanjay Gupta .
On November 24 , 2013 , Paige Figi was a guest on The Doctors TV show , where Charlotte 's story was told .
She was also featured in Gupta 's March 11 , 2014 CNN documentary
" Weed 2 : Cannabis Madness " .
The extract received more publicity on October 6 , 2014 , when The Doctors TV show again featured a story about usage of Charlotte 's Web .
The physicians called for a change of the Federal classification .
Sanjay Gupta has also expressed his support for Charlotte 's Web on The Doctors TV show .
On the October 17 , 2014 episode of the ABC TV series
The View , Paige Figi and Joel Stanley were interviewed by Whoopi Goldberg and Nicolle Wallace .
The CNN documentaries received widespread publicity and popularized Charlotte 's Web as a possible treatment for epilepsy and other conditions .
Colorado has legalized both the medicinal and recreational use of marijuana , and many parents have flocked there with their suffering children in search of Charlotte 's Web and other forms of medical marijuana .
In November 2013 , CBS Denver reported that " [ t]here is now a growing community of 93 families with epileptic children using marijuana daily .
Hundreds are on a waiting list and thousands are calling . "
In October 2014 , Time noted the Stanley brothers had a waiting list of " more than 12,000 families .
" They have been termed " marijuana refugees " , " part of a migration of families uprooting their lives and moving to Colorado , where the medicinal use of marijuana is permitted ... forced to flee states where cannabis is off limits . "
In November 2014 , David Nutt mentioned Charlotte 's Web in the Royal Pharmaceutical Society 's Pharmaceutical Journal , where he appealed for " the UK government [ to ] acts on evidence , allowing the use of medicinal cannabis and reducing barriers to its research . "
Families who say they have run out of pharmaceutical options have moved to Colorado to access Charlotte 's Web .
The demand has spurred calls for more research to determine whether these products actually do what is claimed .
Amy Brooks - Kayal , vice president of the American Epilepsy Society , stated that epileptic seizures may come and go without any obvious explanation , and that Charlotte 's web could cause developmental harm .
She recommended that parents relocate so that their affected children could have access to one of the nation 's top pediatric epilepsy centers rather than move to Colorado .
The product has been described as the " country 's most famous brand of CBD oil " , the " largest selling CBD oil in the country " , and the " number one brand " , with 7 % of the market .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
In November 2013 , Josh Stanley said that Charlotte 's web was 0.5 % THC and 17 % CBD , and that it " is as legal as other hemp products already sold in stores across Utah , including other oils , clothing and hand creams , but is illegal , federally , to take across state lines .
" The legalities of selling the product to people who transport it across state lines is complicated , with difficulties for both the sellers and transporters .
Regardless of state laws in Colorado and Utah which would allow the practice , it is still a Federal offense to transport hemp products across state lines .
In September 2014 , the content was measured at 0.3 % THC .
INITIAL IPO OFFERING IN 2018 Section::::Initial IPO offering in 2018 .
On August 30 , 2018 , Charlotte 's Web Holdings ,
Inc. ( formerly Stanley Brothers Holdings Inc. ) began its launch into the stock market with an initial public offering in Canada : " The offering included a treasury issuance by the company of common shares … moreover , a secondary offering of Common Shares … for total gross proceeds of C$ 115,115,000 ( USD 87,598,872 ) . "
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
The relationship between the Schedule
I status of cannabis in the United States and the lack of scientific research on cannabis has been claimed by some to be directly related .
The situation has been described as a " catch-22 " paradox : " Marijuana is restricted in large part because there is little research to support medical uses ; research is difficult to conduct because of tight restrictions . "
Sanjay Gupta has described the complex interaction between restrictive laws and lack of scientific research :
Gupta repeated throughout the evening that the " policy has outpaced the science . "
The states , he said , " are moving forward without waiting for the science , and the issue is only compounded by the fact that the ' policies and the laws we have in [ the US ] make it challenging for the science to get done . " Even though the Florida " Compassionate Medical Cannabis Act of 2014 "
( SB 1030 ) provides funding for research , the status of all cannabis products as illegal Schedule I drugs has limited the amount of research , with the University of Florida refusing to do such research for fear of losing federal funding .
The interest created by the documentary highlighted a need for increased scientific research , as well as caution against " bad medicine " and raising false hopes : Ed Maa , a specialist in epilepsy , stated : " This is not going away .
...
I think it needs to be studied vigorously and very quickly . "
He hopes to " launch a clinical trial to study the pot and its potential .
" Physicians have called for more research to better understand the potential benefits of controlled use of medical marijuana ; Sharon Levy , director of the Adolescent Substance Abuse Program at Children 's Hospital Boston said : " The AAP strongly supports more cannabinoid research to better understand both how these substances can be used therapeutically as well as their potential side effects — which we may well be underestimating ...
[But ] the AAP does not support ' medical marijuana ' laws as they circumvent regulations put in place to protect patients , and children are a particularly vulnerable population . "
Physicians have expressed both positive interest and worry about the sudden explosion of interest in the legalization of medical marijuana and its research , admitting legalization is both " a scientist 's dream or a doctor 's nightmare .
" They fear that some parents are too open to trying anything before proper research has been conducted , and that they may be disappointed .
They are " alarmed by parallels to past miracle - cure manias later proved false ... " and " ... wary of the heightened placebo effect in treatments involving children , when reports of progress depend on the view of parents .
" There is also danger that " the [ legalization ] movement also opens the way for bad medicine ...
through treatments at best giving hope to the hysterical and at worst delivering damaging side effects . "
According to Alan Shackelford , Charlotte Figi 's physician : " We really do n't know how it works ...
The cannabidiol seems to act as a neuro - stabilizer , but how ?
The research is minuscule on this . "
Orrin Devinsky , a neurologist at New York University 's Comprehensive Epilepsy Center , where he will conduct clinical trials on Epidiolex , a high - CBD drug from GW Pharmaceuticals , expressed his sympathy for those who do not want to wait for research results :
He also expressed concern that the number of parents using the Charlotte 's Web extract will make it harder to find children for the clinical trials , and that : There are many more unknowns than knowns ...
the focus of the community — lay and scientific and governmental — should be on getting good information .
That should be the real focus of what we need right now .
The Epilepsy Foundation and Devinsky issued a joint statement calling for increased research and immediate access to medical marijuana , specifically naming Charlotte Figi 's case .
Devinsky said : We need to make a balanced decision about compassionate use .
If I were Charlotte Figi 's parents and lived in Colorado I would have done exactly what they did .
And as a doctor , I would gladly prescribe marijuana products for many of my patients who failed existing therapies if it were legal in my state .
... Until we have the scientific data , we should make medical marijuana available to physicians who care for people with treatment - resistant epilepsy and their patients .
Due to reports that some people with Dravet syndrome seem to benefit from treatment with Charlotte 's Web , an observational clinical trial was launched in September 2014 at the University of Colorado .
The study will run until February 2016 , will focus on genetic differences between people who respond and do not respond , and attempt to determine if such genetic factors may be related to the success or failure of treatment .
In January 2018 , it was reported that trials with Epidiolex , a high - CBD pharmaceutical , had been successful enough that it might be " available as soon as the second half of 2018 in the United States , pending Food and Drug Administration approval . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Realm of Caring foundation * CW Hemp , A Stanley Brothers Company
* Charlotte 's Dr. moves to Israel to continue research
*
Weed :
Dr. Sanjay Gupta Reports ( full transcript ) , CNN , Full CNN video
* Weed 2 :
Cannabis Madness , Dr. Sanjay Gupta Reports ( full transcript ) , CNN , Full CNN video