2014 FIFA WORLD CUP BRAZIL ( VIDEO GAME ) 2014
FIFA World Cup Brazil is the official video game for the 2014 FIFA World Cup , published by EA Sports for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 .
It was released on 15 April 2014 in North America , 17 April 2014 in Europe and Australia , and 24 April 2014 in Brazil and Japan , as was the case with the 2010 edition .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Gameplay improvements from FIFA 14 include dribbling , an increased accuracy in passing and first - touch mechanics .
The game 's campaign mode , Road to Rio de Janeiro , allows players to play through qualification and the actual FIFA World Cup .
For only the third time in the history of World Cup video games the entire qualification series will be playable .
The 2010 version only presented the UEFA and CONMEBOL groups in their true to life form .
Another mode , Road to Rio de Janeiro , will allow players to compete in an online tournament across the 12 venues of the 2014 FIFA World Cup .
It is similar in format to Seasons in FIFA 14 and Expedition mode from " UEFA Euro 2012 .
Captain Your Country , Online FIFA World Cup , Story of Qualifying , and Story of the Finals modes ( the latter two integrated with EA Sports Football Club ) from the 2010 edition returned to the 2014 edition .
For the first time in the FIFA series , coaches as well as spectators , either in the stadium or through FIFA Fan Fest and generic viewing events worldwide , are included to improve the immersive feeling .
Coaches and spectators will react to happenings on the pitch , from scoring a goal to getting a card and winning the World Cup .
Then - FIFA president Sepp Blatter even appears to present the World Cup trophy to the captain of the winning team at the final .
TEAMS AND VENUES Section::::Teams and venues .
The game contains all of the 203 national teams that took part in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification process .
The national teams of Bhutan , Brunei , Guam , Mauritania , Mauritius and South Sudan , all of which did not participate in World Cup qualifying , despite being FIFA members , do not feature in the game .
Some teams have licensed kits as well as kits worn during the World Cup for select teams , while most get generic unlicensed kits which resemble their official kits .
The game includes all 12 venues used at the 2014 FIFA World Cup , as well as stadiums from each qualifying region and a range of generic stadiums .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The official song of the World Cup , " We Are One ( Ole Ola ) " by Pitbull , Jennifer Lopez and Claudia Leitte , was included in the game 's opening cutscene , as well as " The World Is Ours " by The X Factor USA contestant David Correy , which was soft drink company and World Cup sponsors Coca - Cola 's theme song for the 2014 tournament .
Additionally , the game features EA Sports Talk Radio , where players can choose one of three channels , each featuring a pair of pundits commenting on user - controlled teams ' progress and answering e - mails , texts and tweets .
Andy Goldstein of TalkSPORT and Ian Darke of ESPN host one channel , while the Men in Blazers ( Michael Davies and Roger Bennett - both of ESPN at the time but now with NBC Sports ) host the second channel and the third channel features the voices of Ian St John and Jimmy Greaves , famous for their partnership at ITV hosting Saturday afternoon football preview show Saint and Greavsie between 1985 and 1992 .
The game includes 34 tracks from artists all over the world including Australia , Canada , Israel , Mexico , the United States and Brazil .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The game has been criticized for being available on only a few platforms .
Despite releasing the game during the eighth generation of video game consoles , Electronic Arts decided against developing versions of the game for the PlayStation 4 , the Xbox One or the PC , as there were several major regions in the world where such systems were not adopted widely enough , especially the host country , Brazil .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website