VISA POLICY OF GHANA Visitors to Ghana must obtain a visa from one of the Ghanaian diplomatic missions unless they come from one of the countries or territories that are either visa exempt or whose citizens may obtain a visa on arrival .
VISA POLICY MAP VISA EXEMPTION Section::::Visa exemption .
Citizens of the following 21 countries and territories can enter Ghana without visas for visits up to 90 days ( unless otherwise stated ) : valign = top } " Date of visa changes * 30 April 1980 :
ECOWAS ( Economic Community of West African States ) :
Benin , Burkina Faso , Cape Verde , Gambia , Guinea , Guinea - Bissau , Ivory Coast , Liberia , Mali , Niger , Nigeria , Senegal , Sierra Leone ,
Togo }
According to the Ghana High Commission in the United Kingdom nationals of Lesotho , Malawi , Namibia , South Africa , Tanzania and Uganda are also exempt .
Visa is also not required for holders of a Dual Nationality Card issued by Ghana .
Pre - arranged visa may be picked up on arrival .
Holders of diplomatic , official , or service passports issued to nationals of Brazil , China , Cuba , Germany , Iran , Namibia , South Africa and holders of diplomatic passports issued to nationals of Turkey do not require a visa for Ghana .
Ghana signed a visa - waiver agreement for diplomatic , official and service passport holders with on 24 August 2017 , on 13 June 2016 , in November 2018 and on 9 July 2018 and they are yet to be ratified .
VISA ON ARRIVAL Section::::Visa on arrival .
From 1 July 2016 citizens of the African Union ( except Morocco ) member states that are not visa exempt can obtain a 30 days maximum visa for Ghana upon arrival for fee $ 150 .
The arrangement would be piloted at the Kotoka International Airport in Accra for three months , and thereafter extended to all other entry points of the country .
If special requirements are satisfied , the citizens of countries without diplomatic or consular mission of Ghana travelling on short notice may obtain a visa on arrival .
Visa is granted on arrival for holders of a copy of a pre - arranged approval from immigration .
E - VISA Section::::E - visa .
Ghana plans to introduce e - Visas from 2018 .
SEE ALSO
* Visa requirements for Ghanaian citizens REFERENCES