BEYOND THE LIGHTS Beyond the Lights is a 2014 American romantic drama film directed and written by Gina Prince - Bythewood .
The film stars Gugu Mbatha - Raw , Minnie Driver , Nate Parker , Danny Glover , and rapper Machine Gun Kelly .
The film premiered at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival on September 7 , 2014 and was released theatrically in the United States on November 14 , 2014 .
In 2015 , the song " Grateful " , written by Diane Warren for the film , was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Noni Jean is a hot new artist who has just won a Billboard Music Award without releasing an album and is primed for super - stardom , but the pressures of success compel her to nearly end her life .
She is saved by a young police officer , Kaz Nicol , who has political ambitions .
Drawn to each other , Noni and Kaz fall fast and hard , despite the protests of those around them who urge them to put their career ambitions ahead of their romance .
But it is ultimately Kaz 's love that gives Noni the courage to find her own voice and break free to become the artist she was meant to be .
CAST
* Gugu Mbatha - Raw as Noni Jean * Minnie Driver as Macy Jean * Nate Parker as Kaz Nicol * Danny Glover as Captain David Nicol * Machine Gun Kelly as Kid Culprit * Jordan Belfi as Steve Sams * Hayley Marie Norman as Shai
* Tom Wright as Reverend Brown * Jesse Woodrow as Carl * Jasmine Vargas as The waitress in the night club
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
On August 15 , 2013 , Relativity Media bought the worldwide rights to the film ; Relativity Media financed and distributed the film .
Ryan Kavanaugh produced along with Stephanie Allain .
On December 6 , 2013 , Relativity set the film for a November 14 , 2014 release date .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Three stars — Gugu Mbatha - Raw , Nate Parker , and Danny Glover — were already in the ensemble cast on August 15 ; Raw played Noni Jean , a new singer .
Parker played Kaz Nicol and Glover played Captain David Nicol .
On September 25 , 2013 , Minnie Driver and Machine Gun Kelly also joined the cast ; Driver played Noni 's mother Macy Jean while Machine Gun Kelly played Kid Culprit , a rapper .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography commenced on August 21 , 2013 in Los Angeles .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Relativity Music Group released a soundtrack album for the film on November 10 , 2014 , which features the original song " Grateful " , written by Diane Warren and performed by Rita Ora .
Three songs featured in the film but absent from the soundtrack are Beyoncé 's " Drunk in Love , " India .
Arie 's " I Am Light " and Amel Larrieux 's
" Do n't Let Me Down " as they already appear on each artist 's respective albums .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Beyond the Lights received positive reviews from critics .
Based on 81 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a " Certified Fresh " rating of 83 % , with an average rating of 6.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , "
Thanks to smart direction and a powerhouse performance from Gugu Mbatha - Raw , Beyond the Lights transcends its formulaic storyline to deliver thoroughly entertaining drama .
" On Metacritic , the film has a score of 73 out of 100 , based on 25 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " from critics .
The film received positive reviews , with The Hollywood Reporter praising Mbatha - Raw 's performance as " incandescent " and Prince - Bythewood 's script for its " surprising integrity . "
Hitfix said the film 's excellence showed that writer / director " Gina Prince - Bythewood is n't working enough , " while Variety called it " messy but undeniably entertaining . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
+ Awards !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Recipient !
Result rowspan=2 2014
Gotham Awards
Best Actress
Gugu Mbatha - Raw Capri , Hollywood Rising Star
Gugu Mbatha - Raw rowspan=152015
rowspan=4 NAACP Image Awards Outstanding Motion Picture Outstanding Actor
Nate Parker Outstanding Supporting Actor Danny Glover
Outstanding Directoring
Gina Prince - Bythewood
rowspan=7Black
Reel Awards
Best Film Beyond the Lights Best Director Gina Prince - Bythewood
Best Actor
Nate Parker
Best Actress Gugu Mbatha - Raw Best Screenplay , Adapted or Original Gina Prince - Bythewood
Best
Original or Adapted Song Diane Warren"Grateful "
Outstanding Original Score Mark Isham rowspan=2 International Online Film Critics ' Poll Best Actress
Gugu Mbatha - Raw
Best Original Song
The Dream"Masterpiece " Academy Awards Best Original Song Diane Warren"Grateful
" SEE ALSO * List of black films of the 2010s REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS