LEGO
THE HOBBIT ( VIDEO GAME )
Lego
The Hobbit is a Lego - themed action - adventure video game developed by Traveller 's Tales .
The game was released by
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment on 8 April 2014 in North America , and 11 April in Europe .
The game is a follow - up to Lego The Lord of the Rings based on the first two Hobbit films ; and .
It was released on PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , PlayStation Vita , Xbox 360 , Xbox One , Wii U , Nintendo 3DS , OS X and Microsoft Windows .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The game shows several features from the previous games , including a feature where the user should locate specific materials to build a big Lego object .
When the user selects and input the correct materials a screen is displayed where the Lego machine is built and the player should select the correct pieces in exchange for studs .
Also the characters have different actions to perform , making the Dwarf Company a group with different capabilities during the mission , including someone with archery abilities , another that uses a big hammer that can move big objects , another with the ability to extract minerals from stones , and so on .
Bilbo improves his abilities as the game advances : when he gains Sting he has the ability to be a more skilled fighter ; and when he gets the One Ring he can disappear and build invisible Lego structures .
The game , similar to the latest Lego video games , is composed on a big map , rather than a single hub .
The player can move among different events where different characters ask the player to retain a specific material from a mission or to exchange materials .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Much like its predecessors , the game presents storylines from The Hobbit films : An Unexpected Journey and Desolation of Smaug .
However , the developers modified the storylines to fit the events into a number of game chapters per film , as well as adding the humour the series has become known for .
CANCELLED THE BATTLE OF THE FIVE ARMIES
DLC
Section::::Cancelled The Battle of the Five Armies DLC .
It was reported at the London Toy Fair in January 2014 that a DLC would be released covering the events of the final film in The Hobbit series , to be released around the time of the film at the end of that year .
However , no DLC was released .
Over a year later , in a correspondence with GameSpot it was revealed that , despite no actual cancellation of the DLC , there were no longer any plans to adapt the film as a DLC , nor to adapt it as another game .
AUDIO Section::::Audio .
Similar to Lego The Lord of the Rings , Lego
The Hobbit features talking minifigures .
The dialogue is taken directly from the films .
Additional voices were provided by Tim Bentinck , Liz May Brice , Clare Corbett , Duncan Duff , Daniel Fine , Joel Fry , Jenny Galloway , Andy Gathergood , Anna Koval , Jonathan Kydd , Steve Kynman , Jamie Lee , Andy Linden , Sara Beck Mather , James Naylor , Emma Pierson , Jason Pitt , Richard Ridings , Emma Tate , and Marcia Warren .
Christopher Lee has an uncredited role as the narrator in the game .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The game received mixed to positive reviews .
The critics praised the game 's visuals and humor based on Peter Jackson 's Hobbit trilogy but criticized the disjointed story , sameness of characters and the ending .
REFERENCES