XBOX ONE
CONTROLLER
Xbox
One Wireless Controller is the primary controller for the Microsoft Xbox One console .
The controller maintains the overall layout found in the Xbox 360 controller , but with various tweaks to its design , such as a revised shape , redesigned analog sticks , shoulder buttons , and triggers , along with new rumble motors within the triggers to allow for directional haptic feedback .
It has had three revisions with several changes to the controller 's design and functionality .
Microsoft also markets the Elite Wireless Controller , a premium version geared towards professional gamers , including interchangeable parts and programmability features .
In turn , each of the aforementioned variations has been offered in various color schemes , some featuring special designs tying into specific games .
Per a partnership between Microsoft and Oculus VR , Xbox One controllers are bundled with the Oculus Rift virtual reality headset .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Microsoft invested over $ 100 million into refining the controller design for the Xbox One ; internal designers had created prototypes with various tweaks and refinements to the design over the Xbox 360 controller , along with those including unorthodox features such as embedded screens and speakers ( which were rejected due to their effects on battery life , and redundancy to the main display and sound system ) , and the ability to emit odors .
The Xbox One controller maintains the overall layout found in the Xbox 360 's design , but with enhancements such as redesigned grips , a smoother build , the removal of the protruding battery compartment , and " Menu " and " View " buttons replacing " Start " and " Back " .
The controller also contains light emitters that allow it to be tracked and paired using Kinect sensor , and to detect when it is not being held to automatically enter a low - power state .
The controller contains a micro USB port , enabling wired use of the controller with the console or on computers running Windows 7 or later with drivers , and firmware updates .
For communication , the controller uses a new proprietary protocol with a larger amount of bandwidth than the wireless protocol used by the Xbox 360 controller , reducing wireless latency and allowing higher quality headset audio .
The analog sticks feature a new textured rim , while the D - pad was changed to use a more traditional 4-way design rather than the circular 8-way design of the 360 .
This change was made partially due to criticism by players of fighting games who , despite the use of " sweeps " across the D - pad in these games as motivation , felt that the Xbox 360 's D - pad performed poorly in said fighting games .
The updated 4-way design is also better suited for use as individual keys in games that use them for item selection .
The design of the face buttons was revised to improve their legibility , using a three - layer design consisting of a black background , colored letter , and a clear covering intended to make the letter appear to " hover " inside it .
The buttons themselves are also spaced slightly closer together .
The bumpers and trigger buttons were overhauled with a new curved shape to improve their ergonomics , as the user 's fingers now naturally lie at an angle upon them unlike the straighter design on Xbox 360 controllers .
The bumpers were also made flush with the triggers .
The triggers themselves now have a smoother feel , and were made more accurate .
Each trigger features independent rumble motors called " Impulse Triggers " , which allows developers to program directional vibration .
One trigger can be made to vibrate when firing a gun , or both can work together to create feedback that indicates the direction of an incoming hit .
LAYOUT Section::::Layout .
A standard Xbox One controller features ten digital buttons , a syncing button , two analog triggers , two analog sticks and a digital D - pad .
The right face of the controller features four digital actions buttons ; a green " A " button , red " B " button , blue " X " button , and yellow " Y " button .
The lower right houses the right analog stick , in lower left is a digital D - pad and on the left face is the left analog stick .
Both analog sticks can also be " clicked in " to activate a digital button beneath .
In the center of the controller face are digital " View " , " Menu " and " Guide " buttons .
The " Guide " button is labelled with the Xbox logo , and is used to turn on the console / controller and to access the Dashboard .
Unlike the Xbox 360 controller , the Xbox One controller features a white backlit
Xbox logo on its guide button and does not feature the " ring of light " that served as an indicator for the controller 's assigned number ( 1 to 4 ) .
The left and right " shoulders " each feature a digital shoulder button , or " bumper " , and an analog trigger .
HARDWARE REVISIONS 2015
REVISION Section::::Hardware revisions .
Section::::2015 revision .
On June 9 , 2015 , Microsoft unveiled a revised version of the standard controller .
Its shoulder buttons were redesigned for improved responsiveness , a 3.5 mm headphone jack was added near the controller 's expansion port , and support for wireless firmware updates was added .
2016 REVISION ( XBOX ONE S )
Section::::2016 revision ( Xbox One S ) .
A third revision of the controller was introduced alongside the Xbox One S , an updated model of the Xbox One console , unveiled in June 2016 .
It features textured grips , and additionally supports Bluetooth , which allows it to be used wirelessly on Bluetooth - enabled PCs without the need for the proprietary Wireless Adapter .
Users can also custom - order this controller revision via the " Xbox Design Lab " service , with their choice of colors , and an optional inscription of their Xbox Live screen name for an additional fee .
It has been made available in white , black , red , and blue colors , as well as other limited edition colors .
+ Xbox One controller model summary !
Model ! !
Introduced ! !
Discontinued ! !
3.5 mm jack ! !
Bluetooth ! ! class="unsortable
" Thumbnail ! ! class="unsortable
"
Notes ! 1537 ! 1697 ! 1698
' Elite ' !
1708 Notes COLORS AND STYLES Section::::Colors and styles .
Besides standard colors , " special " and " limited edition "
Xbox One controllers have also been sold by Microsoft with special color and design schemes , sometimes tying into specific games .
* Day One Edition .
Versions with the inscription " DAY ONE 2013 " were bundled with limited " Day One Edition "
Xbox One bundles at launch in November 2013 , which were intended for those who pre - ordered the console .
* White controller .
A white version of the standard controller is bundled with white Xbox One hardware , such as the Xbox One S , the previous Sunset Overdrive bundle , and one given exclusively to Microsoft employees on the release of Xbox One .
The ones in the employee bundle contain the inscription " I MADE THIS LAUNCH TEAM 2013 " ; * Titanfall limited edition controllers were released in March 2014 to coincide with the launch of Titanfall .
The controllers have a white , black and orange design that was inspired by the in - game R-101C carbine , and also accompanied by a similarly - styled console given to Respawn Entertainment employees .
* limited edition controllers were released in November 2014 to coincide with the game .
The controllers are inspired by the aesthetics of the in - game Sentinel Task Force , featuring its emblem , monochrome lettering on the face buttons ( colored dots indicate the face button colors ) , a gold - colored D - pad , and gold , silver , and grey accents .
* " Forces " controllers , featuring camouflage pattern , and optionally bundled with a matching stereo headset .
First , the Armed Forces controller , in green color , was released in October 2014 .
The design was also made in a blue - colored variant called Midnight Forces , released in November 2014 , and a grey and black Covert Forces version , released in June 2015 .
The Covert Forces version is based upon the revised Xbox One controller with 3.5 mm headset jack .
In November 2015 , Microsoft re - issued the Armed Forces edition , now based on the second - generation controller .
*
Forza Motorsport
6 special edition controllers were released in September 2015 with a limited edition of the console , to coincide with the game 's launch .
The controller is colored in dark blue with a " racing stripe " pattern down the centre , similarly to its corresponding Xbox One special edition .
A concept edition of the Elite controller based upon the Ford GT , including redesigned thumb sticks and trigger buttons inspired by the vehicle , was also presented by Microsoft in collaboration with Ford Motor Company .
Three more controllers to commemorate with Ford 's Cobra Daytona , GT40 Mark II and Mark IV .
All of these controllers are now in the Petersen Automobile Museum
*
Halo 5 : Guardians — The Master Chief and Halo 5 :
Guardians limited edition controllers were released to coincide with in October 2015
( the latter was also packaged with the Halo 5 : Guardians console bundle ) .
They are inspired by the armor designs of Master Chief and Spartan Locke respectively ; the Master Chief version features a military green color scheme with a gold " chrome " d - pad and triggers , and the Spartan Locke version has a silver color scheme with a blue " chrome " d - pad and accents .
Both are based upon the revised controller with 3.5 mm headset jack , and feature monochromatic face buttons , etched detailing and texture effects , and are bundled with codes to unlock in - game customization items in Halo 5 .
* Lunar White special edition controllers were released on September 22 , 2015 .
They are based upon the revised Xbox One controller with 3.5 mm headset jack , and feature a white body , gold - colored " chrome " d - pad and triggers , and monochromatic face buttons .
* " Shadow " controllers were unveiled in March 2016 .
They feature metallic color schemes with a gradient effect that fades to black .
The Shadow line was unveiled in copper Copper Shadow and blue Dusk Shadow versions ; in the U.S. they are exclusive to GameStop and Best Buy stores respectively , as well as Microsoft Store .
* Pizza Hut Red controller .
Pizza Hut offered " The Triple Treat Box Instant Win and Sweepstakes " from November 7 to December 24 , 2016 .
Candidates entered a code for a chance to win one of 1,140 prizes consisting of an Xbox One S console and controller bundled with an additional special edition gloss red Xbox One S controller featuring the Pizza Hut logo .
One additional grand prize winner was also drawn at random to win a 4 K television and an audio system in addition to the Xbox One S console .
*
Recon Tech was unveiled in April 2017 , featuring a grey base color scheme with gold , futuristic military - inspired accents .
* Minecraft - themed controllers were released in October 2017 , with versions based on the Creeper and pig characters .
The face buttons utilize a blocky font reminiscent of the game 's visual style .
The Creeper controller is also included in a special edition Xbox One S bundle .
* Sea of Thieves Limited Edition controllers were announced on February 7 , 2018 .
ELITE CONTROLLER Section::::Elite controller .
On June 15 , 2015 , during its E3 2015 press conference , Microsoft unveiled the Xbox One Elite Wireless Controller , a new controller which Xbox division head Phil Spencer described as being " an elite controller for the elite gamer " .
It features a steel construction with a soft - touch plastic exterior , along with interchangeable rear paddle buttons ( with either short or long forms ) , analog stick tops ( original Xbox one stick , a concaved version and a extended version for increased accuracy ) , and directional pad designs ( either the traditional four - way design , or a concave disc - like design ) , and " hair trigger locks " for the triggers that allow users to reduce the amount of distance they must be pressed to register a press .
Through software , users can customise button and paddle mappings and adjust the sensitivity of the triggers and analog sticks .
Two button profiles can be assigned to a switch on the controller for quick access .
The Elite Controller was released on October 27 , 2015 .
A special Gears of War 4-themed limited edition variant of the Elite controller was unveiled during Microsoft 's E3 2016 press conference .
It features a rustic , dark red color scheme with a blood splatter effect and the series emblem on the rear of the controller , and a D - pad disc with weapon symbols corresponding to the in - game weapons bound to these controls .
Plans for a revised version of the Elite controller were leaked in January 2018 , with a number of new features , including USB Type C connector , and other hardware improvements .
These plans , however , were apparently canceled , and a White Special Edition of the controller was announced on August 29 , 2018 as another cosmetic variant of the original Elite .
The White Special Edition does not include the leaked features such as USB - C connectivity , three - level Hair Trigger Locks , or adjustable tension for the thumbsticks , nor does it include Bluetooth connectivity introduced with the revised Xbox One S controller .
SUPPORT ON OTHER PLATFORMS Section::::Support on other platforms .
Drivers were released in June 2014 to allow Xbox One controllers to be used over a USB connection on PCs running Windows 7 or later .
The Xbox One Wireless Adapter for Windows is a USB dongle that allows up to eight controllers to be used at once wirelessly .
Upon its release in October 2015 , it was supported only by Windows 10 .
Drivers for Windows 7 and 8.1 were released in December 2015 .
The adapter was updated in August 2017 with a smaller form factor .
Windows
10 features include button remapping for the Elite Controller , audio through the controller , and firmware updates .
On Windows 7 or 8.1 , drivers are required , and the aforementioned features are not available .
Microsoft also supports Bluetooth - enabled Xbox One controllers on Android , specifically listing support for Minecraft : Gear VR Edition on certain Samsung Galaxy devices .
ACCESSORIES
STEREO HEADSET ADAPTER
Section::::Accessories .
Section::::Stereo headset adapter .
The Xbox One Stereo Headset Adapter allows the use of headsets with 3.5 millimeter headphone jacks with the original Xbox One controller , which does not include a 3.5 mm jack .
An adapter for 2.5 millimeter headphone jacks ( except for ones with a dongle - like adapter ) is also included .
CHATPAD Section::::Chatpad .
A keyboard chatpad attachment , similar to the Xbox 360 Messenger Kit , was unveiled at Gamescom on August 4 , 2015 .
PLAY & CHARGE
KIT Section::::Play & Charge Kit .
Similarly to the Xbox 360 version , the Play & Charge kit is the official rechargable battery pack for Xbox One controllers .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS